BRITANNIA
A ROMAN
A SAXON
A DANE
A NORMAN
THE HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN Under the Conquests of ye ROMANS, SAXONS, DANES
and NORMANS.

Their Originals, Manners, Wars, Coins and Seals with ye Successions,
Lives, acts and Issues of the English Monarchs from JULIUS CAESAR, to our most
gracious Sovereign King JAMES.

by JOHN SPEED

IMPRINTED AT LONDON

Anno Cum Privilegio 1611

And are to be sold by John Sudbury and Georg Humble, in Popes head alley at
ye sign of ye white Horse.



THE PROEME. TO THE LEARNED AND LOVERS OF GREAT BRITAINS GLORY.
Having thus far traveled in the protract, and description of this famous
Empire of GREAT BRITAIN, I might here have rested, and claimed the privilege
that years and imbecillitie have brought me unto: had not a further desire in
others ^ged it a matter incident, historically to lay down the originals of
those Nations and successions of those Monarchs, which either by birth or
conquest have aspired to the Imperial Crown. And albeit I find my self both
tired in the former, and most unfit to prosecute this latter, yet will I
endeavor to give herein my best assayes; though as my labors, so my wants
also, thereby will be made more vulgar to the world.

For if those men were blameworthy against whom Heraclite exclaimeth, who
Heraclite.
with long toil and great trouble find a little pure substance in a great
deal of base earth: how shall I then free me from the like imputatio^, that
from so many mines of pure metals, have gotten so little Oar, and the same
neither well tried in my defective furnace, nor yet artificially cast off
through the default of the mould, wanting both skill for to fashion, and measure
to perform, the true proportions that in such a project is to be required; and
how often these my defects have dissuaded my proceedings, is best known to him
that is the searcher of the heart.

But by what fate I am enforced still to go forward, I know not, unless it be
the ardent affection and love to my native Country; wherein I must confess
that Nature in those gifts has been both liberal, yea and prodigal, though
Fortune as sparing and fast-handed against me, ever checking the Bit with the
Raines of necessity, and curbing the means that should illustrate my labors:
which moves me sometimes to think that if the great Philosopher Theophrastus,
had cause on his deathbed Theophrastu
to accuse Nature, for giving man so long a lesson, and so short a life; then I
against Fortune may as justly exclaim, that has assigned me so great a labor
and so little means. And therefore let it not seem offensive that I draw my
waters from the Cesterns of others, who am not able to fetch them at the
springhead my self: Neither that I strike upon the same Anuile unto their
sound, though nothing so loud, nor with the like strength; wherein yet this
fruit at least will (I hope) redound of my endeavors that I shall incite the
more learned: if not otherwise, yet in emulation of me, to free the face drawn
by Apelles, from the censure of the fault or defect in the foot, and not only
to amend, but even to new-mould the whole. Which thing though my days are
near spent; and with Barzillai I may say that music to me is now unpleasing:
2. Sam. 19. 35.
yet does my ear thirst after the set of that strain, as Socrates thoughts
ran ever Socrates.
on his Book: who the night before he was to suffer death, was desirous to
learn music, because he would die learning still something. Moses when he
foresaw the destruction of his Commonwealth, which whilst it stood, was the
glory of the earth, and a pattern to all kingdoms succeeding, left this for a
Law among the rest, and even to remain Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7.
for ever, that the fathers should teach their children, and should commit unto
writing those things which the Lord in their days had done, and enjoined the
children; Likewise to enquire of the times that were past, even from the first
creation of man: For when as Deuteronomy. 4. 32.
Empires and Kingdoms, Commonweals and Cities, do end and perish, yet the
Histories thereof do remain and live; And that made Cicero to say as he did,
that Salamina should be utterly forgotten, before the things that were done in
Salamina should perish: And therefore as among the wise answers of Thales, the
Histories of Countries are to be Thales.
accounted for principals, either as Cicero calls them the Mistres of life,
and expositions Cicero.
of Times; so likewise let us from the lyricall Poet Simonides learn this
further, That he Simonides.
is perfectly happy which knows his native country to be truly glorious. And
as Cassidor^ calls Cassidore.
him a worthy Citizen that seeks the commodity of his country: So
contrariwise he is by Bale esteemed but a fruitles clod of earth, that sucks
the sap of his soil only to himself, Bale in Leylands Newyeeres gift.
whose memorial shall perish as the dispersed smoke in the clouds, though for
a time he mount aloft in his swelling pride. This natural love and true
affection to our native Country, we may further learn from the ancient
Patriarks and Fathers themselves, who besides a desire that they had to theirs,
continually to live therein during life, commanded their bodies to be buried
therein after death: from whose Bowels they Genesis 49. 29.
first had assumed their breathes, and in whose bosom they laid their bones,
as in their last bed of rest. Yea, of the unreasonable creatures, the Birds and
Beasts, we may learn this love, that always are willing toward their home.
And if it happen that Countries grow unkind as Homers did, that in his old age
and blind, suffered him to beg his bread; or that a Prophet in his own country
is not esteemed, as Jeremy felt it, Ierem. 37. 1.
and CHRIST JESUS taught, yet did the one for his peoples captivity, wish his
eyes a Matt. 13. 57.
fountain of tears, and the other for his countries destruction lamented and
wept, holding Ierem. 9. 1. Luke 19. 41.
it unlawful to take the childrens bread, and to give it unto others. Matt.
15. 26.


That this our Country and subject of History deserves the love of her
inhabitants, is witnessed even by foreign writers themselves, who have termed
it the Court of Queen Ceres, the Granary of the Western world, the fortunate
Island, the Paradise of pleasure and Garden of God; whose Typographicall
descriptions for the whole Island, and Geographical surueyes for the several
parts, exceed any other kingdom under the cope of Heaven; that only excepted
which was conquered and divided by Iosuah; And for fruitfulnes and temperature
may be accounted another Canaan; watered with rivers that do cleave Habak. 2.
9.
the earth, as the Prophet speaks, and make the land as rich and beautiful,
as was that of Egypt. Our Kings for valor and Sanctity, ranked with the
worthiest in the world, Gene. 13. 10.
and our Nations originals, conquests, and continuance, tried by the touch of
the best humane testimonies, leave as fair a Luster upon the same stone, as
does any other, and with any nation may easily contend (says Lanquet) both
for antiquity, and continual Tho. Lanquet.
inhabitants, from the first time that any of them can claim their originals.

And although our many Records are perished by the invasions of strangers,
through their covetous Conquest of so fair a Land; or in the civil
dissensions of homebred aspirers that have sought the possession of so rich a
Crown, yet Truth has left us no less beholding unto her, then mightier
Nations, and them that would be far more famous. Neither is it to be wondered
at, that the Records of GREAT BRITAIN are eaten up with Times teeth, as Ovid
speaks, when as in Times ruins lie buried their Registers, Ovid. Metam* lib.
15.
that have been kept with a stronger guard, as Titus Liuy in the entrance of
his History affirms of the Romans. As for those things (says he) as are
reported either before, or at the foundation of the City more beautified and
set out with Poets fables, then grounded upon pure and faithful reports, I
mean neither to auerre nor disprove. Of whose uncertainties, let us a while
hear the reporters themselves speak, before we proceed to the certain
successions of our British Monarchs: until which time the credit of our
History may well be said to weigh with (if not down peize) many others. Uarro
(that learned Roman writer, who lived an hundred years before the birth of
our Savior Christ) Histories uncertain to the Flood, and from the Flood to
the first Olympias fabulous. Plutarch.
calls the first world to the Flood uncertain; and thence to the first
Olympias fabulous: Because in that time (says he) there is nothing related
(for the most part) but fables among the Greeks, Latins, and other learned
Nations. And therefore Plutarch begins the lives of his worthy men, no
higher then Theseus: because (says he) what has been written before, was but
of strange things, and sayings full of monstrous-fables imagined and devised by
Poets, which are altogether uncertain and most untrue. And Diodorus Siculus
Diodorus Siculus.
(that lived in Augustus Caesar's time, a great searcher after Antiquities, and
for thirty years continuance a traveler into many Countries, for information
and further satisfaction) writing his History called Bibliotheca, containing
forty Books, and years of continuance one thousand, one hundred thirty and
eight, of his first six himself gives this censure in his Proeme. These
Books (says he) containing the Acts of ancient men, before the destruction of
Troy, with the ancient Histories as well of Grecians as Barbarians, are called
fabulous: Which moved Lucretius the Poet to demand this question. Cur supra
bellum Thebanum and funera Troia, Lucretius.

Non alias qu^dam veteres cecinere Poeta?
Why have not Poets in their works of fained stories brought,
Things done before the Wars of Thebes, or Troyes destruction wrought?


Yea and of Troyes story it self, if we may believe Thucydides (whom Bodine
Thucydides.
commends for an absolute Historian) though it be ancient (says he) yet a
great part thereof is fabulous. And Tully out of Plato complayneth of as much:
For you Grecians Tully.
(says he) as children in learning, deliver only things uncertain, and have
mingled fables with the Wars of Thebes, and of Troy, things (perhaps) which
never were, but gathered out of the scattered Uerses of Homer and others, not
digested by Aristarchus, and are yet uncertain and obscure. And that the
Greeks indeed were but babes in Antiquity, Josephus Josephus contra Appion.
lib. 1.
in his Nations defense against Appion, sufficiently does prove, where he
affirms, That the invention of their Letters was not so old as the siege of
Troy, insomuch that the Poesy of Homer (then the which there is none more
ancient among them) was not committed to writing, but sung by roate. And the
Latin tongue it self by M. Cato is M. Cato in a fragment of his.
said, not to have been in use four hundred and fifty years before the
building of Rome. And Titus Liuy their famous Historian, freely confesses,
That the use of Letters and Titus Liui.
learning among the Romans, was rare and hard to be found before the taking of
Rome by the Gauls. Yea, and of the uncertainty of Romes foundation, how lavish
so ever Historians have written, not only Fenestella has continued whole
Pages, but Plutarch Fenestella. Plutarch in the life of Romulus.
likewise in the life of Romulus, has many sayings, whereof this is one. The
Historiographers (says he) do not agree in their writings, by whom, nor for
what cause the great name of Rome (the glory whereof is blown abroad through
the world) wasfirst given unto it; some affirming, that the Pelagians after
they had run over a great part of the world, lastly stayed themselves in that
place where Rome was new built, and for their great strength in Arms, gave
name to that City Rome, which signifies power in the Greek tongue. Other say,
that certain Trojans after their siege, in certain vessels saved themselves
by flight, and being put into the Thuscan Sea, anchored near to the River
Tyber: whose wives being extremely Sea-sicke, through the counsel of Roma a
Lady, the wisest and worthiest among them, set fire on the whole Fleet;
whereupon their husbands (though sore offended) were enforced to make use of
their present necessity, and near unto Palantium planted this City, whose fame
presently grew great, and in honor of Lady Roma named it Rome; and from hence
they say the custom of kissing in salutations came, after the example of these
wives, who to appease the husbands wraths with smiles and imbracings kissed
their mouths. Some will have the name from Roma the daughter of Italus and of
Lucaria, or else of Telephus the son of Hercules, and of the wife of Aeneas.
Others of Ascanius the son of Aeneas. Some again from Romanus the son of
Ulysses and of Cyrce, will have it named Rome. Others from Romus the son of
Emathion, whom Diomedes sent thither from Troy. There are that bring the name
thereof from one Romus a tyrant of the Latins, who drove the Thuscans out of
those parts. And they who think that Romulus (as that is most general, and
carries the most likelihood to be Romes founder,) do not agree about his
ancestors, as more at large in Plutarch appears. And therefore with
Thucydides we may well say, It is a hard and difficult matter to keep a mean
in speaking of Thucydides lib. 2. cap. 7.
things, wherein scarsly can be had a certain opinion of truth. And the
rather, for that the writers themselves have blamed each others of affectation
and falsehood, as in Josephus we Josephus contra Appion li. 1. Hellanicus.
Acusilaus. Diodorus. Herodotus. Ephorus. Timaeus. Philistus. Callias.
Thucydides. Suetonius in vita Caesar. Sect. 55. Tacitus. F. Maximus. Silenus.
Antigonus. Hierome. Dionysius Hai. Bodine.
may see; who affirms, That Hellanicus dissented from Acusilaus, Acusilaus
with Diodorus correcting Herodotus; Epherus accused Hellanicus of untruths; so
did Timaeus reprove Ephorus of as much; Philistus and Callias dissented from
Timaeus in his History of Sicily, and Thucydides accounted a liar by some.
Caesar is taxed by Asinius Pollio (says Suetonius) to be partial in his
Commentaries; And Tacitus by Tertullian is blamed for untruths; Fabius Maximus
is reprehended by Polybius for defectiuely writing the Punicke wars; and
himself again with Silenus, Timaeus, Antigonus, and Hierom, as much found
fault with by Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, for writing the Roman histories so
imperfectly. And a man may use the very same speech against Dionysius, says
Bodine. These things thus standing, let us give leave to Antiquity, who
sometimes mingleth falsehoods with truth, to make the beginnings of Policies
seem more honorable: And whose power is far scrued into the worlds conceit,
that with Hierome we may say, Antiquity is allowed with such general applause,
that known untruths Hierom in his Prolog. in Job.
many times are pleasing unto many. Yet with better regard to reverend
Antiquity, whom Jobs opposer wills us inquire after, and to our own relations
in delivering Job. 8. 8.
their censures, let this be considered; That more things are let slip, then
are comprehended in any man's writings, and yet more therein written, then any
man's life (though it be long) will admit him to read. Neither let us be
forestalled with any preiudicate opinions of the reporters; that in somethings
may justly be suspected, or in affection, which by nature we owe to our
natural Country; nor consent (as Liuie speaks) to stand Titus Liui. lib. 8.
to the ancientnesse of reports, when it seems to take away the certainty of
truth. To keep a mean betwixt both, my self with Bildad do confess, that I
am but of yesterday, and know nothing, and therefore will relate the original
names and Nations of this famous Island, with the successions of her Monarchs
and Historical actions, so far only as is most approved by the best Writers,
and will leave other clouds of obscurity to be cleared by the labors of a more
learned pen.

THE SITE AND CIRCVIT OF GREAT BRITAINS MONARCHY.
CHAPTER I.
BESIDES those fruitful Islands that dispersedly are scattered about the Main,
like to beautiful pearls that incompasse a Diadem, the I Will of GREAT BRITAIN
does raise it self first to our sight, as the Body of that most famous and
mighty Empire, whereof many other Kingdoms and Countries are parcels and
members. Being by the Almighty so set in the maine Ocean, as that she is
thereby the High Admiral of the BRITAIN Admiral of the Seas.
Seas, and in the terrestrial Globe so seated, as that she is worthily reputed
both The Garden of Pleasure, and The Storehouse of Profit, opening her Havens
every way, fit to receive all foreign traffic, and to utter her own into
all other parts: and therefore (as the Sovereign Lady and Empress of the
rest) deserves our description in the first place.

(2) This Island is so spacious and ample, that Caesar (the first Roman
discouerer thereof) supposed that he had found out another World: for to his
seeming it appeared, that the Ocean was rather contained In Panegy. Orat. to
Constan^s.
within that Main, then that Main to be compassed with the Occan about. And
Julius Solinus, for her circuit and largeness, says that it deserves the
name of Another World. But Aristides a Greek Author speaks Aristides.
much more properly, who by way of excellency terms BRITAIN, The Great
Island: As likewise Tacitus, that undertook to describe BRITAIN Tacit. in vit.
Agr.
by his own knowledge, who says, that of all Islands BRITAIN the greatest
Island known to the Romans. Dionysius. Strabo. Rutil. Numat.
known to the Romans it was the greatest: And so does Dionysius in his
description of the World.

(3) But as Strabo compares the then known World, to a Cloak, Rutilius
Numatianus Italy, to an Oken leaf, and Dionysius Spain, unto an Oxe-hide: so
the said Tacitus in the life of Agricola, from Liuie his ancient, and Fabius
Rusticus his modern, does liken the Fabius Rustic.
fashion thereof to a long Dish, or two-headed Axe: whose form notwithstanding
may better be exposed to the eye, in the draught before seen, then can be
explained in words to conceit, or unto any other thing be compared besides it
self: especially seeing that so many good Writers have had but very bad
success in their resemblances of Countries. And this of them is rather unlike
to either, if we speak of the whole, which then was unknown, as it seems
by BRITAIN discovered to be an Island 136. years after Julius Cesars entrance
^to it. Tacitus in vita Agric.
Tacitus. And the huge enorme tract of ground beyond Caledonia, which runs
unto the furthermost point, growing narrow and sharp like a wedge, was first
redoubled with the Roman fleet by Julius Agricola, and BRITAIN discovered to
be an Island, one hundred thirty and six years after Julius Cesars first
entrance therein.

(4) Some have been induced by the narrowness of the Sea, and likeness of
the Soil, to think BRITAIN thought one continent with FRANCE. Seruius
Honorat.
that BRITAIN was sometimes joined to the continent of France: whereunto
Seruius Honoratius subscribeth in his Commentary upon the first Eclog of
Virgil, who there mentions -- Penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos, Clandian.

The Britain people quite from all the world disioin'd.


As likewise by Claudian another ancient Poet it is styled, -- nostro deducta
Britannia mundo,
The Britain soil removed from our worlds continent.


And Vinianus with them affirms, that in the beginning Vinianus.
Britain and Gallia were both one Land. The like does Virgil verify of the
I Will of Sicilie, which in Sicilie thought once one continent with Italy. D^
Niger. Thought of some that all Islands had their first separation from the
Main by the rage of the general Deluge.
times past he reports to have been one with Italy. Others hold, that all
Islands had their first separation from the Main by the rage of the general
Deluge, and that the mountains thereby showed their tops above the plain
grounds; and the plains settling lower, became deep valleys. When or
howsoever, by Gods divine ordinance and wisdom, we see that these Islands
situated in the Seas, do no less serve and adorn the Ocean it self, then
the Lakes and Pooles of water do the dry land, and all of them (as members of
one mass) to minister sustenance for the life of all things living, and
pleasures to the use and service of man.

(5) The Island of BRITAIN, of all others the most famous (by Catullus reputed
the furthest toward Catullus.
the West) is bounded on the South with Normandy and France, upon the East
with Germany and Denmark, upon the West with Ireland and the Atlanticke Ocean,
and upon the North with the vast De^calidon Seas. The length thereof, measured
by the graduations to both extremes, that is, from the Lysard Point Southward
in Cornwall, which lies in the Latitude of 50. degrees and 6. minutes, to the
Straithy head in Scotland (being the furthest point of this Island toward the
North) set in the degree 60. and 30. minutes contains (according to the scale
of the terrestrial Globe) six hundred twenty four miles: not Britains length.
to trouble the Reader with other accounts, seeing the same so exactly to agree
with the spaces of the heavens. And the extent of the Land in the brodest part
is from the Lands end in Cornwall in the West (situated in 14. degrees and 37.
minutes of Longitude, according to Mercator his Atlas) unto the Island Tenet in
the East of Kent (lying in 22. degrees 30. minutes) and contains miles 340.
as they have delivered, that Britains breadth.
with curious search have laid the dimension thereof.

(6) The site of this Island is set by the Mathematics BRITAIN in the 8.
Climate for Latitude, and for Longitude placed between the parallels fourteen
and twenty six.
in the eighth Climate for Latitude, and the Longitude likewise placed betwixt
the Parallels fourteen and twenty six: a seat as well for Air as Soil, both
fruitful and mild; and for length of days, pleasant and delightful: for in
the height of Summer the day is said to be eighteen equinoctial hours long,
whereof sixteen and a half are spent from Sun to Sun. Yea and Tacitus
says, that in the furthest In the furthest North part of BRITAIN ye nights so
short, as the space betwixt the days going and coming can hardly be
perceived. In vita Agricolae.
North part of the Island the nights are so short, that betwixt the going out
and coming in of the day the space is hardly perceived, and the Sun seen
neither to set nor arise: Because (says he) the extreme and plain parts of
the earth project a low shadow, and raise not the darkness on high, so the
night falls under the sky and star. Better might he have said, by reason
of the inclination of his Circle to the Horizon descending not directly, but
passing obliquely, razing as it were under their Horizon.

(7) The air, says Strabo and Tacitus, is rather inclinable to showers then
to snow. And Caesar commends it to be more temperate, and the cold lesser,
Caesar. Com. lib. 5.
then that in France, as not subject to either extremes, The cold in Britain
less^ then in France.
as the more Northern and Southern Countries are: to which temperature
Cescenius Getulicus a very ancient Poet seems to have respect, when of this
Island thus he versifieth: Non illic Aries verno ferit era cornis, Probus in
Virgil. Georgic.

Gnosia nec Gemini praecedunt cornua Tauri.
The horned Ram there butteth not the air of tender spring:
The Twins, nor Bull do to this soil untimely seasons bring.


(8) And although the Seas thereof are accounted and called by Nubiensis the
Arabian, The dark and The Arabicke Geographie.
dangerous Seas, in regard of the misty vapors that therfrom arise, yet in the
winter season those clouds are dispersed into still showers of rain, that do
dissolve the rigor and great extremity of the cold: yea and those Seas
themselves stirred and working to and fro with the winds, do thereby wax
warm (as Cicero* British Seas warm. De natura Deorum Lib. 2. Minutius Foelix,
adioined to Arnobius, as his eighth book.
says) so that a man may easily perceive within that world of waters a
certain heat enclosed. And Minutius Foelix proouing that GOD has a special
regard to the several parts of the world, as well as to the whole, says, that
BRITAIN, though otherwhiles wanting the aspect of the Sun, yet is it
relieved with the warmth of her enuironing Seas; and as much refreshed,
Britains seawindes in summer assuage the heat.
we may well say, by those sweet and gentle winds that in the height of Summer
are sent from those seas, and do abate the rigor of the Suns great scorching
heat; and yields not only intercourse for traffic into all parts of the
World, but plentifully abounds with all sorts of fish, to the great benefit
of the Inhabitants; and brings forth Pearls, as Tacitus shows, which were
usually cast out with the flood, and gathered In vita Agricolae.
at the ebb. These Pearls, though not altogether so orient as they in India,
by Amianus in his 23. book and 12. chapter, are called Rich Gemmes. And Pliny
in his ninth book and thirty fifth chapter, uses the like term: The desire
whereof (as Suetonius says) drew Cesars affection for the Conquest of In vit.
Caesar. cap. 47.
BRITAIN.

(9) The soil (says Tacitus) setting aside the Olive, the Vine, and such
other plants as are only proper to hotter Countries, takes all kind of
Grain, Britain abounds with all sorts of Grain.
and bears it in abundance: it shoots up quickly, and ripeneth slowly: the
cause of both is the same, the overmuch moisture of the soil, and the air.
And Caesar writes, that for timber it was stored of all kinds, as in Gallia,
the Beech and Fur tree only excepted. Caesar. Com. lib 5.
For abundance of Grain, Britain is said to be The seat of Queen Ceres, by
Orpheus the old Poet; Britain called the ^eat of Q. Ceres.
and the Granary and Storehouse for the Western World, as Charles the great
termed it: and by our own Ancestors in the black Book of the Exchequer it
is called a Paradise of pleasure. From whence the Romans Romans laded 800.
vessels with corn in Britain for their armies elsewhere. Zoso^us.
were wont yearly to transport (with a fleet of eight hundred vessels bigger
then Barges) great store of corn for the maintenance of their Armies. But unto
the particular relation of each several blessing belonging to this most happy
Island, we will not again enter, seeing that in every County we have
sufficiently, and no more then truly, spoken thereof. Only, if you please,
hear what has been said of this Land by the Roman Orators, and first in the
Panegyricke to Constantius the Emperor.

(10) O happy BRITAIN, and more fortunate Panegyric. to Constantius.
then all other Lands beside, which first did see Constantine Emperor! For
good cause has nature endowed thee with all blessings both of air and soil:
wherein there is neither In Britain neither excessive cold of winter, nor
extreme heat of summer. Britain abounding with all plenty of food for man's
sustenance and delight.
excessive cold of Winter, nor extreme heat of Summer: wherein there is so
great abundance of grain, that it suffices both for bread and drink. There
the forests are free from savage beasts, and the ground void of noisome
serpents: in whose stead an infinite multitude of tame cattle there are, with
their vdders strutting full of milk, and laden with fleeces to the ground. And
verily (that which for the use of our lives we most esteem) the days are
therein very long, and the nights never without some light, for that those
Britains nights never without some light.
utmost plains by the sea side cast and raise no shadows on high; and the
aspect both of sky and stars passes beyond the bound of the night: yea the
very Sun it self, which unto us seems for to set, appears there only to
pass by a little, and go aside.

And in another, spoken to Constantius, the father Panegyr. spoken to
Constantine.
of Constantine the Great, thus is said:

Though BRITAIN be but a single name, yet surely the States losses have been
manifold, in forgoing a Land so plentiful in fruit and grain, so rich in
pasturage, so full of mines and veins of metal, so gainful in tributes
BRITAIN full of mines of metals.
and revenues, so accommodated with many havens, and for circuit so large and
spacious.

And a Poet of good antiquity, of natures motherly Remaynes.
affection toward this our Island, has thus written: Tu nimio nec stricta
gelu, nec sydere feruens,
Clementi coelo temperieque places.
Cum pareret Natura parens, varioque fauore
Diuideret dotes omnibus vna locis,
Seposuit potiora tibi, matremque professa,
Insula sis foelix, plenaque pacis, ait.
Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat vsus,
Ex te proueniet, vel aliunde tibi.
Nor freezing cold, nor scorching hot thou art;
Thy air a heavenly temper, sweetly breathed:
So pleased Dame Nature when she first bequeathed
To every soil of her rich gifts a part;
Then Mother-like best choice for thee she sought:
Be thou (quoth she) the blessed I Will of peace.
What ever pleasure yields, or wealths increase,
From thee shall grow, or shall to thee be brought.


(11) And that BRITAIN has been taken for those fortunate Islands whereof the
Poets have imagined a perpetual spring time, is certain by Isacius Tzetzes a
Greek Author of good account. And Isaci^ Tzetzes.
in Robert of Auesburie we read, what time Pope Clement the sixth had elected
Lewis of Spain to be Prince Robert of Auesburie. Britain taken for the
fortunate Islands.
of the Fortunate Islands, raising him powers both in Italy and France, the
English Ligier Ambassadors, that lay then in Rome for King Edward the third,
were so deeply set in the opinion, that this preparation was made against
BRITAIN, that they wrote their suspicions conceived, and presently withdrew
themselves into England, to certify the King of these designs. And it seems
Pope Innocent the fourth was of the same mind, when (as Matthew. Paris. writes)
Ad^. 1246.
he said, Vere hortus deliciarum est Anglia: vere puteus inexhaustus est: Et
vbi multa abundant, de multis multa possunt extorqueri, etc. Certes the
Kingdom of England is the very Paradise of pleasures, a Well which can never
be drawn dry: where many things do abound, and whence many things may be
extorted, etc. With Pope Innocent makes suit to the King of England to see
Britain.
which his conceit he was afterward so far transported with a longing desire,
as he made great means and earnest suit to the King of England (as the said
Author writes, ad ann. 1250.) that he might come into England to see that
Country which was every where so much renowned. In a word, BRITAIN is so rich
in commodities, so beautiful in situation, and so resplendent in all glory,
that if the Omnipotent (as one has said) had vouchsafed to fashion the world
Joseph. bell. Judas. lib. 7. cap. 13.
round like a ring, as he did like a globe, it might have been most worthily
the only Gemme therein. Whose Valleys are like Eden: whose Hills are as
Lebanon: whose Springs are as Pisgah: whose Rivers are as Jordan: whose Walls
is the Ocean: and whose defense is the Lord JEHOVAH.

(12) The body then of this Imperial Monarchy shows not only the
greatness of it self in it self, but also extends her beautiful branches
into many other Countries and Kingdoms far iacent and remote. This
greatness is made the more sensible, BRITAIN sustained at once no less then
11. Kings commanding great powers.
for that the Island in times past sustained at once no less then eleven Kings
in their royal estates, all of them wearing Crowns, and commanding great
powers. Such was the Heptarchie of the Saxons seven Kingdoms, seated on the
South of Seuerius his Wall. Two Kingdoms thence had their sites in that
Northern part, and their several Kings of Scots and Picts ruling on both
sides the Clude, even unto the Deucaledonian Seas. And two Kingdoms (if not
more) divided into North and South, and their Kings of the ancient Britains
ruling the West part of this Island D (...) in (...) of (...) in (...) the Great.
beyond the Clawdh Offa, or Offa his Ditch, commonly called WALES.

(13) The Islands likewise belonging to this Empire The I Will of Man belonging to
Britain, a kingdom within it self.
had Kings of their own, as that of Man, the Orcades, and in Ireland at one
time five Kings reigning together. France also is annexed, and so was Cyprus
Cyprus and some provinces subdued to Britain.
sometimes with some Provinces of Syria, subdued by King Richard the first,
surnamed Caeur-de-lion. And at this present in the new World of America a
Colonie of A Colonel of Britains in VIRGINEA.
BRITAINS is seated in that part now called VIRGINEA; whereby the borders of
our Sovereigns command and most rightful title may be enlarged, and the
Gospel of Jesus Christ further preached, which no doubt will in time be
embraced, to the salvation of many, and great honor to the BRITAINS. And that
the borders of this most royal Tent have been wide spread in former times,
White of Basingstocke is of Vitus Basingstocke. The limits of the British
Empire in times past from the Orcades unto the Pyere^ Mountains.
opinion, who affirms that the limits of the British Empire in old time was
from the Orcades unto the Pyrenean Mountains. And that King Athelstan after
his conquest of those Northern parts with that of Denmark wrote so his title:
which further is confirmed by the Charter of King Edgar for the foundation of
the Cathedral Church at Worcester, wherein likewise he so styled himself. The
enlargement whereof we pray to be accomplished, especially in those parts where
God is not known, according to the saying of the Prophet, that the curtains
of our habitations may be further Isa. 54.
spread, with increase on the right hand and on the left: and that our seed may
possess those GENTILES, and dwell in their Cities: whereby the ninth Nation
Eight Nations converted to Christ by Englishmen.
may be converted unto CHRIST, as eight others before this time by Englishmen
have been.

THE NAMES THAT HAVE BEEN ATTRIBVTED UNTO THIS ISLAND OF GREAT BRITAIN.
CHAPTER II.
AS touching the first Inhabitants and original Names of this Island, things so
far cast into the mistie darkness of obscurity and oblivion, that there is
no hope left us, so lately born, to discover them; especially The first
Inhabiters of this Island being merely barbarous, never troubled themselves to
transmit their Originals to posterity. Caesar. Com. lib. 6. Druides the only
wise men among the first Inhabitants of this Island. If the first Inhabitants of
this Island had written any thing of their original, yet it must needs have
perished. Gildas de excidi^ Brita^iae. No understanding of the first af^aires
of this Island, but from sorraine Writers.
knowing that the first Inhabitants being merely barbarous, never troubled
themselves with care to transmit their Originals to posterity: neither if they
would, could have done, being without Letters, which only do preserve and
transfer knowledge unto others. And say they had letters, yet was it not
lawful for them to commit their affairs to writing, as Caesar does testify of
the Druides, the only wise and learned men among them, that had the managing
both of Justice and religious Rites. And had they committed these things to
writing, yet doubtless had they perished in the reuolutions of so many ages as
are passed, and so many conuersions or euersions of the State. Gildas and
Nintus, the Britains first Historians, confess plainly, that they had no
understanding of the ancient affairs of this Island, but from foreign Writers;
and neither that above two hundred and odd years before the birth of our
Savior Christ. At which time Polybius a most grave Writer, and an attendant
Polybius.
upon Scipio, says, that the Regions Northward from Narbona (as this is) were
utterly unknown; and whatsoever was written or reported of them, was but a
dream. And therefore until such time as the Roman Roman Writers the best
directers for the antiquity of Britain.
Writers reach forth their hands to direct us, we shall wander, as without a
guide, and shall seem to heap more rubbish upon former ruins.

(2) Yet let this be granted, that the Original names of Countries and
Provinces were first assumed from their possessors, whereof Josephus in the
seventh The original names of Countries and Provinces assumed first from their
possessors. Judge. 18. 29. Judge. 10. 4.
Chapter of his first Book of Antiquities is a sufficient Witness, who in the
dispersion of Noah's sons and his nephews, names the Countries according to
their families. So did the children of Dan name Laish after their father: Iair
his Cities that he conquered in the Land of Gilead: and Judea from Judah whose
King was of him: And that this also was the practice of the Gentiles, Perionius
does show, who says, that himself (...) de original. Gallic^. Spain named
from Hispalus, Italy fr^ Ital^. (...) the sixth son of Iap^eth the first
inhabiter of this Island, who named it (...) 252. years after the flood.
knew no Nation in the earth, which would not have their names either from
their Prince, Captain, or King: the example whereof he inserteth, that Spain
was so named from Hispalus, Italy from Italus, and the like.

(3) And accordingly from Samothes the sixth son of Iapheth (whom Moses
calls Mesech) the brother of Gomer, and of Ia^an, whose seed is said in the
tenth of Genesis to have replenished the Isles of the Gentiles, is brought by
some Authors into this Island, the year after the general Flood two hundred
fifty and two, where he seated, and gave Laws to his people, and left to his
posterity the name thereof to be called Samothea, after his own. But since
the credit of this Samothes and his Samothea arises only from a The credit of
this Samothes and his Samothea arises only from a small and new pamphlet,
bearing the name of Berosus the Chaldean.
small and new pamphlet, bearing the name of Berosus the Chaldean, bolstred out
under a show of aged Antiquity, and thrust into the world under the
countenance of the ancient Historian himself: I mean not to enforce, seeing
my purpose is to expose this most beautiful Island in her own beseeming
attire, and not deformed by these rotten and patched rags. And of this forged
Berosus we have better cause to vpbraid Johannes Annius his Countenancer and
Commenter, then the Egyptian Priests had to twit Solon, in accusing Plato in
Ti^. Solo^ quippeth the Grecians, as not having attained to the years of a
gray head for history. Lodouic. Viues. Gasperus Varrerius. Berosus reiecte d.
the Grecians, that for history had not attained to the years of a gray head.
For it exceeds not much one hundred and twenty years since the same book
first appeared in the world; and then vehemently suspected as fabulous by
Lodouicus Viues, and afterward convicted by the learned Gasperus Varrerius in
a several treatise, and now universally rejected of all skillful Antiquaries.

(4) But the name ALBION is better received, ALBION ye name of this Island so
termed by the Grecians.
being found so termed of the Grecians in ancient time, as in the book De
Mundo, written to Alexander, and supposed to be Aristotle's, Pliny in his
Natural History, Ptolomie, Strabo, and others: yet upon what ground it should
be so called there arise many conjectures. Pomponius Mela, Nicolas Perottus,
Rigmanus Philesius, Aristotle, and Humfrey Lhuyd, derive it from Pomponius Mela
cap. de Gallia.
Albion Mareoticus a Giant, and son of Neptune, that The name Albion from
Albion the Giant.
conquered (as they say) these Samotheans, and seated himself in this Island
the year after the Flood three hundred thirty five. And if that be true which
Perottus and Lilius Giraldus have written, then may this Albion give name to
this Island. Notwithstanding, Strabo, Munster, and Friar Bartholomew, will have
it so Strabo lib. 4. Munst Cosmogr. Bar^hol. de proprietatibus rerum.
named ab albis rupibus, of the rocks and white clifts appearing toward the
coasts of France: which carries the more likelihood through the credit of
Orpheus a most ancient Poet, who in his Argonauticks (if so be they were his)
calls the Island next unto Hibernia or Hernin, which questionless is this of
ours, (...), that is, the white Land. And accordingly have Albion called the
White Land.
the Welsh Poets called it Inis Wen. And this is further confirmed from Cicero,
who terms these whitish Welsh Poets called this Island I^is Wen.
clifts mirificas moles; as also by the anticke Coins of Antonius Pius and
Seuerus the Roman Emperors, whereon BRITAIN is stamped in a woman's attire
Britain stamped in a woman's attire sitting upon rocks. Fracast. de morbis
contagio^is, Lib. 1.
sitting upon rocks. And the same being chalkie, or of a plaster-like
substance, Fracastorius supposes was the cause of the sweating sickness, and
whereof Albion had the name. Unless some will derive it from Alphon, which as
Festus says, does signify white in Greek; or Olbion, rich or happy, in
regard of the fertility of the soil, wholesome temperature of the air, and
the rich commodities in the same: either from Albion for the high situation.
But from the Latin albis rupibus Humfrey L^uyd in Bre^ar. Brit.
it could not be derived, when that language was unknown to the world.
Marianus the Monk, John Rous, David Pencair, and William Caxton, from others
Marianus Scotus. Ioh. Rous. Albion, from Albina the beautiful daughter of
D^oclesian.
more ancient, do fetch the name thereof from Albina the beautiful daughter
of Dioclesian King of Syria, who with her sisters, thirty in number, for the
slaughter of their husbands, were banished their Country, and without man,
oars, or tackles, were committed to the mercy of the Seas, who after many
adventures, lastly arrived upon this shore, where they inhabited, and gave
name to this Island, calling it Albion after the A ridiculous opinion for a
progeny of Giants in Albion.
name of their eldest sister: and accompanying with Devils, brought forth a
progeny of Giants, if we will believe the Legend of this most impudent lier,
which is worthily rejected by Badius, Volateranus, Harding, Bale, John Rous,
and others. But that the name Albion was both of great acceptance and long
continuance, is apparent by the worthy Epitheton of King Edgar the Saxon, who
in his Charter for the foundation of the Abbie of Ely, has these words: Ego
Edgarus Basileus The name Albion re^eined in the Char^rs of some of our latter
Kings.
dilectae Insulae Albionis, subditis nobis sceptris Scotorum, Cumbrorum, and
omnium circumcirca Regionum, quieta pace fruens, etc. By which he knitteth the
whole Island together, as a Land worthily to be beloved, and calls it ALBION.

(5) The next name ascribed unto this Island is BRITAIN. The Grecians first
named this Island by ye name BRITAIN.
BRITAIN, and that first found and given by the Grecians, who were the first
discouerers of these Western parts of the world: either from their painted
bodies; as their neighbors (if not ancestors) the Gauls were named of their
long shaggie hair, or of their rich metals therein gotten, and thence carried
in abundance into other Countries; or from Brute, that with his dispersed
Trojans conquered it, as he of Monmouth has translated; or what occasion
soever, Ieffrey ap Arthur.
I dispute not: only it fears me I shall give but small satisfaction to the
desirous Reader, of the cause and original of this name, being consorted with
so many uncertainties, wherein the further we follow this entangled How this
Island came to have the name Britanni^ is very uncertain.
thread, the further are we lead into the Labyrinth of ambiguitie. But as
Plutarch, Liuy, and other Latin Writers have complained of the many fictions
The fainings of Poets have bred mistrust in many true histories.
and fables of Poets intermingled with the histories of truth, whereby truth it
self was often made inctedible; so we in rehearsing the diverse names of
Britannie, and the reasons thereof by sundry Writers alleged, rest free in our
relations, either from impeaching the power of Antiquity, or approouing those
things that are as yet wrapped up in Times Obliuions, leaving the credit to
them that have left the same unto us, and the censure of their opinions to the
judgment of the learned, and those of better experience.

(6) The vulgar received opinion, held on with four hundred years
continuance, (some few men's Britain the name of this Island thought to take his
name from Brute.
exceptions had against the same) is, that this Island took the name of
Britannia from Brute the son of Syluius, of whom more shall be spoken in the
next Chapter for the peopling of this Island, and from whom some (following a
suspected Gildas) do write the name Brutaine: for so does Hierome, who
translating Aethicus that excellent Scythian Philosopher, calls both this and
the Islands adjacent, Insulas Brutanicas. But besides the many objections made
both by foreign and home-^red Writers, that seem to make the story of Brute
doubtful, Humfrey Lhuyd a Cambre-Britaine, a learned and diligent searcher of
In his Breuiarie of Britain.
Antiquities, does confidently deny the name Britain to be taken from Brute;
and among many other observations, makes this an infallible argument, that the
letter B. is not the first radical of that name; and affirms The letter B.
no radical in the British tongue.
boldly, that there is not any British word whose first radical letter is B.
And therefore he will have it to be anciently written PRYDCAIN, compounded of
two British words, PRIDE and CAIN, which PRYD-CAIN
signify (as he says) Beauty and White; the C. being lost in the latter word,
for the more easy pronuntiation in the British tongue; and the P. in the
former changed into B. by the Latins, for the more gentle and pleasant sounds
sake: so that himself thinks, that those learned and expert men in the
British tongue, which wrote the Islands name with B. do therein rather follow
the Latins, then judging that to be the true name indeed: for proof whereof
he cites both ancient Copies and Traditions of their own old Poets the
Bardi, by whom Britain usually called Prydain.
(says he) it was usually called Prydain, as the fittest denomination for so
beautiful a Land. But if either color or commodities were her Godfathers at
the font-stone, why was she not rather named The Palace of Queen Ceres, as old
Orpheus terms her; either Insula flor^, as it has been found written in a
very Brita^ia the Insula (...).
ancient manu-script? And yet to second this his conc^ited name, I find
recorded by Bishop Cooper, a learned Bishop Cooper in his Dictionarie.
Writer, that which makes for that purpose. At E^ychurth (says he) two miles
from Salisburie, in the digging (...) written Pryd^a.
down of a wall, a book containing twenty le^es of very thick velo^e was
found, which from the hands of Master Richard Pace, chief Secretary to the
King, I received; King Edward V^.
but being sore defaced, could read no one sentence through, yet did I well
perceive the word PRYTANIA, (not called so, from the adjuncts white and
Beauteous) but rather from the Greek word (...) Prytania, which Prytania so
called from the Greek word (...).
as he says, does signify metals. For the Grecians flourishing in wisdom,
and experience, entered the Ocean, and finding this Island full of Brass, Tynne,
Lead, Iron, Gold, and Silver gave name thereunto accordingly and called it
Prytania. Thus far he. And some in regard of these rich commodities thence
brought, will have it named Britannia, as upon like occasion Vibius Sequester
affirms Calabria sometimes to have been so called. Others, and those many,
do hold a more strange Vibius Sequest.
opinion, namely, that this Island was called Britannia of Bretta a Spanish word
which signifies Earth, for Britannia of Bretta a Spanish word.
that it was separated from the maine land, and, say they, it was once joined
with the continent of France. Of this opinion are Antonius Volscus, Dominicus
Marius Niger, Seruius Honoratus, Vinianus, Bodine, Twyne, and Antonius Volscus
Dominicus Marius Niger, etc.
Verstegan. But how that name from that separation may be gathered I understand
not: for if it be granted, that this Island also was cut from the continent (as
it is thought all others in the world were,) by the violent rage of the
universal flood, yet it follows not, that this only should claim that name,
and from that occasion, more then any other, or then all of them so divided and
set apart in the maine Ocean. Others there are that would have the name
Britain to be brought from Britona a Nymph in Greece, daughter to Britannia
named of Britona a Nymphe. Textor Chr^.
Mars, who (as they say) to avoid the lascivious intents of Minos, forsook the
country, and passing the seas arrived in this Island and by her the name arose,
this has Textor. But I might as well cite Calepine for his Anglia, and
Marianus for his Albina, being all fables Textor.
consorting alike together, and fictions of the same authority that Virgils
Dido is. Hesychius deriueth the Hesychius.
name Britain from Britannus the father of Celtice on whom Hercules begat
Celtus the original of the Celtae as Parthenius Nicaeus a very ancient author
writes. Parthenius Nicaeus. Sir Thomas Eliot. Britain of the Greek word (...).
And Sir Thomas Eliot a learned Knight draws the name of this Island from the
Greek fountain also, but of other signification, viz. (...) Prutania, by which
term the Athenians signified their public revenues, and yet that is justly
excepted against, seeing that it is a peculiar term only to the Athenians, and
that Grecians called this Island (...) and not (...). Goropius Becanus in Orig.
de Ant. lib. 6. Bridania or Free-Denmark.
the Grecians called this Island (...) not (...). Goropius Becanus in his
Original of Antwerp says, that the Danes sought here to plant themselves, and
so named this Island Bridania, that is, free Denmark. And others derive it from
Prutenia a country in Germany. But that both these are fictions it manifestly
appears, for that this Island was famous by the name of Britain many hundred
years before that either Dania or Britain so named before either Dania or
Prutenia were heard of in the world. Pomponius Latus.
Prutania were heard of in the world.

Pomponius Latus would have it Briton, and that name given it from the Britons
in France. Indeed it is probable, that from the Celtes, the old Gauls, our
originals descended: but that the name should come of them has no color of
truth, seeing that those Britons came from us, and not we from them: and in
Caesar's Britons in France came of us. Cambden Brit. page 8. Forcatulus. Britain
called of Brithin a drink. White. Britain called of an Hebrew word. Isidore.
time that coast was called Armorica, but this of ours Britain. Forcatulus
deriueth the name thereof from Brithin a drink, which as Athenaeus says was
used among the Greeks. And others will have it from the Brutij a roauing and
straggling people in Italy: both which are accounted but idle conceits and for
no less we will leave them. White of Basingstocke will have the name thereof
derived from an Hebrew word, and Isidore from a word of her own language. Thus
then is Britanny burdened with many titles under one truth; and these are the
ascriptions, causes and exceptions, as far as we are able to gather: all which
must give place to that which is to follow out of the painful collections and
judicious obseruances of our illustruous Antiquarie Master Cambden. Whose words
I will abridge, and by his good favor bring to furnish this chapter, and
further to satisfy the unsatisfied Reader. Cambdeni Britannia.


(7) This then he holds for granted, that ancient Ancient nations had names
of their own: afterward wrested by Greeks and Latins.
nations in the beginning had names of their own: and that after from these the
Greeks and Latins by wresting them to the analogy or proportion of their
speech, imposed names upon Regions and countries, which took their
denominations from their people and in-dwellers. So Iewry was named from the
Jews, Media from the Medes, Persia of the Iewry so called of the Jews. Media
of the Medes. Scythia of the Scythians. Britta, Brito, Britones and Brittus.
From Brit or Brith.
Persians, Scythia of the Scythians, etc. And why not then by the authority of
Martial, Iuuenal, Ausonius, Procopius, and in old inscriptions set up by the
Britains themselves, BRITTA, BRITO, BRITONES, BRITTVS, from BRIT, or BRITH,
from whom any one being of that nation might be termed NATIONE BRITTO, as is
seen so inscribed in Saint Mary the Round at Rome? The Saxons likewise
themselves called the Britains (...), and Witichindas the Saxon every where
names the Britains Britae: so that the word BRIT. Witichindas.
BRIT is doubtless the Primitive, from whence BRITTO is derived, and from
whence the first glimpse of light Brit the primitive from whence Britto is
derived.
leading to the word BRITAIN, seems to appear. And that all nations devised
their names of that, wherein they either excelled others, or were known by
from others, whether in regard of their first founders honor, as the Jones of
Iauan, the Israelites of Israel, the Cananites of Canaan; or whether in respect
of their nature, conditions, and inclinations; Israelites so called in honor
of their first founder Israel. Iberi why so called. Nomades named of their
breeding of Cattle. Dio. Aethiopians so called of their black hue. Julius
Solinus.
as the Iberi after the Hebrew Etymology because they were Miners; the Heneti
because they were straglers; the Nomades for that they were breeders of
Cattle; the Almanes for their esteemed valor and manhood; the Frankners for
being free; the Pannonians, as Dio conceiteth, of their coats with
cloth-sleeues; the Aethiopians of their black hue: and the Albanes because
they were borne with white hair, for so says Solinus, that the color of
their heads gave name unto the people. Seeing then that these our Ilanders were
known and called by a name common to both them and their neighbors, Cimbri or
Cumeri, Britains and their neighbors called both by one name Cimbri or Cumeri.
Caesar, Mela, Pliny, Martial.
and had no better mark to be distinguished and known from the borderers,
then by their custom of painting their bodies, whereof the most approved
authors do witness, as Caesar, Mela, Pliny, Martial an^ others, who affirm
that the Britanes used to color themselves with woad, called in the Latin
glastum (and Glase at this day with them does The Britain colored themselves
to be distinguished from their neighbors.
signify blew) what if I then should conjecture (says he) that they were
called Britains from this their painted bodies? for what is thus stained or
colored, in their ancient country speech is called BRITH. Neither let this
Etymology of Britains seem to be either harsh or absurd, seeing the very
words sound alike, and the name also as an express image represents the
thing which in Etymologies are chiefly required; for Brith, and Brit, do
passing well accord: And the word Brith among the Britains, implies that
Brith and Brit do accord.
which the Britans were indeed, to wit, painted, stained, died, and colored,
as the Latin poets describe them: having their backs pide or medly colored,
as Oppianus terms Oppianus. Cyn^. li. 1. Britains so named for painting
themselves.
them. From which colors and use of painting, the ancient Britains (as he
thinks) had their names, and as yet in use among the Welsh. But this is
certain that a Britain is called in the British tongue BRITHON, and as BRITO
came of BRITH, so did BRITANNIA, who as Isidore says took the name from a
word of their own nation: for what time the ancient Greeks (that first Isidore.
gave name to this Island) either as rouers or merchants traveled into other
remote and far disioined countries (as Eratosthenes reports) learned from
the Inhabitants themselves, or else of the Gauls which spoke the same language,
Eratosthenes.
that this our nation was called Brith and Brithon: They then unto the word
BRITH, added TANIA, The Grecians unto the word Brith added tania.
which in the Greek Glossaries betokens a REGION, and whereof they made a
compound name (...), that is, the BRITONS-LAND. And that this is so, the
countries also lying in the West part of the world, as Mauritania, Lusitania,
and Aquitania, do sufficiently confirm: for the Grecians being the first
Surueiors of those regions, of Mauri, whom Strabo says was called Numidia,
made Mauritania; Strabo. Tania added to^ diverse countries, by the Grecians. Iuo
Carnotensis.
of Lusus the son of Bacchus, Lusitania, and of Aquis (waters, as Iuo
Carnotensis is of opinion) called the country Aquitania: as also Turditania,
and Bastinania, Provinces in Spain, might arise from the Turdi, and Basti their
possessors. And that this manner of composition is most usual in the names of
countries we see: For came not Ireland by composition of the Irish word Erim?
Did not Angle terre gr^w together of an English and French word and became
England, Does not Franc-lond proceed from England coming of Angleterre.
a French and Saxon word? Came not Poleland from a Polonian word, which with
them betokens a plain? and was not Danmarch compounded of Dan and the Dutch
word Danmarch compounded of Dan and March.
March, which signifies a bound or limit? Neither have we cause to wonder at
this Greek addition TANIA, seeing that S. Hierome in his questions upon
Genesis, proved out S. Hierom. in Gene.
of most ancient Authors, that the Greeks inhabited along the sea coasts and
Isles of Europe thorowout as far as to this our Island. Let us read, says he,
Varroes books of Antiquities, and those of Sisinius Capito, as also the Greek
writer Phlegon, with the rest of the great learned men, and Phlegon.
we shall see, all the Islands well near, and all the sea coasts of the whole
world, to have been taken up with Greek inhabitants, Grecians inhabited well
near all the sea coasts of the whole world.
who, as I said before, from the mountains Amanus and Taurus even to the
British Ocean, possessed all the parts along the sea side. And verily, that the
Greeks arrived in this our region, viewed and considered well the site and
nature thereof, there will be no doubt nor question made: if we observe what
Athenaeus has written concerning Phileas Athenaeus.
Taurominites who was in Britain in the year one hundred and sixty before
Caesar's coming: if we call to remembrance The certainty of the Greeks
inhabiting in Britain. Brodaeus Miscellan. lib. 3. Ulysses Altar in Caledonia.
Thule thought to be one of the Isles of the Orcades in Scotland. Low countries.
the Altar with an inscription unto Ulysses in Greek letters, erected in
Caledonia as Solinus says, and lastly if we mark what Pytheas before the time
of the Romans here, has delivered and written as touching the distance of
Thule from Britain. For who had ever discovered unto the Greeks, Britain,
Thule, the Belgic countries, and their sea coasts especially, if the Greek
ships had not entered the British and German Ocean, yea and related the
description thereof unto their Geographers? Had Pytheas, think you, come to the
knowledge of six days sailing beyond Britain, unless some of the Greeks had
showed the same? Who ever told them of Scandia, Bergos and Nerigon, out of
which men may sail into Thule? And these names seem Thule much mentioned in
Greek writers.
to have been better known unto the most ancient Greeks, then either to Pliny
or to any Roman. Whereupon Mela testifies, that Thule was much mentioned and
renowned in Greek writers: Pliny likewise writes thus; Britain an Island famous
in the monuments and records both of the Greeks and of us. By this means
therefore, so many Greek words have crept into the British, French, and
withal, into the Belgic or Low Dutch language. And if Lazarus Laza. Baysius.
As other nations glory that they derive many words from the Greeks, so may we.
Baysius, and Budaeus do make their vant and glory in this, that their
Frenchmen have been of old (...) that is, lovers and studious of the Greeks,
grounding their reason upon few French words of that Idiome, which receive some
marks and tokens of the Greek tongue: if Hadrianus Iunius ioyeth no less,
because in the Belgic words there lie covertly Greek Etymologies: then may the
Britains make their boast in whose language many words there be derived from
the Greeks. Thus far M. Cambdens judgment for Britannia.

Which name we find first mentioned by Polybius the Greeks historian, who lived
and traueled with Scipio through most parts of Europe, about 265. years before
the birth of Christ. And after him Athenaeus a Greek author of good account,
and before the year Athenaeus. For so by the Scriptures account I place the
time. In Britain great store of large trees.
of grace 179. mentions the name of Britain, and that upon this occasion:
King Hiero, says he, framing a ship of such hugeness and burden, as was
admirable to the world, was much troubled for a tree, whereof he might make the
maine mast: which at last with much ado was found in Britain, by the
direction of a Swineheard: and by Phileas Taurominites the Mechanic conveyed
Phileas Taurominites.
into Sicilie, whereby that want was sufficiently supplied. To this let not the
Critics from Caesar say, that Caesar.
Britain brought forth neither Beech nor Fur, as he in his fist book of
commentaries affirms (if by fagus he mean the Beech) seeing that the same
kind does most In Scotland Fur trees for masts.
plentifully grow in all parts of this Island, and the Firre-trees for masts in
the North west of Scotland upon the banks of the Lough argicke of such great
height and thickness, that at the root they bear 28. handfuls about, and the
bodies mounted to 90. foot of height they bear at that length 20. inches
Diametre, as has been measured by some in commission, and so certified to his
Majesty: and at this present growing upon the lands of the right worthy Knight
Sir Alexander Hayes, his Majesty's principal Secretay for Scotland. But among
the Latin Writers Lucretius was the first that before Caesar mentions
Britain in these verses: Nam quid Britannum coelum defer putamus, Lucretius.

Et quod in Aegypto est, qua mundi claudicat Axis:
We see the difference in the spheeres where Britains Sun does go
From Egypts Clime, wherein Charles waine is forced to draw so low.


(8) Other names has this Island been termed by, and that either by way of
note for her situation, as Insula Caeruli, the Island in the Sea, so written in
the Britain called Insula Caeruli.
sonet or parodia made against Ventidius Bassus, and by Claudian confirmed,
whose sides (says he) the azure Sea does wash. And in a very ancient
manuscript it is found written, Insula florum, an Island of flowers, for the
abundance of Grain therein growing: as also for her subjection to the Romans,
has been called by Aegisippus, the Roman World, and by her own Historian
Britain the Roman world. Prosperus Aquitaine. A prophecy of the Roman sooth
sayers concerning Britain. This Island Britain named the Roman Island.
Gildas, Romania: for being first subdued by them, the very name of servitude
(says he) stuck fast to the soil. And Prosperus Aquitanis in express words
calls it, the Roman Island, and so did the South-saiers when the statues of
Tacitus and Florianus the Emperors were by lightning overthrown, who
prophesied, that an Emperor should arise out of their family, that should
send a Pro-consull to the Roman Island. Upon the like cause of conquest and
subjection we read in Amianus, that what time the Island had assaied a dangerous
Amianus Marcel. lib. 28. cap. 7.
revolt in the reign of Valentinianus the Emperor, Theodosius as then Governor
of Britain, reducing them under their wonted obedience, in honor of
Valentinianus, caused the Island to be called VALENTIA, which name
notwithstanding died either with, This Island named Valentia.
or immediately after the death of the said Emperor.

(9) But about the same time, when as by Gods decree the Romans fullness was
come to the wane, and Many countries arise by the Romans downfall.
the greatness of their glory did abate; by the downfall of that one Empire
many Kingdoms began to arise, and to have their Rulers, Laws, and Limits of
themselves. Among the rest, this Island Britain shortly came to be divided
into three scuerall Kingdoms, This Island Britain divided in to three
kingdoms. The first, Scotland, whose partition southward is from Carlisle to
Newcastle.
and each of them to retain an absolute power in their own dominions, and
known by their several and proper names. The first was Scotland from Scotia,
and that from Scythia, as the best suppose, whose Southern bounds was the
famous Wall from Carlisle to Newcastle, and from thence the enorme tract of all
that Northern promontorie was called Scotia, or Scotland. The second was
Cambria, of us called Wales, sited in the West of this Island, enclosing those
waste The second. Cambria or Wales, whose partition is from Basingwark to Wye.
mountains with a ditch drawn from Basingwarke in Flint-shire in the North,
to the mouth of Wye near Bristoll in the South, so separated by great Offa the
Mercian King. And the third was Angle-lond, the East, the most fruitful, and
best of the Island, lying coasted The third. Angle-lond coasted with the French
and German Seas.
with the French and Germane Seas; so named when the united Heptarchie of the
Saxons was ruled by King Egbert, who by his edict dated at Winchester, Anno
819. commanded the same to be called Angle-lond, according to the name of the
place from whence his ancestors This Island named Angle-lond of a place in
Denmark called Engloen.
the Angle-Saxons came, which was out of the continent part of Denmark, lying
betwixt Iuitland and Holsatia, where to this day the place retains the name
Engloen. And therefore Calepine is to be rejected, that would have the name
from Queen Angela, and Goropius, of good Anglers; either from Pope Gregory
his attribute of Angell-like faces; or from others that Gregory 1.
would feign it from Angula the Giant-like brother to Danus; or force it from
Angulus Orbis.

(10) Neither indeed was it called England before This Island not called England
before the days of Canutus the Dane.
the days of Canutus the Dane; but with Angle-land, retained still the names
both of Albion and Britain, as in a Saxon Charter made by King Edgar the tenth
in succession from Egbert, and no less then one hundred forty and nine years
after this Edict is seen, This Island usually called both Angle-lond, Albion,
and Britain, before Canutus days.
where in the beginning he styles himself thus: Ego Edgar totius Albionis
Basileus, etc. And in the end of the same charter thus: Edgar Rex totius
Britannia D^conem cum sigillo S. Crucis confirmaui. And yet upon his Coins
wrote himself Rex Anglis, whereby we see the relish of the former names not
utterly extinct, though a new was imposed by the Saxons.

(11) This last name this Island still retained, The name England not changed
either by the Dane or Normane Conquerours.
though two several Conquests of two several Nations were made of the same.
Neither did William the Conqueror attempt to alter it, it sounding belike so
Angel-like in his ears, accounting himself most happy to be King of so
worthy a Kingdom: the glory whereof is further enlarged by the ranking of
Christian Has the fifth place in all General Councels.
nations, assembled in their general Councels, wherein England is accounted
the fifth, and has place of presidencie before kingdoms of larger
territories. This name of England continued for the space of seven hundred
eighty and three years, unto the coming Has continued and kept the name
England the space of seven hundred eighty and three years.
in of our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, in anno 1602. who by the hand of GOD
has united all these Diademes into one Imperial Crown, and reduced the many
Kingdoms in one Island, under the government of one Monarch: and after the
manifold conquests, irruptions, and dissensions, has settled an eternal
amity; and extinguishing all differences of names, has given the whole Island
the ancient name of Now reduced to the name of Great Britain.
GREAT BRITAIN, by his Edict dated at Westminster, quartring the royal Arms
of his several Kingdoms in one royal Scutchion, and for his mott, as is most
meet, BEATI PACIFICI.

THE ANCIENT NATIONS INHABITING THIS ISLAND OF GREAT BRITAIN BEFORE THE
CONQVEST THEREOF BY THE ROMANS. CHAPTER III.
IT is not to be doubted, but that this Island with the Universal was
replenished Britain replenished with people before Noah's flood.
with people, immediately after that men began to be multiplied upon the earth,
even in the days of the former Patriarchs, and long before the Flood of Noah,
as sundry ancient Writers have related. And surely if we consider in those
first ages of the world the long life of man (the only means to
multiplication) and the worlds continuance for one thousand six hundred fifty
and six years before it was destroyed, we shall easily yield, that every
Country and corner of the earth was plentifully peopled and inhabited. And so
much do the Sacred Scriptures intimate unto us, where, by the Prophet Esaias it
is said, Thus says the Lord, that created heaven; God himself, that framed
the earth, and made it: he Isa. 45. 18.
has prepared it; he created it not in vain; he formed it to be inhabited.

(2) But when the wrath of GOD was executed upon the world for sin, and all
ouer-whelmed with a Flood of waters, the whole earth thereby became altogether
unpeopled, eight persons only with the breedreserued Noah's flood.
creatures saved in the floting Arc: Whose Port or Haven was the mountain of
Araret in Armenia; The haven of Noah's Arc, Mount Araret.
whence, with the blessing of procreation, mankind again began to be
multiplied upon the earth; and from the confusion of Babels building, to be
scattered Babels Tower the cause of sundry Languages, and dispersion of people.
by Tribes and Colonies, according to the diuer sitie of Languages, into diverse
parts and Countries of the world, giving names to the places where they seated,
according to the names of their Princes, or chief Commanders. Amongst whom the
sons of Iapheth the eldest son of Noah (whom Moses declares to Iapheths
progeny peopled Europe. Genesis 10.
have peopled the Isles of the Gentiles) betook themselves into Europe, these
western parts of the world: as Sem did into Asia, and Cham into Africa: whose
Sems planted in Asia. Chams offspring seated in Africa. Joseph. lib. 1.
posterities accordingly dispersed Josephus in his first Book of Antiquities
has both branched into their several divisions, and reduced them to their
first roots and originals.

(3) Now that the Isles of the Gentiles mentioned Europe the Isles of Gentiles.
by Moses, were these of Europe, all learned men confess: and therefore those
especially of Britannie and Sicilie, as Wolfangus Musculus is of opinion. And
that Wolfang. Muscul. Origin. lib. 9. cap. 2. Wolfang.
Europe fell to Iaphets portion, Josephus and Isidore do agree: who affirm
his offspring to have inhabited from the Mount Taurus all Europe Northward, so
far Lazius. Theophilus Episc. Antioch. ad An^ol. lib. 2.
as the British Seas, leaving names both to places and people. And Gildas, as
Nubrigensis witnesses, and Polydore Virgil grants, will have this Island
inhabited even from the Flood. But of these ancient things, Sebastian Munster.
says Sebastian Munster, no man can write certainly, it depending only upon
coniecturals, and the same by Stories of the first times meerelie coniecturall.
hearsay, and flying reports of private men, as Origin speaks.

(4) Gomer then, the eldest son of Iapheth, gave Gomer the eldest son of
Iapheth.
name to the Gomerians, who filled almost this part of the world, leading (as
Villichius says) in the tenth Villichius. A Colonie of Gomerians called Combri
or Cimbri, of Gomer, came into (...). Englishmen were of Cimbrica Chersonesus,
which came from Italy. Ioh. Lewis in Reform. hist. li. 1. ca. 9.
year of Nimrod, a Colonie out of Armenia into Italy, which of Gomer were
called Combri, and afterward Cimbri: whence such as departed Italy went into
the North parts and gave name to Cimbrica Chersonesus: from whence it is
certain we the English proceed, and of whom also it is likely the Britains
came. For so judges a learned Britain himself, who says his countrymen the
Welsh which are unlearned, as yet know no other name for their land and people,
but only C^mbri.

(5) And that of these Gomerians were also the Gauls of the Gomerians.
Gauls, learned Clarenceaux that brightest lamp to all Antiquities, out of
Josephus and Zonaras sufficiently has observed; who that they were also called
Cimbri, he proves out of Cicero, and Appian Alexandrinus; Appian. Alexand.
Lib. (...).
that those Barbarians whom Marius defeated, Cicero plainly terms Gauls,
where he says C. Marius repressed the armies of the Gauls, entering in great
numbers Gauls by all History were the Cimbrians.
into Italy: which, as all Historians witness, were the Cimbrians. And the
Habergeon of their king Beleus dug up at Aquae Sextia, where Marius put them
to flight, does show the same: whereon was engraven in strange characters
BELEOS CIMBROS; as also the testimony of Lucan does no Marius Habergeon. Marius
killed by a Cimbrian.
less, who calls the Ruffine hired to kill Marius, a Cimbrian, whom Liuy and
Plutarch in the life of Marius affirm to be a Gaul. They also who under the
conduct of Brennus spoiled Delphi in Greece, were Delphi spoiled by Brennus.
Gauls, as all writers with one voice agree; and yet that these were named
Cimbri, Appian in his Illyricks does testify. And for Brennus their
Grand-Captaine, Brennus a Britain or a Cimbrian.
our Historians report him to be a Britain: as likewise Virgil (though in
taunting wise) terms that Grammarian Virgil. Catalect. lib 8. cap. 3.
Quintilian.
the Britain Thucydides, whom Quintilian affirms to be a Cimbrian.

(6) And if of the rest of Noah's nephews, seated The Turks, the Jones, Medes,
and Thracians come of Noah's nephews.
in several countries, the Nations proceeding from them, are known by their
original names, as the Turks of Togorma, whom the Jews to this day so term,
the Jones from Iauan, the Modes from Madai, the Thracians from Tiras, and so of
the rest, whose names as yet sound not much unlike to their first planters; why
then shall not we think, that our Britanes or Cumerians, are the very
offspring of Gomer, Britains or Cumerians the offspring of Gomer.
and of Gomer took their denomination, the name so near according? Since
granted it is, that they planted themselves in the utmost borders of Europe, as
Isodore Isodore.
has said. For the Ark resting in Armenia, and the people Armenia the
fountain region of all Nations. Places nearest Armenia first peopled.
thence flowing like waters from the spring, replenished those parts first that
lay next their site: as Asia the less, and Greece before Italy: Italy before
Gaul, and Gaul before Britain. And if we consider the occasions, that might
be offered, either for disburdening the multitudes of people, for conquest,
desire of The occasions why people disperie.
novelties, smalnesse of distance, or commodities of the air and soil, we may
easily conceive this Island to have been peopled from thence. For it stands
with sense that every country received their first inhabitants Each Nation
peopled from places near.
from places near bordering, rather then from them that lay more remote: for
so was Cyprus peopled out of Asia, Sicile and Candie out of Greece; Corsica and
Sardinia, out of Italy, Zeland out of Germany, Island out of Norway, and so of
the rest. Now that Britain had her first inhabitants from Gaul, sufficiently
is Britain had her first inhabitants from the Gauls.
proved by the name, site, religion, manners, and languages, by all which the
most ancient Gauls and Britains have been as it were linked together in some
mutual society; as is at large proved by our Arch-Antiquary in his famous
work, to which I refer the Britannia Cambdeni.
studious reader.

(7) And although the inner parts of the Island were inhabited, as Caesar says,
of such whom they themselves out of their own records, report to have Caesar.
Comment. Lib. 5.
been borne in the Island: yet the sea coasts were peopled The seacoasts of
Britain peopled out of Belgia.
by those, who upon purpose to make war, had passed thither out of Belgia, and
Gaul, who still carried the names of those cities and states, out of which they
came: as the Belgae, the Attrebatij, Parisi, and the like names of people both
in Gaul, and in Britain, that after the wars there remained. Which is the
more confirmed in that both the Provinces were governed by one and the same
Prince, as Caesar in his own remembrance Caesar. Com. lib. 2 A part of Gaul
and Britain governed by one Prince.
knew, and names one Diuitiacus to hold a good part of Gaul, and also of
Britain under his government. Yea and Tacitus the most curious searcher into
Britains affairs, in the life of Agricola thus disciphereth them. Now (says
he) what manner of men Tacitus in vita Agricola.
the first inhabitants of Britannie were, foreign brought in, or borne in the
land, as among a barbarous people, it is not certainly known. Their
complexions are different, and thence may some conjectures be taken: for the
red hair of the dwellers in Caledonia, and mighty limbs, import a German
descent. The colored countenances The Caledoniant import a German disscent.
The Silures from Spain.
of the Silures, and hair most commonly curled, and site against Spain, seem
to induce, that the old Spaniards passed the Sea, and possessed those places.
The nearest to France likewise resemble the French, either because they retain
of the race from which they descended, or that in Countries butting together,
the same aspect of the heavens does yield the same complexions of bodies. But
generally it is most likely, the French being nearest, did people the Land. In
their ceremonies and superstitious Britain most likely to be peopled by the
French.
persuasions, there is to be seen an apparent conformity. The Language
differs not much: like boldness to challenge and set into dangers: when
dangers come, like fear in refusing: saving that the Britains make show of
great courage, as being not mollified yet by long peace.

(8) Whereby we see, that these Cimbrians (of whom, as Appian Alexandrinus
says, came the Celts, Appian. Alexand. in (...). Celt.
and of them the Gauls, as Plutarch in the life of Camillus Plutarch. Plato.
Aristotle.
affirms, with whom both Plato and Aristotle agree) were the ancient
progenitors of these our Britains: and them, with the Gauls, to be both one
and the same people, is allowed by Pliny, that places Britains and Gauls
both placed in the Continent of France
them both in the continent of France; for so Eustathius in his Commentary
understands Dionysius Afar, that these Britains in Gaul gave name to the
Island now called GREAT BRITAIN, as Pomponius Pomponius Laetus. ^. hist. Angl.
lib. 1, cap. (...).
Laetus and Beda before him had done. These things considered, with the
neerenesse of their sites for ready intercourse, made both Caesar and Tacitus to
conceive as they did. Neither were these things following small motives unto
them: for their religion was alike, says Lucan. Britains and Gauls alike in
many respects. Strabo, Tacitus, Dion, etc. Caesar, Strabo.
Lucan and Tacitus: their boldness in wars, and manner of arms alike, says
Strabo, Tacitus, Dion, Pliny, Herodian, and Mela: Their building alike, says
Caesar and Strabo: their ornaments and manners alike, says Pliny and Caesar:
their wits alike, says Strabo and Tacitus: their language alike, says learned
Bodine: and in Bodin.
all things the unconquered Britains to the ancient Gauls alike, says
Tacitus. And all these do warrant Tacitus.
us (me thinks) to come from the Cimbrians, whose sons, and our fathers,
were the Celts and Gauls: The Celts and Gauls our fathers. Bale Cent. 1.
Britains assisted the Gauls against Caesar.
the bands of whose amities were so linked together, that the Britains gave
aid, and assisted the Gauls against Caesar, which was no small cause of his
quarrel against them.

(9) Not to derive the truth of our history from the fained inventions of a
forged Berosus, that brings Berosus thought a forged author.
Samothes to people this Island, about one hundred fifty two years after the
Flood, to give laws to the Land, and to leave it to his posterity, for three
hundred thirty five years continuance: although he be Holinsh. hist. lib. 1
cap. 2. Vitus hist. Brit. lib. 1. annot. 25. Genes. 10. 2.
countenanced by Amandus Zirixaeus in the annotations of White of Basingstocke:
and magnified unto us by the names of Dis and Meshech the sixth son of
Iapheth, from whom this Island with a Sect of Philosophers took their names,
says Textor, Bale, Holinshead, Textor, etc. Job. Caius in Antiq. Canterb. lib.
1.
and Caius: yet seeing this building has no better a foundation but Berosus,
and he not only justly suspected, but long since fully convicted for a
counterfeit, we leave it, as better fitting the pens of vulgar Chroniclers,
then the relish or liking of judicious Readers: whilst with Laertius we judge
rather, that those Sophes Laertius in vit. Philosophorum, cap. 1. Villichus.
were termed Semnothoes, and they not from Samothea, as Villichus would have us
believe.

(10) Neither sounds the music of Albions legion tunable in our ears, whom
Berosus with full note, and Annius allows to be the fourth son of
Hollinshead. An unlikely story of Britains first peopling.
Neptune, and him the same that Moses calls Napthtahim, the fourth son of
Mizraim, the second son of Cham, the third son of Noah, (because his
fictions should be countenanced with the first) who being put into this Island
by Neptune his father (accounted forsooth the god of the Seas) about the year
after the Samothea this Island Britain conquered by Chams posterities
flood three hundred thirty and five, overcame the Samotheans, as easily he
might, being a man of so great strength in body, and largeness of limbs,
that he is accounted among the Giants of the earth. Him Hercules Pompon. Mela.
surnamed Lybicus in battle assailed for the death of Osiris his father, and
after forty four years tyranny (says Bale) slew him with his brother
Bergion in Bale.
the continent of Gallia near to the mouth of the river Rhodanus: whence
Hercules traveled into this Island, as Giraldus (from Gildas the ancient Briton
Poet) coniectureth, whose fifth dialogue of Poetry he Giraldus.
had seen; and the rather believed, because Ptolemy calls that head of Land
in Cornwall, Promontorium Hercules in Britain left the possesion thereof to
Chams posterity.
Herculis, and left the possession of the Island unto them of Cham, contrary to
the meaning of the Scriptures, that made him a Captive, but never a Conqueror
over his brethren, whiles their first Policies were standing.

(11) The last, but much applauded opinion, for An opinion much applauded.
the possessing and peopling of this Island, is that of Brute, generally held
for the space of these last four hundred years (some few men's exceptions
reserved) who with his dispersed Trojans came into, and made Brute and his
Trojans conquered this Island.
conquest of this Island the year of the worlds creation 2887. and after the
universal flood 1231. in the eighteenth year of Heli his Priesthood in the
land of Israel, and before the incarnation of Christ our Savior one thousand
fifty nine. This Brute is brought from the ancient Trojans by descent, yea and
from the persons of the heathen deified Gods: as that he was the Brute
descended from Jupiter.
son of Syluius, who was the son of Ascanius, the son of AEneas, the
son of Anchises by Venus the Goddess, and daughter to Jupiter their greatest
in account. And if Pliny and Varro hold it praise worthy to challenge descents
(though falsely) from famous Pliny. Varr^.
personages, whereby, as they say, appears an inclination to virtue, and a
valorous conceit to persuade unto honor, as sprung from a race divine and
powerful: A false descent may not be challenged. Geffrey of Monmouth died in
Anno 11^2. Acts 17. 28.
then by all means let us listen to him of Monmouth, who has brought his
Nation to rank in degree with the rest of the Gentiles, which claim
themselves to be the Generation of the Gods.

(12) But why do I attribute the work to him, as the Author, since he
professes himself to be but the translator of that history out of the British
tongue, Monmouth his excuse.
which Walter the Archdeacon of Oxford brought out of Normandy, and delivered
unto him? For the further confirmation thereof, and more credit to his story,
Henry of Huntington, who lived in the time of king Stephen, and wrote likewise
the history of this land, Henry of Huntingdon died in Anno 1148.
brings the line of Brute from AEneas the Troiane, and his arriuage and
conquest to happen in the time of Heli his Priesthood in the land of Israel, as
Geffrey ap Henry Huntington also records Brutes line and arrival in
Britain. Geffrey ap. Arthur. A book hereof found.
Arthur has also done: not taking (as some think) any thing thereof from him,
but rather out of an ancient book entitled De Origin Regum Britannorum,
found by himself in the library of the Abbey of Bec, as he traveled toward
Rome: which history began at the arrival of Brute, and ended with the acts of
Cadwalader, as by a treatise of his own inditing, bearing the same title, has
been compared, and found in all things agreeing with our vulgar history, as
industrious Lamberd affirms himself to have seen. And Ninius is said by the
writer of the reformed history, to Will. Lamb. Peramb. Ninius and Taliesin bring
the Britains from Brute.
bring these Britains from the race of the Trojans, four hundred years
before that Geffrey wrote: yea and long before Ninius also, Taliesin a Briton
Poet in an Ode called Hanes, of Taiess his course of life, in these words, Mia
deythymyma at Wedillion Troia, that is, I came hither to the Remnants of Troy.

(13) That William of Malmesbury (who wrote in the days of King Henry the
first) was before him of Died in Anno 1142.
Monmouth, is most certain; yet does he make mention of Arthur a Prince (says
he) deserving rather to be advanced by the truth of records, then abused by
false imputation Malmesb. de Gest is rerum Anglorum. lib. 1.
of fables; being the only prop and vpholder of his country. And Beda, his
ancient also, names Ambrosius Aurelianus to be King of the Britains, long
before Beda hislor. Angli. lib. 1. cap. 16.
that Geffrey was borne: So was Brennus mentioned by Liuy; Bellinus, (if he be
Belgius) by Iustine; Casibelan by Caesar; Cunobilin by Suetonius; Aruiragus by
Liuy. Iustine. Caesar. Suetonius. Martial. Rusebius. Eutropius. Nicephorus.
Ambrose. Socrates. Harding Chr^. chap. 11. Johan. Hanuil. Nichola. Vpton.
Martial; Lucius by Eusebius; Coel, Constantius, Carausius, and others by
Eutropius, and Paulus Diaconus; and Helena by Nicephorus, Ambrose, and
Socrates. These are the affirmatiues that give countenance to the Archdeacon of
Monmouths translation, and credit to Brutes conquests and successors; yea and
John Harding his Herald, in his homespun poetry, can easily emblaze his arms
to be Gules, charged with two lions rampant endorsed Ore; and the same to be
borne by the Kings of Troy. And his banner displaied at his entrance is said to
be Vert a Diana of gold fitchel, crowned, and inthronized, (...).
the same that AEneas bare, when he entered the land of the Latins. But the
censures of these relations I leave to the best liking of judicious Readers,
only wishing them to be unlike the inhabitants under the rocks of the
Cataracts of Nilus, whereof Cicero and Ammianus make mention, who were made
deaf Cicero de Some. Scipionis. Ammianus Marcel. lib. 22. cap. 14. Histories
must be weighed with judgment.
by the continual noise of the fall of Nilus: left by the sound and loud
voices of these writers, the exceptions of others can not be heard, which from
the fullness of their pens I will likewise declare, without offense, I hope,
unto any.

(14) First (with a reverend reservation had to the sacred histories) Varro the
most learned Latin writer, Va^o.
dividing times motions into three several parts, that is, from the creation
to the flood, which he terms altogether uncertain: from the flood to the
first Olympiad (by Beroaldus computation set in the year of the Times motions
divided into three parts. Beroaldus.
world 3154. and thirty one of the reign of Ioas, king of Judah: seven hundred
seventy and four years before the birth of our Savior) he calls fabulous:
and the last age from the first Olympiad to himself The third only historical.
he names historical. Now the story of Brute beginning two hundred sixty
seven years before the The story of Brute fabulous.
first Olympiad, falls in the time wherein nothing else is related, either of
the Greeks or Latins, the only learned writers, but fables and tales, as both
himself and others have told us, much more then, among the barbarous,
unlettered, and uncivil nations, as all these parts of the world then were.

(15) Whereupon Gildas our ancientest homeborne writer, (cited and in whole
sentences followed Gildas.
by venerable Beda, who terms him the Britains historiographer) in this of
Brute is silent, and in his lamentable Beda hist. Angli. lib. 1. cap 22. Gildas
makes no mention of Brute.
passions never dreams of him, but as one overwhelmed with grief bewaileth
the wickedness of the time wherein he lived, who was born, as himself says,
in the forty fourth year after the Saxons first entrance, about the year of
Christ's incarnation 493. and died, as Bale cites out of Polydore, the year of
our redemption 580. Ninius also another ancient writer, Bale out of Polydore.
Ninius also says nothing of him.
who lived above eight hundred years since, taking in hand the Chronicles of
the Britains, complains that their great Masters and doctors could give him
no assistance, being ignorant of skill, and had left no memorial of things
passed, nor committed their acts unto writing, whereby he was enforced to
gather what he had gotten from the annals and Chronicles of the holy fathers.
Beda likewise, whose history ended in anno 733, begins no sooner then with
Julius Caesar's Beda hist. Angli. lib. 5 cap. 24. Beda begins but at Julius
Caesar. Beda had the help of the Abbat Albinus.
entrance; notwithstanding he had the assistance of the Abbat Albinus, who was
brought up under Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, and had begun the history
of this land with most diligent search from the records of the kingdom of
Kent, and the provinces adioining; as also being further assisted by Daniel
Bishop of the West Saxons, who sent him all the records that were to be found
of the same Bishopric, Of Daniel Bishop of West Saxons.
South Saxons, and the i will of Wight. The like helps had he from Abbat Essius,
for the country of East Angles; Of Abbat Essius.
from Cymbertus and the brethren of Laestinge for the province of Mercia, and
East Saxons. And from the Of Cymbertus and brethren of Laestinge. Of the
brethren of Lindisfarnum.
brethren of Lindisfarnum, for the country of Northumberland; besides his own
pains in collections, knowledge and experience: all which he did digest and
historically compile, and before the publication thereof sent it to king
Ceolulphe at that time reigning in Northumberland, to be approved or corrected
by his most learned skill: yet in none of these found he that history of Brute
nor his successors, which as some The history of Brute not to be found in Beda
his time. Elward.
would have it, was then unbegotten in the world.

(16) After him Elward, as William of Malmsburie calls him, or rather (as he
writes himself) Patricius Consul fabius Questor Ethelwerdus, a diligent
searcher of antiquities, a reverend person, and of the blood royal, wrote
four books, briefly comprising the whole history of England, from the
beginning of the world unto the time of king Edgar wherein he lived; Elward
speaks nothing of Brute. Ingulphus. Florentius of Worcester.
of Brute nor his Britains speaks a word; but passes with silence to the
Romans and Saxons. What need I to cite Ingulphus, who died anno 1109.
Florentius of Worcester, that flourished in the days of King Henry the first,
or William of Malmsbury, that wrote unto William of Malmsbury. All these
writers before Geffrey and yet none mention Brute but he.
the end of his reign; all of them writers before Geffrey of Monmouth, but
none of them mentioning this story of Brute. This moved William of Newbourgh,
borne (as himself says) in the beginning of King Stephens reign, and living
at one and the same time with this Archdeacon of Monmouth, too too bitterly to
inueigh against him and his history, even so soon as the same came forth: as
in the proeme of his book is to be seen. And that the words are his and not
our own, take them from him as they lie. In these our days (says he) there is
a certain writer risen up, devising fictions and tales of the Britains out of
the vain humors of his own William of Newboroughs Chronicle inueighing
against Ieffrey ap Arthur.
brain, extolling them far above the valorous Macedonians, or worthy Romans;
his name is Geffrey, and may well assume the surname Arthur, whose tales he
has taken out of the old fables of the Britains, and by his own invention
augmented with many untruths, foiling them over with a new color of the Latin
tongue, and has invested them into the body of an history. Aduenturing further
to diuulge under the name of autentick prophesies, deceitful conjectures and
foredeemings of one Merline (a Wizard), Merline a wizard.
whereunto also he adds a great deal of his own. And again: In his book
which he has entitled the Britains History, how shamelesly, and with a bold
countenance he does lie, there is no man that reads therein can doubt,
unless he has no knowledge at all in ancient true histories; for having not
learned the truth of things indeed, he admits without discretion and
judgment, the vanity and untruths of fables. I forbear to speak (says he)
what great matters this fellow has forged of the Britains acts before the
Empire and coming in of Caesar. Thus far Paruus.

But I know the answer to this so great an accusation: A device to put by this
William of Newburghs accusation.
namely, that this William making suit unto David ap Owen Gwyneth, Prince of
North Wales, for the Bishopric of Saint Assaphs, after the death of Geffrey,
and thereof failing, falsely scandalized and impudently belied that most
reverend man. Which surely had been a great fault, and might of us be believed,
had not others of the same rank and time, verified as much.

(17) For Syluester Giraldus, commonly called Cambrensis, that flourished in
the same time with the said Descript. Camb. cap 7. He flourished in Anno 1210.
Giraldus Cambrensis calls Bruts history the fabulous story of Ieffrey. John
Weathamstead.
author, made no doubt to term it The fabulous story of Geffrey. The like is
verified by John Weathamstead Abbat of Saint Albanes, a most judicious man that
wrote in anno 1440. who in his Granarie gives sentence of this history as
follows. The whole discourse of Brutus (says he) is rather poetical, then
historical, and for diverse reasons is built more upon opinion then truth,
first because there is no mention thereof made in the Roman story, either of
his killing his father, or of the said birth, or The discourse of Brutus
disproued by John Weathastead.
yet of banishing the son. Secondly, for that Ascanius begat no such son
who had for his proper name Syluius by any approved Author: for according to
them, he begat Ascanius had no son whose proper name was Syluius.
only one son, and his name was Julius, from whom the family of the Iulii
took their beginning. And thirdly, Syluius Posthumus, whom perhaps Geffrey
means; was the son of Aeneas by his wife Lauinia, and he begetting his
son Aeneas in the thirty eighth year of his reign, ended his life by course
of natural death. The kingdom therefore now called England, was not
heretofore, as many will have, named Britain of Brutus the son of Syluius. A
ridiculous thing to usurp gentility.
Wherefore it is a vain opinion and ridiculous to challenge noble blood, and
yet to want a probable ground of the challenge: for it is manhood only, that
enobleth a nation; and it is the mind also with perfect understanding, and
nothing Wisdom the true nobility.
else, that gains gentility to a man. And therefore Seneca writes in his
Epistles to Plato; that there is no King but he came from vassals, and no
vassal but he came from Seneca Epist. 44.
Kings. Wherefore to conclude, let this suffice (says he) that the Britains
from the beginning of their nobility have been courageous and valiant in fight,
that they have subdued their enemies on every side, and that they utterly
refuse the yoke of servitude.

(18) Now that William of Newborough, had sufficient cause (say some) to
exclaim against the fantacies of Merline, and the fictions of Arthur, is made
manifest in the sequel, not only by the decree of that obtruded Council of
Trent, wherein was inhibited the publication of Merlines books; but also (in
effect) by the statute enacted the fifth year of our last deceased Merlines
books inhibited.
Queen Elizabeth of blessed and immortal memory, wherein is forbidden such
fantastical predictions, An Act inhibiting fantastical predictions.
upon occasions of Arms, Fields, Beasts, Badges, Cognizances, or Signets, such
as Merline stood most upon; and likewise William of Malmsbury says that Arthur
Malmesburies testimony of Arthur.
being the only proppe that vpheld his country, deserved rather to be advanced
by truth, then abused with fables wherewith that story is most plentifully
stored. And also, that Weathamstead had reason to account Brutes acts and
conquests, to be rather poetical then any ways warranted by the records of
truth, appears by the silence of the Roman writers therein, who name neither
Brute nor his father in the genealogy of the Latin Kings: and if any such
were, (says Brute not mentioned in the genealogy of the Latin Kings.
the contradictors) how could they be ignorant of the untimely death of their
king, slain by the hand of his natural (though in this act unnatural) son?
or what should move them, being so lavish in their own commendations, to be
thus silent in their Brutes worthiness, that with seven thousand dispersed
Trojans warred so victoriously in Gallia, conquered a kingdom of Giants;
subdued a most famous Island, reigned gloriously, and left the same to his
posterity; none of them, either in prose or poetry once handled, but left to
destiny to be preserved by a long ensuing means, or to perish in oblivion for
ever? And surely this moved the whole senate of great Clerks to give sentence,
that never any such Brute reigned in the world; such Never any such king in the
world as Brute. Boccace, Viues, Hadrianus Iunius, etc. The Critics argument.
as were Boccace, Viues, Hadrian Iunius, Polydore, Buchanan, Vignier,
Genebrard, Molinaeus, Bodine, and others.

(19) Yea, and there are some Critics that feign would take advantage from the
defenders of Brutes history themselves, as from Sir John Prys, that produces
many uncertain ensamples of the original of other nations; which granted,
(say they) does no ways confirm the truth or certainty of our own; neither
is it any honor to derive these Britains from the No honor to the Britans to
be derived from the Trojans.
scumme of such conquered people as the Trojans were. Humfrey Lhuyd likewise
denying absolutely the deriuation of the Britains name from Brute, and
bringing it from two compounded words, (as we have said) does thereby weaken
the credit of his conquest of this Island to their understanding, as also the
The Britains histories weakened by themselves.
catalogue of his successors, which are said to reign successively for many
hundred of years after him. And another industrious British writer, having the
help of two most ancient British copies, the collections of Caradock of
Carnaruan, their own Bardies every D. Powell begins his history of Wales
but at Cadwaller.
third-yeeres visitation, and twenty seven authors of good account, (all of
them cited in the preface of his Chronicle) besides his helps had in the
offices of records for this realm; yet ascending no higher then to the person
of Cadwallader, Prince of Wales, whose reign was in the year of Christ's
incarnation 682. and no less then one thousand seven hundred twenty and six
years, after that Brute is said to come into this Island, does not warrant (say
they) the story that is included betwixt, but rather even the same is
enterlaced Cadwallers story also doubtful.
with many doubtful uncertainties, and so left disputable by the said compiler
himself; as namely whether that this Cadwallader whom the Britains Ran. Chest.
claim to be their king, be not the same Chedwald whom the Saxons would have
theirs; both living at Rob. Fabian.
one time, both in acts alike, and names near, both abandoning their
kingdoms, both taking the habit of religion, both dying in Rome, both buried
in one Church, nay, say they, in one Sepulcher. The like he brings of the
Britains Iuor, and the Saxons Iue, in the like coherences of names, acts,
devotions, and deaths: so that this history of Brute carries not so smooth a
current for passage as is wished, nor is that Gordeons knot so easily unloosed.

Again, the Reformer of the British history himself, although John (...)
he has written one whole chapter in defense of Geffrey Monmouth, and
straineth to make his book authentical, complaining often and accusing
learned and impartial Cambden several times, for blowing away Master Cambden
accused by the defender of Ieffrey of Monmouth.
sixty of the Britain Kings with one blast: yet when he compares the
generations with the time, is forced thus to write: From Porrex to Mynogen are
twenti one Kings in a lineall descent, and but years ninety two: now divide 92.
by 21. and you shall find, that children A further disproofe of Brutes history.
beget children, and these (says he) by George Owen Harry in his book of
pedegrees dedicated to his Majesty appears to be in a lineall descent,
besides three or four collaterals. And yet goes further: Though the Scripture
(says he) allege Judah, Hezron, Solomon, and Ezekiah, to be but young when
they begat their sons, Ach^z he should have said. Rabbi Isack. Aug. de ciuit.
Dei, lib. 16. cap. 43. Hierome.
which (as Rabbi Isack says) might be at thirteen years of age: And although
Saint Augustine say, that the strength of youth may beget children young; and
Hierome brings instance of a boy that at ten years of age begot a child:
yet this does not help to excuse the mistaking of years for the British Kings
above mentioned.

Thus far John Lewis: and for the exceptions made against Brute: wherein I have
altogether used the words of others; and will now (without offense, I hope)
add a supposall of mine own, seeing I am fallen into the computation of
times, which is the only touchstone to the truth of histories, especially
such as are limited by the bounds of the sacred Scriptures, as this for Brutes
entrance is. And that the same cannot be so The Authour^ own opinion of
Brutes history.
ancient (supposing it were never so certain) as the vulgar opinion hitherto
has held, the circumstance of time, to my seeming, sufficiently does prove.

(20) For Brutes conquest and entrance are brought Brutes conquest in the
eighteenth of Heli his priesthood.
by his Author to fall in the eighteenth year of Heli his Priesthood in the
Land of Israel, and so is fastened into a computation that cannot err. Now the
eighteenth year of Helies government, by the holy Scriptures 1. Sam. 4. 18.
most sure account, is set in the year of the worlds creation 2887. after the
universal flood 1231. and before Heli his priesthood in anno (...) 28^7.
the birth of our blessed Savior 1059. years. Brute then living in this
foresaid time, was four descents from the conquered Trojans, (as he of
Monmouth has laid down) which were Aeneas, Ascanius, Syluius, and himself:
so that by these generations successiue in order, the very year almost of
Troys destruction may certainly be pointed out and known: which in searching
has been found so doubtful, that by some it has been thought to be a mere
fable. Yet with more reverence to antiquity observed, let us cast and compare
the continuance of these four generations unto Brutes Conquest, not shortning
them with Baruch, to be but ten years to an age; neither lengthning them with
Josephus, who accounts one hundred Baruch 6. 2. Joseph. contra Appion. lib. 1.
and seventy years for a generation: but with more indifferency let us with
Herodotus, who wrote Herodotus i^ Euterpe.
nearer these times, allow thirty years for a succession, as he accounts in
his second book. Now four times thirty make one hundred and twenty, the
number of years that these four Princes successively did live: by which
computation likewise measured by Scripture, the ruination of Troy fell in the
thirty eighth year of Gideons government in Israel, and was the year after
the worlds creation 2768. But the Judge. 8. 28. Clemens Alexand. Stromat. 1.
authority of Clemens Alexandrinus, alleged out of Menander, Pergamenus, and
Letus, destroieth that time of Troies destruction, and places it fully two
hundred and thirty years after, even in the reign of King Solomon: for in
his first book Stromat^n thus he writes: Menelaus from the over throw of Troy
came Menelaus returned from Troy when Hiram gave his daughter in marriage to
Solomon.
into Phoenicia, at that time when Hiram King of Tyrus gave his daughter in
marriage unto Solomon King of Israel. Where, by him we see, that Troies ruins
and Salomons reign fell both upon one time. And so Brute has lost of his
antiquity, by this account, 230. years; and entered not in Helies Priesthood,
but rather in the usurpation of Iudahs Kingdom by Athalia, and in 2. King. 11.
3. Brute his conquest rather in Athalia her time. Joseph. cont. Appion. lib. 1.
and 2.
the year of the world 3118.

(21) To whom let us join Josephus, an Author of great credit, and without
suspicion in this case, who in his Nations defense against Appion, in both his
books, confidently affirms himself able to prove by the Phoenician Records
of warrantable credit, that Phoenician records. Carthage built after King
Hirams reign 155. years.
the City Carthage was built by Dido, sister to Pigmalion, one hundred fifty
and five years after the reign of King Hiram, which was Salomons friend, and
one hundred forty three years and eight months after the building of his most
beautiful Temple. Now we know by Virgil, Virg. (...) lib. 1.
from whom all these glorious tales of Troy are told, that Carthage was in
building by the same Dido at such Tacitus (...). lib. 16. cap. 1.
time as Aeneas came from Troies overthrow, through the Seas of his manifold
adventures. If this testimony of Josephus be true, then falls Troies
destruction about the twentieth year of Ioas reign over Judah, which was the
year of the worlds creation 3143. whereunto if we add one hundred and twenty
years for the four descents before specified, then will Brutes conquest of
this Island fall with the twelfth of Iothams Brutes conquest rather in Iotham
his time. 2. King. 15. 32.
reign in the Kingdom of Judah, which meets with the year of the worlds
continuance 3263. And so has he again lost of his antiquity no less then
375. years.

(22) And yet to make a deeper breach into Brutes story, and to set the time,
in a point so uncertain, as from which neither circle nor line can be truly
drawn; Manethon the Historian Priest of Egypt, in Manethon cited by Iosepo.
cont. Appion. lib. 2. Israelites depart from Egypt 1000. years before the
wars of Troy, by Josephus account. Iosep. cont. Appion. lib. 1. Brutes
conquest rather after Alexander the great.
his second book cited by Josephus, affirms that the Israelites departure
from Egypt was almost a thousand years before the wars of Troy. If this be
so (as it seems Josephus allows it so) and one hundred and twenty years
more added, for the four descents above mentioned, the number will fall about
the year of the worlds creation 3630. long after the death of Alexander the
Great, and Greek Monarch. By which account the great supposed antiquity of
Brute, is now lessened by seven hundred fifty and two years; and the time so
scantelized betwixt his and Cesars entrance, that two hundred forty six years
only remain: Two hundred forty six years a time too short for the reign of
seventy two Kings.
a time by much too short for seventy two Princes, which successively are said
to reign each after others, and from Brute to Caesar recorded to have swaied
the regal Scepter of this Island.

(23) But unto these objections I know the answer will be ready; namely, the
diversities of Scriptures A supposed answer.
account, being so sundry and different, that the story of Brute cannot
thereby be touched, but still stands firm upon it self. Indeed I must
confess, that from the first Creation, to the year of man's Redemption, the
learned Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, differ much, and that not only each
from others, but even among themselves so far, that there can be no
indifferent reconciliation made, as by these several computations may be
seen, as follows: Hebrews: Baal Seder-Holem -- 3518. Talmundistes -- 3784.
New Rabbis -- 3760. Rabbi Nahsson -- 3740. Rabbi Leui -- 3786. Rabbi Moses
Germidisi -- 4058. Josephus -- 4192.

Greeks: Metheodorus -- 5000. The great differences in computation of years
among Writers.
Eusebius -- 5190. Theophilus Antioch -- 5476.

Latins: Saint Hierome -- 3941. Saint Augustine -- 5351. Isidore -- 5210.
Orosius -- 5190. Beda -- 3952. Alphonsus -- 5984.



And yet do these disagreements help little the Obiectors if this be
considered, that the maine foundation of these diversities consists chiefly
in the first world before the Flood, wherein it is manifest, that These
differences were chiefly before the Flood. Septuagint.
the reputed Septuagint adds to the Hebrew Original five hundred eighty and
six years. And from the Flood to Abraham's birth, is accounted two hundred and
five years more then Moses has. As likewise Joseph. Antiquis. lib. 1. cap. 7.
the like is done in the latter times: for from the Captivity of Babylon to
the death of Christ, one hundred thirty and seven years are added, more then
the Suns course has measured: so that it seems the differences were not
great for the times of Heli, Solomon, nor Iudahs Kings, in whose reigns Brute
is brought to people and possess this Island. But leaving these diversities,
and to come to a certainty, let us calculate the years of the holy history
according as Functius, Beroaldus, and sundry other Theologicke Chronologers
(...). Beroaldus.
have done; who from the Scriptures most sure The accounting of years by the
Scripture is a m^st sure manner of computation.
account, so tie the stories of times together, that like to a golden chain,
the linkes are fastened each to other, and the whole so complete, that a year
is not missing from the fall of man, unto the full time of his redemption.

(24) First then from the Creation to the Flood are From the creation to the
flood 1656.
reckoned years 1656. gathered by a triple account, from the ages, begettings,
and deaths of the fathers. The like is thence observed for four hundred
twenty From the flood to the seventy fif^h of Abraham's life 427.
and seven years, that is, to the seventy fifth of Abraham's life, wherein God
began to tie the times accounts in holier sums: for Terah, the first recorded
Idolater, was the last in honor that had the Suns Joshua 24. 2.
course measured by man's life. And now the bounds of time tie the Promise to
Abraham, to be before the From the promise to Abraham, till the Law, 430
Galath. 3. 17. From the Law, to Salomons Temple, 480. 1. King. 6. 1. From the
foundation of the Temple, to Salomons death, 36. years. 1. King. 11 42. From
Salomons death, to the burning of the Temple, 390. years. 2. King. 25. 8. Eze.
4. v. 2. and 5. From the burning of the Temple, to the end of Iudah^ captivity,
51. years. Ier. 25. 11. Isa. 45. 1. 2. Chron. 36. 21. 22. 23. Ezra 1. 1. 2.
From the first year of Cy^us, unto the death of Christ, 490. years.
Law four hundred and thirty years, as the Apostle to the Galathians
affirms. From the Law to the building of Salomons Temple, and that in the
fourth year of his reign, were years four hundred and eighty: and from
that foundation, to his death, were thirty six years: for his whole reign
was forty. From his death and Kingdoms division, unto the burning of that
Temple, which was executed in the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel,
were years three hundred and ninety, as by the days of Ezekiels siege and
sleep appears in the second and fifth verses of his fourth Chapter. From the
burning of the Temple, to the end of Iudahs captivity, were years fifty and
one, for the whole time of Babels bondage contained seventy years, as Jeremy
25. 11. whereof nineteen were expired; and fifty one remaining unto the first
year of Cyrus their deliverer, whom the Lord in that regard calls his
anointed Isay. 45. 1. In the first year of whose Monarchy he published an
Edict for the return of the Jews and new building of their Temple, as in the
books of Chronicles and of Ezra is seen. And from this first year and
proclamation of King Cyrus, unto the last year and death of Christ our Savior
the great year of Jubilee, the acceptable time, wherein he troad the
winepresse alone; to the finishing of the ceremonies, the taking away of sin,
the reconciling of iniquity, the bringing in of everlasting righteousness, to
the sealing up of vision and prophecy, and to the anointing of the most holy;
were years four hundred and ninety, as the Prophet Daniel from the Angel
Gabriel received, and unto us has delivered Dan. 9. 24. all which added
together make the number to be three Dan. 9. 24.
thousand nine hundred and threescore years. And by this said computation, I
have accounted Brutes story, as all others wherein I shall be occasioned to
speak.

(25) Lastly, if from among these misty clouds of ignorance no light can be
gotten, and that we will needs have our descents from the Trojans; may we not
then more truly derive our blood from them through the Romans, who for the
space of four hundred Britains may more truly derive their descent from Troy
by the Romans. Britain^s took wives of the Romans, and they of the
Britains. B^da hist. Anglic. lib. 1. cap. 16. Genesis 6. 1.
threescore and six years were planted amongst us? in which continuance it is
most certain, they took of our women to be their wives, and gave their women
to be wives unto us, seeing that some of their Emperors did the like
themselves, and from whose blood, says Beda, the Britains Ambrosius lineally
descended. And if beauty and parts be the instigaters unto love, as in the
first world we see it was, no doubt then the features of the Britains were
moving Angels unto the Romans, whose faces even in those times were accounted
to be angelical, and whose personages as yet, are respected as the best (if
not better) then any other in the world. But that the Romans themselves
descended from the Trojans, or AEneas should be the root of the Julian family,
howsoever the fictions of Poets as a spring tide have flowed from the Romans
to be^ descended of the Trojans is a fable.
fullness of their pens, yet Tacitus their best writer accounts those
things not far unlike to old fables, Tacit. (...) 1^. 1^.
wherein he judges that Nero to win credit before the Consuls, and to get
reputation in the glory of eloquence undertook the pleading of the Ilienses
cause, declaring the Romans descent from Troy: and the Iulij from the loins
of AEneas, which notwithstanding he censureth as is said. And Josephus in the
dispersion of Noah's sons and families, affirms that Joseph. 1. 7. Romus the
original of the old Romans.
Romus was the Original of the old Romans and he of Chus, and Cham, if he
mean as he speaks. To conclude; (by what destiny I know not) nations desire
their originals from the Trojans; yet certain it is, that no honor from them
can be brought, whose city and fame stood but for six descents, as under the To
have a desce^t from Tr^y, cannot be an honor to any Nation. Trojans thrice
vanquished.
reigns of Dardanus, Erithonius, Troos, Ilion, Laomedon, and Priamus, during
which time they were thrice vanquished; twice by Hercules in the days of
Laomedon, and the third time rased by the rage of the Grecians in the reign of
King Priamus, and the Trojans themselves made as it were the scum of a
conquered people. And therefore as France has cast off their Francio King
Priamus his son, Scotland their Scotia King Pharaoes daughter, Denmark their
Danus, Ireland their Hiberus, and other Countries their Demigods; so let
BRITAINS likewise with them disclaim their BRVTE, that brings no honor to
so renowned Brute embaseth the descent of the Britains.
a Nation, but rather cloudeth their glory in the murders of his parents, and
imbaseth their descents, as sprung from Venus that lascivious Adulteress.

THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE ANCIENT BRITAINS. CHAPTER IV.
Having thus far spoken of the ancient Names of this famous Island, and of the
Nations acknowledged to be the first Planters and Possessors thereof; it
remains that somewhat be mentioned of the Manners and Customs of those
people and times, though not so pleasing or acceptable as were to be wished,
for that the clouds of ignorance and barbarous inciuilitie did then shadow and
ouer-spread almost all the Nations of the earth: wherein I desire to lay
imputation no further then is sufficiently warranted by most autenticke
Writers: and first from Caesar, who foremost of all the Romans discovered and
described our ancient Britains.

(2) Touching their persons: All the Britains (says Of their Persons. Cas.
(...). (...). 5. where he uses the word (...)
Caesar) used to die themselves with woad, which sets a blew color upon
them, and that makes them more terrible to behold in battle. But (...) Mela
therein moves a doubt. They died their bodies (says he) with woad; but
whether to make a gallant show, or for what other cause else is uncertain. And
yet Herodian herein absolutely determines, where he says, that the Herodian.
Britains knew no use of garments at all, but about their wastes and necks
wore chains of iron, supposing Pliny also adds another ornament, and says
that the Britains wore rings on their middle finger. The Britains would not be
clad, because they would show the gay paintings of their bodies. Pliny.
Oribasius calls that herb, Vitrum; and the Britains call that color, glass:
whence our English word glasle, (called also Vitrum in Latin) may seem to be
taken, by reason of the color thereof. Dio Nicaeus. Caesar. Some Britains clad
in leather. Solinus.
them a goodly ornament, and a proof of their wealth: and their bare bodies
they marked with sundry pictures representing all manner of living creatures;
and therefore they would not be clad, for hiding the gay paintings of their
bodies. To which painting Pliny also agrees, and describes that herb woad,
to be like to the Plantine in Gallia, naming it Glastum, with the juice
whereof (says he) the women of Britain, as well wives as young women, anoint
and die their bodies all over, resembling by that tincture the color of the
Aethiopians, in which manner they use at solemn feasts and sacrifices to go
all naked. And Dio Nicaeus out of the epitome of Xiphilinus, says, that the
custom of that Nation was, to abide in tents all naked and unshod.
Notwithstanding, Caesar does elsewhere report, that they clad themselves in
leather, which perchance is meant of the ciuiller sort of them, and in time of
battle. Solinus likewise speaking of the Britains, says, their Country is
peopled partly with Barbarians, who by means of artificial incisions of
sundry forms, have from their childhood diverse shapes of beasts incorporate
upon them; and having their marks deeply imprinted within their bodies, look
how their growth for stature, so do these pictured characters likewise
increase. Neither do these savage Nations repute any thing a greater testimony
of their patience, then by such durable skarres to cause their limbs drink in
much painting and color. These skarres by Tertullian are termed Britannorum
stigmata, The Britains marks. And unto Tertullian. Britannorum stigmata.
this skie-colour, or bluish dyings, it seems Martial had relation in his
praises of Lady Claudia: Martial.
Claudia caeruleis tum sit Rufina Britannis,
Edita cur Latiae pectora plebis habet?
Since Claudia comes of Azurde Britains race,
Whence comes her mind so decked with Roman grace?


And of this use of painting, as our great Antiquarie judges, both the
Britains had their primitive deriuation, Master Cambden.
and the Picts (a branch of British race) a long Picts of the British race.
time after, for that their accustomed manner, were called Picti by the
Romans, that is, the painted people. Called Picti of their painted bodies.
Caesar. com.


(3) The hair of their heads, says Caesar, they let grow, and wore long, which
naturally was curled, and of color yellow, (as in the Panegyricke Oration
ascribed to Mamertinus, and spoken in praise of Maximianus, is to be seen) all
other parts of their bodies Mamertinus.
being shaven, saving only the head and upper lip. Yet their complexions were
much different, as by Tacitus we see, who avouches that some of those Tacitus
in vit. Agricola.
Ilanders were red of hair, as the Caledonians in the Northern Promontories;
the hair of the Silures colored and curled, like to the old Spaniards; and
those Caledonians the Northern people. Silures the Western.
nearest unto Gallia resembled their complexions, though not altogether so
yellow, says Strabo. But their wit by Tacitus is preferred before them, and
their statures more tall, as Strabo affirms, whose lineaments Tacitus.
showed a good making of body, and measurable Strabo.
proportion in all parts answerable. Their women fair, and of exceeding good
features, as is described by the Roman Writers. Such was Boudicea, says
Xiphilinus; Claudia and Helena, says Martial and Xiphilinus. Martial.
Eutropius.
Eutropius.

(4) That the strength of nature wrought long in the Britains, we read out of
Plutarch, who reports that the people lived one hundred and twenty years,
Plutarch. They lived to a great age.
for that, says he, their cold and frozen Country kept in their natural heat:
whose conditions by Diodorus Siculus are commended to be plain and upright,
far from the wiliness and craft of the Romans. And by Diodorus Siculus.
Strabo their dispositions are partly resembled to the Gauls, but yet somewhat
more rude and plain; and Strabo.
those most civil, who were the inhabitants of Kent, by reason of their oftener
conuersing with other Nations, as Caesar shows. But the farther from the
continent, Caesar. These Britains in Kent the ciuillest. Pomponius Mela.
the more rude, and less acquainted with other kind of riches besides cattle,
as Pomponius Mela affirms.

(5) Now touching their domestic matters. Their buildings were many, and like
to them of the Gauls Of their domestic matters. Caesar. The Britains towns
are their woods being fortified. Strabo.
says Julius Caesar; notwithstanding they give the name of Towns to certain
combersome woods, which they have fortified with rampires and ditches, whither
they retreat, and resort to eschew the invasions of their enemies. Which stand
them in good stead, says Strabo: for when they have by felling of trees,
mounted, and fenced therewith a spacious round plot of ground; there they build
for themselves houses and cottages, and for their cattle set up stalls and
folds, but those for the present use only, and not for long continuance.
Which, as Diodorus Siculus says were usually thacked with reed; but the cities
without walls, and the country Diodorus Siculus.
without towns; as Dion describes the Calidonians and Meats. Dion.


(6) Their wives were ten or twelve a piece, as Caesar has alleged, which
they held common among The Britains multiplicity of wives. Caesar.
brothers and parents; yet the issue reputed his, who first married the mother
when she was a maid: and Dio indeed affirms no less, adding withal, that
Dio.
the children thus begotten, were fostred and brought up in common among them.
And Eusebius likewise Eusebius (...). praepar^. 6.
testifies, that many Britains together kept one wife in common to them all.
This community in marriage moved Iulia the Empress of Seuerus, to twite the
Iulia her reproof to a British woman.
wife of Argetecaxus, that the fashion of the women of Britain in accompanying
with men, was very impudent; to whom she replied and said, we British women The
answer.
do indeed herein differ from you Roman Ladies; for we satisfy our appetite,
by accompanying with the worthiest men, and that openly, but you with every
base fellow, in a Dion. Cas. lib. 76.
corner.

(7) For their diet; it was a heinous matter with them to eat either Hen, Hare,
or Goose, says Caesar, The Britains diet. Prohibited. meats. Caesar.
which notwithstanding they bred for their pleasures; neither fed daintily at
full and rich tables, as Diodorus Siculus affirms, but rather in necessity
could live upon barks and roots of trees, and with a Diodo. Siculus. The
Britains of a very spare diet.
kind of meat no bigger then a bean, after which for a good time they did
neither hunger nor thirst, says Dio Nicaeus: who likewise testifies that the
Britains, did till no ground, neither eat fish, though their rivers Dio Nicaeus.
thereof be pleneously stored, but live upon prey, They eat no fish.
venison, and fruits: to which also Caesar adds milk, whereof (says
Strabo), they had not then skill to Caesar. Unskillful to make cheese. Strabo.
Their drink of barley. Solinus. Pliny.
make cheese. And according to Solinus, their usual drink was made of barley.
But for tillage Pliny seems to contradict Dio, affirming that the Britains
manured their grounds with Marle in stead of dung; which argues no such
simplicity in gardening, planting, and in other like points of husbandry as
Strabo Strabo.
does tax them with. And this foresaid temperance of diet differs much from
that, which Saint Hierome charge their neighbors the Anthropophagi of
Ireland, who used to feed on the buttocks of boys, and Hiero. (...) lib. 2.
women's paps, as their most dainty and delicate dish.

(8) For their religion, or rather diabolical superstition, was as the rest of
the world, (some few excepted) Of their religion and learning.
when Satan had clouded the truth of Gods doctrine, by the foggy mists of
confused darkness. For Tacitus makes their superstitions, and ceremonies to be
the same in conformity with the Gauls. And what that was, Dio Cassius in his
Nero, and Solinus in his history, Dio Cassius. Solinus.
do declare; who do ascribe to them the most inhumane offering of man's flesh
in their sacrifices. The Britains inhumane sacrifices. The names of their
Idols.
And besides their ancient Idols, such as Dis, Jupiter, Apollo, Diana, and the
like, they worshipped Andates for their Goddess of Victory, unto all which
they performed no small adorations and honors, imputing their prosperities unto
them: unto whom also they erected temples with such magnificence as they then
had; whose walls, as it seems, long after remained, whereon some of those
profane portraitures with deformed lineaments were seen by mournful Gildas,
carrying a stern and grim countenance, after the Gildas.
wonted heathenish manner: here see we (says he) upon these desert walls, the
ugly features of the Britains Idols, The Britains Idols exceed Aegipt for
number.
merely diabolical, and in number almost exceeding those of Egypt. So by
Tacitus they are noted with the common custom of the Gentiles, which was that
they sought for the direction of their Gods by the looking into the entralls of
Beasts, yea and of men too; and that they honored the Altars of their Gods with
the sacrifice and blood of such as they took captive in wars. And Pliny
writing of Magic, says, that in his Pliny. Magic highly honored of the
Britains.
days the art thereof in Britain was highly honored, and all the people
thereunto so much devoted, yea and with all such complements of ceremonies in
the same to be performed, that a man would think the Persians had learned all
their Magic skill from them. Priests and instructers had they, whereof the
chief were called Druides, whose office was employed about holy things, says
Caesar; for they had the managing of public and private sacrifices, and to
interpret and Caesar. com. 6.
discuss matters of religion. Unto them do resort great numbers of young men
to learn at their hands, and they be had in great reverence. For they
determine almost all controversies, and matters in variance, The Druides
determine almost all controuerfies.
as well public as private. And if there happen any thing to be done amiss,
if there be any murder committed, if there rise any controversy concerning
inheritance or bounds of lands, they take the matter into their power, and
award either recompense or penalties in the case. And if there be any, be he
private person, or be it corporation, that will not stand to their judgment,
they interdict him, which punishment among them is held most grievous. They
that are so excommunicated are accounted in the number of the wicked and
ungracious: all men shun them, all Excommunication of great sorce in the time
of the ancient Britains.
men eschew their company and communication, lest by conuersing with them, they
should defile themselves and receive harm. If they demand law, they may not
have it: neither may they enjoy any place of honor. Over all these Druides
there is one Primate, Among the Druides one Primat and chief over the rest.
which has chief authority over them. When he is dead if there be any of the
rest that excels in worthiness, he succeeds: or if there be any equal,
he is chosen by voices of the rest, and diverse times they strive for the
sovereignty by force of arms.

These men at a certain season of the year, in the borders of the Caruntes
(whose country is counted the middle of all Gallia) do sit together in a place
hallowed, They assemble once a year at a place in France to hear
controversies.
whereunto resort from all sides all such as have any controversies: and look
what is decreed and judged by them, that they stand unto. This order of
discipline is thought to have had beginning in Britain, Here appears, that
Academies were then amongst the Britans, and from their example derived into
other coun tries. They are exempted from war.
and from thence to have been brought into Gallia. And at this day, they that
are desirous to attain this skill more exactly, do commonly repair thither to
learn it. These Druides customably are exempted from the wars, neither do they
pay taxes and tallages with other folk: for they are privileged as from the
wars, so from all other burdens. Allured with so great rewards, many even of
their own accord, do register themselves in that order, and diverse are sent
thither by their parents and kinsfolk. Where they are reported to learn a
great number of verses by heart. Their scholars must learn a great many
verses by heart.
Whereof it comes to pass, that diverse continue twenty years in learning.
Neither do they think it lawful to put them in writing, whereas in all other
things, for their accounts, as well public as private, they use the Greek
letters.

This order they seem (in mine opinion) says he, to have taken for two
considerations: partly because They use the Greek letters lest their skill
should be too common.
they will not have their discipline published among the common people; and
partly because they will not that they which shall learn, trusting too much to
their books, should have the less regard of remembrance: in that it happens
well near to most men, that upon trust of the help of their book, they are
slacker in learning things by heart, and less care to bear them in mind. This
is one of the chiefest things Their Theology is, that the soul dies not, but
passes from one to another.
that they labor most to beat into men's minds, that the Souls die not, but do
after death pass from one to another: and hereby they think men should be
most stirred unto virtue, when the fear of death is nothing regarded. Also
they dispute many other things: as of the stars, and of their mouings: of the
Their natural Philosophy.
bigness of the world, and the earth: of the nature of things: of the strength
and power of the gods immortal: and do therein instruct the youth. Unto
these Druides and their doctrine had Lucan the Poet relation in his first book
toward the end, where he Lucan.
writes thus of them.

Et vos barbaricos ritus, moremque sinistrum
Sacrorum, Druidae, positis repetistis ab armis.
Solis nosce Deos and Caeli sydera vobis
Aut solis nescire datum. Nemora alta remotis
Incolitis Lucis. Vobis autoribus, vmbrae
Non tacitas Erebi seeds Ditisque profundi
Pallida regna petunt, regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio: longae, canitis si cognita, vitae
Mors media est. Certe, populi quos despicit Arctos,
Foelices errore suo, quos, ille timorum
Maximus, haud urgent laethi metus: inde ruendi
Inferrum men's prona viris, animaque capaces
Mortis: and ignauum est rediturae parccre vitae.


In English thus.

You (Druides) free from wars, with barbarous devices
Sinistrous rites perform, and uncouth sacrifices.
High Mysteries, of God, and Heavens, you only know;
Or only err therein. Where shady woods do grow;
There you repose; and teach, that Souls immortal be;
Nor silent Erebus, nor Plutoes Hall shall see.
And, (if your Sawes be sooth) Death is no final dome,
But only Midway, twixt life past, and life to come.
Brave Britain bloods perdilwarmd with this happy error,
Death (greatest fear of fears) amates the with no terror.
Hence it is, they manly rush on pikes, and griesly death,
And scorn base minds, that stick to sped reviving breath.


(9) These Britains being merely barbarous, as most of the Western parts of
the world then were, lived Of their commerce and traffic.
privately to themselves with scarce any commerce, or intercourse with any
other nation: neither indeed were much known to foreign people, for a long
time. For the first notice of them extant, was by Polybius the Greek writer,
that accompanied Scipio in Polybius the first that took notice of this land.
his wars, about the year of the worlds creation 3720. and two hundred and
nine, before the birth of our Savior Christ. Which Author names their Island
to be plenteously stored with Tynne: but of other Polyb. lib. 3.
things therein is silent, saying that al those parts which lay betwixt Tanais
and Narbor bending Northward in his days were unknown and uncertain, and
therefore the reporters of them he held as dreamers. So does Master Cambden
another Polybius, and no way his Cambd. Britannia de moribus Britan.
inferior, account it a prodigal humor of credulity, to be persuaded that
Himilco, from the state of Carthage sent to discover the coasts of Europe, in
the said expedition Matters scarce to be believed. That Himilco entered this
Island. Polyb. Eclog. lib. 10. That Hannibal should war here. That Alexander
came hither.
entered this Island: or that Hannibal should war in this Island, because Polybius
in the Eclogues of his tenth book says that he was enclosed within the
streits of Britain, which place is mistaken for the Brutij in Italy: or that
Alexander came from the East Indians, to Gades, and from thence into Britain,
though Cedrenus say so, seeing all other writers are against it; or that
Ulysses, (ancient enough if he be that Elishah the son of Iauan, the fourth
son of Iapheth) That Ulysses should visit Britain.
should visit Britain in his travels, whereof Brodaeus makes doubt; though
Solinus report that an Altar in Caledonia was erected, and Ulysses in Greek
letters thereon inscribed. Which might very well be: for who doubts but that
the Greeks, in their vain devotions, did both build and sacrifice unto their
Gods, which they made of their worthiest men? and since Ulysses, (in regard of
his far sea-trauels) was had in special account among all nauigators, why
might The like examples we have now of Cap. Henry. etc. The Romans not
mentioned either by Thucydides or Herodotus.
not such monuments be reared, and his name inscribed, as far as the Grecians
traveled, though his person never came there?

And if the Romans, at whose greatness the whole world trembled, were so
lately known in those ancient times, as that neither Thucydides nor Herodotus
made mention of them: yea and with much ado at last were heard of by the
Grecians themselves: as Josephus affirms; And if the Gauls and Spaniards,
(inhabitants Joseph. contra Appion. lib. 1. Gauls and Spaniards for many
years unknown to Historiographers.
in the continent) for many years together were utterly unknown to the worlds
historiographers; shall we then think, that this remote Island, and people then
far from ciuility, were noted forth with marks of more certainty? surely to
my seeming, nothing less: seeing that their next neighbors the Gauls knew not
so much as what manner of men they were: none resorting thither, except some
few The Britains unknown to their next neighbors. Caesar com. lib. 4.
merchants, and they no further, then upon the sea coasts, neither able to
describe the bignesle of the Island, the puissance of the inhabitants, their
order for war, the laws that they used, the customs of the people, nor their
havens for the receipt of ships; all which Caesar by diligent inquiry sought
after, but could find no satisfaction till he had sent some purposely to search
it out.

(10) Neither is this their want of knowledge to be wondered at, seeing the
intercourse of their traffic was vpheld by so mean commodities: for Strabo
says, that their merchandising chiefly consisted in Their merchandise of small
use. Strabo.
Iuory Boxes, Sheeres, Onches, Bits, and Bridles, Wreaths and Chains, with
other conceits made of Amber and Glass; for which notwithstanding they were
compelled to pay customs and imposts unto Oct auian Augustus, as elsewhere
shall be showed.

(11) And as their commodities were very mean, so were their means either for
exportation or importation very slender in those times; I mean their shipping.
It is true, that some are of opinion, that Their shipping very mean. Sh^s
first invented in Britain, is a matter to be doubted.
Ships were first invented in these our Seas: but that this should be true, I
have cause to doubt, that Art being long before inspired by God himself into
the heart of Noah for making the Arc, and no doubt practiced by that pattern
of many others. But that the ancient Britains had ships of reasonable use,
though of simple Art, Caesar testifies, saying, that the The ships of this
Island according to Caesar.
keeles and ribs of their ships were of light wood, and covered over with
leather: which kind the now- Britains call Corraghs: and with them (says
Polyhistor) they did sail betwixt Britannie and Ireland, (which sea for
roughness and danger may be compared with any other whatsoever) though the
bulk of their vessels were but of some flexible wood, covered with the hides
of Bufflles: and as long as they were sailing, so long did they abstain from
meat: whereby it seems they never sailed any great iourneys. And of this
their shipping Pliny also speaks, and Lucan sings, thus: Pliny and Lucan
of the ships of this Island.
Primum cana salix, madefacto vimine, paruam
Texitur in puppim, caesoque induta iuuenco,
Vector is patiens tumidum super emicat amnem:
Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fusoque Britannus,
Nauigat Oceano. --
At first, of hoary sallowes wreathed boughs, the ships
Small bulk is trimly twist, and clad in bullocks hide:
Then, patient to be ruled, on swelling wanes she skips.
Thus on the spacious Poe the Venice Merchants glide,
And Britain Pilots sail on surge of Ocean wide.
But aftertimes brought the Britains to more exquisite skill in nauall
affairs, insomuch as the royal Navy of this Kingdom has been reputed (and
so is at this day) not only the invincible walls of our own, but the
incredible terror of al other Kingdoms, which have or shall envy our happy
peace: and the adventures likewise of Merchants, and the skill of our Seamen,
has left no corner of the world unsearched.

(12) And their traffic amongst themselves was not of much worth, in that, as
Caesar says, the Coins Casar.
which they had were either of brass, or else iron rings sized The Britains
coins.
at a certain weight, which they used for their moneys. Of which kind some
have auerred they have seen found and lately taken up in little cruses or
pitchers of earth. But as times grew more civil, and traffic more frequent,
they shortly after stamped both silver and gold; and thereon the faces of their
Kings, even in the days of Julius Caesar, who was the first that had his own
The first Roman coins with (...) were in Caesar's time.
stamped on the Roman Coins. Many of these are amongst us remaining, whereof I
have inserted some few, as in their due places shall follow, which I received
from the liberal hand of that most learned Knight, and worthy storer of
Antiquities Sir Robert Cotton of Cunington. These Coins are commonly imbossed
Sir Robert Cotton.
outward and shield-like, whereon the inscription, The m^ks to know (...).
or face, is seen; the reuerse hollow, and therein their devise set: and by
these forms are they known to be the Britains, no other nation stamping the
like, except some few among the Grecians.

(13 We come lastly, to speak of the manner of Of their wars. Caesar com. 4.
their warfare, which Caesar thus describes. First (says he) they ride round
about all parts of the battle, casting off their darts: and often times with
the terrible noise of their horses, and the rattling of their chariot They amaze
the enemy (...) the (...) of their chariot (...).
wheels, they amaze the enemy and break their array. And when they have wound
themselves in among the troops of horsemen, they leap forth of their
wagons, and fight on foot. In the mean while the waggoners withdraw
themselves somewhat out of the battle, and set their wagons in such order,
that if they be ouercharged by the enemy, they may have speedy and easy
recourse unto them. By means whereof they are both as ready to remove as the
horsemen, and as steadfast to stand in the battle as the footmen, and supply
both duties in one. And they are come to such perfectness by daily practice
and exercise, that even in steep and falling places they will stop their
horses running a full gallop, and guide and turn them in a short room, and
run upon the vergies, and stand steadfastly upon the beams, and quickly recover
themselves back again into the wagons.

These would often give ground to egg their enemies from their maine battle,
and then would leap Casar. com. 5.
out of their chariots and fight on foot. And they kept also such an order in
fighting on horseback, that whether the enemies chased, or were chased, they
were always in danger. For they never fought in great companies together, but
scatteringly a great way distant They fight not in great companies together.
the one from the other, and had stals lying in diverse places one to supply
another, having ever fresh and lusty men in the rooms of them that were weary.
They have ever fresh men in the rooms of them that are weary. Strabo. Diodorus
Siculus. The Britains fight in chariots as the use was in the worlds first
age. Pomponius Mela.
Of this their manner of fight in chariots, Strabo also declares; and Diodorus
Siculus says that the Britains lived after the manner of the first age of the
world, using chariots in their fight, as the report goes of the ancient Greeks
at the Trojan wars. Pomponius Mela also describing these Britains, affirms
that their fight was not only with horsemen and footmen, but also with wagons
and chariots, harnessed, and armed at the ends of the axle-trees with hooks
and sithes, after the manner of the Gauls; but with appearance of greater
courage, as Tacitus says; as being not yet mollified by long peace. Their
strength in Tacitus.
field consists most of footmen, yet some countries Their chief strength
consists in sootmen.
there are (says he) that war in wagons, the greatest persons guiding the
same; and so much does Iuuenal intimate, who in show of prophecy but indeed in
Iuuenal.
flattery of the Emperor Domitian, salutes him after this manner. It boads thee
Triumph great; to captinate some King;
Or fierce Aruiragus from Chariots beam to ding.
Dio Nicaeus from Xiphilinus more particularly declares their strength; Their
horses (faith he) are but little, Dio.
yet therewithal swift of pace: their footmen also run very speedily, but in
their standing are the strongest: their armor Their footmen run swiftly. Their
armor.
are shields, and short spears, in the nether end whereof is fastened a round
bell of brass like unto a ball, which at the first onset of encounter they
shake with great courage, supposing that such a rattling noise does much amate
the enemy. And Herodian says that their shields were narrow and spears short,
wearing swords hanging down their Herodian.
naked loins, having neither knowledge nor use either of corslet or helmet.

(14) Some have thought that their women also were not exempted from the wars;
but certain it is Many British women renowned for valor. Tacitus.
that many of that sex were renowned for their valor amongst them. Which made
Tacitus to say, it was usual for the Britains to fight under the conduct of
women, (which the Romans found to their smart) nor to make any difference of
sexes for government. A more noble pattern whereof, never had any age, then in
our late glorious Virgin Queen, (the wonder of her sex, and of al future
ages,) who, as she was inferior to no Prince Queen Elizabeth a glorious virgin
Queen.
ever living, for her admirable government in upholding of her kingdoms peace,
so was she a match (to say no more) to the proudest monarchs, in her managing
of her wars; as (when occasion was offered) she was ready to make good, in her
own royal person in A most valorous Princess in war.
the field. But besides the use of arms, the ancient British women had another
imploiment in the field, which I will only set down in Tacitus his words,
speaking of Paulinus Suetonius his assailing of Anglescy: Tacitus.
The British Army (says he) stood on the shore, thick of men and munition,
and women running up and downc amongst them, like furies, carrying burning
firebrands in rufull attire, and with their hair hanging about their
shoulders. The Druides mean while went with their hands The British women's
rufull attire and the Druides behavior in prayer amaze the Roman soldiers.
lift up to heaven, pouring out prayers and imprecations. The strangeness of
which sight so amazed the Roman soldiers, that they stood still like stocks,
whiles the other wounded them at their pleasure; till Paulinus encouraged them,
and they excited one another, not to be so danted by an army of women and
wizards. etc.

(15) In the relations of these things, let no man think, that the glory of
these ancient and warlike nation of Britains, is any ways disparaged, or made
inferior to them that would be more famous, whose beginning have been as mean,
and state as rude, if not more. For let us consider the Romans so lavish in
their The Romans derive their name from an infamous person.
own worths and greatness; who notwithstanding, bring their name and
original from Romulus, a bastard by birth, nourished by a beast, educated
among a sort of rustic shepherds: and grown to the ripeness of his own
affections, he became ringleader of a damned crew, that lived by robberies and
without laws: besides the shedding of his natural brothers blood, as Titus
Liuie their own historian witnesses: and both himself and followers, had in
such Titus Liuius, etc.
contempt and derision by their neighbor nations, that they both disdained and
refused to give them their daughters in marriage, lest in time they also should
become lawless, until that by subtilty and force, they had ravished their
virgins, and thereby made them unworthy of other matches. Yet when their after
fortunes and success had mounted them upon the wings of glory, and seated them
on the necks of their subdued neighbors, their Caesar's would needs be more then
mortal, and their pedigrees must lineally be brought from the Gods.

(14) And, to let pass many others, the like may be said of the beginners of
the Scythian and Turkish The poor beginnings of Scythian and Turkish Empires.
Empires, two golden pillars raised upon leaden bases, howsoever now, the power
of their command, circles three parts of the earth. Nay what more is, that
precious, royal, and Gods only people, from whom the eternal King of Kings
descended, in their offerings made And of Jewish.
in time of their highest glory, were by the Lord thus commanded to acknowledge
and say: A Syrian was my father, who being ready to perish for hunger, went
down Deuteronomy. 26. 5.
into Egypt, and soiourned with a small company. And the richest stone of that
most beauteous building in his highest pride is counseled by the Prophet, to
look back to the rock whence it was hewn, and to the hole of the pit Isai.
51. 1.
whence it had been dug.

THE GOVERNMENT OF GREAT BRITAIN. CHAPTER V.
WE come, at length, to speak of the government and political estate of the
The British government.
Britains, which doubtless (the times then considered) was as honorable in
their rulers, and as manageable in the subjects, as any other nations in these
West parts of the world: their temperance, religion, learning, and noble
resolution showing no less. But in this point I must crave pardon of our
British Heralds, and some learned Antiquaries, if I bring not a lineall
succession from Brute, and a monarchical government in those Their succession
doubtful.
times of obscurity, through whose mists no Egles eyes could pierce, before the
days of Geffrey ap Arthur, as before was touched. And therefore following his
counsel, who is best able in these things to give direction; I will begin the
succession of Great Britains Monarchs, at the entrance and person of Julius
Caesar; at Not merely monarchical.
which time, it seems, by him and other Latin writers (the best Recorders of
kingdoms affairs,) this Island was governed rather after the manner of an
Aristocratie, that is, by certain great Nobles and Potent men, then under the
command of any One as an absolute Monarch: though herein is a difference, in
that in the Aristocraticall regiment, the rulers are all Peers of one Common
wealth; whereas here, as many Princes, so many several Public weals. For so
Caesar himself found the state of Britain to be How in Caesar's time and after.
divided into Provinces under the names of her inhabitants; and to be ruled by
diverse Peers or petty Kings.

(2) And such a Governor was Cassibelan, over the Trinobantes: Cingetorix,
Caruilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, all four Rulers together in Kent: Comes
supposed to be King of the Atrebatij, and to be the same Comius of Arras, whom
Caesar employed to tease and work the Britains to his subjection. Caractacus
the warlike King of the Silures, Galgacus the worthy King of the Caledonians;
yea and women also, without exception of sex, held government among them, such
as Tacit. an. 14. 11.
was faithless Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes, and famous Boudicea Queen
of the Icenians. Whereby Tacit. histor. lib. 3. cap. 9.
it seems that every several Province owed service and allegiance only to
their own Prince. And as their governments were confined unto certain bounds
and limits, so were the Inhabitants divided and distinguished by diverse Names:
of whom because we shall have occasion hereafter often to speak, it shall not
therefore be amiss in this place once for all, tablewise to lay down the same;
whereby our narrations may pass untroubled without more explanations, and the
readers mind carried with less incombrances. Those ancient names of people,
and places for abode, throughout the whole Island, from Ptolemie were as follow.

A TABLE OF THE ANCIENT INHABITANTS, AND THE SITES OF THEIR POSSESSIONS AS THEY
WERE CALLED BY PTOLEMY, AND OFTEN SINCE MENTIONED IN THE ROMAN WRITERS.
People. Countries. CANTII. -- Kent. REGNI. -- Sussex. Surrey. DVROTRIGES. --
Dorsetshire. DAMNONII. -- Devonshire. Cornwall. BELGAe. -- Somersetshire.
Wiltshire. Hampshire. ATREBATII. -- Barkshire. DOBVNI. -- Oxfordshire.
Gloucester. CATIEVCHLANI. Warwickshire. Buckingham. Bedfordshire. TRINOBANTES.
Hertford. Essex. Middlesex. ICENI. -- Suffolk. Norfolk. Cambridge. Ely Island.
Huntington. CORITANI. -- Rutlandshire. Lincolnshire. Northhampton.
Leicestershire. Darbishire. Nottingham. CORNABII. -- Staffordshire.
Worcestershire. Cheshire. Shropshire. BRIGANTES. Lancaster. Yorkshire.
Richmondshire. PARISI. Duram. Westmerland. Cumberland. ORDOVICES. --
Flintshire. Denbighshire. Caernaruon. Montgomery. Merionethshire. SILVRES. --
Herefordshire. Radnorshire. Brecknock. Monmouth. Glamorgan. DIMETAe. --
Caermarden. Penbrookshire. Cardiganshire. OTTADINI. -- Northumberland.
Teifidale. Twedale. Merch. Louthien. SELGOVAe. -- Lidesdale. Ensdale. Eskdale.
Annandale. Niddisdale. NOVANTES. -- Gallowey. Carick. Kyle. Cunningham. DAMNII.
-- Cluydsdale. Renfraw. Lennox. Striueling. Menteth. Fifa. CALEDONII. Perth.
Strathern. Albin. GADINI. Argile. Lorne. EPIDII. -- Cantyre. VICEMAGI. --
Murray. VENNICONES. -- Mernia. Auguis. Mar. TAEZALI. -- Buquh^e. CANTAe.
CREONES. Rosse. CERONTES. Sutherland. CARNONACAe. Strath^ern. CARINI. CORNABII.
SIMERTAe. Caithues. LOGI.

(3) These States ambitiously banding each against others, to raise their own
Prince to a more sovereign Their emulations and ambition.
supremacy, and to enlarge their Provinces upon the borders of the next, were
ever ready, the least occasion ministered, says Pomponius Mela, to enter
quarrels, and seldom held amity, or were quiet. This Pomponius Mela.
was the cause, as Tacitus tells us, which brought that puissant nation into
bondage: and was the only help to the Tacitus in vita Agrico.
Romans victories: for seldom it chanced (says he) that two or three states
met in counsel, and concurred in opinion to repulse the common danger: so that
whilst they resisted and fought one by one, all at length were subdued. But
this was not at once performed by Julius Caesar the first Roman enterer, who
(as he says) rather showed the place to posterities, then gave them the
possession Caesar first enterer, not conqueror.
thereof, supposing it his glory sufficient, to have done what he did. For unto
the days of Domitian, they held play with the Romans, and that with such
valor, that the subduing of some small part of this Island was accounted by
themselves to match the conquests of other mightier countries, and more notes
of honor showed in their public triumphs for one Britains misfortune, then
usually was solemnized for whole kingdoms subdued. Caractacus.


(4) That such people possessed, and that many Kings together reigned here in
Britain, Pomponius Mela does show: Britain (says he) brings forth
Nations, and Kings of nations, though they be all without ciuility and
barbarous. And Caesar's intendments being known unto them, it is said that many
of their Cities sent him by their Ambassadors profers of submission: whereby
appears their diversities of States, whereof only two held promise, and the
rest failing was the occasion of his second expedition for Britain. And
Tacitus, speaking of the shipwreck suffered by the Romans Tacitus Annal. lib.
2. cap. 5.
in the reign of Tiberius, says, that many of their soldiers then distressed
and torn, being cast upon the coasts of Britain, were by the people
courteously relieved, and by their petty Kings sent back unto Germanicus their
General into Germany; which Princes or petty Kings, were drawn (as else where
he says) by emulation into many partialities and factions; which was indeed
their own destruction. And by Gildas these were termed cruel Tyrants, taking
his authority out Gildas. S. Hierome.
of Saint Hierome.

(5) Let thus far suffice, in general, of these ancient Britains; whose
particulars we will further prosecute in the places of their resistances, lest
otherwise they should seem to fight only against themselves. And therefore so
many of these Governors, as either yielded their subiections to the Romans, or
stood their opposits till their own strengths were spent, I will briefly
touch, until such time as the land was made a Province, by the valor and
industry of Julius Agricola the first Roman that found it an Island, and left it
more civil, and in subjection to the Roman Empire; and by the way I will
insert some of such ancient Coins, as among them were then used, expressing
their names, and places of coynage.

THE KINGS AND GOVERNORS OF GREAT BRITAIN WITH THE ANCIENT COINS USED IN
THEIR TIMES. CHAPTER VI.


THe first British Coin (as is supposed) both by the fashion thereof being
shieldlike, and Name thereupon inscribed REXCOM: denotes Comius, (if he be a
Britain) King of the Atrebatij in this Island: whom some judge to have fled
thence unto Caesar, as a traitor to his Native country; and in Gallia
vanquished those parts, that lay coasted against the Whight, Ptolem^i Geograph.
wherein (by Ptolemy) the people called likewise the Atrebatij inhabited: over
whom he received the government by the gift of Caesar, and was by him employed
to work the Britains to his obedience. And that he was King of the Atrebatij
in Britain, may be strengthened by that which Caesar in his second book of
Commentaries affirms, where, by his own knowledge he says, that one
Diuitiacus reigned over a great part of Gallia, and some portion of Britain
also: and so likewise this Comius is reported to be of great respect among our
Britains, and able in that country to do much. Neither is it altogether
Caesar. (...). lib. 4.
unlikely, seeing the Britains distasted his loyalty to Caesar, and his
Embassage for their subjection, with such dislikes, that they laid violent
hands only upon him, and cast him in prison; using no such rigor against the
rest of their own Ambassadors. Notwithstanding when success altered, they set
him at liberty, and made him their means to pacify Caesar.

Other Coins I have inserted to such British princes as by their inscriptions
are known to be theirs. And whereas some are not yet noted by that honor to the
world; I have unto such added only blankes, if happily more be reueiled
hereafter, and the bowels of the earth deliver to others, her treasures hid, as
formerly (and in these our searching days) she has already done.



(2) Cassibelan, as the most worthy among the Britains Kings, to withstand the
common danger now ready to light upon them all, by the invasions and wars of
the Romans; was by a general consent chosen their chieftaine, though in times
past, he had molested his neighboring provinces to the enlargement of his
own. Whose signiories, as Caesar says, were severed from the Cities toward
the sea coast by the river Thames, about fourscore miles from the same.
Caesar. commen. lib. 5.
He had obtained the government of the Trinobantes, by the slaughter of
Imanuence, and the expulsion of Mandubrace his son. And, with great valor,
held opposite to the Romans, until the revolt of his chief City, the
Cenimagues, Segontians, Ancalits, Bibroces, Cassians, and other states, which
drew back, and yielded to the enemy; his confederates, the four Kings of
Kent, ouerthrown, his own town won, and himself forced to yield unto Caesar,
and the land to pay a tribute of 3000. pound yearly to Rome. A British Coin of
gold with the inscription CAS in scattered letters we have inserted; as also
another whereon is instamped the word VER, supposed to be his, because it is
thought to have bin coined in ancient Verolam, the City of Cassibelan, Verolam
a famous City near to the place where now S. Albons is.
and that in his days, before the Romans won it.



(3) Cingetorix: whom Caesar calls Kings that reigned in Kent, were
instigated by Cassibelan suddenly to set upon, and to assault the Roman
forces, that lay encamped upon the sea shore whilst he kept Caesar occupied
further in the main: which thing they attempted, but failed of their hoped
expectation, their men being slain, three of them chased, and Cingetorix the
chiefest taken captive. This heavy news and unfortunate success, caused
Cassibelan to sue unto Caesar, and by the means of Comius obtained his peace.
Caruill: Taximagull: Segonax:



(4) Mandubrace a prince of the Trinobantes, but a traitor to his country;
whose father Imanuence being slain by Cassibelan, and his own life likewise
sought after, and in danger, fled unto Caesar into Gallia, and followed his
fortunes in the wars; wherein, he was a great spur unto Caesar's forwardness
for Britain, both to be revenged upon the murderer of his father, and to
recover the government of the Trinobantes usurped by Cassibelan: preferring his
own ambitious desire, and the revenge of one man's death, before the freedom
of his native Country, or the deaths of many his cou^trimen, that daily stopped
the Romans passage with streams of their blood. He recovering his chiefest
City with the protection of the Romans, yielded subjection, and forty hostages
to Caesar: whose example drew others to sell their own liberty, and to buy
many miseries at too dear a rate, and with too late repentance, him does Beda
call Androgorius. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 2.




(5) Cenimagues Inhabitants of Norfolk. Suff. Came. etc. Segontians Hantshire.
Ancalits Camb. Britan.
Hendly hund. in Oxford. Bibroces Bray hund. in Barkshire. Cassians Caishow
hund. in Hartf. These people or states, seeing the proceedings and happy
success of Caesar, after the example of the Trinobantes, whose chiefest City
had yielded him obedience, and were thereby secured, and protected from the
harms of his soldiers, sent him likewise their submissions, and were accepted
into subjection: so ready were they to save their own stakes, that they left
the whole to the hazard of loss, which soon after followed as an ouerflowing
flood, wherein was lastly drenched the whole Islands liberty.



(6) Cunobeline (for so upon his Coins his name is instamped) was the son of
Theomantius and he the son of Lud (as say our British historians, by whom his
name is corruptly written Kymbeline) he lived at Rome, and in great favor with
Augustus Caesar the Emperor, by whom he was made Knight, and by his means the
peace of Britain was continued without the payment of their Tribute, as Fabian
out of Guido de Columna has gathered. In the foureteenth year of his reign
the Day Star of Jacob appeared, and the rod out of I shall did flourish from
Numb. 24. 17.
the womb of a Virgin, when the wonderful Isay. 11. 1.
Counselor, the mighty God and Prince of Peace, the Emmanuel with us was borne
at Beth-lehem of Isay. 9. 6.
his maiden-mother the blessed Virgin Mary, and was made man like unto us in
all things, sin only excepted. These were the times that great Kings and
Prophets desired to see, but saw them not, when Matt. 2.
the Wolf and the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Calfe and the Dyon fed
together; for war was Esaias 11. 6.
not heard of then in the world, but rather their swords were made into
mattocks, and their spears Mica. 4. 3.
turned into sithes, as the Prophets, Sibyls, and Poets from them have
affirmed. In Rome the temple of Ianus was shut, and in Britain Cunobeline
enioied peace with the rest of the world, and his fame made more famous by the
many Coins instamped of him, and whose face thereon among all the British
Kings was first inscribed, as by these here inserted does evidently appear,
one with two faces, like unto Ianus, and four more with his own, besides
three others wherein is read his name, one of them with a woman's head, another
with a horse, and the third with a wreath: all these (if not more) are known
to be his, which shows his wealth, his fame, and his civil respect. The
chiefest City for his princely residence was Camalodunum, now Malden in Essex,
won by Claudius from the sons of Cunobeline, as by the inscription of the
Coin next ensuing appears, and wherein many of the British moneys also
received their impresse. This City with the free town Verolam afterward felt
the heavy hand of merciless BODVO in her revenge against the Romans, who laid
the beauty and gorgeous buildings thereof so level with the earth that those
walls and mounted turrets never since aspired to half their wonted heights.



(7) Adminius the first son of Cunobeline, King of the Britains, by
Suetonius his report, upon some offense was banished the Island by his father;
and with a small train fled over the seas into Belgia; where Caius Caligula
was in making his ridiculous expedition against the Ocean. And yielding
himself to his protection, added matter to his vain glorious humors, as of a
great victory and conquest; sending the news thereof to Rome, with an especiali
S^ton. i^ vitae Catig^, s^. 44.
command that his letters should be delivered in the Temple of Mars, and that
in the assembly of a full Senate. It is judged by learned Cambden that the
Roman Coin above prefixed, upon whose reuerse is inscribed Metropolis Etiminij
Regis, to be meant of this Adiminius the son of Cunobeline, whose City
Camalodunum, Claudius Caesar the Emperor afterward won, and wherein a
temple was built and consecrated unto him, attended by the Priests Augustals:
which heavily burdened the poor estates of the Britains.



(8) Catacratus another son of Cunobeline, immediately after the death of his
father, found himself agr^eued Dio calls him Catacratus.
at the Romans, for the retaining of certain fugitives the betraiers of their
native country; where one Bericus was a chief, and a great firebrand of
Claudius his attempts against the Britains. This Catacratus maintained
resistance against Aulus Plautius the Emperors Deputy, with such noble
resolution and warlike encounters, that often he endangered both his person and
army. But Fortune and victory attending the Romans, brought at length
Catacratus their captive into bands, with great slaughters of his Britains,
himself led shortly after in great triumph through Rome, in honor of Plautius
his so fortunate success. The miseries of others thus made the Romans to mount
the chair of their triumphs; and the chains of their captives, the records of
their present aspired pride.

But the bordering D^buni seeing his fall, made their own standings surer by
yielding themselves subjects to Rome.



(9) Togodamnus the third son of Cunobeline, and successor to Catacratus,
prosecuted his countries quarrel with the like boldness and resolution as his
brother before him had done: and was the only touchstone that gave Vespasian
his luster, whose interpositions Tacitus in vitae Agric^.
(as Tacitus says) was the beginning of that greatness whereunto afterward
he aspired. And with such manhood followed the chase of the Romans, that in a
bloody battle he ended his life, and brought Plautius their Lieutenant unto a
stand, where straightened in dangers both of place and people, he was forced to
send to Claudius the Emperor; whose conceit was then grounded, that in Britain
was greatest glory to be gotten, and therefore came to his assistance in person
himself, the first since Julius Caesar that attempted their conquest. His
recorded compositions made with Aruiragus, the marriage of his daughter and
building of Gloucester, I leave to be read out of Geffrey of Monmouth, and to be
allowed at the choice of his hearer; only noting that the possession of so
fair a land drew the affection and aged person of this Emperor to undergo so
far distant and dangerous a journey, as this of Britain lay from Rome.



(10) Cogidunus a Britain borne, received in pure gift at the hands of the
Romans, certain Cities, over which he peaceably reigned their King. For when
they had conquered the nearest part of this Island, and reduced it into the
form of a Promi^; according to their ancient policy, it was their custom,
(says Tacitus) to use Kings themselves for instruments of bondage, both in
admittance of their authority, and in protecting Tacitus in vita Agricola.
them against their opposits. Other memorial of him none remains, but that
he is reported to have rested ever most faithful to the Romans, and was of
them accordingly esteemed, albeit his own people bare him no such good will,
but rather accounted him and others his like, to be Romes only instruments, and
Britains vipers, that brought in strangers to eat out the homebred
inhabitants, and fettered the freedom of their land, with the heavy chains of
a foreign subjection.



(11) Caractacus the most renowned prince of the Silures, in nine years
resistance waded through many adventures against the common enemy. For when as
the Icenians, Cangi, and Brigantes began to faint and give over, he only with
the Ordouices held out with such service and fame, that thereby he grew both
famous and fearful to the Romans. But Destinies determining the downfall of
Britain, the props that were set to stay it still up, proved too slender and
brake under the weight. For this bold Caractacus ouerthrown in battle, his
wife, daughter, and brethren taken prisoners, and his forces defeated,
committed himself to the protection of Cartismandua the Brigantes faithless
Queen: who by her was delivered to the Romans; and by P. Ostorius brought to
Rome; where beholding the riches and glory of that City, he openly and boldly
checked the avarice and ambitious humors of the Romans, who being owners of so
great and glorious things, were (notwithstanding) covetous and greedy for the
poor possessions of the Britains. And there being led in triumph, with
admiration he was beheld of all the spectators, and for his Zonaras.
undaunted spirit and magnanimous resolution released of bands, and taken into
favor by Claudius the Emperor. And the Lords of the Senate assembled together
made glorious discourses touching Caractacus captivity, affirming it to be no
less honorable then when P. Scipio showed Syphax unto the people, and L.
Paulus, Perses, or if any other had exhibited to the Tacit. Annal. 12. cap. 8.
view of the people kings vanquished and overcome. The British Coin here above
showed, by the scattered letters therein inscribed, is by the judicious
obseruers of such ancient moneys supposed to be his.



(12) Venutius, a famous King of the Brigantes, and husband to Cartismandua, (a
woman of an high and noble lineage, but of a base and unsatisfied lust:) finding
his bed abused by Vellocatus his servant and harnesse-bearer, raised his power
against her, and her paramour. With him sided his Brigantes, and the neighbor
countries adioining, whose good will went generally with the lawful husband,
fearing the ambitious authority of a lustful woman. With her went the Romans,
at the command of Didius their Deputy: and these striking battle won the day:
yet so, as the war continued to the Romans, the kingdom to Venutius, and the
infamy with Cartismandua, both for betraying the pledge of her trust reposed by
Caractacus in his distress, and her truth to Venutius her noble Lord and
husband: preferring the licentious pleasures of a vassal, before the bed of
chaste marriage, or the nuptial imbracements of a worthy King, and has to ages
following left her name noted with the scarres of infamy, that time nor
continuance shall ever wear away. His ancient coin is thought to be as thou
see here above described.



(13) Prasutagus Boduo King and Queen of the Icenians, a people unshaken by
war, and themselves rich, (as Tacitus reports;) the only cause of their
ruins, for which the Romans then warred; were brought to destruction upon this
ensuing occasion. King Prasutagus dying, by will left Nero his heir (supposing
by this means to leave his state the safer,) together with the protection of
his two daughters. These, contrary to trust, were abused, and defloured, the
mother Boduo turned out of all, and against all manly ciuility, or womanly
(much less, princely) respect, contumeliously and despitefully whipped. In the
revenge of which insufferable wrongs she so opposed and oppressed the Romans,
that at one battle seventy thousand (or as Dion Cassius says 80000. of their
slaughtered bodies she sacrificed to her dead husbands ghost; and has left the
fame of her proceedings registered, even by her enemies themselves, to her
immortal and never dying memory. The strong Cities, Camalodunum, and
Verolanium, she sacked with the rage of merciless war; Petilius, Lieutenant of
the ninth Legion, she discomfited, Catus the Procurator drove over the seas,
Posthumus the Campe-master durst not resist her, and all indeed feared the
valor of this heroic Lady: whose laws were not martial to save upon
ransom: whose revenge was not pacified with yeeldings or submission, nor did
she think there was blood enough in the Romans to imbrue the altars of her
assisting gods, or to wash off the stain of their unnoble and unmanly
injuries. But when success altered, after loss, and valorous resistance, she
made an end of her life by poison, lest living she should see either her own
miseries in their triumphs, or leave her remembrance in the records of their
lavish and selfe-pleasing historians. Her Coin of gold we have here expressed,
the form shield-like, and upon the embossement thus inscribed: BODVO.



(14) Aruiragus, the valiant British King, whom Humfrey Lhuyd confidently
affirms to be the same man that is called Meurigus, and is said to withstand
Claudius in his enterprises for Britain, until a composition of marriage was
concluded betwixt the Emperors daughter and himself. Notwithstanding by
Iuuenal it is plain, that this Aruiragus was in his fame in the days of
Domitian, unto whom the Poet, as a Prophet, would foredoome his happy success
in the dispossession of his government over the Britains, as in these his
verses are seen; It bodes great honor to thy self, some King the shall
deprive,
Or else Aruiragus from the rule of Britains waine shall drive.
An ancient British Coin of silver is here inserted, and a man's head thereon
instamped, which is supposed to be his, the letters alluding so near to his
name.



(15) Galgacus, a worthy and most valiant prince of the Caledonians, for
virtue, and birth, preferred before any other in the Northern parts of this
Island, and made their General against the invasions of Julius Agricola, was
the last Britain, that against the Romans stood out: accounting those only
happy, which were free from the contagion of that Roman tyranny, and themselves
the flower of all the British nobility, that yet had not subjected their necks
to their yoke. The resistance which he made was great and warlike, but against
the decree of God no man can stand; for the Romans, risen to their greatness,
bare down all that withstood them; and in a bloody battle subdued him, and
his forces, making all silent before them where they came, and leaving
desolation in the places where they had been. Thus then was the whole Island
subjected to the Roman Emperors, about one hundred thirty and six years after
Caesar's first entrance, and the land that had been ruled by many petty kings,
was brought now (as most parts of the world besides were) under the government
of one absolute Monarch. Grievous, no doubt, was the loss of their liberties,
but a greater gain was gotten not many years after; for from the rude and
savage manners of the barbarous, they were reclaimed, and became most civil.
And he that had given their Island to his Christ, prepared their hearts to
receive him their King; unto whose subjection also they were Psalm. 2.
motives to the Romans themselves. Two ancient British Coins stamped in silver
we have here set down, attributing them both to this Galgacus of Caledonia.
Notwithstanding in these (as in the rest) I must submit my self to the more
experienced, and the censures of these ancient things to the learned and more
judicious.



(16) These then were the resisters of the Romans proceedings, that rather
yielded their breasts to the sword, then their necks to the yoke of a foreign
subjection, and made their assaulters more famous in their conquests, and
themselves more renowned to following posterities: neither in these relations
have we followed the records of our own, but the approved testimony of their
best writers, who have delivered what we have said, and no doubt felt the like
repugnancy of many others, both in the South and North of this Island, though
their names died with their valiant resistance. And as these Britains held the
Romans at even hand the space of one hundred thirty and six years, neither yet
then were subdued without themselves, that ever sided with the enemy against
themselves, and whose factions made way for the feet of their conquerors, as
from Tacitus we have declared: So their successors the Saxons found as warlike
withstanders, till God for Britains sins had cast down their strength,
whereof more shall follow (Christ assisting) in the due place of their stories,
that from the reign of Vortigerne the scourge of his country to Cadwallader
the last prince of the Britains, spent their lives in the quarrel of liberty,
and has left their memorials famous for their countries defense.

(17) But the state of kingdoms (how largely so ever extended, or by what
humane wisdom strengthened with defense) do find their periods not to exceed
much the number of six hundred years, as by common experience among most
nations is seen. In these times therefore when the world was shaken with wars,
first by the Romans that strove to mount hie the spires of their intended
glory, and were by Gods decree appointed to ouerrun and afflict the earth, when
Kings of people (I say) were enforced to lay the Crowns from their heads at
their conquering feet; and free nations loaded with the yokes of their bondage:
then was fulfilled the resolution of this question demanded, Alas who shall
live Numb. 24 23.
when God does this? And then among the rest, Britain gave place to necessity
with as manlike resistance as did states more stronger, or kingdoms confined
with far more larger compass. And Caesar himself bought his entrance with
such loss to the Romans that no Emperor after assaied the like, before aged
Claudius, whose opinion was, that thence the remembrance of his succeeding
glory should wholly arise.

But when the props of that Empire began for to fail, as nothing can be firm
in this still-wearing world, the Saxons, for their valor a second triumphant
nation, began as it were where the Romans left: for besides the continual
possession of their own country, as in that case impartial Tacitus does tell
us; their legions were transported into all parts of the world, and without
whom almost no victory was won: of whose power and prowess in the
expeditions of war both Dionysius, Arrianus and Seneca, do speak. To these
then likewise if the Britains gave place, their lots came forth with the like
price of the rest, and in this Island they bought their conquests as dear as
they had done in any other part of the world. Neither was Britain subdued by
either of these nations, or their inuersion and exchange of policy altered,
but with as unwilling subjection and streams of blood as had been slused out
of the sides of their mightier nations, or by them had bin tamed to follow
their triumphal chariots. And more honor attributed to pass these British
seas, with more admiration only to see the Island it self, then was usually
conceived of kingdoms more larger, or that lay iacent as far from Rome. And
the conquest of some small parts of Britain in no small selfe-glory to be
inscribed as trophies of their victories upon their Coins, and to give
sirnames to the Emperors and their sons: as shall be showed, when the age of
this history shall be increased with the times of the Romans assaires in this
Island. Free from subjection before the attempts of Caius Julius Caesar by the
testimony of Diodorus Siculus, and never had yielded to any foreign power, as
not provoked by Dionysius or Hercules, nor enforced by any to maintain their
liberties by the feats of war. But Caesar in Gallia thirsting after
novelties, or his conceited humor to purchase renown, made the sea seem safe
from dangers in passage, and himself resolute to venture his person amongst
those bold and barbarous Britains: wherein he left no means unassayed for
their conquest and subjection, nor his successors omitted any provident care to
retain and keep the land in their possessions, which whilst it stood a
province in their obedience was held and accounted the fairest plume in their
triumphant Diadem, and the loss thereof (if no more but only in name) as was
publicly affirmed, would prove a great detriment to the Empire. This made the
Romans to desire it as they did, who besides the great glory they conceived in
the conquest, made it the granary for the western garrisons, besides the
delicate provisions for their Emperors own tables.

And the German Saxons straightened in their own countries through increase of
their people, or happily to supply their own wants, infested with piracies these
West parts of the world, and among all others set the eye of their affections
upon this most beautiful Island, and never left their attempts unassaulted till
they set the glorious diadem thereof upon their own heads. Changing the name
Britannia into Anglia, a term most fit to express that subject, and pleasing
in sound as Angelical like, neither have themselves proved unworthy of so rich
a possession, that in wars have maintained, and by voiages made known her fame
as far as the sun has his beams, or the endless Ocean her ebbes and tides.
But of these things we shall have occasion hereafter.

And now address our selves to describe our ancient Britains, and to show
their true pictures as they are reported. At first rude and uncivil (I task
them no further then all others then were in the world, some few excepted that
were only taught by God) and with the first were reclaimed to a more civil
respect, both in their apparel and apprehension of literature; whose pictures
in the Chapter succeeding we will demonstrate as they are described by Caesar,
Pliny, Dio, Herodian and others; at first altogether naked, cut, and painted as
thou see, afterward partly clad in imitation of others which frequented
their country either for traffic or conquest; in both which manner take them
as they are reported to be by these authors, and impute no liberty in the
draught to the workmans best liking, nor thy self any whit disparaged to be
brought from such parents, which here are set as the pillars spoken of by
Josephus, that Joseph. Antiqui. lib. 1. cap. 3.
after the flood did preserve the invented science of the celestial bodies,
lest time or elements should consume that knowledge or devour those rules
before demonstrated: So the true portrature of our ancient progenitors may by
these be preserved from the ruins of time and made our motives to be thankful
unto him that has brought us forth in these most civil times, and not only
clad us with the garments of humanity, but by his spirit has guided us unto a
celestial knowledge.

THE PORTRAITVRES OF THE ANCIENT BRITAINS, OF THEIR NAKEDNESS, PAINTING AND
FIGVRING THEIR BODIES, OF THEIR PERSONAGES HABITES, AND HABILIMENTS, BOTH IN
PEACE AND WAR: AS ALSO OF THE PICTS, THEIR ORIGINAL AND HABITES, etc.
CHAPTER VII.
THe understanding and apprehensions of men clouded in ignorance, are Aristotle.
by a Great Philosopher compared to the eyesight of such men, as stand and
behold things afarre-off; because both of these, though they apprehend some
general shapes and notices, yet can they not discern of the true proportions
and proprieties of their Objects. The like happens in the search and survey,
as of all other Nations, so of our own, of our first beginnings, our antique
Customs, behauiours, habits: the true Circumstances whereof are the more
difficill to find, in that those things are not only remote many degrees
beyond the kenning of our Eye, (yea so many Ages from the times wherein we
live,) but are also shadowed and enwrapped in manifold uncertainties and
contrarieties, wherewith even those Writers The reason why Nations Originals
are so hardly found out.
have perplexed our way, who undertook to be both our Guides and our Lights.
Notwithstanding, our purpose being to propose unto the eye of our now glorious
and gorgious Britains, some general draughts of our poor and rude
Progenitors, (that as King Agath^cles in his chief feasts used only earthen
dishes to put himself in mind that his Father was but a Potter, so we may
remember that true British Nobility is more in Virtue then in Ancestors;) let
us first see what the principal notes and marks are whereby the persons of
those first Britains were made so remarkable among all other Nations.

(2) These Notes were chiefly three; first, their going naked; secondly, their
staining and coloring of The three chief notes of the Britains.
their whole Bodies; thirdly, their cutting, pi^king and pouncing of their
flesh, with garnishments (for so they thought them) of sundry shapes and
fashions, as the two first ensuing Icones or Portraitures do represent.
Touching all which, the reports of Authors are very discrepant: and therefore,
since light is gotten out by collision of flintes, we will essay, whether out
of those Writers contradictions (brought to the stroke, and confronted
together) we may strike some glimering light to direct us how to paint them
forth, who so delighted in painting themselves.

(3) First touching their going naked, the authority of Caesar must ouersway
(as being auncientest) 1. The first note of the Britains, their Nakedness.
the too-generall reports of such others, as seem to relate that the Britains
generally used no Gouer^e, as neglectiue either of weathers injury, or of
civil modesty; for he says, interiores plerique pellibus sunt vestiti: the
Inland men for the most part were clad with Caesar.
skins. And yet these Inlanders were the rudest of all the rest, the Kentish
and Sea-borders being full of humanity and little differing from the French
civility. So that when Herodian says, Vestis vsum non cognoscunt, nec
induuntur quidem, They neither know the use of Herodian.
Garments: nor put any on: either he speaks on hearesay, or his large report
must be restrained to some certain Persons, Times, and Places. And for
certain Persons and Times indeed Plynie somewhat limits it, Pliny,
saying, that their married weomen, both elder and younger, (coniuges, nurusque)
in certain festiuals used to go stark naked: so does Dio also for certain
Places: in their Tents (says he) they lived naked and unshod, where Dio.
he seems to allow them some couerture abroad. The like may be supposed in
time of Winter or War, where Herodian himself says only, pleraque corporis
Herodian.
nudi, A great part of their body was bare.

(4) Itmay seem hereby, that those Originals of Particular Nations were not
much unlike that first beginning of the universal prosemination of Mankind,
when our first Parents innocence walked in naked simplicity: the foundations
of all things being, as farthest from our sight, so more simple and far from
those artificial frauds, which some call Wit and cunning. And though an Saint
Cypri^ interprets. A (...), East. D. (...), West. A. arctos, North. (...).
(...). South.
ancient Father be mistaken, in conceauing that by the four letters of the
name of Adam, were signified the four quarters of the World, (that being an
Hebrew name of three letters, and not a. Greek of four) yet all those
Quarters of the World participate somewhat of Adams dispositions; and as all
Natural things return by course to that whereof first they were framed, so
if Laws, discipline, and Customs, did not restrain men, they would in time,
of themselves reuolue to that first neglectiue condition, and carelessenes of
those outward respects whence men are now named Civil.

(5) But in our Britains, three reasons there seem of this their going
v^loathed. First, their hardines, Causes of the British nakedness. 1. Hardiness.
which was partly natural, and partly acquired by practice of their bodies to
durance: of whom Dio records that all of them had an excellent habit in
tolerating Dio Nic.
hunger, cold, and labors in so much as they could endure to abide many days
together in the water up to the chinne without any food at all; that they would
live in the woods on roots and barks of trees; though one kind of food he
there mencioneth unknown in our times, whereof using to make as much as a
bean only, they were not subject either to hunger or thirst. No marvel, if
those, who would endure this, could endure the want of garments: especially in
a soil whereof we find this See Chap. 1. 5. 10
Euloge. Tu (...) nec strict a gelu, etc. Nor freezing cold, nor scorching hot
thou art;
Twixt both thou hold'st the mean and pleasing'st part.
The like patience we find even now not only in the wilder Irish, and
Virgineans, but in rogues and Wanderers of our own Country, who often
pitiless of themselves voluntarily deprive their Bodies of this Protection
against the Aires offense, to procure pity of others. And what speak we of
these? seeing even children for Custom, and Women for pride, will suffer their
Breasts, and most tender parts of their Body, to be exposed not only to offense
of weather, but of modesty also? yea generally, the hands, and faces, being of
most subtilest sense, yet by custom are enabled now to endure that, which by
the like custom the old Britains endured in their whole Bodies; whereby
Plutarch thinks they usually lived so long Plutarch.
even to the age of sixescore, the externe cold keeping in and augmenting their
internal heat.

(6) As ability to endure cold, so ignorance (in many) of means to prevent
it, may seem another 2. Ignorance.
occasion of these Britains nakedness. The Romans (it seems) in their old
Consuls times, and after, had not the skill nor use of Hats, Breeches, etc.
That Britain abounded with wool and other materials for clothing, is past
all doubt, for which cause, by one Panegyric, it is named Rich in Pasturage,
which by another Paneg. ad Constan. Paneg ad Constan.
is thus explicated, that therein was an infinite multitude of tame cattle
both with Vdders full of milk, and laden with Fleeces to the ground. So then
Woll was not wanting, but Will, or Skill; the latter in most likelihood: for,
as Strabo says, that though those strutting Vdders yielded great store of
milk, yet some of them had not skill to make cheese, and having so rich
grounds, Strabo.
yet had not the art of tillage, so their sheep might have such heavy sleeces,
yet some of their Owners no cunning to keep themselves warm therewith. Some
of them, I say; for otherwise, as Pliny, touching Tillage, gives light to
Strabo, witnessing, that others of them were so good Husbands as to manure
their grounds Pliny.
with Marle, as likewise does Dioscorides, saying they had skill to make drink
of Barley: so probable is it, that Dioscorides:
those other who were by Caesar and Tacitus said to be so like the French in
conditions, had also some Caesar. Tacitus.
part of their Art in fitting the Burden of their Sheep backs to cover
their own.



(7) The last reason of such their going naked 3. Pride.
sometimes, was out of an opinion that no clothing so adorned them, as their
painting and damasking of their Bodies, for which cause (says Herodian) they
Herodian.
would not cover themselves, lest then their gay painting should not be seen:
but Pomponius Mela makes doubt, Mela.
whether their thus painting themselves were for ornament or for some other
use; which doubt Caesar seems to resolve, as if the men did it; because it made
them Caesar.
look more terrible in war.

(8) And thus we are now orderly fallen on the second of those three notes
appropriated by Authors 2. The second note of the Britains, their painting.
Caesar.
to our Britains, which is their painting and staining of their Bodies, which
appears by Caesar to have been more universally used, then going naked, for
all the Britains (says he) die their bodies with staining. As Authors differ
in the reason of this their painting, (as we showed) so in the name, perchance
also in the substance. of that wherewith they stained themselves, and somewhat
also in the color it self. The substance Caesar calls luteum, which yet in
vulgar acception is thought to be some yellow substance, as Pliny calls luteum
Caesar. Pliny.
oui, the yolke of the Egg; Pliny himself says the Frenchmen call it
glastum, describing it to be an herb like Plantayne, which Oribasius (as
learned Cambden Cambd. in Bri^. p. 14. Mela.
shows) does term Vitrum, in which sense Mela is understood, to say, that
they were stained Vitro (and not Vltro,) it being generally taken to be Woad,
from those ancient times hitherto used for the surest stain. But for the
color which is made, Caesar and the rest agree, it was Caeruleus, bluish or
azure, which color the Cambro-Britannes do yet call glace, whence our glass
for windows (called also vitrum) seems by reason of the color, to have
taken name. Only Pliny Pliny.
leaves some scruple, in saying, that the naked painted women imitated the
Ethiopian color; which must be understood either comparatively, in respect of
People white and unpainted, or because blew a farre-of has the appearance of
black.

(9) That the Britains took their Name from See Chap. 25. 7
this painting, has been already showed out of Isidore, who writes, that they
had that name from a word of their own language, wherein Breeth signifies as
Isidore. What the Picts were.
much as painted or stained; but whether those other Inhabitants of the more
Northern parts of this Island, called also Picti or painted, had their name
upon the same ground, and whether they were some branch of the British stock,
or of some transmarine Colonie, it is a question not yet decided. Pomponius
Laetus, and some other, derive them from Germany, some from the Pictones in
France; but Beda, from Scythia, whence says he, they are reported to have
come into Ireland in a few long bottomes, and finding no seating there to have
entered into Britain. Though Beda his authority Cambden p. ^2.
be venerable, yet the learned find reasons to induce them rather to believe,
that they were the remains of those ancient Britains which either inhabited
the North-part of this Island, before the Romans entrance, or which (upon their
Conquest) fled thither to avoid the Romish yoke, where the difficulties of the
air and soil protected them from the Romans ambition and invasion. Whereto
Tacitus well accords, Tacitus.
saying, that Agricola drove the Romans Enemies (he means the more
intractable Britains) into those parts, as it were into another Island. And it
is thought incredible, that those Enemies of the Romans, who sent forth
against Agricola an Army of thirty thousand strong, and who so vexed Seuerus,
that in one Expedition he lost seventy thousand of his Romans, and their
Aiders were so utterly extinct, as that none of them remained; but that rather
they wonderfully multiplied, being those who afterward much perplexed and
ouerran the Roman Province, and to whom (not unlikely) some other, such as
Beda mentions, did afterward join themselves.

(10) If we would add reasons unto Authorities, to prove that these Picts were
no other then that multiplied offspring of those Britains, we could produce
their Beda makes the^ diverse tongues, but they were only different Dialects.
See Cambden.
language, their manners, their kind of Government (all bearing British
Resemblance) to confirm the same. But what need? since the selfe-manner of
painting is an undoubted mark in the Children representing of what Parents
they were borne. That they were painted, Claudian shows, calling them, The
Pictes, so truly named; which Isidore well expounds, Claudian. Why the Pi^ were
so called. Isidore.
The Pictish Nation had their name from their Body, depainted with the juice
of an herb growing amongst them. When therefore the Romans excluded them from
their other Provincial Britains, this name (Pictes) for distinctions sake was
in use amongst them; before which times, yea and long after, they were known
to Writers by no other name then Britains, and the Roman Emperor, Commodus,
Seuerus, Bassianus, Geta, upon the Conquests of them, instiled themselves
Britannici, British (not Pictish) Conquerors. But after the Roman tongue had
prevailed with the Roman sword, the Britains themselves used to name any
thing painted by the name of Picte; as may be gathered out of Vegetius, who
says, that the Britanes called certain Shallops, Picts, because their sails,
tackle, and Mariners apparel, were colored blew, the very color, wherewith
these British Pictes (as V^. Annal. Anglor^.
somewhere they are truly called) used to stain themselves. When afterward
the Irish-Scots had confederated themselves with these against the Romans,
they all began by degrees to be more ciuilized: the more Southerly of them
being by Ninian the Britain converted unto Christ, about the year of Grace
430. those other more Northward, by Columbanus Anno 565. by which time, it is
likely, that Civility increasing, their painting and other like ruder Customs
were well nigh forgotten, both amongst them, and also amongst those other
Britains under the Romans Government. In which regard we have besides those
praefixed Icones, and Patterns of their first and most sauaged times, here
added also their Habits, when they began to put on, with conditions, a little
better clothing also.

(11) Neither may we think that formerly they 3. The thi^d note of the
Britains, their picturing of their bodies.
refused such Apparel, only to show this staining and coloring of their
Bodies: for besides it, some other bellishments they had, which they esteemed
much more graceful, then either their painting was, or any Clothes could be.
Which of the Britains, Solinus thus delivers: The Country is in part (note
that he Solinu^
makes it not general) inhabited by People barbarous, who by artificial forms
of incision have from their Childhood sundry shapes of Beasts depourtraied in
their bodies, and as their limbs increase in growth, so does the pictured
work together therewith, neither does these wild People boast of any greater
kind of patience, then in bearing long-lasting scarres, where the paint had
deeply suncke into their sliced flesh. The very parallel whereof is also by I
sidore set down touching our Picts whose bodies I sidore.
sliced and pinked be an artificial punchion, did suck in the tuice of the
stayning herb, carrying these rasures on their pictured limbs, as badges of
their Noblenes, thus endamasked. Neither only the shapes of Beasts, but
Maculosa Nobilitas.
of all other things, were so printed in their flesh; which Herodian takes to
be the prime reason, why Herodian.
they delighted to go naked, least they should hide these their pleasing
garnishments. Where also by the way may be observed, since Solinus says that
the barbarous only used so to do, and Herodian, that those who did so, used
therefore to go naked; that therefore not the Britains in general, but the
most barbarous of them used to go naked. And very answerable to Solinus, (who
elegantly calls such their figuring of themselves, inscriptis visceribus, a
writing on their Bodies,) Solinus.
is that of Claudian, Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente Claudian.
figuras, On dying Picts he reads the breathles shapes, as if the beasts so
lively portraited on them, seemed to lie dead together with the murdered bodies
of the Picts.

(12) By these varieties of picturing, (if The Appendix to Hariots Virginea.
Their married weomen.
some have not misinformed us out of their alleged ancient Authors,) those
people so distinguished themselves, The use of their different picturing.
that the married weomen were known by having pictured on their shoulders,
elbowes and knees, the heads of some fierce beasts, as Lions, Gryphens, etc. On
their Belly, the Sun spreading his beams: on their Pappes, Moons and
Stars etc. On their arms, thighs, and legs, some other fancies of their
own Choice. But for their Virgins, their whole Body was garnished over with
the shapes of all the fairest kinds Their Virgins.
of flowers and herbs; which (to speak indifferently) could not but yield,
though a strange, yet no unpleasing aspect. Whereas the Men were (as Caesar
speaks) very horrible to be looked on, having all their The Men.
breast and body disfigured with ugly Beasts, Serpents, ravenous Birds,
scales and finnes of fishes etc. In which relation yet, this scruple will not
easily be removed (if it be true, that from their childhood their prints
increased with their bodies) how those, who being Virgins had no prints but of
herbs and flowers, becoming Wives were so easily transformed either into
Beasts or heavenly Creatures.

(13) The later Women, (as you see by the later portraicture,) became far
more modest, that is indeed The later British weomen.
more womenly; having learned that then they openly show most beauty, when
openly they show not their beauty; much less should they expose to the view,
that which nature most endeavored to hide, as knowing it least worth the
viewing: yea * some observe that weomen being drowned, naturally swim with
their face and foreparts downward, Agryppa de land saeminarum.
whereas Men do contrary, as if the impression of modesty were not to leave a
Woman even after death. Agryppa who mentions it, reports also of some
Matrones, so too-modest, that they chose rather to die, then to expose some
hidden diseases to their Chirurgians view: A point unfortunately inserted into
his witty book, in praise of women, which he dedicated to Margaret wife to
Maximilian (afterward Emperor) she, of womanly bashfulnes choosing rather to
die, then to have her thigh cured, which was broken with a fall from a horse.
The picture of this British woman here last deportraied, is framed to that
description of the most valient British Lady. Boudicea, of whose brave attempts
on the Romans you shall read, more heareafter in the 7. Chapter of the Sixth
Book.

(14) Of which Sex, though naturally the weaker, yet in most Writers their are
remembrances of Of their women Governors.
some, whose Actions both politic and Warlike have been no way inferior to
the worthiest Men; as our own Age has given testimony to the World in another
Great Lady of British race, (the offspring of the valiant and lovely Meredicke
of Wales,) the glory of Queen Elizabeth descended from Owen Tender, whom
L^iland calls M^ridyck.
whose Reign and Regal virtues shall be as lasting as the World. Whose just,
wise, and resolute kind of Government has justified that Custom of our old
Britains and Picts, of the former of which Tacitus reports, as Beda does of the
later, that they made no difference Tacitus. Beda.
of Sex for the Sovereign Command, yea and used to war under the conduct of
women. In which respect though their Ordinary sort of weomen were not employed
in martial services, otherwise then before we showed in the fourth Chapter,
yet because some of the choicest of them have been so employed, we have so
deciphered them in their Martial habit.

(15) For their other habiliments of war, and the manner thereof, we have
described it in the same Of the Britains habits in war.
4. Chapter; their fight being (as Diodorus says) after the fashion of the
Heroes in the first age of the World, who Diodorus.
fought in Chariots; yet on foot also they were most strong (says Die) and
also most swift; which makes me marvel why Strabo should say, they were
pedibus male suffulti, Die Strabo
not strongly underpropped; Who also ads that they were (as himself observed
at Rome) much tauller then the Gaulles, but yet of no very elegant shape and
timber; Using as (Caesar says) to wear their hair very long and curling,
otherwise shaven all their body over, except only the upper lip. Their
weapons (says Herodian) were narrow shields, and short spears, at the end
whereof Herodian.
(says Dio) was a little bell like a ball, which they shook at their first
encounter in War for terror of Die
the Enemy. Swords also had they, but short, hanging at their naked sides; but
helmet and corslet they used Herodien.
none, as esteeming them burdens rather then helps in war. But about their
necks they wore a round circle of Iron (as an ornament no less esteemed then
gold with other Nations) as also about their waste, whereat they hung their
skeines: being doubtless, a most warlike Nation, (as their posterity have ever
since proved,) and most desirous to spill blood, wherein yet their Offspring by
divine blessing are now most different from their Ancestors.

THE SVCCESSION OF THE MONARCHS OF GREAT BRITAIN IN THE TIME OF THE ROMANS,
WITH AN HISTORICAL RELATION OF THE LIVES, ACTS, AND GOVERNMENTS OF THEIR
EMPEROVRS AND LIEVTENANTS: So far as touches the affairs of this Island, and
so long as it stood a Province to that Empire.
BOOK VI.
CHAPTER I.


THe next Nation that to the Britains obtained possession, The Romans the
second possessors of this Island. Julius Caesar the first Roman attempter.
and sovereignty of this Island, were the Romans, and of them Caius Julius
Caesar the first; what time their State had undergone all kinds of governments,
and now aspired almost to their highest pitch of glory. This Caesar bearing the
office of Questorship in Spain, and naturally disposed for great assaies, was
thereto the more incited at the sight of Alexanders portraiture, standing in
the temple of Hercules at Calez. Suet. in vita Caesar. Sect. 7.
Gades, where beholding it with great admiration fell into a sudden dislike of
himself, and (as Alexander in seeing Achilles tomb) with an ambitious, yet
honorable emulation, sighed and said: Have thou at my years achieved the
conquest of the whole world, my self Caesar's speech beholding Alexanders
picture.
hitherto having done no memorable act? Ever after which he disdained that his
petty charge, and made suite to the Senate to be dismissed, holding that the
cloud which ouershadowed his following and (soon after) flowing fortunes. And
forthwith returning to Rome Caesar's complottings for the Empire.
observed every occasion that might make him gracious in the peoples eyes,
having the advantage of the time which then was swaied with most dislikes: and
entering into many factions, yea and some of them not without suspicion of
conspiracy, did notwithstanding so manage his proceedings, that their
constructions were ever made honorable, and himself the man by all assents
that did support the glory of their State; unto whom offices of high dignities
were assigned, which daily increased his credit and power. And in the time of
his Consulship, took upon him Caesar ten years in Gallia.
the government of Gallia, where he remained ten years together, and forbear
no occasion for war, were it never so unjust or dangerous: Insomuch that
framing a Bridge of wood over the broad and swift river Rhene, he entered the
country of the Sweuians, Caesar the first Roman that assailed the Germans.
being the first Roman that assailed the Germans: And thence with victory
returning, found his charge the Gauls in quiet: both which fortunes were as
spurs to his aspiring mind, and set his thoughts to work upon other
attempts.

(2) For now intending a voyage into Britain, he prepared thitherward, as well
to enlarge the extent of his ambition and glory, as to satisfy himself with
the sight and seat of the Island, as for a further knowledge Causes of Caesar's
invasion.
of those people the inhabitants, after whom he had most diligently inquired,
yet by no relation could find content. But his pretense was revenge against the
Britains, for that thence (as himself speaks) the Gauls had received most
of their supplies against him in all his wars, or as some have written, for
the desire Sueton. in vita Caesar. Strabo.
of Pearls that therein plentifully grew, whose beauty and weight he had often
observed.

But because the summer was almost spent, and that the voyage seemed dangerous
through want of knowledge, either for place of entrance, or safety in harbor
(for our learned countriman Roger Bacon Bacon de art and natura.
was doubtless in an error, who thinks that Caesar set up perspectiue
glasses on the coast of France, and thence saw all the ports and creeks in
England) he thought good to send one Caius Volusenus a military Tribune in a
Volusenus Caesar's spic.
galley before him, giving sufficient instructions for so great an enterprise
in hand, himself drawing toward those parts of Gallia, that lay nearest
coasted unto Britain, thence expecting his success.

(3) These things were not so secretly done but that the Britains received
notice thereof, and thereupon some of their private States sent Ambassadors with
proffers of submission under the assurances of their hostages. Which Caesar
accepted and sent back again with liberal promises, ioining in commission with
them Comius a king of the Atrebatij (for so he is styled upon his Coin) a man
well reputed, and respected among the Britains, that he might persuade the rest
of the States to embrace Caesar's amity. In effecting of which business, some
five days being spent, Volusenus returned, having waffed upon the coasts of
Britain so far, as with safety he might, which was no further then to view it
with the eye, his foot not daring to tread the shore replenished with those
barbarous people, as it pleased the Romans to term the Britains: His
discovery and relation gave small encouragements to Caesar's hoped success,
and had not The Morines were of the hither parts of France, as Turwine. Calis,
etc.
the Morines yielded him their obedience, it may be thought his voyage at that
season had been stayed.

(4) But now composing his affairs in Gallia, and having ready an hundred
ships (wanting but two) Athenaeus reports he had 1000. ships.
besides many Galleys also for transporting his army, he loosed from the
shore; having a good wind, about the third watch of the night, taking order
for his The Romans divided the night into four equal parts, each part being
called a watch. Caesar comes in person against Britain.
horsemen to imbarke with all speed and follow after him; himself early in the
morning attained the sight of Britain, whose cliffes he found covered with
armed men, and place for entrance so naturally beset and strengthened with
steep hills and rocks, that he there cast anchor, and called to counsel the
Legates and Tribunes, declaring unto them the danger of the haven that gave such
advantage to their enemy, whose darts from the higher ground might much impeach
their arriuage, and therefore determined their landing elsewhere.

(5) Their Counsel was no sooner dismissed, but Caesar both tide and wind
fitting him, not foreslowing the occasion, gave sign of remove, and some eight
miles distant came to Thought to be Deal.
a plain and open shore, and made preparation to land his men. Thither also
the Britains had removed part of their forces, and so valiantly withstood the
enemies, that Caesar himself, though wholly addicted to honor himself and his
Romans, yet confesses that his army was sore ouerlaid and terrified with that
encounter: and had they not been assisted from the Galleys with an unusual
kind of Engines, which did beat back the Britains (inexpert of that strange
manner of assault) from the shore, the Romans had not set foot on British
soil, neither durst they then adventure it, until the standard bearer for the
tenth legion desperately leapt forth This ensign was an Eagle of silver
standing in a little shrine upon the top of a spear. Valor. M^. lib. 3. cap. 2.
of the ship with his Eagle, calling on the danted soldiers and asking whether
they would dastardly forsake their ensign and betray it through cowardice to
the enemy? which opprobry provoked them to follow his example, and so they got
the shore after an encounter fierce and terrible on both parts, as Caesar
acknowledges. But the first of all (even before the Stander-bearer) who put
courage into the Romans and taught them how to deal, was (as testifies
Eutropius) one Scaeua a Britain (who formerly had fled to Caesar) and guiding
four other soldiers in a boat to a rock nere the shore, where the tide
leaving them, his fellows slunke back in the boat, but he most boldly
defended himself from the rock against the Britains, like a Bear at a stake
among a multitude of mastiues, till having all his armor broken in pieces and
himself all wounded with darts, he swamme to the fleet; and begging pardon for
his foole-heady forwardness, Caesar both forgave him, and rewarded his valor
with the honor of a Centurion: and he did Caesar afterward noble service at
Dyrrachium in the civil wars. Caesar confessing, that he alone saved the
fortification against Pompey, at which time his target Caesar. bell. ^il.
was showed to Caesar, having 230. holes pierced in it by the enemy, whereof
Josephus Iscanus that ancient Joseph. Iscanus in Antiocheid^.
Poet of Excester writes thus: Hinc and Scaeua satus pars non obscura tumultus
Ciuilis, Magnum solus qui mole soluta
Obsedit, meliorque stetit pro Caesare murus.
The Britain Scaeua in civil wars well known,
Besig'd the Viz. Pompey.
Great, and rampires overthrown,
Was Caesar's wall more strong then wall of stone.


The first attempt assaied, that is warranted by any true Record for the
conquest of this Island: which The first assay for the conquest of this Land.
An. ^nds 3873.
happened in the year of the worlds creation 3873. and before the birth of our
Savior Christ, 54.

(6) This enterprise for landing thus achieved, Caesar charged so fiercely
upon the enemy, that he put them to flight; but wanting his horsemen to
follow Caesar puts the Britains to flight.
the chase, (which as yet were not arrived) he proceeded no further, but
encamped his host upon a great plain, not far from the Sea, and not without
At Barham Down Caesar sees the dispersion of his ships.
likelihood thought to be Barham Down: for so near lay it upon the shore,
that thence he beheld the dispersion and loss of his 18. ships (coming under
sail with his horsemen to his assistance) through the violence of a storm,
and rage of Sea.

(7) In the mean time the Britains; that after flight had again recovered
head, and in their assemblies advisedly considered their imminent dangers;
concluded their submission for the safest remedy, and to that end sent their
second Ambassadors unto Caesar, with whom Comius before remembered was
employed, The Britains second embassage to Caesar.
whom they had retained in strait prison for Caesar's cause, but now made him a
mean to work their peace; which was granted after some soft and gentle
reproves, with hostages received for performance of Covenants, and resort of
their Nobles to Caesar's camp, to yield themselves and Cities to his will.

(8) These Britains, although rude in regard of the Romans, and unmatchable
to them in educated civility, yet were so skillful in the affairs of war,
and so ready to discern the least advantage, that they easily perceived the
weakness of Caesar's power, both in want of horsemen to equal their wagons,
wherein chiefly stood the strength and order of their fight, as also of ships
for service and safety, as occasions should be offered: whereby their minds
touching their promised submission began to waver, and the matter with better
advice to be pleaded in their assemblies; for that not only these foresaid
ships for Caesar's supply were dispersed and hindered, but even his own Caesar's
ships distressed.
flect, which lay then in harbor by the rage of wind and sea, (being then
spring tide, and the moon in the full) was not only filled with waves, but
also their tacklings, sails, and anchours spoiled or lost, the violent storm
so dashing the bulkes one against another, that their bruised bottomes were
thereby made unfit for burden.

(9) This loss was so great, that it is accounted Suetonius in vit. Caesar.
the first of the three adverse fortunes which ever happened to Caesar in all
his proceedings: and it was so well observed by the Britains, that immediately
they intended a revolt, and in Counsel urged this, as the material point that
breathed hope and life to their Britains revolt.
former liberties, condemning themselves as impious if they should refuse to
join consent with the heavens, whose elements had thus far fought for their
freedom and full deliverance, assuring themselves (if on this advantage they
might cut off these new guests) that never any afterward would adventure to
enter Britanny in hostile manner.

And thereupon they began both to slack the performance of covenants, and
daily to withdraw themselves from Caesar's Camp, which gave him just occasion
to suspect whereat they aimed. And to prevent their proceedings he as wisely
wrought: for first repairing his Navy with the huls, timber, and tackling of
the most bruised ships, with the loss of twelve ships only, the rest were made
able to brook the seas. And providing against the advantage of the enemy, he
sent forth the seventh Legion for forage to supply any occasion.

(10) This Legion taking the coast clear, and little surmising so sudden a
revolt, fell to the sickle and sith like harvest laborers, and laid their
weapons apart, mistrusting no Enemy. Now the Britains as forward to put in
practice what they had determined, closely had laid themselves in ambush, for
thither they knew the enemy would come, a piece of corn there standing,
whereas in all other parts harvest was past: and so having these workmen in
their danger, suddenly fell upon them, slaying some, and forcing The Britains
suddenly assail the Romans.
the rest out of their array, who not knowing the order of their fight, cast
themselves in a ring (the best defensive form of embattelling) and stood on
their guard as they might: but had they not happily been rescued, Caesar had
lost one whole Legion at that time.

(11) For though this skirmish thus in acting was altogether unknown and
unexpected to the rest of the Romans, yet by the rising of the dust, appearing
to the Coherts that warded before their Camp, the same was mistrusted, which
caused Caesar in all haste to make thitherward with part of his host.

(12) The Britains thus prevented, seeing more supply to maintain the battle,
stood still, without further stroke: and the Romans as much amazed at this
sudden attempt, and order of their fight, made a stand, not venturing any
further. Which order in fight so often mentioned, and so much admired, in
Caesar's words we will declare, the rather because some Clem. Edmunds his
observations on Caes. Comment. li. 4. ca. 12. obscr. 2.
have thence collected, that the Britains were the offspring of the Trojans,
who with other Eastern Nations only used this kind of fight in Chariots.

(13) They used (says he) to ride in wagons against Cas. Commen^. li. 4.
the approach of the enemy, and to circulate them about with a whirling
compass, and rattling noise, each ways casting their darts as they did drive,
and ever as they saw advantage The manner of the Britains fight.
would wind themselves in amongst the horse and foot, to break the array;
which done, they would for sake their wagons, and onfoot most dangerously
assail the enemy. In the mean while the Wagoners would withdraw themselves
somewhat out of the battle, and place their wagons in such order, that if their
masters were ouer-charged, they might have speedy access, and opportunity of
retrait, by which means they were ever as quick to move as were horsemen,
and as steadfast to stand the battle as were the foot, whereby they did supply
the duties of both at once, and by daily exercise grew so expert in managing
their horses, that running them forcibly down a steep hill, they would stop,
and turn them in the midway: and they would run along the beam, and stand
firm upon the yoke; whence with like facility they would again return into
their Chariots.

This order Caesar so well observed, as that notwithstanding his desire of
revenge, yet wanting his horsemen (as he pretended) wherein consisted the
chiefest resistance, he durst attempt no further on them, but was content to
keep the field without profer of battle.

(14) The Britains likewise hopeless of further success at that present,
departed without any impeachment, intending to prosecute their cause with a
greater and more general supply: and thereupon The Britains gather a greater
power.
sent messengers to their seuerail States, with notice of their hopes against
so small a power; whose Camp by them if any way might be vanquished, the
purchase of spoil, besides their frced liberties, would requite the pains.

(15) These States, though maintaining civil factions amongst themselves, yet
seeing the intended danger of this general enemy, presently assembled Cor.
(...). (...).
a great power, purposing yet once again to try the hazard and fortune of
war. Caesar, whose vigilance did ever equal his valor, prepared his army,
wherein now only ^0. horsemen were present, and those Comius supplieth Caesar
with ^0. (...).
brought to him by Comius the King. The battle ioining continued not long, but
that the Britains gave back and fled, whom the Romans pursued as far as
strength endured, and returned with the slaughter of many, burning the Country
where they came.

(16) Thus the Britains once again vanquished, The Britains ^ubmit (...) the
third time.
forthwith sent their third Embassage unto Caesar, desiring peace, with
promise of quiet subjection; whom he with hard terms now reproved, and
imposed a double number of hostages to be brought him into Gallia, whither he
made all possible preparation, for that the Aequinoctium drew near, doubting
his crazed Aequinoctium is (...) the (...) are both of a length.
ships would hardly brook the winter storms, that usually rage upon these
Seas. And having gotten a fair wind, embarked all his forces about midnight,
and so brought most of his fleet safe to the continent. This enterprise so
fortunately accomplished, Caesar by his letters made known to the Senate, who
decreed and proclaimed to his honor a general supplication Caesar was now the
first that had 20. days (...) g^ted: the greatest (...) but 5. days, or 10.
at the most.
or thanksgiving to their Gods, for the space of twenty days together,
wherein all the Romans, clothed in white garments, and crowned with garlands,
went to all the Temples of their Gods, and offered sacrifices for so glorious a
victory.

CESARS SECOND EXPEDITION INTO BRITAIN. CHAPTER II.


CAESAR expecting the performance of Covenants agreed upon in the treaty of
peace with the Britains, received hostages from two of their Cities only, and
no more: the rest Most of the Britains break covenant with Caesar.
drawing back, refused his subjection: whereupon intending not to lose so rich
a prey, nor to suffer that Sun to be eclipsed, whose glory thus far in his
Horizon had as^nded, he appeased some troubles in Gallia, and in the winter
season began his preparation to that enterprise. And having had experience of
his former wants, he furnished himself accordingly, and the next spring
following drew his forces toward Calis, the shortest cut (...) some think to
be Calis. some S O^.
into Britain. There committing the charge of Gallia to T. Labienus his
Lieutenant, himself with five Legions of soldiers, 2000. horsemen, and 800.
ships, about going down of the Sun loosed from the shore, and with a soft
Southern gale were carried into the stream. But about midnight the wind
failing, and their sails becalmed, the tide diuerted their course: so that in
the dawning he well perceived his intended place for landing to be passed.

(2) Therefore falling again with the change of Caesar again landeth at the
place of his first arriual
tide, and endeavors of their Oars, about noone the same day he recovered the
shore, even in the same place (and that without any show of resistance) where
he had found best landing the Summer before. There in convenient manner he
encamped his host, and by certain Fugitives got notice of the power and place
of the enemy.

(3) And lest delay should afford them advantage, he committed the government
of his ships at anchor to Qu. Atrius, and his camp on land to the guard of ten
Cohorts, besides the strength of three hundred horsemen; and himself with the
rest about the third watch of the night took their march toward the enemy,
proceeding with such celeritie, that by the day dawning they were entered twelve
miles higher into the Continent: where seeking to pass a river, which is
supposed to be the water Stower, the Britains with Caesar resisted at the
river Stower.
their darts and chariots began in most terrible manner to assault the Romans.
But being at length by them repulsed, took into a wood strongly fortified both
by nature and man's industry. For in the time of their own dissensions they
had formerly made this place one of their strongest fortresses, and had cut
down many trees, which overthwart the ways of entrance they had bestowed.

(4) In this they secretly kept, and where they saw advantage, would by
companies sallie out upon the enemy to their no little annoiance. Whereupon
Caesar commanded the seventh Legion to raise a bank, and to build a Testudo of
boards, covered with The Britains driven from their fortress.
raw hides, by which means the place without much ado was won, and the
Britains forced to forsake the woods. Whose chase Caesar forbade both in
regard the day was near spent, as also that the country was altogether
unknown to the Romans. But the next day the pursuit being begun, sudden news
was brought from Q. Atrius, that most of his ships the night before by a
violent tempest were cast on Land, Caesar's Navy greatly impaired by tempest.
their bulks shaken, their cables broken, and anchours lost. Caesar's experience
in like mishaps the Summer before, made him so much more ready to prevent the
worst. And therefore recalling his forces, in all haste returned to his Camp,
finding the relation too true in their wrack, wherein forty of his ships were
quite lost. Wherefore he wrote to Labienus his Lieutenant in Gallia for supply
of ships, thence to be sent in all haste. Then gathering his shipwrights out
of the legions, with the ruins of the bruised bulkes, he repaired the whole;
and now having twice felt the dangers of these seas, caused his whole fleet (a
strange attempt) to be drawn on land, even into the midst of the fortifications
He draws his fleet on shore.
of his camp, so to secure them from the like mishap, and that one strength
might defend both.

(5) In which admirable toil ten days and nights were altogether spent,
before he could return to the place from whence he came; where now the
Britains through great confluence of people had increased their power, and
entered again their fortress and wood. The chief command of these affairs
was committed to Cassibelan, whose coin we have here likewise set, a Prince
of good repute for feats in war, whose Seigniory was severed from the Cities
toward the Sea, by the great and famous river Thamisis, and extended into the
land full fourscore miles.

This Cassibelan present Governor of the Trinobants, had attained to the
possession of their chiefest City by the slaughter of Imanuence their former
Ruler (a man well respected, and much lamented after death) whose son
Mandubrace, a gentleman of great hope, Caesar. Com. lib. 5.
fearing the like danger, by the new established authority of Cassibelan, had
made over into Gallia, craving Caesar's assistance to set him in his right.

(6) Cassibelan (if among these authenticke Authors Flor. Histor. Fabian.
the British Writers may be heard) was the brother of King * Lud, and in the
nonage of his nephews Cassibelan brother of King Lud.
governed the Trinobants, whose bounds he sought to enlarge upon the bordering
Countries of his neighbors, and in his fortunes had so borne himself, that he
was much maligned, and more feared. But now all their dangers yoked alike in a
common peril, they laid aside private grudges, and held him the only man to
support the strength of their troubled and declining estate, and by a common
consent made him General of their wars. The expectation of whose proceedings
he long delaied not, but with a fierce and hot encounter did assail the
Romans, and so manfully discharged the parts of his place, that in the sight of
the whole Camp Quintus Laberius a military Tribune was slain, (in memory
whereof the place as yet, though somewhat corruptly, is called Iul-laber) and
Caesar Lamber. Peramb.
himself professes he learned many points of martial policy by their brave
and running kind of encountering.

(7) But his next days service proved not so fortunate; for the Romans having
learned their own defects by the former days experience, laid aside their
weighty armor, that with the more facility they might both assail the
enemies, and with like nimblenesse avoid their fury, they having now bestowed
their powers dispersedly, and scattered their troops into companies, whereby
the Romans were still matched with fresh supplies. A policy no doubt of no
small consequence, had not destiny determined the fatal subjection of the
Britains, and Fortune now raised the Romans almost to the height of their
Monarchy.

(8) For this failing, the Britains never after showed Britains retire to
their several Provinces.
themselves with any united resistance, but having lost the day departed,
thinking it better to secure every private by his own means, then by a
general power to hazard all, as hopeless any more to uphold that which the
heavens (they saw) would have down. And Cassibelan himself despairing of happy
success, drew into his own territories, keeping with him not above 4.
thousand wagons. And fearing the Romans further approach, fortified the river
Thamisis (then passable Thought to be Oatland.
only in one place) with sharpened stakes bound about with lead, and driven so
deep into the bottom, that Beda and Asser report them so to remain Beda lib.
1. cap. 2.
in their times. All which notwithstanding, the Romans passed with the repulse
of their enemies, and Caesar, who grew now to the height of his honor, marched
further into the Continent, and coming forward, was met by Ambassadors from
the chiefest City of the Trinobants, which first of all the States proffered
submission, and promised subjection, with this The Trinobants submit to Caesar.
Beda calls him Androgorius, lib. 1. cap. 2.
entreaty also, that Mandubrace (who being Caesar's follower, and doubtless
the contriuer of this submission) might be Governor of their City.

(9) Caesar ready to work upon such advantage, seized them at forty hostages,
with sufficiency of grain for his whole army, which with all expedition
those Suppliants performed, preferring the satisfaction of their own
discontentments before the common cause Ceminagues, Segontianus, Ancalits,
Bibrokes, Cassians.
of their Native Country, thus laid open, and betrayed into the enemies hands;
from whose example many other States without stroke yielded to Caesar's command:
yea further treacherously showing unto him both the power and place of
Cassibelans abode, who had now retired himself into his own City called
Verolam, well fortified both with woods and marish S. Albans besieged by Caesar.
grounds.

Thither Caesar came, and with little loss or labor won the place, and many
of the miserable Britains both taken and slain. Cassibelan now despairing of
his own power, far unable to match, and much less to ouermatch his Enemies,
instigated the Governors The Governors of Kent join with Cassibelan against
Caesar.
of Kent, being four in number, Cingetorix, Caruilius, Taximangulus, and
Segonax, (whom Caesar terms Kings) to raise all their strengths, and suddenly
to set upon the Romans Camp that guarded their ships; which enterprise was
accordingly attempted, but with such success, that the Britains were on each
side slain, and Cingetorix taken prisoner, the rest saving themselves by
flight.

(10) Cassibelan beholding these unfortunate proceedings, feared the end of
unhappy success, for he saw his Country wasted, his own designs defeated,
and himself forsaken by the traitorous revolt of many Cities and States on
every side. Therefore as bootlesse to bandy against fortune, he sought to hold
Cassibelan solliciteth for peace.
his own with others, and sent Comius King of the Attrebatij to be his mean
to Caesar for peace, which was the willinglier heard and granted, for that he
determined to winter in Gallia, his affairs so requiring it.

(11) The conditions were hard, but necessity must be obeyed: for Caesar
imposed a grievous Tribute A great Tribute.
to be taxed of the Britains, of no less then three thousand pounds yearly
to be paid, and moreover included So says an old written Chronicle, the Author
not named.
the safety of Mandubrace, with his Trinobantes taken into friendship, and
protection of the Romans; and lastly, that these Covenants should be faithfully
observed, he commanded hostages for assurance forthwith to be delivered. These
things thus compounded, he took the Seas, about the second watch of the night,
which then began to equalize the day in length, and safely arrived in the
Continent of Gallia; Having rather showed the place to posterities, then
delivered to Tacitus in vita Agric.
the Romans the possession thereof, as Tacitus says, supposing it his glory
sufficient to undergo a matter so rare and difficult, and at his coming to
Rome, to have presented his British Captives; whose strangeness for attire and
behavior filled the peoples eyes both with wonder and delight. He offered also
in the Temple Eutrop. Plin.
of Venus genitrix, a Surcoat made all of British pearls, as a Trophey and
Spoil of the Ocean. And now his fortunes coming to the highest, the title of
perpetual Dictator (then which the State of Rome could afford nothing
greater) sufficed him not, but a King he will Caesar's ambition.
be, and sole governor over all, though contrary to the Law and liking of the
Romans; whereof in short time grew such heart-burning and hatred, that seventy
principal men conspired his death, and after his many dangers Caesar's death.
of enemies in battles abroad, was in the Senate House amongst his supposed
friends, and in peace (if treachery may be called peace) cruelly murdered,
receiving in his body three and twenty wounds, whereof he died, after he had
sat Emperor only five months.

(12) I am not ignorant that the British Writers do vary from Caesar in
relating these his proceedings, British Writers vary from Caesar.
and speak more honorably of their own resistance then himself has set
down, namely, that by the valor of Cassibelan their King, in his first
attempts he was twice driven back without his purpose, That Cassibelan
repulsed Caesar twice.
and forced to take the Seas, to the great hazard of his ships and men, yea and
with the loss of his own sword, which with great prowess was won from him
in a single encounter by Nenion Cassibelans brother. And surely howsoever
Polydore accounts Nenion won Caesar's sword.
their Story new, and Caesar carries himself gloriously in his own
affairs; yet by sundry other renowned writers it seems, that the current of
his Conquest went nothing so smooth and untroubled, or with so Beda hist. li.
1. c. 2.
little loss of the Romans, nor the Britains liberties forgone by so easy
resistance: which may be collected even out of some covert passages of Caesar's
own words, where it appears, that he durst not at sundry times give the
Britains battle, though they were only harnessed in leather, and his Soldiers
were all old Legionaries of long service, called for their huge armor, Milites
grauis armaturae, as having a helmet, corslet and boots, all of massy brass or
iron, with a large target, a strong two-edged sword, and a great staff or
clubbe headed with an iron pike; which odds notwithstanding had not Cassibelan
been undermined by Mandubrace, and traitorously forsaken (which Caesar himself
confesses) by the Princes which promised him assistance, but ever mangned him,
and had now a fair time of revenge, perhaps Caesar might have missed this
parcel of his glory. Yet for all these helps, Lucan says expressly of him,
Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis:
He Britains found, but left them soon by fright. Lucan.



Eutropius says, He was wearied out and quelled both with the fierce battles
of the enemy, and cro^es of tempests. Eutropius,
Tacitus says, He found out Britannie for the Romans, Tacitus.
but could not win it for them: which was the very cause why (as Dion
witnesses) for twenty years after Caesar's entrance, Britannie kept their own
Kings and their own laws, and had no foreign Prefects to command them. And
Beda shows, that Caesar in this Land was both received with sharp and sore
fight, and weakened by the loss of his ships, and with the most part of his
men at arms. Tacitus also, using the speech of Caractacus to his Soldiers,
has these words: He called (says he) upon the names of his Ancestors, Tacit.
lib. 12. ca. (...).
which chased Caesar the Dictator out of the I Will, by whom and by whose valor
they were delivered from Hatchets and Tributes, and enioied freely their wives
and childrens bodies undefiled. Again, in the consultations of the Britains
intending a revolt, he allegeth their arguments, whereof one was the sudden
departure of Caesar out of this Island, little better then a slight. With In
vita Agric.
whom Dion Cassius also agrees, affirming that Caesar Diodi. 39. Caesar got
nothing in Britain, save the sight of the Country.
got nothing in Britain besides the honor and renown of that voyage, and
sight of that Country, until then unknown to the Romans. And again (says
he) Caesar departed thence having done no memorable act, which caused the
Britains to be secure and careless to provide themselves against his second
arriuage. Whereby is apparent (even by Roman Writers) both the bold resistance
that the Britains made, and the dear subjection that the Romans bought. But
in matters so far past, it is hard for me to avouch any thing resoluedly,
unless I could meet with that aged Britain whom M. Aper conferred with here
in Britanny (as Quintilian writes) who auowed that he was in the British
Camp Quintilian.
when they did beat Caesar from the shore.

(13) Neither will I urge that for truth, which Authors have left us in their
reports, concerning the many prodigies before going, and forewarning his death:
things rather to be accounted the superfluities of their own pens, and vain
imageries, ever working upon accidental events, and ascribing issued success
to a supernatural cause. Such conceit had Caesar of himself, that for his
fortunes he would be styled amongst Caesar would be styled amongst the Gods.
the Gods: and his deity to that credulous generation was further strengthened
by the appearance of a blazing star, which moved (no doubt) an ouerlarge
opinion of his humane power, and caused his glory much to surmount it self.
And therefore lest ignorance should any way blemish his immortality, they have
fained the manner of his dying best pleasing Sueton. Plutarch.
to himself, and many ominous signs to foreshew the same: all which he either
lightly despised, or carelessly neglected, as they would have their Readers
believe.

(14) Such was that of Spurina his diuiner, that Caesar forewarned to take heed
of the Ides of March.
forewarned him of great danger, which should not pass the Ides of March. And
Suetonius out of Cornelius Balbus reports, that in the ancient Monuments of
Capuae, discovered but few months before, was found a Table of brass, wherein
was written the manner of his murder, and the revenge that should follow: his
own dreams the night before, wherein he seemed to fly in the His dreams.
clouds, and to shake hands with Jupiter: as also his wives, that thought him
stabbed in her arms, and to lie all bloody His wives dream.
in her bosom. Besides many other obseruances both of beasts and birds, and
that in such plenty, that it yielded sufficient matter for Ovid the Poet to
furnish Old. Meta. li. 15.
and fill up the latter part of his last book of Metamorphosis. His feature,
qualities, and fortunes, are by them thus described: Of personage to be tall,
strong, His personage.
and well limmed, fair, and full faced, with black eyes, and bald headed, to
cover which he usually wore the Triumphant Laurel Garland. He was well
learned, and therewithal very eloquent: and although so great a warrior,
thirsting after fame, yet would he be easily reconciled to his enemies, yea and
often times Easy to be reconciled.
seek the means first himself. And he held it no less valor to subdue his
wrath, then his enemy; as likewise in his disasters he was of great temper
and Seneca.
moderation, insomuch that Seneca writes of him, that whiles he was in
Britain, hearing news of his daughters death (which was lamented as a great
loss to the whole State) he conquered that sorrow as easily and as quickly as
he subdued all things where ever he came. And of his other moderatenesse,
Cotas (who then held the second Cotas apud Athenaeum.
place of honor and command in the Army) writes, that though Caesar was then
so great and glorious a Commander, yet he was so far from outward pomp, as
that when he came into Britannie he had only three servants to attend him.

(15) In his enterprises he was both valiant and fortunate, and is therefore
singled out for an Idea or Pattern of an absolute General, especially for
four militaric properties very resplendent in him: first, laboriousnesse His
success in war, and number of battles.
in his affairs: secondly, courage in his dangers: thirdly, industrious
contriuing of what he undertook: fourthly, quick dispatch in accomplishing
what he had once begun: In all which he proceeded with such success, that in
fifty several battles by him fought, he always prevailed, one only excepted,
as both Pliny, Solinus, and others have recorded. Four times he was created
Consul, and five times entered Rome in triumph, bearing His Offices.
still the style of Perpetual Dictator. And therefore with less dishonor did
nations subject themselves unto him; and this of Britain with them, whose lot
being cast among the hazards of the world, was drawn with an equal chance, as
the rest, and yielded their freedoms with as hard conditions, as did Countries
of more extent, and Kingdoms of greater account. But most especially the
decree of God could not be gaine-stood, who had foreshewed by his Prophets the
rising Number. 24. 24. Dan. 11. 30. Dan. 2. 35.
of these Chittims, and them a means to make the metalline image dust.

OCTAVIUS AUGUSTUS: CHAPTER III.


AFter the death of Caesar, thus slain in the Senate, Octauian (the
grandchild of Iulia, Cesars sister) whom he had adopted, and declared his
heir, returned unto Rome from From Macedonia, say some.
Apollonia, where he studied Philosophy, intending to prosecute the revenge of
Caesar's death; where falling at odds with Marcus Antonius a man of great
spirit and power, and setting himself Caesar against Antony. Sueton. in vita
August.
against Brutus and Cassius, with their Accomplices, for the murder of his uncle,
secretly wrought the friendship of the Citizens, before whose eyes also Caesar's
wounds seemed yet to bleed.

(2) These factions thus begun, grew to such height, that in the Senate House
their causes were pleaded, and by the instigation and eloquence of Marcus
Tullius Cicero, Antonius was proclaimed enemy to Cicero against Antonius.
the State: against whom Octauian was sent, with Ensigns of Consul, and title
Propraetor, being yet not twenty years of age; which duty and office he so
well discharged in the parts of a valiant Captain, that Antony was forced out
of the field, albeit in this battle the one Consul was slain, and the other
deadly wounded. For Antonius discomfited.
which service so effected, he entered Rome in Triumph; though the glory thereof
was much blemished, being obtained but in an intestine and civil war. Marcus
Antonius, to recover himself, and make good his cause, joined friendship with
Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, Captain of the horse, who together interposed
themselves against Octauians proceedings; but by mediation of friends all three
were reconciled, and jointly Octauian and Antony reconciled.
erected that form of government which thence was named the Triumuirat: for
the establishment whereof they had several jurisdictions assigned them: to
Lepidus, Africa, whereof he was present Governor: to Antony, the Countries as
well of Greece as Asia, that lay betwixt the Ionian Sea, entering at the gulf
of Venice, unto the river Euphrates: and unto Octanian all these West parts of
Europe, amongst which this our Britain was one.

(3) In these civil broiles, and bandings of great men (as Tacitus terms it)
the State of Britain lay long forgotten, and stood in peaceable terms,
Augustus thinking it wisdom (says he) to restrain the infinite desire of
enlarging the Roman Empire, whose extent was grown to that vast greatness,
as it seemed even burdensome unto it self, whereby this remote The Empire too
great.
Island lay ouershadowed from their sight: whereunto may be added that the
presence of Kymbeline the British Fabian out of Guido. Columna.
King (as their history records) in great favor with Octauian, was a great
furtherance to the peace, even without payment of the formerly imposed Tribute.
But yet the truth is (as Dion Cassius has it) that Dio Cass. lib. 49.
Octauian desirous in all things to be like unto Caesar, seeing their tribute
neglected, had intended a voyage toward Octauians preparation for Britain.
Britain; but having set forwards into Gallia, he had there tidings of the
sudden revolt of the Pannonians, against whom he diuerted his prepared power,
and left his first designement for that time. Notwithstanding, he still
retained the desire of their subjection, and four years after made a second
very great preparation thitherward, proceeding with his power again into
Gallia.

(4) The Britains that had felt the force of the Romans, and in regard of
their own distractions at home were hopeless of strength to withstand them,
sought the favor of Augustus by their submission, and to that Dio. Cass. lib.
53.
end sent over their Ambassadors, who presenting themselves before him in
Gallia Celtica, appeased his The Britains appease Octauian.
wrath, with promise of obedience and full satisfaction for their Tributes
detained: whereby Caesar was again stayed, and the Britains taken into savor
and protection. Notwithstanding, the minds of their Magistrates were so
unconstant, or else the money so hardly drawn from the people, who naturally
hated all such Strabo lib. 4.
obliged seruitudes, having ever lived a free Nation (as Aegisippus speaks of
them) that they again failed their payment; whereat Augustus was sore
offended, and the third time prepared his voyage that way, which Augustus third
preparation against Britanny.
yet a while was hindered by the revolt of the Byscayans, and some other
Provinces.

(5) The Britains seeing themselves thus still sought after, sent unto Caesar
their excuses, with presents to be offered in the Capitol to the Roman Gods,
The Britains excuses.
having now learned with the rest of the world to appease Princes by gifts and
rewards, yielding part of the Island, and swearing him fealty in the Temple of
Mars, and so were registered subjects to the Roman Empire. At which time also
they agreed to pay toll^s Customs first paid in Britain.
and customs for all wares which they transported into other parts, their
merchandise chiefly consisting of Iuorie boxes, Iron Chains, and other small
trifles of Amber and Glass. All which agreements and compositions were
afterward so loyally observed, and the The Britains loyalty.
Land so composed to quietness, that one band of soldiers, with a small
troop of horse (as Strabo says) or four Legions (as Josephus writes) were
sufficient to contain so great a multitude in a settled form of obedience.

(6) Over the Trinobantes, the greatest and most potent State of the Britains,
then reigned the happy Prince Cunobeline (for so in his Coins yet remaining
Cunobeline prince of the Trinobantes.
we find it) corruptly written Kimbeline, the son of Theomantius nephew to
Cassibelan before spoken of, whose abode and principal seat was Camalodunum,
Malden.
as by the reuerse of the said Coins may appear. This Prince to make his
estate more respective, The first stamped Coins in Britain.
caused his own Image to be stamped thereon, after the manner of the Romans,
(who now had newly taken up that fashion) his paiments before consisting for
the most part in rings of iron, and plates of brass, seized at a certain
weight, which usually passed for current amongst the Britains, as Caesar
reports, and as those rings are yet witnesses, whereof we have Caesar. Com.
lib. 5.
seen some.

This man trained his people to a more civil life then formerly had been
accustomed, and enioied peace with the rest of the world, which then stood
universally A general peace through all the world. M^cah 5. 2. Isay 9. 6. Genesis
3. 5. Isav 7. 14. Gal. 4. 4.
in quiet, as waiting the coming of that Prince of peace, whose going forth
had been from everlasting, and of whose kingdom there shall be no end: even
Christ the anointed Emmanuel and son of the living God: so long before
expected, and now in the fullness of time manifested: at whose birth war went
down, as Virgil speaks, or rather to use the words of the Prophet, when
(...) were made into mattocks, and spears broken into (...): (...).
And as in the building of Salomons Temple neither (...) of axe, nor the sound
of hammer was heard^ so his (...) I (...) building of (...) Temple. Ioh. 3. 19.
Luke 2. 14.
the true Temple, he came and was ^arnate at such time, when the sound of
war did not awake the world, but a calm and quiet peace incompass^d it, as
by the Angels was proclaimed amongst the Jews, and now was more publicly made
known amongst the Gentiles by the shutting Paulus O (...). (...) Temple is
shut.
of Ianus Temple in Rome. This universal peace was so famous and so admirable,
that it found matter for the finest wits amongst the Heathens to enlarge
themselves: whereupon Virgil framing the persuasions of Jupiter to his
daughter, foresheweth the happy success of her seed, and in what tranquillity
they should sit, when the hands of Mars were thus restrained from fight, as he
thus expresses: Aspera tum positis mitescent secula bellis: ^^rg. Aeneid. li.
^.

Cana fides, and Vesta, Remo cum fratre Quirinus
Iura dabunt: dirae ferro, and compagibus arctis
Claudentur belli portae: furor imptus intus
Saeua sedens super arma, and c^ntum vinctus ^enis
Post tergum nodis, fremet horridus ore cruento.
Then men shall milder prove: cease shall fierce wars: The fruits of a true
peace.

Faith, Gods, and Princes all shall justly guide:
Wars ghastly gates with bolts and iron bars
Fast shut shall stand: and Mars cashierd shall hide
Among heaps of rusty armor, where his hands
Bound fast shall be with hundred brazen bands.


And yet further in his Ecloge (from the Sibyls, who Lactan. li. 4 ca. (...).
in all likelihood had it from the divine Oracles) he D^ples. (...). c. 32.
uses the very words of the Prophets in speaking of a Maid, and a Child of a
new progenic borne and sent down from heaven, by whom the brassy and iron-like
world should cease, and a pure golden age succeed. Thus he sweetly sings:
Vltima Cumaei venit iam carminis aetas: Eclog. 4.

Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo:
Iam redit and Virgo: redeunt Saturnia regna:
Iam noua progenies coelo demittitur alto.
Tu modo nascenti puero, quo ferrea primum
Desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea mundo, etc.
Now is the time of which Sibylla said,
The old world does his prime again renew:
Now has the world a pure unspotted Maid: Sa^urne (whom Virgil names) was
esteemed the father of the Gods.

Now reigns the * God of Gods, whose offspring new
Descends from heaven. Blessed be the babe whose rays
Has turned our iron age to golden days.


In which Ecloge are sweetly couched many other most divine allusions to our
Saviors Magnum Io^ is incrementum, etc.
Deity, M^tri long^ december, etc
birth and humanity, Nec Deus b^c ^ensa, etc.
poverty, Assyriu^ vulg^ ^scetur, etc.
graces, Cui non risere parents. etc.
crosses, Paca^ (...) reget patri^, etc.
kingdom, and Soluet (...), etc.
redemption of the world from Si qua (...), etc.
sin, Fall^ herba veneni, etc.
death, and Occidet and serpen^, etc. Sueton. in vit. August. Sect. 94. D^ples.
veritat. Christi. 32. sol. 518. Niceph li. 1. ca. 17. Iuuenal. Sa^yr. 3.
Zephan. 2. 11. Our Savior Christ borne in the fourteenth year of Cunobeline.
hell.

So likewise Marcus Tullius Cicero saw in his dream (as himself reports) a
child of an ingenuous and beautiful countenance, let down from heaven by a
golden chain. And Suetonius in the life of Augustus from Julius Marathus has
observed, that certain predictions in Rome happening, were so respected and
generally expounded, That Nature was about to bring forth a King that should
reign over the whole world. And albeit these and other Heathen Writers ascribe
these things either to Augustus himself, or to some of his favorites, yet we
see them accomplished in none other but Jesus Christ the Messiah our blessed
Savior, in whom only the Kingdom of God began, with the utter subversion of
all their heathenish Oracles, which at his birth, or at furthest at his death,
ceased all, and gave place to HIS eternity. Which time of his birth by the
Scriptures most certain account, was from the worlds creation, 3927. and is
set by the Britains in the fourteenth of their Cunobelines reign, and by
other authenticke Writers in the two and fortieth of Augustus Caesar, even in
the top of that Empires greatness, when Rome was with an universal subjection
acknowledged the absolute Lady of the known earth. For so in S. Luke we read,
that this Augustus then first Luke 2.
taxed the world. A text most strong for the full dissolution of the four
foregone kingdoms represented in Daniels Image, by the fall of this stone
Christ, the rock and stay of our eternal happiness. Dan. 2.


(7) This Emperor reigned in great honor the Augustus described. His reign.
space of fifty six years, and was obeyed both by the Eastern Indians, and
the Northern Scythians, with the subjection of the Parthians, a fierce and
untamed people, and generally with the love of all. He was a Prince endued
with great wisdom, magnanimity, and Justice; yet faulty in this, that he
took from Tiberius Tacit. Annal. li. 5. cap. (...).
Nero his wife Liuia, both great with child, and having also formerly borne him
a son. Devout he was in the worship of the Roman Gods; amongst whom in the
Capitol he built an Altar unto the Hebrew child, with this inscription: The
Altar of the first begotten His devotion to Christ. Niceph. li. 1. ca. 17.
Suid^.
Son of God: being thereunto moved by the Oracle of Apollo that had answered
his own destruction by the birth of this child. Of Stature he was but low,
and His endowments of body.
of a good complexion; gray-eied, his hair somewhat yellow, and his body
freckled with spots, which as his flatterers would have the world believe, were
in form like stars. Predictions foreshewing his government and death are
alleged, the which I willingly ouerpasse, holding most of them rather fantasies
then truth. At his death he demanded of the standers by, whether he had well
acted the interlude of Sueton, in vitae August^.
his life upon the stage of this world: and died fourteen years after Christ
his incarnation; leaving after him so honorable an estimation of his glory,
that as the succeeding Emperors in remembrance of Julius Caesar gloried to be
called Caesar's, so they ever held the name of Augusti to be sacred, and only
befitting persons destinated to imperial Majesty. And both their names were
inserted into the number of the months, that The months of July and Augst.
the honor of them both might never perish while Times euiternitie should
endure.

TIBERIUS. CHAPTER IV.


AVgustus Caesar thus gloriously reigning, and peaceably dying, had ordained
for his successor Tiberius Nero, the son of Tiberius Tiberois Nero his
parents.
the Patritian, and of Liuia his wife, whom (as we said before) he had taken
for his Empress, and by whose incitements and continual instigations that
matter was procured: though Suetonius thinks, it was by Augustus his Sueton.
in vit. Tiber.
own ambitious conceit, to make himself the sooner missed, and the more
lamented, in leaving his son so unlike him to succeed, whose conditions as
they stood upon their own basis, he knew to be both reprooueable, and also
contemptible.

(2) But before the death of Caesar could be diuulged, to write his imperial
style as it were in blood, he His actions and conditions.
began with the murder of young Agrippa the son of Iulia, daughter to
Octanian, and once his own wife, and continued his reign with such tyranny,
that many Tacit. Annal. li. 1. cap. (...).
he slaughtred, without respect of person or cause; and in his loosest
lasciviousness, thought of nothing but how to subvert the Nobility; for rare
it was in his Tacit. (...). (...). (...). cap. 3. His plotting against his
Nobles. Tacit. (...). (...). (...). cap. 7.
days that any such died a natural death: and maintaining a race of men
(Promoters, as Tacitus terms them, found out for a common overthrow and
destruction of others) allured them by rewards to accuse the rich, though
guiltless; only this favor granted to the condemned, that if they slew
themselves before the day of execution, their bodies should have burial,
Tacit. Annal. li. (...). cap. 7.
their goods not confiscate, and their testament stand good in law.

(3) A great dissembler he was, seeming ever to hate (...) his hypocrisy.
those vices which in truth he loved, and to love those virtues which he did
most deadly hate: and for life His libidinous, ^esse.
and libidinous filthiness so extreme, that a Christians pen may not express,
when the Heathen themselves do blush to name such things as he shamed not
openly Tacit. Annal. li. 6. cap. 1.
to commit: his public drunkenness, and continual banquettings, whereat he
spent whole days His (...).
and nights together without intermission, caused exchange of names from
Tiberius Nero to A wine-^.
Biberius Mero. Dissolute and careless he was in government, Careless in
government.
though some have accounted him a wise and politic Prince: for the Provinces
he left to defend themselves, The provinces v^defended.
and yet daily charged them with larger Tributes, to their great
impouerishment, and almost utter ruin.

(4) In this state, amongst others neglected, Britain Britain without
foreign garrison or government.
stood, wherein Tiberius neither maintained garrison, nor attempted alteration,
and whereby (as it may be thought) their own Laws and Princes bare sway among
themselves, howsoever the cause for Tribute was ballized betwixt them. And most
certain it is, the Britains, if not in subjection, yet were well affected to
the Romans, as appears by Tacitus in the kind entertainments, and in
releeuing their shipwracked Tacit. Annal. li. 2. cap. 5.
soldiers, that in crossing the Seas were by tempest driven upon their Coasts,
and courteously sent thence by their petty Kings unto Germanicus their
General. Notwithstanding, Ieffrey Monmouth seems to affirm the contrary,
that brings the reign Ieffrey Monm.
of one Guiderius, and the valor of Aruiragus, the sons of Cunobeline (of
whom more hereafter) to withstand the Romish Command, and utterly to refuse
the payment of Tribute, banding both against Tiberius, as also against Caligula
and Claudius the Emperors succeeding.

(5) Other remembrances of these times concerning Our Savior Christ's death.
us find we none, besides that which is common to all, namely the death of our
Savior Christ, which under this Tyrant, and in his eighteenth year was
accomplished by the proceeding of his (as wicked) Tert^l. in Apolog. ad^s.
ge^es, c. 5.
Deputy Pontius Pilate, who both adjudged him to die, and to be guiltless of
deserving death: whereby was wrought the mystery of our Redemption, with such
signs and evidences of his Deity, that the wicked Judge himself wrote
thereof to Tiberius, and he to the Senate, to have him consecrated among the
Roman Gods. Which they refused to do, that the wisdom Eus^b. ^ccles. hist.
li. 2. ca. 2.
and divine power of God in the doctrine of Salvation should not need the
allowance and commendation of men, as Eusebius has well observed.

(6) Finally, when he had reigned hated of all Tiberius hi^ reign, age, and
death. Tacit. Annal. li. (...). cap. 7. 2. Chr. 21. 20. Tacit. lib. (...). ca.
12.
men the space of three and twenty years, with no better liking then is read
of Ioram King of Judah, that lived without being desired, he was smoothered to
death (as is thought) by Caligula, the seventeenth of the Kalends of April, the
year from Christ's Nativity thirty nine, and the seventy and eighth of his
own age. He was of personage tall, and of body strong, broad chested, and used
both his hands alike, fair of complexion, but great and goggle-eied, whereby
he saw so clearly as is incredible to report.

CAIUS CALIGVLA. CHAPTER V.


^ himself feared by Tyranny at home, then any ways famous by Acts abroad.

(2) How the other Provinces stood affected, I leave to themselves; but by
Tacitus it should seem the Britains and Germans were not his best subjects:
Tacit. in vitae Agric.
for these are his words, that Caius had a meaning to invade Britain, it is
certainly known: but his rash running Casigula intends to invade Britain.
head, and hasty repentance in his attempts against Germany, turned all to
nothing. And Suetonius ascribes the foolish erection of that admirable bridge
over a creek of the Sea in Campania (whereof Dion writes at large) to his
vainglorious conceit, that by a brute Dion Cass. lib. 59.
blazed abroad of so huge and monstrous a work, he might terrify Germany and
Britain, upon which Countries he meant to make war. The issue whereof was as
fruitless as his great cost was ridiculous. Sueton. in vita Caligula.
For having set forward for the conquest of Britain with no small preparation,
he proceeded no further then to those parts of Holland that confront against
Northfolke, where he suddenly pitched his tents, and stayed.

(3) At which time, Adminius the son of Cunobelin King of Britain being
banished by his father, Adminius banished flies to Caesar.
fled over Sea with a small power, and submitted himself unto Caesar's
protection: whereupon Caligula wrote vaunting letters to the Senate, as if the
whole Island had been yielded into his hands: commanding the messenger that his
letters should be carried in a Chariot into the Curia, and not delivered but in
the Temple of Mars, and that in a frequent Caligula his vain ambition.
and full assembly of the Senate. And having no further matter to work upon,
he caused certain Germane prisoners secretly to be conveyed into a wood, and
word to be brought him in great fear and amazement of the sudden approach of
the enemy; against whom with show of great manhood and noble resolution in all
haste and warlike manner he marched, and in chains openly showed them as his
captives taken in war, sorbidding the Senators the wonted celebration of
their Feasts, or to enter their Theaters His deluding of the Senate.
to take solace, seeing their Caesar exposed himself to so many perils, and
fought so great battles with hazard of his life. Last of all, as if he had
meant to make a final dispatch for ever of the war, he drew his forces
down to the Seacoast of Belgia, and embattailed His warring with the Sea.
his army upon the Ocean shore; planting his balists and other Engines of
artillery in their several places, no man witting what he meant: which done,
himself in a Galley launched into the Sea, and immediately returning, caused
the Trumpets to sound the Caligula his great victory.
battle, and commanded his Soldiers forthwith to fall a gathering of cockles
and muscles into their helmets, terming them the Spoils of the conquered
Ocean: Against which he also built a Tower, as a Trophey of his victory, the
ruins whereof as yet remain in Holland to this day, and is called The Britons
house, Ort^lius Geograp.
in memory of that fantastical service: upon which exploit he made a glorious
Oration to his soldiers, commending and requiting their valors with rewards,
and auowing their shell-spoiles worthy offerings to be presented in the
Capitol, writing letters to Rome His ambition.
of this his great Conquest, and demanding Triumph, and divine honors to be
assigned him: which when the Senators made some question of, he threatened
them with death. But this Sea-seruice (as it seems) so ran ever after in
his mind, that one night he dreampt that the Sea in dreadful shape came and
expostulated with him, which cast him into an incredible horror and affright.
Affrighted in his sleep.


(4) In his last year of life and reign, Pontius Pilate, under whom Christ
Jesus suffered, was apprehended and accused at Rome, deposed and banished to
the Town of Lions in France, where, in despair Pontius Pilate banished
kills himself.
he slew himself in the year from Christ his incarnation, forty one, and from
his death, the seventh, as Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Eusebius has noted.

(5) And now both the Ambition and cruelty of Caius was grown so intolerably
savage, as that he often lamented that some rare and unusual disaster (as
either some horrible slaughter of huge Armies, or some universal plague, or
famine, or fire, or opening of the earth, or ouer-flowing of the Sea) happened
not in his time, whereby his reign might be made memorable to posterity. And
he wished that all the people of Rome had but one neck, that he might have
the glory of giving the brauest blow that ever was given, whereby so infinite
multitudes of men might be killed by him at one stroke. But this his wish was
prevented by a blow on himself, his death and downfall being Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 19. cap. 1.
complotted and executed by certain Tribunes, whereof Chaerea was chief; who
following him from the Theater with resolution for the fact, took the time
when Caligula turning suddenly aside into a narrow Cloister to see certain
boys sent him out of Asia, lost the defense of his fore-warders, and the
straitness of the place permitted not his guard to follow, on which advantage
Chaerea demanded his watchword, which he (according to his usual manner) gave
in great disdain and scorn, whereunto Chaerea replied, and with his sword
wounded him in the neck, and iaw; Caligula slain.
and then the rest of the Conspirators coming in, with thirty wounds made an
end of his life, after he had most impiously reigned three years and ten
months.

(6) He was of stature tall, of complexion pale and His personage.
wan, of body somewhat gross and unfashionable, his neck and legs
exceedingly slender, his eyes sunk into the hollow temples of his forehead,
and that also frowning and full of wrinkles: his hair was thin and shaggie,
but bald on the crown, though otherwise so hairie of body, that all the time
of his reign if a man did but name a Goat, it was held a touch and offense of
Lasae Maiestatis against his imperial person. His Countenance Sabe (...).
(...). 7. lib. 2.
naturally stern and grimme, which by composing and gesture he purposely made
more ugly and terrible. His apparel always costly, but not always
Court-like, neither civil: his beard he wore of gold like Jupiter or
Aesculapius. In his hand for a Scepter, a Mace three-tined, as Neptune or God
of the Sea, and upon his body the Curace of Alexander the Great, taken from his
Sepulcher and Monument. He died aged twenty nine years, whose memory was so
hateful unto Dion lib. 60.
all, that all the Copper Coins or Modals stamped with his picture were melted
down by decree of the Senate, whereby (if it were possible) his name and His
hatred after death.
feature might be forgotten unto future ages.

CLAUDIUS DRVSVS. CHAPTER VI.
Claudius Drusus E^p.
Aulus Plantius Lieut.


But Claudius Drusus a man of better spirit and temperature, Claudius Drusus
chosen by the Pretorian Soldiers.
immediately upon the death of Caligula, and even in the height of those
disturbances, by the Pretorian Joseph Antiquit. l. 19. cap. 3.
Soldiers (who were encamped nere the walls of Rome) was nominated, and
chosen Emperor; whereas the Senate had decreed and determined to reduee the
City into her ancient liberty, without admission of any Caesar, or subjection
to such absolute and sole authority; notwithstanding, the power of this Army,
and the vote of the City so prevailed, that the election was confirmed, and
the Imperial dignity by him assumed, as the next, and only man to whom it
must of right belong: whose father Drusus was the son of Claudius his
Parentage.
Liuia, wife to Octauian, to whom the Emperors succeeding held it a glory to
be any ways allied.

(2) In his first proceedings with the Provinces affairs, he determined war
against the Britains, The Britains detain their Tribute.
whose Tribute had been a long time neglected, and whose subjection was now to
be feared: all of them being raised in a tumultuous uproar. The cause
pretended was certain fugitives, (the betraiers of their State, and liberties)
lately departed, and by the Romans received with protection of the Emperor: a
matter that moved them to great discontents, and served as a show for their
just revolt.

(3) Claudius, as ready to prevent the worst, being thereto further incited by
Bericus one of those British Dion Cass lib. 60. Anno Domi. 45.
fugitives as Dion reports, in the second year of his Empire, and from
Christ's Nativity forty five, sent Aulus Plautius a Roman Senator, well
experienced in the Aulus Plautius sent against the Britains.
affairs of war, to take charge of the Army remaining in Gallia, and with
those old trained Soldiers to make over into Britain to retain their
obedience. Which service upon them thus imposed, was generally distasted, as
apparently was showed by their unwillingness His Soldiers unwilling. Dio.
lib. 60.
thitherward, muttering and complaining, that they must now be enforced to make
war out of the world, and protracting time, could hardly be drawn forward,
though the Emperor sent his second command.

(4) But being at last embarked and crossing the Seas, their ships were
beaten with contrary winds, which still added discouragements unto their
proceedings, and had not an accident the same time happened, the edge of their
courage had been more abated: for even in this distraction suddenly afiery
learn shot it self from East to West, the same way that their Encouraged by a
sign from heaven.
ships made sail: which presently gave hopes to their despairing hearts,
being heathenishly interpreted for a sign of good luck, and so sent from
their Gods, whereupon without any resistance, they came to shore and took
land.

(5) The Britains that mistrusted no such sudden invasion, and now thus
surprised unawares, dispersedly secured themselves in woods and marshes,
thereby to detract time, and the more to weary the Enemy by delays: which
thing Plautius well perceived, and with much labor, and hazard followed so
extremely, that many he slew, and took prisoner Catacratus their Captain, the
son of Cunobeline but lately deceased, which brought Catacratus taken prisoner.
such terror amongst the Britains, that thereupon the BODVNI, the inhabitants
of Oxford and Glocestershires, yielded themselves to Plautius devotion: for
which service thus effected, the Senate decreed his Triumphs; and it is
probable that this defeat of the Britain forces, and surprise of their King,
fell out in the sixth year of this Emperors reign, by the reuerse of his
money then minted with a triumphall arch and inscription, De Brittan:

(6) But he following still the Enemy, being seconded by Flauius Vespasian
(afterward Emperor) the leader of the second legion (the foundation of Tacitus
in vit. Agric.
whose succeeding fortunes was first laid here in Britain) gave them again
another overthrow. The chiefest means whereof was a policy they had gotten to
gail the Chariot horses, whereby their riders were maistered, and their whole
powers disordered: many Britains in this battle were slain, and more in
danger, had not the night ended theskirmish.

(7) The next day the battle was again begun and maintained on both parts
with equal advantage, till C. Sidius Geta enforced the Britains to retire, C.
Sidius Geta his valor.
whereby the victory rested in the Romans: for which exploit Triumphall
honors were assigned him, although he had not yet attained to the Consular
degree. In this Conflict, Vespasian hardly escaped, being sore oppressed by the
Enemy, and in such sort, that had not Titus (his renowned son) come to
rescue, he had been slain, whose valor afterward was tried in one and
thirty battles, and in the Conquest of the I Will of Wight.

(8) After this conflict, the Britains withdrew The Britains retire to places
of advantage.
themselves into places of more advantage, and in the mouth of Thamisis near
her fall into the Sea, passed the shallowes and firm grounds in safety,
whereas the Romans ignorant of both, brought many into danger, and in their
distressed passage, were sharply assailed by the Enemy, in which turmoile, a
bloody battle was begun, wherein Togodumnus a British Togodumnus slain.
Prince, brother to Catacratus, and son to Cunobeline, was slain:
Notwithstanding, the courage of the Britains was nothing abated, but rather
exasperated to a further revenge: for effecting whereof, new forces were
gathered, and confluence of people assembled from each part of the I Will.
Plautius the Lieutenant seeing daily the increase of their power, Vespasian
employed in other parts, and himself streitned in a place of danger, proceeded
no further, but sent word to the Emperor of the doubtful estate of their
affairs.

(9) At that time (says Suetonius,) the Senate had Claudius the Emperor
comes into Britain with a great Army.
by decree allowed Claudius his Triumphall ornaments. But he supposing that
such a bare title of honor was inferior to the Majesty of an Emperor, and
willing of himself also to enterprise some exploit whereby he might win the
glory of a complete Triumph, made choice before all other Provinces, of
Britain, attempted by none since Julius Caesar of famous Memory. And with
great strength entered into the journey, having with him a mighty Army both of
horse and foot, as also Elephants, a beast of great bigness and burden, Dion
Cassius. lib. 60. Elephants first brought into Britain.
whose strangeness then amazed the Britains, and whose Carcases falling in
this Land, their late found bones (no doubt) have bred our error, being
supposed to be of men, and not of beasts.

(10) With very great danger he passed the Seas, and ioining strength with his
Lieutenant and Vespasian, they all together crossed the River Thamifis, where
Claudius enters Britain.
presently they were encountered by the Britains, who a while maintained the
battle very desperately, but in the end gave place and fled, whom the Romans
pursued even to their strong Camulodunum, then the seat of Adminius,
Cunobelins son, as may aptly be He surpriseth Camulodunum.
coniectured by the Medul of Britannicus the Emperors darling, figured in the
front of this Chapter; which City they surprised and fortified with their own
Garrisons, which the Emperor in the eleventh of his reign, as appears by
the other coin, turned to a Colony of Roman Citizens. Claudius now disarming
the Britains, remitted further punishment either upon their bodies or
confiscation of their goods: The which his favorable clemency moved those
distressed Britains to such liking and love, that they erected a Temple and
Altar in his name, and gave him divine His clemency makes him to be honored
for a God.
honor, as a God: The rest as unable to resist, proffered their submissions,
and promised a peaceable subjection under the Romans government.

(11) These things thus achieved, at the end of six months Claudius in his
ninth year returned and Claudius returns to Rome, and enters in Triumph.
Sueton. in vita Claud. Sect. 17.
entered Rome in triumph with more then usual manner, stamping again upon his
moneys his Arch of victory, as appears in the face of this Chapter, a
perpetual trophie of his victories and memory of our servitude. After whose
Triumphant Chariot rode Messalina his wife, the Monster of her sex for
impudency and lascivious life: and upon the top of his Palace he placed a
Nauall Coronet in memorial of the Ocean by him sailed over, and subdued:
withal assuming to himself, and son, the Surname Britannicus: And honored
Plautius with his presence in his Triumphs for Britain, giving him the right
hand, ascending the Capitol, and besides graced diverse Captains that served
under him in that war with Triumphall Ornaments. So great an esteem was held
of the Conquest of so small a part of this Island.

(12) The British Historians relate these things The British Historians vary
in relating Claudius doings in Britain.
far otherwise, reporting that their King Aruiragus, the youngest son of
Kymbeline, withstood Claudius in his enterprise, with whom (say they) he came
to composition by giving him his daughter Genissa in marriage, in memory
whereof, he built the City Glaucester, according to his name, which now is
called Gloucester: But Suetonius writing the life of Claudius, his wives and
children, names his daughters only to be Claudia, Antonia, and Octauia,
without mention of Genissa at all, and therefore not likely to have any such:
And Dion Cassius reports that Claudius himself Dion Cass. lib. 60.
stayed not above sixteen days in Britain, a time too short for the sending
to Rome, and thence for the return with his daughter, or for the building of
so great a City as Gloucester is. Neither indeed was Aruiragus known in the
days of Claudius: But rather lived in the time of Domitian the seventh in
succession after him, as plainly appears by Iuuenal the Poet, in those his
verses spoken to Domitian, which elsewhere we cited. Whereby appears that the
stirs of this King could not accord with Claudius reign, and that the truth
of this report is much weakened from more sufficient authorities. But to
proceed, Aulus Plautius (the first Lieutenant authorized over the Britains,
Aulus Plautius first Lord Deputy.
upon some occasion was thence revoked, the wars not quieted, and with a
small Triumph (as Tacitus says) entered Rome. Unto him succeeded P. Tacit. in
vit. Agric. Tacit. Annal. li. 13. cap. 7.
Ostorius Scapula, for reputation in martial affairs nothing his inferior,
who at his first landing found all in an uproar: Of whose proceedings let us
hear Tacitus speak: The Britains (says he) that were yet Tacit. Annal. li.
12. cap. 8.
unconquered, ranged the Countries of the confederates, presuming both upon the
approach of the winter, and the Propretors vnacquaintance with his Army: But he
knowing that the first success breeds either fear, or confidence, gathered
the Cohorts, and made toward the Enemy, slaying all that made head against
him, and disarming those whom he most suspected. And to retain Cogidunus the
King in stricter assurance and fidelity to the Emperor, granted diverse Cities
and States to him by way of Donation.

The first that began to stir, were the Icenians, the Inhabitants of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, and Huntington-shires, a strong people unshaken
with wars: And with them (at their instigation) their neighbors adioining.
These together chose a fit place for fight, compassed in with a rude, but
defensible trench, which had only one narrow entrance whereby the Horsemen must
be much impeached. This Rampire notwithstanding the Roman Captain, with the
only aid of the * Allies brake down, and disordered the Enemy even in this
their Confederates perchance is meant.
own fortress, who seeing all passages for escape to be stopped up,
(Ostorius having hemmed them in Neu in Northampton shire, says Camde^.
with Garrisons between the Rivers * Antonia and Sabrina) showed great valor
in defending themselves, and by their deaths gave place to the Romans. This
overthrow and slaughter of the Iceni wrought a more stayed resolution in those
that before were wavering between war and peace. And the Army led against
the Cangi, with waste and spoil consumed the Country, the inhabitants not
daring to be seen in field. Whereupon the Romans pierced through the Land
even unto the Seacoast that looks toward Ireland. A small resistance was
made by the Brigantes, but without much trouble soon quieted by the execution
of some few, and pardoning of the rest.

(13) But the Silures (that is, those of South Wales) could not be brought to
bear the Romish yoke of subjection, who besides their own courage relied much
upon the strength and valor of their Prince Caractacus (whose Coin we have
here expressed) a man which had waded through many dangers, and in many
adventures both prosperous and luckie had gotten such reputation, that he was
preferred before all the British Captains. This General knowing his own
strength unable to match the enemy, by policy thought to supply that want,
and having advantage of the Country, removed the war unto the Ordouices,
which is now North Wales, where all joined to him that either feared or
disdained to hold peace with the Romans. Here he chose a place to encampe his
host, even on the top of a hill naturally defensed His manner of encamping.
from access: and where any doubt was, there he stopped up all passage with
heaps of stones in manner of a Rampire; near the foot whereof ran a River with
a foord somewhat dangerous, and not easily found, where a troop of his best
soldiers were set in order to receive the Enemy.

The more to animate their minds, the Leaders His animating of his soldiers.
went about exhorting and encouraging the Soldiers, taking all occasions of
fear from them, and putting them in hope, with all inducements of resolution:
especially Caractacus, who coursing hither and thither, protested that day and
that battle should be His resolution.
the beginning either of a recovered liberty, or else a perpetual servitude
and bondage: and ever he called upon the names of his valiant Ancestors, who
formerly had chased Caesar the Dictator out of the I Will, by whose valor they
were delivered from Hatchets and Tributes, and enioied freely their wives and
childrens bodies undefiled. The Soldiers also themselves showed as great
forwardness, and as Echoes redoubled his words, vowing according to the
Religion of their Country, never to yield for wounds or life, which they all
were ready to sacrifice in the cause of their liberties. This their apparent
resolution much appalled the Romans cheerefulnes, and most of all the Captains
and Leaders, who before their faces saw the River, on both sides of them had
the hanging hills, and the Fort commodious for the enemy, but deadly unto them:
all which notwithstanding the common Soldiers despised, and demanded the
battle. Ostorius, whose Ostorius his care.
study was chiefly to perform the parts of a General, passed the River with
some little difficulty, and leading his Army up to the Rampire, was met with
such a shower of darts, that many therewith were wounded and slain. Yet at
length breaking down those rude compacted stones, joined battle with the
enemy, and afront came close to handy strokes; wherein the Britains having
better courage then armor (for they had neither headpeece nor coat of defense)
were sore galled with their Iauellings and two-handed swords, and so
disordered, that they betook themselves The Britains put to flight.
to flight.

(14) This victory as it was almost unexpected, so was it made famous by the
taking of Caractacus Caractacus wife, daughter, and brethren taken prisoners.
Himself betrayed by Cartismandus.
wife, daughter, and brethren, and himself flying for succor and protection to
the Brigantes, was (as we have before showed) by Cartismandus their Queen
betrayed and delivered into the hands of the Conquerours after his nine years
most generous resistance. He (...). Tacit. Annal. 12 cap. 8.
Whereupon his fame being carried over the Islands, and spread abroad through the
Provinces, was also renowned in Italy, and they desired to see him that so
many years had contemned their forces. Neither was his name meanly esteemed of
at Rome; for whilst Caesar's worth and power was there commended, a more
glorious conceit was held of the conquered Caractacus: and against his coming
to the City Caractacus led in triumph.
the people from all parts were assembled, as to behold some notable and most
rare spectacle. The Emperors Guard in arms and good order were placed in the
field before the Camp, through whom the Captives and Trophies were carried, and
presented after this manner: first the vassals of Caractacus going foremost
bowed their bodies to the people as they passed, and seemed by their ruefull
countenances to discover the sense of their calamity. The caparisons, his
chains, and other spoils gotten in the wars, were carried after them. Then
Caractacus his brethren, wife, and daughter followed, and last of all himself,
whose attire and stout behavior filled the peoples eyes with wonder and
delight. His body, for His habit and attire.
the most part, was naked, and painted with figures of diverse beasts. He ware
a chain of iron about his neck, and another about his middle: the hair of
his Ex histor. magn. Britan.
head hanging down in curled locks, covered his back and shoulders, and the
hair of his upper lip parted on both sides, lay upon his breast. Neither was
his behavior less noted then the strangeness of his habit: for he neither
hung down his head, as daunted with base fear; nor craved mercy, as the
rest; but His vndauntednesse.
with a confident spirit, and bold countenance, held on till he came before the
Imperial Seat, where making his stand, and a while beholding Caesar's Majesty,
at last with great courage spoke to this purpose.

(15) If my moderation in prosperity had been His Oration to Claudius Caesar.
answerable to the greatness of my birth and estate, or the success of my late
attempts to the resolution of my mind, I might have come to this City rather
as a friend to be entertained, then as a Captive to be gazed upon; neither
would thou disdain to have received me on terms of amity and peace, being
a man of royal descent, and a Commander of many warlike Nations. But what
cloud soever has darkened my present lot, yet have the Heavens and Nature
given me that in birth and mind, which none can vanquish, or deprive me of.
I well see, that you make other men's miseries the subject and matter of your
triumphs; and in this my calamity, as in a mirror, you now contemplate your
own glory. Yet know that I am, and was a Prince furnished with strength of men
and abiliments of war; and what marvel is it if all be lost, seeing
experience teaches that the events of war are Events of war variable.
variable, and the success of policies guided by uncertain fates? As it is
with me, who thought that the deep waters like a wall enclosing our Land, and
Britains wall.
it so situated by heavenly providence, as in another world, might have been a
sufficient privilege and defense for us against foreign invasions: but I now
perceive that the desire of sovereignty admits no limitation; and if you Romans
must command all, then all must obey. For mine own part, while Ambition has
no bounds.
I was able I made resistance, and unwilling I was to submit my neck to a
servile yoke, so far the law of Nature allows every man, that he may defend
Nature disdaineth servitude.
himself being assailed, and to withstand force, by force. Had I at first
yielded, thy glory and my ruin had not been so renowned. Fortune has now
done her worst: we have nothing left us but our lives, which if thou take from
us, our miseries end; and if thou spare us, we are but the objects of thy
Clemency.

(16) Caesar wondering to see such resolutions and so free a mind in a Captive
estate, pardoned Caractacus, his wife and brethren, who being unbound, did
their reverence to Agrippina the Empress, that sat aloft on a Throne Royal.
This Conquest and Triumph over Caractacus, ministered matter of discourse and
admiration thorough out all Rome, and the Lords Tocit. Annal. li. 12. cap. 8.
of the Senate held it no less honorable, then that of P. Scipio, who
triumphed over Syphax the Numidian King, or that of Perses, whom Paulus
Aemilius vanquished, or then any other King that had been taken in war, or
exhibited to the view of the people. Then were also public Triumphall honors
decreed for Ostorius; whose fortunes until then had been very prosperous, but
now began to be doubtful, or Ostorius and his fortunes decline.
rather to decline, either because Caractacus (the foil of his glory) was
removed, and thereupon (as though all had been subdued) a more careless
service entertained, or else the courage of the Britains was more The
Britains take heart again.
inflamed to revenge through the fervent compassion of the fall of so mighty a
King.

(17) For immediately they environed the Campmaster, and the Legionary Cohorts,
which were left to build fortresses in the Country of the Silures, whom with
eight Centurions, and the forwardest Soldiers, they slew, and had put all the
rest to the sword, if rescue had not speedily come from the villages and forts
adioining. The Forragers also and troop of horse that were sent to aid them
they put to flight. Their victory.
These affronts touched Ostorius to the quick, and lest their aids should grow
to a greater head, he sent forth certain light-harnessed companies, which with
the Legionary Soldiers undertook the battle, and with small odds was it
continued till the night came, and parted them: diverse other Skirmishes
afterward were made, though for the most part in woods and marshes, whence
taking their advantage in sallying forth, they many times prevailed, sometimes
by strength, sometimes by mere courage, and sometimes by chance; neither were
they always commanded by their Captains, but many times fought voluntary and
without warrant.

(18) The principal motive that induced the rest to take Arms, was the example
of the Silure, who were most resolutely bent, as being exasperated by certain
speeches that the Roman Emperor himself Caesar's threats make the Britains
more resolute.
had used, which was, that as the name of the Sugambri was destroyed, and the
people transported into Gallia, so the memory of Silures should utterly be
extinguished: And in this heat as men desperate (whose destinies were read and
lots cast already) they intercepted the scattered troops of the Romans that
uncircumspectly wasted and spoiled the Country, taking of them many prisoners,
and recovering rich booties, which they sent and distributed amongst their
neighbors; whereby many other were drawn to revolt: These proceedings sat so
near Ostorius his heart, who with long cares and travels had wearied his
spirits* spent the strength of his body, and thereunto had now added the
coffeehouse of his mind, that in these vexations he gave up the Ghost,
Ostorius dies.
the Silures reioicing that so worthy and victorious a Captain was fallen in
their wars.

(19) But Claudius Caesar, lest the Province should make head, presently sent
Aulus Didius for his Aulus Didius sent Lieutenant into Britain.
Lieutenant into Britain; where, notwithstanding all his haste, he found all
out of frame. For Manlius Valens with his Legion had encountered the Britains
Tacit. Annal. 12. c. 8. Manlius Valens encountered the Britains with ill
success.
with ill success, yet not so bad as the Ilanders gave forth, thinking
thereby to terrify their new-established Governor: which report himself also
in policy was contented to augment, thereby to purchase more praise in
appeasing so dangerous stirs; or if he could not, to retain his own credit
without his valors impeachment. These resisters had made many inroads into the
subdued Countries; against whom upon his first arrival, Didius entered the
field, and for a while Didius for a while keeps them in awe.
kept them in awe.

(20) But Venutius a very expert man in Military affairs (trusty to the
Romans, and defended by their power so long as the marriage betwixt him and
Cartismandua continued) began a new rebellion: for Cartismandua (in special
favor with the Romans for the delivery of Caractacus) abounding in wealth,
peace, and pleasures (which commonly are the Nurses of licentious living) fell
in love (as before was touched) with Vellocatus her husbands servant, and
harnesse-bearer, and forgetting her own honor, preferred him before Venutius,
and labored to make him King. The good will of the Country notwithstanding
went generally upon the lawful husband: who being deeply touched with this
open injury, raised a power against her and her Paramour. At the first this
quarrel was only betwixt them, until that Cartismandua by policy had taken
her husbands brother, and some of his nearest kindred, prisoners. Whereupon the
next Inhabitants fearing her purposes, and disdaining to be brought under the
yoke of a woman so defamed, declared themselves for Venutius, and with a
choice band of youthful Soldiers invaded her Territories: whereof Didius
Tacit. hist. li. 3. cap. 9.
having intelligence, sent certain Cohorts to second her, and encounter them.
In which conflict, the Romans for Cartismandua did prevail; yet the kingdom
remained to Venutius, and the wars still unto them.

(21) For the Silures were not altogether quieted, and a Legion commanded by
Caesius Nasica, fought luckily against the Britains. In all which stirs
Didius Tacit. Annal. 12. (...).
in person was absent, as being stricken in years, and having received many
honors, held it sufficient to execute his charge by the assistance of others.
The State of Britain thus standing, let us so leave it, during this Emperors
reign, which now began to draw toward his last period, by the working of
Agrippina his wife, and by her upon this occasion.

(22) It chanced, Claudius in his wine, to cast Claudius his own words the
occasion of his death.
forth a word of great suspicion, in saying: That it was fatal unto him first
to bear the leaudnes of his Messalina was his first wife, a woman of
insatiable lechery, who was put to death.
wives, and then to punish them. She knowing her self guilty in disinheriting
of Britannicus, who was Claudius his own son, for the adoption of Nero who
was hers, besides other insolences, wherewith she might be taxed, sought
therefore to clear her own way by taking him out of the way: and with Locusta
a woman skillful in poisoning, and Zenophon a Physician, as Tacit. Annal. lib.
12. cap. 13.
large of conscience, conferred for the manner of his death: who in fine,
concluded that poison was the surest and the least in suspect, or at leastwise
the most difficult to be proved against her.

(23) This then resolved, they temper poison in Joseph. Anti. lib. 20. ca. 5.
a Mushrom, whereof he greedily did eat, and shortly after ended his life the
thirteenth day of October, The continuance of his reign.
when he had reigned thirteen years, eight months, and twenty days, the
year of Christ his incarnation fifty six, and of his own age sixty four.
He ANNO DO. 56.
was of stature tall, and of a pleasing Countenance, full His indowments of
body. His imperfections.
of Majesty and comely gray hairs, his Head continually shaking, somewhat
stammering in his speech, very learned, but therewithal very forgetful, and
altogether ruled by his wives, and domestical Servants, the two ordinary banes
of most men who are adua^ced Wives and servants most misleade great personages.
to any eminent place of government and command.

(24) This Emperor (says Seneca) might make his boast that he was the first
conqueror of the Britains, for Julius Caesar did but show their Island unto
the Romans, whereas Claudius made their necks yield to the chains of their
captiuities. And Aegisippus says thus of Claudius, His witness is Britan,
which lived without the world, but now by him reduced under the Romans Empire,
and those whom the former ages knew not, neither themselves any servitude, are
now by him both made known, and servants to the Romans. And again: As great a
matter it was to pass those Seas, as to have triumphed over those Britains,
wherein (says he) even the elements have done homage unto Claudius. In joy
whereof, and reverence to the Gods, in his triumph he mounted the stairs of
the Capitol upon his aged knees, being supported and lifted up by his sons in
Law on either side, the glory of this Islands conquest had so possessed this old
Emperors mind.

NERO. CHAPTER VII.


THis violent and unexpected death of Claudius, gave breath and life unto
Neroes further hopes: for whilst the Consuls were assembled to make
supplications for their Prince, (not knowing him already dead) Nero suddenly
set open the Palace gates, and accompanied with shouts and acclamations, entered
the Cohorts that kept the watch, where of them Nero assumeth the Empire.
and the rest of the soldiers he was saluted Emperor, the Senate as men
affrighted with amazement, not once contradicting the same.

(2) He was the son of Domitius Nero, and of Iulia Agrippina the daughter of
Germanicus brother to His parents.
Claudius the precedent Emperor, vicious by nature, as sprung of those parents
from whom (as his own Suetonius in vita Neronis.
father Domitius said) no goodness could proceed: and the same vile
disposition was perfected and augmented by his own affected study and pursuit
of all possible lewdness, as one who could well fit his wanton and lascivious
humors to the vnripenesse of his years, being not passing seventeen when he
assumed the Empire. All religion he had in contempt, and all laws violated,
letting loose the reine to all unnatural lusts, and licentiousness of life.

(3) For blood and libidiousnesse he was held a most unsatiate fury, and
amongst men a very monster His excessive lust and bloodshed.
of nature. His father he poisoned: upon his mother he committed both incest
and murder: upon males, pollutions against nature: deflowred the Vestals (a
matter sacrilegious and impious) slew his brother Germanicus, Suetonius in vita
Neronis.
and his sister Antonia, his wives, Poppaea and Octauia, his aunt Domitia, his
son in law Rufinus, and his renowned Tutor Seneca; With such savage slaughter
of the Roman Nobility, that Tacitus (their best Remembrancer) was wearied to
record their names, Tacit. Annal. 16. cap. 3.
whilst with a servile patience (as he terms it) they died honorably. Rome
set on fire by Nero.


(4) The City Rome he set on fire, charging the Christians with the fact, and
inflicted such torments and death upon them, that they were pitied of their
enemies, and his own cruelties thereby made more notorious. Whose Religion,
though Suetonius termed Suet. in vita Nero.
new, and a wicked superstition; and Tacitus (as it were in contempt) names
the Author thereof to be Christ, who in Tiberius reign (as he with the
Evangelists Tacit. Annal. 15. cap. 10.
agrees) was put to death under Pontius Pilate Procurator of Judea, where that
religion first began; yet by him it is confessed, that these men were innocent
of the fact, and their doctrine to burst forth further into many other parts,
insomuch that Rome it Christians in Neroes Court.
self did affect the same. Yea and in Neroes Court also some embraced that
faith, as by the words of the Apostle is manifest, who from the Saints in
Caesar's house sent salutations to the Brethren. Phil. 4. 22.

(5) And lastly, to fill up the measure of his bloody Peter and Paul put to
death. Eusebius. li. 2. ca. 25. Tertul. Apol. ca. 5.
cruelty, he crucified Peter upon the Cross, and beheaded Paul with the
sword, two principal Apostles of Jesus Christ, and worthy instruments of the
worlds salvation; and forgetting the Majesty of his estate, fell into the
sink of contempt and all sins, giving his mind leave to digest all
uncleanness, and his body over to work any base exercises, attending nothing
besides his Harpes and Harlots, whereby a careless (but yet a cruel)
government was entertained, and the Senate fashioning themselves to feed his
loose humors, strove each to outstrip other in their base flatteries.

(6) In this state the Provinces subiections began to A great overthrow of the
Romans. Tacit. Annal. 15. cap. 2.
stand doubtful, and the greatness of the Empire to ouercharge the
foundation; for the Parthians under Vologeses gave Paetus the Roman a great
overthrow, and that in such wise, that those which escaped were termed the
unfortunate Army. And in Britain their affairs proceeded with no good
success; for aged Didius could do no more then keep that which he had
already gotten: and Verannius his successor, only with small inroades assailing
the Silures, was in his first year cut off by death, insomuch that Nero having
neither Tacitus in vita Agric. Suet. in vit. Nero.
will, motion, nor hope to propagate and enlarge the Empire, minded once to
have with-drawen the forces out of Britain, had it not been for very shame.

(7) But Paulinus Suetonius attaining the government of that Province, in skill
for service, and opinion of people comparable to any, sought to match his
concurrent Corbulo, who with daily victories prospered in Armenia, himself
wanting neither courage nor discretion to atchieue the like, only matter and
occasion the Island affoorded none. Therefore determining an expedition into
further parts, he made preparation to invade the I Will of Mona, separated from
the Continent Anglesey invaded
by the River Menai, and fronted upon the midst of Ireland, both strong with
inhabitants, and a receptacle of Fugitives.

(8) Against his approach the Ilanders had gathered their powers, which stood
thick upon the shore ready armed to make resistance, their women running
among in mourning weeds, their hair loose, and firebrands in their hands,
like furies of hell, together with their Druides (men of religion) who with
hands and eyes lifted up toward heaven, cried for vengeance, and powered out
curses as thick, as hail. With the strangeness of which sight, the Romans
stood amazed, not offering one stroke; seeming rather to Romans amazed at
sight of the British.
present themselves for a pray upon their enemies weapons, then for the
Conquest of their land or lives: which sudden and unexpected discouragement,
their Captain soon redressed, by putting them in remembrance of their wonted
valors, which now was far ouermatchable unto a fearful flock of weak
women, or a company of rude and frantic men: whereupon their Ensigns were
displaied, and the Enemy presently dispersed and slain, themselves becoming
masters both of the field, and whole I Will: which no sooner was thus obtained,
but sudden news came to recall their powers, the Provinces being raised to a
present revolt.

(9) For the Britains in absence of the General, laid open their public
greeuances grown now both common and intolerable by the oppressions of the
Romans, who from the diseases of their Head, had sucked and dispersed their
corruptions throughout the Provinces of the Empire: and Catus Decianus the
Procurator here in Britain, renewed the confiscation The Receiver of tribute
his oppression. Di^n Cass. lib. 62.
of their goods, which Claudius had formerly remitted. The Roman Colonie at
Camulodunum, thrust out the ancient Inhabitants; seating themselves in their
possessions without any other recompense, saving reproachful terms, calling
them their drudges, slaves and vassalls: besides, the Temple there erected in
honor Tacit. An^al. 14. cap. 10.
of Claudius, was now become an eie-sore unto them, as an Altar of their
perpetual subjection, while the Augustall Priests there attending, wasted all
their wealth under pr^text of Religion. But the very spring or head, from
whence the cause of this sudden Rebellion issued, was the present abuse offered
to (...).
Boduo, Queen of the Icenians, late wife to Prasutagus, deceased * V^dica.
upon the ensuing occasion.

(10) This Prasutagus King of the Icenians famous for his riches, which a long
time he had been Prasutagus his Testament.
gathering, made Caesar with his two daughters his heir, by Will, thinking by
that flattery, his kingdom, and house had been sufficiently warranted from
future injuries: which fell out clean otherwise, for his kingdom of the
Centurions, and his house by slaves were spoiled as lawful booties: his wife
whipped, and his da^hters deflowred, and the chiefest in that Province
dispossessed of their rightful inheritance, and the Kings kindred reputed and
used as Slaves.

(11) Whereupon the Icenians began seriously to discourse of their present
miseries and bondage, made subject not only to a Lieutenant that sucked their
blood, but likewise to a Procurator, that sought their Tacit. in vit. Agric.
page 190.
substance, while with a servile fear they yielded to please the meanest
Soldier; As though the Heavens had framed them only for servitude, and the
Earth appointed to bear their injuries unrevenged, whereas contrariwise, they
saw both heaven and earth flexible to their deliverance: For (whether by
policy or chance) the Image of victory at Camulodunum fell down reuersed
without any apparent cause known: the women Prodigies daily seen.
distempered with fury, ran in the streets, singing, and prophesying
destructions: strange noises were heard in the Court, and howlings in the
Theater, and strange apparitions, and Edifices seen in the River Thamisis: the
Ocean it self between Gallia and them, seemed all bloody, and the prints of
dead bodies left in Dio. lib. 62.
the sands at the Ebb. Again, waighing the present estate, they saw Suetonius
absent, and busied to enlarge the Confines, the midst but slenderly guarded,
and by Other Provinces shake off the yoke. In the battle against Quintilius
Varius. Tac. in vit. Agric.
those who were readier for private gain, then diligent to discharge the
offices of war. The examples of other Provinces also whetted the edge of
their encouragements: for Germany (they saw) had well shaken off the yoke of
subjection: The Parthians had revolted, and Armenia held play with Corbulo, as
famous as Paulinus: Their cause was as just, their land as well defensed; their
ancestors as valiant in resisting the first Ringleader Caesar; and themselves
better experienced of their adversaries powers, and the^r own abiliments. So
now having attained the hardest point, which was their assembled Consultations
(a matter of as great danger to be taken with, as in acting their intendments)
in fine this was resolved, that liberty was Their Resolution.
to be preferred, though bought with their lives; and bondage to be avoided,
if not otherwise then by their deaths.

(12) These their often and noted assemblies brought suspicions of some
designements, and the prodigies daily happening as they were motives of
encoragements unto the Britains: So were they ominous signs to the Romans,
of either part framed in their own imaginations, and construed according to
their hoped or feared events.

(13) The Confederates in this business were not to seek their Leader: their
Queens dishonours so apparently known, (and for matter of government they
made no difference of Sex) her birth extracted from their Royal blood, her
hearts affection approved to her Country, her indignities received of the
proud Queen Boudic^ chosen Leader.
oppressors, and her haughty spirit threatening revenge; assured them of her
uttermost endeavors: which accordingly she effected to her dying day, and to
her never dying fame.

(14) The Romans likewise provided themselves, and in the absence of
Suetonius, craved aid of Catus Dicianus the Procurator; who sent them not
above two hundred men, and those but badly armed. These ioining with the rest
made no great power, al of them relying more to the franchise of the place,
then securing themselves with Trench or Bulwark: And given over to pleasure,
and play, as in the time of a public peace. Which advantages by the Enemy were
wisely She surpriseth the Romans.
espied, and by boduo coming on as nobly pursued, when with sword and fire she
wasted all in her way, the Temple only excepted, whereinto part of the
Soldiers were fled, but after two days ^iege it was battered and taken.

(15) In this heat of fury, the Britains proceed, and meeting Petilius
Cerealis Lieutenant of the ninth She puts Petilius Cerealis to flight.
Legion, on a hasty March to rescue that which was already lost, they encounter
his forces, and slew all his footmen, himself with his troop of Horse hardly
escaping to his Camp, where in great fear he entrenched, not daring to
attempt any further matter. At notice of these mishaps, Catus like a tall man,
took to She forces Catus to fly into Gallia.
his heels, and sailed into Gallia: by whose cruelty and covetousness the
Britains were thus enraged to take Arms and revolt, and their entrance thus
fortunately proceeding, gave heart and hope to further success.

(16) For in this heat of blood and fury they set She sack^th Verolanium.
upon, and sacked the free-towne Verolanium, both strong for garrison, and rich
in Inhabitants: which City (as also Camulodunum had) felt the rage of their
merciless hands, from whence great booties were carried, and no less then
seventy thousand Citizens and Seventy thousand slain by her Army. (...). in
vit. Nero. sect. 39.
Confederates slain. This commotion in Britain by Suetonius Tranquillus is
accounted one of the most unfortunate losses to the Empire happening under
Nero, and the more ignominious to the Romans (as Dion observes) Di^. C^ss.
lib. 6^.
in that is was performed under the command of a woman, neither experienced in
the feats of war, nor using the victory according to the Law of Arms: for
not any prisoner taken in regard of ransom was saved, nor intercourse of
exchange admitted, but kill, hang, burn, and crucify, as though the measure
of their revenge could never be sufficiently heaped, or the wrath of their Gods
satisfied with the blood of their Enemies.

(17) By this time Suetonius the Lieutenant was returned, and taking muster of
his forces in London (a London long since renowned.
City even t^n famous for concourse of Merchants, and of great renown for
provision of all things nesary) stood yet doubtful whether he should choose
that place for the Seat of war, or no. But better aduising, dislodged his
Host, and with the fourteenth Legion, the Standard-bearers of the twelfth, and
other aids from places adioining, encamped upon a plain, enclosed with woods,
having a narrow entrance, and free from Ambush or enemy at his back.

(18) The Britains likewise, inferior neither in number nor courage,
triumphed abroad by such troops and multitudes, as the like had not been
seen, yea and so fierce of courage, and with such assurance of hope, that they
brought their wives to the place to be witnesses of their valors. Boduo in her
Chariot doing the parts of a most noble General, Boudicea suruei^ her troops.
drove from troop to troop to see and commend their forwardness; and
dismounting attended with her two daughters, and two hundred and thirty
thousand resolute Britains, gat her to a seat made of marishturfes, after the
manner of the Romans, apparelled in a loose gown of changeable colors,
wearing a kirtle thereunder Her attire.
very thick pleited, the tresses of her yellow hair hanging down to the
skirts. About her neck she had a chain of gold, and in her hand held a light
spear, being of personage tall, and of a comely, cheerful, and modest
countenance, and so a while she stood pawsing, in viewing her Army, and being
regarded with a reverend silence, at length to this effect she spoke Her
Oration to her Army.
unto them.

(19) My Friends and Companions of equal fortunes, there needs no excuse for
this my present Tacit. Annal. li. 11.
authority or place, in regard of my Sex, seeing it is not unknown unto you
all, that the wonted manner of our Nation has been to war under the The
custom of this and other Monarchies to be governed by women.
conduct of a woman; and not only ours, but also of the greatest Monarchies
swaied upon this universal Globe: for the Empire of the Assyrians (the first
and most famous that ever was) under the command Justin. lib. 1.
of Semiramis triumphed over the fierce Aethiopians; Semiramis.
and the gold-veined India; Babylon for strength and beauty was both defensed
and enriched by Nitocris Nitocris.
her sole Empress. The Scythians under Tomyris Tomyris.
overcame, and slew the great Conqueror Cyrus. Justin. lib. 1.
Egypt governed by Cleopatra: yea and Romes Monarkes Cleopatra.
themselves ruled, if not ouer-ruled, by Messalina and Agrippina the monsters
of our Sex. My Messalina and Agrippina.
blood and birth might challenge some preeminence, as sprung from the roots of
most royal descents: but my breath received from the same air, my body
sustained by the same soil, and my glory clouded with imposed ignominies. I
disclaim all She disclaimeth all superiority.
superiority, and as a fellow in bondage bear the yoke of oppressions, with
as heavy weight and pressure, if not more. Had I with Caesar's mother been
suspected of Treason, or with false Cartismandua defiled my Bed, to the
disturbance of their peace, my goods might have gone under the title of
Confiscation, Reioiceth in her innocence.
and these prints of the whip under pretext of justice. But why name I Justice
in these grand Catalogues of oppressions, whose Actors respect neither person,
age, sex, nor cause? For what abuse can be so vile, that we have not
suffered; or indignity so contemptible, that we have not borne? My stripes,
yet felt and seen against their own laws, and the violent rapes of these my
harmless daughters, The indignities offered by the Romans.
against the Laws of God and Man, do witness well what government they
intend: and your wealths consumed by their wastefull wantonness, your painful
travels upholding their idleness, do seal the issues of our succeeding
miseries, if not timely prevented by one joint endeavor. You that have known
the freedom of life, will with me confess (I am sure) that liberty (though
in a poor estate) is better then bondage with fetters of gold: and yet this
comparison has no correspondencie in us: for we now enjoy no estate at all,
nothing now being ours but what they will leave us; and nothing left us, that
they can take away, having not so much as our very heads toll-free. Other
subdued Nations Dion Cass. lib. 62.
by death are quit from bondage; but we after death must live (...), and (...)
(...) (...) our (...). Have the (...) man us the ends of the (...), and have
not assigned the end of our wrongs? Or has Nature among all her free works
created us Britains only for bondage? Why, what are the Romans? Are they more
then men, or immortal? Their slain carcases sacrificed by us, and the
^trisied blood corrupting our Air, does ^ll us they are no Gods. Our
personages are more tall, our bodies more strong, and our ^oints (...) ^t: and
(to say as it is) every part of us ^amed more fit for the spear then for the
seade. But you will ^ay they are Tacit. Annal. lib. 14. cap. 11.
our Conquerours. Indeed overcome we are, but by our selves, our own factions
still giving way to their intrusions: for had not the ^ator a Mandubrace?
Caligula an Adminius? Claudius a Bericus, and Cogidunus? Caesar. Com. lib. 5.
Nero (that strumpet, and our still-liuing shame) Cartismandua? Romes
instruments, and Britains Britannith vipers.
vipers? without which, you shall see Caesar in single fight, lose his sword,
and after fly the Country (a dishonor ind^lible) Tiberius forgo his Tribute,
though extremely covetous, Claudius glad to make peace, and be quiet. and Nero
might still have followed his fiddling trade at home, if our discords had not
made up his Music here abroad. Our dissensions Tacitus in vita Agric.
Domesticke conspirators most dangerous.
therefore have been their only rising, and our designs still weakened by
homebred conspirators. Neither has our noble resistance ever been without
desert and note of honor: their public triumphs being made more admirable by
one Britains Conquest, then usually has been solemnized over whole
Kingdoms. Caligula for beholding our cliffes only would have diaine honors:
and forgetful Claudius remembered unto posterities (in his Britannicus) a
glorious surname from us. Our strengths have been acknowledged the maine
support of other States, and shall it not be supplied to maintain our own?
We have as much to keep as Birthright has given us, that is, our Island
possessed by our Ancestors from all antiquity: Ours Caesar. Com. li. 2.
by inheritance, theirs by intrusions, claims so different in the scale of
Justice, that the Gods themselves Motives inciting to pursue the Romans.
must needs redress, and set the balance in their equal poise. We have seen
their propitious beginnings, in making us instruments over seventy thousand of
our enemies; and yet in this revenge our forces not diminished, but much
increased in number and power: which thing, as it serves to our encouragements;
so is it to their fear. For Catus has set the Seas (a sure defense) betwixt
him and us; yet not a Britain pursuing: for surely if any had, he would have
hid himself in the waves. Petilius the field-mouse does keep his hole, and
with the Moale works the earth for his safest refuge: And Posthumus their
Campemaster is too wise to venture all at a cast. Only Plautius fleshed by his
late victory over a company of unarmed Priests, whose resistance consisted
only in prayers, and a few weak women, whose weapons were only firebrarnds,
builds the hopes of his aspiring mind, as Caligula did his Trophey of
Cockleshels. For see we not him encamped rather to defend his own, then to
offend others? His Army crouched together, as fowls flocked against a storm,
or rather like to fearful Hares squatted in their bushes, who no sooner shall
hear the cry of their pursuit, but their Muise or Fortress will be left:
and for their last refuge, as Hares, trust to the swiftness of their speedy
feet. Suddenly, as she was thus speaking, she let slip a Hare which she had
Her device at concluding her speech.
secretly couched in her lap, which with a great shout escaped through the
Camp, and gave occasion to the Army (who little suspected it was done by her
of purpose) to construe it as an ominous and luckie sign of victory.

(20) And thereupon with great force they assail their enemies, whiles
Suetonius was likewise encouraging his Soldiers to the like resolution. The
fourteenth Legion by his direction kept the strait as a sure place of defense,
till the Britains in the fury of their first onset had spent all their darts,
which with good success they had bestowed: but then failing and wearied in
their first coming on too hotly, the Romans sallied out upon the plain, the
Auxiliaries and Horsemen with long lances making their way, and beating down
all that stood before them. The Britains unable to endure or withstand such
fierce assaults, were The Britains vanquished.
forced to give back, and at length sought to save themselves by flight, but
were hindered by their own Wagons placed in the rere-ward of the Army, which
gave the more impediment to their retrait, in that they were then full of their
women who in confidence of the victory came thither to behold the fight, which
were among the rest all-slaine, without regard of sex or mercy. This day was
famous and comparable in renown for victory to any other of former times, for
therein were slain of the Britains to the Eighty thousand Britains slain.
number of eighty thousand men: And the Land brought under an unrecoverable
subjection.

(21) Boduo seeing the overthrow of her Army, Boudicea poisoneth her self.
was notwithstanding unvanquished in her own Noble spirit, and scorning to be
a spectacle in their Triumphs, or a vassal to their wills, after the example
of Cleopatra, Tacit. Annal. lib. 14. cap. 11.
she made an end of her miseries and life, by poison. And Paenius Posthumus,
Camp-master of the second Legion, seeing the good success of the fourteenth
and twentieth: for that disobaying the General (contrary to the discipline of
war) he had defrauded himself and followers of their parts of glory in that
service, Paenius slew himself. Tacitus hist. lib. 2. cap. 4.
for very grief slew himself: and for their good service there performed,
Nero greatly honored the eleventh, thirteenth and foureteenth Legions,
reposing a most sure trust in their valor and fidelity, ever afterward.

(22) Suetonius animated with this victory, gathered his Army, and encamped
again, purposing to end the residue of the war, if any resisters should
remain: And at that present were sent him out of Germany two thousand
Legionarie Soldiers, eight Cohorts of Auxiliaries, and a thousand Horse,
whereby his strength was augmented, and the ninth Legion which had been much
weakened by the rashness of Petilius, fully supplied: The Britains miseries.
So that bootelesse it was for the poor Britains to make any further
resistance, and such as did, or stood doubtfully affected, were daily put to
the sword. But nothing distressed them so much, as did famine, and want of
Corn, being a people in all ages more given to war then good husbandry, and
rather relying upon the provisions of others, than by the plough to provide for
themselves, fierce of nature, and slowly lending ear to peace, or their mind
to such Arts as either nourish, or are nourished by peace. Julius Classicianus
a receiver.


(23) In these stirs Julius Classicianus, sent from Nero to succeed Catus in
his office of receipts, an enemy, and at variance with Suetonius, the more to
cloud his renown, gave it forth for certain, that a new Lieutenant was to be
expected, who without either hostile rancour, or pride of a Conqueror, would
entreat Promises Clemency.
the yeelders with all Clemency: And likewise by letters sent to Rome, he
signified that no end of war was to be expected, so long as Suetonius
remained General, attributing every adverse luck to his intolerable pride,
and every prosperous success only to the good fortunes of Caesar and State of
Rome. These Great men's dissensions awaked Nero, fearing left the Britains,
thereby would be more forward to advantage, with whom experience had showed
there Tranquillus in vit. Nero. Sect. 40.
was no dallying, and his former losses among them being again recovered, he
thought himself discharged and quit from all fatal Calamities, as Tranquillus
does Polycletus sent to reconcile Classicianus and Suetonius.
affirm. Therefore he sent Polycletus, one of his freed seruitors, with
Commission to examine the differences, and to interpose his authority to work
a reconciliation: at whose greatness it was also thought that the Britains
would have quaked, and come in under fear. Which thing fell out otherwise: for
howsoever the Captain and Soldiers regarded him for his place, unto whom he
showed himself both arrogant and terrible, yet the Britains made him but
their laughing stock, as being themselves borne free, and knew not Liberti or
Freemen, were such, as being first bond slaves, by their service obtained
freedom, and many of them about the Emperor came to be of great sway.
Suetonius delivers up his charge. Petronius his disposition.
what the power of freed-men was, much admired that such Commanders and Armies
which had achieved so great exploites, could be brought to obey, and yield
account of their actions to so base a bondslaue, as they termed him.

(24) But Suetonius grown great by his fortunes in these wars, and as it
should seem both suspected and feared of Nero, was by him commanded (the
wars yet continuing) to deliver up his Army to Petronius Turpilianus, who
had lately given over his Consulship in Rome, a man of a softer, and more
intreatable condition; and as a stranger to the faults committed before,
readier to receive to favor and forgive: who having composed the former
troubles, not daring any further, neither egged, nor provoked the Enemy, but
gave himself to a quiet, or rather idle life, which he thought might pass
under the title of an honorable Petronius Turpilianus gives up his charge to
Trebell. Max.
peace. In which estate he gave up his charge to Trebellius Maximus, and was
after slain by Galba, nothing objected against him, but his faithfulness to
Nero, in that he would not betray him, as the rest had done. Petronius
Turpilianus slain, because true to Nero. Julius Vindex opposes Nero. Tacit.
histor. in vit. Nero.
For Nero now grown Odious to God and Man, Conspiracies were continually
attempted, though not in act effected, until that Julius Vindex Lieutenant of
Gallia opposed his proceeding, being the first stirrer, and the rolling stone
that (as Tacitus terms it) tumbled Nero out of his Seat.

(25) For having proclaimed Galba Emperor, an Proclaims Galba Emperor.
old and weak man, at that time Governor of Arragon, neither privy to the
conspiracy, nor assenting to the title, he set up daily many bitter and biting
Edicts against Nero, whereby he was rowsed from his lascivious rest, and began
to fear the fatal end, whereunto his impious life and bloody reign had now
lastly brought him; who destitute of all power of resistance, did now set his
whole hope and refuge, upon that means, to which the compass of his time had
ever pointed; for relying only upon his skill in Music, he intended Nero
seeks to fly into Eegypt.
his flight into Egypt, there to teach the instructions of that Art: into such
sudden baseness was his mind dejected, that formerly had lashed out beyond all
measure in luxury, pride, and prodigality. Unto this conspiracy joined
Virginius Rufus Lieutenant of high Germany, with Nymphidius, Sabinus, and
Sophonius Tigellinus, Captain of the Guard, who after Vindex his death, (which
happened upon an accident even in his entrance to Arms) maintained the
election of Galba: The Senate send to apprehend him.
and the Senate as forward to Neroes destruction, proclaimed him Enemy to the
State, and pronounced his punishment more maiorum, sending out each way to
apprehend him alive.

(26) In this fear Nero attended with four servants Nero hid^th himself.
only, had hid himself in a Country Cottage, not passing four miles from
Rome; whence hearing his decreed judgment, and demanding what was meant by
that sentence, it was answered, that his neck should be locked in the forke of
a tree, and his body He kills himself.
all naked, whipped to death; whereupon lamenting that so good a Minstrell
should be made away, he ran himself through on his sword, and so rid the world
of a Monster. His lineaments. Suet. in vita Nero.


(27) Of stature he was indifferent, his body full of freckles, his hair
somewhat yellow, his countenance rather fair then lovely, his eyes gray and
dim, his neck fat, his belly bearing out, and his legs slender and
small; A most skillful Musician he was, and in His qualities*
that Art sought to excel others, and to equalize Apollo himself, as also in
his Chariot-riding to imitate the swiftnes of the Sun. So prodigal in
apparel, that he never wore one Garment twice, and so sumptuous Joseph. Bell.
Iud. lib. 5. cap. 6. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 5.
in buildings, as is incredible. He reigned thirteen years and eight days,
and died the eight of June, in the one and thirtieth of his age, and after the
birth of His reign and age.
our Savior Christ the threescore and tenth: as Eusebius does account.

GALBA. CHAPTER VIII.


WIth the death of this Tyrant, ended the progeny Nero the last of the Caesar's.
of the Caesar's, and the Emperors succeeding were afterward Suet. in vit.
Galb. Sect. 1.
elected, either for the opinion of their own worths, or else, (and that
oftener) by the faction and voice of the Soldiers, The manner of choosing the
succeeding Emperors.
whose violence the Senate ever feared to contradict, and whose Colonies in
every Province sought to raise their own General to that high estate. In
which time of Combustion, though little be recorded of the British affairs,
yet because the Monarchy of this Island was then and long after invested in the
Imperial dignity, we may not omit to speak somewhat of the ensuing
Emperors, as the chief Governors of this kingdom. Upon Neroes declining,
diverse there were (as Vindex and Virginius, Nymphidius and Sophonius) set up
against him, but Galba for his reputed integrity got the Garland from them
all: who little dreaming of the Imperial Diadem, fortune set it upon his head
before his hand had Galba got the Empire ere he looked for it.
touched the same: for Vindex in Gallia having proclaimed him Emperor, and
himself in Arragon not free from Neroes hatred, he sought rather to hazard
his life with the Glory of a Crown, then depend upon his mercy, who had sent
secretly the sentence of his death. And therefore mounting the Tribunal, the
more to impresse a fresh remembrance of former cruelties, he placed before his
throne, the Images of Galba his policy to make Nero odious.
certain Nobles executed by Nero, with some personages sent for out of exile,
whose presence might provoke a deeper edge of hatred; and his Army about him
ready for mutation, these, or the like words he spoke.

(2) My fellow Soldiers and friends, we at this time are assembled, to bestow
that upon others, His Oration to his soldiers.
which we our selves have smally enioied, I mean, liberty from bondage, and
freedom from fears of a Tyrant. The life that I have hitherto lead, will
sufficiently discharge me from any aspiring conceit, and my own Conscience
does witness that I speak not upon malice or private respects: It greeueth me
to say, but it boots not to hide, that, which every man sees. Has ever
Bondman under a cruel master passed a year of harder service, then we have
done fourteen under Nero? what kind of exaction has he not proved to supply
with extortion, that which with shame he has spent? what kind of cruelty
has he not practiced? If we would conceal or seek to suppress it, these
dumb stones would declare them: For behold, he poisoned his Father and brother,
abused and slew his own mother, murdered his wife, his Tutor, and what else so
ever valiant or virtuous in Senate, in City, in Province, without any
difference of Sex or Age. I need not to speak of the sorrowful sighs, and
bitter tears of so many young gentlemen bereft of their fathers, so many wives
robbed of their husbands, so many great men deprived of their Country, all
which cry vengeance upon such a Prince: a Prince? nay an Incendiarie, a Singer,
a Fiddler, a Stage-plaier, a Cart-driuer, a Crier; no Prince, nay no man; that
has a man to his husband, and a man Nero described.
to his wife, but a monster of mankind: And in truth Nero solemnly married
one of his youths called Doriphorus, and kept him as his wife: so likewise did
he with Sporus, whom he endeavored to transform into a woman.
a subject, upon whom, vice has made her full experience, and raised her
triumphs from the base of Caesar's throne. Against whom, what Vindex in France
has already intended, I am sure you do know, and I, for my part, am most
sorry to hear. The whole course of my former life has been hitherto removed
from Ambition in Court, or from aiming too high abroad, and this little that
remains of my days, I could heartily wish were to be spent in more ease: But
since I know not by what my misfortune, some have imposed upon me a Part which I
never meant to sustain, and least of all at this age, I will not refuse, if
you will also approve it, to sacrifice this old Carcass of mine for the wealth
of my Country, not as Emperor or Augustus (which sacred names I adore afar
off, not daring to approach them) but as -- And no further heard, was with great
acclamations saluted Emperor.

(3) But such is the height of glory, which is raised by the blasts of the
multitude, that it falls again as the Glory like a Bubble.
bubble burst in the swelling, which leaves neither circle nor sign of his
former pride. And so is the state of Galba with one breath applauded, and
placed upon the Imperial Throne; and that scarce cold, ere they dislike of
their own hasty election: for news being brought that the State stood firm
for Nero, and for certain that Vindex in his quarrel was slain, even in his
first enterprise of revolt; that Virginius was sided by his Germane Legions,
and his name inscribed in their banners; that Nymphidius was the man whose
deserts could not be sufficiently honored with less recompense then the
princely Diadem: These distractions so much ouer-swaied his aged and
passionate heart, that he retired to Clunia in great deiection, repenting
himself of that which he had done, and wished again his private estate.

(4) But the death of Nero commonly diuulged, and Virginius his refusals of the
Imperial Title, gave strength and life to his former election, now further
ratified by the full resolutions of the Army: who the more to seem both
strong and valorous, though indeed a weak, sickly, and silly old man,
Souldier-like in his coat of Arms showed himself, and in that array passed
the vast mountains for Rome. With whose entrance, entered the dislike of his
person, as one unfit to support the state of others, that by age and
imbeciliitie was not able to sustain his own: to which were added the
imperfections of his government, carried every way far under expectation. And
long he sat not before he saw his own defects: to redress which he
elected Piso Licinianus, Caesar, ioining Galba chooses Piso Licinianus for his
Caesar.
him in power with himself, and declaring him his Successor, in a short and
blunt Oration, in presence both of the Senate and Soldiers.

(5) Whereat howsoever others stood affected, yet Martus Saluius. Saluius Otho
conspireth Galbaes death.
Saluius Otho (one, who for commerce in Tacit. hist. 1.
leaudnes was very dear to Nero, and whose hope depended upon the common
disturbance, for that his excess in riot had now brought him to the brinke of
beggary) much envied thereat; the rather because himself had entertained a hope
that Galba would have adopted him, and therefore as his concurrent set his own
aspiring mind for the Crown. And even now this time best fitted his attempts,
as being the wane of Galbaes authority, and before the full of Pisoes power;
his Astrologers and starre-gazers forwarding him with Astrologers and
Starre-gazers.
their vain predictions, a kind of people ever to Princes unfaithful, to
hopers deceitful, and in a commonwealth always forbidden, yet always
retained. The soldiers likewise ever disliking the present, and affecting the
new, fell without respect to Othoes side: amongst whom Sulpitius Florus, one of
the British Cohorts, slew Piso the elected Caesar; Galba himself being Piso
slain. Galba murdered.
murdered and mangled by the Soldiers and band of Horsemen.

(6) He was of a good stature; his head bald, his His description.
eyes gray, and his nose hooked, his hands and feet crooked by reason of the
gout, and a bunch of flesh or wen upon his right side. A great feeder and
Sodomite His vices.
he was, severe in justice, and ouer-ruled by his servants. He died aged
seventy three years, having His age.
out-liued five Princes. In prosperity happier under the Empire of others,
then in his own; for he sat only seven months, and them with small
contents. And reign.
In his flourishing age with great renown he had served in Germany: Afric he
ruled as Proconsul, and the nearer Spain uprightly and well; seeming more then
a private man whilst he was private, and held capable of the Empire, had he
never been Emperor.

THE FIRST PLANTING OF RELIGION IN BRITAIN. CHAPTER IX.


THis short time of Galbaes government, with the conspiracies against his
Predccessour, admits small remembrances of our British affairs: which
Province (says Tacitus) Britain in quiet repose. Tacit. hist. 1. ca. 3.
among all other stirs against both Nero and Galba, held amity, and stood in
quiet; whether it was the far distance of place, severed by Sea from the
seditions of the Reuolters; or that by continual service against the Enemy
the malice of their humors were spent, it is uncertain. Therefore a while to
digress from the Succession of our British Monarkes, and to fill up the
emptiness of those Times with matters incident to our selves, let it not seem
either tedious or superfluous, to speak of the planting of his Kingdom in
this Island, whose Rule in short time extended to the Ends of the Earth; and
whose Ambassadors (as some have written) about Christianity supposed to be
brought into (...) in Ne^ time. Ex Antiq. Manuscript. Frec^lphus (...), Tom. 2.
lib. 2. cap. 4. William o^ Malmesburie.
the midst of Neroes Reign, and in the year of Christ's Incarnation sixty
three approached for the Inhabitants salvation, Aruiragus then swaying the
Scepter of this Kingdom.

(2) At which time (say they) were sent certain Disciples out of France into
Britain by Philip the Apostle, whereof Joseph of Arimathea, that buried the
body of Christ, was chief; who first laid the foundation of our faith in the
West parts of this Island, at the place then called Aualon, (afterward Inis
Witrin, Bale Centur. lib. 1. Harding says fourteen, cap. 47 Joseph of
Arimathea buried at Glastenbury. Gildas in vit. A^rel. Ambrosij.
now Glastenburie) where he with twelve Disciples his Assistants preached the
Gospel of life unto the Ilanders, and there left their bodies to remain for a
ioifull Resurrection. This does Gildas affirm, and Malmesburie in his Book of
the Antiquity of Glastenburie written to Henry de Bloys, brother to King
Stephen, Malmesburie.
and Abbat of the same place, report, and is consented unto (for the matter,
though all agree not touching the time) by the learned Antiquaries of later
Cambden. in Brit. Bale, Cent. 1. Matthew. Park. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. Polydor. Virg.
and aly.
times, grounded on the Testimonies of the best approved Ancient writers: who
account the most happy influence of Christianity, to have been by those
glorious conduits conuayed into these remote parts of the world: that so
(according to the promise of God by Esaiah) The Isles a far off which had not
heard of his fame, should be converted, and have his glory to them declared
Esaias 66. 19.
among the Gentiles.

(3) And if the credit of Dorotheus Bishop of Tire, Dorotheus in the lives of
Saints.
(who lived to see the Apostacy of Julian) weigh any thing with us, in his
tract of the Lives and Deaths of Luke 6. 15.
the Prophets, Apostles, and Disciples, he brings Simon Zelot^ (an Apostle of
Jesus Christ) to preach the word, Simon Zelotes martyred in Britain. Nicephor.
lib. 2. cap. 40. John Capgraue.
and to suffer Martyrdom on the Cross here in Britain: with whom Nicephorus,
and after him John Capgraue (in his Catalogue of English Saints) agree, saying
that the same Simon spread the Gospel to the west Ocean, and brought the word
of life into the Isles of Britain: and, in the conversion of Countries wrought
by the Apostles, the same Nicephorus, with Nicephor. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Egypt and Lybia assigns Britain also to be one. And the foresaid Dorotheus,
as also Mirmanus, names Aristobulus one of the seventy Disciples (the same
whom Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Romans among Romans 16. 10.
others saluteth) to have taught the doctrine of Salvation, and to have
executed the office of a Bishop here in Britain.

(4) To these first Planters and Sowers of this heavenly Baronius in histor.
Eccles. Mary Magdalen, Lazarus, and Martha in England.
Seed, Caesar Baronius, that voluminous Historian, ioineth Mary Magdalen,
Lazarus, and Martha, who (by his relation) being banished Jerusalem, in a
masterlesse ship without tackling arrived in Gallia, and with them Joseph of
Arimathea, who afterward landed in Britain (vt tradunt, as he says, out of
an old Manuscript which he saw in the Vatican Library:) yea and with them also
Eurgain the sister of Joseph, who Eurgain the sister of Joseph married Siarklos
a Britain. Georg. Owen in his Pettigrees.
afterward married a Britain named Siarklos, if the authority whereon George
Owen-Harry does ground that report, be of any credit.

(5) But yet there are others, who upon a very good ground from the words of
Gildas (the most ancient Gildas de Conquest. Brit.
of our British Historians) will have the Sun of the Gospel long before to
have risen in this our West, and this Island of Britain to have enioied the
very morning of his Ascent, the brightness thereof piercing through the mistie
clouds of error, and shining here in Britain even in the days of Tiberius,
toward whose end Christ suffered his death, and by whose indulgence toward
Christians, their profession was propagated far and near. Which assertion
the said Gildas does not deliver coldly or doubtingly, but with great
confidence, and relying upon good grounds, as it appears when he says,
Scimus, etc. We know for certainty, that this was in the latter times of
Tiberius. Which was immediately after our blessed Saviors Passion.

To which uncontrollable testimony some others have added (though not perhaps
on so undoubted warrant) that S. Peter the Apostle preached the word of S.
Peter the Apostle supposed to have preached in Britain. Act. 15. 7.
life in this Island, as to other Gentiles he did, for whom God had chosen him,
that from his mouth they might hear the Gospel and believe, (as himself
allegeth) and that he here founded Churches, and ordained Priests and
Deacons, which is reported by Simon Metaphrastes out of the Greek Antiquities,
and Guilielmus Metaphrastes.
Eisingrenius in the first of his Centurie, who says that Peter was here in
Neroes time; whereas Baronius Centur. 1. part. 7. did. 8.
thinks it was in the reign of Claudius, when the Jews were banished Rome,
and that therefore Paul in his Epistle to the Romans mentions him not. Indeed
Baronius and some others plead very hotly for S. Peter's preaching here: but I
see not well how it can Baronius.
stand either with Eusebius his account, which keeps him so long at Rome after
he was Bishop there, or with Eusebius.
Onuphrius, who denies that he went westward (being Onuphrius.
expulsed by Claudius) but to Jerusalem, and thence to Antioch, where he lived
till the death of Claudius: whence it must follow, that if Peter were here at
all, it was before ever he went to Rome, and that the Gospel was preached
here before it was in Rome, if Peter were the first (as some hold) that
preached there: both which may be the more propable, if we consider the huge
multitudes of Christians (fifteen thousand, says Baronius) which dispersed
themselves into all parts of the world upon the martyring of S. Steven at
Jerusalem, (which was presently upon the death of Christ) and that Joseph of
Arimathea was one of that number, Baronius does confess. I am here contented
to step over that Monkish tale reported by Aluredus Riuallensis (the writer of
King Edward the Confessors A Monkish tale of S. Peter.
life) that a holy man (forsooth) studious and careful for a Governor to
succeed, was in his sleep told by S. Peter that the Kingdom of England was
his, wherein himself had first preached, and would also provide him
Successors. For s^eing it was a dream, for a dream we leave it, and Peter
among the other Elders to attend his Throne, that now sits Apoc. 4.
in glorious Majesty, and who in this life minded no such earthly
pre-eminence, no not to divide betwixt Luke 12. 13.
brethren, though the Kingdom and rule of all things was his alone.

(6) Certes Peter was principally the Apostle of the Circumc^, and therefore
more likely to have spent his endeavors on them: but for Paul (the Docter of
the Gentiles) his arrival here may seem more warrantable, S. Paul preached
in Britain.
who doubtless (after his first releasement from Rome) confirmed the doctrine
of Christ to these Western parts of the world, and among them, as may appear,
to this Island of Britain, as both Sophronius Sophr. in his Sermon of the
nativity of the Apostles. Theodoret. de curandis Graec^ affectionib^, li. 9.
Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Theodoret an ancient Doctor of the Church, do
affirm and approve, saying that Fishers, Publicans, and the Tent-maker
(meaning S. Paul) which brought the Evangelical light unto all Nations,
revealed the same unto the Britains. That Paul came into Illyricum, Gallia,
and Spain, and filled all those parts with his doctrine, both Eusebius,
Dorotheus, Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 1. Doroth. lives of Saints. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom.
2. Romans 10. 18.
and Epiphanius do testify: and of this general Embassage the Apostle
himself says, that the sound of the Gospel went through the earth, and was
heard unto the ends of the world: which his sayings cannot more fitly be
applied to any other Nation then unto us of Britain, whose Land by the
Almighty is so placed in the terrestrial globe, that thereby it is termed of
the ancient, The Ends of the Earth, and deemed to be situated (...). lib. 27.
c. 7. Joseph. bell. Judah. lib. 2. cap. 16. Tacit. in vit. Agr. Solinus.
in another world; for so in an Oration that Agrippa made to the Jews, and
Agricola to his Romans, it is called: which made Solinus write, that the coast
of France had been the End of the Earth, had it not been for Britain, which
was as another world. And in Dion Dion Cass. lib. 60.
we read, that the old Soldiers of Gallia, whom Claudius commanded for
Britain, complained that they must be enforced to make war out of the
world. And of this Land and latter Apostle (if credit may be given to a Poet)
Venantius Fortunatus thus records: Transijt Oceanum, and qua facit Insula
Porrum,
Quasque Britannus habet terras, quasque vltima Thule.
He crossed the seas unto the land, and utmost coasts of Thule,
Ariuing at the Ports and Isles where Britains bare the rule.


(7) Thus for Paul: well known in Rome by his long imprisonments, and (at that
time) in reverend regard for his doctrine with many there: among whom also
there were some Britains that embraced the faith, whereof Claudia Rufina
(remembered by Martial another Poet) was one, whom he thus extols: Claudia
caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis Martial. lib. (...)54.

Edita, cur Latiae pectora plebis habet?
Quale decus formae? Romanam credere matres
Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam.
How has Dame Claudia, borne of Britains blew,
Won fame for wisdom with our sages grave?
Her comely form and learning, as their due,
Rome claims for hers, and hers would Athens have.


This Claudia is by the learned commended to have Matt^. Part. Ar^. in A^iq.
Eccl. Brit^. (...), etc.
been most skillful in the Greek and Latin tongues; of whom hear them (not
me) speak. At the commandment of the Tyrant Nero (say they from Tacitus) many
Noble Britains were brought to Rome, who remaining there their Confederates;
they held it an honor to have their children named after the nobility of the
Romans: and from Claudius Casar was this Lady Claudia named, who according to
her worth was matched in marriage to Rufus a gentleman of Rome, then a Coronell,
after a Senator, a man of a mild disposition, naturally modest, a great
Philosopher in the Sect of the Stoickes, for his sweetness of behavior
called Pudens, who by his grave persuasions caused Martial (the witty but
wanton Poet) to reform many things in his writings, and by him is commended
for his humanity, piety, learning, and eloquence: as also his wife Claudia
the Britain, for her beauty, faith, fruitfulness, learning, and languages.
In proof whereof, Bale has mentioned three several (...) (...) ^ed writings.
D^. of the (...) of the D^ciples. V^ lib. 1^. 2. Tim. 4. ^1.
treatises, besides others by her compiled, both in the Greek and Latin
tongues. Dorotheus names P^dens to be one of the seventy two, and Volater^
affirms them both Paul's disciples, from whom he sends greeting to Ti^theus
in these words: (...) and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren
salute thee. But some may object, that Martials Claudia could not be that
Lady, who living in Neroes time gave hospitality unto Peter and Paul at their
being in The same Claudia that Paul and Martial speaks of.
Rome, for that she could not retain such beauty and perfection as the Poet
to her does ascribe in the reign of Domitian, the seventh in succession from
Nero, the time being too long (says Ado, Bishop of Treuers, Vsuardus and
others) for beauty to be so freshly preserved. Now these account her age then
to be sixty; but if we reckon according to Eusebius, we shall see that he
sets the last of Claudius in the year of grace fifty six, and the first of
Domitian in eighty three, betwixt which, are but twenty seven years, and yet
Paul came not to Rome till the tenth of Nero, and in his thirteenth year, from
the prison wrote his Epistle to Timothy, as the same Eusebius declares: so
that from Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 22.
hence unto Domitian, is left but fourteen years, a time no whit impossible
to retain Beauty, though twenty years and many more of her age had been
formerly spent; seeing that in those times Plutarch praises Alcibiades to be
passingly fair when he was Alcibiades his beauty in old age.
threescore years of age.

This Claudia then with Paul's spiritual Manna, is said to send likewise the
choicest and chastest of the Claudia sends both Paul's and Martials writings
into Britain.
Poesies of Martial (whose verses generally are no lessons befitting Ladies)
for new-yeares gifts unto her friends in Britain, both for to feed their
Souls with the bread of life, and to instruct their minds with lessons best
fitting unto civil behavior; which thing moved the Poet himself with no
small selfe-glorie in his verse thus to write: Dicitur and nostros cantare
Britannia versus. Martial. lib. 7. Epig. 10.

And Britain now (they say) our verses learns to sing.


(8) It has also passed with allowance among the learned Senate of our
Antiquaries, that when Claudius and Nero began to banish and persecute the
Christians Tacit. Annal. 15. cap. 10.
in Rome, (whose superstitions, as Tacitus pleases to term them, from Judea
had infected the City it self) many Romans and Britains being converted to
the Faith, fled thence unto these remote parts of the earth, where they might
and did more freely enjoy the liberty of their Professions, until the search
of Tyrants by the flame-light of Persecutions, had found out all secret places
for the safeties and assemblies of Gods Saints: as after in the days of
Dioclesian we shall find. And from this Sanctuary of Salvation the sad
lamenting Lady * Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plautius (the first Lord
Lieutenant of Britain) brought Aulus Plautius his wife became a Christian in
Britain.
that Religion, whereof she was accused and stood indicted upon life and death,
which was none other, then the Christian Profession, seeing the same both by
Tacitus and Suetonius, is every where termed the Tacit. Annal. l. 13. 7. and
lib. 15. 10. Suetonius in vita Nero. Sect. 16.
strange superstitions and new kind of Sect that the Christians embraced, and
for which they were accounted unworthy to live.

(9) And much about these times (as Beatus Rhenanus in his History of
Germany, Pantaleon and others B. Rhenan. in his Hist. of Germany. Pantaleon.
do report) one Suetonius a Noble man's son in Britain converted to the
Faith by the first Planters of the Gospel in this Island, and after his
Baptism called Beatus, was sent by the Brethren from hence unto Rome, to be
better instructed, and further directed by Saint Peter himself; and returning
through Switzerland, found such willingness and flocking of the people to hear
and receive the Doctrine of Christ, that he there stayed and built an Oratorie
not far from the lake Thun, and near the Town called Vnderfewen, wherein
preaching and prayers he employed his time to the day of his death, which
happened in the year of grace 110.

And that there were Christians in Britain at these times I make no question,
though some exceptions may Holinshed descript. Brit. cap. 9.
be taken against the Monk of Burton the reporter thereof, who says in the 141
year and reign of Hadrian, nine masters of Grantcester were baptized
themselves and preached to others the Gospel in Britain; howsoever he fails
in the Emperors name, which year was the second of Antonins Pius his
successor, and ascribes to these men Schoole-degrees, altogether unknown for
nine hundred years after, yet these do not hinder the truth of the thing,
though that Monk was none of the best Historians. It is reported also that
Patricke the Irish Apostle, and Canonized Saint, long before the Patrick the
Irish Apostle preached in Wales.
Reign of King Lucius preached the Gospel in many places of Wales; As also
that Ninianus Bernicius of the race of the British Princes converted the Picts
to the Religion of Christ. Unto these aforesaid authorities and testimonies
howsoever we stand affected: yet it is certain by Chemnitius citing
Sabellicus, that the Britains were with the first Conuerts: And Tertullian,
Chemnitius (in examine. Co^il. Triden.) ex Sabellic^.
who lived within two hundred years of Christ's Nativity, shows no less:
Who the more to provoke the Jews against whom he wrote, calls to witness
the fruitful increase of the Gospel of Salvation, through many Countries and
Nations, and among them names the Britains to have received the Word of life,
Tertullian. cont. Iud^s cap. 7.
the power whereof (says he) has pierced into those parts whither the Romans
could not come. Whence Petrus Cluniacensis supposes the Scottish men the more
ancient Christians, as not being in the like subjection to Petrus Cluni. ad
Bernard.
the Romans, as other then were.

(10) Origin, who flourished not much above two hundred years after Christ, in
his Homilies upon Ezechiel shows, that the first fruits of Gods harvest was
Origin. in Eze. ^mil. 4.
gathered in the Island of Britain: who consented to the Christian faith by the
doctrine of their Druides: that taught one only God: with whom Hector Boethius
agrees, saying, that some of these Druides condemned Hector Boet. Chro. Scot
lib. 2. The Druides allowed not Images nor any visible form of the Godhead.
the worship of God in Images, and allowed not the application of the Godhead
unto any visible form: which might be the cause why Claudius the Emperor
forbad their Religion, as sauouring in these things too much of Christianity,
whom likewise he banished Rome, as some from Suetonius conjecture. Of these
Suetonius in vita Claud. Sect. 25.
Druides we showed before, that their offices were most employed about holy
things, and that their doctrine chiefly consisted in teaching the immortality
of the Tacit. Annal. l. 14. cap. 10. Casar. Com. lib. (...).
soul, the motions of the heavens, the nature of things, and the power of the
Gods: yea and Postellus from others will enforce, that they prophesied likewise
of a virgins Postellus.
conception. These were the helps, says Tertullian, that caused the Britains
so soon to embrace the Doctrine of Christ, and thereupon immediately after his
death does Gyldas fasten our conversion, where he writes, That the Glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which first appeared to the world in the later time of
Tiberius Caesar, did Gyldas de Excidi^ Brit.
even then spread his bright beams upon this frosen Island of Britain.

(11) Whereby we see the waters of life, flowing from Ierusalems Temple, into
these far set Countries and uttermost Seas, to be made both fruitful and
Ezech. 47. 8.
wholesome, according to the sayings of the Prophet, that in that day the
waters of life should issue from Jerusalem, half of them toward the East Sea,
and half of them toward the uttermost Sea, and shall remain fruitful
Zachar. 14. 8.
both in Summer and winter: and even in the infancy of Christianity, both the
Apostles themselves, and also the Proselytes their Disciples to become fishers
therein for the Souls of Men, as Christ in choosing of them said they should
be; whereby his Kingdom Matt. 4. 19.
was soon enlarged unto these Ends of the Earth, and Psalm. 2. 8.
his Throne established among those Heathen, whom God his Father had given to
be his. So fruitful and famous was this spreading of the Gospel, that
Baptista Mantuan, a Christian Poet, compares the increase thereof with that of
Noah, thus alluding unto it: Sicut aquis quondam Noe sua misit in orbem
Pignora sedatis, vt Gens humana per omnes Baptist. Mant.

Debita Coelituum Patri daret orgia terras;
Sic sua cum vellet Deus alta in regna renerti,
Discipulos quosdam transmisit ad Vltima Mundi
Littora, doct^ros Gentes quo numina ritu
Sint oranda, quibus Coel^ placabile Sacris.


In English thus:

As Noah sent from the Arc his sons, to teach
The Laws of God unto the World a right;
So Christ his Servants sent abroad to preach
The Word of Life, and Gospel to each Wight:
No place lay shadowed from that glorious Light:
The farthest Isles, and Earths remotest bounds,
Embraced their Faith, and ioi'd at their sweet sounds.


(12) To which effect also the sayings of S. John Chrysostom, Bishop of
Constantinople, enforce, who Chrysostom. in Sermon. de Pe^cost.
showing the increase of Christianity, and the success of the Gospel
preached, shows the power thereof to have extended, not only to the Countries
far iacent in the Continent, but also to the Islands situated in the Ocean it
self, and amongst them expressly names this our Britain; whose Inhabitants
(says he) have also consented to the word which is planted in every heart, in
honor whereof they have erected their Temples and Altars. And again: Those
Britains (says he) which had formerly fed upon humane flesh, making no
difference betwixt the blood of man and beast, now through the power of the
word by them embraced, have learned the law of true piety, and give themselves
to a religious abstinence, and holy fasts. Of which Barbarism S. Jerome also
complained, that some of those Aduers. Ioui^. li. 2
Nations used to eat the buttocks of boys, and Paps of Virgins, which in their
Feasts were served for the daintiest dishes. But elsewhere speaking of the
Britains conversion, he says, that they had turned themselves Epitaph.
Marcellae Viduae.
from their western Paganism, and now had di^ected their faces toward
Jerusalem in the East, whose beauty shined in the word of God.

(13) And thus we see by the planting of the Gospel in this Island, the saying
of the Psalmist accomplished, that God would give his son Christ the Heathen
Psalm. 2. 8.
for his inheritance, and the Ends of the Earth (the proper attribute of this
our Britain) to be his possession. And the success in History most
apparently shows these parts (by an especial prerogative) to be Christ's
Kingdom. For albeit that Jerusalem and Antioch may rightly Act. 11. 26.
claim the precedencie of all other places, the one being as it were the
chamber where Christians were first borne, and the other the font where they
were first Christened with that most sacred name: yet britain in some other
graces has outstript them all, having the glory to be graced with the first
Christian King that Britain had the first Christian King. Ex Archi^. Ciuit.
London.
ever reigned in the world, which was our renowned Lucius, the first fruits of
all the Kings that ever laid their Crowns at the foot of our Saviors Cross:
as also for producing the first Christian Emperor that Britain had the first
Christian Emperor.
ever by public authority established the Gospel through the world, which was
Constantine the Great, borne and brought up here in Britain by Queen Helena,
a most virtuous and religious British Lady: Helena mother of Constantine a
Britain.
unto whose days the succession of Christianity did here continue, as by the
martyrdomes of many Saints under Dioclesian is apparent. Herein also reigned
the King that first uncrowned the head of the usurping King Henry the Eighth
the first that quailed the Pope. Apoc. 9. 2. King. 18. 4. Genesis 26. 18.
Beast, and triple-headed Cerberus, and freed the Land from his devouring
Locusts: putting down Idolatry with Hezekiah that brake the Brazen Serpent:
and with Isaac new dug the Wels that those Philistines had stopped. And
lastly has this Island produced that most royal and Christian Monarke, whose
learned pen has first depainted Antichrist, and pierced the heart King James.
of all Papal Supremacy, as the sword of Gedeon did Zalmunna ( For so the
word Zalmunna signifies, Judge. 7. 20.
the Image of trouble) King of Madia^. And as a Lion has he met that crooked
Isa. 27. 1.
Serpent in the way of his usurped authority; whereby in short time
undoubtedly the Hos. 13. 8.
Kall of his heart will be broken, if other Potentates likewise by his most
godly example, cast off the yoke of vassallage, and in their several Dominions
govern (as free Princes ought) the people that GOD has committed to their
charge. So that in those and many other the like Princes of this happy Island,
most properly is performed that prophetical promise made unto the Church of
Christ: that Kings should become her nursing Fathers, and Queens should be her
nursing Mothers: Of both which may be Isa. 49. 23.
truly said to Britain, in imitation of that of Solomon; Many kingdoms have
done gloriously, but thou have surmounted them all. Pro. 31. 29.


(14) And of such power has Christ been in these His Possessions, that even
the Hostile Kings and Conquerours thereof, were they never so savage and
Idolatrous Britain conu^ted her Conq^rors to the faith of Christ.
at their first entrance, yet when they here had seated for a time they became
mild and religious, and gladly submitted their hearts to the Religion of
those, whose necks themselves held under the yoke of subjection.

(15) Such were the Romans in this Island, whose Ho^ (...). c. 9.
Deputies at the dayspring almost of Christianity were converted; as
Trebellius, Pertinax, and others, which submitted themselves to that
profession, and were motives to King Lucius more publicly to maintain the
same: as also Constantius the father of great Constantine, that here in
Britain permitted the profession of the Gospel, with the erections of
Churches for the true service of God, and prohibited the superstitious worships
of the Gentiles.

(16) The Saxons after them (in time, but not in Idolatry) had never tasted
the living waters of Siloh, till they were here seated in Christ's Possession,
where they changed their affections as far from their wonted manners, as did
the Messengers to Iehu, which turned after his Chariot to destroy the Altars of
Baal: or 2. King. 9. 18.
as Saul and his servants, who no sooner had entered Naioth in Ramah, but that
their spirits were joined to the Prophets, and the heat of their fury, with
their 1. Sam. 19. 20.
garments, cast down at Samuels feet.

(17) The Danes likewise, their Conquerours, and Successors in this Royal
Throne, ever until then were both bloody and barbarous, and therefore of all
our Writers commonly called the Pagan Danes; whose many desolations and ruins
remain as records of their cruelties in many places even unto this day: yet
being a while in this Land, King Guthurn, with thirty of his chief Princes
and people, were drawn by the valor Or (...)
and virtue of King Alured to receive the Christian Faith, by whose bounty
thereupon they enioied the possession of a fair portion of this Kingdom. And
afterward Canutus, their greatest King, no sooner almost had this Imperial
Diadem set upon his head, but that he held it his chief Majesty to be the
vassal of Christ, confessing him only to be King of Kings: and with such
religious devotion as then was taught, crowned the Crucifix at Winchester with
the Crown C^ crow^d the Crucifix with the Crown he wore. H^. (...). lib.
(...). P^chr. li. (...). c. 20. (...). li. 1. Acts and Mo^. lib. 3. p. (...).
he wore: and never after, through all his reign, by any means would wear the
same: and the Danes his Soldiers remaining in England, began by little and
little to embrace Christianity, and in short time were al converted to the
Faith. Thus then we see the happy increase of these holy seeds springing from
the furrows of this blessed ground: and the Tents of Se^ to be spread upon the
Mountains of Britain, wherein God (according to his promise) persuaded us who
Genesis (...). 27. Orig^ upon (...), (...). (...).
are of Iapheth, to dwell.

(18) As hitherto we have searched the first foundation of our Faith, so
neither want we testimonies concerning the continuance of the same in this
Land unto following Posterities; although the injury of Time and War have
consumed many Records. For the Britains that were daily strengthened in their
received faith, by the Doctrine of many learned and godly men, left not their
first love with the Church Apoc. 2. 4.
of Ephesus, but rather took hold of their skirts, as the Prophet speaks,
until the tortures of Martyrdom Zecha. 8. 23.
cut them off by death: And those Fathers even from the Disciples themselves,
held a succession in Doctrine, (notwithstanding some repugnancie was made by
(...). (...).
the Pagans) and preached the Gospel with good success, (...).
even till the same at length went forth with a b^lder countenance, by the
favorable Edicts of Adrian, ^useb. (...). 4 c. (...). etc. 13. and lib. (...).
cap. 5.
Antonius Pius, and Marcus Aurelius Emperors of Rome (as Eusebius has noted:)
and in Britain was established by the authority of Lucius their King: whereby
this was the first of all the Provinces (says (...). (...). (...). lib. 5.
(...). (...). (...).
Marcus Sabellicus) that received the Faith by public ordinance: Of the
te^chers of those times Bale from some other has these verses. Sicut erat
celebris cultu numeroque Deorum
Cum Iouis imperium staret, Britannica tellus:
Sic vbi terrestres caelo descendit ad or as
Expectata salus, patribus fuit inclyta sanctis.
Qui Neptunicolum campos, and Cambrica rura,
Coryneasque casas, locadesolata, colebant.
As were the Britains famous for their zeal
To Gentle Gods, whiles such they did adore*
So, when the Heavens to Earth did Truth reveal,
Blessed was that Land with Truth and Learnings store:
Whence British Plains, and Cambri as desert ground,
And Cornewalls Crags, with glorious Saints abound.


In which number were Eluanus and Meduinus, those Floren. Wigorn. Two learned
Divines sent to the Bishop of Rome.
two learned Divines, which were sent by King Lucius unto Eleutherius Bishop of
Rome, with whom returned two other famous Clerks, whose names were Faganus and
Damianus; these together, both preached Alij Fagatius vel Fagatius and Divines.
and baptized amongst the Britains, whereby many daily were drawn to the
Faith: And, as a worthy and ancient Dicetus Deane of London: a Manuscript in
the Kings Libratie, ad ^n. 178.
Historian says: The Temples which had been founded to the Honor of their
many Gods, were then dedicated to the one and only true God: For there were in
Britain eight and twenty Flamins, and three Arch-flamins, in stead of which,
so many Bishops and Archbishops were appointed: under the Archbishop of London
were the Provinces of Loegria and Cornubia: under York, Deira, and Albania:
under Vrbs Legionum, Cambria: By which means, this happy Kingdom under Saint
David's in Wales.
that godly King, was nobly beautified with so many Cathedral Churches, and
Christian Bishops Sees, before any other kingdom of the world.

That this Lucius should be the Apostle to the Bauarians, or that his sister
Emerita was crowned with the King Lutius the Apostle to the Banarians. Aegidius
Scudus de Prisca Rhaetia. Hermanus Schedelius, cap. 3.
flames of Martyrdom fifteen years after his death, I leave to the credit of
Aegidius Scudus, and Hermanus Schedelius the reporters, and to the best liking
of the readers. But most certain it is, that the Christian faith was still
professed in this Island, sound and undefiled, as Beda witnesses;
notwithstanding the cruel persecutions Beda. Hist. ^nglic lib. 1. cap. 4.
of the bloody Emperors.

19 For, all this time (says the said Dicetus) Christian Religion flourished
quietly in Britanny, til in Dioclesians Dicetus ad annum 287.
time, their Churches were demolished, their holy Bibles castinto Bone-fires,
the Priests with their faithful flock bloodily murdered. In which number,
about the year two hundred ninety three, as we read (in Beda, Malmesburie,
Randulphus, and others) Albane with his teacher Amphibalus were both of them
martyred for the profession of the Gospel at the old Malmesburie. Randulphus.
Town Verolanium: as also in Leicester, those two Noble Citizens, Aaron, and
Julius, with multitudes both of men and women in sundry places (says Beda) as
shortly after no less then a Thousand Saints suffered Beda lib. 1. ca. 7. At
Liechfield 1000 Saints suffered death. Matthew. 27. Liechfields Arms.
death at Liechfield, whereupon the place was called another Golgotha, or field
of blood: In memory whereof, the City bears for Arms to this day, in an
Eschucheon of Landscape, sundry persons diversely Martyred. And yet after these
times also the Britains continued constant in Christianity, and the censures
of their Bishops (for the great estimation of their Constancy, piety, and
learning) required, and approved in great points of Doctrine among the
assemblies of some General Councels; as that of Sardis and Nice, in the time
of great Constantine (the first Christian Emperor, and this our Country man,
whose blessed days gave free way to that Profession, to the Councels
Authority, and to the whole world Peace) had we our Bishops present; whose
forwardnes against the Arrian Heresy, afterward Athanasius aduanceth in his
Apology The Bishops of Britain withstood the Arrian Heresy.
unto Iouinian the Emperor, among three hundred Bishops assembled at the
Council of Sardice, in Anno three hundred and fifty: whose words (as
Nicephorus reports them) are these. Know most Christian Emperor Nicephorus
Ecclesiast. Hist. Athanasius Apolo. 2.
(says he) that this faith has been always preached and professed, and that
all Churches of Spain, Britain, France and Germany at this day with one voice
do approve the same. As also at that of Ariminum, in the year three hundred
fifty nine, and in the reign of Constantius, who caused four hundred
western Bishops to be there sommoned in favor of the Arrians, whereof three
were out of Britain, (as Sulpitius Seuerus the good Bishop of Burges has
reported) that Sulpitius Seuerus, lib. 2.
gave their suffrages against that Heresy. These does Hilarie term the
Bishops of the Provinces of Britain, Hilarie in an Epist. to the Bishops.
by whom they were somewhat derided, because being far from their own
Country they lived upon the Emperors charge. And Beda testifies, that from
Dioclesians time they both reedified their former Temples, and founded new also
in memory of Bed. lib. 1. cap. 8.
their then fresh-bleeding Martyrs, and enjoyed a general and ioifull peace in
their religious profession, till that Arrian Heresic having first filled the
Continent, sought and found passage over the Seas into our Island.

Gennadius in his Catalogues Illustrium Diuorum Gennadius in Catal. Illus. Diu.
tells us of an other learned Bishop of Britain, Fastidius; who in the time of
Cestius Bishop of Rome, wrote unto one Fatalis a book devita Christians, and
another de viduitate seruanda; of much divine learning and comfort. Chrysanthus
likewise is recorded by Nicephorus, to be son of Bishop Martian, who having
Nicephorus in Eccles. Hist.
been a Consular Deputy in Italy under Theodosius, and made Lieutenant of
Britain, where with great praise he managed the common wealth, was against his
will afterward made Bishop at Constantinople of the Nouatians, that called
themselves Cathari, that is, pure, making a schism in the Church by their
denial of Salvation, to such as fell into relapse of sin after Baptism once
received. This is that Bishop of whom we read, that of all his Ecclesiastical
revenues he reserved only for himself two loaves of bread upon the Lords
Tripart. Histor.
day. And in the first Tome of Councels is mention of Restitutus Bishop of
London, whom (because that, as is most probable, Christian Religion had in
those primitive times taken more firm footing in Britain then in France) the
French Bishops called to their National Council, the second at Arles, in Anno
three hundred thirty five, that he might with his Suffrage approve their
Decrees. About the year four hundred seventy, was a Provincial Council held
in Britain for the reforming of Religion, and repairing of the ruined
Churches, which the Pagan marriage of Vortiger had decayed, to the great grief
and discontent of the people, a pregnant sign of the continuing zeal, which
unto those days had left a glorious memory.

(20) And the Ensign of Arthur, wherein the Arthurs Ensign. Vincentius in his
specul^ Historiali.
Virgin with her son in her arms (as is noted by Vincentius) was portraied,
so often displaied for Christ, and his Countries liberty, against the Pagan
Saxons, is as a seal to confirm us of their Profession, and does show the
badge of that ages Christianity. But the famous Monastery of Banchor, as a
College of divine Philosophers, and by Clariuallensis truly acknowledged to be
the Mother of all other in the world, and her Monks Clariuallensis. Bangor in
Wales the first Monastery in the world. Bed. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. 6. 2.
distributed into seven several parts, every part numbering three hundred
souls, and earning their bread by their daily labors, does notably witness
to all succeeding ages, that Christian Religion was then both planted and
preached in this Island. And in the Synod held at Austins Oak were seven old
Britain Bishops, besides other Doctors, who met with that Roman Legate, and
not in points of doctrine, but rather in their several rites and ceremonies
did vary, by any thing that in that Assembly appeared. For as it is most
undoubted, that (if we speak properly) Jerusalem is the Mother of us all, and
of all Churches; and our Beda lib. 2. cap. 2.
former allegations do euince, that the first Plantation of the British Faith
was altogether by Jews and others of the Eastern Church: so the very rites of
this Religious College of Banchor do evidently prove, that their first
institution in Religion came from the East, Beda showing that in all of them
they dissented from the Roman Church; yea, and that they never did, nor then
would acknowledge any authority of the Bishop of Rome over them in matters of
the Church and service of God. All which accords right well with that before
cited out of Zachary, that the waters of life should issue from Jerusalem. And
S. Hierome, who spoke most properly, in saying, the Britains leaving
Paganism, had turned their faces to Jerusalem in the East.

The foundation of the said College is ascribed to King Lucius, from whose time
unto the entrance of this Austin the Monk, four hundred thirty eight years
were expired: in all which space we have seen that the Christian Faith was
both taught and embraced in this Island, notwithstanding the continual
persecutions of the Romans, Huns, Picts, and Saxons: which last made such
desolations in the outward face of the Church, that they drove the Christian
Bishops into the The Bishops of York and London driven into the Deserts. Acts
and Monuments, lib. 2. Heb. 11. 25.
deserts of Cornwall and Wales. In which number were Theomis and Thadioceus
Bishops of London and York, choosing rather to suffer adversity with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. By whose
labors the Gospel was plentifully propagated among those vast mountains, and
those parts especially above all other made very glorious, by the multitudes of
their holy Saints and learned Teachers.

(21) Lastly, (for the close of all) that these testimonies are sincerely by us
produced, for the first preaching and planting of the Gospel, and by such
means and men as we have declared, and particularly by Joseph of Arimathca
and his associates, the consent of all Writers, both foreign and homebred,
does sufficiently approve: and the reverend regard had of the place, with the
many Charters thereof to this day remaining, are strong inducements for those
our first Apostles Residencies and Burials: whereof one, exemplified under the
Seal of King Edward the third, is to be seen at this day, reciting that the
Abbey of Glastenburie being burned in the time of King Henry Glastenbury Abbey
burnt.
the second while it was in his hands, at the request of the Patriarch of
Jerusalem (then present in England) instigated further both by the Bishops and
Nobilitic, he did reedifie the same, causing diligent search to be
Glastenburie Abbey new built by Henry the second
made for the ancient Charters of that foundation, and among many recited in
that exemplification, in one of them it is called, Origo Religionis in Anglia:
in another, Tumulum Sanctorum, ab ipsis discipulis Domini aedificatum, fuisse
venerabilem. Also in the same Charter amongst many other Kings, there is
mention made of King Arthur, to be a great Benefactor unto that Abbey; King
Arthur a great benefactor to Glastenburie Abbey. The Arms of King Arthur at
Glastenburie.
whose Arms upon the stone walls, both in the Chapel (called S. Joseph) and
in diverse other places of the Abbey, are cut: which is an Eschucheon, whereon a
Cross with the Virgin Mary in the first quarter is set, and is yet to this day
remaining over the Gate of entrance, and is held to be also the Arms of that
Abbey. This place is said to have been given to Joseph and Glastenburie Abbey
given to Joseph by (...) Two divines ^ent by (...) to Rome from Glastenburie.
W^lles called Belga.
his brethren, by Aruiragus then King of Britain: and from hence were those
two divine Doctors sent to Elutherius by King Lucius, as by their Epithetes
does appear: the one of them called Eluanus Aualonius, or of Glastenburie; and
the other, Meduuinus of Belga, that is, Wells, near unto this place. And to
these persons and place, Polydore Virgil, that dwelled among us, Angl. hist.
lib. 2.
and had perused most of our Antiquities, ascribes the original and
precedencie of our Christian Faith, in these words: Haec omnia Christianae
pietatis in Britannia extitere primordia, quam deinde Lucius Rex accendit and
adauxit, etc. And our other latter Writers likewise with him agree of this
place, further affirming, that at first but poor, and without all pomp, it
was their Oratorie, built only of wrethen wands, as both In his catalogue of
Saints.
Capgraue, V^ta. lib. 1.
Bale, In his preface.
Mayor, De Antiq. ^ar. cap. 7.
Scroope, Chap. 47.
Harding, Thorn.
Thorn, and others affirm: Afterward by diverse Princes raised unto greater
glory, with many large privileges and Charters granted; to wi^, of (...),
(...), (...), (...), Many (...) to (...).
(...), (...), the Conqueror, Rufus, and others: all which were diligently
perused by King Henry the second, as we have said, and that Rectorie in these
Charters continually termed The Grave of Saints: The mother Church: ^he
Disciples foundation, and dedicated unto Christ, as the first place in this
Land wherein hi^ Gospel was first preached and embraced.

(22) To conclude this digresson, grown much greater then was intended, we see
it is most apparent, that the Britains had a settled opinion in (...), (...)
prosessed Christianity ^ore it came (...) Ro^. Esaias 49. 22. Dan. 11. 31. Micah
4. 8. Esaias 2.
before the sound thereof was heard from ^me; and that the Lord had here set
up his Standard, whereunto these Ilanders resorted as to the Tower of their
strength, and was the first Kingdom of the Gentiles, that are said to bring
their sons thus in their arms, and their daughters thus upon their
shoulders, unto the Lords Sanctuary: whose knowledge continually increasing,
has hitherto, to Englands great joy and fame, been still continued, though
the spiritual sparks thereof for a season have sometimes been covered in the
cinders of the Pagans desolations, or with the superstitious worships of man's
inventions; both which now dispersed as clouds before the Sun, the light
appears in his full strength, and the most pure waters of the word run
untroubled. This Island then, in this thing made happy before the most, the
Inhabitants became Instructers of others, and in their earthly vessels bare
this heavenly liquor, which through their golden Conduits ran into many other
Countries, and filled their Cesternes with this water of life. For from hence
was Netherland converted to Christianity, as testifies the story of
Swithbertus: Burgundy by Swithbertus.
our Columbanus, says Sigebert: Scotland by Brandanus, Sig^bert.
as Bernard the French Monk affirms: Swedia by Bernard. Petrus de Natalibus.
Matthew of Westminster. The Britains con^erted many Countries.
Gallus, as says Petrus de Natalibus: and Frisia by Wilfred, as is recorded by
Beda and Matthew of Westminster: the Franconians, Hessians, and Thuringians, by
Winifred our Devonshire man: the Norwegians by Nicolas Brekspere of Middlesex:
and the Lithuanians by Thomas Walden of Essex. Again, if we shall cast our eye
on all the Reformed Churches in Christendom, and with them on Luther, Husse,
and Prage, they will all confess, they first derived their light from the
learned Wickleffe of Oxford; the Lamp of whose sacred knowledge has illumined
not only all the corners of this Kingdom, but also all those foreign States,
whom it has pleased God to deliver from the thraldom and vengeance of
Babylon: so that with the German Poet, to Gods glory, and Britains praise,
the English thus may sing: Quin se Relligio multum debere Britannis
Seruata, and late circum dispersa, fatetur.
Religion does confess, to Britain deep she stands
In debt, by whom preserved, she now fills foreign Lands.


In which regard, Polydore Virgil does rightly call Polydor. Virgil.
England the Parent or Mother-Monasterie of all Europe. As likewise Peter Ramus
terms Britain to be Peter (...).
twice Schoole-mistresse unto the Kingdom of France. Annals of Flanders.
And the Annals of Flanders testify, that no Nation had so many Divine Nobles
(they might likewise have said, so many Noble Divines) as England has had;
neither any more bountiful to Gods Saints. Our Kings for sanctity ranked
before all other Potentates of the earth, as Vincentius records: Our Nobles
truly honorable, (...).
and the sons of Princes: Our Divines and Eccles. 10. 17. Ier. Lam. 4. 7.
renowned Nurseries of learning and Religion, shining like the two greater
lights in our British firmament. And all of us claiming our spiritual lots of
I^ritance Ezech. 47. 22.
in the midst of the Tribes of Israel.

OTHO. CHAPTER X.


But leaving Christ's proceedings Ann. Do. 70.
to the dispose of himself, let us return to the subject from whence we have
wandered, and continue the successions of Great Britains Monarchs, unto them
that have held it, whether by chance of war, or voice of Election: In which
sort (as is said) Galba got it, and but short time kept it: And from him Otho
took it, and a shorter time enioied it.

(2) Whose Original (says Tacitus) was from Otho his original. Tacit. Hist.
2. cap. 17.
Ferrentium, his Father a Consul, his mothers blood somewhat disparaged, but
yet not base; his youth run over with voluptuous wantonness and prodigal
expenses, more ready for disturbances, then depending upon preferment or
dignity of State; and having gone thorough all his wealth, retained only the
hearty affections of the Soldiers, which Galba had utterly alienated. Neither
did Otho himself bandy against Galba, but Vitellius in Germany was favored
against Vitellius much favored.
both; Two persons so vile and ambitious, as was much feared, would prove the
scourge of the Empire, and the ruin of Rome.

(3) Unto Vitellius sided the Britains, under the Conduct of Tribellius
Maximus, (remembered before) a man unfit for war, and unexperienced of
service, compounded altogether of covetousness, and for his niggardly
sparings, and unmerciful pollings, exceedingly hated of his Army: which was
further aggrauated by Roscius Calius, Lieutenant of the twentieth In chap. 7.
sect. 24.
Legion, his ancient Enemy, betwixt whom the sparks of envy shortly burst
forth into flames of reciprocal accusations. Trebellius being charged of
insufficiency for command, with the beggering of the Province, Roscius Calius
and Trebellius accuse each other.
and Legions; and he again accusing Calius of factious behauiours, and
dissoluing of discipline: through which dissensions a negligent regard was held
of the Soldiers, who carried themselves arrogantly, even against both; and as
men that had rather be doing ill, The Soldiers thereby disordered.
then doing nothing, grew daily into mutinies. In these stirs Maximus finding
himself unable to withstand Roscius, (the common affection swaying on his side)
with his friends and followers entered Germany in the quarrel of Vitellius,
and joined those British forces to maintain his cause, who now presuming upon
his own strength, and others his Confederates, ambitiously played the Prince,
grown to that height even of nothing.

(4) Otho his Concurrent (in this thing only commendable) sought by all means
to stay the effusion of more civil blood, and that already spent, so possessed
his thoughts, that his mind was still distracted and nightly affrighted with
the seeming appearance Otho affrighted in the night.
of Galbaes ghost: for which causes he sent conditions of peace to Vitellius,
offering him an equal part Sueton. in vita Otho. sect. 7. His offer to
Vitellius.
in the Empire, and to give him also his daughter in marriage. But Vitellius
disdaining any competition, refuses all Capitulations, and prepares himself
for the war. Otho thus constrained, sets forth his forces, and in three
several skirmishes had the victory, Has the victory in three skirmishes.
Lost the day in the fourth.
but in the fourth at Brixellum lost the day; yet not so much weakened or
unrecoverable, (his Army in number and courage surmounting the other) as
himself was unwilling to try the chance of war any more; for being
importuned by his Captains and Leaders, to reenforce the Battle, with
Importuned by his Soldiers to renew the battle, is unwilling.
many reasons, and probabilities of an assured victory, in a thankful and
short Oration, answered thus their Petitions.

(5) To hazard your virtues and valors for one Man's estate, I hold dangerous,
and needless it is, His Oration to his Soldiers.
that my life should be prized at so dear a rate; already fortune and I have
had sufficient experience each of others, and not the least in this my short
time of glory, wherein I have learned, it is harder to moderate affections in
the excess of felicity, then either industry or hazard for attaining the
same. These civil wars Vitellius began; which I for my part purpose not to
continue; and hereby let Posterity esteem of Otho, that others have kept the
Empire longer, but never any that left it more valiantly. Let this mind
therefore accompany me to the Grave, that you for your parts would have died
for my sake, and I to save your lives die voluntary and unvanquished. I blame
not the Gods, nor envy your Emperors rising glory: It is sufficient that my
house has touched the highest strain of Honor, and my self to be left in
records, The soueraign Monarch of the World.

(6) And thereupon solemnly taking his leave of He kills himself.
the whole Army, went to his Tent, and with his dagger wounded himself under
the left pappe, whereof immediately he died, in the year of his age thirty
seven, and days of his reign ninety five. He was of His age and reign.
stature but low, feeble in his feet, and unto so great a mind, his body
not any ways proportionable; his His lineaments and habit.
face without hair and woman-like, his attire nice and delicate, and his life
and death nothing at all consonant or agreeable.

VITELLIVS. CHAPTER XI.


WHen certain news of Othoes death was brought Ann. Do. 70.
Vitellius, he presently assumed the name of Caesar, and administered the
affairs of the Empire, with no less authority then the absolute Commander of
the World. And of such acceptance was the accident, that he dedicated the
dagger wherewith it was done, Vitellius glad of Othoes death.
unto Mars in his Temple at Colleyn, as the luckie instrument of his advanced
Estate.

(2) Naturally ambitious he was, and now the Sueton. in vit. Vit^ll. cap. 10.
Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 8.
same the more inhaunced by his strengths of the German Soldiers, and the
flatteries of the Senate, which ever bare sail with the fairest wind. His
entrance into Rome was above measure magnificall, having the Ot^o magnificall
above measure.
naked sword of Julius Caesar borne before him, with sound of Trumpets,
Ensigns, Standards, Banners, and Flags, accompanied with an Army worthy of a
better Prince then Vitellius was.

(3) His original is diversely reported: either framed His descent diversely
reported.
according to the affections of his flatterers, or blasted with the tongues of
deprauing backe-biters; and both in extremes, extremely disagreeing. For Q.
Eulogius, as Suetonius writes, deduceth his descent from Cap. 1.
Faunus King of Aborigines, and Lady Vitellia his wife, worshipped in many
places for a Goddess. But Cassius Seuerus affirms him to be sprung from no
better root then a Cobbler, and a common naughty-packe Tacit. bist. 3. c. 13.
the daughter of a Baker. Howsoever, true it is, that Lucius his father bare
thrice the Consulship in Rome, was Provost of Syria, and in such credit with
the Emperor Claudius, that in his absence and expedition into Britain, he had
the whole charge of the Empire committed unto him: himself in special favor
with Tiberius, and in use for his strumpets: with Caius, for Vitellius in favor
with diverse former Emperors.
his Chariot-running: with Claudius, for his dice-plaiing: and with Nero, for
his flattery: unto whose Ghost in public show he sacrificed, and disposed
the Imperial affairs at the discretion of base Stage-Plaiers.

(4) His unmeasurable gluttony was such, that the His excessive gluttony.
Sueton. in vit. Vitell. cap. 13.
whole imploiments of his Captains were to provide him Cates, and that in such
excess, that two thousand dishes of fish, and seven thousand of foul, were
served to his Table at one supper; and yet was he not ashamed to commend his
own Temperance, in a set Oration before the Senate and People, who well knew
him to be guiltless of that virtue: insomuch that Tacitus reports, in those
few months wherein he reigned, he had wasted nine hundred millions of
sesterces, which Tacit. hist. 2. c. 27. His huge expense of treasure. Joseph.
bell. Iud. lib. 5. c. 13.
amounts to seven millions, thirty one thousand, two hundred fifty pounds
sterling. And Josephus thinks if he had lived longer, the whole revenues of
the Empire had not been sufficient to maintain his Gluttony. A Prince
otherwise no way memorable, as being indeed without skill in profession of
Arms, without counsel in matters of the greatest importance, commonly drowned
in surfeit, and far unmeet to weld weighty affairs.

(2) These defects found ready vent to his Opposites, and gave liberty of
speech in the Assemblies of Vespasian his Abettors for the Empire.
their Estates: amongst whom Vespasian was held the only Morning-Starre, worthy
to ascend on the setting of this darkend Sun; unto whom Licinius Mutianus,
Governor of Syria, was no auerse, Marcus Clunius Rufus of Spain stood very
well affected, and Tiberius Alexander of Egypt for him the foremost. Also with
him sided the Kings Sohemus, Antiochus, and Agrippa, with the beautiful Queen
Berenice: unto whom Vespasian and his son Titus were well known, Governors
Tacit. hist. (...). c. ^3.
together in the Provinces of Syria and Judea.

(6) The first that did revolt were the Illyrian The first reuolters from
Vitellius.
Bands: to suppress which, Vitellius sent unto Vectius Bolanus Lieutenant of
Britain, for aid of that Province, having had good experience of their service
in his wars before. As when Hordeonius Flaccus brought Tacit. (...). (...).
c. ^0.
eight thousand Britains to his quarrel against Otho. As also when Trebellius
Maximus (formerly mentioned) joined them to the German forces. Which last
Tacit. i^ (...). Agric.
man had now again resumed his former place in Britannie, without either
Majesty or Authority; but rather ruled by way of entreaty, and at the
discretion of the Soldiers.

(7) Unto whom, this Vectius Bolanus succeeded for Deputy: a man of no great
parts in war, but more temperate, and not odious for any crime. His answer
unto Vitellius was, that the Country of Britain stood not so quiet, that he
might spare any number thence, the Soldiers and Confederates having their
hands full, to hold all upright. Neither (in truth) were they fast to his side,
but rather affected Vespasian, Hist. 3. cap. 9.
whose reputation in warlike affairs was first gotten amongst them in
Britain, in the reign of Claudius: though we find in Tacitus, that the
Vexillaries of three Hist. (...). c. ^9. Hist. 3. cap. (...).
British Legions followed Vitellius in his expedition against the Illyrian
Army, wherein the flower and strength of all the Britains are reported to
have been, and that their fourteenth Legion came to his aid, in whom
notwithstanding he had no good confidence: but hearing the daily reuolts of the
Provinces, and the approach of Vespasian, was minded to resign his dignity
unto him, had not the outcries of the people been against it.

(8) Finally, when he had reigned only eight months, Hi^ (...).
and five days, as Josephus accounts, he was slain in most ignominious
manner: for his hands His de^. Joseph. bell. I^. cap. ^3.
were bound behind his back, a halter fast about his neck, his clothes rent
and torn, a sword point set under his chinne, and head held backward by a bush
of hair, as condemned malefactors were used, to the end, that he might see and
be seen of all, to satisfy their malice and augment his miseries. He died
aged fifty seven; and as he is set in the Table His age.
after Malmesburie, Huntington, and others our English writers, the ninth
Calends of January: But yet it should seem by his edicts set out against
Astrologers, that commanded all of that profession to depart out of Rome and
Italy before the first day of October, that much about that time he should
die: for Suetonius records, that the said Astrologers set another against him
in the words as follow. WE GIVE WARNING Suee. in vita Vitel. Sect. 14.
BY THESE PRESENTS UNTO VITELLIVS GERMANICVS, THAT BY THE CALENDS OF THE SAID
OCTOBER HE BE NOT SEEN IN ANY PLACE WHERESOEVER.

(9) Of stature he was exceedingly tall, his face red, and a fat paunch, and
somewhat limping upon one leg, by a hurt formerly received.

FLAVIVS VESPASIAN. CHAPTER XII.
Vespasian.
Petilius.


SO acceptable was the fall of this Prince, and such Ann. Do. 72.
hopes revived at the entrance of his Successor, as that all men's minds were
raised to an expectation, that the glory of the Empire, so much Eclipsed
through the civil broiles of Galba, Otho, and this last Vitellius, should now
shine again in the beauty of her former liberty, by the desired government
of aged Vespasians worth and estimation.
Vespasian; whose integrity, valor, and service, had been sufficiently
approved by his many Expeditions in all the Provinces wherein he had to do.

(2) His descent was from the Flauian family, and His original. Sueton. in
vit. Vespas. sect. 1.
that but base and obscure: his Father called Titus Flauius, his Mother Polla
Vespasia, his Wife Domilia, and his Sons Titus, and Domitian, both Emperors
succeeding after him.

(3) In his young years, he served as a Military His employments in former
ti^es. Tacit. in vita Agric. (...). 189.
Tribune in the Country of Thracia, and as Questor in the Provinces of Crete,
and Cyrene: Under Claudius the Emperor, he went forth into Germany, as
Lieutenant of a Band, and from thence was sent into Britannie, to be Leader of
the second Legion, where the foundation of that greatness whereunto after he
attained, was first laid: for as Suetonius has written, therein with victory
he fought thirty set Battles, and was also Conqueror of the I Will of Wight:
whereby two mighty Nations were subdued to the Romans, and twenty Towns
won from the Britains: for which exploits he had Triumphall ornaments,
worthily assigned him by Claudius, whose own Triumph, (as Josephus says) was
gotten without his pains, but by the only prowess of Vespasian. After this,
he governed Josephus ^el. I^d. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Afric with singular integrity and much honor, and was lastly sent by Nero
for his Viceroy into Syria upon this occasion.

(4) There had been spread through all the Eastparts, Sueton. in vit. Vespasi.
Sect. 4.
an old Prophecy and settled opinion constantly believed, that it was appointed
by the Destinies, there should come out of Jury him that should be Lord of the
whole world: which how it served for the Jews to revolt, or for the Romans to
apply only unto Vespasian, An ancient prophecy in all the East parts.
the event shows, which cannot agree to any other, then to the person and
power of Christ Jesus, there borne, and throughout the whole world still
reigning: Yet upon the confidence of such an accomplishment, the Jews revolted
from the Romans obedience, and The cause of the Jews revolt.
slew their President Sabinus by name, putting to flight Gallus, Lieutenant
General of Syria, that came to his aid, and got from him the maine Standard,
or Ensign of the Eagle. This Nation was so populous and strong, that none was
thought fitter to stay their attempts, then was Vespasian, who with great
honor and approbation, reduced that Province unto their former subjection, and
there remained the short time of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius their Reigns; of
whose Joseph. de Ballo Iud.
proceedings there Josephus writes at large, unto whom I must refer the
unsatisfied Reader.

(5) All which times, the civil stirs amongst the Romans, gave the
Provinces occasion to attempt their former liberties; as did the Batauians,
Germans and French, with whom the Britains also took heart Taci^. Hist. 3.
cap. 9.
to revolt: But the first that sided with Vespasian, were two thousand expert
Soldiers, drawn out of the Mesian Legions, and sent to aid Otho against
Vitellius; who marching as far as Aquileia, they heard there of the certain
death of Otho, and thereupon taking the advantage of the offered opportunity,
with an uncontrolled liberty, committed many robberies and outrageous
villainies: In so much, that fearing condign punishment, they held it their
best policy, to combine some special man by their favors unto them, whereby
their facts might be either quite smoothered, or lightly reprehended; neither
in their opinions was any so gracious for desert or power, as was Vespasian,
and therefore with one assent they proclaimed him Emperor, and wrote his name
in their Vespasian chosen Emperor by the Mesian Soldiers.
Banners, thinking themselves as worthy to make an Emperor, as were the
Legions either of Spain, or Germany.

(6) Of the like mind were his own Legions in Syria and Jury, grown now so
famous by the prosecution of those wars, that they highly conceited his
valor, and their own sufficiency to be inferior to none: And therefore all
on the sudden at Caesarca, both Captain and Soldier salute him Emperor;
which By his own. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 10.
title when he resolutely gainsaid and refused, with drawn swords they
threatened his death. Thus then being brought into danger every way, he sent his
letters unto Tiberius Alexander, Lieutenant of Egypt, who likewise at
Alexandria, presently proclaimed him Emperor.

(7) At this time Vectius Bolanus sent by Vitellius, Tacit. in vit. Agric. fol.
187.
was Lieutenant of Britain, there ruling in a gentler and milder manner then
was fit for so fierce a Nation: for the Soldiers having gotten head, by the
remiss Government of Trebellius Maximus, continued the same looseness in
discipline still: and Bolanus in stead of awe and Obedience, retained only
their affections and good wills. But most especially the short Reigns of these
last Emperors (whose beginnings were altogether employed to satisfy their
licentious pleasures, and latter times spent for the defense of their Lives
from violent Deaths) gave way to many imperfections of the Governors, and
misdemeanors of the common Soldiers.

(8) But when Vespasian had assumed the Empire, Petilius Cerealis Deputy in
Britain.
great Captains and good Soldiers were sent into the Provinces, and into
Britain, Petilius Cerealis, that had formerly there made proof of his service
under Nero, in the wars against Boduo, and afterward in other parts, as
against the Gauls and Batauians, with prosperous victories. The fame of this
man struck Yorkshire, Lancashire, Westmerland, and the Bishop. ricke of
Durha^.
great terror into the hearts of the wavering Britains, and amongst them of
the * Brigantes, the most populous State of the whole Province: against whom at
his first approach he warred, and in many battles, and some of them bloody, the
greatest part of these people were wasted, and their Country came into the
Romish subjection.

(9) Whereby the glory of Cerealis might well have dimmed the fame of his
Successor, had not Julius Frontinus a great Soldier also, sustained the
charge Julius Frontinus subdueth the Britains.
with reputation and credit, in subduing the strong and Warlike nation the
South Wales.
Silures: where he had, beside the force of the enemy to struggle with, the
straits, and difficult places of rocks and mountains, for access.

(10) After whose government (no further Acts being mentioned) Julius Agricola,
who in Rome had Julius Agricola Lieutenant in Britain.
been Questor, Tribune, and Praetor, and Lieutenant in Aquitania, was sent
General into Britain by Vespasian the Emperor, the year before his death.
This man formerly had there served under the command of Petilius Cerealis,
whereby he had gained experience both of the People and Province; and at his
first approach gathered the Ensigns of the Legions, and other aids of the
Auxiliaries, (who for that year attended an end of their travels, because the
Summer was almost spent) lest by protracting time, the violence of the
Ordouices should further burst forth, who a little before his entrance, had
utterly almost cut off a wing which lay on their Borders, the rest of the
Country, as men desirous of War, allowing their example.

Against these Agricola addressed, who kept themselves in places of advantage,
and durst not descend into indifferent ground. He therefore being himself
foremost, lead up his Army to their encounter, and seconded with the courage of
his trained Soldiers, put them all to sword and flight, whereby the He
overcomes the Ordouices.
whole Nation was almost quite destroyed.

(11) And now that his fame began to ascend, he knew well that with instance it
must be followed, and as the first affairs had issue, the rest would succeed;
he therefore deliberated to conquer the Island Mona, from the possession whereof
Paulinus Suetonius was revoked, by the general Rebellion under Boduo. But in a
purpose not purposed before, and ships wanting, the policy of the Captain
devised a passage; for he commanded the most choice of the Aids, to whom the
shallowes were well known (and without whom the Romans did almost attempt
nothing) to put over at once, and suddenly to invade them. These Britains,
after the use of their Country manner, were most skillful swimmers, and in
swimming armed, able to govern themselves and horses. The Monaans thinking
themselves secure, for that no Ships were seen in their River, now thus
suddenly surprised, as men amazed, firmly thought that nothing could be
invincible to them, who came with such resolutions to War, and therefore they
humbly desired Peace, and yielded the Island unto Agricolaes devotion. He
wins the Island o^ Mon^.


(12) Who now in these prosperous proceedings of his fortunes, sought not with
any glorious relations or letters of aduertisements, to improoue and augment
the greatness of his honor; but rather in seeking to suppress his fame, made
it shine more bright; and addressing himself for civil government, reformed
many abuses in his House, his Camp, and in the whole Province, and those
especially that most touched the poorer sort, as by moderating the Agricola
good to the poor.
increase of Tribute and Corn, wherewith the Britains were daily burdened: by
the suppressing of which enormities (and the like) an honorable opinion of him
was every where entertained, and a general inclination unto Peace, which
partly by the negligence, partly by the avarice of former Governors, had been
no less feared then War it self.

(13) And whereas the Britains hitherto still harried with Oppressions and
Wars, had little leisure or will to apply themselves to things which
accompany Peace, and are the ornaments of Civil and settled Societies, and
therefore were prone upon every occasion to revolt and stir: to induce them
by pleasures to quietness and rest, he exhorted them in private, and helped
them in public, to build Temples, Houses, and Places of Assemblies, and common
resort; and likewise provided that the sons of their Nobles should be
instructed His good course in winning the people from wildness.
in the liberal Arts and Sciences, commending the industry, and preferring
the wits of the Britains before the Students of France, as being now grown
curious to attain the Eloquence of the Roman The Britains ciuili^ed.
Gentry, (yea even the Gown, the habit of peace and peaceable Arts) and to
delight in gorgeous Buildings, Banquets, and Baths.

(14) And thus far had Agricola proceeded before the death of Vespasian,
whose managing of the Imperial dignity was every way answerable to so high a
place, and whose death was as much lamented, as his Virtues did surmount his
Predecessors. But as touching Agricola cures the blind and the lame, and
that miraculously.
his miraculous cures of the Blind and the Lame, as they serve not either to
be urged or inserted in this our present History; so yet may they convince
the indurate Atheist, whose conscience is seared with the sin of incredulity
of the Miracles wrought by our blessed Savior Jesus Christ. For if the wisest
Historians Suet. in vit. Vespas. sect. 7.
of those times have believed themselves, and left Records upon their credit to
following posterities, that by his touch only he cured a Lame-man, and with
his Tacit. hist. 4. c. 35.
spittle opened the eyes of the Blind, being a mortalland sinful man; shall
it then be doubted, that he Agricol^es miracles convince Atheists that d^ny
our S^uiours miracles.
which knew no sin, neither received the gift by measure, either in power
could not, or in act did not work such Miracles as were the witnesses of his
Godhead, and for such are recorded to confirm our faith? But to our purpose.

(15) When Vespasian had lived threescore and nine years, seven months, and
seven days, and had Vespas^ dies peaceably. Eus^b. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. ca.
12. and 13.
reigned ten years, as Eusebius says, he died peaceably in his Bed; which no
Emperor since Augustus ever did, having been a great Scourge and Instrument
of God against the miserable Jews; whose kingly race from David's line he
sought by all means to extirpate, that A great scourge of God against the
Jews.
so all their hopes and expectations might for ever be cut off.

(16) He was of a middle stature, well set, and strongly compact: his
countenance not altogether His endow^nts of body. (...) in ^it. V^^ ^t. 23. H^
ver^s.
amiable, neither any ways deformed: a great favorer of Learning, very
Liberal, a Just, Wise, and Most Valiant Prince.

TITUS FLAVIVS VESPASIAN. CHAPTER XIII.
Titus Emp.
Agricola Lieut.


PResently upon the death of this Emperor, Titus Ann. Do. 81.
his eldest son, surnamed Flauius Vespasian, without al contradiction was
received and obeyed for his Titus made Emperor without all contradiction.
rightful successor: as well for that his Father in his lifetime had made him
his Partner in the Empire, and at his death by Testament declared him his
Heir; as also for the general opinion conceived of him, for his inbred
goodness and noble conditions; called and esteemed the lovely darling and
delight of mankind. Indeed Called the delight of mankind.
of a most comely presence he was, and fitted thereunto with all heroical
virtues, a great Soldier, learned in the Arts, a good Orator, a skillful
Musician, Sueton in vit. Tit. Sect. 1. Fitted with all heroical Virtues. His
employment in former times.
and could by artificial characters write both very fast and very fair.

(2) His youth he spent in Military qualities, and served in Germany and
Britain with exceeding commendations, and in Jury warred with the like
glory, which is nothing impaired by the learned style of his Recorder
Josephus, unto whom again for these affairs I must refer the curious Reader.

(3) Jerusalem, with the slaughter of eleven thousand Joseph bell. Iud. lib. 6.
and 7. He won Jerusalem in the lifetime of his father.
Jews, even on the birth day of his daughter, with such honor he won, that
thereupon presently he was saluted Emperor, even in the life time of Vespasian
his Father: and from that day carried himself as his Associate in the Empire;
for with him he Triumphed, and with him he jointly administered the Censorship,
his Colleague he was in the Tribunes authority; and his Companion also in
seven Consulships: In all which, though the Edicts went forth in his fathers
name, yet were they penned by himself. Of this his victory over the Jews,
he left the remembrance to posterity by stamping upon the reuerse of his
coins IVD. CAP. with pictures expressing his Triumph and the Jews overthrow,
which in the front of this Chapter we have also placed.

(4) Somewhat he was blemished with the love of His faults.
Berenice, the beautiful Queen of Iewrie, and much more with the murder of
Aulus Cinna, only through jealousy conceived of her: and whether that was the
sin whereof at his death he repented, is uncertain, when lifting up his eyes
to Heaven, he complained His repentance at his death.
why his Life should be taken from him, that excepting one offense deserved not
to die. As himself in glory wielded the Imperial Scepter, so did his
Substitutes govern the Provinces; at which time in Britain, Agricola was
President, and therein had spent almost two years under the reign of
Vespasian, in such manner as we have declared.

(5) In his third year, he discovered new Countries, and parts of this Island,
yet untouched, or at leastwise not thoroughly subdued, as altogether unsatiate
Tacit. in vit. Agric. Agricola enlarges the Empire.
of that which was gotten, and sought to draw the confines of the Empire with a
larger compass: therefore marching Northward to the Frith of * Taus, wasted
TVVEEDE, as is thought.
all as he went, and without any resistance fortified the places with Castles
and Bulwarks, which he stored with sufficient provision; where every
Garrison wintring, guarded it self, and with the Summers service, ever repaired
the Winters events, whereby evermore the Enemy went to the worse, and his
designs prospered as himself wished.

(6) The fourth Summer was spent in perusing and ordering that which he had
overrun. And if the glory of the Roman name could have permitted, or so
been satisfied, it needed not to have sought other limits of Britain: for The
frith of Dunbret^on.
Glota and Edenb^rough frith.
Bodotria, two arms of two opposite Seas, shooting far into the Land, and
only divided asunder by a narrow partition of ground, the same was both guarded
and fortified with Castles and Garrisons: so that the Romans were absolute
Lords of all the South Side, and had cast the Enemy as it were into another
Island.

(7) In this state stood this Province of Britain at the death of Titus, whose
short reign has left no long matters of discourse, and his Acts greater under
other Emperors, then when he was Emperor himself; yet that little time
wherein he governed, was with Justice, Liberality and Love of all. A great
Enemy he was to Promoters, Pettifoggers, and Extortours of penal laws, Titus
governed with love of all.
which Cancker-wormes of Commonwealths, and Caterpillars to Courts of Justice,
he caused to be whipped and banished out of Rome. Loving and familiar he was
to all his Subjects, and so desirous to give them satisfaction, that his usual
saying was, No man ought to go sad from the speech of a Prince. Merciful he
was to the poor, and so ready to do them good, that one day being spent by
him without any notable action, in sorrow he said: I have quite lost a day. He
died the His propensiti^ to do good. Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 15. His age and reign.
thirteenth of September, the year from Christ's Nativity eighty three, when
he had reigned two years and two months, and in the two and fortieth year of
his age, being poisoned by Domitian his Brother ^uagrius l. 3. c. 41.
and Successor.

FLAVIVS DOMITIAN. CHAPTER XIV.
Domitian Emp.
Agricol^ Licut.


DOmitian attaining the Empire Ann. Do. 83.
by the death of Titus, (wrought by himself) as far differed from him in
virtuous conditions, as he was linked near him in consanguinitie of blood: His
youth not spent in Sueton. in vit. Domit. sect. 1.
Arms, with his Father and Brother, but inertiously consumed in
lasciviousness and penury.

(2) At Rome he was in the Vitellian troubles, where, with Sabinus his Uncle,
he had been murdered, His escaping killing.
had not the Sexton of the Capitol hid him in his house, and in the habit of a
Minister unknown, thence escaped: which place afterward, when he Tacit.
hist. 3. c. 13. He dedicateth a Temple to Jupiter.
came to be Emperor, he gorgeously built for a Temple to Jupiter his supposed
Preserver, and consecrated himself in the lap of that heathenish Idol. He
very speedily apprehended the hope of an Empire, for no sooner was his Father
made Emperor, but that he assumed the name of Caesar, and in Rome carried
himself with such prodigality, and so liberally made promises of the
Imperial Offices, that his father hearing thereof, said, he marvelled why his
son sent not one to succeed him in his place. But to dissemble and cloak his
idle conceits, he gave himself to the study of Poesy, (although with little
affection, as the end proved) for which notwithstanding both Pliny and Martial
Pliny in his Proeme of natural history. Martial in his Epigram. To. Emp.
fol. 134. Sueton. in vit. Domit. sect. 4.
do highly commend him, as it is the manner of men to admire the very shadow
of a good quality in Princes and great ones: and so does Iuuenal and Suetonius
praise his brave mind, for his shows in the Amphitheater, wherein not only
men, but women also were brought, and forced to fight for their lives with
wild beasts: a cruel spectacle nevertheless, and unbeseeming to humanity.

(3) His first entrance into state and dignity was neither greatly applauded
nor gainsaid, he seeming to carry an equal mixture, and his virtues to hold
level with his vice. But Ambition now supported with Sovereignty, did quickly
set the scale only for the worse side. The affairs of the Empire he
altogether neglected; and impatient of labor, or affection to Arms, daily
retired into a private chamber or Gallery, wherein he usually applied himself
only to His vain misspending the time.
catch Flies, and with the point of a bodkin to prick them through: whereupon
one being asked what company was with the Emperor, replied, Not so much as a
fly. In which princely exercise let us a while leave him, and return to his
better employed Lieutenant Agricola.

(4) Who now in the fifth year of his government Tacit. in vit. Agric.
took the seas, and with many prosperous conflicts subdued some adjacent
places and people, before that time unknown, and furnished with forces those
parts of Britain, which lay coasted against Ireland: to which Country also
he had a mind, and Agricola his opinion of Ireland.
would often say, that if the Romans were therein planted, the Liberty of the
Britains would soon be banished quite out of sight, and out of hope.

(5) Now in the sixth year of his Prefecture, because a general rising of all the farther Nations beyond Bodotria was feared, and passages were all beset
with power of the Enemies, he manned a Fleet to search the creekes and
harboroughs of the ample Region beyond it, and with his Army marched further
He searches the creekes and harboroughs.
North. The Britains heereat, especially at sight of their ships, much amazed
and troubled, knowing now that the secrets of their Seas were all discovered,
and no refuge left if they were overcome, armed themselves with great
preparation; and the Caledonians (a most puissant and strong Nation in those
parts) Caledonians most puissant.
the foremost; who, as challengers, braued the Romans so boldly, and in such
manner, that some counseled the General to retire his forces on this side
Bodotria, and rather of his own accord to depart, then to be repelled with
shame.

(6) Agricola, whose courage could not be clouded with any dastardly fear,
held on his intents; and hearing by prisoners taken, the manner of his Enemies
proceedings, orders his host accordingly, dividing his army into three
battles, and so lay entrenched; the weakest whereof, containing the Ninth
Legion, the Britains by Night assailed, and having slain the Watch, brake
into their Camp with a furious noise: to whose rescue, Agricola sent his Light
horsemen, and a Band of foot, whose Ensigns and Armor glittering in the
appearance of day, so rebated the edge and further purposes of the Britains,
that they gave back to the gates of the Trench, where, in the straits the
conflict was sharp and cruel, till in the end they were forced to quit the
field. Upon this battle so manfully fought, and so famously won, the Romans
presuming that to their prowess all things were now easy and open, cried to
lead into Caledonia, and to find out the limits of Britain, with a course of
Agricola searches out the limits of Britain.
continued Conquests: and those which erewhile were so wary and wise, waxt
forward and bold after the event, and grew to speak bigly* such being the hard
condition of Wars, that if ought fall out well, all challenge a part,
misfortunes are only imputed to one. Contrariwise, the Britains presupposing
that not valor, but skill in the General by using the occasion, had carried
it away, abated no whit their wonted courage, but armed their youth,
transported their Children and Wives into places of safety, and sought by
Assemblies and Religious rites to establish an Association of the Cities
together. And so for that year both parties did depart, incensed to further
preparations.

(7) In the beginning of the next, Agricola sending his Navy before, which by
unexpected spoiling in several places, should induce a greater and more
uncertain terror, followed himself with his Army by Land: having drawn to
his party some of the valiantest Britains, whom by long experience in Peace,
he had found most faithful for his Wars: and so arrived at the Mount
Grantzbaine.
Grampius, where the Britains had lodged themselves before, and as men nothing
dejected by the unfortunate chance of the former battle, had now prepared
themselves attending only for Revenge or Servitude. And being taught, that
common danger must be repelled with mutual Concord, by Leagues and Embassages
they assembled the The Britains gather a great power.
power of all their Cities together, above thirty thousand armed men, as by
view was taken, besides an endless number of youth which daily flocked unto
them, and many lusty Old men renowned in the former wars, and bearing the
Badges due to their honor; at what time, Galgacus, for virtue and birth, of
all the Leaders the Principal man, seeing the multitude Galgacus their
General.
hotly demand the Battle, is said to have used this, or the like speech.

(8) When I behold this present Assembly, and consider the cause of this
instant necessity, I have His Oration to the Britains. Tacit. in vit. Agric.
reason to presume, that this day, and this our agreement in consent, will give
a happy beginning to our freedom, and an end of troubles unto our Island. The
cause of a flourishing estate. The necessity of resolution.
For, we which inhabit these furthest Promontories, know no Land beyond us
whereunto we may fly, nor no Seas left us now for safety, the Roman Navy
thus (as you see) surueying our Coasts: So that combat and arms, which men of
valor desire for honor, the very dastard of force must now use for his
security. We that are the A dishonor for the chief of a Nation to be
dastards.
flower of the British Nobility, and are seated here in the uttermost part of
the I Will, saw never yet the borders of those Countries which served in slavery,
our eyes being unpolluted and free from all contagion of Tyranny. Our former
Battles fought with the Romans had their events, yet so, that refuge Former
battles not unfortunate.
and hope rested still in our hands; we have hitherto lived in liberty,
whereas none beside us are free; us hitherto this Corner and secret recesse
has defended, now the Uttermost point of our Land is laid open: and things the
less they have been within knowledge, the greater the glory is to atchieue
them. But what Nation is there now beyond us? what else see we but Water and
Rocks, and the Romans within, Landlords of all, nay rather Robbers of all,
both in Land and Sea? whose Subjection will not avail.
intolerable pride by humble subjection in vain shall we seek to avoid. If
the Country be rich, they seek to win wealth; if poor, to gain glory:
but neither East nor west, can satisfy their greedy affection, much less
this cold North can set an end to their desires. To kill, to spoil, and take
away The Romans government and peace.
by force, that falsely they term Empire and Government: and when all is made
a waste wilderness, that they call Peace. Most dear unto man are his Children
and blood; but those are pressed for their wars, and serve as their slaves,
we know not where; our Goods are their tributes, our Corn their provision; our
Wives, Sisters and Daughters, in War violently forced, in Peace under title
of friends and guests, shamefully abused, and our own Bodies worn and consumed
in pauing of Bogs and other servile drudgeries, with thousands of stripes, and
many indignities more. Slaves which are borne to bondage are sold but once, and
after are fed at their Owners expenses; but Britanie daily buyeth, daily
feeds, and is at charges with her own Bondage. We are the last to be
conquered, The last to be conquered ought most to resist.
and therefore is our destruction most sought, as being the most vile in
account: No Fields we have to manure, no Mines to be dug, no Ports to trade
in, and to what purpose then should they reserve us alive? Besides, the Manhood
and fierce courage of the subject, pleases not much the jealous Manhood and
fitness of place more suspected of a jealous Sovereign.
Sovereign: and this Corner being so secret, and out of the way, the more
security it yields us, in them it works the greater suspicion. Then, seeing
all hope of savor is past, let us take courage to defend and maintain our
own safety as well as our honor. The Icenians led by a Woman, fired the
Colonie, forced the Castles; and if that luckie beginning had not been ended
in a careless security, the Southern Britains might with ease have shaken
Women's valor ought to shame men's coward. (...).
off the yoke. We as yet never touched, never subdued and borne to be free,
not slaves to the Romans; we (I say) now are to make proof of our This time
the fittest to prove our valor.
valor, and to show in this encounter, what men Caledonia has reserved for
her self. And do you think, that the Romans are as valiant in War as they
are wanton in Peace? I assure you, nothing The Romans wanton in peace.
less: for not by their Virtues, but by our Iarrings, they are grown into
fame: and of the enemies faults they make use to the glory of their own Army,
composed (we know) most of diverse Nations; and therefore as in prosperity they
hold not alalwaies Their Army composed of diverse nations.
together, so doubtless, if fortune turn aside, their services will appear:
unless you suppose the Gauls and Germans, and (to our shame be it spoken)
many of our own Nation, (which now lend their lives to establish a foreign
Usurper) be lead with hearts affection; whereas contrariwise it is apparent,
that Terror and Distrust, (weak workers to conserve love) are the only
cause; which once removed, then those that have made an end to fear, will
soon begin to hate. All things that may incite unto victory are for us: the
Romans have no Wives to harten them on, if they faint; no Parents to vpbraid
them, if they fly; most of them They are destitute of many encouragements.
have no Country at all, or if they have, it is by intrusion taken from
others: A few fearful persons stand here before us, trembling and gazing at
the strangeness of the heaven it self, at the Sea, and at the Woods, whom the
Gods have delivered, mewed up and fettered into our hands. Let not their brave
shows of glistering Gold or Silver, any way dismay you, which of themselves
neither offend nor defend. And be you well assured, amongst our enemies we
shall find many on our side; The Britains will agnize their own Cause; The
Gauls will remember their wonted liberty and former estate; And the rest of
the Germans will leave and forsake them, as of late the Vsipians did. What
then shall we fear? The Castles are empty; the Colonies peopled with aged and
impotent persons; the free Cities discontent, and in factions, whilst those
Many Cities in factions.
which are under, obey with ill will, and they which do govern, rule against
right. Here you see before us is the General and the Army, on each side
Tributes, Seruitudes and other miseries inseparable; which whether we shall
continue for ever, or cast off subjection as freeborn Britains, it lies
this day in this Field and your approved manhoods Wherefore I beseech you in
joining Battle, bear in your Minds your worthy Ancestors, your Selves, and
following Posterities, which if you fail, shall for ever live in subjection
and slavery.

(9) This speech was so vehemently delivered, and so cheerfully of them all
received, that with songs and confused acclamations (after their accustomed
fashion) they clustered together on heaps, and some of the boldest advanced
forward, whilst Agricola likewise was encouraging his men, who straightwaies
ran to their weapons, and rushed on furiously toward the Enemy.

(10) The Britains were marshelled in the higher ground, fitly both to the
show, and to terrify: the first Battalion standing on the plain, the rest on
the ascent of the hill, knit and rising as it were one over another; the middle
of the field was filled with clattering and running of Chariots and horsemen.
Agricocola seeing their number to exceed his, drew his battle The number of
Britains exceed the Romans.
in length, and leaving his horse, advanced himself before the Ensigns on
foot.

(11) In the first assault before the joining, both sides encountered with
discharge of their darts, wherein The first encounter.
the Britains, employing both art and valor, with their great swords and
little Targets, avoided the volue of the Romans, showring down withal great
store of theirs upon them, wherewith they were both galled and sore wounded.
Agricola seeing his men thus stoutly resisted, took another course: for,
spying the advantage, he commanded three Hollanders.
Batauian Coherts, and two of the Liege in the Low Countries.
Tungrians, to press forward, and bring the matter to handy strokes and dint
of sword, a thing which (in respect of their long service) they were very
expert in; but contrariwise to the Britains very prejudicial, by reason of
their little Bucklers, and huge swords, being blunt pointed, and no ways fit
for the close in fight. This command aduantaged the Romans much; for these with
the pikes of their Bucklers, when they came to deal blows; so mangled the
faces of the Britains, that they were not able to stand before them; and the
rest, gathering courage upon emulation of these, ascended the hill, bearing
down all that was in their way, so that many half dead, and some wholly
untouched, were ouer-passed, and left for haste of winning the field. In the
mean while the Chariots mingled themselves with the battle The Britains
Chariots disorder the horsemen.
of footmen, and the troops of horsemen began for to fly: who albeit they had
lately terrified others, were now distressed themselves, by the unevenness of
the ground, and thick ranks of the enemy, and were forced to fight standing
still, and by the maine weight of horses to bear down one another. The
wandering Wagons also, and masterlesse horses, as chance or fear did guide
them, ouer-bare many times their friends, and thwarted their way that met them.

(12) The other Britains that kept the hill, and had leisure to behold the
manner of fight, began to come down by little and little, and sought to
compass the back of the enemy; which intent Agricola soon prevented, by
sending four wings of Horsemen, retained purposely about him for sudden
dispatches and chances of war. These so fiercely assailed them, The fight
fierce on both sides.
that a most sharp and bloody battle ensued, wherein the Britains on each
side were beaten down and slain, notwithstanding many of them showed both
valor and revenge even to the end: the rest disbanded, turned their backs,
and fled toward the desert; whose pursuit was followed until Night, and
fullness The Britains discomfited.
of blood made an end of the chase.

(13) Of the Romans side were slain (if we must credit their own friends)
only three hundred and forty persons, and of them, one of extraordinary note
The Romans loss.
and account, Aulus Articus perchance.
Articus, Captain of a Cohort, who upon a youthful heat, and fierceness of
his horse, was carried amidst his enemies. Of the Britains fell ten thousand,
and their designs so defeated and The Britains that died.
broken, that as desperate men, they forsake their houses, and in despite set
fire on them themselves: the hurt persons they carry and draw with them, and
call them that are unhurt, hoping to be relieved by them. One while they choose
out holes to lurk in, for their lives safety; eftsoons in great haste
forsake them, as doubting therein their own security. Dispersed asunder, they
lament, and attend death: assembled together, expostulate of their means and
life: one while conceiving a glimmering of some small hope, another while
dejected with utter despair: Sometimes at the sight of their dearest beloved,
moved to pity; but much oftener stirred to rage, for revenge; and many of
them, even by way of compassion; slew their dearest Wives and Children, to rid
them from their future miseries.

(14) Agricola having made every where a desolation and silence, withdrew his
Army toward the Anguse in Scotland.
Horrestians, where taking hostages for their fidelity, sent the Admiral of
his Navy to sail about the North Coasts of Britain, who with strength and
store took Agricola sends to discover the North coasts.
the Seas, their terror gone already before, himself with easy and gentle
iournies disposed his foot and horsemen in their Wintring places, and planted
Garrisons upon the Borders between Glota and Bodotria. And his Navy with
prosperous wind and success arrived at the Port (...).
Trutulensis.

(15) Thus, after many conflicts, about the space of one hundred thirty six
years from Julius Caesar's Histor. m^gn. Brit. Lib. 2. cap. 17.
first entrance, the utmost limits of Britannie, and the Isles of the Orcades
lying on the North side of it, were by the valor and industry of Julius
Agricola first discovered, Britanny w^olly discovered by Agricola.
and made known unto the Romans: and the South part of the I Will, in the fourth
year of the reign of Domitian, (being the year of our Savior eighty Ann.
Dom. 86.
six) reduced into a full Province, the government whereof was ever annexed and
appropriate to the Dio lib. 55.
Roman Emperors themselves, and not at the disposition of the Senate, as other
Provinces were.

(16) This state of affairs in Britannie, Agricola Agricola writes to
Domitian.
signified by letter, without any amplifying terms to Domitian the Emperor,
who (after his manner) with a cheerful countenance and grieved heart,
received the News; being inwardly pricked with fear and disdain, that his
late counterfeit Triumph of Germany (wherein certain slaves bought for money,
were attired, and their hair dressed as Captives of that Country) was had in
derision, and justly skorned abroad; whereas now a true and imperial victory
of so many thousand enemies subdued and slain, was current and famous in every
man's mouth: as being indeed a thing dangerous, that a private man's name should
be exalted above his Prince. In vain then had he suppressed the study of
Oratorie, and other worthy politic Arts, thereby to keep down other men's
reputation, if he should in Military glory be disseised by another. And to be a
good Commander of an Army, was to be above private estate, that being a Virtue
peculiar for a Prince, and therefore not lightly to be passed over. With these
and the like incentiues his mind was tormented; yet thought he it best to
dissemble his malice; until the heat of his glory, and love of his soldiers
were somewhat abated. And forthwith he commanded for Agricola, Triumphall
Agricola receives Triumphall ornaments.
ornaments, statue, honors, and what else usually conferred in lieu of
Triumph; he yet remaining in charge, from whence, with the like policy also,
he was shortly displaced. For Syria, by the death of Atilius Rufus, lay
destitute of a Lieutenant; and that place reserved for Men of great quality,
Domitian gave forth was purposed for Agricola, and sent him both his Patent
and Successor into Britain; who thereupon delivered up the Province in a
peaceable estate unto Salustius Lucullus, and returned to Rome.

(17) Where the life of Domitian was now grown unmeasurable vain. The surname
Germanicus he assumed to himself, for some small service therein Suetoni^ in
vita Domitiani. Domitian his vice^.
done. The Months September and October he changed into the names of
Germanicus and Domitianus, because that in the one he entered his Empire, and
in the other was borne. He caused his Statue to be made in gold, and commanded,
himself to be called GOD. His cruelty every way matchable to his pride. The
Senators and Nobles upon small surmises he murdered: many new tortures he
invented: Confiscations and Banishments, were favors, not punishments. Amongst
all which, the Christians bare a part, whose Second Persecution this Tyrant
raised and began. The great Evangelist John he banished into the I Will of
Patmos, He banished S. I^su. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 15. Apocal. 1. 9.
Daniel 10.
where he received his Revelations from Jesus Christ, appearing unto him in no
less Majesty then Daniel before time had seen him in his Visions, and both
(after a sort) in one and the same manner: their Visions alike, and almost to
the like end: For as Daniel saw a Lion, Bear, Leopard, and Monster with Ten
horns, persecute the Jews Gods people, and to fall before the Stone cut
without hands, which brake into powder the Image of their Tyrannical
Government, to give place to the peaceable Birth and Kingdom of Christ; so
John saw one Beast compacted of these four, mouthed Apocal. 13. 2.
like a Lion, footed like a Bear, spotted as the Leopard, and horned for
number and power with the Monster, retaining their Tyranny in raising
Persecutions in the Church of Christ, and clouding with Idolatry the
brightness of his Word: which shall be cast into the Lake of fire and
brimstone, when Christ shall bind up Satan, and by his appearance abolish the
2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
Man of Sin.

(18) Among many others slain by Domitian, Salustius Lucullus whom he had made
Lieutenant General Salustius Lucullus put to death. Sueton. in vit. Domit.
sect. 10. His offense.
of Britanie was one, and the only cause is reported to be, that he had
devised and made certain Spears or Lances for service, which he caused to
be called Lucullians after his own name; which was a matter held very
suspicious by Domitian, who thought every memorable act done by another, did
pluck a feather from his plume. And in these courses continued so long, that
lastly he grew odious to all, even to his nearest friends and followers which
himself had raised, who, together with his Wife, conspired his death.

(19) The chiefest in the Action was Stephen, a Procurator and Steward to
Domicilla his Empress, who faining himself lame of the left arm, in
delivering him a scroll containing the names of the conspirators, The actors of
his death, and the^ treache^e
stroke him into the belly with his sword, and the rest coming in, with seven
wounds made an end of his life; whose death was so acceptable to the Senate,
that they disgracefully abused his carcass, cast The Senate glad.
down his scutcheons and Images, and forbad all manner remembrance of him;
albeit some of the Soldiers The Soldiers enraged.
as much stormed, seeking to revenge his death, and canonized him for a God.

(20) Of stature he was tall, his complexion fair, His personage.
his countenance modest, his head very bald, his eyes red, full, great and
dim, of a comely form, only his belly bearing out, his legs small, and
his foot somewhat short. He died the eighteenth day of September, His death,
age and reign. Eusebius. Eccles. li. 3. cap. ^8.
aged forty five, when he had reigned fifteen years, the year of our Lords
incarnation ninety eight, with whom both Tacitus and Suetonius end their
History.



The Resisters of the Romans proceedings in this our Island of Britain, in the
days of this Emperor Domitian, for these Southern parts, was Aruiragus, as
from Iuuenal we have said; and in the Northern Caledonia, was Galgacus their
Captain; whose Coins, as Remains and Monuments of their neuerdying fame, we
have here again inserted.



NERVA. CHAPTER XV.
Nerua Emp.


HItherto have we pursued Ann. Do. 98.
the successions in the British monarchy, together with the Invasions,
attempts, and success of affairs, for the Conquest of this Island, under the
first twelve Emperors of Rome: And that from such writers, who though they
were the most favorable Registers of things done by the Romans, yet had they
best means to know, and publish their Histories with warrantize of truth. But
after the death of Domitian died many Records, and Domitian being dead, soon
after many Records were lost.
the Provinces proceedings (especially those that most concern Britain) left
uncertain; and therefore are neither with the like largeness prosecuted, nor
with the like authority avouched. And were it not that these Roman Emperors
succeeding, did only continue the succession of our British Monarchs, many of
them might be quite omitted, as neither themselves, nor deputies, allies, or
enemies once spoken of concerning our affairs, and the Government of this
Province, during those times so maimed and defective (in respect of any
warrantable relations) that hardly a method can be observed to the fitting of
a continual History. Yet as we find it, let us have liberty Hist. magn.
(...). lib. 3. cap. 1.
to deliver it, and rather to expose Truth in the mean attire that Time has
left her, then by disguising her Plutarch in the life of Pericles.
in richer roabes to abuse the World, and make her seem naught else but a
counterfeit, as Plutarch in the life of Pericles has complained.

(2) Domitian therefore thus made away, Cocceius Cocceius Nerua aged and
prudent.
Nerua, a prudent, honorable, and aged person was elected Emperor by the
Senate, assisted by Petronius Secundus, Captain of the Praetorian Army, and
Parthenius chief Chamberlain, and one of the Murderers of Domitian. His
birth was noble, and of Italy in the City Narnia, and of the Province Vmbria:
ruling so well as he may be esteemed too good a Prince, long to continue in so
bad an age.

(3) What Lieutenants under him were in Britain Gau^r. Monmouthensis.
o^ under his Successor Traian, I find not in Record: but our English Writers
from the Archdeacon of Monmouth, bring a succession of British Kings, and
amongst them Marius, who conquered Rodorick, King Flores Historiar. W. l. of
Malm. ascribes this memorial to be erected for Marius a Consul of Rome.
Polycbr. lib. 4. c. 12
of the Picts accompanied with the Scots, whose Trophie erected near unto
Carleill, remained a long time after, bearing the inscription of his victory:
and after him his son Coilus brought up in Rome all the time of his youth,
retained their favors, and paid them tribute without constraint. Albeit by
Iuuenal, it seems that Aruiragus the father of Marius, a great resister
Aruiragus the father of Marius. Chap. 6. sect. 12.
of the Romans, lived in the reign of Domitian, as has been touched,
unless you will say, that Meurigus and Aruiragus was the same Marius, as a
worthy Antiquarie affirms. But through these vncertaineties and disagreements
occasioned by the silence of better Authors, our Histories rest doubtful, and
so must we leave them, returning to finish Humfrey Lhuyd in the Breu^ary of
Brit.
up briefly the Reign and Life of this good Emperor Nerua.

(4) Who having reformed many enormities, and Also in an old Manuscript is
called We^met. cap. 43. Cocceius Nerua recalled from banishment the Christians.
Dion Cass. lib. 68. John the Evangelist returned from Pathmos. Eusebius. lib. 3.
c. 1. 18. Eutropius.
remitted many grievous Tributes and exactions, as that of Carriages mentioned
on the reuerse of the prefixed Coin, minted by authority of the Senate, in
eternal memory of his goodness; recalled from banishment the Christians
severally dispersed, and suffered them to enjoy the freedom of their
profession. At which time John the Evangelist returned from Pathmos, (wherein
he had been confined) unto Ephesus, a City in ^sia the less. And Nerua
reigning only one year, four mone^s and nine days died (of a passionate
anger conceived against a Senator) in the year Dion Cassius.
of Christ his incarnation ninety nine, the twenty seventh day of January,
and seventy sixth of his own age.

TRAIAN. CHAPTER XVI.
Traian Emp.


Unto Nerua succeeded Vulpius Traian in the Roman Empire; borne near unto
Seuill in the Territories of Spain: of a noble family, Ann. Do. 99.
but was much more ennobled in himself for his princely endowments, which
moved Nerua in his life time to adopt him into Se^tus Aurelius.
so high a calling, and the whole Senate after his death ioifullie to confirm
his Election, and so often to honor him with the title of the Most Excellent
Prince, in public dedications, as on the Coin above. Traian raised the Romans
to the highest glory.


(2) He raised the Roman Empire unto the very highest pitch of glory, and
spread the power of their Command into the largest circuit that ever before or
since has been possessed. For the Kingdom of Dacia he subdued; Armenia,
Parthia, and Mesopotamia Dio. Cass. lib. 68.
made subject; Assyria, Persia, and Babylon conquered; passed Tigris, and
stretched the confines of the Roman Empire unto the remotest dominions of the
Indies, which never before that time had heard of the Roman Indians never heard
of the Romans till Traians time.
Name. And indeed, if we look upon his politic managing of the government,
he may seem (in comparison of others) a right worthy, memorable and Traians
affability and moderation toward his subjects. Eutropius.
lovely Prince, of much affability, and familiarity even with his inferiors,
and of such carriage toward his Subjects, as he himself would wish his Prince
(he said) to use toward him, if he were a Subject. A great obseruer also of
Justice, insomuch that when he invested any Praetor, in giving him the Sword, he
commanded him to use the same even against his own person, if he violated Law
or Equity. But yet against the good Christians he used neither of both: nay
he stirred up their Third Persecution, wherein Ignatius and many The third
persecution of the Christians. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 30.
other worthy Saints of God, received the Crown of Martyrdom, in such cruel
manner, as that his other virtues are much clouded by that taxation: for
mollification whereof, he was compassionately entreated by Plinius Secundus his
Tutor; whose Epistles to that purpose are yet extant.

(3) The Jews in his time rose up in arms against the Gentiles, and in
Cyrene, Egypt, and Cyprus, slew Jews made ^at against the Gentiles.
a great number: against whom Traian sent his Captains with forces sufficient,
and in diverse parts of the Empire put the Jews to death, in such infinite
numbers, as that Massacre is accounted the greatest Execution Traian his
slaughter upon the Jews the greatest the ever was.
that ever had been in the world, God suffering this their punishment to light
upon them for their infidelity and obstinacy against his Christ.

(4) Finally, after his Conquests in the East, returning toward Rome, at
Seleucia in Asia the less himself Dion Cassius. Polycbr. lib. 4. cap. 13.
was conquered by the stroke of death, by a flux the seventh day of August,
after he had reigned nineteen years, six months, and fifteen days, the
year of our Redemption one hundred and eighteen, and of his age sixty four:
whose ashes brought to Rome, were enclosed within the Crown of a goodly
Pillar, wrought of one entire stone, containing one hundred forty foot in
height.

(5) Of stature he was big, of complexion swarthie, thin of hair both head
and beard, a hooked Traians portraiture.
nose, broad shoulders, long hands, and a pleasant eye; whose lively Image was
borne in Triumph after his death, and that in most glorious and pompous manner,
in celebration of his great renown and fame attained in his life.

(6) How silent soever writers have been for this Emperors affairs in this
our Island, yet it is to be thought that unto this, as well as unto other
Provinces, both Propretors, Lieutenants, Presidents, Pretors, and Proconsuls
were sent, and every City to have their municipall Magistrates. The Praetor
that yearly proclaimed solemn Sessions, wherein himself sat aloft upon
Ro^erdus in Protribunal.
a high tribunal seat, and guarded with his lictors about him in great
estate, did execute his authority throughout his own jurisdiction, and
determined all causes brought before him, where rods and axes were prepared for
the common people, that were enforced to receive a new Ruler every year. And
surely as this yoke of bondage was grievously borne of every Province, upon
whose neck, it was imposed and laid: So the Britains underwent the weight of
that subjection with such unwillingness, that in the time of this Traian, they
revolted and rebelled, though presently suppressed, as it is evident out of
Spartianus.

(7) The care that this good Emperor had for the weal of his Subjects is
proiected by his providence in making ways passageable from place to place,
whereof remain many testimonies by those his Causeies drawn with wonderful
diligence, even through the whole Island, which now, though dismembered and cut in
pieces by the Country people, wherethorow they passed, yet do many remnants
thereof remain, especially in pastures, or by-grounds out of the rode way,
with banks so high, that evidently they show themselves. Of these Causeies
Gallen writes as follows: The ways (says he) Traian repaired, by pauing
with stone, or raising with banks cast up such pieces Galen lib. 9. cap. 8*
Met^.
of them as were moist and miry: by stocking up and ridding such as were rough
and ouergrowne with bushes and briers: by making bridges over Rivers that could
not be waded through: where the way seemed longer then needed, by cutting out
another shorter: if any where by reason of some steep hill, the passage were
hard and uneasy, by turning it aside through easier places: now in case it was
haunted with wild beasts; or lie waste and desert, by drawing it thence through
places inhabited, and withal laying level all uneven and rugged grounds.

Along these Causeies the Emperor caused to be set little pillars or
Columns, with numerall Characters cut in the^, to signify how many miles was
from place to place. Of these Sidonius Apollinaris writes thus: Antiquus tibi
nec teratur agger;
Cuius per spatium satis vetustis
Nomen Caesareum viret columnis.
Break not the ancient Causeies strong,
Whereon the Columns stand along,
Nor names of Caesar's do not wrong.


HADRIAN. CHAPTER XVII.
Hadrian Emp.
Cneus Trebel. Lieut.


AFter the decease of Traiane, his Nephew Aelius An. Do. 119.
Hadrianus, by the consent of the Army, who swore to him obedience, was
proclaimed Emperor, the Polych. lib. 4. c. 14.
Senate likewise confirming their choice, as being a man endued with gifts
both of Art and Nature, answerable to the fortunes of his Estate.

His birth was of Spain, in the City Italica, near unto Cicill, where Traian
was born, his Father Noble, and his Mother in Cales descended of an honorable
stock.

(2) A great Mathematician he was, skillful in Arithmeticke, Geometry,
Astronomy, and Judicious Astrology; learned in the Greek, and Latin
Tongues; in which languages he wrote both Poesy and Prose: well seen in
Physic, and knew the Virtues of Herbs, Roots, and Stones: A singular
Musician both for Theorie and Practice; and could both limme and carue with
approbation of the skillful: but above all, is Spartian^. Hadrianu^ of an
admirable memory.
the admirable report of his Memory, who never forgot any thing that he either
read or heard.

(3) His first business for the Empire, was rather a care to hold securely
what was gotten, then by Hadri^ policy.
enlarging the bounds to endanger the Best: and therefore lessening the
Compass, and bettering the strength, he planted his forces along the River
Euphrates, and assigned that for the Eastern limits, leaving out India,
Armenia, Media, Assyria, Persia, and Mesopotamia, as Countries too remote for
the Romans to hold to their profit. By which his doings other Provinces took
occasion to revolt, thirsting after Liberty, Britains attempt alteration.
and among others the Britains (as ever most impatient of Servitude) attempted
alterations, whose Lieutenant Cneus Tribellius (Successor to Julius Agricola)
could not so govern his Soldiers which were Ho^ingshed lib. 4. cap. 20. Cneus
Trebellius Lieutenant of the Britains.
grown out of discipline, and by long rest far out of Order, but that they
fell at variance among themselves, and disquieted the most peaceable of the
Britains by their licentious manners.

(4) The Northern Inhabitants, that were more at liberty, and imboldened by
their Bogs and Rocks inaccessable, set themselves to withstand their wro^gs, to
whom also many others joined their affections and forces, whereupon some
bickering insued with loss and blood; to repress which Julius Seuerus was
Julius Se^ sent to suppress the Commotions of the Britains.
sent by Hadrian: but ere he could settle the Commotion, was again recalled
and employed in Syria, to suppress the Jewish rebellion.

(5) These stirs here still continuing, the Emperor took it to be of such
importance, that he resolved Hadrian hims^ came into Britain to suppress
rebellion.
in Person to address for Britannie, which he performed in his third
Consulship, the year of Christ One hundred twenty four, attended on by three
Legions: of which, his Army for this exploit was then composed, as appears by
his money in the entrance of his life, fixed in memory of this undertaking:
With these he encountered the Northern Riders; recovered such holds as they
had taken, and forced them into the Woods and Mountains, whither the Roman
Horsemen without danger could not pursue them. But perceiving the Air too
sharp for the Romans constitution, and the Soil rough and of less profit
then the rest, he made a Fortification or strong Wall of Earth, which (as
Lampridius Adrians wall. A^li. Lamprid us.
says) did continue on the West from Ituna, (that is, the River Eden in
Cumberland near Carleil) unto the River Tina, or Tine at Newcastle in
Northumberland in the East, and was no less then Eighty miles in length. This
Wall (says he) was made of stakes driven deep into the ground, and bound
together in the manner of an hedge, and with Turfe and Earth intermured as a
Rampire or Bulwark to defend the Incursions of the wilder Britains and ill
Neighbors that daily molested the peace of the Romans. Hadrian his work
finished, and the Province reduced to the obedience of the fatal Gouernesse
Rome, at whose feet he had laid again the name of Britain, as appears in
the first Reuerse of his Coin, placed in the fronture of this Chapter)
triumphantly returned to Rome, and for his honorable adventure and Expedition
had his name inscribed upon his Coin with this addition: THE RESTORER OF
BRITANNIE. Adrians Coins.


(6) Neither after this seemed the Southern Britains greatly to contend, but
patiently bore the yoke of subjection, which Time and Custom had made less
painful, the rather, for that they saw themselves to stand in need of the
Romans help against the inroades of their own Countrymen, whose cruelty was
now as much feared, as in former times the Invasion of Strangers: whereupon
they conformed themselves more willingly to the Roman Laws, both in Martial
and Civil affairs: which were then principally directed by Licinius Priscus,
who had been not long Licinius Priscus Lieutenant of Britain. Hist. magn.
Brit. lib. 3. cap. 1.
before employed by Hadrian in the service of Iewrie, and was at this present
Lieutenant of Britannie.

(7) This Jewish war happened in the eighteenth year of the Reign of
Hadrian, who suddenly Dion Cass.
assailed and slew where they came, both Romans and Christians: for revenge
whereof, besides an infinite number of them slain and tortured, their City
Jerusalem was also raced even to the ground, and another Jerusalem raced to the
ground.
built, but not altogether in the same place, and the name thereof changed to
AELIA: the Jews utterly banished thence, and (as Aristion Pellaus writes) not
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 6. Jews not permitted to look to Jerusalem.
lawful for them to look toward that City nor Soil, no not through the
Chinke or Creuice of a door: And upon the Gate that leads toward Beth-lehem,
he caused a Swine to be engraven, a Beast by the Law accounted A swine set on
the Gate of Jerusalem.
most unclean, and by them abominable.

(8) But as this Emperor was exasperated against the Jews, so was he
gracious and favorable to the Adrian favorable to the christians.
Christians, and the rather at the request of Quatratus, a Disciple (as is
supposed) of the Apostles; who wrote unto him concerning them; and of Aristides
a learned Philosopher of Athens, who made an Apology for their defense; so
that the Persecution then in practice was forbidden by Hadrian in a public
Edict; who (as Lampridius writes) was minded to have built a Lampridius (...).
Se^eri.
Temple to the service of Christ, had not some dissuaded him therefrom. In
extremity of sickness he designed Caesar, Lucius Aelius, whose Coin we have
hereunder expressed. A man dear to this Emperor, if we consider at how great
a rate he bought for him the acceptance of the Commons and Military men: And
how short a time the blaze of that Honor continued: for he died so soon,
that Hadrian himself had wont to say, Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, nec
vltra
Esse sinent. --


(9) When he had reigned in great honor and love the space of one and twenty
years, five months, and fifteen days, he died, the eighth or Spartianus.
Dion Cassius. Polycbr.
tenth of Iulie, of a dropsy: which malady so tormented him, that willingly
he refused all sustenance, and languished away through faintness. He was of
personage tall, and very strong, of a good complexion and amiable countenance,
wearing the hair of his head and beard long, and died aged sixty two, the
year of our Lord God, One hundred thirty nine.



Under this Emperor M. F. CL. PRISCVS LICINIVS, was the Propraetor of
Britannie, and employed in the Journey of Jury with Hadrian; as appears by
this antique Inscription in a broken Marble.

M. F. CL. PRISCO. ICINIO. ITALICO. LEGATO. AVGVSTORVM PR. PR. PROVE.
CAPPADOCIAE PR. PR. PROVE. BRITANNIAE LEG. AVG. --

ANTONIUS PIUS. CHAPTER XVIII.
Antonin. Pius Emp.
Lollius Vrbicus Lieut.


NExt unto whom succeeded Antoninus, (for his An. Do. 139.
many virtues) surnamed the Pious: and by the Senate, Father of his Country.
This man did not only equal his Adopter and Predecessors, in wisdom and
other princely qualities, but was also compared, for his peace and policy,
unto Numa Pompilius the second King of Rome, who for his renowned government,
is so famously in their Histories recorded. His birth was in Lombardy, the son
of Aurelius Fuluius, and Nephew to Titus Aurelius Fuluius, that had been
Consul, and held other Offices of dignity and State. The whole time of whose
Reign was so spent in peace, that small remembrances remain of any martial
affairs: yet such as we find in Britannie we will deliver.

(2) At his first entrance into the Empire, about the year of Christ, One
hundred thirty nine (as appears by the money minted in memory of the
Antoninus reigned in peace.
reduction of Britain) the Northern Britains in that part of this I Will began
to stir, and made inroads into the Province, notwithstanding the Rampire or
Wall The Northern Britains rebel in the beginning of Antoninus reign.
that Adrian had made. Against whom Lollius Vrbicus Lieutenant here under
Antoninus, brought his power, and with some skirmishes put them back: taking
from the Brigantes part of their Land, as a Mulct, for the waste they had done
to the Genounians, a Province adioining unto the Brigantes, whose people had
put themselves under the Emperors protection. Which done, he repaired the Wall
with stronger Fortifications; Adrians Wall fortified.
or (which is more probable) raised up another not far from the same, to
double the defense: for (says Julius Capitolinus) Lollius the Legate to
Antoninus ouercomming Julius Capitolinus.
the Britains, built another turfe Wall to divide the Province, and to impeach
the incursions of the barbarous. Notwithstanding the honor of this service (as
is testified by the ancient Panegyricke) was (by one M^mertinus in a
Panegyricke Oration, in praise of Maximian.
Fronto) attributed wholly to Antoninus the Emperor himself: who, although
absent and in his Palace at Rome, yet sitting as it were at the Helm of a
Ship, did command and direct the enterprise, and therefore had right to the
glory thereof. This Wall also (as M. Clarenceaux coniectureth, having seen it
so tracted in an Cambden Brit.
ancient Chorographicall Chart) was drawn from the River Tine unto Carleill:
but Time and War have worn it now away.

(3) In the mean while a new insurrection was kindled among the Yorkshire,
Lancashore, Westmerland, Northumberland. Hist. magn. Brit. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Seires Saturnius Admiral of the British Fleet.
Brigantes, that annoied some of the Roman Confederats. But by the discretion
of the General, it was quenched before it came to flame: for upon the first
rumor of the Revolt, Lollius marched thither with part of his Army,
commanding Seius Saturnius, Admiral of the British Fleet, to waffe upon the
North of the Island both to defend the Coast from danger, and also upon
occasions to further the Landseruice, if need were: by which means, the
Brigantes were easily reduced to obedience, even by the presence only of the
Lieutenant, who for his good service done in Britain, during the short time of
his imploiment there, obtained the surname Britannicus. This may by the first
figure in the face of this Chapter (being in the third Consulship of this
Emperor) be coniectured to have happened in the year of Christ one hundred
forty one; and by inscription of the last Coin in that rank it is manifest
that there was some other expedition against Britain the year following.

(4) I cannot omit, though not directly pertinent to our purpose, the care that
this good Emperor generally Antoninus Pi^ a great defender of the Christian.
had for the distressed and persecuted Christians (who no doubt by his bounty
enioied much tranquillity here in Britain also) in whose defense he wrote
to his Deputies in Asia, and published an Edict against their Accusers, the
effect whereof (from Eusebius) (...). Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 13.
is this:

(5) The Emperor Caesar Marcus Aurelius Antoninus The Edict of Antoninus for
protection of the Christians.
Augustus, Armenicus, Pontifex Maximus, fifteen times Tribune, thrice Consul,
unto the Commons of Asia sends greeting. I doubt not but the Gods themselves
have a care that wicked persons shall be brought to light: for it much more
does appertain unto them, then it does unto you, to punish such as refuse to
yield them worship. But this course which you take does confirm them whom you
persecute, in this their opinion of you, that you are impious men, and mere
Atheists; whereby it comes to pass, that they desire in the quarrel of
their God rather to die, then to yield to the wills of such as you are, and to
embrace your form of Religion. Let it not seem unseasonable to call to your
remembrance the Earthquakes, which lately happened, and which yet are to your
great terror and grief; because I understand that in such like accidents you
cast the envy of such common misfortunes upon their shoulders, whereby their
confidence and trust in their God is much the more increased: whereas you being
still ignorant of the true causes of such things, do both neglect the worship
of the other Gods, and also banish and persecute the service of the Immortal
God, whom the Christians do worship, and you persecute to the death all the
embracers of that Profession. In the behalf of these men many of the
Provincial Presidents have written before unto our Father of famous memory: to
whom he answered, that they should not be molested, unless they were proved
to have practiced Treason against the Imperial State: and touching the same
matter some have given notice unto me; to whom I have answered with like
moderation as my Father did before me. And by this our Edict do we ordain,
that if any hereafter be found thus busy in molesting these kind of men
without any their offense, we command that he Julius Capitol.
that is accused upon this point, be absolved, albeit he be proved to be such a
man as he is charged to Antoninus person and virtues.
be, that is, a Christian: and he that is his Accuser shall suffer the same
punishment, which he sought to procure upon the other.

This Edict was promulged at Ephesus in the General Council of all Asia: so
favorable was this good Emperor to the true Professors, and (indeed) to all
sorts of men, having that Apothegme of Scipio Africanus rife in his mouth: That
he had rather save one Subjects life, then kill a thousand Enemies.

(6) He was of Stature tall, of a seemly presence, in countenance Maiesticall,
in manners mild, of a singular wit, very learned and eloquent, a great lover
of Husbandry, peaceable, merciful and bounteous; in the last of which
virtues, he so much exceeded; that thereby he set going wholly his own
private estate and demaines, whereat when his Empress much repined, he told
her, that when he undertook the Title and State of an Emperor, he then did
forgo the interest and proprieties of a private Person: meaning that a Prince
is not much to respect his private wealth, so as the public wealth and welfare
of the State may be advanced. In fine, this large Euloge and praise is
fastened on him, that neither in his youth he did any thing rashly, nor in his
age any thing negligently: In which honorable course, having reigned twenty
and two years, (some say twenty three) seven months, and twenty six days,
he died of a fever at Lorium the seventh of March, the year of his life
seventy five, and of Christ one hundred sixty two.

MARCUS AURELIUS. CHAPTER XIX.
Marcus Aurclius Emp.
Calphurnius Agric. Lieut.


FRom the virtuous examples An. Do. 162.
of the good Emperor Pius; proceeded a branch of no less towardliness and
fruitfulness, Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus, Verus, Philosophus (for by so many
honorable names is he remembered:) and although he sprung not from Pius, as
from his native root, yet was he his adopted Son, and graffed into his
Stock and alliance by the Marriage of his daughter Faustina: He was the Son
of Elius Verus who died Praetor, and whose Pedigree is brought from Numa
Pompilius, the Julius Capitol. Lucius Verus chosen. Caesar.
second King of Rome; and his Mother was Domitia Camilla, daughter of Claudius
Tullus.

(2) This man chose to him for his Associate in the Empire, Lucius Verus, the
son of Lucius Ceionius Commodus, whom Pius had adopted (but died before him)
and therefore this Verus was respectively commended unto Aurelius; betwixt
whose natures and conditions was as much odds, as betwixt Day and Night; The
one very moderate, loving, and industrious, the other proud, careless and
cruel: the fruits whereof, the poor Christians felt, whose chiefest pillars,
Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, and Justinius Martyr, an excellent Philosopher,
with infinite more, were put to most cruel deaths; and by him the fourth
persecution of Gods Saints was begun: whose licentious and bloody life,
lasting in Authority the space of nine years, was cut off by an Apoplexy in
the presence of Aurelius being then in expidition toward Germany, whose
Coin we have here expressed as we find it minted with his face and reuerse.

(3) Aurelius the Emperor following the wars against those, who there
revolted, was enclosed about with his Enemies, called the Quadi, and suffered
great mortality both by Pestilence, and much more by want of Water, whereby
himself and Host were almost consumed: At which time many Christian Soldiers
being in his Camp, and commanded (as Jonas was) to call upon their God, they
fell prostrate on the ground in prayers, and obtained of him so plenteous a
shower of rain, as therewith after five days extremest drouth and thirst,
the whole Army was refreshed, and the Quadi contrariwise by Thunder Aureli^
obtains t^ne by the Christians prayer. Eutropius. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5. Acts
and Monuments.
and Lightning were quite dispersed and overthrown.

(4) This wonder (says Eusebius) is reported even by those Historians, who
favored not Christianity: and the prudent Epistle of the Emperor himself,
(which he wrote to the Senate for confirmation of this miracle, yet extant)
does warrant the same: whereupon he both mitigated the rage against Christ's
Professors, and (by testimony of Apollinaris) named that (...). P. Oro^.
Tertulli^n.
Legion of the Christians, for an everlasting remembrance, The lightning Legion.

(5) In his Reign Calphurnius Agricola was sent Lieutenant into Britannie,
where the inhabitants sought some alterations of the State, sore repining at
the oppressions of the Romans. But the Surname Agricola reviving the
remembrances of their former overthrows, so daunted their Courages, that at
the presence of the General, who came amongst them to prevent all occasions,
they gave over their intended enterprise: for which, and for many other his
policies there used, he worthily deserved great commendations, but (for the
most part) the glory of all such services was attributed to the Emperors
themselves, and the pains in attempting, and perrils in obtaining did commonly
breed nothing but disgrace and envy after victory, to those by whom it was
achieved. Yet besides the stories, the memory of his being here Lieutenant,
is delivered to posterity, by this Inscription, once erected in the Picts
Wall, an Altar to the Goddess Suria, and now preserved by Sr. Robert Cotton of
Connington, amongst other Monuments of like quality. DEAE SVRIAE SVB CALPVRNIO
AGRICOLA LEG. AVG. PR. PR. A. LICINIVS. CLEMENS. PRAEF. C. oH. 1. HAMMIo R.



So also Lutius Verus, (whom this excellent Emperor had in the year 162. as
appears by his Coin of Concord, set in the entrance of his life, elected his
College in the Empire) to supply the defect of merit in himself, took from
the Conquest of Auidius Cassius, and other his Captains in Armenia, Parthia
and Media, the Trophies of their victories, with which he filled up his Title,
and adorned his Money, expressed in the beginning of this Chapter.

(6) About these times, albeit other things went not so happily with Britain
as might have been wished, yet one felicity then befell her, which did both
counteruaile her own calamities, and ouerpoize the good fortunes of all other
Nations: and that was the blessed rest of the Gospel of peace in this warring
and unpeaceable Kingdom, a great part thereof being governed at that time by
King Lucius, N^ius. Lucius and Leuer-Maur do both signify Great Brightness.
Tacitus in vita Agricola.
surnamed Leuer-Maur. For that was the policy and ancient custom of the
Romans (as Tacitus says) to use even Kings themselves for their instruments,
to bring the people into bondage. And Antoninus Pius ending war, permitted
Kingdoms to be governed by their own Kings, and Provinces by their own
Comites (as says Capitolinus.) This King disliking the Capitolinus.
Paganism and Idolatry of his people, (though, as we have showed, among many
of them the truth of Christ's Doctrine was both taught and embraced, even from
the first planting thereof) and being incited both by the exemplary life and
piety of the Christians, (...). Hare^ Marty^log. Sanctorum.
and also by the manifest miracles wrought amongst them, and encouraged
moreover by the favorable Edicts of the Emperors in their behalf, and by the
good affections and forwardness of their Deputies here, Trebellius and
Pertinax; he gave leave to their Religion by public warrant, and was the first
Christian King in the world, and Britain the first Province Lucius the first
Christian King.
that embraced the Gospel by public authority, as Sabellicus says.

(7) This Lucius (as before we have touched) to (...). 7. lib. 5.
be better furnished with Christian Laws for himself and Subjects, missa
legatione ab Imperatore Romanorum, and a Papa Romano Eleutherio, (as Nennius
says) for in Nennius.
this purerage the Church was so humble, to veil (as far as might be) her
actions in the Imperial license, sent two learned Clerks, whose names were
Eluanus Liber La^nsis Eccles. Florentius Vig^rn. Beda lib. (...) cap. 4.
Flores^ ^riarum.
and Meduuinus, skillful in the Scriptures, to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome:
whose Reply to his most godly Demand (because the favorers of the Papal
Authority either do doubt it, or altogether deny it) I have thought good
here verbatim to insert, as I my self This Record is now in the hands of the
right worthy Antiquarie, Sir Robert Cotton Knight.
have found it, in a most ancient Manuscript, amongst the authenticke Records
and Constitutions of the City of LONDON.

The original Epistle of Eleutherius Bishop of ROME unto Lucius the first
Christian King of BRITAIN.


(8) SCripsit Dominus Eleutherius Papa Lucio Regi Britanniae ad correctionem
Regis and Procerum Regni Britanniae. Petistis a nobis Leges Romanas, and
Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in Regno Britanniae vti voluistis. Leges
Romanas and Caesaris semper reprobare possumus, Legem Dei nequaquam.
Suscepistis enim nuper (miseratione diuina) in Regno Britanniae, Legem and
Fidem Christi. Habetis penes vos in Regno vtramque Pagi^am: ex illis (Dei
gratia) per Consilium Regni vestri sum Legem, and per illam, Lege Dei
patientia.
de patientia vestrum rege Britanniae Regnum. Vicarius vero Dei estis in Regno,
iuxta Prophetam Regem; Domini est terra, and plenitudo eius; orbis terrarum,
and vniuersi qui habitant in eo. Et rursum, iuxta Prophetam Regem: Dilexisti
iustitiam, and Odisti iniquitat^, prop^ vnxit (...) Deus Deus tuus (...)
l^titia pr^ consorti^ (...).
o. i^. prop^. (...). te Deus Deus tuus o. l. p^. co^. cae. Et rursum, iuxta
Prophetam Regem: Deus iudicium tuum, etc. Non enim dixit iudicium, neque
iustitiam Caesaris. Filij enim Regis, gentes Christianae and populi Regni sunt,
qui sub vestra protectione and pace in Regno degunt and consistunt, iuxta
Euangelium: Quemadmodum gallina congregat pullos sub alis. Gentes vero Regni
Britanniae and populi vestri sunt; quos diuisos, debetis in vnum, ad
concordiam, and pacem, and ad fidem, and legem Christi, ad sanctam Ecclesiam
congregare, reuocare, fouere, manutenere, protegere, regere, and ab iniuriosis
and malitiosis, and ab inimicis semper defendere. Vae Regno cuius Rex puer est,
and cuius Principes mane comedunt: non voco Regem propter paruam and nimiam
aetatem, (...) propter paruam nimiam aetatem.
sed propter stultitiam, and iniquitatem, and insanitatem: iuxta Prophetam
Regem: Viri sanguinum and dolosi non dimidiabunt dies suos, etc. Per
comestionem, intelligimus gulam: per gulam, luxuriam: per luxuriam, omnia
turpia and peruersa, and mala: iuxta Salomonem Regem: In maleuolam animam non
introibit sapientia, nec habitabit in corpore subdito peccatis. Rex dicitur a
regendo, non a regno: Rex eris dum been regis: quod nisi feceris, nomen Regis
non in te constabit, and nomen Regis perdes, quod absit. Det vobis Omnipotens
Deus, Regnum Britanniae sic regere, vt possitis cum eo regnare in aeternum,
cuius Vicarius est is in Regno praedicto. Cui cum Patre, etc.

The same in English:
POpe Eleutherius thus wrote to Lucius King of Britannie, for the reformation
of the King and the Nobility of the Kingdom of Britain: You desired us to
send unto you the Roman and Imperial Laws, which you would use in your
Kingdom of Britannie. The Roman Laws and the Emperors we may at all times
mislike, but the Law of God by no means. By the Divine Clemency you have of
late received in your Kingdom of Britannie the Law and Faith of Christ: You
have with you in your Kingdom beth the Old and New Testament: out of them (in
Gods name) by the Counsel of your State, take you a Law, and therewith by Gods
permission, govern your kingdom of Britannie: For you are Gods Vicar in your
Kingdom, as the kingly Prophet says, The earth is the Lords and the plenty
thereof, the whole world and they that dwell therein. And again in the same
Prophetical Psalm. 89. 11.
King; Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, wherefore, God, even
thy God, has Psalm. 45. 7.
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And again: Lord
give thy judgments unto the king, and thy justice unto the Kings son. He
says not, The judgment or justice of the Emperor. And Psalm. 72. 1.
the Kings sons are the Christian Nations, and People of the kingdom, such
as live and abide together in your Kingdom, under your Protection and peace;
according to that in the Gospel: As the Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings. The Nations of the Kingdom of Britanny are your People, who being now
severed, you Matthew. 23. 37.
ought to gather them unto Unity, Concord and Peace, and reclaim them to the
Faith and Law of Christ, and to the holy Church, to foster them, cherish them,
protect, and rule them, and always to defend them from all injurious,
malicious, and hostile attempts. For, Woe be to the kingdom, whose King is a
child; and whose Princes rise early to banqueting: Neither do I call a King a
child, for the tenderness of his Age, but for the folly and wickedness and
madness of his disposition: As that royal Prophet says: Wicked and
bloodthirsty attain not to half their Age. And by banqueting I mean
gluttony; by Psalm. 55. 23.
gluttony, luxury; by luxury all filthiness, peruersity, and lewdness:
according to that of King Solomon: Wisdom shall not enter into the wicked
soul, nor shall it dwell in a Body enthrald to Sin. A King has his name
from Ruling, and not from his Kingdom: and so long shall you be indeed a King,
while you rule well; which if you do not, the name of a King will not continue
with you, but you shall lose that royal title; which God forbid. Almighty God
grant you so to rule your Kingdom of Britanny, that with him, whose Vicar you
are in your said Kingdom, you may reign eternally. To whom with the Father,
etc.


(9.) The date of this Epistle (as by some other Copies it appears) being the
year of the second Cambden.
Consulship of Commodus and Vespronius, may give great light and satisfaction
to such as are curious to know the truth, and to reconcile the differences of
our Historians, touching the time: That Consulship being about the year of
Christ one hundred and eighty: which was at the beginning (if not a little
before) of Commodus his reign; and therefore whereas some refer it to the one
hundred sixty ninth year after Christ's Passion, it is apparent to be the only
error of transcribers, who so writ in stead of one hundred seventy nine after
his birth; which was, anno currente, the very time of Commodus being Consul the
second time: and on this year agree; both foreign and domestic Sabellic.
Jewel. Fox.
writers of this matter. And albeit the very texture of this Epistle, carries
with it the true Character of Antiquity, yet because our worthy writers,
mentioning Parsons 3. Conuersions. Part. 1. c. 4.
this Epistle, are charged of flat forgery (by such who challenge to be Masters
in all ancient knowledge) we will add somewhat, to wash off those false
aspersions, both from the Record, and from the mentioners thereof.

Their first exception is; that the Latin Copy would doubtless have been
produced by them, if it had not been Ibidem.
counterfeit. Whereto what need we answer, since now we have produced it, and
can produce as many, as there are Copies of King William the Conquerors Laws,
wherein it is expressly repeated? The next is, that the English translations of
it differ each from other. A reason more childish then the former, since every
man has a several conceit of that he translateth, and sometimes the very
Originalls, (by transcribers ignorance or omission) cause variety of
translation, as may appear in the variae lectiones of this Copy prefixed. The
last, but most saucy and ignorant exception is, that the places of Scriptures
mentioned in the letter, are so Parson^ ibid.
sottishly and senselesly applied, as is unworthy to be fathered on the learned
Eleutherius. Let us therefore in a word, bring the divinity of this
Grand-censurer to the touchstone: For Eleutherius proves, first, that Kings
are Gods Vicars in their kingdom, because the whole Earth is properly Gods,
and therefore Kings have it not as their own, but as his Lieutenants: Next,
that as David typically, and Christ impliedly, was by God anointed King, for
the execution of Righteousness and Justice, so every godly King ought to make
that the only end of his high honor, that being by God advanced, he might
likewise advance Righteousness, Justice, and the service of God, whose vassal
he is: and that therefore Gods judgments and Laws, are to be preferred by
them, before all humane Laws: with which they should rule and cherish their
godly subjects as their children: and protect them and gather them under one
faith as Christ (their master) does, who therefore compares himself, to a Hen
gathering her Chickens under her wings.

The defects of which Princely duties, Eleutherius most lively expresses
afterward, in so proper applications, as if the learned fathers on these
places be duly examined, they will be found no whit to exceed the apprehensions
of this Godly Bishop. But if Robert Cowback, would have cast his eye on the
modern Popes, and their Cardinals applications of Scriptures, what would he
then say? God made a greater light and a less: therefore the Pope is as much
greater then the Emperor, as the Sun is bigger then the Moon. Christ said to
Peter, Kill and eat: therefore the Pope may excommunicate and depose Kings (yea
and kill them too for a need.) Peter said, Behold two swords; therefore the
Pope has both Temporal and Spiritual Jurisdiction over the world. So God
said to Jeremy, he should plant and transplant: therefore the Pope may dispose
and transpose all Kingdoms at his pleasure. Christ to Peter, Cephas is a stone
but all serves their turn.
thou art Cephas, and Cephas is a head; therefore the Pope is head of the
Church. Domini sunt Cardines Terra. The earth is the Lords: therefore the
Cardinals are the Lords of the Earth. On such pillars and applications of
Scriptures, is the whole Papal greatness founded, and yet these late Scribes
can scoffingly cavil at the godly applications of ancient Eleutherius. But to
our purpose.

(10.) This Epistle with two other Preachers, Capgraue. Marianus.
Faganus and Daminius, sent unto King Lucius, did not a little encourage him in
his godly purpose, in so much that receiving Baptism, the Temples of the Lucius
his reformation of matters upon the Bishops letter. Records of Saint Asaphs
Church. Chester as says an old Manuscript. chap. 34. S. Peter's Church in
Cornhill builded by Lucius.
Heathenish Flamins and Arch-Flamines even thirty one in number, were
converted into so many Christian Bishops Sees, whereof London, York and
Carlein, now Saint David's; were made the Metropolitants of the Province.

(11.) A table remaining in the Parish Church of Saint Peter in Cornhill
London, records that the foundation thereof was by this King Lucius, and that
Church to have been the Cathedral to that Archbishops See. There be that
ascribe the foundation of Poll. Virg^l. Will. Harrison. W. Lamb. Pera^.
Saint Peter's Church at Westminster unto him; unless the places are mistaken.
Others affirm that this King Lucius likewise built a Church within
Douer-castle, to the service of Christ, endowing it with the Tell or customs
of that Haven. Differences there are about the time of his Reign, but none at
all for his conversion and establishing of the Christian Faith. As for Fabi^.
those who would have this Lutius after his Baptism to sail into Gallia and
other foreign parts, where subduing many Pagans, he became the Apostle to the
Banarians, and that his sister Emerita fifteen years after Emerita a Martyr
in the City Augusta.
was martyred in the City Augusta: I find thereof no warrant in any sufficient
writer; but in this all others agree, that he reigned twelve years, and lies
buried in Gloucester.

(12) This good Emperor possessed the Seat of Majesty, nineteen years and
eleven days; wherein he always approved himself, in wit excellent, in life
virtuous, very learned and eloquent, full of Clemency, Instite, and
Temperance, nothing inferior to most of the worthiest Emperors before him,
nor matchable in qualities by many of the MOnarchs that Tertull. by Onuphr.
Dion. Cassius.
followed him: He died the seventeenth day of April the year of our Savior
one hundred eighty one, and of his own age fifty nine: leaving to the world a
miss for the present, and to posterities a perpetual memory of his virtues;
and happy had he been, says Capitolinus, had he not left behind him a Son.
Valerianus lib. 2.


LIVIVS AELIVS AURELIUS COMMODVS ANTONIUS. CHAPTER XX.


THE prudent life, and love conceived of so good a Father, Ann. Dom. 181.
gave hopeful signs and ioifull entrance unto Eutropius.
the Reign of young Commodus, his soon degenerating Son; who had nothing
from him but Nature, and that also much suspected: The known Adulteries of
Faustina, his Mother strongly confirming the opinion of Bastardie.

(2) At nineteen years of age, he was invested Emperor, his reign not long,
but life as loose and impious Commodus his qualities.
as the worst: in sottish pride equalizing Caligula, for intemperancie another
Vitellius, and in cruelties a second Domitian. Three hundred Concubines
continually he kept, and upon one of them, named Martia, so doted, that he wore
her painted Picture upon the outside of his Garment; and instiling his money
Herculi Commodiano or Romano, which was stamped about the year 193. Sometimes
(Hercules-like) would show himself roabed in a Lions skin, bearing a Club in
Cassiodor.
his hand in stead of a Scepter. Other whiles wantonly clad in the habit of an
Amazon woman; always costly, but seldom civil.

(3) The Month August, he named Commodus, September, Herculeus, and December,
Amazonius, according Commodus altered the Months.
to his own or his Concubines names. Commendable in nothing but for his skill
in darting, and for some small breathing of the persecuted Christians; which
came not of himself, but (as Xiphilinus writes) by the mediation of Martia
his beloved Concubine, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 19.
who was found very favorable to their doctrine: But the outrageous
wickedness of his life made him so hateful to all, as that his death was
often Acts and Monuments.
plotted; and once by some of the Noblest, with whom Lucilla his own Sister
conspired; for which fact he put her, with the rest of the conspirators, to
death. The Empire and all things else he wielded at the discretion of others,
attending only his voluptuous pleasures, howsoever the State or Provinces fared
under him.

(4) In Britanny the Northren Borderers brake through the Wall, and finding the
Frontiers but weakly guarded entered the Province, where suddenly they surprised
the Roman General; and killing many of the Soldiers, ranged the Country,
wasting (without resistance) all where they went. Commodus at Rome, hearing
these stirs in Britain rouzed up his spirits, and sent one Vlpius Marcellus
to stay their fury; who with great difficulty forced them back beyond the Wall:
Vlpius Marcellus sent Lieutenant into Britain.
and seeing the careless service of the Soldiers, revived again the ancient
discipline of War, that by long ease had been left off by the Romans. The
repressing of this incursion, as it seems by some revolt of the province, was
about the year of Christ one hundred eighty six, as appears by the moneys of
this Emperor set in the entrance of his life, at which time in memory of some
worthy expedition and victory against the Britains he stamped them.

(5) This Lieutenant Marcellus is reported to be Dion. Cas. lib. 72. Vlpius
Marcellus a man of great virtues.
of a marvelous great temperance and strange diet; for all the time of his
abode here he would eat no Bread, but such as was baked in Rome, neither slept
he more then would maintain nature, whereby both his private businesses and
proiects for public services were commonly dispatched by night. Severe he was
in the execution of his place, not led by favor of the person, nor staid from
justice by corrupted Bribes; esteeming Money only for necessity, and riches no
further then made for public good: But those his virtues though now with us
they get him honor, yet then did purchase him Envy with the Emperor. Who
lived (says Lampridius) for his Subjects mischief and his own shame: For
Commodus hearing Marcellus daily Lampred.
commended, construed his Praise to be his own Reproach; and doubting lest he
should grow too high, thought good to crop him off betimes, and so sent him
Letters of discharge.

(6) The Army then feeling the raines loose that ere-whiles had been borne
with a stiffer hand, fell straight to a disordered mutiny, and therein
proceeded with such boldness as they openly refused any longer to acknowledge
Commodus for their Sovereign: At which time Perennius was a chief Agent and
so ruled all in Rome for the Emperor, as that he entertained a hope to be
himself (in time) an absolute Perennius the greatest substitute under Commodus.
and sole-ruling Emperor, and having now fit occasion offered to spread his
power further; he took upon him to redress these disorders (whilst Commodus
wallowed in his lascivious idleness) and displacing some worthy Captains at
his own pleasure, sent other persons of mean respect or parts, to command
those Legions in Britain, that formerly had been led by Noble Senators and men
of Consular dignity, whereby greater mischief began to accrue and civil
dissensions daily to burst forth, the Army scorning their vpstarst Commanders,
and the Captains insulting over the Soldiers, (of all sides) the Aides so
disquieted, that had the Britains followed the advantage, the whole Province
at that time had been in hazard to be lost: upon which distractions no less
then fifteen hundred Soldiers at once went out of the Land to Rome to
complain their wrongs unto Commodus: where charging Perennius to be the
stirrer of these troubles, with an intent thereby to raise himsefe or his son
to the Imperial Majesty (a string that cannot be touched without sound in a
Sovereigns ear) they were so far heard and believed that Perennius was to
them delivered to be put to death, which accordingly Perennius delivered to the
British Soldiers to be put to death.
they accomplished with all extremity.

(7) Then was sent for Lieutenant into Britain Heluius Pertinax, a man of low
birth, but high Fortunes, being risen from the state of a common Soldier,
Lamprid. Heluius Pertinax sent Lieutenant into Britain.
to the dignity of a Consul, and had been Commander before that time over many
Provinces. Him had Perennius discharged from Britain, and with disgracesent
and confined into Liguria where he was borne, whose credit Commodus again with
such favors repaired, that he gave him the Surname Britannicus, which glorious
title also himself had taken about the year 184. At his first entrance and
ariuage, he assaied Out of a coin of this Emperors instiling him Brit. in the
8. year of his Tribuneiship and 4. of his Consulship.
by rough hand to suppress the rebellions of the Army, and adventured his
person so far in some tumults that he was stricken down and left for dead:
but afterward proceeding with better advice he composed those troubles with
most severe punishments of the principal offenders: whereby notwithstanding he
presently grew odious to all, and thereupon so far feared his own safety, that
he made suit Heluius Pertinax made suit to be discharged of his office.
to the Emperor to be discharged of his Lieutenantship.

(8) Unto him succeeded Clodius Albinus in the Government of Britain, a man of
great birth, forward Histor magna. Brit. lib. 3. cap. 7. Clodius Albinus sent
Lieutenant into Britain.
enough, and fortunate, for which the Emperor Commodus either upon favor or
fear, did honor him with the title of Caesar, though Albinus seemed unwilling
to accept of the same, and afterward discovered his disposition more openly in
approving the Ancient and free state of the Romans. For upon a false report of
the death of Commodus, he made an Oration to the Legions in Britanny in favor
of the Senate, whole kind of Clodius Albinus more affecting Senators then
Emperors.
Government he much commended and preferred before the rule of the Emperors: Of
which his affection when Commodus understood, he sent Julius Seuerus in all
have, to take charge of the Army: and Albinus Julius Seuerus Deputy.
retired himself from all public affairs, until the death of Commodus,
which not long after followed, and was wrought upon this occasion: He having
assigned many to die, and to that end had enrolled their names in a scroll, it
chanced Martia his Concubine to light on the same, wherein she saw her self
allotted Commodus purpose discovered by his Concubine.
for one: And revealing this his purpose to others, that stood in the same
list, and in the like danger; they together thought best to secure their own
lives by his death: and with poison, stabs and strangling made him away, when
he had lived one and thirty years, Eutrop. Lamprid. Maximus.
four months, and viciously reigned thirteen years eight months and fifteen
days, the year of Christ's nativity one hundred ninety and three: the night
before the Kalends of January.

(9) Of stature he was indifferently tall, of a fine constitution of Body, very
fair of complexion, with Commodus his portraiture.
clear eyes and golden locks, neither in person nor in Princely parts
resembling his Father: How ioifull the death of this Tyrant was both to People
and Senate, their execrations pronounced against him, and their assemblies in
the Temples to give thanks for their deliverance, do manifest, as is at large
reported by Lampridius, who wrote his life, and styled by all, Host is humani
Lampridius. Maximus.
Generis, The enemy of Mankind: The very name of the devil.

PVBLIVS HELVIVS PERTINAX. CHAPTER. XXI.


UPON the person of this Heluius Pertinax (of whom we are now to speak)
Fortune An. Do. 194.
(as it seems) meant to make the full experience of her power, and from a
very slender foundation to raise the building of her own Pride: His birth was
but poor, and parents as mean, whose Father from a servile condition got to
be free, and traded in Mercery wares for his living: himself educated
according to his Dion. Cassi. lib. 73.
birth rose by degrees to mount the Chair of all wordly glory, and to be the
Monarch of the whole world.

(2) At first a Schoolmasters, and taught the Grammar; next a Ciuil-Lawyer,
and pleaded causes in Courts; and lastly, a Martial-man, and served in Camp:
where Fortune attended him with such favorable success, that within five
days, out of the rank of a common Soldier he was preferred to be Captain
of a Cohort, in the Syrian wars against the Parthians, which ended, he was
employed into Britannie, Missia, and Germany, and also had charge in chief of
a Fleet upon the Flemmish Seas: he served likewise in Dacia, with such
honorable proof of his valor, as that wise Emperor Marcus Aurelius held him
in high esteem, and afterward made him Senator of Rome. Then was he assigned
Governor of all Syria and Asia, the greatest place of Credit and reputation
that might be; and from thence sent again ininto Britain, chosen out as the
principal man, of note for to stay the Commotions there raised against
Commodus, where in the Field he was left for dead: but thence also returning
after he had governed four several Consular Provinces, was created
Preconsull of Africa, and immediately after Prefect of Rome. Neither yet made
he his stand there, (though the greatest of any subiectiue degree) till he had
mounted the Throne of Majesty, and had obtained the command over All: which
fell to his lot by the death of Commodus; and by the means of Martia, Aelius
Laetus, and other Conspirers of his end.

(3) For the Murder being done in the dead of the night, Laetus in great haste
repaired to Pertinax his lodging; at whose sight the Old man in bed, expected
nothing but Death, as supposing him sent from Commodus to no other end. But
Laetus salutes him by the unexpected name of Emperor, carrying him with
acclamations unto the Army, and in the morning to the Senate, where, of them
all with great joy, he was confirmed Augustus. Heluius Pertinax made Emperor.


(4) His first business was to bridle the Licencious lives of the Praetorian
Cohorts and injuries done by them unto the Roman Citizens, which gained him
such hatred, Heluius Pertinax envied by the Praetorian Cohorts.
that it was cause of his death: For these men grown disordered and lawless
in the reign of Commodus, held themselves wronged; to be nowlocked under the
constraint of Laws civil Government: and these only envied the peace and
prosperity of Pertinax, Sabellicus.
whereas all the Provinces abroad at the very hearing of his Election, and fame
of his Imperial virtues, laid a side their weapons; and disired to embrace
peace with a Prince so nobly qualified.

(5) The first that conspired against his life, was one Falco; whom
notwithstanding he freely forgave, yet punished certain Soldiers thereto
accessory: whereupon, the rest assembling themselves in tumultuous and furious
manner, with their drawn swords invaded Heluius Pertinax asslaulted by his
Soldiers.
his Palace. He seeing their purposes sought no escapes, but descending the
Palace, met them in the base Court: At whose presence and Majesty they were
much amazed, and a while made a stand: unto whom with great gravity, and
without show of any fear, he thus spoke unto them. Heluius Pertinax his speech
to his Soldiers.


(6) Soldiers and Companions, if you come to kill me, (as I think you do)
you shall therein perform an act neither valorous, nor otherwise very
commendable for you, no, nor any way grievous unto my self, for every man's
life has his limit, and to mine, by Natures course, the last period cannot be
far: Or think you that I fear death, who now am so ripened for it, and have
already gotten the very height of all renown unto my Name? Surely you are
deceived: but at this I grieve, that my life and short time of Government,
which I had devoted to the good of all, should seem so disgustfull unto any; as
to deserve a violent and hastened death, especially by you, who are by office,
the Guarders of my Person: you (I say) whose charge and Oath is, to secure your
Sovereign from peril, and now seek to sheath your Swords in his breast, shall
either leave a Testimony of my bad life deserving it, or brand your places with
such stains of Treason, as Time shall never wear away. And what I pray is
mine offense? for maintaining your Laws? why, it was the charge your selves
imposed upon me. Are Laws too strait? surely, not to the virtuous, who are
even a Law unto themselves: are they needless? why then were they made? and
being made, why should they not be executed? If the death of Commodus grieve
you, was I the cause? If he were made away by Treason, your selves are
conscious of my innocence. And this I assure you, in the word of a Prince, that
his death shall deprive you of nothing, which you require, if you require
nothing but that which is honest and just. My life, whilst I was a Subject, was
spent with you in War, now (being your Sovereign) is consumed with cares for
your Peace: which if you free me of, by taking it away, my troubles shall
thereby end, but your conscience shall begin to groan under the guilt of blood
and perchance be touched with too late Repentance.

(7) His words were spoken with such a moving gravity, and unmoved resolution,
that the foremost in the attempt gave back, and were ashamed of their audacious
enterprise, but the rest furiously driving forward, Pertinax killed by his
Soldiers.
one Trusius with a Lance ran him into the Breast, whereupon Pertinax covering
his Head with his robe, quietly yielded his body to the traitorous strokes of
them all, and so died that poor, old, and innocent Emperor. The years of his
life, says Julius Capitolinus, were sixty, seven months, and twenty five
days: But Dio, Spartianus and Herodian accounts them to extend Pertinax his
reign.
to sixty eight: Eusebius to above seventy: The like disagreement there is for
the short time of his Government: Eusebius. li. 5. c. 24. Eutrop. l. 8.
for Eusebius says that he reigned not fully six Months: Eutropius says but
three: Julius Capitolinus and Aurelius Victor, eighty five days: Dio,
Herodian, and Spartianus, two Months and twenty eight days: how long so ever,
thus he lived, and thus he died, the fifth Calends of April.

(8) He was of an honorable and Maiesticall presence, strong of body, large and
full breasted, long bearded, curle-headed, smooth of Speech, and indifferently
eloquent.

DIDIVS IVLIANVS. CHAPTER XXII.


THE state of man continually attended with uncertain An. Do. 194.
chance, apparently does show, the weak condition that nature enioieth, and
with what vnsurenesse the seat of majesty is possessed, as is seen by the
precedent Emperor, who sitting at peace in his Palace at Rome, renowned,
beloved, and guarded with the strengths of Europe, Asia, Africa, Egypt, and
Greece, was notwithstanding surprised and slain at noone day, by a Band of
Soldiers, not much exceeding the number of three hundred, and all escaping
unpunished, the deed was so sudden and men's minds so distracted, that it
could not be fully believed, though witnessed by sight.

(2) The Senators mistrusting each others, abandoned the City, and the
Citizens in secret secured themselves, all in an uproar, but none for revenge
of the treason: The murderers, in as great fear as any, fortified their
Camp, and with weapons in hand stood upon their guard: But seeing all in a
maze, and nothing against them attempted, a further boldness (the like before
never heard of) ensued: for by a Common Crier they made Proclamation for the
sale of the Ae^ Spartianus Proclamation for the sale of the Empire. Didius
Iulianus bu^h the Empire of the Roman Soldiers.
Empire, to any man that would give them most: which offer was readily accepted
by Didius Iulianus (a man of much more wealth then honesty of life, and a
Lawyer, says Eusebius) who with larger promises then ever were performed,
obtained the Imperial Diadem.

(3) His birth was in Millen, the son of Petronius Didius Seuerus, his mother
Clara Emilia, and himself brought up in service under Domitia Lucilla, the
mother of Marcus Aurelius, by whose favors, he was first made Questor, next
Edile, and then Praetor in Rome. In Germany as a Captain he served under
Aureliu, then was he appointed Governor of Dalmatia, ^thinia, Didius Iulianus
his imploiments in State before he was Emperor.
and of the Lower Germany, and was Consul with Pertinax, and afterward
Proconsul in Africa. These were his risings and means to that Majesty, which
not long he kept: for hated in Rome and not approved abroad, Syria chose for
Emperor their own General, Pescenius Niger, Germany, Septimius Seuerus. By
whose consent Clodius Albinus leader of the Britain Syria chooses their
General. Germany chooses theirs.
Army was first elected Caesar, and then his fellow in the Empire, whereby the
Aegle, the fairest of Birds became monstrous, and in one Body bore three Heads.

(4) For Albinus at that time having gotten again the government of Britain,
where erecting his Albinus Governor of Britain. a Competitor for the Empire.
own Statues and stamping his picture in his Coins, gave great suspicion that
he intended to be a Competitor, and with his Army a foot meant to have gained
the Imperial seat it self, by advantage of Septimius forces, absent in
suppressing of Pescenius; which to divert enforced Seuerus until better
opportunity, to declare Albinus his companion, for he much more feared him then
either of the former: Because Didius in Rome, and Pescenius in Antioch consumed
their times in banqueting, and vnmartiall disports, whiles Albinus managed his
office most souldierlike, and was highly esteemed and honored of them.

(5) Seuerus hasting toward Rome, was met in Italy by Ambassadors from Didius,
with fair offers of Seuerus wageth war for the Empire. Re^useth composition.
He is proclaimed Emperor.
peace, and possession of half the Empire: but refusing composition and making
still forward, the Senate that so lately declared him a traitor, now proclaimed
him an Emperor: And the Soldiers unsatisfied of the couenanted promises, and
in hope to purchase favor with Seuerus, slew their Chapman Didius in his
Palace, the Calends of Iulie, being but five days after he had done himself
as much for Pertinax, when he Iulianus slain. His reigns continuance.
Eutropius. Spartianus. Dio.
had reigned, as Eutropius says, seven months: Spartianus says but two, and
Dio sixty six days: the year of his age fifty seven, and of our Saviors
appearing in our flesh, one hundred ninety and four.

SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS CHAPTER. XXIII.
Sept. Severus.
Clodius Albinus.


SEuerus having by this bloody accident of the giddie An. Do. 194.
multitude gained with more facility then he expected, the fatal seat of
government, it was his next in place to suppress Pescenius by force, and
Albinus by falsehood: whose Actions and lives since they happened with this
Emperor, and ended with his sword, I will record together, beginning with Cains
Pescenius first, since first he fell under the fortune of this man.

This old man in the year of Christ one hundred ninety four, was elected
Emperor by Acclamation of the Syrian Army, of which (though begun but by a
handful in respect of all the other Imperial forces) he had good hope, since
to the honor of that Goddess he dedicated the first mark of his Sovereignty,
the minting of his money.

A person he was of seemly stature, lovely feature and fair skin, except his
Neck, which differing so far from the rest gave him the surname of Niger: his
complexion was ruddy, his Body fat, his voice so piercing, that it would be
heard a mile off: and his hair for more ornament long he wore in reflected
curles upon his shoulders. A commendable soldier and well bearing himself in
the military offices he underwent. In his Lieutenancy abroad he was severe,
and at home he so well acted his part when he was Consul, as in his Clemency
and Justice he seemed emulous of Pertinax. Thus all his life he enioied the
goodness of his merit and fortune, and had not his ambition begun, where his
years were ending, had so parted: For no sooner had he put on the Robe
Imperial, but Seuerus defeated his Army at Cizicum, pursued him to Antioch,
and took him at Euphrates, sending to Bizanti^ his head a Trophie of the
Conquest, and to his wife, children, and followers (unto whom at first this
Victor granted banishment) in the end denied life.

(1) Now as soon as Seuerus made his approach near Rome, he gave command that
the Pretorian Cohorts should attend him disarmed, which done, he vehemently
checked them for their proditorious treachery against Pertinax, and pronouncing
sentence, deprived them both of name, honor, and arms of Soldiers, and
banished them from Rome, and the circuit thereof for one hundred miles
distance: which act of his won him such reputation, that in Rome the whole
Story of Pertinax his ruin, and Seuerus his aspiring to his Throne, was at
large portraited in an excellent piece of work, of solid molten brass, as
Herodian relates, though he ascribes the occasion of it, to a dream of
Seuerus.

(2) Those two objects Didius and Niger, who gave some hinderance to Seuerus
his beginning, being thus defeated of their high hopes; the third, which was
Albinus, seemed now a more dangerous cloud, which would altogether ouer-cast
his brightness and glory, if it were not dispersed or blown back in time: and
therefore to make fair weather with him, he created him Caesar and his
Successor in the Empire, but afterward his good fortunes thus swelling in the
Albinus made Successor in the Empire.
East, and himself still courted by Ambassadors from all parts, with their
tender of subjection, he began to grow proud, and to disdain any Copartner in
State: His death practiced.
and thereupon first secretly sought the destruction of his Caesar; which
failing, he then proclaimed him Traitor and Enemy to Rome. Proclaimed Traitor.
He wageth w^te against Seuerus.


(3) Clodius Albinus brought into these unexpected dangers, prepared his
strengths, and with the choice of all Britain entered France, and near unto
Lions took the field against the Emperor; but with no better success, then
Pescennius had done in Asia the less, in the same place (as Herodian,
Eutropius and Spartianus affirm) where Darius was first ouer-throwne by
Alexander. The Armies ioining, a bloody Battle was fought, which through the
great prowess of the Britains went at first so sore against Seuerus, that
being beaten off his Horse, despairing of Victory, and almost of Life, cast
off his Imperial Robe, and flying, ignobly hid himself. Laetus one of Seuerus
his Captains, kept aloof all this while, of purpose as was thought, to bring
the Emperor to ruin, and now upon report that he was slain, came on most
furiously with his forces, in hope of winning both the day, and the Empire to
himself: Albinus vanquished by Seuerus.
whereupon the Emperor drawn again into the field, the day was his by the
means, but not the meaning, of Laetus: whom on attainder of his Treason he
afterward put to the sword. That day a great part of the flower of Britain was
slain, together with their valiant Leader Albinus, a Captain of exemplary
Severity and Martial discipline, a great admirer of Hannibal and Marius; for
the Scipio's he thought them rather fortunate then valiant, and in the time of
his service in this Island, there was no toil which he commanded his
soldiers, but himself would bear therein a part, even in carrying of burdens
on his Back: and yet so far from vaunting of his valor, as that when an
Historian would have recorded his noble Acts, he willed him to write of theirs
who were already dead, whom he need not to flatter; holding it a foppery to
write of those, of whose favor or wrath the Inditers stood in hope or fear:
Being such a one, no marvel if Seuerus so feared him, as he did, which he
showed even after he was slain, by putting incredible numbers of great
Personages both in the City and Provinces to death, with this one Pretense, for
all, that they wished well to Albinus.

After this overthrow Seuerus forthwith sent Heraclianus hither, to keep the
rest of the Britains in quiet, and to be Lieutenant in Albinus his room, as
Spartianus writes: Of whose affairs therein little remembrance Spartianus.
is left, only it seems by a Coin of Seuerus minted in his second
Consulship, which fell in the year of our Savior one hundred ninety eight,
and about the period of this his last Competitor, that the Britains gave not
at first their service and servitude to this man, until he had made the
purchase of it by his sword; the brand of which he has left to posterity in
figuring the Goddess Victory seated upon spoils, and writing in a shield,
Victoria Britan.

Unto this Lieutenant, Virius Lup^ succeeded President of Britain, as Vlpian
the Lawyer terms him, Virius Lup^ made President of Britain.
and was about the year of Christ one hundred ninety seven, as appears by
this Inscription erected at Olinaca amongst the Brigantes, in memory of the
reedifying of that place by this Emperor and his eldest Hekely in Yorkshire.
Son, then first designed Caesar, by which the time is discovered, and in
this stone inserted. IM. SEVERUS. AVG. ET ANTONIUS CAES. DESTINATVS
RESTITVERVNT CVRANTE VIRIO LVPO. * LE G. EORVM PR. * PR.

Iegatio.
Pro Prat^re.


(4) This man strengthened the Province especially in the North, with many
strong Castles, repairing many places ruined either by fire or fury of the
bordering swords: Of which Bow^: under S^more in Rich^shire.
Lauat Rae, where the first Cohort of the Thrasiaus lay, was one, as appears
by this Altar there erected to the Goddess Fortune, and since removed to
Conington the house of Sir Robert Cotton in Huntingdonshire. DEAEFORTVNAE
VIRIVS LVPVS LEG. AVG. PR. PR. BALINEVM. VI IGNIS. EXVST. VM. COH. I. THR ACVM.
REST. ITVIT. CVRANTE VAL. FRON. TONE PRAEF EQ. ALAEVETTO



He warred against the Maatae and North Britains with such bad success, that
he was forced to redeem his peace with money, and was so much weakened by loss
of his men, that he sent to Rome for present supply, with relation of his great
danger, and the Enemies (...) why brought into Britain.
strength: which news touched Seuerus to the quick; and notwithstanding his
years (sixty at the least) and gout wherewith he was continually grieved, yet
would he undergo that journey in person himself, as well to satisfy his own
vain glorious humors, as to train his Son Bassianus from his licentious
life, wherein he wallowed idly in Rome, who together with his brother Geta,
accompanied their Father into Britain. Aemilius Papinianus a famous Lawyer.


(5) The Britains then hearing of the Emperors approach, sent him their
Embassage for entreaty of peace, whereby the Island might have been settled and
secured without blood, but the old man (says Sabellicus) had so insatiable a
desire to bear the glorious Surname of Britannicus, that he preferred war,
and accepted not their proffered subjection.

(6) Seuerus thus entered, Geta was appointed to remain in the South of the
Province, and to govern those parts that stood in quiet, assisted by Aemilius
Papinianus the famous Lawyer, whose Tribunal seat was held in York; himself
and Bassianus marching further Fifty thousand of Seuerus army dead through
toylesome labor and sickness.
into the North against the Maatae and Caledonians their neighbors, both which
bare themselves boldly upon the advantage of their Countries, their waters
brackish, and unwholesome drink for their Enemies, the air sharp and
contagious to their constitutions, and the soil it self so pestred with
Loughs, Bogs, Meares, and Mountains, that the Romans were forced to make way
by continual Labor, in cutting down Woods, in building of Bridges, and in
drayning of Meares, so that by distemperature of diet, continual Sabellicus.
labor, contagiousnesse of Air, and afflictions by sickness, fifty thousand
of them perished, and that without Battle, says Dio: many Soldiers also,
Herodian.
whose spirits were spent, and through feebleness could not keep rank in
their March, were for mere Caledoniane desire peace.
pity slain by their fellows, lest they should fall into the hands of their
Enemies.

(7) These miseries, notwithstanding old Seuerus endured and fought many
Battles, but (as Sabellicus confesses) ever with more difficulties to the
Romans then to the Britains, and yet in some small skirmishes he went away
Victor, and continued his courses with such resolution, that lastly the
Caledonians thought good to entreat their peace; which upon these conditions
was granted: first, that they should forthwith lay aside all hostile Arms,
without any further resistance: next, that they should deliver into the Romans
Possession, those Countries that were next abutting on their Province: and
lastly, that thence-forth they should live in quiet, attempting nothing against
the public Peace.

(8) The State thus settled, Seuerus bethought himself of some further means
to secure the Province, by building many Inland strengths anew, and repairing
those with Stone and Cement which formerly were but of Turffe and earth, as
appears by this Inscription found in the Ruins of one of his works near
unto the River URE, in the County of Richmond erected.

IMP CAES. L. SEPTIMIO PIO PERTINACI AVGV. -- IMP CAESARI. M. AVRELIO APIO
FELICI AVGVSTO -- --

A wall from Sea to Sea.
Herodian. Spartian. Pol. Virg. de Reb. Angl. lib. a. Hect. (...).


And neglecting the uttermost and vast Northern parts of this Island, drew a
Wall or Fortification, which might serve as a Rampire and division betwixt the
savage and more civil people, stretching it self through the whole Island, even
from Sea to Sea; that is, from the Bay of Itun (otherwise Solweyfrith) in
Scotland, to the door of Tine or Tinmouth, containing in length One hundred
thirty and two Miles, as Sextus Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, and others account
them, and by some Seuerus surnamed Britannicus Maximus.
more. This Wall he built of Turfes and Timber strongly fensed with Bulwarks
and Turrets, near unto (if not upon) the foundation of Adrians Wall, the tract
whereof through the Countries of Westmorland and Northumberland, is more
pleasing to be seen, then easy in word to be expressed. For which his Acts
thus here achieved about the year of grace two hundred and eleven, he
assumed to himself his much desired Surname Britannicus Maximus, causing in
his own and his sons Coins that inscription to be stamped.

(9) And recording to posterity the glory of his first atchieuement here,
upon the reuerse of those his moneies, whereon he sometimes formed a Trophy
erected upon spoils with two Captives, vndersetting the word VICT. BRIT.
sometimes a winged victory: grauing a Shield, hung on that tree which is the
meede of Conquerours, VICTORIAE BRITANNICAE: and sometimes in such a form and
(...) disloyalty.
phrase as is expressed in the entrance of this his life. And now retired to
York, he left his eldest son to finish this work of war by him begun, as
being rather allaied then altogether ended.

(10) Bassianus thus set in the one part of the Island, as Geta was in the
other, sought rather to gain the affections Caledonians rebel.
of his Army, by a loose liberty to do what they list, then to manage the
trust reposed on him, by the restraint of Martial Discipline, and exaction of
Military duties: hoping by such his plausibilitie and indulgence, to purchase
to himself their best concurrence for the obtaining of the Empire, which he
so thirsted after, as that he often tampered with them to raise him, by the
fall of his father. A general Massacre of them by Seuerus.


(11) The Caledonians understanding the dissoluteness of his Camp, and the
want of a better Captain, suddenly assailed the Romans, putting many to the
sword, and taking great booties, (which they dispersed amongst their
neighbors) without any regard of the obligation of their former Covenants:
whereat the testie old man was so much disquieted, and so far enraged to
revenge, that he gave an express charge to make a general Massacre, without
exception of any; using in his speech to his Soldiers, these verses borrowed
out of Homer: Nemo manus fugiat vestras, cademque cruentam:
Non foetus, grauida Matter quem gestat in aluo,
Horrendam effugiat cadem. --
Let none escape your bloody rage; with terror let all die:
Spare not the mother, nor the child that in her womb does ly.


(12) This (which seems to have been the work of Seuerus second year in
Britannie, Anno two hundred and twelve for so it is expressed upon the moneys
of himself and sons) may (and with a fit and easy inference from the same
authority) seem to have been here the fortune and effect of two encounters
and Conquests that same year: for whether we observe the two several coins
of victory then minted, on one of which is the Statue of that armed and winged
Goddess, at whose feet are two Captives prostrate bound; or the other bearing
on it a double figure of that Lady, grauing the sculpture of the former, VICT.
BRIT. upon a Shield, it can conclude no less in probability.

(13) Seuerus remaining in York, where the Sixth Legion called Victrix kept,
(which place afterward grew to be one of the chiefest for account among the
Brigantes, as commonly the Sta^ of the R^dus The seed-plots of our Cities and
T^.
Colonies were the seed-plots of all our Cities, and principal Towns) grew
feeble and sick, being weakened with age, and wearied with travel, his
malady more increasing by the disturbances of the Enemy, and the (...)
daily disloialtie of Bassianus his son, insomuch that despairing of life,
he called his Counsel and Captains before him, and vnderlaid with pillowes,
he thus addressed his speech.

(14) Eighteen years almost have I wielded the affairs of the Empire, and
borne on my shoulders S^erus his speech to his Counsel and Captains.
the burden of her encombred estate, both at home and abroad; at my first
entrance, troubled every where, now at length quiet, even here in Britain, the
most unquiet and molestious Province of all: The profit of which travels I must
now leave for others to enjoy, and with ease in peace to keep that which I
with care and war have gotten. If therefore amity and mutual concord, be
embraced (the only sinews of a Commonwealth) the glory of the Empire shall
yet shine more bright, since by concord we see that small things grow to
greatness, whereas contrariwise, discord is the ruin of all. I die and must
leave the success of all to my Successors and Sons by Nature, though the
Elder unnatural: I mean Bassianus new made Antoninus and your Emperor, who
often ere this has sought to gain that title by his sword and my death; but
knows not the dangers that attend a Diadem, neither remembers that high
places are continually guarded with Envy and Fears. But so blind is Ambition,
as it sees not that a Sovereigns greatness is such unto others, but least in
himself, and that the things possessed are not the very things they seemed: It
is not these Titles therefore can make man happy, the line of his life being
drawn forth with so many uncertainties, and the height of his power laid upon
so weak foundations. My self Spartianus.
at this instant may serve for example, of whom this may be said, I was all
things, yet nothing, seeing I I must pay my debt to Nature, and leave my
exploits in East and West to be registered (either at your disposal) for
matters of moment, and good of the Empire, or blotted to the reproach of my
government, with the shadowing pencile of Oblivion. That therefore my care for
the welfare of this State may survive my self, and bring forth the happy
fruits thereof when I am withered, this shall be my last and only request,
that you will ever assist my sons both with your counsel and aid, whereby
they may rule according to Law, and you obey according to Right, that so in
you both, the good of the Empire be above all things respected. With which
words he ended both his speech and his life.

(15) This Emperor by Historians is rancked with the best, both for his
wars, wherein he was very fortunate, and for his wisdom in governing the
Empire: and yet is he taxed very sharply both by Sabellicus for sundry vices,
and by Eusebius for stirring up the fifth Persecution of the Christians in the
tenth year of his Reign. In which Ireneus the learned writer, among many
others, suffered Martyrdom: howbeit, toward his end, he became more mild to
them, as says Saint Jerome: as also that he was a diligent reader of the
excellent works of Tertullian, whom usually he termed his Master.

(16) This Emperor was by birth an African, to which Country his affection and
graces were so much, that the illustrious City of those parts, recorded upon
their coin his many favors by this Inscription, INDVLGENTIA AVG. IN CARTH.
and inshrined Bed^.
him amongst the Gods of that Nation. He was the son of Geta, his mother Pia
Fuluia: himself rough, cruel, covetous, and ambitious, and his nature,
relishing too much of the Punick craft and simulation: otherwise a most expert
Soldiour, and a worthy Prince, more battles he fought, and more victories
obtained, then any other that ever had ruled before him the Roman Empire. In a
word, of virtues and vices so equally composed, that lastly this grew into a
customed speech: It had been good that this Emperor had never been borne, or
being Emperor, that he had never died.

(17) Of stature he was tall, and of a comely personage, Seuerus his
description.
his countenance severe and representing Majesty, his beard white and long, and
the hair of his head he wore usually curled. He was very learned in the
Mathematics, a good Philosopher, an eloquent Orator, and of a deep sounding
voice. He reigned eighteen years (says Eusebius) by Dion Cassius, Herodian,
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. ca. 7.
and Eutropius, seuenteen years, eight months, and odd days. He died in
York, the fourth day of April, Seuerus dies at York. The first Ides of
January, says Sauils Table.
in the year of Christ two hundred and twelve, not so much of sickness, as of
discontent and grief, or (if our British writers may be credited) of a deadly
wound given by Fulgence, Captain of the Picts, who as the Monk of Chester
says, was brother to Martia, the first wife of Seuerus and mother of
Bassianus. His Polychr. l. 4. (...). 19.
second wife was Iulia Domna the mother of Geta, (though some think that she
was mother to both) a woman of a surpassing beauty, and an earnest instigator
of the two Bretherens reconciliation, had she not been blemished with other
vices, as after we shall here.

M AVRE. BAS. CARA. ANTO. BRIT. Brethren. P. SEPT. ANTONI. GETA BRIT. CHAPTER
XXIIII.
Bassianus Caracalla.
Septimus Geta.


BAssianus Caracalla, and his Brother Septimius Geta, together An. Do. 212.
were declared Emperors by old Seuerus in his life time, and both of them by
their father surnamed Antoninus, a name very gracious in the esteem of the
Romans, the elder so styled about the year of Salvation two hundred and five,
and the younger four years after, (as it appears by the mintage of their
moneys;) were approved and applauded by people and Senate, and of all men
saluted and acknowledged for Emperors. Bassianus the Elder, stiling himself
Britannicus Maximus, as it should seem, was admitted his Fathers fellow
Emperor at York at his residing there, to quiet the Northern Britains;
wherein Godd. 3. Tit. de rei vi^dicatione lege. 1.
also he gave him the name Antoninus; for so implies that famous Law, bearing
jointly the names of Seuerus and Antoninus, enacted by them at York, touching
the interest and right that masters have to the goods and possessions of their
servants. His mother, the first wife of Seuerus, was Martia a British Lady (say
our British Historians, though Sabellicus does judge her G^ss Monmouth.
Sabellicus.
to be an African) and himself better beloved of the Britains for her sake,
then for his own.

Geta was the son of the Empress Iulia, a second wife, a woman of passing
beauty and surpassing lust, who being persuaded (by some Oracle or dream)
that her husbands successor should be an Antoninus, Some s^y it was (...) his
^ame. Sabellicus.
lost her Son should lose his hope of the Empire, she importuned Seuerus to
bestow the name of Antoninus also on Geta; who with it gave him likewise the
title of Caesar, about the year two hundred and two. And to unite the
affections of his two sons, as well as to eternise their memories, he minted
their features upon one Medall, inscribing the one side ANTONIUS PIUS AVG.
PON. TR. P. IIII. the other, Herodian. Sabellicus.
P. SEPT. GETA. CAES. PONT. having the year before matched the^ together upon
the reuerse of his own money, and incirculing their heads with this word,
AETERNITAS IMPERI. as if the separation of their affections were the
dissolution of his and the worlds Empire.

(2) Upon Seuerus his death, Antoninus Caracalla, hastening for Rome, proffered
good conditions of peace to the Britains, who long tired with wars accepted
thereof, and hostages were given for conseruing the same. Whereupon the
Empress Iulia accompanied with both the Caesar's, departed hence, carrying with
them the funeral ashes of the deceased Emperor in a golden Vrna to Rome,
where they solemnly consecrated him a God: the ceremony whereof (because it
concerns so great an Emperor and Monarch of this kingdom) is not unworthy
the inserting.

In the Porch of his Palace was a bedsteed all of Iuory, dressed with richest
bedding and furniture of gold, wherein was laid his image protraited to the
life, but yet in manner of a sick man. On the left side sat all the Senators
and Princes in black mourning weeds; on the right, all the great Ladies,
cladde in white (which then was the mourning color of that Sex.) The
Physicians diligently coming to visit him, and feeling his pulse, as if he
were alive, do signify that his disease did still increase upon him. This
they all did seven days together: at last, as if then he were Forum was the
ch^ place of public me ung^ and pleadings.
dead, all the prime of the Nobility carry him in his Iuorie Bed to the *
Forum, where all the Patrician youth, and Noble Virgins, encompassed him with
most doleful Hymns and ruefull ditties. Thence again he was removed to Mars
his field, where was erected a foure-square frame of Timber, of a huge height
and compass, the stories still mounting to the top with sundry ascents, and
richly beautified with strange varieties of gold and purple ornaments, and
images of great Art and price: On the second of which ascents, was placed the
Emperors said Bed and Statue, with infinite store of sweetest odours, brought
thither from all parts of the City: which done, the young Nobles bravely
mounted on Horseback, rid round about in a kind of dance or measure, and
another sort likewise (who represented great Princes) in their Coaches,
whereupon his successor in the Empire, first setting fire to the frame,
forthwith all the people did the like on all sides: and when the whole began to
be on flame, an Eagle secretly enclosed within, was let fly out of the top;
which soaring a great height, and out of sight, the people followed it with
shouts and prayers, supposing that therewith the Emperors soul was carried up
to heaven. And thus Seuerus, which was before a man of Gods making, was now
become a God of man's making: and the more to preserve the memory of his fathers
glory, Caracalla erected a magnificent Edifice, which he instiled Seuerus his
Porch, wherein with most exquisite Art, and admired workmanship, were
portraited all his Fathers wars and triumphs, achieved here in Britain or
elsewhere. Sabellicus.


(3) But presently after, these two ungodly sons of this new supposed God, so
much emulated each others glory, that the deadly sparks of envy, blown a long
time with the bellows of their ambitious desires, brake out into the flames of
murder and blood, being brethren by one Father, but not by the same mother (as
it is said) and in this only like, that they were both stark naught, though
both in contrary kinds of Vices. And albeit the Empress Iulia had sought by
all means to make peace betwixt them, both formerly, here in Britain, and
now, after their return to Rome: yet the desire of a sole Sovereignty, had
been a long time so rooted in Bassianus his heart (for which he had twice
attempted his Fathers life, and so much hasted his death, that he slew his
Physicians, because they had dispatched him no sooner) could not endure an
equal (much less a confronter) in authority, and therefore in the Court and
in the arms of the Empress, he slew her son Geta, in a time least
suspected, Geta slain in his mothers arms.
when he had sat with him in state and disdain, the term of one year and
twenty two days. Herodian.


(4) And to cloak this fratricide with show of constraint, first to the
Soldiers, and then in the Senate, he accuses his Brother to have sought his
death, and that in defense of his own life, he was forced to slay the other,
and flying to the Pretorian Cohorts for the safety of his life, as though
further conspiracies had been intended against him in the City, and at his
return commanded Papinianus the famous Ciuilian, to excuse Dio Spartianus.
the murder in his Pleas at the Bar: which when he refused, he caused him
to be slain, as also all those, Papinianus slain for refusing to desend a
murder.
that had been acquainted with Geta; whereby so many of the Nobility
perished, that he was thereby accounted another Nero in Rome: and by his
favorites the name of Geta was raced out of all monuments and imperial
inscriptions, as we have seen some of the^ defaced upon some Altar stones
found here in Brit.

(5) Of nature he was subtle, and could well dissemble with them whom he
feared, and make show of love where he deadly hated; always fitting himself
to the humors of flatteries: Among the Germans, counterfetting their gate and
garments; In Greece, be like Alexander, bearing his neck somewhat awry; In
Troy, would resemble Achilles; always so Camelion-like, as the Romans (his
followers) were therewith ashamed. In a word, Caracalla (says Dio) never
thought of doing good, because (as himself confessed) he never Dio.
knew any goodness.

(6) And to fill up the measure of all iniquity, as one regardlesse of
humanity or shame, he married Iulia his mother in law, late wife to his own
Father (a sin (says S. Paul) not to be named among the Gentiles) 1. Cor. 5.
1.
and by Sext. Aur. Eutrop. and Spar. reported upon this occasion. It fortuned
that Iulia in presence of Caracalla, either by chance, or of purpose rather,
let fall the veil which she wore, discovering thereby her Sextus Aurelius.
Eutropius. Spartianus. Sabellicus.
naked breasts and beauty, which was great; whereat the Emperor casting his
lascivious eye and bewraying his affection, presently said, Were it not
unlawful, I should not be unwilling: to whom she replied (without Iulia her
wicked speech.
respect of modesty) that all things were lawful to him that made laws for
others, but was subject himself to none: forgetting at once both the murder
committed upon Geta her son, and the scandals that accompanied so foul a
sin, the pleasure whereof they did not long enjoy, both their deaths (by Gods
vengeance) soon after ensuing.

(7) For Caracalla remaining in Mesopotamia, and carrying (as it seems) a
guilty conscience, and suspicion of his life, sent to Maternus, whom he had
left Antoninus seeks to sorcerers.
Governor of Rome, to assemble all the Astrologers and Mathematicians (unto
which learned imposters he always gave especial credit) and of them to
enquire how long he should live, and by what death he should die. Maternus
having so done, wrote for answer, that Macrinus his Prefect of the Praetorium
(then with him in his expeditio^s) went about to murder him. Which is thought
rather in envy of Macrinus to have been fained, then by any Astrologicall
directions so given forth. This letter and others coming to Caracalla his
hand, at such time as he was busy about his disport, he delivered them to
Macrinus to read, and give him the report at his return. In perusal whereof
finding himself to be accused of Treason, and fearing lest by the sequel he
might be brought into greater danger, he incensed one Martial a Centurion
(whose brother the Emperor had lately slain) to Sabellicus.
murder him; which was soon performed, and occasion in the fields offered: for
Caracalla stepping aside from his train to ease nature, Martial, as though he
had been called, ran hastily in without hindrance or Antoninus Caracalla killed.
suspect, and with his dagger stabbed him to death; but being too late
perceived, was yet so hastily pursued, that he was hewed to pieces before his
tongue could reveal the principal Traitor. Iulia his incestuous wife hearing
of his death, with poison slew her self at Antioch, leaving her shame to
survive her life.

(8) Antoninus Caracalla, says Eusebius, reigned Emperor Antoninus Caracalla
his reign. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. ca. 20.
seven years and six months, but Herodian, Spartianus, and Dio allot him
six years and two months: he died the eight of April, and year of Christ
two hundred eighteen. The testimonies of these many writers notwithstanding,
together with the place and circumstances of his death, and the person by whom
it was committed, the British Historians do contradict, reporting him to be
slain in Britain in Battle against the Picts, by one Carauceus a man of a
low and obscure birth. But by this it may seem Old Ma^scr. cap. 136.
some wounds received by him in those British wars, gave occasion to that
error. He left a son not by his incestuous mother, nor by Glantilla his
wife, who^ he exiled into Sicily; but by a mistress, whose name was Iulia
Simiamira his cosen German, and indeed no better Eusebius calls her Sa^iam, alij
Sarius, and her moneys Iulia (...), that she was his whore, not his wife.
Sabellicus.
then a common strumpets which corrupt roots brought forth as bitter fruits,
even Heliogabalus, of whom hereafter we shall have occasion to write.

OPILIVS MACRINVS. CHAPTER XXV.
Opilius Macrinus.
Diadumenus.


IN prosecuting our intended An. Do. 218.
course, for setting down the Acts and Lives of sundry Emperors, hereafter
succeeding, I know I shall hardly satisfy my Readers, being no way able to
give content to my self, in that, on the one side, finding very few
remembrances concerning the state of this our Island, till the reign of
Dioclesian, the History of that Interim may seem impertinent to our purpose;
and yet on the other side, considering how unfit it is, that the Succession of
all our British Monarks should be interrupted (that Royal Title being likewise
annexed to those other Emperors) I suppose it will be expected, that somewhat
also be said of them, though managing their affairs in places far remote. It
seems that the continual striving for the Imperial Diadem, and their
nearer hazards at home, made them contented to give Britain some peaceable
breathing, and so deprive us of the Roman Records of those times: which want
if I should supply out of our homebred British Writers, I might be thought,
not so much to repair the ruins of our Monuments, as to heap more rubbish
upon them. And therefore (necessity so enforcing) I must crave patience, if I
proceed to the rest of our Countries Monarkes, though I cannot to the residue
of our Countries Exploits and Affairs in those days.

(2) Opilius Macrinus from obscure and base parentage, An. Do. 218.
by favors of the Emperor, without any notable desert in himself, first
aspired to the Office of a Prefect, and at last by the election of the
Soldiers, to the Dignity Imperial. So far from suspicion of Caracallaes
death, by the outward appearance of a seeming sorrow, that he was held of all
most free from the Treason, and the second person worthy of their voice. For
first, the Title was conferred upon aged Audentius, a man of good sort, much
experience, and an excellent Captain; whose wisdom could not be Audentius
refuses the Empire.
drawn to adventure his life under the weight of so uneasy and dangerous a
Crown, but excusing himself by the privilege of his age, as far unfit to
wield the troubles (much less to increase the glory) of the Empire, refused
their offers, but with return of as many thanks as they had given him hands
or voices. Whereupon they again consulted and determined for Macrinus, which
as willingly received, as Audentius refused: unto whom they swore fealty, but
not long after failed in performance.

(3) He made for his Caesar, Diadumenus his son, Diadumenus appointed for
Caesar. Called Antoninus
changing his name (a usual custom at their election) into Antoninus, because
that name was gracious among the Romans. The Senate at home confirmed all that
the Army had done abroad; unto whom it seemed their right, as it were by
prescription, to have the election of the Emperors.

(4) His first expedition was against Artabanus King of the Parthians, that
hasted against the Romans, for wrongs received by Caracalla deceased: but after
three great and dangerous Battles, came to an atonement, and a peace betwixt
them concluded. After this, as free from further troubles, he returned to
Antioch in Syria, and there spent his time in Banquets, and other sensual
pleasures, being drenched so far therein, that the Army began to dislike his
Government, and to favor young Bassianus the son of Caracalla, Antoninus
son of Caracalla.
then present at E^esa a City in Phoenicia, with Moesa his Grandmother by his
Mothers side, who there had built a Temple consecrated to the Sun, and
therein ordained him a Priest; for which cause he Antoninus called
Heliogabalus, that is, A Priest of the Sun.
was called Heliogabalus, that is to say in the Phoenician Language, The Priest
of the Sun.

(5) To this Temple in their vain devotions resorted many of the Roman
Soldiers; and seeing the beauty of the youth, allured Moesa to bring him to
their Camp: where known to be the son of Caracalla, the Soldiers
proclaimed him Emperor, and Herodian.
maintained his right against Macrinus; who after this revolt, met young
Heliogabalus in the Confines betwixt Phoenicia and Syria, where was fought a
bloody Battle, and Macrinus forsaken of all, and driven (...) Capital.
to fly; who with his son hasting through Asia and Bithinia, came lastly to
Chalcedon, where he fell sick, and was there, together with Diadumenus, put to
Mar^ and Diad^ put to death. (...), (...) reign.
death the seventh day of June, the year of Christ's Incarnation two hundred
and nineteen, when he had reigned one year, one month, and twenty eight
days.

ANTONIUS HELIOGABALVS. CHAPTER XXVI.
Antoninus Heliogabalus Emp.


YOung Bissianus, surnamed Heliogabalus, the son of An. Do. 219.
Caracalla before mentioned, thus elected, and prospering at his entrance, gave
hopes to his raisers, of many princely parts, and signs of those things that
in sequel by better proof appeared to be only signs indeed: for nature had
plentifully adorned him with the complements of her gifts, had his mind been
answerably furnished with virtue. But as the one was ouer-prodigall and lavish
in his outward form, so was the other as sparing and defective in bestowing of
her inward gifts. insomuch that both in mind and garment, he seemed to be
that which in truth he was not. This Emperor, as appears by the reuerse of
his money, took it no mean addition of honor to his Imperial Dignity, to
be styled, The Priest of the Sun; which in the Assyrian Tongue is called El,
from whom he took the surname Elagabal.

(2) As Soon as he had settled the Empire firm upon himself by the death of
Macrinus, he began to discover his own dispositions, and in wantonness,
apparel, lightness, and diet, to exceed any that had Heliogabalus exceeds
in wickedness all others before him
gone before him in Rome; and so far differed from the manners of men, that
modesty will not suffer us to record his greatest vices.

(3) His apparel was rich, and most extreme costly, and yet would he never
wear one garment twice: his Shoes embellished with Pearls and Diamonds; his
Seats strowed with Musk and Amber; his Bed covered with Gold and Purple, and
beset with most costly Jewels; his Way strewed with the Powder of Gold and
Silver; his Vessels (even of basest use) all Gold; his Lamps burning with no
other Oil then the Balmes of India and Arabia; his Fish Ponds filled with no
other water then of distilled Roses; his Ships (in his Naumachies or
Ship-fights) floted in a River of Wine; his Bathes most stately built, and
again after they were once used, presently plucked down; his Plate of finest
Gold, but never served twice to his Table; his Rings and Jewels most rich, yet
never worn twice; his Concubines many and chargeable, but not one lain with
twice; his Diet so profuse, that at every supper in his Court, was usually
spent a Thousand Pound Sterling: inuiting the chief Citizens to a Feast, he
strewed all the Rooms with Saffron, as it were with Rushes, saying, That such
Cattle were worthy of such costly Litter. Near the Sea, with him no Fish was
eaten: in the Land, no Flesh: whole Meals made of the Tongues of singing Birds
and Peacocks, or of the Brains of most costly creatures, always saying, That
meat was not sauorie, whose sauce was not costly. And indeed so costly it was,
that the revenues of Germany, France, Britain, Spain, Italy, Sicilia,
Graecia, Asia, Syria, Egypt, Arabia, and all the Islands, were not suffcient to
defray the charges.

(4) In his Progress, six hundred Chariots followed him, laden with Strumpets,
Boys, and Bawdes, for whom he built a Stews in his Court, wherein himself in
the attire of an Harlot, made to them solemn and A^lius Lamprid.
set Orations, terming them therein his Fellow Soldiers, Herodian.
and Companions in Arms, with Instructions for them how to practice with most
variety their filthy Luxuries. In regard of which kind of actions, one does
make this doubt, whether were greater his boundless Prodigality, his
stupendous Lechery, or his foppish Foolerie: the last of which his Imperial
Virtues, he gave proof of, when he gathered in the City ten thousand weight of
Spiders, professing that thereby he understood how great a City Rome was: at
another time, ten thousand Mice, and a thousand Wizels, which he brought forth
in a public show to the people, for some wise State-purpose, like the former.

(5) In Rome he built a Temple consecrated to the Sun, (like to that in
Phoenicia, whereof himself was Priest) commanding the Christians therein to
worship: as also a Chatter-house for women to meet and determine of their
Attires; and brought into the Senate House his mother Semiamira, allowing her a
Voice among the Senators. In modesty I forbear to write the particulars of
his vn-manly libidinous filthiness, adding only that which a judicious Author
speaks of him: Kings (says he) as they have greater power to sin then other
men, so have they lesser safety in sinning then any man; for being set above
others in the eye of the World, they are as Marks that are aimed at, and lie
open to the shute of Revenge. And so was the state of this Superlatiue Monster,
whose own Conscience still stung him, even in the midst of his sweetest
sins, and therefore ever expecting some violent end, he prepared Silken
Halters richly wrought to hang himself, if need were; and Golden Knives to
stab himself, or cut his throat; and built a goodly Tower of exceeding height,
adorned with Gemmes and Gold of inualuable cost, that thence he might cast
himself headlong, having these words often in his mouth, That howeuer he died,
his death should be precious in the eyes of all men. But he failed of his hope,
though not of his desert; for against him the Praetorian Soldiers suddenlic
arose, no wrong offered them, more then unto others, but out of a Justice in
God, who repaieth sin with sin, and suffers not such outrageous wicked
ones to escape unrevenged.

(6) These breaking into his Palace, found him not in estate answerable to his
calling, but hid (for fear) in a homely place suitable with his dirty
conditions: A Privy. Sabellicus.
from whence with Acclamations through the streets of Rome, more like a Dog
then a Man, they dragged him with his mother, saying, The Bitch and her whelpe
must go together: and after their fury spent, threw their bodies into the
Common Sink of the City, and thence into Tyber, sinking them down with great
stones, lest the carkases cast up with the waves, should either find burial,
or infect the air. The Senate approving all that was done, decreed that his
name should be obliterated out of all monuments in Rome, and never any
Antoninus (a name before very gracious) should rule again their Empire: so
odious was the remembrance of this Image of Ignominy.

(7) He was aged but fourteen years when he became Emperor; by Herodians
computation, he reigned six years, and died at twenty: By Aurelius Victors he
died at seventeen, and reigned not fully three years: Eusebius says, that he
reigned fully four: Onuphrius Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 20.
would have him to live eighteen years, and to die the 8 day of March, Anno two
hundred twenty three.

ALEXANDER SEVERUS. CHAPTER XXVII.
Alexander Seuerus Emp.


BEfore the death of Heliogabalus, his Cousin German An. Do. 223.
Alexianus, by the working of his mother Mammea, was made his Caesar, whose
virtues daily increasing, with his age, gave hopes to the better sort of some
happier times by his means: but so far incensed Heliogabalus (who hated
nothing more then virtue), and so dimmed his fame, that he often assaied to
take away his life by treachery: But suruiuing him, whom no man wished to live,
he was with public blessings, and unspeakable joy elected Emperor; * his
name they changed from Alexianus to Alexander, Lampridius says, he was borne
on the day that Alexander the great died, and had therefore his name.
and his surname given of old Seuerus.

(2) He was the son of one Varius, a Syrian borne, and of Mammea, sister to
Simia^ira, though there are who say that both the sisters attending on their
Aunt Iulia the Empress, were gotten with child by young Caracalla, and so he
father of Alexianus: howsoever, Sabellicus. Lampridius.
he was brought up in learning from his childhood, having a natural propension
to all humane virtues, and divine pieties: He was very skillful in the
Mathematics, Geometry, Music, Caruing, and Herodian.
Painting, and composed some Books also of Poetry; so great a lover of the
liberal Arts, that he allowed the Sabellicus.
professors thereof annual stipends for their further encouragement: and that
which most is, he much favored the Christians, from whom he took to himself
examples of life, and urged their Precepts unto others, and this one especially
Lampridi^ the truest relator of this Emperors acts: (for Herodian speaks on
spleen) says, he caused this Christian poesy to be written all about his
Palace, and sometimes commanded by voice of a public Crier. Lamprid^.
Sabellicus.
NOT TO DO TO OTHERS WHAT WE WOULD NOT HAVE DONE TO US. Their Christ he
honored (though as a Heathen man) and would have had him consecrated among the
Roman Gods: unto whom he also was minded to have built a Temple, had not his
Idol-Priests hindered the same, but a place of their holy assemblies he allowed
them by his Imperial warrant: for when certain Vinteners or Victuallers laid
claim to the place whereunto the Christians resorted to pray, he thus decided
it, That it was much fitter that God therein should be worshipped, then
belly-gods should be pampered to surfeit there. (A good document of a Heathen
for some Christians, who turn places consecrate to Gods divine service into
Sheep-Coates, or to the like profane uses) This good inclination Alexander
Seuerus incited to Christianity by his mother Mammea Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib.
6. cap. 20. Jerome.
of Alexander the son, was undoubtedly stirred up by the instigations of
Mammea his mother, who, as Eusebius witnesses, had sent for Origin (the
Christian Doctor) from Alexandria to Antioch: by whom she was so well
instructed, that Jerome gives her the honorable Title of a most holy Woman.

(3) Himself, though young, ruled the Empire with great Wisdom and Justice:
admitting only such for his Counselors, as were men vncorrupt, sage and
learned, skillfull in the Civil Law, and experienced Sabellic^.
in Antiquities of elder times, and preferring none to any office or charge by
suite, but only by the commendation of each man's worth and fitnes for the
place: In regard whereof, he caused Turinus (one of his Courtiers who took
money of diverse, with promise to procure the Emperors favor in their suites)
to be put to death by smoke, the Crier proclaiming, That he had sold smoke,
and therefore with smoke he should die. And likewise to cut off, in Lawyers
their continual selling of Justice (the bane of all Common wealths) for a fee,
he granted a public and set reward to such as should plead gratis. By which
courses, his civil affairs were nobly managed, and his wars likewise proved
as prosperous: for he triumphed with great glory over the Parthians: The
Germans also, who in furious manner had passed the Rivers Danuby, and the
Rhine, in many skirmishes he put back, and forced them to their former
obedience.

Bountiful and liberal he was both to the people and soldiers, as by the
reuerse of his Coin above prefixed is seen, wherein is expressed the fourth
Donatinum and Congiarium, bestowed by the bounty of this Emperor upon the
Soldiers and common people, of which Lampridius makes mention in his life.

(4) But as Envy ever attends persons of Estate, and a desire of change, breeds
a dislike of the present, so the Roman Legions grown far out of order by the
prodigious Government of the last Emperor, proved now unnatural to their
dread Sovereign: whose wars drawing him into Germany, and thence hither
into Britain, he found some of his Soldiers Sabellic^ and others.
here so tumultuous, that he thought fit to use exemplary severity toward
them, whereupon they, being secretly backed, (as is supposed) by Maximinus (a
potent man in the Army, raised only by the Emperors favor) they
traitorously assailed him, and together with his mother Mammea, murdered him
in a village Seuerus and his mother murdered.
then called Sicila, though others say he was slain in Germany, in the City
Mogunce, and some in France, no other cause moving them, but only his virtue,
the eight day of March, when he had reigned (by Lampridius) thirteen years
and nine days, aged by Herodian, and Julius Capitolinus, twenty nine years,
Seuerus the time of his reign.
three months and seven days, the year of our Savior, two hundred thirty
six.

CAIUS. JULIUS. VER US. MAXI. EMP. CHAPTER XXVIII.
CAIUS. JULIUS. VER US. MAXI. CAES. Maximinus Emp.
Maximus Caesar.




MAximinus, a man barbarous by birth and disposition, (himself a Thracian, his
father named Nicea, borne in Gotland, very obscure, his mother Ababa of An. Do.
236.
little better rank) spent his youth in keeping of Cattle, the poverty of
his parents admitting no better maintenance: yet afterward his fortunes
brought him unto great advancement, and that by working upon the outward object
of his person, being for shape and strength (if the reporter deserve credit)
rather to be thought a vast Giant, then described for a goodly man: For Julius
Capitolinus, affirms Iuli. Capitol. Maximinus of a huge stature.
his height to be eight foot and an half by Geometrical measure, and his
Body answerable in every proportion, insomuch, as he did wear as a Ring on his
thumb, the * Bracelet which his wife used to wear on Capitolinus calls it
Dextr^cherium, being a broad plate of gold, set with rich Jewels, an ornament
in use amongst the Roman Ladies.
her arm, a stature thought incredible; and yet Josephus, an Author of great
credit, does confidently record, that one Eleazar a Jew accompanied Darius the
Kings son of Persia unto Rome, (sent by Vitellius to Tiberius for an hostage)
whose height, as he says, was fully seven cubits, a measure surmounting this.

(2) This Maximinus increasing strength with Joseph. Antiq. l. 18 cap. 6.
growth, left his trade of Cattle-keeping, and resorted to the Roman Camp
then in Syria, where for his admirable Maximinus his means of rising to
preferment.
height, he was admitted by Septimus Seuerus into the rank of a common
Soldier, and shortly after, preferred to be one of his Guarde. Bassianus made
him a Coronell, and Heliogabalus gave him the leading of certain foot: but
the last Emperor Alexander, advanced him to be a Captain of the fourth
Legion, whose death notwithstanding he disloiallie practiced (of such force is
the desire of Sovereignty, which makes men forget all bonds of gratitude and
Herodian and Aurelius Victor ^y that this was done, Alexander yet living.
loiall trust) and was thereupon by the Soldiers elected Emperor, with fealty
sworn unto him.

(3) The ignoble Vpstart thus borne from the Maximinus of a naughty disposition.
dunghill, upon the wings of Fortune, unto the seat of Majesty, thought the
increase of his pride was an increase of State; and knowing he had nothing for
which he might deserve to be loved, he studied in the whole managing of his
estate, how by all means he might be feared. He therefore displaced
Senators, Captains, Soldiers, and whom not? with murders, banishments, and
confiscations of their goods: all such especially he did cut off, whom he
supposed to have knowledge of his base beginnings. The Christians Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 27. Maximinus persecuteth the Christians. His death
attempted.
likewise under him were martyred, (whereof Origin wrote a Book, not now
extant) and he is by Writers accounted the sixth Persecutor of Gods Saints: so
that, whereas his flatterers at first called him Milo, Antaeus, and Hercules,
for his strength; now they all termed him, Busiris, Phalaris, and Cyclops, for
his savage cruelty.

(4) But his life being odious to God and Man, Herodian.
was often attempted to be taken away; first, by Maximus, a man of a Consular
dignity; then by Quarcinus (whom Capitolinus calls Ticus) set on by the old
Soldiers of Septimus Seuerus, that had been disgraced by Maximinus; and
lastly by the Army in Africa, who elected Gordianus (their Proconsul, a very
Gordianus elected Emperor, and his son^e elected his Caesar.
worthy and learned man of fourscore years old) Emperor, and his son (of
the same name and Princely qualities) his Caesar: the Senate likewise
confirming all that they had done. He took to himself the surname Africanus
either in respect of his Pro-Consulship which he exercised in that Province, or
else as descended from Scipio his family who bore that surname: His son
Gordianus likewise was styled Augustus, as appears by his Coins, whereon he
writes himself AVG. and upon the Reuerse, Liberalitas AVG. I. two Emperors
sitting.

Maximinus then in Hungary, and hearing thereof, rather like a mad man raged
at his misfortunes, then either by courage or wise forecast endeavored to
redeem them.



(5) In the mean while, aged Gordianus with the An. Do. 238.
Ensigns and glory of an Emperor, entered Carthage, with blessings and
acclamations of joy: whereat his old enemy Capeltanus, Governor of Numidia
and Mauritania (Provinces in Afric) much envied; and gathering forces in
Maximinus his name, made head against him, and shortly gave him Battle, wherein
Gordianus the younger was slain before the walls of Gordianus the younger
slain.
the City. The father seeing his Caesar's disastre, and himself an Emperor
only nominall, and his new risen Sun to have passed the circle of his
height, and now to approach to the setting and fall, wished again his private
estate; and in despair, grief, and disdain of his enemies success, with the
Girdle which he wore, strangled himself to death, when he had Gardianus the
father strangled.
been styled Emperor only twenty six days: whereat Maximinus was not a
little ioifull, and the Senate no less perplexed, seeing themselves deprived
of their hopes, and now laid open to the Tyrants will, who like a Lion came
raging on, threatening revenge in all their bloods.

(6) The State thus standing, all the Peers and Princes thereof assembled
themselves together at Rome: and in the Temple of Jupiter, after long debating
of their present dangers, concluded, that Maximus Pupienus and Clodius Balbinus
together should be Emperors; men of great account and favor with the people.
These taking Oath and Imperial Robes, levied forces to maintain their cause:
and Balbinus taking charge of the City, Pupienus marched to meet Maximinus,
who in great pride had passed the Alps, entered Italy, and now laid siege
against Aquieliea; in which this was very memorable, that The Citizens wives
cut off the hair of their heads, to make bow-strings for resistance of so
hateful a Tyrant: where after long assault prevailing little, his discontented
Soldiers fell to mutiny: and entering his Pauilion, at noone day without
resistance slew both him and his son, bearing the same name whom he had
created his Caesar, Maximinus and his son slain,
and whose moneys, as he minted them, we have inserted at the entrance of his
Empire. Their heads for a Trophy they sent before them to Rome, where with such
acceptations they were received, as that the Senate acknowledged themselves to
be rid of a Monster.

(7) He was, as is said, exceedingly tall, his body great, and ioints
proportionable, fair of face, full eyes, and of such strength as is
incredible: and according to his limbs, so was his diet; for he daily
devoured Maximinus his intemperance in di^t. Iul. Capitol. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
lib. 6. cap. 27.
forty pound weight of flesh, and thereto drank six Gallons of wine. He died
aged sixty years and odd, when he had reigned three years, in the year of
our Lord two hundred thirty and eight.

PVPIENVS MAXIMUS Emperors. CLODIVS BALBINVSCHAPTER XXIX.
Pupienus Maximus Emp.
Clodius Balbinus Emp.


PVpienus Maximus and Clodius Balbinus thus elected together for Emperors, the
An. Do. 238.
one in action, and the other resident, a great sedition chanced betwixt the
Senate and Soldiers, which grew to a bloody issue among the Citizens, and
Rome it self was set on fire in sundry places; the Emperors presence and
authority little prevailing: which struck such fear into their hearts, that
they accounted these times most unfortunate, and themselves and present estate
to be most desperate. But the death of Maximinus (and his head happily brought
them at the instant) gave present life to their dying hearts. And Pupienus
coming to Aquieliea as much quieted the Army, sent back the Lieutenants to
their places of charge, and with great pomp and praise returned to his
Fellow-Emperour.

(2) The parentage of Balbinus is reported to be both noble and ancient, made
Citizens of Rome by great Pompey, and himself borne at Cales in Spain.
Pupienus Ancestors were much latter, yet had he borne many Offices of
Magistracy, and ever discharged them with wisdom and valor: both of them
highly accounted of in Rome.

(3) Peace thus established beyond all expectation, with shoutes and applauses
the Emperors enter the Senate House, where (according to the custom and their
deserts) they were styled, The Fathers of the Senate, I^l. Capitol.
with thanks as to the only preseruers of their lives and estates: and some
extolling the Senate highly for their provident foresight, in clecting such
sapient and worthy Emperors, contrary to the rash and indiscreet practice of
such as chose their Governors to fit their own fancies, rather then the
charge to which they advance them; and whose bad lives brought commonly their
untimely, but deserved deaths. The Pretorian Soldiers took themselves to be
taxed with those aspersions, and the rather, because the German Strangers were
brought in to be of the Guard, as if themselves were not to be trusted: so
turning their spleen against the present Emperors, sought to set up a new,
which shortly after they found opportunity to effect.

(4) For these Emperors, though aged and wise, The Emperors envy one another.
were not so linked together in affection, as they were near joined in
authority: and therefore the wind of emulation had the easier passage betwixt
the chinkes of their own conceits; the one prizing his wisdom and government
to be more judicious; the other, his birth and Nobility to be more honorable:
and each of them having his own Guard, stood upon his own Guard, though one
Palace contained them both: and both their endeavors ever well consorting for
the businesses of the Empire.

(5) At this time the Provinces of Parthia and Germany grew unquiet, and by
civil discords, endangered their subiections: to repress which, the Emperors
agreed to go in person, the one into the East, the other into Germany. Now
whilst these great preparations were in making, the Capitoline-Games were
celebrated in Rome, whereunto all (almost) resorted, but especially the
new-come Guards of the Emperors. The Pretorians finding the aduantagious time,
which they had long waited for, suddenly in armor assailed the Court; which
Pupienus perceiving, sent in all haste for Balbinus, and both their Guards for
defense. But his Fellow-Emperour, upon a vain suspicion detracted time
himself, and hindered the forwardness of the Guards, so that these Traitors
had easy access into both the Emperors Chambers, where in their rage they
dispoiled them of their Imperial Robes, and haled these poor aged and
innocent Emperors, like two Thieves through the midst of the City: Lastly,
they slew them, and left their bodies to despightfull ignominy.

(6) These Emperors reigned together one year, and somewhat more, and died
the year of Christ two hundred thirty nine: in which year happened so great
an Eclipse of the Sun, that the nooneday thereby became as dark as the
midnight.

M. ANTONIUS GORDIANVS. CHAPTER XXX.
M. Antoninus Gordianus Emp.


GOrdianus (for Antoninus he An. Do. 239.
might not be called, a law formerly acted inhibiting the same) was the son
of a daughter to old Gordianus (that had made away himself in Carthage, as is
declared) at the age of eleven years was created Caesar by the Senate, with
Pupienus and Balbinus; and at their deaths by the Pretorian Soldiers, elected
Emperor, not yet fully fourteen years of age. Greatly was he strengthened by
the Alliance and Counsel of one Misitheus, his Prefect and Instructor, whom
for his great learning he so honored and loved, that he took his daughter for
his wife; and by whose only direction, he prosperously administered his State
affairs.

(2) Touching the affairs of our Provinces proceedings, or what Lieutenants
were employed in Britain since Virius Lupus there placed by Seuerus (since
whose death our Story has spent twenty seven years) we find not recorded.
Yet now in the reign of young Gordianus, some glimmering light for her
Governor appears by an Altar-Stone found in Cumberland at a place then
called Old Carleil.
Castra Exploratorum, with an inscription for the happy health of the Emperor
Gordian the third, his wife Furia Sabina Tranquilla, and their whole Family:
which votiue Altar was erected by the Troop of Horsemen surnamed Augusta
Gordiana, when Aemilius Chrispinus a native of Africa governed the same under
Nonnius Philippus Lieutenant General of Britain, in the year of Christ, two
hundred forty three, as appears by the Consuls therein specified: whose form
and inscription we have followed by the Stone it self, now remaining at
Connington among many others, in the custody of Sir Robert Cotton Knight.

IOM. PRO SALVTE IMPERATORIS M. ANTONI GORDIANI. P. F. INVICTI AVG. ET SABINIAE
TVR IAETRANQVILECONIVGIEIVSTO TAQVE DOMV DIVIN. EORVMA LA AVG. GORDIA. OB
VIRTVTEM APPELLATA POSVIT: CVI PRAEEST AEMILIVS CRISPINV. S PRAEF. EQQ. NATVS
IN PRO AFRICA DE TVIDRO SVB CVR. NONNII PH LIPPI LEG. AVG. PROPRETO... ATTICO
ET PRETEXTA TO COSS.

In his fifth year, the Parthians under the Leading of Sapor their King, had
passed into the confines of the Roman Provinces, as far as Antioch in Syria,
which City they had taken, with spoil of the Countries adioining: against
whom, the young Emperor in warlike manner addressed himself, and in person
prepared to undergo the wars.

(3) In Rome the Temple of Ianus that long had stood shut, he caused to be
opened, a sure token that ^tropius. Gor^us opens the Temple of Ia^.
wars were in hand: and departing the City, passed the Straits of Hellespont,
and took his way through Mysia, to stay the Goths that were come down to
inhabit Thracia. Thence marching to Antioch, recovered the City, forcing Sapor
to forsake the Province, and to content himself with his own demaines.

(4) But long this Sun went not without a Cloud, nor his favorable fortunes
without a check; H^er. Ili^des 4. Mi^beus poisoned by Philip.
for Mi^theus, his Nest^r, paying Natures debt before it was due (being
poisoned by Philip, as Eutropius affirms) was wanting in counsel, and missed
for trust: to supply which, Philip (an Arabian, and of ignoble parentage) was
made his Prefect; wise (I must needs say) had he been moderate; and valiant
in Arms, had he been true. But the glory of a Diadem beheld with the false
light of ambition, so dimmed the eye of his dutiful affection, and blinded the
senses of his aspiring mind, that he, who from nothing was risen to be
something, thought that also nothing worth, whilst it was shadowed with the name
of a subject. First therefore he sought to win credit with the Soldiers, to
whom he was facible; to regard the poor, to whom he was liberal; and in all
things to outstripe his Sovereign, to whom he was treacherous. Young Gordianus
unable to endure his Prefectors designs, Philip his treachery.
or his own disgraces, and perceiving the mark whereat he aimed, complained
his wrongs in open assemblies, and to the Soldiers after this tenor.

(5) I got not this state from my Parents by Gordi^ his speech to the Soldiers.
birth, nor yet by any deserts (I must confess) in my self, being the least
of many that did deserve it better: but it was you, my fellow Soldiers (upon
what fate I know not) that have made me what I am. If then I have defrauded
your hopes, by carrying my self under your expectations, I wish to be set in
the place where I first was; or rather (if I so deserve) my life, and state,
may at one instant be ended by your unerring hands: For Noble minds cannot
brook to be curbed with the bitte of base indignities, nor suffer their
vassals to be Corriuals of their Majesty. It is a jealous object (I must
needs confess) and many times casts great suspicion when is small occasion,
but I, for my part, have always thought of that humor, that men causlesly
icalous, do most justly deserve what they unjustly fear; and both your
selves will be my witnesses, how far I am from the touch of that stain, and
also the dailic occurrents of my Caesar, (if so low I may term him) does make
more then manifest. I am but young, yet elder by six years then I was; my body
tender, yet exposed to the chance of war; my counsel raw, yet bettered by
your wisdoms; and my conquests in my self nothing, but yet in your valors
both glorious and famous. What then are mine errors, that I may amend them? or
your discontents that I may redress? for by the powers of heaven I protest, it
is your loves which I most esteem, and the good of the Empire, for which I
only wish to live; the first is in your powers to bestow at your pleasure, but
the other in me (if it be possible) shall live even after death.

(6) These complaints notwithstanding, Philip so politickly, nay, rather
traitorously brought his own proiects to pass, as that the young innocent
Emperor was displaced, and abandoned of all: in which distress he first sued
to be made his Caesar, and that denied, to be his Praetorian Prefect: but
neither would be had, yet at length the charge of an ordinary Captain, was
with some difficulty granted him. But Philip bethinking himself of the
greatness of Gordianus his blood, his love and esteem both in Rome and the
Provinces, and his own virtues equalizing any, he commanded him to be slain
in the twenty two year of his age, and the sixth of his reign. The Senate
hearing Gordia^us slain.
thereof, elected M. Marcius, and after him again, L. Aurel. Seuerus,
Ostulianus. But Philip through the giddie multitude, prevailed against both.
This Emperor though young, so well demeaned himself, that the Senate by
authority added to his titles TVTOR REIPVBLICAE, and PARENS PRINCIPVM POPVLI
ROMANI, and after his death even by his own murderers, his Monument of fair
Stone was raised in the confines of Persia, and upon his sepulcher this
inscription set

DIVO GORDIANO VICTORI PERSARVM VICTORI GOTTHORVM VICTORI SARMATARVM DEPVLSORI
ROMANARVM SEDITIONVM VICTORI GERMANORVM. SED NON VICTORI PHILIPPORVM.

To the Sacred Gordianus vanquisher of the Persians, Goths, and Sarmates,
extinguisher of the Roman Civil discords, and subduer of the Germans, but not
of the Philippians.

(7) He was of condition most noble and lovely, Gordianus his virtues.
of behavior gentle, very studious and given much to learning; having in his
Library no less then threescore and two thousand Books, as is reported. The
truth is, that wicked people were not worthy long to enjoy so virtuous, so
clement, so peereles an Emperor. He died in the month of March, in the year
of our Redeemer two hundred forty five.

M. JULIUS PHILIPPUS EMP. CHAPTER XXXI.
M. JULIUS PHILIPPUS CAES.

Julius Philip. Emp.
Julius Philip. Caes.


WHat man is there, who considering those forepassed An. Do. 245.
murders, of so many, and so mighty Monarchs, would not, by the spectacle of
others calamities, be induced to prefer the security of a moderate estate,
before the desire of Sovereignty; whose glorious content is only in
appearance, but the cares and hazards are both real and perpetual. But of so
attractiue virtue is the Lodestone of Majesty, through the imagined felicity
thereof, that most men's desires are drawn to that one point of the Compass,
and if a little fair wind of fortune shall blow on them; they will launch
forth with their full sails into that Mare incognitum, a Sea of unknown
calamities. And amongst others, such were the blind desires, and such the
unhappy event of this Julius Philippus the Arabic Bararian. Of parentage
obscure and ignoble, as Victor and others affirm, who plucked off the imperial
robes of his Liege-Lord, to inuest himself.

(2) Being now accepted as Emperor by the Soldiers An. Do. 245. Victor.
Eutropius.
in Parthia, he wrote to the Senate of the death of Gordianus, as though it
naturally had happened, and with fair pretensions of his good purposes, but
more through the feareof his Parthian Soldiers, obtained their consents;
whereupon shuffling up a most dishonorable peace in those parts, and declaring
his son Philip for his Caesar, (whose Coins with his, we have set in the
beginning of this Chap.) he made all speed toward Rome: where, the year
Aurelius Vi^r.
ensuing, his shows and games were exceedingly magnificent, for the
Celebration of the Birthday (as we we may term it) of Rome, that being, the
thousand year from her foundation.

(3) It pleased God at length to touch this Emperors heart, both with such a
sense of his own forepast Sabellic^. Orosius. Eusebius.
sins, and also with the light of heavenly truth, that he has the honor of
being the first Emperor baptized into the faith of Christ, together with his
son Philip, and his wife Seuera: though the public authorizing of the same
Profession was reserved for the blessed times of our British Constantine. The
means of his conversion from Idolatry, were Fabianus and Origin, who by
letters exhorted him thereunto: and for the same Profession, were both himself
and son murdered by Decius his Captain, though others report, that Decius
did rather hate Christianity for their sakes, then them for their Professions
sake. And howsoever Pomponius Laetus accuses him to be Pomp. Laetus.
a dissembling Prince, yet Eusebius declares the effects of his Profession
far otherwise: for Philip (says he) seeking to communicate with the Saints,
could not be admitted, till such time as he had made open confession of his
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 33.
Faith; at which time he joined himself with those, who for their sins were
brought to examination, and was placed in the room of the Penitents, because
that in many things he had been faulty: which willingly he obeyed, and
declared by his works his sincere and religious mind toward God. Which may
the rather appear by Sabellicus and Bergomensis, who show, that the hatred of
Decius Sabellic. (...). 7. lib. 7.
against Philip and his son was conceived, for that they had committed the
custody of their Treasures unto Fabianus the Christian Bishop of Rome, who
baptized them, as some write; though others say, Poncius the Martyr did it.
Polychro^. lib. 4. cap. 21. Goths infest Misia and Thracia.


(4) The Goths again descending from Scythia, infested Misia and Thracia with
a mighty Army, seeking their habitations in those Countries as formerlie they
had done: against whose irruptions, the Emperor sent one Marinus a most
valiant Captain, who no sooner came into those parts, but drew the Soldiers
into a Rebellion, and proclaimed himself Emperor, taking (as he said) his
example from Philip, that had in like sort raised his title by his Sovereigns
fall. But the Soldiers that had newly erected him, as suddenly again threw
him down, and in their mutable affections slew him. (...) (...).


(5) Into whose Charge was sent Decius, a man of great experience, who also no
sooner was in the Army, but they forced the Imperial Ensigns upon him,
Decius enforced to be Emperor.
and (as some report) against his will: he therefore sent secretly to Philip,
declaring this attempt of the Soldiers, and how he meant to make escape from
them with persisting in his dutiful allegiance. But the Emperor fearing this
to be but policy in Decius, lest by delay he might give him more strength,
omitted no time to uphold his own, and with a mighty Army undertook these
affairs himself, not trusting any more to the disposal of his Captains. And
immediately departing Rome, with a stern resolution, and ouer-hard hand, held
the reine of that begun Expedition, whereby he presently lost the love of the
Army, and Decius was accounted the more worthy of rule, whom in Verona they
forthwith proclaimed Emperor, and cut off Philips head through the teeth,
Philippus and his Caesar slain. E^trop. Capitol.
before they had departed Italy. At news whereof, the Pretorians slew Philip
his Caesar and son, a man of so obseruable composedness, as that he had
been never seen to laugh in all his life. And thus the two Philips ended
their reigns.

(6) Julius Philippus (says Eusebius) reigned seven Eusebius. Eccles. ^ist. lib.
6. cap. 38.
years: but Eutropius and Victor give him only five; whose death happened in
the year of Christ Jesus, two hundred and fifty.

GN. MESSIVS, QVINCTVS, TRAIAN, DECIVS. CHAPTER XXXII.
Tra. Decius Emp.
Dec^ C^s. Hostil.


DEcius elected Emperor by the Persian Legions, proclaimed An. Do. 250.
in Verona by the Roman Soldiers, and in Rome confirmed by the Voice of the
Senate, was of them all with wonted flatteries styled Augustus.

(2) His Birth was noble, of the City Cabali in Decius his parentage.
the Lower Pannonia, now known by the name of Hungary: himself well
experienced, wise, and valiant, and wielded the Empire as a worthy Prince, had
he not blemished his reign with a stain of Tyranny, (...) a (...) scourge of
the Chri^.
and persecuted Gods Saints with such a Heathenish rage, that he is rightly
noted by learned Writers, to be the seventh Horn of the
Persecuting-Imperiall-Beast, Apocal. 13.
whose savage cruelties toward the innocent Christians, is most lamentable to
be heard, but more to their (...). Or^.
smart that suffered and felt it.

(3) The Grid-iron he made the Altar, whereupon Ambr. l^b. 2. de Virgin.
blessed Laurence offered his body in sacrifice; the Stews the Temple, wherein
Theodora the unspotted Virgin worshipped her Christ; the comfortless Deserts,
the refuge of aged Chaeremon, Bishop of Nilus; Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 6.
cap. 41. Vincent. Niceph. lib. 5. cap. 27.
and the Cave, the Sanctuary of the seven Soldiers, fabuled by Nicephorus for
seven Sleepers: and so barbarous was he that way, that he put to Martyrdom
many children, as Vincentius, citing Hugo, affirms. Vinc. lib. 11. e. 52.
Sabellicus.
Fabianus and Cornelius, both reverend Bishops of Rome, he slew; Alexander,
Bishop of Jerusalem, imprisoned Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 38.
to death; and Great Origin, after he had scourged him at an Iron-stake, his
feet he locked in the Stocks four paces asunder, where he so continued
certain days, inuenting such tortures and strange temptations against the
guiltless Christians, as are most admirable to hear. But long he raged not,
ere God in his justice took revenge, and brake him to pieces as a Potters
Psalm. 2. 9.
Vessel.

(4) For the Goths that had invaded Mysia and Thracia, continuing their
Irruptions into the bordering Provinces, drew him into an Expedition for those
parts, where being betrayed by Trebonianus Gallus Pomponius Letus. Iornandes.
his own Captain, he saw his two sons, Decius and Hostilianus, (whom he had
admitted in fellowship of Empire with him, and whose moneys we have with his
expressed) slain before his face; and himself to Decius and his Caesar their
deaths. Cassiodor.
intombe his body, as a last refuge, in a deep whirlepoole; wherein it was so
swallowed up, as it could never be after seen; having no other honor of
Burial, nor place of remembrance where his bones should rest. And according to
his Death, so was his Descent: for neither has he Father, Mother, nor Wife
mentioned (for ought I know) by any Writer, (for of Salustia Barbia Orbiana, it
is doubtful whether to him or his son Hostilian she were wedded) nor his
Acts so exactly registered, as were those of the preceding Emperors, his sins
so deserving it, and God in his revenge so punishing it.

(5) Aurelius Victor and Eutropius say, that he reigned two years and odd
months: but Eusebius Decius his reign Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 7. cap. 1.
affirms his reign, not fully two years: most hold him to have died at the
age of fifty, and in the year of Christ, two hundred fifty two.

C. VIBIVS TREBONIANVS GALLVS, Emperors. C AIVS VIBIVS VOLVSIANVS, CHAPTER
XXXIII.
Tree. Gallus Emp.
Vibius Volusi. Emp.


THis overthrow of the Romans, and death of Decius, An. Do. 252.
in outward semblance was so grievously taken by Trebonianus Gallus, that no
man was so forward for revenge as he, and therefore the last in suspicion of
Treason. The Army he strengthened, and daily encouraged, pretending great
service against those barbarous Scythians, but all to gain credit and liking
of the Soldiers, whereby he soon achieved his desire, and with their
applauses was proclaimed Emperor. Gallus elected Emperor. His parentage.


(2) By Birth, he was descended of an honorable Family in Rome: but true
honor cannot harbor where dwells treachery and falsehood, as it was with
him, when appointed by Decius to be Governor of Mysia, and to keep the
passages from the inuading Goths, the desire of Rule so corrupted his mind,
that he plotted with them against the Army, and betrayed the trust and life of
his Sovereign.

(3) Neither is he stained with the blot of Treasons Pomp. Lat^. Bloud^.
Sabellicus.
only, but also with a careless and cruel government; for with the Goths he
made a dishonorable peace, whereby the Romans (who were Lords of the World)
became Tributarie by a yearly pay to those uncivil Scythians, who
nevertheless in short time brake their Truce with him, sacking and spoiling
the Provinces of Thrasia, Mysia, Thessalia, and Mecedonia: the Persians then
also by their example entering Mesopotamia and Syria, made spoil even through
Armenia.

(4) Gallus little regarding these troubles abroad, consumed his time idly in
Rome, rather as a Bondsman to his own voluptuous desires, then a Conquering
Monarch; taking for his companion and Fellow-Emperour, his son Volusianus, as
appears by inscription of Coin placed before, a very child, whose years
did quit him of any Capital Crime. But himself not perceiving the unfortunate
success of Detius for persecuting the innocent Christians, stumbled (as Gallus
persecuteth the Christians. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 7. cap. 1. Universal
Pestilence through all the world. Paul Orosius.
Eusebius says) at the same stone, and banished them whose Prayers preserved
his prosperous estate: at which time followed so universal a Pestilence, that
no Province in the world was free from the same: and his wicked Life and most
unfortunate Reign hastened now unto their period.

(5) For the Goths continuing their furies begun, Aemilian. Maurus his
victory.
his General Aemilian. Maurus overthrew them with a wonderful slanghter;
whereby he grew so famous, and Gall^ so contemptible, that the Soldiers (ever
affecting change) proclaimed him Emperor, the news whereof soon roused
Gallus from the Bed of his lascivious pleasures, and with his son entered the
quarrel against Aemilianus, whose fortune was to slay them both in fight, the
year of Christ's Incarnation, Ga^ and his son (...). B^op (...) Hist. lib. 7.
cap. 9.
two hundred fifty three, after he had reigned not fully two years, and lived
(as Victor testifies) forty and seven: whereupon the Armies ioining their
forces together, conferred the Imperial title and Ensigns upon the Conqueror.

C. JULIUS AEMILIANVS. CHAPTER XXXIV.
Aemilianus Maurus Emp.


AEmilianus succeeding Gallus by the only election of An. Do. 253.
the Mysian Army, was by birth an African in the Province Mauritania, of
Parentage base and obscure; who being risen by the Wars from mean places of
service, and no better then a Common Soldier, aspired to the charge and credit
of a Captain General. Aemilian. Maurus his descent.


(2) His Election at first was contradicted by the Italian Bands, in favor of
Valerianus their own Leader, whom they sought to raise Emperor, the Senate
also inclining thereto, the fame of the man among them was so renowned. The
most voices therefore heard on his side. Some have rather accounted Aemilianus
an Usurper, then ranked him in the catalogue of lawful Emperors.

(3) But seeing Eutropius does allow him the place, Entropi^
we are not to dispute his title or claim: only his short time of government
admits no matters of large discourse, being cut off in the budde, before the
graft had time to spring. For his Army disliking what themselves had done, and
hearing of the worths and election of Valerianus, laid down their weapons born
in his defense, and tumultuously murdered him in the Aemilius. Maurus his end,
and continuance of his reign.
heat of their bloods, after he had reigned in name, without action, the space
almost of four months.

(4) So unconstant is the state of worldly felicity, and may be compared to a
mastlesse Ship, which without Tackle is left to the mercy of the raging
Seas, that is one while carried with the fair winds of hope toward the haven
of wished desires, but straightwaies overwhelmed with the waves of despair:
and most especially him that is borne upon the opinions of the giddy multitude,
now carried aloft upon the floods of their fawning favors, and anon left in
the sands of their retiring ebbes, with a sudden shipwreck of all their
fore-gone fortunes. And these adventures too soon Aemilianus felt, who the
same year that he thus put forth to Sea, lost all his adventure, and
therewith his life, Anno 253.

P. LICINIVS VALERIANVS. CHAPTER XXXV.
Valerianus Emp.


IF ever the saying of the Anno Dom. 254.
wise Athenian Solon (spoken to Croesus the rich king of Lydia) was true, That
no Herodot. in Clio.
man can be happy before the day of his death: then most truly may it be
verified of this Valerianus the next succeeding Emperor: whose years were
multiplied with increase of honor, until they came to seventy and seven, but
then were clouded with such ignominious miseries, as the like had never happened
to any Roman Emperor before him, and (I may well say) to no other Monarch in
the world before living: Such is the Ordinance of our great God, sometimes from
the Dunghill to raise men of low degree, and to place them with Princes in the
Chair of Majesty; then again to bring down the Mighty from their Seat of
Glory, and to leave them chained with the poorest Captives, and basest Vassals.
For such was the State of that Great and Proud King of Babel, who from the
height of Majesty fell into Dan. 4. 27.
the conditions of an unreasonable Beast. And so was it with Valerianus, though
not utterly abandoned from the Society of men, as Babels King was: yet was he
carried Captive unto a Nation whose Society was scarce human, and where his
usage was more then barbarous.

(2) This man was both nobly descended, and of Valerianus his descent.
so great esteem among the Romans, that being but a private, and then also
absent, they chose him for their Censor, an Office of high dignity, conferred
ever Treb. Pollio.
upon the Best, as Trebellius Pollio, who wrote the History of his Life, has
declared. Eusebius reports his beginning to have been gracious and mild
toward the Christians, above any of his Ancestors whatsoever; yea even those
who were themselves openly Valeria^ a protector of the Christians.
accounted Christians: insomuch, that his Clemency was their Protection, and
his Court the Sanctuary of their safeties. But Satan (whose hatred sleeps
not) stirred up an Egyptian Sorcerer against them, who so Paul. Orosius. a
Necromancer seduceth Valelerian.
enchanted the Emperors heart, that with great cruelty he began the Eighth
Persecution, and so raged, that some have appropriated the sayings of the
Apocalypse in the thirteenth chapter unto him, as to whom power Apocal. c. 13.
was given for two and forty months over the Saints of God, and a mouth to
utter great blasphemies: Of which Dionys^ in Epist. ad Hermam^ apud Eusebi^.
opinion is the ancient Dionysius Alexandrinus. Many indeed were the Martyrs
that he caused with horrible tortures to die, and more had done, if the just
revenging Sabellicu^ Volateranus.
hand of God had not cut him off.

(3) For Sapores the savage King of Persia, making great spoil in Syria,
Cilicia, and Cappadocia, drew Valerian Valerianus taken prisoner by Sapor
from Rome into Mesopotamia, to withstand his rage, where striking Battle with
him was left (either by Treason or Chance) without sufficient Guard to secure
his Person, and was there taken Prisoner by the Persians, having then reigned
seven years (whereof two were spent in spilling of the blood of Saints) and
thence forward, the rest of his life was enthralled to a most miserable and
merciless servitude: For the Tyrannizing Persian puffed up with this fortunate
gale, Trebel. Pollio.
to an excessive swelling of pride; whenever he was disposed to take Horse,
made Valerianus his Footstool, causing this Greatest Monarch of the World to
whom all Nations did homage, to bow down his neck and back for himself
thereon to tread, and mount into his Saddle: In which insufferable slavery,
his old body endured without release, to the end of his most Pompon. L^tus.
wretched life, which by some Authors account was full seven years more; the
very time of the Babylonian Aureli^s Uictor.
Kings abasement.

(4) But herein the misery of Valerianus is much greater then Nabuchadnezars
was, in that God both restored him to his former glory, and endued him with
heavenly grace to confess his sins; whereas Valerianus perished in the
desperate calamity whereinto he was fallen; as Eusebius shows in these
words: Eusebius in sermon. ad Conuen^ Sanctorum.
And thou Valerian, forasmuch as thou have exercised the same cruelty in
murdering the subjects of God, therefore have proved unto us the righteous
Judgment of God, in that thy self wast boundin Chains, and carried away for a
Captive Slave with thy Glorious Purple and thy Imperial Attire, and at length
also commanded by Sapors King of the Persians, to be slain, and powdered with
salt, have set up unto all men a perpetual Monument of thine own wretchedness.

(5) How unspeakable the cruelties were which this wretched Emperor endured by
that Tyrant, may hence appear; in that not only those which were Allies to the
Roman Empire, but also the Barbarous Kings, and friends of Sapores were moved
with commiseration, and distaste, as Trebell. Pollio proves by their own
letters sent for his release, the copies whereof he there produces. Other
Princes also of the East, as of the Bactrians, Albanians, Ilberians, and
Scythians, inhabiting Mount Taurus, had such sense of these ignominious vsages,
that they disdained to receive the letters from Sapor of his Victorious
success, and sent their Ambassadors to Rome, profferring their assistance for
the redemption of their Emperor; yet all auailed not, and Sapor held still his
Prisoner, abating nothing either of his own pride, or his Captives misery,
Valeria^s had his Eyes pulled out.
but in the end (so hellish a fiend is revenge) commanded his Eyes to be pulled
out, and so for age and grief he died, as Eusebius says: being, as Agathus (a
writer of credit) reports, flaied alive by direction of this Flaied alive.
unhuman King. Thus did God punish one Tyrant by another, and thus himself
felt those torments vnpittied, which he had without pity inflicted on others.
The race of whose Reign is accounted to be seven years before his
Captivity, wherein he lived almost so long as Galienus his son sat Emperor,
and died in the year two hundred sixty one.

P. LICINIVS GALIENVS. CHAPTER XXXVI.
Gallien. Emp.
Aureolus. Odenatus.


VAlerian now Captine in Persia (while Odenatus grasping An. Do. 261.
the advantage, took upon him the Empire of the East; and the now guidelesse
Army of Rome, occupied only in spoil and mutiny, their leaders in faction,
and the whole State astonished in affrighted terror and amazement) Balista (a
gallant gentleman) first of the Romans moved with the instant misery of the
Commonwealth, resolved by electing Rome in disturbance for election of an
Emperor.
anew an Emperor, to prevent the apparent ruin of his own Country: yet never
in this his worthy resolution, once dreamed of Gallienus, (though before
chosen Augustus in the full fortune of his father) but the affection of the
Army forcibly settled the Garland upon Macrian and his two sons, as the most
worthy; Marianus with his sons elected, subdued and slain.
who with his eldest not long after subdued by Aurcolus usurping Illyria
(against Gallenus then received Sovereign by the Roman Senate) and his
youngest betrayed to murder by plot of Odenatus, left the distracted Empire to
those three, of which the last disdaining 1. Aureolus in Illyris. 2. Gallienus
in Rome. 3. Odenatus in the East. Odenatus overcomes the Persians.
much the indignity offered to the State of Rome, by that base captivity of
Valerian, whose calamity nothing touched the sense of his unnatural son,
entered a war against the Persians, and took from them their Cities Nisabis
and Carras. But such was the moderation of this man, that although he had
power of an independent Soueraignety, yet he held still a good correspondencie
and intelligence in all his actions of Government, with Gallienus, to whom he
sent (as monument of Victory and Revenge) such of the Persian Nobility as
became his Prisoners: and thus Odenatus did conquer, and Gallenus triumph. But
such was the baseness of the other, that when he could not by any Galie^
seeks Odenatus his death.
Princely virtue in himself, eclipse the true merit of Odenatus, he endeavored
to deface by treachery what he could not suppress by valor. But in this
failing, he made him then (through fear) copartner of his Empire, stiling him
Augustus, and stamping his face and the Persian Triumph upon the public Coin
of the State, by approbation of the Senate, leaving him alone to defend those
Frontiers of the Empire, whilst himself, neither regarding his old fathers
miseries, (most miserable that he had so unnatural a son) the dishonor of
the Roman State, nor the reuolts of the Provinces, whereof news was daily
brought him, spent his unprincely thoughts upon fruitless devices, as in
reserving sundry Fruits and Flowers, that they might grow green and flourish
all seasons of the year; and (which was worse) upon women and wanton
dalliances. Yet had he a Lady of excellent beauty and allurements, Cornelia
Salonina Pipara, to his wife, the daughter of the King of the Martomanni, whose
feature we find often minted upon her Moneys. His son by her Saloninus he
adopted Caesar, of whom there is no more remembered in Story, then that he was
borne noble, trained up princely, and perished through the errors of his
father, and not his own. And to his brother Licinius Valerianus (to whom the
father had given the title of Caesar) he added the honor of Augustus. And
therefore we have not held it improper, to adioine to his their moneys in the
front of his life.

(2) The calamities of this Emperors time were so many, as almost exceed
credit: and Signs showed both in the Heavens and the Earth, manifested his
wrath, that sat upon the Throne of Jasper, from whose presence issued
Thundrings, Lightnings, and Voices. For Apoc. 4. 3. Trebe^. Pollio. Strange
sigh^s in the Heavens.
(by Writers of best credit) the Sun was clouded as under sackcloth, and not
seen for many days together. Earthquakes great, and fearfully resounding,
overthrew Great and mighty Earthquakes.
Cities and other edifices, shaking the ground so terribly, that vast Caves,
and hideous gaping bowels of the earth were thereby laid open, and whereout (no
less strangely) flowed great streams of salt waters. The Earth roared, and
seemed to thunder, when there was no voice heard in the air. The Sea
ouer-swelled her banks, and brake into many Continents, drowning Countries,
Cities, and People: and (besides all these) so violent a Pestilence raged, that
in Rome no less then 5. thousand persons died in a day.

(3) These miseries somewhat moved this Heathenish Emperor to remorse: and
thinking thereby to pacify the wrath of the Divine Powers, he stayed the
Gali^ stayed the per^cutions of the Christians Eus^b. Eccles. ^st. lib. 7. cap.
12. Apoc. 1. 16.
Persecutions of the Christians, sending out his Edicts in favor of them. For
not only the Heavens, Earth, and Seas declared the anger of their God, out of
whose mouth went a two-edged sword, but the Provinces also seemed to be removed
out of their places. The Soldiers of all parts electing their own Generals,
advanced no less then Thirty at once, who assumed the title of Emperors,
Thirty Empero^ (...) onc^.
but are recorded to Posterities by the name of Usurping Tyrants. And as they
were all deadly opposite each to other, so were they jointly almost all bent
against Galienus; whereby the Roman Empire was more oppressed with her own
forces, then ever it had been by foreign Powers. And since six of them
assumed the Purple Robe in this Western Angle of the ^mpire, it will not be
impertinent to the course of Story, with a light touch to remember them, and to
express their Moneys, as we have done the rest of those that held the reins
of government in these parts of the Roman World.



M. Cassius Labienus Posthumus after the death of Saloninus (who was committed
to his education by Gallienus) assumed the Empire, by aid and encouragement of
those of Gallia, over whom he had born the office of liefetenancie by favor of
Valerian the Emperor. And these again, as all Populars greedy of Innovation
from him and Iunius Cassius Posthumus his son, took both honor and life,
after ten years government. This opportunity either made by L. Aelianus, or
fitly taken, mounted him up with ease into that Imperial throne, in which he
sat not with like fortune of continuance, though of conclusion. To this man
succeeded together, M. Aurelius Victorinus, and Lucius his son; both in a
Tumult near Colayn by their soldiers murdered. And had not the inordinate
lust of the elder, blemished his other virtues, he had to all the most excellent
Emperors bin nothing inferior, in the best of their other virtues.

(7) The restless humor now of the giddy Commons, next setleth it self upon
Aurelius Marius, a sovereign suitable in his mean condition to their base
affections (for he was no better then a Blacksmith) yet to him a man of their
own means and making, they were no less unconstant and cruel, then to the
rest: after three days, setting an end of his government, with a sword of his
own forging. And therefore Piuesius Tetricus, the father and son, though
ascending the throne of Majesty, with the greatest applause of that people,
and filling it up with much merit and happy success of their own, when they
considered the insufferable insolences and desperate practices of that
profane rank, chose rather to adorn Aurelians Triumph, in a voluntary
captivity, then to live and rule at the devotion of a lawless multitude. And
these times seemed no less fatally bent to blood, disorder, and tyranny in
other parts as well as these: For the Pannonians raised Ingenuus: The Myssians,
A. Regillianus: The Egyptians, Aemilianus: In Africa Celsus was proclaimed: In
Illyricum, Aureolus: and in the East, Pomp. Laetus.
Odenatus (a man the more famous for Zenobia, his glorious and magnanimous
Wife; Whose valor was so feared of Galienus, that to make him his, he
admitted him his Fellow-Emperor, with the Style of Augustus as we have
remembered before.) The Panlus Oros.
Germans invade Italy: The Cassidor.
Goths waste Greece, Pontus and Asia; The Samartians seize Iornandes. Eusebius.
Austriche and Hungary: The Persians rob Syria: The Saxons break into
Gallia: The Franks into Spain: In a word, all are in vproares, Apoc. 6. 4.
the second seal opened, and the Red-horse prepared for Battle, whose Rider
had received a great and sharp Sword, with Commission given him to take Peace
from the Earth: and these times of troubles are so famous in Story, and the
reuolutions of Acts so agreeable to the words of the Prophecy, that they may
seem justly a most exact accomplishment of that sacred Galienus times
prophesied of by the Evangelist S. John.
vision.

(5) Finally, when Gallienus had reigned from his first Associating with his
Father the term of fifteen years, Martian, Heraclianus, and Ceronius, three
of his principal Captains, (compounding together that one of them should be
Emperor) plotted his death, whiles he besieged the City Millan, where they
traitorously murdered him, the year of our Lord Galienus his death and
continuance of his reign.
two hundred sixty nine, after that he had suffered the Empire to be rent in
pieces, and usurped by many Foreign and barbarous Nations.

M. AURELIUS FLAVIVS CLAUDIUS. CHAPTER XXXVII.
Fla. Claudius Emp.


ROMES glory thus declining, and the Imperial An. Do. 269.
Foundations thus undermined, the aspiring tops of all that beauteous frame
began to shake, and to foreshew the signs of her approaching fall. And had
not the Fates even at that instant raised a stay to underprop the Walls, those
mounted Towers which so long had braued the Sky, had been laid level with
the Ground, and made the ruins of All-consuming Time.

(2) For whereas by the strange confusions under the late Emperor, the Eagles
body was burdened with the weight of those thirty heads at once: of which
number though many of them by their own mutual ravening were consumed before
the death of Galienus, yet the mightiest, as Aurelius Governor of Dalmatia,
Tetricus and Victorinus, who held Britain and Gallia; and Zenobia (the
Heroicke Queen and wife of Odenatus) all the East; to omit the Murderers of
Galienus, that durst not make their claim, (their deed so ill disgested) all
these were still remaining and strong, at such time as Flauius Claudius by the
Soldiers was elected before the Walls of Milan, and confirmed with much joy
by the Senate in Rome.

(3) This Flauius was descended of noble Parentage, His descent.
out of Dalmatia, by some; or as others say, of Dardania, and sprung from the
Trojan Blood. But Aurelius Victor will have him the son of Gordianus the
Aurel. Victor.
Emperor before spoken of. Howsoever, a most worthy man he was, an excellent
Captain, of singular Flauius Claudius his virtues.
continence, a just Judge, a lover of strangers, severe to the wicked, but most
benign to the virtuous: so that we may well say, In Rome was a new world; or
at least, In the World was a new Rome.

(4) His first Expedition was against Aurelius, that held Milan, whom he there
slew, and joined his Soldiers to his own strength. But preferring the
general good before his particular quiet, he addressed his wars for the
East, against the Goths, who (as Iornandes their Story-writer reports) had
infested those Iornandes. Goths invade the Empire.
parts of the Empire (for fifteen years continuance) with continual
irruptions, and had now lately entered friendship with many other like barbarous
Nations, inuading Thracia, and the Countries before them, even Paul Orosius.
unto Macedonia: and thence taking their way through Hungary, came down the
River Danubie, with two thousand Sail of Ships, fraught with Munition Two
thousand sail of Goths.
and Men. To meet these, Claudius prepared: but before his Encounter, he wrote
thus to the Senate:

(5) Renowned Fathers and Reverend Lords, understand Claudius Letter to the
Senate.
ye for certain, that three hundred and twenty thousand men of war are
entered our Confines, whose weight does seem to burden the Earth it self, and
whose warre-like preparations make these parts of the Empire to tremble and
quake; with whom I am now to strike Battle: wherein if the Conquest be mine,
the joy will be yours. But if I fall, yet I pray remember that I fight after
Galienus has reigned, and rent the strength of the Romans in these remote
Provinces, and after the Rebellions of Lollianus, Posthumus, Eugenius,
Regillianus, Celsus, and others, who have so weakened the sinews of our Arms,
and broken the Swords and Lances of our defense, that I may well say, we
want, if not strength, yet weapons wherewithal to fight. And to our shame be
it spoken, Zenobia a Woman commands all our Crosse-bowes, and bends them
against our unarmed breasts. How small soever therefore our performance shall
be in this service, repute it (I pray) for great, and wish our proceeding may
sort to the weal of the Empire.

(6) Which done, with no daunted spirit he entered Goths vanquished.
Battle, and with more then wonted courage fought so valiantly, that he slew
and took Prisoners, to the number of three hundred thousand fighting men, with
two thousand Ships laden with Munition, so that whole houses were filled to
their tops with Targets, Shields, Swords, and Lances, and other abiliments
for War, whereof he wrote again to Rome: and following the Enemy with
success of Victory, in Thracia near Bizantium, in Macedonia near
Thessalonica, drove the Goths out of those parts which they had so long
infested, and restored the wonted bounds of the Empire. Thence marching into
Germany, near the Lake called Garda, gave that revolted Nation a great
overthrow, where (as Eutropius and Victor do report) he vanquished two
thousand of those strong Germans, and there established again their subjection
to the Romans power. And now minding to go forward against Tetricus and the
puissant Zenobia, a Fever did first cut off his purpose, and shortly after his
life: a thing very strange and rare in that Flauius Claudius died a natural
death.
age, as by the course of their reigns we have hitherto seen; not that so
great a Monarch should die, (they being all of the same earthly mould that
meanest men are) but that in those days a Roman Emperor should die in his
bed, as other men do, of a natural death.

(7) He was of personage tall, his body well His personage and qualities.
composed and strong, bright and clear eyes, his face great and full; and of
life most temperate and chaste. He reigned one year, ten months, and
fifteen days, and died the fourth of February, in the year of Christ, two
hundred seventy one. His Statue of Gold was set up in the Capitol, and his
Target of the same metal hung up in the Senate House, himself (in honor of
his admired worth) placed among the Roman Emperors that were deified for
Gods: such an estimation and love did his virtuous life procure unto him even
after his death.

M. AURELIUS QVINTILIVS. CHAPTER XXXVIII.
A. Quintilius Emperor.


QVintilius, the Brother of Claudius, and Viceroy in An. Do. 271.
his absence for the Guard of Italy, was by the Army whereof he had command,
proclaimed Emperor Eutropius.
immediately upon the News of Claudius his death: The Senate as ioifully
confirming his Election, as they were sorrowful for their loss of his most
worthy Brother. Brethren indeed they were by Quintili^ brother to the last
Emperor.
nature, and in conditions not much unlike; so that what seemed to be past in
the one, was in the other supplied and still remaining: For this M. Aurelius
Quintilius, was both wise for Civil Government, and experienced for Wars,
wanting no complements of an absolute Prince.

(2) But long his glass stood not without a turn, nor his Fortunes fauning
without a frown* For the victorious Soldiers which in his expeditions had
followed Claudius, and thought themselves worthy of the first voice in
Election, proclaimed Aurelianus for Emperor, a most valiant Captain; and of
whose prowess there had been so sufficient experience, as that Quintilius knew
he could not stand against him.

And therefore mistrusting the strength of his Title, and affections of his
Soldiers, reputed it ignominious for a noble mind, to die with less honor
then he attained unto, and enioied by his life: and therefore resolving to die
an Emperor, chose rather by a voluntary cutting of his own veins, to power
out his life Quintilius cut his own veins, and so bled to death.
with his blood, then to hazard the chance of uncertain wars, or to return
to his private estate.

And thus no longer reigning then seuenteen days, He reigned but seuenteen
days.
(which short time could minister little matter of larger discourse) he died
with his brother the same month of February the twentieth day, and year of
Christ his incarnation, two hundred seventy one.

L. DOMITIVS AURELIUS VALOR. AVRELIANVS. CHAPTER XXXIX.
Val. Aurelianus Emperor.


SO short was the Reign of An. Do. 271.
the last Emperor Quintilius, that Aurelianus who followed him* may be said to
be the Successor of Claudius, and not of him: being elected by his Legions in
the East, as soon as the other had been in Italy (though confirmed before him
of the Senate in Rome) continued still his rival for Majesty, and attained
the top of that high set Gole, whereof Quintilius failed, before his foot had
well mounted the first step. Aurelianus his descent.


(2) This Valerius Aurelianus was of parentage neither honorable nor rich, and
yet his fortunes carried him to the height of both. Some recount his birth was
of Dacia; others of Mysia; both so doubtful that Flauius Vopiscus, (the copious
Writer of his Life) leaves it undecided, and to the censure of his Readers.
Fla. V^p.
His risings were by the Wars; whereunto from his childhood he had a
natural inclination: and for continual carrying of his weapons, was commonly
called Aurelianus the Sword Bearer.

(3) His service was sufficiently known to the Generals of diverse Provinces,
who had forty sundry times employed him in the charge of a Lieutenant: and
under Claudius in Persia he was the Coronell of the Horse. In the wars of
Sarmatia he is reported to have slain forty Enemies with his own hands in one
day; and at other several times, to the number of nine hundred men, as both
Vopiscus and Theoclius have affirmed. And generally so famous were his deeds,
both before he was Caesar, and after, as that he is by some compared Aurelianus
comparable with Caesar and Alexander.
with Julius and Alexander.

(4) Upon the ratifying of his election by the Senate at Rome, he hasted not
thither to be saluted and enstalled Emperor, but forthwith marched against
the Sueuians and Sarmates, who sore infested the Empire with wars: and having
soon subdued them, and quieted those parts, in great haste he came into
Italy against the Germans, who with Fire and Sword had gone as far as Milan:
and them likewise with great valor he forced thence. Then entering Rome with
great pomp, caused the Walls to be repaired and enlarged, which was not
lawful but only for Victorious Aurelianus enlarged the walls of Rome.
Emperors. But long he stayed not, ere he returned into Syria, against the
stout Queen Zenobia, whose brave resolutions, and warlike power for fight, her
Letter in answer unto him (when being sorely tired, he proffered her wealth,
life, and liberty to yield) Chap. 37. Sabellicus says she both tired him, and
put him to flight also.
does manifestly declare: the tenor thereof being as follows.

(5) Zenobia, the most mighty Eastern Queen, to Aurelianus, Romes Augustus,
sends greeting. Zenobia her Letter to Aurelianus.
Never Captain to this day, in using Pen in stead of Spear, or filed Words
for Weapons points, has more sufficiently discharged the parts of War, then
thou to me in Writ have done: wherein I well perceive thy drift, and blame thee
not, that see me but a Woman: which Sex you men make subjects only by your
smoothing tongues. But know, Augustus, thou dealest not with a Roman Dame, nor
with her who upon base conditions will subscribe her honor; but with Zenobia,
the The great City Palmyra (says Josephus) was built by King Solomon; whence
their Nation took the name. It bordered upon the Parthians Kingdom in the
middle betwixt it and the Roman Empire.
Palmyrean Queen, in whose womanly breast the manly heart of great Odenatus
does still-liue and lie. These courting terms do ill beseem a Camp, and
worser him who would be styled a Mars. But yet thy Golden Shower has rained
beside our Lap; nor we a Ovid. Metam. li. 6.
Venus to meet thee for thy sport, but with our Lance in hand to try our
lawful right, and with our Swords to answer thy demands in blood. I am a
Woman; so was Tomyris was a valiant Scythian Queen, who slew King Cyrus, and
all his Host: and filling a vessel with their blood, did cast in Cyrus head,
saying, Blood have thou thirsted, now drink thereof thy fill. To this does
Zenobia allude.
Tomyris; thou know the rest: in Arms against Augustus; so was Cleopatra,
who rather chose to sting her self to death, then live a subject (though a
Prince) under great Octanian. Art thou his better? thou art deceived: or I her
worse? nothing less: who from her person do derive my Pedigree, and from her
courage will maintain my cause. I am a Queen, and reign beloved, was Romes
Empress, obeyed and honored; and the wife of Odenatus, whom all you Romans
greatly feared. Are my powers weak? The Persians (whose strength you well have
tried) will supply. Are my Soldiers few? The Saracens have more that will
assist: and the Armenians are wholly at my command. If then Thieves and Robbers
in Syria were sufficient to ouer-throw thine Army, what hope is left thee to
escape our hands, when all these our strengths shall be thus conioined in one?
Therefore the same offers that to me thou have sent, the same to thee I here
return, and will perform, if thou in time embrace this truce.

(6) This haughty answer of that undaunted Queen, put more fire to the fury
of Aurelianus, who took the Letter in such scorn, that he threatened death to
the Inditer, (whom he supposed to be Longinus the Philosoper, who was always
with her, and her Instructor) which afterward he did accomplish: for
destroying her several Aids before they could meet together, and besieging
Palmyra her strong City, he brought the same to such distress, that in the
end he took her Captive; and glad of such a prey, carried Zenobia vanquished.
her himself to Rome, where following his Chariot of Triumph, attired in
Tissues and richest Robes of price, she was lead his Prisoner in Chains of
Gold: upon whose presence the Spectators with admirations so much gazed, that
somewhat it dimmed the Majesty Zenobia het beauty.
of Aurelianus: for she is said to be exceedingly fair, though not very
white, but somewhat brown: her eyes black and bright, her teeth shining like
pearls, her body tall, and of most stately proportion, her Flau. Vopisc.
countenance modest, mild, and pleasing, her voice sweet, her conversation
honest, her mind chaste, and body continent, wise, temperate, and learned in
the Greek, Latin, and Egyptian tongues. Yea the atchiuement of this Conquest
was held so notable, that he reputed himself the Restorer of the East, as it
appears by the reuerse of his money here prefixed in the entrance of his
reign.

(7) These Acts of Aurelianus made him so famous abroad, and feared at home,
that Tetricus which had held out against Galienus, came in under his
protection, holding it more safe to be a Subject in quiet, then a Commander
against an Opposite of so invincible a mind: by whom thereupon he was made
Governor of Campania, and of other Provinces in Italy.

(8) Hitherto this Emperors successes were very prosperous (we may well
suppose) for his indulgence to the Christians, whose assemblies he permitted,
and whose Bishops he so favored, that at their request he banished Paulus
Samosatenus the Heretic out of their Councels, and published an Edict in the
behalf of their Synods. But afterward Satan minding to sift the Wheat, Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 7 cap. 39. Paul. Orosius. Aurelianus at first a favorer, now
a persecutor of the Christians. Aurelianus scard with a Thunderbolt from heaven
Psalm. 2. 10.
that the Chafe might be his, stirred up this Emperor to raise the Ninth
Persecution, and to send forth his Edicts for the destruction of Gods Saints:
which whilst he was in perusing, and about to set his hand and seal, a
Thunderbolt from Heaven struck into his presence, and so near unto his
person, that all accounted him to be therewith slain, God warning him by this
his Messenger to be wise, lest he perished in his own ways; as shortly after
he did, being slain by his Seuants, Aurelianus slain.
through the Treason of Mnestheus his Secretary, the nine and twentieth day of
February following, near unto the City Bizantium, when he had sat Emperor
Entropius. Aurelianus.
four years, eleven months, and seven days, the year of our happiness,
two hundred seventy six.

(9) He was of stature tall, of body well shaped, a pleasing countenance, and
of a seemly presence, a His feature of body and mind.
great feeder, and very severe, whereby he was as much feared as beloved, and
therefore reported to be a good Physician, but that he ministered too bitter
P^tions; and was Canonized after his death among the holy Emperors: in the
second year of whose reign, the Great (...).
Constantine of Helena in Britain was borne.

M. CLAUDIUS TACITUS. CHAPTER XL.
Claudius Tacitus Emp.


THe former seditions ended An. Do. 276.
by Aurelianus, and the state of the Empire remaining Aurelianus being dead no
man sought to be Emperor.
now in quiet, no man appeared to sue, much less tumultuouslie to strive for
that Royal Diadem; but all the great Commanders (as though they made courtesy
in giving way each unto others) stood at the foot of Majesty; no man
attempting higher to mount. The soldiers Senate and Soldiers strain courtesy
who shall choose the Emperor.
sent to the Senate, to design the man whom they best liked; the Senate
requested the soldiers to elect him whom they held worthiest; in which
respective complements, and most kind correspondencie of all parts, eight
months passed with a peaceable Interregnum, as writers report.

(2) It seems, the fresh sense and fearful experiences Eusebius Vopiscus.
Orosius Oneuphrius.
of the former heady proceedings, made men more wise, then to seek their own
deaths, and especially the Generals to be better advised, then to run
desperately upon their own destructions. A change incredible, that Thirty ere
whiles would needs be styled Emperors, among the tumultuous Soldiers (though
they were sure to buy the use of that name with their dearest blood) and not
one now in peace could be found, either hasty to seek it, or very willing to
accept it.

(3) At last both Senate and Soldiers, having in their eye M. Claudius
Tacitus, a man very Noble Claudius Tacitus elected Emperor
and of Consular degree, of great age, singular learning, and long experience
in Magistracy; him by a joint and conspiring suffrage, they all elected to
their Empire: but he having before hand some inkling of this their purpose, got
him out of the way, living very secretly two months at his Rural Manor,
flying (says Vopiscus) that high dignity which he foresaw would prove his
overthrow. And when they did by Embassages often solicit him to accept of
their Election; sending him the Ensigns and Style of Augustus: he again
returned them, though with hearty thanks, yet absolute denial, alleging by
reason of his age and infirmity, that he was every way unable to discharge
their so great expectations.

(4) But after much inter-course, and many entreaties passed, at length (the
necessity of the State so requiring) he accepted their offer, though not with
much contentment to himself, who knew the weight of so great titles would prove
heavy and always dangerous for him to bear; but with unspeakable joy, was
received by the whole State, which promised all blessed hopes to the state
under so worthy, so wise, so virtuous, learned, and so just an Emperor.

(5) For as before his advancement, he was of Exemplary composednes and
virtuous disposition, so in Claudius Tacitus his virtues.
this high Estate, his life was temperate, and without al pride, and so
desirous to be a Preceder of moderation, and singularity unto others, as that
he would not permit his Empress to wear any Jewels of high price, nor to use
other customable superfluity, or excess in his own house. For learning and
learned men, whom he ever embraced in his private Estate, he now by all means
endeavored to honor and advance, and publicly professed that what Imperial
virtues he had, he was to ascribe them to his study of good letters: For
which cause, he was wont to call Cornelius Tacitus (that worthiest Historian
of the Romans State) his Father, and commanded his works to be carefully
preserved in every Library throughout the Empire; and ten times every year to
be transcribed on Claudius Tacitus his care to preserve the works of Cornelius
Tacitus.
public cost. All which notwithstanding, many of that worthy Authors Books
have since miscarried.

(6) But his virtues were too great for the world long to enjoy: and since his
Reign was but short; it is bootelesse to lengthen it with long discourses: For
his Peace continued without any memory of Wars; and his short time (wherein
he did nothing without consent of the Senate) was spent rather reforming other
men's vices; and abuses of the Laws and State, then in displaying his own
virtues; which doubtless (if their fair stream had not been untimely stopped)
would have proved incomparable to any his fore-goers; and unmatchable by any
his followers. What death he died is left uncertain; Eutropius Eutrop. l. 9.
thinks him slain, by his rebellious soldiers in Asia, upon his voyage
against the Persians: but Victor reports Aurel. Victor.
that he died a natural death, and that of a burning-feuer, in the city of
Tharsus: And Flauius Vopiscus, (who wrote his life) ^ith his death came upon a
surcharge of grief, by reason of factions; whereby Vopiscus.
(the infirmity of his age thereto helping) his understanding was crazed, and
his heart broken, whereof he died, when he had reigned six months, and twenty
Claudius Tacitus his Reign.
days, the year of Christ Jesus, one hundred seventy six.

M. ANNIVS FLORIANVS. CHAPTER XLI.
M. An. Florianus Emp.


NO sooner was the death of Tacitus diuulged, but his An. Do. 277.
brother Florianus (much unlike him in that point) took upon him the Name and
Authority Imperial, Florianus made himself Emperor.
without expecting any election either of Senate or Soldiers, and therefore not
likely long to stand sure. And although in all other princely parts he was not
much unlike his brother, yet having so great an Opposite as Probus was, on whom
the Eastern Army had conferred the same Title, the blossoms of his conceited
hope withered even in the budde, and perished before they had any time of
growth.

(2) For no sooner came to his ears the news of Probus his election, but he
found that heady and precipitate attempts were pleasing in their Beginnings,
but full of difficulties in their Proceedings, and most disastrous in their
Success: and therefore despairing both of Men and Means to raise the
Building, whose Florianus his death.
foundation he had so hastily (but too weakly) laid, he caused his own veins
to be cut, as Quintilius before Chap. 38.
him in like case had done, whereby he boldly bled to death, after he had
enjoyed a Titular Sovereignty only eighty days, says Eutropius: but
Vopiscus says, Eutrop. lib. 9. Vopiscus. Florianus his reign.
not altogether two months, and thinks him killed by the Soldiers, in the
City Tharsus likewise, in the year of Christ two hundred seventy and seven.

M. AVREL. VALOR. PROBVS. CHAPTER XLII.
Val. Probus Emp.


THE Eastern Army most potent and famous at the An. Do. 277.
death of Tacitus, from them was expected the new Emperors election, which
accordingly they did, but with much more wisdom and deliberate
circumspection, then the Soldiers of those times were accustomed to do. For
every Captain of the Army singled out his own Companies, and in several
Assemblies exhorted, that all affections laid aside, they would apply their
minds to think of the worthiest man, on whom they might confer their voices
and favors. At which time, the opinion of Probus his worth had so generally
possessed the hearts of* all men, that the shout and cry of all was uniform;
Let us have Probus for our Emperor. This being signified to Rome, the Senate
with applause and thanks approved and confirmed his Election, with additions
to his Title, Augustus, The Father of his Country, and Probus called the
father of his Country, and the highest Bishop.
the highest Bishop. For in those times, even amongst Heathens, the sacred
Title of a Bishop was accounted an additament of honor even to an Emperor:

(2) He was borne in Hungary in the City Sirmi^, of honorable Parentage,
especially by his mothers His desce^
side. His fathers name was Maximus, a man famous in Military Service, who
died Tribune at the wars in Egypt: and himself very young, but very
valorous, by the Emperor Valerianus (who so loved him for his virtues, that he
used to say of him, that of all men he best deserved the name Probus, that is
virtuous) was made a Tribune also. In which Office, with great praise he served
Sabellicus.
under Galienus, Aurelianus, and Claudius the Emperors; under whom besides
other exploits he fought several single-combats to the great honor of
himself and Country, and received as marks of victories, many Ciuicall
Crowns, Collars, Bracelets, Lances, Banners, and other Ensigns of Martial
device and Privilege. Preferred to be General in Africa, he subdued the
Marmarides: In Egypt the Palmerines; under Aurelianus the Sarmates and Germans;
under Claudius the Goths; and in all places so famous Probus comparable with
Hannibal and Caesar.
for his Acts, that he was compared with Hannibal and Caesar.

(3) His first service after he became Emperor was in Gallia, against the
Germans, that had made themselves Probus slays 400000. Germans.
Lords thereof, where in one Battle, continuing two days, he slew four
hundred thousand of them, and Henr. Mutint.
recovered seventy Cities from the Enemy, as himself signified by his own
Letters to the Senate. After this warring in Sclauonia, he quieted the
Provinces of Muscouia, Russia, and Polonia: And entering Thracia, did no less
in Greece, Syria, Arabia, Palestina, and Judea; whence passing into Persia, he
had honorable compositions of Narseus their mighty King. Whereupon issued so
universal Peace, that there were no wars heard of in all the Provinces of
the Empire; insomuch that it was a common Proverb, The very mice durst not
gnaw for fear of Probus. But long this lasted not, ere he was disturbed: for
the Egyptians erected one Saturninus, a Captain both wise and valiant, for
Emperor, Saturninus cho. sen Emperor.
and that so sore against his will, as he was like to be slain by them for
gaine-saying their desires; and by a speech delivered to his Erectors, he made
known to them his aduers^es from so dangerous an ambition; to this effect.

(4) Fellows and Friends, by my whole endeavors I have always sought to
prevent that, which His speech to his Electors.
now I see I cannot shun, I mean the Throne of Majesty; which howsoever to
others, it may seem full of glory and security, yet to my self, I foresee it
will prove, both base and dangerous. Base, for that I am no more the master of
mine own affections; which hitherto in my private estate were bestowed freely,
and where I thought best, but must he^ce-forth be carried at other men's dispose,
and cast upon those that deserve them least. That little time that I was wont
to take, in retyring my self to my self, must now be straightened to serve
others; and my thoughts wholly spent to prevent those weapons, which are borne
(in show) for my defense, but are (in truth) the keys of mine Imprisonments. I
cannot go without a Guard: I cannot sleep, without a watch; I cannot eat
without a Taster; these are but bondages to a free condition, and never need
in a private fortune. That it is dangerous, it is no less apparent: for
besides the sharpe-pointed and weighty sword, hanging only by a twisted-thred
over our heads, Probus is not a Galienus to compound for the Diadem, but to
touch his scepter, is to awake a sleeping Lion: What should move you then, to
stir up his wrath, to seek my death, and your own destructions? For assure
your selves when I die, I shall not die alone: So all our fame purchased in so
many years imploiments, shall be lost by this one days work: and my Conquests
in Africa, of the Mores, and in Spain, branded lastly with the eternal scares
and infamy of Rebellion.

(5) These speeches (as Flauius Vopis. the Writer thereof received them from the
report of his Grandfather, who was, there present and heard them) could
nothing at all divert the resolution of the Soldiers, but that they persisted
and maintained their Election against Probus: who upon notice thereof hastening
toward them with a mighty power, offered them pardon, as one unwilling to shed
Ciuill-bloud, or to lose so worthy a man as Saturninus was: but upon refusal
of his proffered Clemency, he gave him a most sharp battle, wherein most of
the Reuoulters were ouer-throwne, and Saturninus in the assault of a Castle
Saturninus his death.
besieged, was slain, to the great grief of Probus, who sought to have saved
his life.

(6) But with his death ended not all Civil Vopiscut.
Broiles: for Bonosus and Proculus two monsters of that Bonosus and Proculus
rebel against Probus.
age (though of different kinds of vices) opposing themselves against him, and
assuming the Title and Robes Imperial, usurped the Provinces of Britain,
Spain and some part of Gallia, knowing that in these places Probus was not
much beloved. Bonosus was borne in Britain, but brought up in Spain, without
note of action, but only in his cups, for he was esteemed the greatest
drinker of all men living: insomuch as Aurel. said of him, he was born, no^ vt
viueret, Sabellicus.
sed vt biberet; not to draw breath, but to draw in liquor: and yet (as it
seems) he was in good account under the said Aurelianus, having a charge of
Ships upon the Germane Seas, which either by treachery or negligence were
burned by the Enemy, in the mouth of Rhine, and (as Probus took it) not
without the priuitie of Bonosus: who therefore not daring to stand to the
trial, made all his powers against the Emperor, but was in Battle overcome,
and despairing ever again to make head, put his own in a halter, whereupon it
was said, that a Barrel was hanged, and not a Bonosus death.
Man.

(7) Proculus was a Lygurian borne, as unsatiate a vassal to Venus, as the
other to Bacchus; and therewithal Sabellicus.
so impiouslie impudent, that as he had a heart to commit any filthiness, so
a forehead to boast of it openly, as appears by his own Letters, wherein he
vaunteth, how many scores of Sabellicus.
fair Virgins he deprived of that fair name in one fortnight; but this
Graund-General of Venus Camp was suddenly forsaken by his Soldiers, and came
to his deserved end.

(8) Some stirs there were at that present in Britany, by the incitements of
their Governor, whose name though Histories do not specify, yet he may seem
to be that Cl. Corn. Lalianus, whose ancient Coins are found in this Island,
and not elsewhere: and his means to the place, was Victorinus a Moore, in
great Victorinus a Moore his Stratagem.
favor with Probus: who taking himself not clear from suspicion got leave of
his Emperor to repair unto Britain, where giving it out that he was come
thither for safety of his Life, was courteously received by the General. Whom
secretly in the Night, he murdered, and then speedily returned to Rome;
having by this Expedition, both appeased the tumults in the Province, and
approved his fidelity to Probus. About this time (as is recorded) certain
Vandals and Burgundians that had invaded Gallia, were sent Hist. Mag. Brit.
lib. 3. cap. 10. Vandals and Burgundians sent to inhabit in Britain.
into Britain by the Emperor to inhabit, who though they had troubled the
Romans peace in Gallia, yet did them good service in Britain to stay their
subjection; and the Britains themselves for some good services were now
suffered by these Emperors, Vopiscus Sabellicus.
to plant Vines, and make Wines, with other matters as well for pleasure as
profit. Wine made in England.


(9) At length the Empire in these West parts standing universally quiet,
Probus determined a iourny into the East, to end at once all foreign wars;
saying, he would shortly bring it to pass, that the state should need no more
Soldiers: (which speech they took very indignely) and having passed Illyricum
in Sclauonia, was by some of his own Army (for curbing, as they conceived, with
an ouer-hard hand their dissolute and idle manners) conspired against and
treacherously murdered, in November Probus his death.
the second, and year of Christ, two hundred eighty two, having reigned five
years and four months: others say, six years: where notwithstanding they
erected for him a most honorable Sepulcher, wherein was engraven this Epitaph:
Here lies the Vopiscus Entropius. Eusebius Eccl. hist. lib. 7. cap 29.
Emperor Probus, justly for his goodness called Probus, of all the Barbarous
Nations and Tyrants a Conqueror.

M. AURELIUS CARVS, WITH CARINVS AND NVMERIANVS HIS SONS. CHAPTER XLIII.
M. Aurel. Carus Emp.
Carinus, Numerianus, Caesar's.


PROBVS thus slain in the midst of his Army, without Anno 282.
any apparent cause ministered, the Soldiers were stricken into a great fear
and mistrusted each other to be guilty of the Treason, no man therefore
diligent to find out the beginner, nor hasty to punish the bloody executors;
but holding the right of Election to remain in themselves, they presently chose
Carus for their Emperor, who had been the Pratorian Prafect valiant,
sufficient, of worth and esteem; whereunto the Senate likewise consented.

(2) From whence or what parents we should derive his birth, is uncertain, and
of diverse writers diversely reported. For Flauius Caecilianus, who wrote the
story of his time, as Vopiscus does report, says, that he Flauius. (...).
Vopiscus.
was borne in Sclauonia, or as we call it Moscouia. Onesimus an ancient writer
affirms his birth was in Rome, and that his father was a Sclauonian indeed,
but held for a citizen, as he cites by letters from Vopiscus: Aurelius Victor,
Eusebius, and Paulus Orosius will have him a French man, and borne at Narborne:
but whence soever, Uictor. (...). Orosius.
his princely parts deserved these his princely preferments, and no ways for
the short time of his reign, carried he himself under expectation. Two sons
he had of unequal conditions, Carinus and Numerianus, these both he made his
Caesar's, with the Card^ and Numerianus Casars.
Name and Power of Augusti.

(3) His first proceedings was to find out the murderers of Probus, whom he
severely punished, which took away all suspicion of treason in himself. Then
marching against the Sarmates, whose fury had pierced so far into Panonia,
that they threatened Italy it self, he overthrew with the slaughter of sixteen
thousand, and took twenty thousand of them prisoners. And leaving Carinus (his
elder son) to govern Britain, Gallia, Illyricum, and Spain, himself with
the younger, Numerianus, prepared for the East against the Persians, in which
expedition he took in his way Mesopotamia, Seleucia, and certain cities whom
the enemy had entered: and being surprised with sickness, and not able to
travel, pitched his Pauilion upon the shore of Tigris, where in the midst of
his army (about the year of our salvation 283.) guarded from all supposed
Carinus slain by a thunderbolt.
dangers and assaults of man, felt the unexpected stroke of death even from the
hand of God himself: for in his bed by a thunderbolt falling from heaven, he
was slain, with many others then present with him in his tent, and the same
consum^ altogether with lightning fire.

(4) The terror thereof so daunted the courage of his whole army, that no
further they proceeded in their enterprise: and his death was so grievous unto
Numerianus now elected Emperor, that with continual weeping (a fault in few
Sons who are raised by their fathers fall) his eyes were so weakened, that he
could not endure any light. Upon which accident, Arrius Aper, (his wives
father) took occasion to conspire his death, hoping thereby to attain the
Empire himself. For having at all times free access to his presence, at
length in his closet he secretly, murdered him; pretending to the army, that
his infirmity only kept him from sight; and so leaving his body to putrify
and corrupt, in short space by the very savor thereof the treason was descried,
and the Traitor slain by the hands of Dioclesian, who was both his Judge and
executioner.

(5) His Empire thus ended before it was well begun, the Army proclaimed
Dioclesian, a Principal man in the Camp for Emperor: who to uphold his
election, made al his power for Gallia, against his Concurrent Carinus, a man
of profuse sensuality, who there had caused himself to be proclaimed, and in
his fathers absence had so ruled there and in Britain, that P^phyrio living at
the same time, gave out this testimony, Hierome.
that Britain was a fertile Province of tyrants. Betwixt these two Captains,
many skirmishes were fought with variable success, till lastly in a set
battle, Carinus was slain by a Tribune, whose Wife he had defiled; whereby
the Imperial Title was jointly conferred upon Dioclesian.

(6) The time that these three, the father and two sons reigned, is reported
to be two years and somewhat more; and this last to die the year of Christ's
nativity, two hundred eighty four.

C. AURELIUS VALOR. DIOCLESIANVS IOVIVS AND M. AURELIUS VALERIVS MAXIMIANVS.
CHAPTER XLIIII.
Val. Diocles. Emp.
Val. Maximian, Caesar and Emp.


THe Empire thus deuolued to Dioclesian, with approbation of the Senate, he
every way studied to be accounted worthy of the same, as knowing well his
birth was no way answerable to his present lot: and therefore chose for his
Caesar, Maximianus, a man of better descent, very honorable, wise, and
valiant, as was manifested in his first service against the Gauls, whom with
an infinite number of pesants in that province, troubling the peace of the
Romans, he with much slaughter overcame. For which exploit so fortunately
accomplished, the Emperor made him his Consort in the Government.

(2) Dioclesians parentage is uncertainly reported by Writers, some making him
the son of a Notary, Paulus Orosius. Eutropius.
and others of a mere Bondsman; but all agreeing that his Country was Dalmatia,
and his offspring very base. This man being but a Common Soldier, consulted
with a Witch for his future success; who told him (if you please to believe
the reporters) that he should become an Emperor after he had killed a Bore: to
which he gave credit, and ever after was a great enemy to that beast, and in
time grew under Probus to so great account for dexterity in expediting his
affairs, that he was made Steward of his house, and now lastly elected to the
Empire.

(3) The very first thing that he attempted, was the punishment of his
predecessors death: for which Arrius Aper being convicted before his tribunal
seat, himself rising suddenly from the Throne, ran him through with his sword,
in outward show for zeal of Justice, as not able to endure so foul a fact:
but in truth to fulfill the Prediction of his hostess, the Druid; for that
Aper signifies a Bore. After which act, he held Flauius Vopiscus.
his Empire fully established.

(4) To let pass many imploiments and troubles of the State, these two
Emperors chose to themselves two Caesar's, whereby the One-bodied Eagle became
again Eutrop. Signon^. O^pbet.
foure-headed, and each almost of an equal authority. Dioclesian chose
Galerius Maximinus, and Maximianus, surnamed Herculius, chose Constantius
Clorus a Pomp. Laetus. An. Do. 286. An. Do. 291.
Roman Senator, enforcing them to put away their former Wives, and to take
their Daughters, for an assurance of love by the bonds of that Alliance; of
whom the former was employed for defense of Illyricum, and the other afterward
into Britain against the Rebellions there raised by Carausius, whose coin is
here set.

Carausius a Britain raises rebellion in An. 287. Bed. hist. Ang. lib. 1.
cap. 6.


(5) This Carausius by birth a Menapian, but of low Parentage, as Beda and
Eutropius says; who being Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 6.
appointed Admiral by the Romans to guard the British Seas, from the Pyracies
of the Saxons and Lower Germans, who with continual robberies wasted the
coasts, abused his authority both in suffering those Pirates to pass under
Compositions, and in taking many Ships and much substance from the true
Subject to his own use: whereby in short time he became very rich, and (like
a cat set to keep mice from the larder) did more mischief then the Robbers
themselves. Sabellicus reports, one very politic custom whereby he enriched
himself; and that was by suffering the Pirates to take as much spoils as
possibly they could before he would surprise them; whereby they were his
instruments to rob others, and nothing to better themselves.

(6) Maximianus then warring in Gallia, and fearing the greatness of his wealth
and power, sent secretly to slay him by treachery; and in the mean while
surprised many of his principal men at Now called B^leyn in Picardy.
Gessoriacum.

(7) Carausius now rich and compassed with friends, seeing his destruction thus
intended and sought, thought that death was but death as well to Prince as to
Peazant: and therefore with a bold resolution, and aid of the Picts or
Northern Britains, (who had been always enemies to the Roman Subjection) put
on the Purple Robe, and usurped the Authority and Title of Emperor, which he
most valiantly maintained in sundry Battles, and so kept it for the term of
seven Carausius defends his usurpation seven years. Maximianus against
Carausius.
years.

(8) Against him Maximianus set forward with a puissant Army, and marched to
the British Ocean: but there understanding the power of his Enemy, and finding
himself in want of men for Sea-seruice, he pitched down his Tents: and
knowing Carausius a man meet to command the Ilanders, and able to defend them
against the other Warlike Nations, sent him offers of peace: the making of
which is remembered unto us by the Coin of Carausius before expressed, whereon
are stamped the Portraitures of two Emperors ioining hands. So himself
returning against the Batanians, left Carausius for Britain, who governed the
Province with an upright and unstained reputation, and with exceeding
peaceablenesse, notwithstanding the incursions of the Barbarous. He reedified
the wall (as Ninnius the disciple of Eluodugus writes) between the months of
Cluda and Carunus, fortifiing the same Ninius.
with seven Castles, and built a round house of polished stone upon the bank
of the River Carun, which (some think) took name of him, erecting therewith a
Triumphall Arch in remembrance of Victory. Howbeit, Buchanan thinks the same
to be the Temple of Terminus, and not the foundation of Carausius.

But the date of his noble Government was brought now to a period, by the
Treason of Allectus his Familiar friend, one whom he had employed in managing
of the State, who thirsting after the Supreme A perfidious friend.
Authority, betrayed his trust, and treacherously murdered him by a wile,
putting on himself the Purple-Robe, stamping this his Image upon the public
Coin as an absolute Sovereign, and assuming the Title Imperial, about the
year of Christ 294.



(9) Constantius who had levied an Army, and was come with great speed unto
Bulloigne in France, (a Town that Carausius had sometime fortified and kept)
hearing now of his death, determined the recovery of Britain; and after great
preparations, at length passing the Seas in a dark fogge or mist, landed his
men without impeachment: which done, he fired his own Ships, thereby to
frustrate all hopes of escape. Allectus, who had laien to intercept his
coming, forsook also the Seas, and meeting at unawares with Asclepiodotus,
great Seneschall of the Praetorium, as a desperate man, hasted upon his own
death: for encountering with him, he neither ordered his Battle, nor marshalled
his men, but fought at random very unfortunately: for having put off his
Purple Garment, he was among many other slain, when he had held his estate
the term of three years. Allectus slain.


The Frankners and others of the Barbarous Soldiers escaping the Battle,
sought to sack London, and so to be gone: but as good hap was, the Soldiers
of Constantius, which by reason of a mistie and foggie air were severed from
the rest, at unawares came to London, where they rescued their Allies, and
making great slaughter of the Enemy, slew Gallus their Leader, casting his
body into a Brook that the^ ran through the City, which thence after was
called by the Britains Nant-gall, and by the English, Gallus his Brook, where
now a fair Street is built, called (upon that Walbrooke in London of Gallus.
(...) T^eb.
occasion) to this day Walbrooke.

(10) The deaths of these two Usurpers, with the recovery of the Britains
unto their wonted obedience, was accounted so great a benefit to the Romans,
that it is most gloriously commended, and Rhetorically set down in a
Panegyricke Oration ascribed to Mamertinus, in the praise of Dioclesian,
Maximianus, and Constantius: Mamertinus Panegy^. Orat.
where (after he had extolled the fertility of the British Soil, and the
Riches that the Empire reaped thence) he set forth the strength of the Enemy,
grown to so dangerous a head: and concluded with this Acclamation; O what a
manifold Victory was this, worthy undoubtedly of innumerable Triumphs, by
which Victory The Emperors extolled for recoucting Britain.
Britain is restored to the Empire, their Confederates brought to obedience,
and the Seas secured to a perpetual quietness! Glory you therefore
(invincible Emperor) for that you have as it were gotten another World, and in
restoring to the Romans puissance the glory of the Conquest by Mamertinus
Paneg. Great.
Sea, have added to the Roman Empire an Element greater then all the compass
of the Earth, that is, the mighty maine Ocean it self: and afterward now by
your Victories (Invincible Constantius Caesar) whatsoever did lie vacant about
Amiens, Beauois, Trois, and Langres, begins to flourish with Inhabitants of
sundry Nations. Yea and moreover, that your most obedient City Autum, for whose
sake I have a peculiar cause to rejoice, by means of this Triumphant Victory
in Britain, has received many and sundry sorts of Artizans, of whom those
Provinces Many Artificers in Britain.
were full. And now by their workmanship the same City rises up, by repairing
of Ancient Houses, and restoring of Public Buildings and Temples: so that now
it accounts that the old name of brotherly Incorporation to Rome is again
restored, when she has you eft-soones for her Founder.

(11) But leaving Constantius to be further spoken of in his due place, let us
pursue the Reigns of these two Tyrants, who new began the Persecutions of Gods
Saints in all the parts of the Empire, wherein the rage of Satan so prevailed,
that seventeen thousand men and G^. Damas^. Sabellicus.
women were crowned with martyrdom, within the space of one month, besides
infinite numbers of such as were otherwise punished.

As in other Countries, so here in Britain the Christians Churches were
demolished, their Bibles Eusebius. Beda. Rad. de Dicet^.
and other godly writings burned, and themselves tormented with a more cruel
and longer continuance then formerly had been used: for this endured the term
often whole years together, leaving no The Christians torments for ten years
together.
time of intermission, nor place free from the stain of Martyrs Blood.

And amongst others, it made Britain to be honored with the glory of many holy
Martyrs, which constantly stood and died in the Confession of the Faith;
whereof the first is reported to be Albane of the City Verolanium, who was
beheaded at Holmehurst Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 7.
(since called Derswold) where now the Town of S. Albans (bearing his name) is
built, and in whose honor, Offa the great King of Mercia founded a most S.
Albane put to death at Saint Albans.
magnificent Monastery. Of this Alban the ancient Fortunatus Priscus in his
book of the Praise of Virginity, Job. Capgraue.
makes mention thus: Albanum egregium foecunda Britannia profert:
Britain fertile of all good,
Washed with glorious Albans blood.


(12) His Instructor Amphibolus afterward apprehended, was brought to the same
place, and whipped Amphibole a Britain put to death.
about a stake, whereat his intrailes were tied: so winding his bowels out of
his body, was lastly stoned to death. Sundry others also in other places laid
down their lives for their Professions sake, as Julius and Aaron Julius and
Aaron at Leicester.
at Leicester, says Beda, or rather at Caer-leon in Monmouthshire, as our
Grand-Antiquarie judges: and in At Lichfeild gr^ multitudes in Cambden. Ioh.
19. 17. Ioh Ross^ W^wicens. in lib. de (...). ^pis. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
Leichfeild so many, that the place became another Golgotha, A Field of dead
Corpse. For which cause the City does bear an Escocheon or Field charged with
many Martyrs, for their Seal of Arms even unto this day.

(13) This last rage is by Orosius and Beda accounted the Tenth Persecution
from Nero; and by others, the Tenth Horn of the Imperial Beast, who had
received his Power from the Dragon (the devil) and Form from those four
Beasts deciphered by the Prophet Apoc. 13. Dan. 7.
Daniel, whose mouth was as the Lions mouth of Asshur, his feet like the
Bears feet of Persia, his spots as the Leopards of Greece; and these ten
horns taken from the Monster of the Grecians parted kingdom, the Seleucies
and the Ptolemies, called in Ezekiel, Gog and Magog, and here alluded unto by
S. John, that Ezekiel. 38. 2.
thus made battle against the Saints. But as those four Beasts perished and
were crushed by the fall of The stone cut without hands, Emmanuel borne in our
flesh: so this Beast compounded of them Four, fell in the destructions of
these most wicked Emperors, whereof all almost died so untimely and unusual
deaths, as the like is not read of elsewhere.

(14) For some slew themselves, as Nero and Otho did; some were smothered to
death, as was Tiberius; some poisoned by their wives, as Claudius and Commodus;
The violent deaths of many Emperors.
some tugged and torn in pieces by their own Subjects and Soldiers, as
Vitellius, Heliogabalus, Pupienus, and Balbinus; some stabbed by them whom they
most trusted, as Caligula, Domitian, Didius, Gallienus, and many others; some
tumultuously murdered, as Pertinax Seuerus, Maximius, Aemilius, and Probus
were; some slain in battle and defense of their titles, as Macrinus and
Gallus; some hanged themselves, as Gordianus and Maximianus did; some drowned
and swallowed up, as Decius and Maxentius were; some slain by a thunderbolt
from heaven, as Carus was; some died in most miserable captivity, as
Valerianus did, whose skin was fleaed off, he yet alive; some cut their own
veins and bled to death, as Quintilius and Florianus did; some dying mad, as
did this our Dioclesian; some few, and them somewhat favoring Christians, died
in their beds, a thing most strange to see in these times, wherein the Wrath of
God thus fought against them in his Justice, and the power of his Gospel
preached by his Apostles and Disciples, that as a Conqueror crowned, and riding
upon a White horse, bare a Bow in his hand, and shot the sharp Arrows of
death into the hearts of these the Kings enemies, as in the opening of the
First Seal is Psalm. 45. 5. The first Seal. Apoc. 6. The second Seal.
seen; and in the Second is described and made manifest by a Red Horse
prepared for Battle, whose Rider bare a Bright sword, and had commission To
take peace from the earth; which most effectually we have seen performed in
most of these preceding Emperors. And as Famine in great Wars is not greatly
strange; so Scarsitie exceeding Plenty, was seen under the opening of the
Third Seal; whence a Black horse sent from God, pased through the earth,
whose Rider bare a Balance The third Seal.
to weigh Corn, as it were Spice, for dearth: and in the reign of this last
Tyrant Dioclesian, they that had Eagles eyes might see the threefold judgments
of God in the opening of the Fourth Seal, when Sword, Famine, and Death went
all together as a pale-horse, sent The fourth Seal.
from the presence of the Lamb, whose rider was Death and Hell, following as
his Page. These were the times of calamities, wheas the Souls of the righteous
in the opening of the Fifth Seal, cried for vengeance for the blood of the
Martyrs, whom these ten horns had gored The fifth Seal.
to death: and under the Sixth Seal, both then, and for ever the wicked are
said to call for the Mountains The sixth Seal.
to fall upon them, and for the rocks to hide them from the presence of Him
that sat upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, before whom none
could stand.

But why do I (weak man) thus open the Curtains of Gods most sacred
Tabernacle, to behold the Mercy-seate of his divine Mysteries in the
accomplishments of these holy Oracles, when as they who have worn the Ephod,
and in whose hand Aarons Rod has Exodus ^9. Numb 17.
Budded, with a religious reverence have feared to look into the same?
Therefore with the charge of Joshua I will not approach near the Arc, and
with Jobs hearers Josh. 3. 4. Job 29 9.
will Lay my hand on my mouth, and return to the prosecution of my purpose.

(15) It was the nineteenth year of his reign, in the month of March, when
this Tyrant sent forth his Eusebius. eccles. lib. 8. cap. 1. 2. 3.
wicked Edicts through all his Empire; That all churches should be utterly
overthrown; that the Scriptures should be burnt; that all Christians for
honor should be held infamous, and all Christian servants should be
incapable of freedom; that all Pastors should be enforced to offer to Idols,
etc.

(16) The fountain and chief cause of these miseries lighting on the Church
of Christ, did arise from the Christians themselves, as Eusebius in these words
declares: After that our conversation through too much liberty and
licentiousness was degenerated, and holy discipline Eusebius. hist eccles. lib.
8. cap. 1.
corrupted, whiles every one of us did envy, bite, and backbite each other,
waging intestine wars within our selves, and piercing one another hearts
with the sharp spears of opprobriouswords; so that Bishops against Bishops,
and people against people were at bitter contention. Lastly, whiles nothing but
hypocrisy was in the face, deceit in the heart, and guile in the tongue,
whereby mischief was even full at the brimme, then began the heavy hand of God
to visit us, etc. Where he proceeds and shows that the grievous sins of
the Christians; was the cause of drawing down these judgments on their heads.

(17) And so this wicked Tyrant accordingly was but as Gods Instrument and
Iron-threshing-flaile, to bruise the precious wheat and seed of the Gospel,
and Amos 1. 3.
to crush that outward glory of the Christian profession, which then was
flourishing in most parts of the world.

(18) But long the Lord deferred not their release nor that Tyrants end. For
after the First year of their Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap. 2^.
persecutions, and twentieth of his Reign, the thirteenth day of April, in the
year of Christ's Nativity three hundred and three, he with his Fellow Emperor
(both of them by the revenging hand of God, stricken with a mad humor (says
Eusebius) renounced the Empire, and descending from the Tribunal put off their
Purple and Imperial robes, whereby they again became Private men.

(19) Dioclesian retired into Dalmatia, where in the City Salonia, he
poisoned himself; as Aurelius Victor affirms: and Eusebius says, that no
small disease Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap. 14.
ouertooke him, for that he died mad. His consort Maximianus escaped not
unpunished, but died for attempting the Murder of Constantius, and as Eusebius
Fox Act. page 119. and 123. Eusebius. eccles hist. lib. 8. cap. 19.
avouches, he hanged himself in the city Marsillis: such ignominious deaths
followed these two persecuting Tyrants, whereof Dioclesian had formerly made
himself a God, and by an Edict commanded his Foot Dioclesians practice. The
Pope an imitator of him, and not of Christ.
to be kissed: a practice pretily since imitated by his Successors, who have
revived the wounded Head of the Beast, and have trod his steps in wounding
and persecuting the true members of Christ.

FLAV. VALOR. CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS, C. GALERIVS VALERIVS MAXIMIANVS. CHAPTER XLV.
Constantius, Chlorus, Emp.
G. Val. Maximianus, Emp.


DIoclesian and Maximianus resigning up their Soueraignties Dioclesian and
Maximianus resigned up the Empire the 9. Call. of May, in the year of Christ
304.
(as is said) at the City Nicomedia in Bithynia, committed the charge thereof,
and the defense of the Commonweal unto Gallerius and Constantius, who
Galerius and Constantius Emperors.
had been their Caesar's: upon which occasion, great peace followed in the
Church of Christ, and most especially The Christians enjoy peace.
unto these Western Provinces. For those Emperors confirmed by the Senate,
presently divided the Empire betwixt them, as two Several Estates, and not
subject to one Government, as formerly had been exercised; which (as Eusebius
has noted) was the fatal end of the Imperial Glory.

(2) Unto Gallerius fell the government of Sclauonia, Macedonia, Thracia,
Egypt, and the Provinces in Asia, who took for case of that burden these two,
whose Coins we have here expressed.

Maximinus and Seuerus made Caesar's.


(2) C. Galerius, Valor. Maximinus, and Aurel. Valor. Seuerus his sisters
sons, whom in the year of Christ three hundred and six, he elected Caesar's,
and after Augusti; which honors the last enioied not long, for he was slain
at Rome by the treachery of Maxentius, after one year. And the other, when he
had four years governed as Caesar, and three as Augustus in the East, died at
Tharsis in Cilicia.

(3) And to the lot of Constantius, who much at one time with his Copartner,
elected his son Constantine, (so famous in christian history) Caesar, fell
Constantine the Great elected Caesar.
Italy, France, Britannie, Spain, Germany, and most of the Provinces in
Afric: which seeming to him (who rather chose to govern well then much) too
spacious, gave up to Gallerius all that in Afric, as too remote from the Seat
of his residence, and eye of his direction.

(4) This good Emperor was for his Palenesse surnamed Chlorus, by birth a
Roman, his Father named Eutropius, his Mother Claudia, Niece to the Emperor
Claudius. Himself had attained the dignity of a Senator, and was both Wise,
Valiant, Noble, and Virtuous; whose parts Eusebius does thus commend.

Constantius was a man of singular clemency toward men, and piety toward
God. He did not partake with him Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. (...). cap. 16.
in cruelty, whose partaker he was in Sovereignty: neither staining his
Reign with the blood of the Saints, nor destroying our Churches and places of
Prayer, as Maximianus furiously did; but rather he reverenced and highly
honored those who truly honored God. For which God so blessed him, that this
godly Father left a more godly Son Constantine, the Heir of his well-gotten
Empire.

(5) To which his virtues, other Authors add, that he was of great
affability, loving, and gentle, little Pomp. Lat^.
regarding his Private Profit, but altogether reigning to enrich his Subjects,
and to that end would often say; That it was more be h^full for the Weal
public, that the wealth of the Land should be dispersed into the commons
hands, then to lie locked up in Princes coffers. In which kind, so auerse he
was from all superfluities, that he may be adjudged faulty the other way: for
upon Feastinall days, and in his Entertainments of Strangers, he was feign to
borrow Plate of his friends (for such many times are richer then their
Sovereigns) to furnish his Table and Cupbords.

(6) But above all other virtues, was his loving countenance and protection to
the late persecuted Christians, making his Court their Sanctuary, and his
Chapel their Oratorie. And to winnow the Chafe from the Wheat, he used the
like policy as Iehu King of Israel 2. Kin. 10. 20.
sometime had done against the Priests of Baal. For he commanded all his
Officers to offer sacrifice to the Constantius policy to try who were true
Christians.
Idoll-Gods, pretending to dis-court all such as refused: but contrariwise
those that obeyed he put from him, with this reproof, that he who is
disloyal to his God, will never be true nor trusty to his Prince.

(7) When he was first made Caesar, he was forced Constantius his wives.
to forsake his first wife Helena, by whom he had his virtuous son
Constantine, and to take Theodora daughter in Law to Maximianus, for a further
confirmation of friendship.



(8) Helena by birth was a Britain, the daughter of Eutropius.
Coelus a British Prince, as says Eutropius, though Nicephorus make her of
Bithynia, and Beda terms her his Contubine, some an Inne-holder, and others
for her person Nicephor. lib. 7. cap. 18. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Holinsh. Chron. lib. 4. cap 26. Cambd. Brit. pa. 74
and parentage stand very doubtful: to meet with whom, let us hear the
censure of Times Chief Secretary, the learned Cambden in his Britannia:
Constantius (says he) what time he served in Britain under Aurelian, took
to wife Helena daughter of Coelus or Coelius a British Prince, on whom he begat
that noble Constantine the Great in Britain; for so (together with that great
Historiographer Baronius) the common opinion of all other Baronius.
Writers with one consent bear witness, unless it be one or two petty
Greek Authors of late time, and those dissenting one from the other; and a
very learned man, grounding upon a corrupt place of Iul. Firmicus. Howbeit,
compelled he was by Maximianus to put her away; for to mary Theodora his
daughter. This is that Helena which in Antique Inscriptions is called
VENERABILIS and PIISSIMA AUGUSTA, and for Christian Piety, for cleansing
Jerusalem of Idols, for building a goodly A Church builded by Helena in the
place where our Savior suffered.
Church in the place where our Lord suffered, and for finding the saving Cross,
is so highly commended of Ecclesiastical Writers.

And yet both Jews and Gentiles termed her by way of ignominy and reproach,
Stabularia, because she (a most godly Princess) sought out the Cribbe or
Manger where Christ was borne: and in that place where Helena builds another
Church where the Inn stood in which our Savior was laid in a Cratch.
stood that Hostelry, founded a Church; for which cause she was by the Enemies
of Christian Religion called an Hostess, and (because such are commonly kind
to their Guests) a Concubine also. For whose defense, let the Funeral Oration
of Ambrose, made upon the death of Theodosius, answer, wherein he does rather
commend her humility, then affirm any such base Offices in contempt of her
person.

They say that this Lady was at first an Inne-holder or Hostess, etc. Well
(says he) this good Hostess Helena Ambrose his Oration upon Theodosius.
hasted to Jerusalem, and sought out the place of our Lords Passion, and made
diligent search for the Lords Cribbe. This good Hostess was not ignorant of
that Guest which cured the wayfaring man's hurts, that was wounded by Thieves.
This good Hostess chose to be reputed a Stable-sweeper, that she might thereby
gain Christ.

And verily she was the moouer and only worker of her husbands conversion, who
casting off all superstitious worships, willingly acknowledged the only
allruling God, suffering the Christians that had been hid in Caves and
Dens, now to exercise their Devotions publicly, and both to reedifie the old
ruinate Churches, and to erect new.

(9) Of the like Piety we read in a Queen of the like name, Helena, Queen
of Adiabena (commended Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2. Helena Queen of Ad
ab^na a virtuous woman also.
by Josephus) that was a Convert to the Jewish Religion, who coming to
Jerusalem to visit the Temple in time of a grievous Famine, which happened in
the days of Claudius, sent to Alexandria for great quantity of Corn, and for
Dried Figs from Cyprus, which she very charitably bestowed upon the poor.
And about three stades or furlongs off from Jerusalem, built a Sepulcher with
three Pyramides, wherein her self and her two sons (both Kings) were
afterward interred. But to proceed.

(10) Constantius being here in Britain, and lately returned from his
Expedition made against the Caledonians and Picts, fell sick in the City of
York, where the Imperial Throne of his residence was set. At which very time,
Constantine his son escaping the hands of Gallerius, (with whom he had been
left hostage) hasted Constantine escapes Galerius.
from Rome, having belaid all the way with Posthorses for the purpose, and left
them houghed for His preventing pursuit. He comes safe to York to his father.
fear of pursuit, came with all speed to York, and to his fathers presence;
who so much ioied at his sight, that he sat himself upright upon his Bed, and
in the presence of his Counselors spoke as follows:

(11) It now suffices, and death is not fearful, seeing I shall leave my
unaccomplished actions Constantius his speech to his son.
to be performed in thee my Son, in whose person I doubt not but that my
Memorial shall be retained, as in a Monument of succeeding fame. What I had
intended, but by this my fatal period left undone, see thou perform: let
those fruits be ripened in thee the Branch, that I thy Stock from a virtuous
intent have had ingraffed always in me: that is, govern thy Empire with an
upright Justice; protect the Innocent from the Tyranny of Oppressors; and
wipe away all tears from the eyes of the Christians; for therein, above all
other things, I have accounted my self the most happy. To thee therefore I
leave my Diadem, and their Defense; taking my Faults with me to my Grave,
there to be buried in everlasting oblivion.: but leaving my Virtues (if ever I
had any) to revive and live in thee. With conclusion of which virtuous
counsel, he took his last farewell of his son, his friends, and his life,
after he had sat Caesar sixteen years, and Emperor two, as Constantius his
reign and death. Pomp. Laetus. Socrates Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Eusebius accounts, and died the five and twentieth day of July, the year of
our Savior three hundred and six, and of his own age fifty six.

FLA. VALERIVS CONSTANTINVS MAXIMUS. CA. VALERIVS LICINIVS LICINIANVS. CHAPTER
XLVI.
Val. Constant. Emp.
Li^in. (...) anus Emp.


THE Father thus departing both gloriously and An. Do. 306.
peaceably, in the presence of his Son and sage counselors, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
lib. 8. cap. 14.
the grief in the loss of the Sire was no greater then was the joy conceived
that they had gained the son for his Successor, all men reioicing at the
good fortune of that journey, wherein he came to close the eyes of his dying
father, and to comfort the sorrow of his mournful Contrymen. For forthwith
here in Britain by acclamation of the Socrat. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. (...).
people, assistance of the Soldiers, and advice of Erocus King of the Almans
(who by the way had accompanied him hither in his flight from Rome) they
proclaimed him at all hands Emperor, and Successor to all that part of the
world which his father held. This election was ioifully ratified by the Senate,
and of all other Provinces so gladly accepted, that they accounted this Island
most happy of all other, whose chance was first to see him their Caesar, as in
these words of the Panegyrist is seen: O fortunate Britain, and more happy
then all other Lands, that have the first Panegyricke Oration unto Constantine
the great. Eutropius. Constantines descent.
sight of Constantine Caesar.

(2) His birth (as is said) was in Britain, and honorably descended, his
father a Roman Senator, Caesar, and Emperor; his mother a Britain, (daughter
to Coelus) a Princess virtuous, wise, chaste, and religious: himself in true
Piety degenerating from neither. At his first entrance he pursued the relics
of the War which his father had begun against the Caledonians, and other
Picts, subduing the Britains that were more remote, and Inhabitants of those
Islands that are witnesses Eusebius. in vita Constantini.
(says one) of the Suns set or going down

(3) Maxentius the son of Maximianus Herculius, who at the death of
Constantius was proclaimed Augustus by the tumultuous Praetorian Soldiers at
Rome, and Romulus his son (whose face we have here with his fathers from
both their moneys expressed) was created his Caesar (the way to that Seat of
Majesty whereunto he had too hastily and most unduly climed) for now this
Usurper by his Necromancies, Adulteries, Persecutions, and Murders, was grown
Sabel^icus.
so intolerable and odious, that the Senate sent to Constantine, craving his
aid and redress; who sore lamenting the sores of the Empire, and the case of
the Christians, first wrote: but that taking no effect, prepared his forces
against Maxentius.

Maximianus the father, either in true zeal or fained pretense, (which by the
sequel is more probable) took great offense at his son Maxentius
insufferable outragiousnesse; and under color of dislikes and redress,
repaired to his son in Law Constantine, whose daughter Fausta he had married,
and notwithstanding his fair pretenses before the face of Constantine, yet
secretly he tampered with Fausta to make away her husband. But the good Lady
well knowing that the bond of a child is great, but greater the love of a
wife, revealed his treachery to Constantine, who caused him thereupon to be put
to death, a fit end for Maximianus put to death by Constantine.
so bloody a Tyrant. And ripe was the like destiny for his no-way-degenerating
son, against whom he prepared his forces: and drawing Licinius Governor of
Sclauonia, who was made Caesar, to his side, by giving him his sister
Constantia to wife, (a man but of an ordinary descent, though Gallienus
Maximinus had made him in Illyrica his Copartner in the East) hasted toward
Rome with an Host of ninety thousand foot, and eight thousand horse; levied out
of Britain, France, and Germany.

(4) But knowing well that success in war depends more in divine
assistance then humane strength, yet doubtful what God h^ should in this
blessed enterprise invoke for aid, (for as yet he was not fully settled in the
Christian Faith, though the Gods of the Gentiles he observed altogether
deceitful) cast up in this his holy meditation his eyes Eastward to heaven,
and had by divine ordinance presented to Niceph. li. 7. c. 2^. Eutropius lib.
11. Zoso^. lib. 1. ca. 5. Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 2. V^spurgens. Chron. Paul. Diac.
li. 11.
him in object the sign of a Cross, wherein were Stars (as letters) so
placed, that visiblie might be read this sentence in Greek, IN HOC VINCE, as
diverse Authors report.

Yet are there some from the testimony of Eusebius himself, unto whom this
blessed man Eusebius.
did declare his Vision, that affirm this form The form of the Cross.
being the first Greek Characters of the name of Christ, (to which the reuerse
of Decentius hereafter expressed, Tetu^. against Marcion, li. 3. Hieron. in
Ezec^. cap 9. Raynolds conference with Heart, cap. (...). Martial. of the
Cross. (...), D^logue 4. Lip^ de Cruce.
as of many others, may add much probability) rather then either of these,
although Tertullian and S. Jerome affirm, that the latter was the very figure
of the Cross whereon our Savior died: but this as a question beyond my
judgment or intention, I leave to those learned Divines and others, who have
labored in that subject with curious search.

(5) This miraculous sign promising Victory, and that (says Eusebius) not in
an Inscription only, but Eusebius. ecles. hist. lib. 9. cap. 9. Sabellicus.
by voice of Angels, was so comfortable to Constantine, that with great courage
he went forward, bearing before him and his victorious Army, in place of the
Imperial Standard, the form of this vision imbrodered with gold and stones of
greatest price. And as one armed from heaven, proceeded against his hellish
Constantines repose.
adversary.

Maxentius as much depending upon his Sorcerers, was no less assured of the
victory. In furtherance Pomp. Laetus. Maxentius trusts to Sorcerers.
Sabellicus.
whereof, as a stratagem of war; he framed a deceitful Bridge over the
river Tyber, near to Pons Miluius, to entrap Constantine: but joining battle,
and ouer-laid with strokes, retired and fled, and (whether for haste, or
through forgetfulness) took over the same Bridge, which suddenly failing
under him, he was with many more drowned, and Constantine remained Victor. In
memory whereof, he caused a triumphall Arch to be erected in the midst of
Rome, wherein his Statue was imbossed, holding in his Right hand a Cross;
according to the fashion of that which he had seen in the heavens: and upon
ancient inscription in memory of this Victory, this we find engraven:
INSTINCTV DIVINITATIS, MENTIS MAGNITVDINE CVM EXERCITV SVO, An inscription made
on memory of Maxentius overthrow.
TAM DE TYRANNO QVAM DE OMNI EIVS FACTIONE, VNO TEMPORE IVSTIS REMP. VLTVS EST
ARMIS. Thus: By instinct of the divine power, with great magnanimity and help
of his army in a lawful war, he revenged the cause of the common wealth, as
well on the Tyrant himself, as on his whole faction all at once. With the like
success had he warred against the Frankners in Batauia, whose Victory was
likewise stamped in gold, wherein is a Woman The memorial of his victory over
the Frankners. Cambd. Brit.
sitting under a Trophey, and leaning her head upon a Crosse-bowe, with this
inscription, FRANCIA.

(6) But as his fame increased in the minds of most, so was it as much
maligned by Licinius his fellow Emperor and Brother in L^; who in his heart
never favored the Christians, howsoever for a time outwardly he suffered
their Religion: but at last, seeking occasions against Constantine, he raised
a cruel Persecution in the East, where he reigned with Martinianus, whom at
Byzantium, and Julius Licinius Licinianus at Arlas, he had before made Caesar's:
permitting the^ to stamp these moneys as marks of Sovereignty.



(7) By this affliction of Gods Church, he enforced this Champion of God for
their defense to prepare his forces, with which he met Licinius in Hungary,
where he gave him a great overthrow. But he Licinius put to death at
Nicomedia, and his son after, Anno 326.
escaping to Byzantium in Asia, the less, joined again battle, and was there
taken Prisoner: yet by the mediation of his wife Constantia, had his life
spared, and was confined within the city Nicomedia; where for his treasons
afterward, he and his son Licinianus, that somewhat suruiued him, were put
to death. And now the peace of Gods Saints manifestly appeared, and the
progress of the Gospel passed untroubled.

(8) For now (says our Gyldas) no sooner was the blasting tempest and storm
of Persecution blown over, but the faithful Christians, who in time of
trouble and danger, had hidden themselves in woods and deserts, and in secret
caves, being come abroad to open sight, reedified the Churches ruinated to the
very ground. The Temples of holy Martyrs they founded, and erected (as it
were) the Banners of victory in every place, celebrating festival holy days,
and with pure hearts and mouths performing the sacred ceremonies: for the
which blessedness, he ever after had the Attributes ascribed unto him of most
blessed Emperor, most pious, happy Redeemer of Romes City, Founder of Peace,
Restorer of Rome, and of the whole World, most great, invincible Augustus,
S^cred, Divine, and of sacred memory, etc. Howbeit, for admitting these
praises, as it should seem, he is taxed by Eutropius and Victor of pride; as
also cruelty for putting to death Crispus his son (by Mineruina his
concubine, whom he had made Caesar, and permitted to stamp these moneys here
under inserted) as likewise his wife Fausta, sister to Maxentius: but others
affirm that the Sigonius.
causes of their deaths were just, though (as Paulus Orosius says) the reason
thereof was kept secret, and Zosimus does therein excuse him as Cassiodore
relates, In hist. tripart.
and so does Rufinus and Eusebius.



(9) Touching Constantius affairs in this Island, it appears by the last
Author, that after his Fathers death, and his own departure out of this
Country, some aspiring mind taking advantage of his absence, in other wars,
persuaded the people here to withdraw their obedience. Whereupon once again he
addressed himself with his Army to the reestablishing of the Islands
subjection: and passing (says Eusebius) over into Britain, enclosed on every
side within the banks of the Ocean, he conquered the same. The joyful memory
of this expedition is registered to posterity upon his Coin set in the
entrance of this Chapter, inscribed Aduentus Augusti, and by these Letters, P.
L. N. the place of the Mint to be at London.

(10) After this (says the same Author) he began to Eusebius.
compass in his mind other parts of the World, to the end he might come in
time to succor those that wanted help: and when he had furnished his Army
with mild and modest instructions of Piety, he invaded Britain, that he
might likewise instruct those that dwell environed round about with the waves
of the Ocean: bounding the Suns setting as it were with those coasts. And of
the Political government therein by him altered, let it not seem offensive
that I, who know and profess mine own weak sight in most of these matters,
do light my dim candle, at the Bright-shining Lamp of that Cambden in his
Britannia.
Illustrious Antiquarie, who says:

(11) About this time (says he) as evidently appears by the Code of
Theodosius, Pacatianus was the Vicegerent of Britain: for by this time the
Province had no more Propretors, nor Lieutenants, but in stead thereof, was a
Vicegerent substituted. And again, Seeing that Constantius altered the form
of the Roman Government, it shall not be impertinent to note summarily in what
sort Britain was ruled under him; and in the next succeeding ages.

He ordained four Praefects of the Pretorian, to wit, of the East, of
Illyricum, of Italy, and of Gaul: two Leaders or Commandere of the forces, the
one of footmen, the other of horsemen in the West, whom they termed
Praesentales. For civil government there ruled Britain, the Prefect of the
Praetorium or Grand Seneschall in Gaul, and under him the Vicar General of
Britain, who was his Vicegerent, and honored with the title, Spectabilis;
that is, notable or remarkable: him obeyed respectively to the number of the
Provinces two Consular deputies, and three Presidents; who had the hearing of
civil and criminal causes.

For military affairs, there ruled the Leader or Commander of the footmen in
the West, at whose disposition were the Earls or Lieutenants of Britain, the
Earl, Count, or Lieutenant of the Saxon coast along Britain; and he Duke of
Britain, styled every one Spectabilis.

The Earl Lieutenant of Britain seems to have ruled the Inland parts of the
Island, who had with him seven companies of footmen, and nine coronets or
troops of horse.

The Earl Lieutenant of the Saxon coast, who defended the Maritime parts
against the Saxons, and is named by Amianus Lieutenant of the Maritime tract,
for defense of Amianus Marcill.
the Sea coast, had seven companies of footmen, two Guidons of horsemen, the
second legion, and one cohert.

The Duke or General of Britain, who defended the Marches against the
Barbarians, had the command of thirty and eight garrison forts, wherein their
Stations kept, consisting of fourteen thousand foot, and nine hundred horse.

So that in those days (by Pancirolus account) Britain maintained nineteen
thousand, two hundred sootmen, and Nineteen thousand foot and seventeen
hundred horsemen maintained in ordinary in Britain.
seventeen hundred horsemen, or thereabout in ordinary.

Besides all these, the receiver of the Emperors Finances or public revenues:
the Provost of the Emperors Treasures in Britain, and the Procurator of the
Draperie in Britain; in the which the clothes of the Prince and Soldiers were
Wouen: and the Count also of private revenues had his Rational or Auditor of
private State in Britain: to say nothing of the sword-fence-schoole Procurator
in Britain (whereof an old inscription makes mention) and of other officers
of inferior degrees.

(12) After the settling of these affairs, to the end that he might with the
more facility bridle the untamed Persians that seldom were in quiet, he
removed the Imperial seat of his Residence into the East, for now Gallerius
and Licinius both dead, the rent and divided state of the Roman Empire was in
him united: and purposing to build there a City, as an eternal Monument of
his name, he chose the plot at Chalcedon in Asia: but whiles they were
measuring out the circuit, an Eagle scouping at the Line, fled with it over the
Sea toward Byzantium in Thracia, to which place (the thing seeming ominous) he
transferred his new foundation, and there built a most Magnificent City,
naming it New Rome) as appears by an inscription Sabellicus.
of his Statue). In imitation whereof, he circulated Seven hills with a Wall for
Height, Thickness, and Beauty, A Jewish Doctor thus described this City, in
an epistle which himself delivered to our English Ambassador, remaining in
Constantinople in Anno 1594.
the fairest in the world: and not only erected Temples, Towers, and most
stately Palaces himself, but by his public Edicts, commanded all the Princes
of the Empire to raise therein some Monuments and memorable Edifices, beseeming
the Majesty of so glorious a foundation.

(13) Hither also from Rome he caused to be brought many renowned Monuments
of Antiquities, as the famous Goddess Pallas of old Troy, the Image of Apollo
in brass of an unmeasurable bigness; the Statues of Juno, Minerua, Venus, and
the like: whereupon Hierome says; That Constantine to enrich this one City,
impouerished all others in the Empire: and other Hier. in his additions to
Eusebius.
Writers which saw it in the perfection of beauty, report it to be rather an
habitation for the Gods, the^ the dwelling place for Earthly men. Herein also
(so studious was he of good Arts) was built the Proud Palace of that Public
Library, wherein were contained one hundred twenty thousand of the chiefest
Written Books, and in the midst thereof were the Guts of a Dragon, in length
one hundred twenty Foot, on which was admirably written in Letters of Gold,
the Iliads of Homer. The New Name of this new City lasted not long; for the
affection of all men to the Founder, afforded it rather the name of
Constantinople. As a trophey Constantinople built by Constantine.
then of this Emperors renown, though now a brand of infamy to another of
that name, who lost it in the year 1452. to Mahomet the Turk: and as New Rome
was reared and ruined in one name, so had Old Rome in Augustus her pitch of
height, and in Augustulus her period.

(14) He drew likewise hither those Legions that lay for defense of the
Provinces, as well in Germany and Gallia, as in Britain: from whence he
brought (says Malmesbury) a great power of British Soldiers, through whose
industry and forward service, having obtained Triumphant Will. Malmsbury.
Victories to his hearts desire, and (...) Empire: such of them as were past
service and (...) formed the painful parts of Soldiers their fulltime, he
planted in a certain part of Gaul Westward, upon the very (...) of the Ocean:
where at this day their posterity (...), are wonderfully grown even to a
mighty people; in manners and language somewhat degenerate from our (...). In
which his doings, he laid open the Provinces to the irruptions of their
Enemies; and is therefore by Z^imus hardly censured, as being the only man
that by this means first subverted the flourishing estate of the Empire. And
indeed, by withdrawing his Forces out of Britain, the Picts and other their
wonted Enemies had the bolder and easier entrance into the more civil parts of
this Island; where by ere long, being altogether abandoned of the Romans, it
became a pray of Conquest to the Saxons, as shall be showed in due place.

(15) But howsoever his policy failed (carried (as it seems) by a Divine
inspiration to leave Rome) yet is this good Emperor much commended by all
Writers for his many virtues, especially for that he so laid the foundation of
the Christians security, that the same has stood under the protection
Constantine the establisher of Christianity.
of Princes ever since, even unto this day. And albeit that many Caesar's his
successors, have often attempted to shake it by their authorities, and the
sharp instruments Ambrose upon the death of Theo.
of heretics dangerously have undermined it, yet has it borne out the Storms
of all their boisterous assaies, and stood in the strength that this Emperor
first laid it.

(16) And upon this foundation, that a glorious building might be raised, he
congregated three hundred and eighteen Christian Bishops in the City Nice in
Thracia, where himself was present, and also President Ruf^. Cassiod. Eusebius
eccles. hist.
of the same Council (though now his Beadsmen (the Popes) put him and his
Successors from that right) and as another Moses, he then pacified the
contentions of the brethren, and reestablished the authorities of the Bishops
for the godly government of the Church in that Primitive age.

(17) But as the cleerest Sun has his set, and the fairest day his night, so
Constantines glorious life drew to an end, though his liuing-glory shall be
endless: for intending a voyage against the Persians, he fell grievously
sick, and counseled by his Physicians to be carried Hierom^.
unto Nicomedia, a City in Bythinia, to the Hot Bathes that naturally there
sprang (which caused some erroneously to write that he became a Leaper) he died
on the way near to the place, and in great devotion commended his departing
Soul to his Crucified Redeemer, Maij 22. the year of Christ Jesus three
hundred Eusebius. Sigonius. Constantine buried at Constantinople. Socrates,
lib. 1. cap. 26.
thirty seven, and of his happy victorious reign thirty one, and of his age
sixty five; whose body was interred at Constantinople, in the Church of the
Apostles that himself had therein founded.

(18) Eusebius writing this good Emperors life, says, that he deferred his
Baptism until his old age, in desire Eusebius in vi^ Constable. lib. 4.
that he might receive it in Iordayne, where our Savior himself was baptized.
Yet others think that he was baptized with his Son Crispus, what time he
created him his Caesar: for the Celebration whereof, he caused a most
sumptuous Font to be made in Rome; which Platina and Sabellicus affirm to have
continued to their times. And the ingenuity of the same Sabellicus Sabellicus.
is much to be approved, in that speaking of Constantines Donation, which some
so much vaunt of (though the vanity of that forgery is now laid open to the
view of all by sundry learned men) he acknowledges (himself being a Romanist)
that he finds no mention of any such matter, in any of the ancient Records
which he followed, and so leaves it to the Patronage of those Crafts-men, out
of whose forges it first was formed. He left to succeed him in the Empire as
Augusti, (with distaste of the eldest) his three Sons, Constantine,
Constantius, and Constance, whom before he had made Caesar's, and designed by
Testament, Constantines successors.
Delmatius, the son of Anniballinus, (his brother) Caesar: and therefore we
have inserted his money in rank of those that succeeded this great and glorious
Emperor.

FLA. VAL. CONSTANTINVS IVNIOR, Emp. FLA. VAL. CONSTANS, -- FLA. JULIUS
CONSTANTIVS, FLA. DELMATIVS ANNIBALLIANVS, CHAPTER XLVII.
Constantinus Junior Emp. Val. Constans Emp.
Iul. Constantius Emp. Delmatius Annibalianus Emp.


FOR the Empire being divided among these Brethren, An. Do. 337.
Constantinus the eldest, whose portion was Britain, France, Spain, and part
of Germany, took Constantinus his part of the Empire.
himself wronged in this partition; whereas Constans his second brother had
Italy, Africa, Sclauonia, Dalmatia, and Greece; and Constantius the youngest
Constans his part of the Empire. Constantius his part of the Empire.
possessed Thracia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, Provinces much greater in
his sight, then his own seemed to be; and therefore at last ambitiously he
attempted to enlarge his upon the Frontiers of his brother Constans, at that
time in Dacia, and in wars against the Goths, who there also invaded his
territories, but was met with and slain by a Captain of his Constantinus
slain. Socrates lib. 2. c. 3.
brothers, near to the City Aquileia in Italy, when he had held his
Seigniories the term of three years.

(2) Hereupon Constans grew exceedingly proud, and seizing his deceased
brothers Provinces, joined them unto his own Possessions, and with his brother
Constantius came into this Island. This Battle, and their arrival here, by the
words of Julius Firmius, Cassiod. trip. Hist.
chanced in the winter season: for (says he, speaking to these Emperors) you
have subdued under your Oars the swelling and raging waves of the British
Ocean, even in the deep of Winter; a thing hitherto never seen before. And
the Britains were sore afraid to behold the unexpected face of their Emperor.
This Constans was he that called a Council to Sardica against the Arrians, A
Council against the Arrians called by Constans.
whither were assembled three hundred Bishops, and among them, some of the
British, as formerly we have mentioned. But this Prince being youthful, cast
away all care of the Empire; and drowned in his own pleasures, followed ill
counsel, (the usual way to Princes ruins.) Thus grown grievous to the
Provinces, and nothing acceptable to the Soldiers, was by Magnentius a
Captain of his own slain, as he was hunting near the Castle of S. Helens,
situate amongst Constans slain.
the Tapori, a Spanish people under the Pyren Mountains. And as hence this
Murderer of his Sovereign Lord and Master, was branded with the name of
Taporus, so in this Emperor there murdered was fulfilled a Prophecy that he
should die in his Grandmothers Amianus. l. 20. c. 1^
Lap.

Olympias the Widow of this Constans was given to Arsaces King of Armenia, by
Constantius his brother, to be a bond and purchase of his surer friendship, of
which his need was much, as the times required: for after the death of
Constance, Vetranio was proclaimed Emperor by the Pannonian Army, though
shortly disrobed, and sent to end his decrepit age in a private fortune.
Nepohanus the nephew of Constans by his Fl. pop. Nepohanus p. F. Aug.
sister Eutropia, was at Rome by the abject Rout saluted Augustus, which he
enioied not much above twenty days, being suppressed by Magnentius, who had
now made the truncke of Majesty, his Sovereigns body, the Basse, whereby he
meant with Decentius and Desiderius, his two brethren, to ascend the Throne.

(3) Simon Dunelmensis says, that Great Constantine Simon Dunelm. I. Stow.
at his departure from Britain, left one Octauius to govern the Land, who
shortly rebelled, and after diverse conflicts was slain by Traherne, Commander
of a Roman Legion. Galfridus makes the said Octauian a Galfridus Monm.
Britain, and will have him to reign with great Victories over this Island the
space of fifty four years, which (as Fabian has accounted) does extend to
the Rob. Fabian.
time of Valentinians Rule in Rome: so far do our British Historians differ
from the Romans. But from them most certain it is, that Magnentius before
mentioned, a Britain by his father, though borne among the Laeti in France,
invested himself into the Imperial Dignity, usurping France, Spain, and
Britain, thus stamping the face of himself and his brother Decentius, by him
made Caesar at Millan, upon the current Moneys of such revolted Provinces as he
usurped.



And did for three years bandy against Constantius, though with some unequal
success: but lastly despairing to uphold his own greatness, murdered
himself Magnentius murdereth himself.
at Lions in Gallia, as his brother upon news thereof, did with a halter in the
same Country. For this event (no other occasion moving) Constantius both shut
the Temple of Ianus in Rome, as a token of an Socra. li. 2. cap. 27.
Universal Peace; and gloriously triumphed with more then a usual aspect.
Amian. li. 16. c. 5.


(4) At this time the General of the Army in Britain was one Gracianus; the
father of Valentinian the Emperor, by birth an Hungarian, and so strong of
Gracianus of admirable strength.
limme, that no five men could pull a rope out of his hand with all their
force; whereof he was surnamed Funarius, the Roper. This man giving
entertainment to Magnentius, was condemned in confiscation of all his goods by
Constantius that now ruled sole Emperor, unto whom also the Britains
submitted themselves, and whose Deputy after Gratianus was aged Martin Deputy
in Britain.
Martin, a man (no doubt) virtuous and upright, as he witnessed by his death:
for Constantius, whose base and distrustful heart feared the wagging of every
leaf, by the slaughter of many guiltless, sought to make himself secure: and
egged on by his Flatterers, (to serve their purposes) sent one Paulus a Notarie
Amianus Marcel. lib. 14. cap. 4.
into Britain, to apprehend them that had aided Magnentius.

(5) The said Notarie was a Spaniard of a pestilent Paulus a Spaniard his
subtlety.
wit and subtlety, especially in finding out all quirkes and devices to
endanger men's estates: whose business being now to apprehend and bring away
such Martial men as had entered action in the foresaid conspiracies, he under
that pretense drew into danger many that were guiltless, and the Emperors
true Subjects: some of which he imprisoned, others he tormented, and many with
Manacles and Chains Amianus lib. 25. cap. 2. Paulus called Catena for his
cruelty.
so bruised, that therefore he was called Catena. Old Martine the Deputy, much
lamenting their miseries, besought the Spaniard to surcease, and not with the
Offenders thus to punish the Innocent; whereat the proud Catch-pole so much
disdained, that he threatened and sought to bring Martin before the Counsel,
and that in bands in manner of a Traitor; which so much incensed the aged man,
that with his dagger he assailed him; but perceiving the wound he gave was not
deadly, he stabd the same into his own side, and Martine killed.
thereof presently died: unfortunate in this fact, but otherwise a most
righteous man (says Amianus) that thus attempted to ease the wrongs of these
oppressed Britains.

(6) But besides these their distresses, the outrodes Amianus Mar. li. 20. cap.
1.
of the Scots and Picts breaking into the Marches of the Britains, sore
molested their peace: for redress whereof, Julian the Caesar wintring at
Paris, and distracted into sundry thoughts, was afraid in person to pass those
Seas himself, and to leave Gaul without a Ruler, especially at such a time,
when the Almans had stirred up a most cruel war: wherefore he sent
Lupicinus at that time Colonel of the Infanterie, and Master Lupicinus sent
Deputy into Britain.
of the Armorie, to withstand their fury; a warlike man certes, and skillful
in feats of Arms, but withal proud of heart and countenance, looking high,
and speaking big, and in gesture demeaning himself in his charge as an Actor
upon a Stage, and otherwise so qualified, that men doubted a long time whether
he were more Covetous or Cruel. He from (...).
Bononia embarked all his men, and with a good gale arrived in the Haven
Richburrow or Rip^bester.
Rutupi, marching in all haste to London.
Lundinium, that from thence, after advice taken, according to the quality of
the business, he might make more haste to come into the field, and give
battle. But with what success his affairs afterward proceeded, I find not
recorded: and therefore I return again to the Emperor Constantius.



(7) Flauius Claudius Constantius Gallus his cosengerman Gallus chosed Caesar.
he elected Caesar, permitted him to stamp this money, and linckt him in
marriage with his sister Constantia. But he, designed to govern the East, and
make good those Frontiers against the Persians, forgot the duty of his charge,
and gave himself up at Antioch to all licentious lusts and cruelties: of which
when Constantius (infected before with some jealousy of his ambition) was
informed, he so plotted, that this lost man, drowned in his own vicious
security, was surprised, and with his hands bound backward (like a Fel^n)
given up to the common Headsman for execution. Gallus executed.
His brother Iulianus was then made Caesar, and this Emperors other sister
Helena bestowed upon Iulian^ made Caesar.
him, whose Victories against the Germans and Gauls gained him such applause,
that he was against his will Iuliani Epist^.
by the Soldiers elected Augustus, and made Consort with Constantius in Power
Imperial.

(8) Whose fortunes thus sticking in a tumultuous State (for, with others,
Nigrinianus (whose consecrated memory is left to posterity upon this money)
attempted the disquiet of this Emperor, by an ambitious affection of rule,
that was both short and fatal to him) did plainly foreshew, that neither his
Reign nor life would last long.



For besides the affections of the time that then followed that new risen
Star Julian, his nightly visions and imagined apparitions did both terrify
and appal his mind; for as he thought, his fathers Ghost presented unto him, a
Babe of an ingenious countenance, Constan^ apparition.
which struck the Ball (that the Romans call Tufa, a Globe borne only by a
Monarch) out of his right hand, betokening naught else but a change of State.
Which howsoever his diuiners interpreted for pleasing things, yet himself
thought his own Genius still followed him, in a forlorn, poor, and mournful
habit.

(9) These dumpes notwithstanding, this new Election he meant to disauow: and
Julian for his part resolved in point of honor to maintain and uphold. He
leads an Army against Iulianus, and dies by the way. Socrates lib. 2. cap.
37.
Whereupon wars prepared, Constantius set forward to encounter him, and
coming to Tharsus, from Antioch in Syria, fell there sick of a fever, which
still increased as he further traveled, and in the borders of Cilicia, at the
place called Mopsus Wels, situated at the Amianus Mar. lib 21. cap. 13.
foot of MountTaurus, died the third day of November, the year of Christ by
Ieromes account, three hundred sixty four: by others, three hundred sixty
one; when he had ruled twenty four years, and lived forty and a few
months, as Amianus Marcellinus, and Pomp. Laetus affirm. But Socrates and
Zosimus The time of his reigning.
say, that he lived forty five years, and reigned thirty eight, that is,
thirteen a Caesar, in the life of his Father, seven a Competitor in the lives
of his brethren, and seventeen years Emperor alone.

He is neither accounted with the best, nor worst Emperors, his Virtues
seeming to hold scoale with his Amianus lib. 26. cap. 9.
Vices: temperate, courteous, liberal, and affable; not elequent, yet desirous
to speak well; blunt witted, yet Constantius perfections and defects. His wife
was Faustina. Constantius a great exacter of tribute. Sulpitius Seuerus.
a great fauorer of learning; a most skillful Archer, and apt to take pains;
but withal very suspicious; led by Flatterers, and most cruel to the accused,
and in exacting importable Tributes, drew more hatred upon his head then money
into his coffers. But especially is he stained with the heresy of the Arrians,
for whose sake he banished many of the Christians, and amongst them Athanasius,
that excellent light of the Catholic A Council in favor of the Arrians
assembled by Constantius.
Church. In favor of those Heretics, he caused to be summoned four hundred
western Bishops unto the Council of Ariminum, whereof three are reported to
come out of Britain. And he is by Amianus his Life-writer, Hilarie calls
them the Bishops of the Provinces of Britain in an Epistle unto the Bishops.
condemned for mingling foolish doting superstitions, with the sincere doctrine
of the Christian Religion, given rather to a more intricate search therein,
then to settle his opinions upon gravity: and stirring up schisms and
discords in maintaining of words and contentious disputations, which as they
spread more and more, gat wing even unto this Island of Britain, as by the
words of our lamenting Historian Gyldas is seen. When (says he) the sweet
concent of Christ the head, and his members Gyldas.
the body, had continued until such time, as that deadly and perfidious
Arrianisme, like to a pestiferous Serpent from the other side of the Sea,
casting up her venom upon us, caused brethren dwelling together, to be
disioyned piteously one from another. And thus the way as it were being made
over the Ocean, all other cruel and fell Beasts wheresoever, shaking out of
their horrible mouths the deadly poison of every heresy, inflicted the deadly
stings and wounds of their teeth upon this our Country, desirous evermore to
hear some novelty.

(11) For personage, this Emperor was indifferently Amianus Marc. lib. 11. cap.
15.
tall, his complexion brown, the cast of his eyes lofty, his sight quick,
his hair soft, his cheeks always shaven; from the graffing of his neck to
the groine very long, but from thence somewhat short and bowlegged withal. His
body after death was embalmed, and in Constantinople enterred near unto his
Father, at Constantius his portraiture; Constantius buried at Constantinople.
the commandment of Julian, whom by his testament (for all his former
displeasure) he declared his Heir and Successor.

FLAVIVS CLAUDIUS IVLIANVS EMPEROR APOSTATA. CHAPTER XLVIII.


IVlian succeeded, whose birth had as much of Nobility as either the
greatness of place; (for it was Iulien his Parentage.
New Rome); or the high blood of parentage could Amian. Marcell. lib. 15. cap.
7.
add unto him; for his Father Constantius, was the brother of great
Constantine, and not much his mother Basilina was lower in her birth, though
most unfortunate in bearing him, her own destruction. An Orphant he was left
together with Gallus his brother, long tossed between the sourges of his own
imperfect constitution, and the bloody jealousy of his ruling-kinsmen (not
long before the fatal ruing of his Father) for being too near allied to their
Crowns.

Mean he was of stature, yet carrying from head to foot a just proportion and
uniform knitting of His proportion and feature. Amian. Marcel. lib. 25.
his lineaments, whereby he had agilitie and strength: big and broad his
shoulders, his neck fat, bearing his head forward; lovely and graceful was
the cast of his quick and clear eye, straight his nose, and no feature of his
face amiss, but the greatness of his mouth, and the parting of his nether
lip; the soft hair of his head he wore in a decent length, and his rough
beard he cut in a pointed fashion.

(2) His education was under many masters, of which Mardonius a Scythian Eunuch
was the first. His education. Misopo. Iul. Imp.
From him he was sent to the public School at Constantinople, where of
Nicocles of Lacedemon, he learned his Grammar, and of Ecebolius the Sophister
his Rhetoric; and of both of them (as of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia) the
Christian Religion, in which his delight was such, that he betook him to the
function of a Deacon, reading in public to the people the sacred Books; and
aimed at no further mark of greatness then the reputation of a holy man: led
on with Socrates lib. 3. cap. 1.
the love of knowledge, he went to the Schools of Nicomedia, where, of
Iamblicus, who succeeded Porphyry in the Chair; he learned the Philosophy of
Aristotle and Plato. There bewitched at length with the fame of Libanius
Eloquence, though detesting his religion; from reading in private study his
profane labors, he grew a public hearer of his inuectiue Lectures: and
imitating at first in exercise of wit only this Rhetoricians form of
declaiming, he grew in the end the profanest Railer, and deadliest Enemy of
all other himself against the Church. And to fill up this vessel of iniquity,
Maximus, the only Impostor and Magician then of the world, (worthily after for
his impious doctrine put by Valentinian to the sword) must come to Nicomedia.
From him did Julian learn such Astrology as sets Natiuities, and such
Magic as inuoketh Spirits. And here was the school of this man's Error, and
Mistress of his impiety. The seeds of whose Nature and Education having thus
observed, let us search with an impartial Eye into his manners and condition,
and see what virtue was in fruit.

(3) His temperance is commended to us with admiration. He slept little, and
could awake at pleasure: His temperance.
his bed was ever with the hardest, and his diet of the Marcel. lib. 16. In
Misopo. Julian. Imp.
meanest meat, and the moderatest measure, whereby he never but once, and that
by accident, disburdened his stomach by vomit; and would often say, that it
was the safety of his life, that he never had any war with his belly. Such was
his chastity, that having lost Marcel. lib. 25. and 24.
at once in France, Helena his beloved wife, and her infant, his only Son, he
never so much as in suspect, had an incontinent desire. And therefore of all
the Persian beauties taken in those wars, as the richest spoils, Nec
contrectare aliquam voluit nec videre: Neither suffer in his Army either Cooks
or Barbers, as Marcel. l. 22.
being deliciarum atque intemperantia ministros.

Arceo meipsum a Theatris: I force my self (says he) from the view of
Stage-plaies, and never but once a In Mesopo. Julian. Imp.
year permit my Eye that delight in Court; wherein the distaste of my mind is,
tanquam pauper agricola tributum aliquod pendens iniquo Domino. And when the
action was performing; similior sum detestanti eos ludos quam spectanti. Yet
does Marcellinus tax him of much verbositie and affectation of vain glory. And
Marcellinus, l. 22.
Gregory Nazianzen charging him with intemperate Gregor. Nazianzen in lib.
contra Iulianum.
passion as vnconstability, says; That by his ranging and furious aspect, his
unsteady and halting pace, his fleering look, and immoderate laughter, Tale^
ante opera vidi qualem in operibus cognoui.

(4) The love of Justice in this Prince is remembered to us in his rules of
DIRECTION: for he so His Justice. Marcellinus, l. 22.
amended the Laws Ambagibus circumcisis, that the Judges might clearly see,
Quid iuberent fieri quid vetarent: and in his EXAMPLE for imitation. For when
to an innocent denial before him, Delphidius the Orator inueighed saying;
Nocens esse poterit vsquam si negare suffecerit: himself replied, Et quis
innocens esse poterit si accusasse sufficit? and so discharged the party. As
for his clemency and charity, which ought to attend the sword and Scepter of a
Sovereign, since the one is Magnum timor is remedium, and the other will be,
post cineres tributum; Nebridius and Lucillianus are Mart. Epig.
Registers of the one, whom notwithstanding their conspiracies in favor of
Constantius, he not only pardoned, but defended wiih peril of his own
person from the furies of his own followers. And for the other, those his
letters to Arsacius is a sure record. Let there be in the Cities of your
charge, many Hospitals erected, that the want of the way faring may be relieved
by Ex Julian. Epist. ad Ar^a. pont. Galatia.
our benignity: and not of them only of our Religion, but of all the rest: for
it suits not well with the goodness of our Government, that when the Jews
permit none of theirs to beg, and the wicked Galileans relieve not only
theirs, but ours, that ours should be disconsolate of other help.

Some have blemished his bounty with the brand of vaineglory: thus did the
Antiochians for depressing In Misopogon, Julian, Imp.
so much the reasonable price of Grain in their Markets, by a profuse expense
of his own Treasure, gaining thereby at first only the applause of the light
multitude, after which he hunted, and drawing on in the end a miserable dearth,
through the licentious excess of their improuidence: which often happens.

And as the banishment of Palladias into Britain upon a weak suspicion,
Taurus to Vircillum, in whom the eye of Justice could find no skarre; and to
death Vrsulus, with Pigmeus (the first his Treasurer, that had spent with him
and on him his own means, when being Caesar, he had little of his own: the
other the guide of his youth, and to whom he truly ought the greatest part of
his goodness) may justly stain him with lawless severity, and ungrateful
cruelty; so may his malicious spirit against the Christians, howsoever masking
in more Art then many that went before him, set him up in the rank and top of
the greatest Persecutors. And although there be some passages in his Government
more easy then in some others that may imply a gentle disposition toward them,
(sometimes taking the Gods to witness, that the Galileans (for so he named the
Christians) should not undergo the least of injury, neither be led to Pagan
sacrifice, Ex Epist. Julian. Imp. ad Artab^. Ex Edicto Julian. in Edissenet.
(...) ad Alexandrian.
or forced to any thing beyond the compass of their own contents: and that he
not only revoked the Edict of Constantine the Arrian Emperor, whereby those
holy men stood long exiled: but taking the advantage of an vproare begun by the
Arrians, Ex Epist. Julian, Imp.
(their Enemies) at Edissa seized upon their goods, swollen too great in number
and fortune by the gracious aspect of his Predecessors, to whom he dissembled
himself a Christian): yet did he whiles he had in his own hands the reine of
Government, by all his actions and ends, declare himself an heavy opposite
unto them. Sometimes by allurements to assay to corrupt them; sometimes by a
subtle siding with Hieron Russi^.
one faction of the Church, as he did with the Catholic against the Arrians,
to counterpeise their power, vt securius regnaret, that by such license of
sedition, Non timeret vnanimantem plebem, he need not fear the power of their
unity, as himself professed.

From this unfortunate plot of earthly policy (but with worse success) he
incited the Jews to reedifie the Temple at Jerusalem, and renew their
Sacrifice, remitting to them their debt of Tribute, and vowing that at his
return from Persia he would visit that holy City, and (as he says to them)
vt vna vobiscum in ea Deo optimo gratias agam; well believing that by raising
such an opposite to the Christians, he should suppress their increase, and
annihilate their Prophecy of Ierusalems desolation. To repair these cursed
walls against the providence of Divine Justice, Alipius of Antioch, that had
been Governor of Britain, was sent: but his endeavor, and the work of all
his Ministers, was interrupted by fearful flaming balls of fire, which
issued from the Earth near unto those foundations, consuming very many of the
Jews and workmen; by reason whereof, this Element still giving fresh assault
on them, the place became inaccessible, and the enterprise given over: so vain
it is for Man to strive against the decreed purpose of God. And it is by others
affirmed, that at the same time an Earthquake so shook those Foundations which
were left by Titus untouched, that one stone thereby was not left standing
Secr^tes lib. 3. cap. 17.
upon another, but were all laid level with the ground: by which miraculous
sights many Jews were Sabelli^
turned to the embracing of the Christian Faith, upon whose garments fell
forms of Crosses, which shined as the beams of the Sun, neither could they
by any means be washed or wiped away. Alipius that had been chief in this
business, was afterward confined (...), lib. 2^. cap 4.
into Banishment, with the loss of his goods, by Valens upon suspicion of
Treason. And thus far of Iulians veiled hatred: now of his open actions of
despite against the Christians.

Constantius no sooner dead (under whom as before is said he dissembled his
Religion) but that he opened the Temples of the Pagans Gods, repaired their
Altars; declaring to future ages, the memory of this his detestable act, by
minting a Bull prepared for sacrifice, upon the Current money of the State,
with this inscription; Securitas reipublicae; as if Romes Empire should lose
her security, and the fatal destiny of Command, when the Genius of that
City and the Gods of her foundation should be forsaken. And where there
remained any antique Monument of the Infant Christian Church, or any new
erected badge of Religious devotion, those he caused to be defaced. Thus did
he in Caesarea Philippi, with that Brazen figure of our Savior arraied in a
short vesture, Eusebius, lib. 7. ca. 17.
and the Woman cured of her blodie issue, kneeling and eleuating her hands to
him; and at whose feet in the said Pillar grew a certain Herb, in height
unto the Hem of his Garment, which cured all kind of maladies; placing his own
figure, to the intent that it should be worshipped: but suddenly it was with
Lightning from Heaven destroyed, breaking with violent force the Breast thereof
asunder, and striking the Head fast into the earth; whose Relics, as Zosimus
says, remained Zosimus Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 20. Iulianus picture destroyed by
lightning.
there to be seen a long time after, a witness of man's presumptuous error and
Gods just displeasure. Many laws he made against them, and many rights of
Subjects he took from them. By Edict he forbad the Christians the public
Schools and study Ex Edicto contra Christian.
of the Arts and Tongues; Jesting away the reason of this injustice with
scoffs, as he did the rest; saying, that Aristotle, Isocrates, and Plato, who
must be their guides in such liberal learnings, adoring Mercury and the other
Gods, he held it absurd that they should read and learn of their Books, that
loath and rail at their Religion.

The equity of this extended power may appear by Marcellinus censure, a man
of his own Religion, who of it says, Inclemens obruendum perenni silentio;
Let the Edict be dambd to eternal silence. When he seized upon the goods of
the Christians, which was often, and upon weak pretenses, he used to inuert
the Letter of their own Doctrine, in warrant of his foul act, saying that he
did it, vt facilius in Regnum Coelorum veniant. When he had disabled the
Christians of all Ex Epist. Julian. ad Ecebolum.
command, either in the Field or Commonwealth, (as he did Iouinian,
Valentinian and Valens, after Emperors) he would say, he did it because their
Gospel takes Hieron. Cassiodorus. Socrates.
from them Potestatem Gladij. And wheresoever any poor Christian implored the
hand of Justice against wrong and violence, they returned with no better
redress, then that it was the rule of their Religion, perferre iniurias, it
was the duty of their Profession to bear all injuries. And although most
Authors agree that he stained not his government with the blood of any
Catholics, well knowing that gore of Persecution is the seed of the Gospel;
yet some affirm that when Apolloes Oracle, near Antioch, had lost his power
of answer by the holy presence of Babillaes body Sabellicus. Socrates. lib. 3.
ca. 11.
(there martyred and intombed) and that the Christians in remoouing it away,
sung solemnly the Psalm, Let all them be confounded which worship graven
Images: this Emperor (although the Act was his direction, though not the
order) grew so enraged, that he put then many Christians to the sword.

Of the prudence and learning of this man there be His prudence.
many notable monuments remaining: for in all the courses of his life he did
rather labor to content the parts of his understanding, then of his
sensuality, often being heard to say, Turpe esset sapienti, cum habeat animum,
captare lauds ex corpore: and therefore writing to Ecdicius, Prefect of
Egypt, to help him to the Epist. Julian. ad Ecdicium praef. Egypt.
Books of George Bishop of Alexandria, he says, Where others delighted in
Horse and Hawks, I have been from my infancy inflamed with the love of
Books. Many works there were of his own pen, though now raked up in the ruins
of the time.

As his Oration to Iamblicus, and other Volumes of various learning, remembered
by Suidas: yet is there Suidas.
extant that witty Satyr of his, of all the Caesar's.

The Register of his Epistle, full of worthy observations. Julian. Imp.
Caesares.


His discourse De Regno, wherein he deciphereth Iul. Imp. Epist. Lib. Iul. de
praeclaris actionibus. Hymnus Julian. in Solemn.
much of his Persian Actions.

His Hymn to the Sun, a song of a high strain, and of a matchless
delicacie, if the subject had not been too profane.

As for his Misopogon, (where playing with his own Misopogon vel Antiochensis.
person and beard, he sharply reprehendeth the Antiochians of their
intemperance in frequenting Stage-Plaies; of their impiety, in changing
Jupiter and Apollo (Gods of their Forefathers) into the Christ of the
Galileans; and of covetousness in their Magistrates, in selling Justice) it is
one of the wittiest Inuectiues extant of those middle times.

In the course of his Religion he is by the Writers His Religion.
of his own affection and time rather reported superstitious then devout; and
his fancies therein rather to them accounted ridiculous then religious. Such
was Marcel. lib. 25.
the excess and waste of Oxen in his sacrifices, that it is believed if his
return had been from the Persicke Expedition, there would have been want of
them to supply his Rites, and therefore they might happily say as the white
Oxen did of the Emperor Marcus, Si tu viceris, nos perimus. Yet were his rules
of order to the Priests of his superstitious zeal, such as may well become the
most religious Churchman of our age to imitate: for he prohibited those
Priests from gaze of Stage Plays, frequenting Tauernes, or exercising Ex
Julian Epist. ad Pon. Galatiae.
any foul or illiberall profession, persuading them to imitate the Christians,
whose bounty to strangers in distress, charity in burying the dead, and whose
humble manners and sanctity of life (though but dissembled) had so much
increased their Profession.

(6) His fortitude appears in the process of his His Fortitude.
Martial Actions. At three and twenty years he was made by Constantine his
nephew Caesar, matched to Marcel. lib. 15.
his sister Helena, and sent in person to restrain those barbarous Nations
that had forced in upon the Roman Limits. But whether this imploiment was
grounded upon the Emperors own fear to adventure his person against these
Savages, a desire to nurture this mere Scholar his brother in law in more
princely manners, who then was rude; or to expose him (in respect of some
iealousy in State) to an assured peril: it remains doubtful. Only himself
says, that he that bestowed his Title of Caesar, libenter dabat; and qui Ex
Epist. Julian Maximo Phylosopho.
accepit, omnino recusabat: for in it he gained nothing but vt occupatior
interiret, taking this his Expedition against those Inrodes, as a banishment
into the Hercinian Desert, vt tanquam venator cum feris bellaret: and believing
himself rather thereby called out to an expected death, then intended honor.
But this man then neither of opinion or hope, and who should have seemed to
have effected a point of excellent service, if he had no more but defended the
frontiers, and repelled the Enemies, did by his valor perform no less then
deeds of admiration.

He recovered the revolted Cities of Gallia, overthrowing seven of the
mightiest German Princes in one set Battle.

He sent to Rome Chonodomarius and Badonearius, two of their greatest Kings,
as spoils to adorn the Amian. lib. 16.
Trophey, and attend the triumph of Constantius. He forced on every side those
to fear his power, that had so long been fearful to the Roman Empire. And
had he returned home, borne up only with the merit of this his service, and
opinion of the world, and not been blown beyond the bounds of his old
moderation by a new desire, he had escaped the imputation of ambition and
treachery, and been esteemed a just successor, against whom he is deemed now
an unjust usurper. But it may be said that it was a divine power that inspired
it, and a strong hand that enforced him to it: for from above the Porch of his
entrance, into one of the regained Cities, the Wreath of Laurel (reserved an
ornament of that place) fell in wonder upon his head. The Genius of Rome in
many apparitions chiding and reprehending his slow desire to affect the Empire,
and restore the State. As touching his election, he calls the Gods to
witness his unwillingness, and the public protestation he made against it at
Paris, when he was there by the tumultuous Army saluted Augustus. And although
by the great provision made by him of Corn from Britannie, to hold a foot the
Army against the plots of Constantius (that grew now envious of his fortune,
he may seem to have intended the ruin of his Sovereignty) yet does he by
the Gods of his greatest confidence, Jupiter and the Sun, protest, Quod
Constantium occidere nunquam optauit, imo ne id accideret exoptauit.

(7) But Constantius ending this quarrel and competition by his death, Julian,
whom a Pithonist had deluded with the hope of Persia, telling him that his
fortunes should be as his feature, like Great Alexander, bred in him a thirsty
desire after the surname Persicus: whereupon he prepared an Army for this
expedition, and seeking the favor of his Gods the Moon, Fortune, and Mars,
embrued their Altars with the Sabellicus lib. 22. cap. 2. Julian his sacrifices.
Blood of an hundred Bulls at once; though many ominous signs, as they were
interpreted by his Philosophers and Southsaiers, forbad the same. Such was the
great Earthquake happening in Bithynie, that swallowed up the City of
Nicomedia. Rivers likewise are said An Earthquake.
to stand dry, even in the heart of winter; and Springs forgetting their
usual boilings, yielded not forth their wonted waters: yea and if we will
believe the reporters; his success was foreshewed by the departure of an
Angel, and by a Meteor gliding in the Air. All which he sought to prevent,
by pacifying Sabell. lib. 25. ca. 2.
his Heathenish Gods with multitudes of Sacrifices: and with an Army extended
ten miles in length, entered An Army reaching ten mile.
Persia, cutting asunder the Bridges by which he passed over his men, to add
to them more of resolution, as their means were less of return, refusing all
humble submission and composition offered him by their King; and at the place
then called Phrygia, joined Battle against Surena, a great Commander among the
Persians, and Merenes, General of their Horse, accompanied with two of the
Kings sons, whose powers not able to resist the Romans, gave back and fled.

Julian either upon a vain confidence, or sudden Alarm, had forgot to arm
himself with his Corslet or Brigandine; and in following the disarraied flight
of the Persians, lift up his hands in sign of victory: at which very instant
a Iauelin struck through his left Julian struck into the body with a Dart.
Arm into the short Ribs, and stuck in the nether lappet of his Liver;
which whilst he endeavored to pluck out, did cut the sinews of his fingers:
whereat altogether distracted, he fell forwards upon his horses maine, and
thence was carried unto his Pa^. From whose hand this Iauclin came (faith
Amianus) Amianus. lib. 25. (...). 3.
God only knows. Some report the Caster to have been a fugitive Persian:
others say that from the hand of one of his own Soldiers it proceeded: and
Calistus one of his own Guard, that wrote this Battle in Heroical Verse,
affirms, that by some wicked Fiend S^es lib 3. cap 18.
or Devil, this Iauelin run him through. Howsoever, there are that report that
in pulling out this Lance, (...) lib. 6. c. (...). T^d. lib. 3. c. 25. Sabell.
^us.
and casting it into the air with his blood, he should utter this blasphemous
speech, and say, Thou have overcome me, O Galilean. At his setting forth he
vowed to his Gods a Sacrifice of Christians blood, if he returned Conqueror,
but he performed it with his own. His slain Corpse was carried to Tarsus a
City in Cilicia, where with small pomp of Funeral Obsequies it was interred
near to the Cities side; which place himself to that purpose had formerly
assigned: although Nazianzen affirms the earth to have opened, and in a flame
of Sulphur to have sucked up his body into her Womb.

(8) Thus ended this Emperor, the twenty sixth of June, in the two and
thirtieth year of his age, and three hundred sixty and three of Christ's
Nativity, when he had reigned Augustus near three, and Caesar full seven
years. Whose wit and eloquence needs no further testimony then the Monuments
of his own Pen; nor his religious zeal more then the Function his youth so
worthily performed in the Christian Church. His Imperial Virtues we see match
him in story with Titus, in moderation with Aurelius, and for success in
war, with Traian; three of the most excellent Princes: and his fortune was to
see bounded within his sole greatness, what the hand of right and sword of
tyranny had so late dispersed. But now one Error, his Apostasy, disroabing
him of all his Moral Virtues, leaves him an object naked to the vulgar eye,
but as a Monster of men, and mark of infamy. I hold it therefore fitting no
less the use, then the justice of a Story, to do him (as I have done) all
his right: since in him we learn that all those admirable endowments of
Nature, embelished with all the moral and internal graces that Art could
add, are not the base of holiness, without divine grace; nor dalliance of
Fortune, and fullness of Empire (that made this man wanton and forgetful) is
the center of security and happiness, without heavenly protection: since from
the sense of Sacred Piety he fell to Pagan Superstition: for many are called,
but few are chosen; Matthew. 20. 16.
and in the seat of Presumptuous Majesty he felt the rod of Divine Revenge.

Discite Iustitiam moniti, and non temnere Diuos.

FLAVIVS IOVIANVS. CHAPTER XLIX.
Fla. Iouianus. Emp.


THe minds of the whole Army being much distracted An. Do. 364.
by the death of Julian; the next day, being June twenty seven, they met, and
consulted upon a new Emperor: where for a while two factions were maintained,
and with equal deserts argued, till lastly in one accord they both agreee upon
Marcellinus, says Eutrop.
Salustus, a man very honorable and wise, but withal aged and weak, and
therefore he absolutely refused the election. Iouianus by them then was
nominated, in regard of his fathers deserts indifferently commended, says
Amianus: but Rufinus, Theodoret, and Socrates attribute great worths unto
himself, and confidently Rufi^ (...). Hist. lib. 10.
affirm his unwillingness to accept of that dignity, for that the whole
Army had yielded to Iulians Idolatrous Edicts, openly professing himself to
be a Christian, and withal protesting that he would not be a Sovereign over
an Ethnicke Empire, until by the instance of the Soldiers, which declared
themselves likewise; to be Christians, he did accept of the same.

(2) His Father was Varonianus, by birth an Hungarian, a Captain of good note,
who not long before Iouianus his Parentage.
had laid down his charge of war, and retired into his Country, to a more
quiet course of life. Himself served Julian the Apostata in his Camp; from
whence he departed by virtue of his Edict, commanding all Christians out of his
pay, among who^ Iouianus, his piety.
Iouinianus (as we have said) chose rather to cast from him his Sword and
Girdle, (marks of honor to Military Professors) then to forsake the Ensign of
his Heavenly Chieftaine, and the Badge of his Christian Profession.

(3) No sooner was he clad in the Purple Robe, but one Iouianus (a Roman
Ensigne-bearer, lately at variance with this new Elected Emperor, then a
private man) fearing the danger of so powerful an Enemy stepped now above the
degree of the common sort, revolted to the Persians; and having good access,
informed King Sapores of the death of Julian, (to them till then unknown) and
disabling Iouianus for an Unskillful and Effeminate Captain, both encouraged
the Enemy; and gave directions how to take the advantage. The Persian as ready
to execute as joyous to hear, set forward his forces, his Elephants leading
the way, whose terrible brayings and fearesull approach much affrighted the
Roman Soldiers. A sore battle was fought, and fountains of blood drawn from
the sides of both parts: wherein, with an infinite number of Persians,
Iulianus, Macrobius, and Maximus, three Roman Tribunes, of those Legions that
then were the Principal of the whole Army, were slain: in regard whereof, and
especially for want of Victual, (whose scarsitie then was such, that for one
Pecke of Meal, ten pieces of Gold were given) Iouianus made Peace with the
Persians for thirty years, giving them five Provinces beyond Tigris, some
Cities and Forts in Mesopotamia, whereof Nisibis is named for one that Amian.
Marcell. lib. 25. cap. 13. Cassiod. Tripar. hist. lib. 7.
had been the very sinews and strength of the Confines, ever since the Wars
of Mithridates: for which his doings, he is taxed by Eutropius and Amianus (who
both lived in his days) and of most the deed is held very dishonorable to the
greatness of the Roman Empire: howbeit diverse others excuse him very justly,
considering the extreme misery and famine wherein Paulus Orosius. Sabellicus.
Iulianus left the Army, which was in apparent hazard to be given over for a
pray to the Enemy, to the indangering of the whole Empire, had it not been thus
prevented: and therefore they highly commend him herein, as the only
Preserver of the Roman Army.

(4) Howsoever, he is highly commended by Socrates, Socrates Scl^. lib. 3. cap.
20.
(the continuer of Eusebius his History) who flourished above Twelve hundred
years since; for his constant faith grounded upon the Nicen Creed, and for his
Loving Reverence to the Christian Bishops, recalling Bishops recalled from
banishment.
from banishment those that Constantius and Julian had exiled; among whom,
Athanasius of Alexandria was one: putting down the Idolatrous Temples of the
Gentiles, and restoring to their Offices both in Court and Camp, those who for
their Conscience had been expulsed.

(5) At his departure from Persia, he visited the City Tarsus, where he
caused the Sepulcher of Julian Iouianus adorneth Iulians tomb.
(though otherwise he had found him auerse both in Affection, and Religion, yet
for that he was his preceding Emperor) to be richly adorned: and taking
Antioch in his way for many days together was troubled with some accidents,
which that age did take for Ominous signs. For the Statue of Maximianus
Caesar, standing at the entrance into the Kings Palace, let fall the Ball or
Globe out of his hand, no force moving it: horrible sounds and noises were
heard within the Consistory: and Blazing-starres appeared at Nooneday. A
Blazing star seen at Nooneday.


Thence therefore in greatt haste he marched, and at Ancyra, declared his son
Varronianus his Caesar, a very Infant, whose Wrawlings and unwillingness to
ride in the Imperial Chariot, portended (says Amianus) that which after
happened. For hasting still toward Constantinople, he came to Dadastana, a
place that divides Bithynia and Galatia asunder, and there died suddenly of
the obstructions and stopping of the Lungs, caused by the dampe of a new
mortered Chamber Sabellicus.
wherein he lay; or (as others write) by coals there set to dry the new
seeling, whose vapors having no issue, stifled him to death, the seventeenth
day of February, Iouianus death. His reign. Amianus Mare. lib. 25. cap. 14.
Socrates eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 22.
the year of the worlds redemption, three hundred sixty four; after he had
reigned seven months, and twenty two days, aged thirty three years.

(6) For his personage, he was of goodly presence, Iouianus shape and
disposition.
both tall and big, his gesture grave, his eyes gray, and countenance pleasant:
an affectionate lover and professor he was of the Christian religion, of
indifferent learning himself, but a most honorable imbracer thereof in others;
very precise and considerate in choosing of Judges and Magistrates; facile and
familiar to his seruitors about him. His Blemishes were these, that he was a
great feeder, and given to wine; and somewhat to that other Vice which usually
accompanies such intemperancies.

FLAVIVS VALENTINIANVS, Emp. FLAVIVS VALENS, -- CHAPTER L.
Flauius Valentinianus, Emp.
Flauius Valens, Emp.


PResently upon the death of Iouianus, by a secret An. Do. 364
whispering and running rumor, Equitius, Tribune of the Scutarij was nominated
Amianus Mar. lib. 26. cap. 5.
Emperor, a man naturally rigorous, and rude; and therefore disliked of the
better advised, and no further followed. But from him, their voices turned to
Ianuarius, a kinsman to the last deceased Iouianus, at that present Governor of
Illyricum. But he also rejected, Valentinianus, then absent, was Elected at
Nice, as a fit and meet person for the managing of their Wars, and good of
the Wealepublike. Socrates in eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 1.


(2) His birth was of Pannonia, in the City Cibalas, of mean and poor
parentage; the son of Gracian spoken of before, who by trade was a
Rope-seller, but of great strength; and therefore by service preferred Chap.
47. sect. 4.
to places of account, and had been made Ruler of Britain. His own life
likewise was spent in service of War, and was ere-while a Captain over the
Targatiers: but Julian requiring him either to Sacrifice to his Gods, or to
leave his place; he chose rather to lay aside his Belt then his Faith and
Christianity, as likewise Iouianus Valentinianus a Christian.
had done; and so for neglecting a little honor then, he had now a far
greater bestowed on him by the disposer of all Earthly Kingdoms. The Estate so
urging it, he made Valens (his Brother) Partner in the Empire, the trumpets
every where sounding Wars throughout the Roman World. For the Almans invaded
Gaul and Rhaetia, the Sarmatians and Quadi made spoil of Pannonia: the Picts,
Saxons, Scots, and Attacots infested the Britains: the Austorians made roades
into Africa: the Goths ransacked Thracia, and the Persians entered Armenia. For
which cause, Valens remained to defend the East, and Valentinianus took his
Theodoret.
progress into the West, where in three Battles under the conduct of Iouinus,
he discomfited the Almans: and Valens likewise overcame and beheaded
Procopius; whose feature we have here expressed, a dangerous Usurper in the
East.



(3) But in Britain things prospered not so well: Amian. Marcel. l^b. 17. cap.
7.
for by the general bandings of the foresaid Nations, their old Enemies, the
Province was sore distressed and brought to extreme misery. For Nectaridius,
Admiral of the British Fleet they slew, and Balchobaudes Lord Warden of the
Marches, by a train of these barbarous Nectaridius slain.
people, was forelaid and assailed on every side. The intelligence of which
occurrences, when it was brought to Rome with great horror, the Emperor first
sent hither Seuerus, Steward of his House, if fortune would happily speed his
hand, to redress whatsoever had happened amiss. But he in short time being
called away, had not the hap to see the wished success. Then Iouinus, famous
for his Wars in Germany, came into the same parts; and seeing the puissance
of the Enemy, meant to crave aid of the Auxiliarie Forces, the urgent
necessity requiring so much: at last, in regard of many (and those fearful)
accidents, which rumor continually reported, touching the state of this Island,
hither was designed Theodosius, a man esteemed most happy, and approved for his
Martial prowess, who with a bold resolution and select power both of Horse
and Foot, set forward for Britain.

(4) The Picts at that time were divided into two Nations, to wit, Deucalidones
and Western Picts.
Vesturiones. The Attacots likewise a warlike kind of people, and the Eastern
Picts.
Scots ranging in diverse parts, wasted all where they went. As for the Tracts
of Gaul, the Frankners and Saxons their near confined neighbors, wheresoever
they could break forth, and make Roades by Sea or Land, made havoc here by
seizing of Booties, firing of Towns, in killing of men and women, and leading
away Captives. To stay these woeful miseries, if the Heavens had been so
benign, this valiant Captain intended a voyage to this Britain so called.
our end of the World: and coming to Bolog^.
Bononia, which lies divided from the opposite tract of Land by a narrow
Channel ebbing and flowing with terrible Tides, where the waters are seen
sometimes to match the highest Mountain, and again to settle with the Ieuell
of the Plains, without any harm of Sailers or Passage: this Sleue with a
gentle course he crossed, and arrived at Ribchester.
Rutupie, a quiet Road and Harbor over against it: from whence after that the
Bactauians, the Heruli, Iouij, and Victores (Companies bold and confident in
their strengths) were come, he marched toward Lundinium, an ancient City,
which posterities afterward named Augusta: London called Augusta.
and having severed his Troops into sundry parts, he charged upon those
companies of rouing and robbing enemies, even when they were heavy laden with
Booties and spoils, and were driving away before them both Men and Women bound
for their Captives, besides much Cattle, and a great Prey. These he soon
discomfited, and restored to the poor distressed Tributaries their Liberties
and Losses, bestowing some small parcels thereof among his weary and
well-deseruing Soldiers: and entered the City with exceeding Theodosius
ioifullie received into London.
great joy, in manner of a Petty-triumph, which erewhile was ouer-whelmed with
Calamities, but now on the sudden refreshed and set in perfect safety.

(5) Upon this prosperous success encouraged to greater attempts, he abode
yet doubtful of the future, casting with himself many proiects, which poised
Fortunes Scales alike: but lastly by certain Captives and Fugitives he
learned that those Companies of sundry fierce Nations, spread so far and
diffusedly upon the face of the Province, could not be vanquished, unless it
were by sleights and stratagemes. By Edicts therefore he first proclaimed
impunitie to such as had forsaken their Colors, if they would return; whereby
many which had run to the Enemy, or at their own pleasures had been
dispersed into diverse parts, came in, and by their countenance declared their
resolutions in his behalf. Notwithstanding, mistrusting the event, and pensive
still with cares, he thought good to call to his assistance Ciuilis, a man of
great understanding, quick spirit, and withal an upright Iusticer, who was to
rule Britain as Deputy, and likewise Dulcitius a Captain, renowned for his
skill and deeds of Arms.

(6) After Consultation with them, having gotten Amianus Marcel. lib. 28. cap.
7.
courage, and departing from Augusta with a power of Soldiers, which in his
politic industry he had levied and trained to his hand, he brought exceeding
great succor every where unto the troubled and confused state of the
Britains, gaining before hand such places in each part, as might give
advantage to annoy the barbarous Enemy; and enioined the Common Soldiers no
service, whereof himself took not the Assay with a cheerful heart: in this
sort performing as well the Offices of an Active and hardy Soldier, as the
careful charge of a right-noble General, he discomfited and put to flight
diverse Nations, whom insolent Pride (fed with security) had incited and set on
fire, to invade the Romans Territories; and so restored wholly unto their
former state the Cities and Castles which had sustained many losses, and
established a sure peace for a long time following.

(7) Now there happened whiles he achieved these exploits, a dangerous matter
likely to have broken out into great mischief, had it not been quenched in
the very beginning of the enterprise: for one Valentinus of Valeria Pannonia, a
man of a proud spirit, first Deputy Leiutenant and after president, for some
notable offense banished into Britain, as Frontinus immediately before had
been, as one impatient of rest, like some noisome wild Beast, upon a certain
swelling pride, rose up in commotion against Theodosius, whom he perceived to
be the only man able to withstand his wicked designs. Howbeit, casting about
many ways, both closely and apparently, as the gale of his unmeasurable desire
rose higher, he solicited as well the banished persons as Soldiers, promising
(as the time would afford) rewards to allure and draw them on to some actual
attempt. Yet when the day came wherein it should have been effected,
Theodosius having intelligence thereof, surprised Valentinus with some few of
inward accomplices, and delivered them unto Dulcitius, to be put to death
Valentinus a Rebel put to death.
accordingly. But in his military skill and policy, (wherein he was reputed
to have exceeded all men living in those days) gessing at future dangers, he
Theodosius an expert Warrior.
inhibited all Inquisitions to be made touching the rest of the Conspirators,
lest so general a fear surprising at once, and spread abroad among many those
tempestuous troubles of the Provinces, which were now well allaied, should
revive again.

(8) Therefore turning himself from this business to the reforming of such
enormities as were of most consequence, now that all dangers were quite
ouer-blowne, he reedified the Cities, repaired the Garrison Castles, and
fortified the Frontiers with standing Watches, and strong Fore-fenses. And thus
having recovered the Province again which had yielded subjection to the
Enemies, he reduced it unto the pristine Estate, so as by his means and motion
it had again a lawful Governor appointed, and also named it VALENTIA, in
honor of Valentinianus the Emperor. Britain called Valentia.


(9) The Areans, a kind of men (as witnesses Amianus) instituted by those of
ancient times for politic Amian Marcel. lib. 28. cap. 7.
imploiments, who by little and little were fallen into disorders and vices, he
removed from their Areans removed from their Stations.
Siations, as being manifestly convicted, for that (induced with the greatness
of rewards received or promised) they had diverse times discovered unto the
Barbarous whatsoever was done or debated betwixt the President and his
Counsel: for indeed their charge was to run to and fro by long iournies, to
intimate and make known unto the Romans Captains upon the Marches, what
doings and stirs were among the Neighbour-Nations; whereby they had great
opportunities both to know and reveal the secrets of the State.

(10) And thus Theodosius having managed most excellently these affairs, was
sent for to the Emperors Court; who leaving the Province ouer-ioied for their
Peace, was no less famous for his many important Victories, then was either
Furius Camillus, or Papinius Theodosius comparable to Camillus.
Cursor. And being honorably accompanied and attended unto the Narrow Seas,
with the hearty love and favor of all men, departed, and with a gentle gale
of wind passed over, and came to the Princes Camp, where (being received with
joy and praise) he succeeded in the room of Valens Iouinus, who had the
conduct of the Horsemen. For these his Martial deeds so happily achieved, in
honor of him there was a Statue erected, resembling a Man of Arms on
Horseback, as by Symmachus may be understood, thus speaking to his son
Theodosius: The Author of your Symmachus.
kindred and stock, Captain General both in Afric and Britain, was (among
other ancient Titles) consecrated by the most honorable Order with Statues of
Knighthood. And in his commendations, Claudian with full note thus poetically
sang: Ille Caledonijs posuit qui Castra pruinis,
Qui medios Libyae sub Casside pertulit aestus. Claudian in praise of
Theodosius.

Terribilis Mauro, debellatorque Britanni
Littoris, ac pariter Boreae vastator and Austri.
Quid rigor aeternus? Coeli quid sydera prosunt?
Ignotumque fretum? Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule,
Scotorum cumulos fleuit glacialis Hiberne.
In Caledonian frosts his Tents he pight,
And Lybiaes scorching heat endured in Field:
The Coleblacke Moors, and Britains fair, in fight
He queld, and forced both South and North to yield.
What then auaild cold Clime, strange Seas, or Stars,
When Orkney Isles he drencht with Saxons gore;
When Thule did reake with Picts blood spilt in wars,
And Ireland did huge heaps of Scots deplore?


(11) Strange and dreadful were the signs that in the third year of this
Emperor chanced; as Earthquakes, Dreadful sights, and fearful Earthquakes.
Amian. Marcell. lib. 26. cap. 14.
Inundations, and the like; whereof Marcellinus thus reports: A little after
the Sunne-rising (says he) the weighty and steady mass of the whole Earthly
Globe shook, flashes of lightning very thick and fierce going before: the Sea
also driven aside, and the waves and billows so preposterously tumbling and
retiring back, that the deep Gulfes being discovered and laid empty, a man
might have seen sundry sorts of swimming creatures sticking in the Gulfes of
the Sea laid bare, and many Cities drowned.
mudde: Also the vast Valleys and Rocks, which Nature had set far away under
the huge Waters, did now behold the Beams of the Sun; insomuch that many
Ships were bedded fast in the dry ground, and flocks of people stragled at
their pleasure in the small remains of water, to take up Fishes as the
Sea-spoile; when on the sudden the waves disdaining to be thus dispossessed,
returned with such violent beating upon the Islands and Promontories, which lay
far into the Sea, as that they ouer-slowed, and laid level an infinite
number of buildings and Cities. And therefore in this furious discord of the
Elements, the surface of the world being covered, represented strange and
wonderful sights. Among which S. Jerome reports, that there Paulus Orosius.
S. Jerome. Wool rained from Heaven.
rained Wool from Heaven so perfect and good, that no better grew upon the
Sheep, the natural Producer. But to return.

(12) Fraomarius, whom Valentinianus had ordained to be King of the
Bucinobantes in Germany, was Amian. Marcell. lib. 29. cap. 9. Fraomarius made
King of the Bucinobantes.
made Tribune and Colonel over a Regiment of Almains in Britain, which for
number and valor in those days were renowned; where (no doubt) matter enough
was ministered for him to work upon, but the death of the Emperor presently
following, admits no mention of further discourse: which happened in this
manner: The Quadi after many molestations done to the Roman Legions and their
Confederates, sent their Ambassadors unto him, desiring pardon for their
former faults committed, and an abolishment of all remembrances thereof: (...)
conference, suddenly the blood (...) (...)
mouth; and being laid upon his (...) ^ed of an Apoplexy, or rath^r of the
Plague, (...) Marks appearing upon his dead body gave ^cture: November the
seventh, of his age fifty five years, having reigned eleven years, eight
months, and two days, in the year of our Christ three hundred seventy five.

(13) For presence, he was Maiesticall, of body fat, his complexion fair, his
eyes gray, and having (...) (...)
therewith somewhat a scue cast, his hair shining bright, his ioints strong and
well knit: he was a Prince merciful and loving, and mitigated many Tributes
formerly imposed on the Provinces: a wise Warrior, stern in countenance,
hasty of speech, and chaste(...) body, a good Iusticer, and impatient of all
delays. But these his Virtues with some Vices were accompanied: for he is
taxed with envy and partiality, in punishing severely the poor Soldier for
small offenses, but remissiue to the faults of their Captains and Leaders, and
that was the cause (by Amianus his report) of the troubles in Britain, the
losses in Afric, and the wasting in Illyricum.

(14) His Arian brother Valens suruiuing him, Ualens Emperor in the Last.
reigned Emperor in the East; by whose sufferance the Barbarous Goths entered
Thracia, which presently proved to be the bane of the Roman World, for that
these Goths (a strange and unknown People till then) being forced out of a
secret Nooke in Scythia, by the Hog-Backt Hunnes, rushing as an irresistable
Whirle-Winde from those High Mountains, infested the Coasts Amian. Marcell.
lib. 31. cap. 34.
about Danubius, and obtained license from Valens to pass the River Donaw into
Thracia, where long in quiet they stayed not, but like a violent Flood running
with a full current, they ouer-whelmed all before them, ouercomming the Romans
in many Battles, and Goths overcome the Romans. Ualens slain.
in one slew the Emperor Valens, with most of his approved Captains, and
twenty five Tribunes that had charge of Regiments, the third part of his Army
hardly escaping unslain. Some report that Valens flying the Field, took into
a house near Adrianople, whither being pursued by the Enemy, and his Hold
fired upon his head, was therein burned to ashes, after he had sat Emperor
fourteen years.

FLAVIVS GRACIANVS -- Emp. FLA. VALENTINIANVS IVNIOR, CHAPTER LI.
Gracianus and Valentinianus Emp.


GRacianus, the Eldest Son of Valentinianus, by his Empress Seuera, was made
An. Do. 376.
his fathers Colleague in the Empire in the fourth year Amianus Mar. lib. 27.
cap. 5. Gracian and Valentinian Emp.
of his Reign: notwithstanding six days after his death, his second Son
Valentinian, a Child of Four years old, by the advice of the Counsel and
general consent of the Camp, was also styled and proclaimed Emperor. These
Brethren Lib. 30. cap. 13.
lived in much love, and ruled in the West, as their uncle Valens did in the
East, of whom we last spoke. And albeit Gracian had cause of displeasure, that
this his Younger Brother was thus advanced without his allowance; yet he as a
Prince kind and natural, regarded his Brother exceedingly, and brought him up
in Gracian loving to Valentinian.
all tender affection, forgetting the wrong offered unto himself and his own
Mother for Valentinians mothers sake.

(2) The Mother of this Valentinian was Iustina, a damsel of an admirable
feature and exceeding beauty, Iustina mother of young Valentinian.
surpassing all other women so far, that the Empress her self fell in love
with her, and usually conuersed with her familiarly as her equal, imparting
her most private secrets unto her as her trusty Counselor, and often bathing
together in the same Bath. Neither was her ardent affection contained within
the measure of Womanish modesty, insomuch as she refrained Sorates eccles.
hist. lib. 4. cap. 25.
not in the hearing of the Emperor (her Husband) to extol her incomparable*
beauty, preferring her far above any creature in the World. Whereupon
Valentinianus so far affected this Lady, as that Ualentinianus marries
Iustina, by whom be had young Valentinian.
he took her to his Wife; by whom he had this young Valentinian, and also
three Daughters, notwithstanding Seuera was yet living.

(3) The storms of the Goths as a violent tempest beating still against the
Shoares of the Roman Provinces, caused Gracian to bear Sail toward the safest
Harbor, and to commit the guidance of his ship to the most assured Pilot:
their forces being so great, and their outrages so terrible, that he thought
it best not to adventure his own person, but to employ some other approved
Captain. For which exploit, none was held more sufficient then Theodosius, the
Son of that Theodosius who was so famous for his British Wars, and whose
life was taken away by Valens the Eastern Emperor. Him he made first Captain
General of the Roman Empire, and immediately upon his first service against the
Theodosius, Captain general of the Roman Empire, and fellow Emperor.
Goths, his Fellow Emperor and Augustus, allotting him those parts in the
East, that his uncle Valens lately had enjoyed.

(4) In many Battles, fought to the last drop of blood, this worthy General
overcame the Goths, so Theodosius overcomes the Goths.
that their King Athanarius was lastly enforced to sue for his Peace, which
upon honorable compositions was granted, and himself in most princely manner
entertained by Theodosius in the Imperial City Constantinople; where falling
sick after three months, he Aurelius Victor. Paul's Orosius.
died, and was both much lamented, and sumptuously buried by the Emperor. These
reports caused Sapor, the most puissant King of Persia, to submit himself unto
Theodosius, and by his Ambassadors, attending his Sapor King of Persia.
Court, obtained his Amity. Thus gloriously reigning and perfect peace
established, he ordained his young son Arcadius his Fellow Emperor in the
East.

(5) But the affairs in the Western Empire proceeded nothing so fortunately:
for Gracian a meek and soft spirited man, balanced with Theodosius, was held
without regard; and Valentinian by his Prefect Probus, held both Rome and Italy
at his devotion; only Gallia obeyed Gracian. For Clemens Maximus borne in
Spain, but descended lineally from Constantine the Clemens Maximus rebelleth.
Cambden.
Great, by his affability and liberal carriage, had won the affections of the
Britains to side with him; a man, no doubt, both Valiant and Wise, had he held
his alleagiance to his Sovereign Lord. But the time fitting his purposes, when
the Scots and Picts with their wonted Ann. Do. 381.
inroads, sore indamaged the Province, he set himself for their deliverance,
and therein sped so well, that the Soldiers by constraint (as Oresius says)
forced him to assume the Imperial Style and Purple Robe. And Zosimus. Paulus
Orosius.
so hasting into Gallia, with all the flower and strength well near of the
Britains forces, arrived in the mouth Clemens Maximus ^ssumeth the Imperial
Style.
of Rhene, unto whom also the Germans Army joined, and now accounting himself
an absolute Monarch, admitted Victor his son, then Caesar, to be partner of
his Empire, whose Stamp therefore with his father we have here annexed.



(6) Thus Maximus establishing his throne at Triers, Spread his wings (says
Gyldas) the one into Spain, the other into Italy, and with the terror of his
Name, levied Tributes and Pensions for Soldiers pay, of the most fell and
savage Germans.

Against him Gracianus made his power, but after five days skirmishings was
forsaken of his own Soldiers, and so put to flight. And now dejected and
destitute of means to maintain his quarrel, he sent Ambrose (a great Doctor
of the Church) his Ambassador unto Maximus, to entreat for Peace, which in
outward show was granted, but was far otherwise intended, as the sequel
proved. For seeking his death, he did shortly after effect it in this wise: He
caused Letters, and reports to be given unto Gracian, that his Clemens Maximus,
his stratagem against Gracian.
Empress was in iourny to visit him, and withal sent forth a Carroche stuffed
with Soldiers, and with them a desperate Captain named Andragathius. Gracian
Andragathius a murderer.
greatly rejoicing for his Wifes approach, prepared himself to meet Her
accordingly, and opening the Litter, thinking to embrace his Empress, was by
these Ruffins treacherously murdered near unto Lions, Gracian, his death and
reign.
when he had reigned fifteen years, and lived twenty nine. Valentinian with
his Mother Iustina, fearing the like conspiracies, became supplicants unto
Theodosius in the East against Maximus.

(7) He therefore preparing his forces, marched as far as Aquileta in
Lombardie, where Maximus remained both confident and secure. For having
fortified the straits of the Mountains with sufficient Garrisons, and dammed
the Havens with strength of Ships, himself and assisters with great boldness
proceeded against Theodosius, and gave him a battle before the City Syscia in
Pannonia, and again most valiantly received him in another, under the leading
of his brother Marcellus; but in both of them was overcome. From this last, he
secretly retired unto Aquileia, where of his own Soldiers he was betrayed,
and delivered to Theodosius his pursuer; and by him to the Executioner to be
beheaded: of which his unfortunate, but deserved end, the famous Bishop
Martinus Turonensis ^
being in Britain, did foretell him long before. Andragathius also, the
Murderer of Gracian, whose state was now desperate, cast himself headlong
into the Sea, and made an end of his wicked life. Vector the son of Maximus,
made his Caesar in France, as we have said, was defeated, taken Prisoner and
slain. This Victory was held so worthy and memorable, that the Romans from
thence forward solemnized that day every year as festival, says Procopius.

(8) But these Britains that had assisted Maximus, as by Writers is recorded,
did foribly invade Armorica, and there planted themselves: From whence says
Beda, the Britains first arrived into this Island. But surely himself is
either greatly mistaken, or else we mistake him altogether, and that rather,
for that by Caesar those Coasts that lie upon the Sea shoares, are called
Armorica, and there the Celtes seated, being the Original of our Inhabitants,
as is holden, and so from thence they might spread themselves further into
these British Islands, long before it received the name of Little Britain. The
like troubles fell to other Provinces at the same time, by the intestine Wars
of the Empire: for the Gauls were molested by the Frankes; Spain by the
Sueuians; and Africa by the Vandals: the East parts by the Heruli, Ostroges,
and Hunnes; Italy by the Lombards, and shortly after by the Goths.

(9) These troubles in the Provinces, caused the Emperors to call home their
Armies, with Aides of their Allies, and all too little to support their own
declining Estates, which now began to end of it self, and these Emperors
reigns to be cut off by their untimely deaths.

But to return into the path of our History, from whence (by the entangled
occasions of these four Emperors reigning together) we have wandered; let us
remember what occurrents happened upon the death of Maximus the Tyrant, and
hasten to end the greatness of the Empire, which in most Provinces began to
end of it self. For Valentinian being rid of his fears, unto which he had
been subject; and Theodosius of his Colleague, unto whom he was enforced;
great hope was conceived of a flourishing Estate, but it brought forth only
the remains of their downfall: for the one returning to Constantinople in
great Triumph, lived not long after; and the other left peaceably in the
Western World, was (as you shall hear) soon made away by Conspiracy.

(10) Valentinian remaining at Vienna in France, free from Hostile Enemies,
retained in his Court those that sought his life, whereof Arbogastes, a
Captain of a haughty stomach, politic, aduenturous, and of Arbogastes a
conspitator.
great power, but withal of a base Parentage, a stranger and an Infidel, was
one; Eugenius a Grammarian, Eugenius a Grammarian, another.
but now bearing Arms, and of great account, was another. These corrupting his
Chamberlaines, compounded for his death, which they as wickedly performed, by
strangling him in his bed, giving it forth Valentinian strangled.
that the Emperor had hanged himself; which was so confidently avouched, that
Prosperus in his Addition to Eusebius writing his death, says, that it was
Prosper^.
acted by himself, after he had lived twenty six, and Valentinian his reign.
reigned sixteen years, being strangled in the year of Grace three hundred
eighty four.

FLAVIVS THEODOSIUS. CHAPTER LII.
Flau. Theodosius Emp.


WE have declared in the life of the last preceding Emperor, An. Do. 392.
the Birth and Fortunes, Wars and Victories of this most worthy Theodosius,
until the death of Maximus the Britain, (for so most writers term him) and
now only remain his latter Acts in War and Peace to be further related.

(2) This Emperor returning from Aquileia in Lombardie unto Constantinople in
the East, long time there stayed not, but was drawn again into the West both
to revenge the death of Valentinian his Fellow-Emperour Theodosius goes
against Arbogastes and Eugenius.
so trecherously strangled, and also to oppose the proceedings of Eugenius,
whose Coin we have here expressed, being one of the Murderers then usurping
that portion of the Empire, sided by Arbogastes the other.

Eugenius usurper.


(3) Theodosius marching with his forces toward the Confines of Italy found
the passages stopped at the foot of the Alps, and his Enemies powers far
surmounting his: Therefore a while to deliberate on these businesses, he
pitched his Tents, and there stayed. In the mean time Eugenius and Arbogastes
his associate had forelaid the Country, and hemmed him about in such a strait,
that no victuals could be brought unto his Camp.

(4) No means being now left, but either to clear the passages, or be
overthrown, he first became supplicant with Fastings and Tears unto his God,
whom he knew to be the God of Hosts, and whom Theodosius prays to God for
victory.
ever he had served, and whose aid had hitherto never failed him: whereupon
boldly encouraging his men, he accepted of the Field. But the Battle furiously
begun, fell so sore against him, that ten thousand of his Soldiers were
presently slain; and the rest despairing ready to fly, himself at that
instant had been surprised, had not God turned the heart of Arbitio, a
Sabellic. Ennead. 7 lib. 9.
Captain of his Enemies, suddenly to come to his side, and to rescue him.
Theodosius much daunted by these unfortunate beginnings, yet conceived better
hopes of the following success, trusting to the uprightness of his Cause, and
the help of his God, which still he implored, till the Heavens were propitious
to his earnest desires.

(5) For suddenly a violent tempest arose, and a raging wind rushed so
extremely on the faces of his Theodosius obtains victory.
Enemies, that they were in no wise able to withstand it, the power thereof
beating back again their darts into their own sides; whereas the arrows
shot from the Emperors part, were thereby forced with double strength to pierce
through the Rebels Iron plates, Secrat. Eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 24.
whereby a most glorious victory was obtained; and Eugenius taken, who lay
grouelling at the Emperors feet, deploring his estate, and craving his pardon;
but even as he kneeled with cries and tears, the Soldiers standing by
struck off his Head. And Arbogastes the Author of these evils by flight
escaping, Eugenius beheaded.
two days after ran himself upon his Sword, and so revenged on himself his
own wicked actions. This Arbogastes kills himself.
victory was achieved the sixth of September, in the year of grace three
hundred ninety six, by Socrates account: and was so famous, that besides the
Records of Christian Historians, Claudius a Heathen Poet thus eternizeth the
same in his Heroic Poem. Gods darling dear, the heavens thy soldiers were
in arms,
And winds conspired to aid and follow thy allarms.


(6) Theodosius thus delivered, repaired unto Millan, Theodosius dies.
where worn with years and travels, shortly after he sickened unto death. And
sending for his Son Honorius and Arcadius made Emperors.
Honorius, made him Emperor of the West, and to Arcadius gave the East, wherein
he had before made him his Caesar. The Province of Africa he assigned to
Gildus Governor of Africa.
the government by one Gyldus in his Sons behalf, and in the Nonage of
Arcadius appointed Rufinus for Rufinus Governor of Constantinople. Stilicho
Governor of Italia.
Constantinople, and Stilicho Tutor to young Honorius in Italy, three most
worthy men undoubtedly, had the greatness of their spirits been contained
within the lists of their trust and places.

(7) This last named Flauius Stilicho, famous for a long time, and an inward
companion with Theodosius, had been employed in the Britains wars against
Stilicho sometimes employed in the British Wars.
the inroades of the Scots, Vandals, and Picts, and therein had borne himself
with fortunate success, as the Poet Claudian implies, where he brings in
Britain thus speaking: Me quoque vicinis pereuntem Gentibus, inquit, Stilicho
commended by Claudian for his service in Britain.

Muniuit Stilicho, totam quum Scotus Hibernem
Mouit, and infesto spumanit remige Thetis.
Illius effectum curis, ne bella timerem
Scotica, nec Pictum tremerem, ne littore toto
Prospicerem dubijs venientem Saxona ventis.
And I, says she, that ready was
by bordering foes to perish,
When Scots did cause the Irish stirs,
then Stilicho did me cherish.
When Seas did foame with strokes of Oars,
that beat the bellows back,
His force effecting with his cares,
prevented still my wrack:
He bad me fear no foreign powers,
that Scots or Picts could make,
Nor of the Saxons that on Seas,
uncertain courses take.


So that being by him freed from those many dangers, and all her enemies
overthrown, she sings her security by the same Poet. -- Domito quod Saxone
Thetis
Mitior aut fracto secura Britannia Picte.
My Seas, though rough are calmed,
since Saxons conquered are,
And I securely rest,
now Picts are queld in war.


But this her joy through the Treasons of these three Governors, was soon
turned into laments and tears, and the whole Empires glory brought to a fatal
period, as presently it will appear.

(8) This Theodosius for his Princely parts by all writers is ranked among the
very best of all the Emperors: Theodosius his virtues.
And as he is likened to Traian for his feature and personage, so may he be
compared in wisdom to Marcus Aurelius: In temperance with Antoninus Pius: For
his Christian profession and devotion, with Constantine the Great: and for his
meeknes, equal to any: Whereof among many other, we have one example very
remarkable, upon an offense committed by the Inhabitants of Thessalonica, he
commanded most severe punishment to be inflicted, which was so unadvisedly
executed, that as well the innocent, as the offenders were inuolued therein. He
then coming to Millan, would have entered the Church to have communicated with
other Christians in their sacred devotions, which Ambrose, the great Doctor,
and Bishop of that Sea (though otherwise a man of admirable mildness) resisted
and forbad, in which estate the Emperor stood for eight months continuance:
and then with great humility and Theodosius upon his submission, absolved by
the Church.
submission, acknowledgeing his offense was absolved, and again received into
the congregation: For preventing of the like rash offenses by him committed, he
then enacted a Law, that thirty days should pass betwixt the sentence of
death, and the execution of the Malefactor: And to suppress his hasty choler
(whereunto he was much subject) his usual Theodosius, his Art to suppress^
anger.
manner was to recite the Greek Alphabet, before he vttred any speech
sauering of that humor.

(9) He died January the seventeenth, the year Socrates eccles. hist. lib. 5.
cap. 25.
of the worlds happiness three hundred ninety five: when he had reigned
seventeen years, and lived sixty, Theodosius his death and progeny.
as Aurelius Victor writes, with whom he ends his History. His first wife was
Flacilia, a religious Lady, the Mother of Arcadius and Honorius, by his second
wife he had a daughter named Placidia Galla, first married unto Athaulpus King
of the Goths, and after his death unto Constantine, whom Honorius her brother
made Augustus and his fellow Emperor.

ARCADIVS Emperors. HONORIVS CHAPTER LIII.
Arcadius Emp. East.


Honorius Emp. West.


Fatal was the Act of Theodosius, in his Election of the three foresaid
Protectors, Anno 395.
whose greatness carried with a glutted prosperity, grew to a surfeit after his
death in their ambitious thoughts, and was the downfall of the now aged and
drooping Empire: first Gildus in Africa, not contented with the title of Comes
or Earl, cast off all subjection, and as an Gildus rebelleth.
absolute Lord, acknowledged neither Arcadius, nor Paulus Diaconus.
Honorius for his Sovereign.

(2) Against these proceedings, his own brother Mastelzerius opposed himself,
and both in words Mastelzerius over comes his brother Gildus.
and acts assayed to set him in his wonted place of obedience, which by no
other means could be brought to pass, but by assistance sent him from
Honorius, with which, though much too weak, he marched against the Emperors
Enemy, and as Paulus Orosius Paulus Orosius.
writes more by force of prayers to God, then power of men, in his encounter
prevailed, and beheaded Gild^s beheaded.
Gildus for his Treason: But himself becoming mighty, and forgetting that
which in others he remembered, himself usurped the command of Africa against
Honorius, casting off all subiectiue obedience, and as a free Prince ruled the
Province: The Soldiers that had lately assisted the Emperors cause, now well
perceiving his aim, leuelled at the Crown, thought best to cut the string
before he loosed the Mastelzerius beheaded.
shaft, and made him shorter by the head.

(3) Ruffinus in Constantinople as boldly bare himself, Ruffi^ ambition.
thinking Arcadius both too weak and young to sound the depth of his designs,
whose thoughts did also work upon conceited Soueraignety: he therefore
secretly solicited the Goths to war upon the Empire, that so Arcadius might
either be slain or intrapped, or else himself in those dangers, set up as the
more sufficient. But these things thus dangerously complotted by Ruffinus, were
as politically prevented by the Emperor, although a Child: for before the Seed
of this Treason could bring forth either Bud or Blade it was discovered, and
the Author slain by an Italian Band, his Head (which as some affirm, first
Ruffinus slain.
took breath in Britain) was advanced over a Gate in Constantinople.

(4) Thus Peace obtained by the Deaths of these two Traitors, the Third stood
up with more danger in Stilicho set at hazard the whole Empire.
the West. For Stilicho, Tutor to young Honorius, thought it not sufficient
honor for him to have his Daughter an Empress by the Marriage of his Ward;
but set at hazard (for himself and son) his own Conscience, both their
Lives, and the fatal ruin of the N^w-declining Empire. For first, sowing
seditions amongst the Lieutenants of the Provinces, picked also quarrels in the
Emperors Court, Casshiering with disgraces those Goths that had served with
good proof of their fidelity above twenty years, since their entertainment
by Theodosius. These to revenge their Wrongs, chose for their Cheiftaine a
valiant Gothe named Alaricus, which shortly proved the Scourge of Rome: with
whom joined Alaricus the scourge of Rome.
the Vandals, Alanes, and Sueuians, who jointly with great fury began to
war in Austria and Hungary, increasing their Powers with such Multitudes,
that as Paulus Orosius, an Author of that time says; Paulus Orosius.
The World was amazed and stood in fear. For unto these Colonies resorted two
hundred thousand Goths, more, under the leading of Radagasius their King, who
Radag^sius with two hundred thousand Goths.
together with united forces, subdued all Thrasia, Hungary, Austrich,
Sclauonia, and Dalmatia, and spoiled all in such manner, that it seemed Devils
and not Men had passed that way, as Saint Jerome (who lived at that time)
expresses: These brute Beasts (says he) suffered by the wrath of God in this
war, have laid Cities waste, Hieron. in epist. ad Paul. (...) Eust.
slain the People, and left the very Fields bare and desolate, whereof the
Provinces of Thracia, and Sclauonia, with the Country wherein my self was
borne, bear too true, but lamentable Records.

(5) The Roman Empire thus daily declining, and these fierce Nations making
hauock where they came, the Armies in Britain were put in great fear, lest
the Flames of their Neighbors fire might Flash out, and take hold of them
also. Therefore prouidently to prevent that danger, they elected one Marcus
their Marcus chosen Emperor. Marcus murdered. Sabellicus (...). 7. lib. 9.
Lieutenant for Emperor, yielding him their obedience some short time, and then
finding his defects, immediately murdered him.



In whose stead they Inthr^ed one Gracian a Britain: whose carriage not
answering their expectations, Gracian chosen Emperor. Gracian murdered.
they Murdered also, within Four Months after his Royal solemnity.



The features and Imperial Titles stamped on the Romish Money of these two
Usurpers, (according to the usual manner of the like in Estate) we find not,
neither stands it with credit of our History to feign them at pleasure:
therefore till time bring them forth, from the Caves of obscurity we have
allowed them place only by these Circles inserted, that others may supply what
presently we want, and accomplish by pencile what we cannot by Press.



(6) Yet time to Constantine has bin more favorable in preserving his
remembrance by his minted Moneys, Constantine of a common Soldier made
Emperor. Ann. Do. 410.
which here with his Story we present to sight. At the fall of these former, no
better at all then a Common Soldier, but upon confidence only conceived of
his Name, was made Emperor, who with more respect of honor, and listing of his
aduancers, bare himself better then the others had done. For putting to Sea,
and landing at B^logne, he easily induced the Romans forces as far as the
Alps to side with him: Valentia in France he manfully defended: the Rhine,
which long had been neglected, he fortified with Garrisons: upon the Alps as
well as upon the Maritime Coasts, where passages were frequented, he built
Fortresses: Spain likewise he held under the hand of Constans his Son, whom
of a Monk he had made Constans the (...) of Constantine made Augustus.
Sabellicus.
Augustus, and by whose valor subdued all from the Pyrenean Mountains to the
Ocean. Whose Moneys wanting to express his Image and Style, we have also
supplied with another Blanke.



(7) Constantine prospering as we have said, sent Letters of excuse unto
Honorius, affirming constantly Honorius allows Constantine Emperor.
that he was compelled by the Soldiers to do what he did: whereby he so
pleased the Emperor, that commending his Valor, and holding him fit, he sent
him of free gift a Purple Robe. Whereupon this new-growne blade began to (...)
^ire, and at Arles planted his Imperial Seat, Co^ding the City to be called
Constantina from him, and ordained that the Assemblies of the affairs of Seven
Provinces should be therein held. But this his Sunshine of prosperity was
soon ouercast with the Clouds of adverse fortunes, and his Crown and Life
laid together in the dust. For in Spain against him was arreared Maximus a
Vassal, whose General Gerentius intercepting Constans, (his Son and Caesar)
at Vienna in France slew him: and Constantine Constans slain.
himself within the Walls of Arles, besieged for Four Months, after the
Reign of Four Years, laid aside his Purple Robe, and entered the Church in
Order of Priesthood; surrendering the City with his Style Imperial, was
lastly led into Italy, and there beheaded. Constantine beheaded.


(8) From that time Britain renewed her obedience to Honorius, and the
Province a while was refreshed by the Wisdom and Prowess of Victorinus her
Victorinus Lieutenant in Britain.
Lieutenant, who often repressed the incursions of the Scots and Picts:
whereupon in his praise Rutillius Claudius thus wrote: Conscius Oceanus
virtutum conscia Thule, Rutilius Claudius. Paul. Oros. lib. 7. August. de
Ciuit. Dei. Hieron. in Epist. ad Princip.

Et quaecunque ferox arua Britannus arat.
The Ocean wide and Thule,
his virtues witness will;
And all the Champian Fields,
which Britains fierce do till.


(9) But Rome at this time being sore afflicted, and by Alaricus with his
Goths and Vandals presently Iornandes in hist. Goth.
sacked, Honorius sent for Victorinus with his Army out of Britain, to the
rescue of the City, as Claudian Victorinus leaves Britain.
signifies, when he reckons up among other Aides, the British Legion sent
thither: whereof the Scots and Picts had soon notice, and (according to their
wonted manner) with fire and sword molested their neighbors.

(10) The Britains therefore resolutely engaging themselves into dangers, took
Arms, and freed their Cities and States from those Barbarous People: by whose
example, the rest of their Nation in Armorica, with the Provinces of Gaulois,
delivered themselves also from their oppressions, and all of them cast out the
Roman Presidents, settling a form of Commonwealth Zosimus.
to their own liking. But these our Britains growing too weak to withstand
the continual inroades of their Northern Enemies, humbly besought Honorius
for succor; whose return of comforts consisted Britains write to Honorius
for succor.
only in words, exhorting them by Letters, to stand upon their own Guard. But
they knowing it was not words which must help them, again deplored their
miseries, and so obtained of him the assistance of one Legion, which in their
aid drove back those Assailants into their own Marches, and fortified again
the Wall betwixt the Frith of Edeburgh unto Clutd: so then departing, left the
Britains to defend themselves; who now, besides the Common Enemies so often
mentioned, were much molested, and their Faith corrupted by one Pelagius, by
birth a Britain, Pelagius an Heretic corrupts the Britains. Beda hist.
Angl. lib. (...). cap. 10.
by profession a Monk, by leaud doctrine an Heretic, who was brought up in
the famous Monastery of Bangor in Wales, had also traveled Italy, Sicilia,
and Egypt, for the study of learning, and grew into great favor with
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and with S. Augustine Gennadius.
also, till his Heretical Assertions, which had been by him and his disciple
Coelestius (a Scot secretly taught, and by Saint Jerome discovered) were
afterward condemned by Innocentiue the first, Bishop of Rome. But Innocentiue
condemns Pelagian Heresy.
the Arch-heretike returning into Britain, began again obstinately to
maintain the same, together with Agricola, one who spread the venom of that
Heresy into Foreign parts: whose doctrines were, 1. That August. de Haeres.
Pelagius his opinions.
Man, without the grace of God, was able to fulfill all the Commandments. 2.
That Man in himself had Freewill. 3. That the Grace of God was given unto us
according to our merits. 4. That the Just have no sin. 5. That Children are
free from Original sin. 6. That Adam should have died, though he had not
sinned. And therein also one Timothy most impiouslie disputed against the
Divine and Humane Natures Timothy his Heresy.
of Christ. Notwithstanding, at the same time flourished Fastidius, a most
learned British Bishop, and Chrysanthus also the Deputy or Vicegerent of
Britain, who with great honor governed the affairs of the Church and
Commonwealth, and was afterward (as elsewhere we have showed) made Bishop at
Constantinople of the Nouatians against his will. Lib. (...). cap. 9.


(11) Thus were the affairs of this Land managed under these Brethren
Emperors; the elder of which, Arcadius his death and reign.
Arcadius, died in peace at Constantinople, leaving his son Theodosius, a
child of eight years, to the succession of the Empire, and to the tuition of
Hisdigerdus Theodosius his successor.
King of Persia; a matter which seemed at first very dangerous, but proved at
the last very profitable. Hisdigerdus his Tutor.
He reigned thirteen years, and died the first of May, the one and thirtieth
of his age, the year of Christ's birth four hundred and ten. At which time one
Iouinus, of an obscure beginning, had raised some Tumults in Gallia, styled
himself Emperor, usurped the Purple Robe, and stamped his Coins with the
Title of Victory, as is seen in one which we here present.



(12) Against him Honorius made his power, and with his little loss slew the
Vpstart in the Field: whereby his fame was more spread in the West, though not
so fortunate as his brothers was in the East, after whom he lived fifteen
years, and with whom he had reigned other thirteen; and he died, says
Paulus Diaconus, of an infirmity at Rome, in the year of grace Honorius his
death and reign Paul. Diacon.
four hundred twenty four, leaving no issue of his body to succeed him in the
Empire.

THEODOSIUS 2. Emp. VALENTINIAN 3. CHAPTER LIIII.
Theodosius 2. Emp. East.


Valentinian 3. Emp. West.


GReat have been the Wars and strange the Alterations An. Do. 408.
which both here at home, and through the World abroad have chanced unto States
since the first attempts of Julius Caesar unto these present Theodosius and
Valentinian the last Roman Monarks in Britains.
Emperors, Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third, his Associate;
whose Lives and Reigns did conclude the Successions of the Romish Monarchs
within this Island of Great Britain, and threw down their Triumphall Arches in
many other Provinces, which for long time had been obsequious to Romes
Sovereign Command. So uncertain is the Glory of this World, and her Seeming
Strength so liable to Mutabilitie, that the Powers and Periods thereof held in
His hand that holds the Universal Ball, are suddenly turned from their
high-mounted site and beauty of the Sun unto the Downe-fall and dark side of
the Globe; and either fall again into the small Circuit of their first
compass, after they have expired their Number, Waeight, and Measure: or else
with Daniels Image are utterly Dan. 2. 35.
extinct and blown away, as the chafe from the Summer flower.

(2) The continuance of whose Estates, seem they never so Great and Durable in
Power, Circuit, Defense, The Roman Monarchies condnuance.
and Multitude, has seldom extended much the limit of Five hundred years,
but that their high and mounted Flames, fall in the ashes of their own
consuming decaies, or else has received some other alteration of Empires
increase, as many learned Writers have obsered in most Commonwealths. So was
it in the State established by God himself among his Peculiar People. As from
the Promise to Abraham, made of Abraham the time between the Promise made to
him, and the giving of the Law. Call. 3. 17.
Christ the Blessed Seed and Life of Man (where ceased the Worlds formerly-vsed
computation from the Ages of Men) unto the Law delivered upon Mount Sinai,
declaring condemnation and death, were four hundred thirty years: from
Isreal's departure out of Egypt, when their Commonwealth began to be ruled by
Judges, and Gods service celebrated in the Tabernacle under Curtains unto the
Building of their Glorious 1. King. 6 1. Israel, the time between their
departing out of Egypt, and the building of the Temple of Solomon. David, the
time between his Anointing and the death of Zedechiah.
Temple erect by King Solomon, were years four hundred and eighty. From the
Anointing of David, the first King, set upon Iudahs Throne, unto the death of
Zedechiah the last King thereof, slain by Nebuchadnezer, and that Holy Temple
consumed by fire, were years four hundred and seventy. And other Politic
Estates have stood much upon the like Space of time. For the Kingdom of Athens
set up by Cecrops the first King thereof, unto Codrus the last, when they
changed their Monarchy to a Democracie, is said to have The time between
Cecrops his setting up, and Codrus the last. Lycurgus, the time between him
and Alexander the Great. Taerquinius, the time between him and Julius Caesar.
Caesar, the time between his invasion of Britain, and Valentinian the third.
Saxons, the time between their intrusions and King Egbert. Egbert, the time
between him and Edward Confessor. Normans, the time between their Conquest,
and the entrance of our gracious Sovereign King James.
continued four hundred and ninety years. The Lacedaemonians State from
Lycurgus their Lawgiver, unto Alexander the Great, that overthrew it,
flourished the space of four hundred ninety one years. From the expulsion of
Romes Kings under Tarquinius, unto the affected Empire in Julius Caesar, were
four hundred ninety and nine years. And omitting many others, to come to our
selves; from Caesar's first Invasion of Britain, unto the days of this
Valentinian the third, wherein the Romans did quite abandon it, were five
hundred years. From the Saxons intrusions and division of this Realm into an
Heptarchie under their Government, until the united Monarchy made by King
Egbert in the year eight hundred and nineteen, were years four hundred
sixty nine. But from thence, until their issue failed in King Edward
Confessor, were years only two hundred forty seven. And from the Normans
Conquest, unto the death of that most sacred Sovereign of eternal memoric,
Queen Elizabeth, when began again the name of GREAT BRITAIN, and the Union
of the whole Island to be brought into one entire Monarchy, by the rightful
Succession and thrice-happie entrance of our most gracious King JAMES, are
years five hundred thirty six. But of these three last, we are to speak
hereafter; and now return to finish up the falling Estate of the Romans
Greatness.

(3) Theodosius the son of Arcadius began his Empire in the year of the
worlds salvation four Theodosius 2. under the Persian King.
hundred and eight, and was governed with a special protection by the Persian
King during his Minority, Antigonus his Tutor.
under the charge of Antigonus an excellent man. But now grown to years, and
some variance happening betwixt him and his Tutor, he was left to the dispose
of himself: and his uncle Honorius leaving at his death great troubles
unquenched in the West, the mightiest Potentates assaied to make themselves
Emperors over several Dominions, and from the richness The di^ipation of the
Roman Empire.
of the Imperial Diadem, each one sought to pluck a Jewel to beautify his
own Crown. So the Barbarous Nations out of this one Monarchy began the
foundations of many succeeding Kingdoms. For in Spain the Vandals, (...), and
Alanes, not contented with their portion therein assigned, betook themselves
to Arms. The Frankes and Burgundians, which had been driven out of France,
resolved again to return. The Goths, that were Lords of Barcelona, Narbona,
and Tolosa, did as the rest. The Hunnes entered Hungary. John the Tyrant held
Rome: and in Africa, Boniface became a Neuter: These stirs moved Theodosius
to nominate Valentinian his kinsman Emperor in the Valentinian elected
Emperor in the West.
West; whose reign and affairs (so far as they touch Britain) we will
follow, being the last of the Roman Emperors that held out the succession of
our British Monarkes.

(4) This Valentinian was the son of Constantine, His descent. In Chap. 52.
sect. 8.
made Augustus, as is said, and of Placidia Galla daughter to the first
Theodosius Emperor: which Lady in the sacking of Rome by Alaricus the Gothe,
was taken Prisoner, and by him given in marriage to his near kinsman
Athaulphus, who afterward was King of that Nation; and by her sweet demeanor,
and prudent means, a Peace was concluded betwixt her Husband and her Brother,
but with such dislikes to the Goths, that they presently killed him, and
raised one Wallia for their King; who likewise coming to composition with
Honorius, delivered Placidia according to Covenants, whom the Emperor her
Brother bestowed in Marriage upon Constantine his General, in regard of his
good service and Victories by him achieved.

(5) She, with young Valentinian New-made Emperor, Placidia Galla her care of
Valentinian her son. Aspar and Actius chosen by her.
being sent into Italy, selected the best approved Captains to secure her
sons Estate; whereof Aspar was one, that in Rome slew John the Usurper, who
had there made himself Emperor, stamping this his face and style upon the
current Money of the State, and by his Tyrannies held his fortunes for five
years continuance.

John Usurper.


Aetius likewise, that had been Governor of Spain, was employed into Gallia;
where the Frankes and Burgundians (under the conduct of Clodius their second
King) sought to establish (as shortly they did) their Kingdom in that
Country, giving it the name of France, according to their own, by which name
they were never known to Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, Tacitus, France not known to
Caesar by that name.
Mela, nor Ptolemie; whereby the great blast of their Antiquity is showed to
be but a puff of wind.

(6) At this time the Britains were again sore oppressed Britains sore
oppressed with the Scots and Picts.
by the Scots and Picts, who having notice that the Aides sent by Honorius were
returned, passed over the Water in their Boats at both the ends of the Wall,
and invaded the Province with such force, that they bare down all before them.
The Britains in this lamentable plight, sent their Ambassadors to Rome,
Britains sorrowful Embassage to Valentinian.
with their Garments rent, and dust upon their heads, unto Valentinian the
Third, bewailing their most miserable Estates, and craving his help. The
Emperor moved to remorse, sent a Regiment of Soldiers into Britains obtain
some small succor. Gallia sent to aid them.
Britain; under the Command of Gallio of Rauenna, a most valiant man, who
having put back the Enemy with the assistance of the Ilanders, gave some
small comforts to the distressed Britains. But the Burgundians passing the
Rhene, and threatening to waste Italy, Burgundians threaten Italy. Gallio
recalled, and the Britains quite forsaken of the Romans.
Aetius was compelled to recall Gallio with his Legion, to secure the Country
about Paris, whilst himself with his, followed the dangerous Enemy.

(7) He now ready to depart for France, told the Britains that it was not for
the Romans to take so long and painful Iournies, neither at that time
especially when their own Empire was in danger to be ouer-run. Therefore he
willed them thenceforth to stand upon their Guard, and to provide for their
own safeties: and to that end, in regard of their good services done to the
Romans, he taught them the use of their Armor The Romans kindness at their
departing from Britain. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 12.
and Weapons, as also to strengthen their Fortification, and Wall of Turfe,
which now they began to build with firm Stone, laid eight foot in thickness,
and Gildas.
twelve foot in height. This Wall (says Gildas) they drew in a straight line
(at the public charges of the State) from East to West, and from Sea to Sea,
planting Bulwarks, and raising Turrets, with convenient spaces distant one
from another; which gave a fair and far prospect into the Sea. And so the
Romans gave a final Farewell, meaning never to return again; and burying
part of their Treasures here in the Earth, whereof much has The time of the
Romans final forsaking of their temporal jurisdiction in Britain.
been found, and more is still sought, left Britain about the year of Christ
five hundred, after the first invasion thereof made under the conduct of Julius
Caesar.

(8) This unfortunate Emperor Valentinian lost Nicephorus.
not only Britain, but suffered also Africa, France, and Spain to be plucked
from his Empire: and the weakness Prosperus Aquitanus.
of the Romans power (whose strength consisted most in Foreign Aides, (as
Tacitus says) was left unable Romans unable to desend their own Country.
to defend it self; when they had bereft this Province of all the Flower and
Choice of Men, as Gildas in that age complained, saying, Britain is despoiled
of all Gildas.
her armed men, with her military forces: her Rulers (cruel though they were)
are wasted, her Garrisons withdrawn, and defense laid open, and an exceeding
great number of her stout courageous Soldiers taken from her, to serve the
Romans in their wars. With which his sayings the Roman Writers themselves
agree, and record the Musters and great multitudes of Britains that have been
transported by them out of this Island: as when Trebellius Maximus with his
British Forces made strong Tacit. hist. l. 1. (...). 9.
the Faction against Otho in Germany: and then also Honorius Flaccus brought
thence eight thousand chosen Soldiers to uphold Vitellius in his cause.

Clodius Albinus.


Clodius Albinus banding against Seuerus the Emperor, assuming the Title, and
stamping the Moneys of the Imperial Estate (as by this here inserted is to be
seen; which coming to our hands since his Story was written, we hold it more
acceptable to set here, though out of place, then to give it no place at all
in this Work, being so worthy an Antiquity, and so much concerning the
Britains) under whose Banner the Flower of their Cheualrie perished in Battle,
when in the Fields of France, and near unto Lions, they spent their blood in
his cause; whereby the sinews of their own Countries defense was sore
weakened, and laid open to Foreign I^aders. Constantine the Constantine
transported a great power of Britains.
Great also (as Malmesbury notes) carried hence a great power of British
Soldiers with him in his wars, by whose puissance (as he says) he obtained
Triumphant Victories, and the Empire of the whole World: and after assigned
them that part of Gallia to inhabit, which was called Armorica, lying westward
upon the Sea Armorica a part of Gallia given to the British Soldiers.
Coasts, where they seating themselves, their posterity was increased, and
continues a Mighty People even unto this day.

(9) This Country afterward (being conquered by Maximus, and his reconciled
Enemy Conan Armorica conquered.
Meriadoc, Lord of Denbigh-land, by the prowess of those British Soldiers
whom hence he, carried in his quarrel against Valentinian the Emperor) was
received in free gift of Conan, after the slaughter of Iubates the King, and
the name thereof changed to Little Britain, as being a Colonie or Daughter of
this our Island. Armorica changed to the name of Little Britains.
The Pronince is large, pleasant, and fruitful, and contains in her Circuit
nine Bishops Seas, whereof three are called Cor^aille unto this day, which are
Le^sss, S. Paul, and Treg^rs: the other six are D^le, Rhenet, S. Malo,
Nanetensis, Vannes, and Brien, whose language differs from their Neighbors
the French, and retains It contains nine Bishops Seas. Keeps as yet the
British Dialect. Great numbers of Britains sent to Conan. A great multitude of
Virgins sent out of Britain to Armorica.
as yet the British Dialect. I omit to speak of those other Numbers of men sent
for out of this Kingdom by the said Conan, whereof our British Historians make
mention; besides the sending of Vrsula with Eleven thousand Virgins to be
matched in marriage with these their Countrymen, all of them perishing by Sea
or by Sword, but none of them returning hither again; whereby the bane of the
Land presently followed, her hopes being cut off, and deprived of wonted
Posterities.

(10) This Conquest and Plantation in Armorica, Matthew of Westminster
accounts to have happened Matthew Westminster. Henry Hunt. Ninius.
in the year of Christ three hundred ninety two. And these Soldiers thus
withdrawn, are so recorded by Henry of Huntington his ancient; and Ninius also
Maximus gave many Countries to the Britains his Soldiers.
long before both, reports that Maximus gave many Countries to these his
Britains, even from the Poole which is on the Top of Jupiters Hill, to a City
called Cantguic, and unto the Western Mountains. These (says he) are the
Britains in Armorica, who never returned to this day, in regard whereof
Britain was Conquered by Strange Nations. With whom agrees Geruasius a Monk
of Canturburie, John Anglicus, Ranulphus Geruasius. Job. Anglicus.
of Chester, and others. Thither also in the downfall and desperate Estate of
the Britains, many of them fled from the rage of their Enemies, as he that
was borne in Armorica, and lived nearest to that age, even the Writer of the
Life of S. Wingualof the Confessor, does sufficiently prove. An offspring
(says he) of the Britains embarked in Flotes, arrived in this Land, on this
Britains fled into Armorica in the time of the Saxons.
side the British Sea: what time as the Barbarous Nation of the Saxons, fierce
in Arms, and uncivil in manners, possessed their Native and Mother Soil, etc.

(11) And lastly, in the cause of that other Constantine, who was elected only
for his Name, most of the Constantine who was elected for his name,
transporteth great multitudes of Britains.
Flower and Strength of the Britains were transported into Gallia and Spain,
where in his variable fortunes many of them perished. And Malmesbury writing of
these Times, says, that the Romans had emptied Britain of all her Flower and
Chiualry of War, leaving now in her Countries but Halfe-barbarous men, and in
her Cities only Epicures, unfit for service. In confirmation whereof, the most
learned Cambden out of Antike Cambden.
Inscriptions, and the Book named Notitia Prouinciarum, has observed, that
these Companies under written served the Romans in their Wars, and were
dispersed here and there in their Provinces, which also were from time to time
evermore supplied out of Britain.

Ala Britannica Milliaria. Ala IIII. Britonum in Aegypto. Cohors prima Aelia
Britonum. Cohors III. Britonum. Cohors VII. Britonum. Cohors XXVI. Britonum in
Armenia. Britanniciani sub Magistro Peditum. inter Auxilia Palatina.
Inuicti Iuniores Britanniciani Exculcatores Iun. Britan.
Britones cum Magistro Equitum Galliarum. Inuicti Iuniores Britones inter
Hispanias. Britones Seniores in Illyrico.


(12) No marvel is it then if Britain lay weak, being thus continually
exhausted of her strengths, which these approved Records made so apparent, as
we need not allege the doubtful Story of Irpus of S. Iobn Pays. Irpus of
Norway transporteth an incredible number of Britains.
Norway, for the depopulation of the Island, who is said by subtilty under
pretense of Kindred, and Honor to be achieved, to have gotten an infinite
number of Britains to follow him in his enterprise, which never returned
again: or the Book Triades mentioned by the Author of the Reformed History of
Great Britain, that brings an Army hence, consisting in number of one and
twenty thousand men, into Aquitaine Britains one and twenty thousand
transported into Aquitaine against Caesar.
and Gaul: which, as he says, was the Aid mentioned by Caesar, that out of
Britain assisted the Gauls against him. Which may partly seem to be gathered
from Caesar himself, as has been said: where he affirms, that the Britains
and Gauls were governed under the same King: and is further confirmed by the
fashion and Inscriptions of Antique Coins, which we have seen stamped in
Gold, the Form round, and Shield-like: Imbossed outward in the Face, and
Hollow in the Reuerse; a Form infallible to be of the Britains Coins, and
yet the word Comes is inscribed upon the Imbossed side, whom we imagine to be
the same Governor Attrebatij in Gallia and Britain.
of Artoye in Gallia, whom Caesar mentions.

(13) Thus then was Britain first made Weak by the Romans exhaustings, and
then quite abandoned of their help, and left as a tree in the Wilderness, to
lose her fair leaves by the continual blasts of these sharp Northern winds,
whose beauty before had bin as the Cedars of Libanon, or like unto those in the
Garden of God. And whose Riches had drawn the Worlds then-Monarchs to such
liking and love, that no means was omitted to attain the same, nor care
neglected to keep it in their Subjection: which, while it stood a Britain
accounted the fairest plume of the Roman Diadem.
Province in their obedience, was held and accounted to be the fairest flower
in their Triumphant Garlands, and of some of their Emperors thought worthy the
Residencie of their Imperial Throne.

THE ORIGINAL, INVASIONS, AND HEPTARCHIE OF THE SAXONS; WITH A SVCCESSION OF
THEIR MONARCHS IN THIS ISLAND OF GREAT BRITAIN, THEIR REIGNS, MARRIAGES, ACTS,
AND ISSVES, UNTIL THEIR LAST SVBVERSION BY THE DANES AND NORMANS. But first of
the Downe-fall of BRITAIN.
BOOK VII.
CHAPTER I.
BRITAIN thus abandoned of all the Roman Garrisons, and emptied of Britain
abandoned of the Roman Garrisons.
strengths that should have supported her now down-falling-estate, lay
prostrate to confusion and miserable calamities; no less burdened with the
tumultuous vproares of her own great men, who strove for the supreme
Government, then of the Barbarous Nations which with continual incursions made
spoil where they came. These times (says Ninius) were full of fears, and
were prolonged Ninius.
with forty years afflictions: wherein Vortigern then King was troubled with
the violence of the Romans, Great troubles in the reign of Vortigern.
the dreads of the Picts and Scots, and the oppositions of Aurelius Ambrosius,
who suruiuing his slain Parents, that had worn the Imperial Purple Robe,
sought their revenge upon their wicked Murderer: besides the Intrusions of the
Germane Saxons, called in for Friends, but proved indeed the greatest Enemies.
During the conflict of these tempestuous storms, some small comforts were
ministered unto the Britains by Bishop German his presence, who from France
assisted Bishop German an assister against the Pelagians.
them against the Pelagian Heresies, and the perilous assaults of the Scots
and Picts, who in diverse skirmishes overcame them.

(2) These dolorous times of Britains destruction, Gildas the mournful
Historian, who lived not long after, Gildas.
does declare. As soon as the Romans (says he) had left Britain, and were
returning unto their home, forthwith hideous multitudes of Scots and Picts
came swarming out of their Carroghes, (wherewith they passed the The Irish Sea.
Scitick Vale) like whole Armies of duskish vermin, which at high noone, when
the Sun is in his greatest heat, began to crawle forth of their narrow holes
an infinite number of hidcous Scots and Picts; which two kinds of People,
though in conditions somewhat different, yet they consorted too well in greedy
desire of bloodshed: and having intelligence, the associates of Britain were
now returned with utter disclaim of further assistance, with more Scots and
Picts (the Romans departed) seize all the Northern parts.
confident boldness then ever before, they seize all the Northern and
uttermost part of the Island, as if it had been their own inheritance, even as
far as to the Wall. Against these attempts there were ranged in the high
Forts along the Wall, Garrisons of Soldiers, but such as were both slothful,
and also unserviceable for Martial Affairs: which white-liuered Lozels with
quaking hearts sat still warding day and night, till their ioints were as
benumbed and stupid as the stones whereon they sat: insomuch as the naked
Enemies did with long hooked Engines pluck from Scoti and Picts catch the
Britains with long hooks.
off the wall those miserable Warders, dashing their bodies against the ground.
This good yet they got by this their untimely deaths, that being thus suddenly
dispatched out of the world, they escaped the imminent lamentable calamities
that their brethren and children shortly felt. To be short, having abandoned
their Cities and this high defensive Wall, once more they betook themselves to
flight, and were dispersed in a more desperate manner then ever before. For the
enemy was more hot in pursuit, and more cruel in the slaughter, the woeful
Inhabitants being by their Enemies massacred, and rent in pieces like Lambs in
the hands of bloody Butchers, or in the jaws of cruel and savage Beasts. In
these most miserable times, (necessity so compelling) the poor distressed
people forbear not to rob each other of that sustenance, which could help them
but for a very small season: and so their hostile oppressions were increased by
their domesticke vexations, for that the whole Country by these continual
direptions, was utterly deprived of the staff of food, having nothing left to
prolong their life, but that only what they get in hunting. Whereupon, about
the thirty nine year of Theodosius, and of Christ four hundred forty six,
the distressed Remains of the down-cast Britains addressed their missiue
Letters to Actius, whom Gildas calls Agitius, President of Gallia, in
Britains send for help to Actius President of Gallia.
most lamentable manner, and thus inscribed.

To AETIVS Thrice Consul, the groans of the BRITAINS.
The Barbariaus drive us back to the Sea; the Sea again Beda Hist. Angl. lib.
1. cap. 13.
puts us back upon the Barbarians: thus between two kinds of deaths, we
are either slaughtered or drewned. And the more to intimate their miseries, and
to move his assistance, thus they further urge: We (say they) are the Remnant
that survive of the Britains, and are your Subjects, who besides the Enemy,
are afflicted by famine and mortality, which at this present extremely rages
in our Land. And putting him in mind that it much imports the Majesty of the
Roman Empire to protect and succor their Province, seeing it had now stood
upon the point of five hundred years under their obedience, whose strength of
Soldiers taken from thence to serve their Emperors in their Wars elsewhere,
was now decayed, and their wealths wasted by maintaining their many Legions in
their own Land and abroad: All this notwithstanding the Romans either would
not, or could not relieve, having enough to do to uphold their own; but
returned them again with heavy hearts into the hands of their most cruel
Enemies, who now knowing themselves free from the Romans interceptions, as a
violent flood brake through the Province, and bare down all before them; the
Inhabitants flying like chased Dear, some taking over Seas into Britany in
France; some to Britains fly into France, South Wales, North Wales, Cornwall,
Demonshire.
South Wales, North Wales, Cornwall, and parts of Devonshire, leaving the best
of the Land to the will of their Persecutors, and much of their Treasures hid
in the ground, which never after they inioyed.

(4) But the grievous Famine still increasing, A great Famine. Gildas, ibid.
though it had this woeful issue with some, that it made them yield themselves
into the Enemies bloody hands (only in hope to gain a little sustenance of
food for the present) and for many years after left lamentable tokens (says
Beda) of great desolations Beda, lib. 1. c. 14.
wrought by that dearth: yet with those other which were of more noble and
resolute spirits it produced a better effect; insomuch as from out of the
Mountains, Caves, and thick woods, they assailed their enemies, reposing their
trust not in Man, but in God, whose help Britains trusting in God, overcome
their enemies.
is then most at hand, when man's help fails. These in many skirmishes gave
them the overthrow with much slaughter, and that for many years together, when
they made their incursions for booties and spoil; which caused these Ravening
Irish to return home; and the Picts a while rested from further molestation.
Notwithstanding the Britains returned not from their own wickedness, growing
strong now daily in repressing the Enemy, but stronger in their own sins
and civil dissensions. By means whereof, though a surcease of Hostile Wars
was embraced, and the skarres of famine clearly skinned up, yet another sore as
dangerous as either, secretly bred, and shortly brake forth. For the Land being
free from the Enemies wastes, yielded such plenty and abundance of all things,
as the like before no age had seen; and Beda hist. Aug. lib. 1. cap. 14.
therewithal such riot and excess, that the peoples sins grew to a plentiful
harvest, as by the words of Gyldas is apparent.

(5) Certainly it is heard (says he) that there is such Great sins among the
Britains.
fornication, as the like is not among the Gentiles. Truth with the maintainers
thereof is hated: Lies with the Forgers thereof highly esteemed. Evil is
entertained for good, lewdness respected more then uprightness, darkness
desired before the bright Sun, and Satan accepted for an Gildas.
Angel of light: Kings then were anointed, not according to Gods liking, but
such as excelled others in cruelty; and as cruelly again by their anointers
were they murdered, not for any demerit, but that they might advance others
more savage then the former. If he were mild, or inclining to truth, the
darts of hatred were on every side leuelled against him, as the only Subuerter
of the Britains Estate. What was pleasing or displeasing to God, was all one
with them, saving that the better things commonly wrought most discontent: so
that rightly the saying of the Prophet, which was denounced unto the people in
old time, might be applied to our Country: Ye lawless and corrupt children
have forsaken Esaias 1.
the Lord, and provoked unto wrath the holy one of Israel. Why should ye be
smitten any more, still multiplying iniquity? Every head is sick, and every
heart is heavy: from the sole of the foot unto the crown of the head, there is
nothing sound therein. Thus did they all things that were contrary to their
safety, as if that medicine which Britains did all things contrary to their
safety.
was bestowed by that truest Physician of all, was needless for the world. And
not only the prophaner sort did this, but also the selected flock of the
Lord, and the Shepherds thereof, who ought to have given example to the whole
people. To speak of drunkenness, numbers of them lay senseless and weltring
in wine, swelling with pride, contention, and griping envy, putting no
difference in judgment between good and evil: insomuch that it seems
contempt was powered forth both upon Princes and people: and all of them seduced
by vanities, wandered in errors and bypath, Psalm. 106. 40.
not lead in the right way. When God therefore was minded to purge his Family,
and to recure them thus infected with the corruptions of sins, by hearsay
only of Tribulation, the winged flight of an often-tried rumor pierced the
attentive Britains hear of an invasion, yet not reclaimed.
ears of all men, giving notice of their ancient Enemies, ready to arrive, and
fully minded to destroy them utterly, and to inhabit (as erst they did) the
whole Country from one end to another. Yet all this could not reclaim them,
but like unto mad horses, which taking the bit fast betwixt their teeth, run
away with their Riders, so these leaving the way which leads (narrow though
it be) unto salvation, ran at random in the wide way of all wickedness,
which leads directly to death. Whiles therefore (as Solomon says) the
stubborn servant will not be amended Prou. 29. 19.
with words, he is scourged for a fool, and feels not the whip: for lo, a
pestilent contagion fell heavily upon this foolish people, which (though the
enemies sword was gone) in short space destroyed such multitudes of them, that
the living were not able to bury the dead. Neither yet also were they thereby
bettered, that the saying of the Prophet Esaias in them might be fulfilled: God
called them to mourning, to baldness, and sacke-cloth: but behold, they fell
to killing of Esaias 22. 13.
calves, and to staying of Rams; lo, they went to eating and drinking, and
said withal, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die. And indeed the
time now drew near, wherein their iniquities (like as those in times past of
Britains iniquity.
the Amorites) should come to the fullness. And even at that instant the like
measure began to be heaped upon the Britains.

(6) For the common enemy now inuading the The Enemy inuadeth the Southern
parts.
Southern parts, was entered as far as Stamford upon the River Welland; whom
to resist, the Britains assembled together, and having experience what
ciuilliarres had formerly done, they jointly unite their means and powers, and
with one consent elect a Britains unite their powers.
King to manage these affairs, which was Vortigerne, by birth extracted from
the British Line, nobly descended, Vortigern of the British line.
had not his many vices blemished the same. The British History says, that
he was Earl of Cornwall, and of great command in the days of Constantine
Earl of Cornwall.
their King, whose simplicity he much abused, and whom lastly he caused to
be murdered by the Guard The Scots and Picts set to murder Constantius.
of his Person, the Scots and Picts by him so placed, and to that end
instigated: whom nevertheless with death he severely punished, to avoid
further suspicion. In whose revenge, these fierce Nations so assaulted his
Dominions with rape and spoil, that he was forced for further assistance to
send for these Saxons Will. Malms. The Saxons (...) for.
to his aid. Whether thus, or otherwise, most true it is, the Saxons were sent
for, and of hoped Friends, became the tried Enemies to the Britains and their
Estates, as out of Gildas their Historian we shall anon declare.

(7) The occasion and manner of this their inuiting and coming, is set down by
a Countryman of their own Witichindus, a Writer of good antiquity, who thus
relates the circumstance thereof. Britain (says Witichindus.
he) by Vespasian the Emperor, long since being reduced among the Roman
Provinces, and held in their subjection, stood them in no small stead: but
their Legions abandoned, and destiny (as it seems) determining the downfall,
became soon assaulted by their neighbor Nations the Northern Borderers. For
the people of Rome after that the Emperor * Martial was slain by his
Soldiers, being tired out Martian he means.
with foreign wars, were not able to assist their friends with supply of
accustomed aides. And yet had they built a mighty piece of work for the
defense of the Country, reaching between The Romans work for the Britains
defense, raced by the Northern Borderers.
the confines from Sea to Sea, where it was thought that the Enemies would
assail the Inhabitants left in the Land. But no difficulty it was for them so
fiercely bent, and ever ready to make war (especially where they dealt with a
Nation feebled and left unable to make resistance) to destroy the said work.
Therefore hearing of the worthy and fortunate exploits achieved by the Saxons,
they sent an humble Embassage to require their aid; and these having audience,
Saxons great Warriors and fortunate.
spoke as follows.

Most noble Saxons, the poor and distressed Britains. The Britains Embassage
and speech to the Saxons.
Brets, outworne and tired by the many incursions of their enemies, hearing the
fame of those victories which you have most valiantly obtained, have sent us.
Suppliants unto you, craving that you would not deny them your help and
succor. A large and spacious Land they have, plentiful and abundant in all
things, which we yield wholly to be at your devotion and command. Hitherto
we have lived freely under the patronage and protection of the Romans, next
unto whom we know not any more powerful then your selves; and therefore we
seek for refuge under the wings of your valor. So that we may by your
puissance be superior of our enemies, whatsoever service you shall impose upon
us, that will we willingly abide.

To this petition the Peers and Nobles of the Saxons briefly made answer in
this wise. The Saxons answer to the Petition of the Britains.


Know ye that the Saxons will be fast friends unto the Brets, and ready at
all times both to assist them in their necessity, and also to procure their
wealth: with joy therefore return ye Ambassadors, and with this wished-for
tidings make your Contrymen glad. Hereupon (according to promise) an Army
sent into Britain, and ioifully received, Saxons good service at their first
coming.
which in short time freed the Land from the spoiling enemies, and recovered
the country unto the behoof of the Inhabitants.

(8) But how true this last clause is, may appear out of the ancient Gildas,
who thus records it: To repress (says he) many Invasions of those their
ancient Gildas.
enemies, which with cruel slaughters and booties continually afflicted them,
the Britains fell to consult upon some convenient course therein to be taken.
Lastly, all the Counselors, together with the proud Tyrant, being blinded in
judgment, devised such a protection, as in the end proved their Countries
destruction; namely, that those ^rce Saxons, a people savage and of hateful
name, odious both to God and man, should be let into this Island, as it were
wolves into sheepe-folds, to repulse (for sooth) the Northern Nations; then
which project doubtless nothing was ever more pernicious and unhappy unto
this Land. O senses senseless and plunged into deepest mists of error! O
desperate dullness, and blind blockishnesse of mind! Those whom in absence
were feared more then death, now of their own accord are invited by these
Princes of Egypt (if I may so say, thus sottishly counselling their Pharao) to
come and rest with them under one roof. Presently out of the Den of that
barbarous Lioness rushed forth a kennell of her whelps, in three long
Vessels, called in their Language * Cyula, carried under full sail, and with
ominous presages Keeles.
fore-prophecying that for 300. years they should possess that Land unto
which they then directed their course, and Saxons prophecy to possess
Britain for 300. years.
for half of that space, (viz. one hundred and fifty years) they should
waste and depopulate the same. These being put on shore first in the East part
of the Island, and that by The Saxons first arrival on the East part of this
Island.
Commandment of this unfortunate Tyrant, there set fast their terrible paws,
pretending to the Ilanders, defense of their Country, but more truly intending
the destruction of them. The foresaid Lioness finding that her first troop of
whelps sped so well, sends again a greater Rabble of the same Litter, which
here arrived in Fl^es, bringing with them some other Associates of bastardly
and unnoble brood. And these beginnings, the slips of iniquity, and the roots
of bitterness, (an accursed plantation well befitting our demerits) have
sprung up, and put forth in our soil their haughty boughs and spreading
branches. This barbarous Nation thus admitted, professing themselves our
Soldiers, and such as would endure all hazards (so they fained) in defense for
their good Hosts, first they craved supply of victuals only; which being given
them, for some time stopped (as we may say) the Dogs mouth: howbeit, afterward
they complain that their wages was not bountifully enough Saxons invent
occasions of quarrel.
paid, devising of purpose colorable occasions of quarrel, and threatening
that unless they might have more munificent entertainment, they would with the
breach of covenant spoil and waste the whole Island. And without further delay,
they second these threats with deeds (for our Sins, the cause of deserved
revenge, were still nourished) and the fire kindled Eastward, was set a flaming
by these sacrilegious men from Sea to Sea, ceasing not to consume all the
Cities and Countries bordering there about, until such time as burning
welneere all the Inland Soil of the Island, it licked (as it were) with the red
tongue of the flame the very Western Ocean it self. In this violent invasion,
comparable to that of the Assyrians against the Land of Israel in old Saxons
spoils comparable to the Assyrians upon the Israelites. Psalm. 74. 8.
times, is historically fulfilled also in us that which the Prophet by way of
sorrowful lamentation utters: They have set fire upon thy holy places, and
have burned the dwelling place of thy name, even unto the ground. And again: O
God the Heathen are come into thine heritage, thy holy Temple Psalm. 79. 1.
have they defiled: for all the Fortifications demolished with their Engines,
and the Inhabitants together with the Bishops of the Church, and also the
Priests and people, with glistering swords and crackling flames, were all at
once laid along upon the ground, yea and (which was a most lamen-table
spectacle) the stately Turrets, high mounted Walls, and the sacred Altars, lay
all tumbling together (all purpled with the broken and bloody Quarters and
goared Carcases mixed as in a horrible wine press. Neither were there any
other Sepulchers abroad, save the (...) of buildings, and the bowels of wild
beasts and birds.

(9) During this most woeful, desperate, and tempestuous season (says the
mournful Historian) some Britains (...) in the Mountains.
poor Remains of Britains being found in the Mountains, were slain by whole
heaps: others pined by famine, came and yielded themselves unto their enemies,
upon composition to serve them as Bond-slaues for ever, so they might not be
slaughtered out of hand: which granted, was reputed a most high and especial
grace. Others went over Seas into Strange Lands, singing under their spread
Sails with a lamentable and mourning note, that of the Psalmist: Thou have
given us, O Lord, as Sheep to be devoured, and have scattered us among the
Heathen. Yet others remained still Psalm. 44. 11.
in their own Country (albeit in fearful estate, and continually suspecting
hazard) committing their lives and safety to the high steep Hills, to
craggie Mountains naturally entrenched, to thick grown Woods and Forests,
yea and to the Rocks of the Sea.

(10) Thus was Britain brought to the period of her glory, and the people
miserably subjected to a foreign Nation, about the year from Christ's
Nativity 473. and after the Romans last farewell 28. In which time you see
they were most cruelly pursued (...) pursued with all calamities of War.
with all calamities of war, and lastly betrayed by them in whom so much
trust was reposed, as mournful Gildas has ruefully declared.

THE SAXONS ORIGINAL. CHAPTER II.
AS times decayed Ruins have stopped the Passage of those small Springs issued
from the first fountain of Nations beginnings, and have diuerted their
streams far from any sure Course, or certain known Heads; so the original
parent, place, and name of our English-Saxons, have bin written with a pen of
slight touch upon the leaves of oblivion, or else recorded in those obscure
Roules, that as yet lie bound up in the Office of Times forgetfulness: whereby
it rests doubtful from what root these branches first sprang; some bringing
them from Asia, some from Africa, Saxons, the uncertainty from whence they
came.
some from Macedon, some from Denmark, and some without all likelihood from
Britain it self.

Occa Scarlensis a Frislander borne, affirms these Saxons to come of Saxo a
Prince of India, who with Occa Scarlensis. Saxons from Saxo a Prince of India.
his two brethren were banished by lot to seek their destinies abroad, their
own Countries being pestered with over many people at home. These (says he)
following Alexander the Great into Greece, became Progenitors to their
Countries, that from them received their of-springs and names: as that from
Friso the eldest, his Frislanders descended; from Saxo the second, the Saxons
upon the River Albis; and from Bruno the youngest, the Inhabitants of the
Dukedom of Brunswic. And of this opinion also Sufridus Petri seems to be.
Crantzius does derive them from the Catti in Sufridus Petri Crantzius.
Germany, and the Phrygians a Region in Asia; to omit others, who would bring
them from Saxo the brother Saxons of the Catti in Germany.
of Vandale.

(2) F. Albinus a learned Author, does think the Saxons to be descended from
Sacae, a people in Asia, Saxons from Sacae a people in Asia.
and that afterward in process of time they came to be called Saxons; as if it
were written Sax-sones, as much to say as The sons of the Sacae. To this
opinion F. Albinus in Progy^. Mr. Henry Ferrers in his progeny of English
Monarchs.
Master Henry Ferrers, a Gentleman of ancient descent, great reading, and a
judicious Antiquary agrees; whose judgment for my particular, I have always
honored, and from the Progeny of his English Monarchs have taken my principal
proceeding in these Saxon Successors.

(3) As touching the ancient place of their abode, Ptolomie the Alexandrian
places the people Sasones in the Inner Scythia, betwixt the Mountains Alani
and Tapurt; and Amianus Marcellinus siteth the Sacae (no doubt Ptolemy Geogra.
in description of Asia. Amian. Marcel. li. 23. cap. 10.
the very same) a fierce and savage Nation, to inhabit ouer-growne places,
commodious only for cattle, at the foot of the Mountains Ascanimia and
Comedus, near unto which the City Alexandria, Tribatra and Drepsa were
adjoining, and are so set by Ptolemie. Neither is it less probable that our
Saxons descended from these Sacae in Asia, Michael Neander.
then the Germans from those Germans in Persia, of whom Herodotus writes. And
Joseph Scaliger, a renowned Herodotus. Joseph Scaliger.
Author, shows, that these words fader, mother, brader, tutcher, band, and
such like, are at this day Persian and Saxon tongue agree in many words.
found in the Persian tongue in the same sense, as we use Father, Mother,
Brother, Daughter, and Bound, etc. a great inducement (as some think) for the
Saxons original from those parts; though in my opinion the Latin, Pater,
Matter, Frater, have no less affinity of sound, and in all likelihood were the
Primitiues to these of ours. Of these Sacae, Strabo writes that they made
invasions into Countries lying far off, as Strabo.
namely Armenia, where they left the memory of their success in a part of that
Country, by calling it Sacacena, after their own name.

(4) From these parts of Asia, as Seythia and the rest, one Band of them,
consisting chiefly of their Youth, Saxons coming into Europe.
proceeded by degrees into Europe, and possessed the Nesse, or Forland, which
the Romans called Cimbrica Chersonesus, being at this day the continent part of
the kingdom of Denmark. In which place they were first known by the name of
the Saxons. And here also they among themselves began first to be
distinguished into other Tribes, as Holt-Saxons (for so Verstegan, out of their
old Chronicle, says they were called) Verstegan. cap. 1. Holt-Saxons. Saxons
Angles and Saxons Iutes.
for their keeping in the Woods: but more properly (we may say) into Saxons,
Angles, and Iutes. From hence afterward they departed, and passing over the
River Elbe, divided themselves into two Companies; whereof the one taking into
the upper parts of Germany, by little and little intruded themselves into the
ancient Seat of the Sueuians, which now of them is called Westphalia and
Saxome: and the Sebastian Munster. lib. 3.
other incroched upon Friseland and Holland (then called Batania) with the rest
of those Countries that lie along the German Seas.

(5) The time wherein these Saxons should thus infest Germany, by Occa
Scarlensis verdict, is as ancient The time of the Saxons entrance into Germany.
as great Alexander: others account it long after, in the reign of Tiberius.
But before Ptolomie we find them not mentioned by any Author, who flourished
in the days of Antoninus Pius, about the year from Christ's Nativity 140. And
most certain it is by Eutropius and Beda, that before the year three hundred,
Eutropius. Beda. Saxons fearful to the Romans themselves.
when Dioclesian swaied the Roman Scepter, the Saxons out of Cimbrica
Chersonesus sore offended the coasts of Britain and France, with their many
piracies, and were fearful even to the Romans themselves. These multiplying in
number and strength, seated in the Maritime tract of Iutland, Sleswick,
Holsatia, Ditmarse, Breme, Oldenburgh, all Frisland and Holland: and indeed,
according to the Testimony of Fabius Quaestor, Wholly all the Sea coasts from
the river Rhene unto the City Donia, which now is commonly called the Denmarc;
and with him Henry of Erfurd affirms Saxon-land to stretch from the River
Albis vntothe Rhene; the bounds of no one people of all the Germans extending
any way so far, says he.

(6) But these spreading Boughs, are brought by others from a nearer Root,
planted not in Asia or Scythia, but rather in Europe and in Germany it self;
The names of these Saxons Tribes.
grounding their opinion from Cornelius Tacitus, who makes them to be bred in
the same Country, though distinguished by Name from the rest, as others more
beside then were. Which Saxons (say they) though they were not mentioned by
Tacitus in his Description Tacit. Descr. Germ. cap. 1.
of Germany, yet in Ptolemy, that wrote not much above forty years after
him, they are named; as also the Gutae, and the Angli, Copartners of their
Conquest, Tacitus places among these Germans that worshipped Herthum the
Mother-earth for their Auowrie Tacit. Descr. Germ: cap. 6.
Goddess; at first but one People, but afterward divided into three several
Tribes; that is, the Saxons, Angles and Iutes, who left the remembrance Saxons.
Angles. Iutes.
of their Names stamped (as it were) in the soil from whence they departed,
and also coined new unto others, whereof they became possessors.

(7) Ptolomy, among the Sueuians in Germany places Ptolem. Geogr. in de^r.
Ger. The place of the Holt-Saxons inhabiting. Beda Hist. Angliae. lib. 1. cap.
15.
the Saxons, near to the mouth of the River Albis, in the continent of
Cimbrica Chersonesus. And in this Island of Britain, Beda tells us, that the
Kingdoms of the East and West Saxons were of them peopled: Whose original
Name, besides the Indian Saxo or the Seythian Sacae, some will have Etymologed
from Saxum a Stone, because forsooth these people were hard or Stonie-hearted;
and some again from the Axones in Gallia, of whom Lucan makes mention in this
his verse: Longisque leaves Axones in armis,
And nimble Axones in their Armor light.


(8) Iustus Lipsius coniectureth, and Engelhusius Iustus Lipsius and
Engelhusius deriuation of the Name Saxon.
affirms (as Verstegan says) that the name Saxon, took the appellation from
the Fashion of the Weapon that usually they wore; which was a Crooked Bowing
Sword, somewhat like unto a Sith, with the edge on the contrary side, called
by the Netherlanders, a Saisen, and by themselves Seaxen, and the shorter of
like Saxons weapons called Saisen, Seaxen and Seaxes.
fashion for hand-weapons, Seaxes; such as were those that were hid under their
Garments in the Massacre of the British Nobility upon Salisbury Plain, when
Hengist British Nobility massacred.
gave the watchword, Nem eour Seaxes, that is, Take you Swords: three of which
Knives Argent, in a Field Gules, were borne by Erkenwyne King of the
East Saxons, upon his shield of Arms, as some of our Heralds have imblazed.
And that their Name was so given them from their Weapons, some allege their
accustomed manner in wearing thereof, which usually was to trusse the same
overthwart their backs when they went forth to battle; whereby notice was
taken, and that name attributed unto them, as the like has been upon like
occasion unto others: for so in Asia the Scythians were named for their skill
in shooting; in France Scythians so named of Scyttan to shoot. Picards for
their long Pikes. Galloglasses for their Pollax.
the Picards for their long Pikes used in fight; and in Ireland the
Galloglasses, which bare the Pollax as their principal weapon: and of latter
times, upon less occasions have Surnames grown both to particular men, as
also to whole Societies; which may appear in such as having vowed their voyage
and service for Jerusalem, wore continually upon their backs a red Such as had
vowed their voyage to Jerusalem, named Crosse-backe. Crouch-backe.
Cross, whereby the name Crosse-backe, or in old English, Crouch-backe, was to
them attributed: in which rank, Edmund Earl of Lancaster (second son to
King Henry the third) was a principal, and thereby got that name, which he
could not claw off from his back ever since. So likewise those men who entered
that Religion of Monastical life, wore usually upon the outside of their
Garments the sign of a Cross, whereby that Order was distinguished and noted
from others by the name of Crouched or Crossed-Friers. But whence or howsoever
the name arose, among all the Germans there were none in reputation for
military Arianus. Zosimus.
deeds comparable unto these Saxons: neither had any adventured by Sea and Land
so far to purchase Seneca in lib. de Ira.
renown and praise, or perhaps (and that more likely) to supply their own
wants; ranging often Egin^ardus.
from place to place, as men always ready to enter any action: and in Germany
to this day a great Dukedom retains from them the name of Saxony.

(9) The Gutae (no doubt the Iutae) Ptolomie likewise The place of the Iute
Saxons inhabiting.
places in the Island Scandia, lying very near the Coasts of Germany, upon
whose uttermost Promontorie (as says an ancient Manuscript) the Iutes did for
certain inhabit, which unto this day of the Danes is called Iutland. These
Iutes, Gutes, Getes, or Goths (or as Iutes called Gutes, Goths, or Uues.
Beda calls them) Vites, gave names to those parts of Britain which they
inhabited, as to this day the I Will of Wight bears their impression. This
variety of names I Will of Wight how so named.
we will no further enforce, then that these Goths were not the same that had
passed Ister by Pontus Euxinus, and ouer-ranne Europe, who were also called the
Getae John Mayor. Verstegan Restit. cap. 5. Sebastian Munst. lib. 3.
by John Mayor. Their name, as Verstegan will have it, was taken from their
agilitie, or swiftness of foot: and some of them (as Sebastian Munster
declares) went and inhabited among the Mountains that divide Germany from
Italy, whereupon their name grew to be called the Hill-Vites, which are now
the Hel^ans.

(10) The Angles (by Fabius Quaestor Ethelwardus, an ancient Writer, and a
Noble Person of the Saxons The Anglia Saxon-place o^nha (...). ^uld-Anglis.
Royal Blood) are brought from Ould-Anglia, a Portion lying betwixt the
Countries of the Saxons and the Giots, as he writes them, whose chief Town
was by them called Sleswic, and of the Danes, Haathby: but (more particularly)
it lay betwixt the City Flemburge and the River Sly, which Country by Albertus
Crantzius is called Anglia. From hence (says He^ricus Crantzius.
Rantzouius) the Saxons, who were also called the Angle-Saxons, Henr.
Rantzouius.
went to aid the Britains. And at this day there is a little Province in the
Kingdom of Dania, named Angel, beneath the City Flemburge, which Lindebergus
calls Little Anglia. Their site notwithstanding Lindebergus.
is placed by most Authors in Westphalia, where the A Province in Dan^ cal^ed
little England.
City Engern stands, and where Tacitus and Ptolomy rangeth them among the
Sueutans; which in their times might very well be. Others would have them in
Pomerania, where the Town Engloen does somewhat sound their name: so do
Engelheim, Engleburg, Words of affinity with the name Angles.
and Englerute, places in Germany, bear witness, and are prints of their
footing among the Longobards and Sueuians. But the most glorious remembrance of
that their name has been for these many ages in this Kingdom of England:
though Saxo Grammaticus (as erst we touched, Lib. 5. Cap. 2) will needs have
Anglia Saxo Grammaticus.
named from Angul the son of Humblus, and Giant-like brother of Danus the
first King of Denmark. But Albertus Crantzius being offended at his folly,
tells him that England had the name of Britain many hundred Albertus
Crantzius.
years after that Angul was dead. Others there are that derive the name
England from the manner of this Verstegan.
Islands situation, being narrow in the West and North, for that Eng in the
ancient Teutonik Tongue, as well as in the modern, does signify Narrow,
Strait, or a Eng signifies narrow.
Nooke; and to that purpose do produce this verse of a Portugals allusion:
Anglia terra ferax et fertilis Angulus Orbis,
Insula praedines, quae toto vix eget orb:
A fruitful Angle, England thou, another world art said:
An Island rich, and have no need of other countries aid.


(11) Callepine without proof deriueth the Name from Queen Angela: but on as
weak a ground as those Callepine. Beda hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 1.
who will fetch it from their Angel-like faces, alluded unto by Pope Gregory
the Great. Or that of Goropius, from the Angle or Fishing-hooke, because, says
he, Geropius Becca-Angles so called of a Fishinghooke.
they hooked all things to themselves, and might very well therefore be called
Good Anglers: a very mean conceit in sooth. But howsoever, most certain it is
that these Angles stole the name of this blessed Angles stole their name. Genesis
27.
Island from their elder brethren the Saxons (as Jacob did the birthright from
Esau) and called it after their own; as we shall further show when our
History has gotten to the age of the Saxons Monarchy.

(12) These all claim their descents from Prince Saxons both Angles and Iutes
descend from Woden.
Woden, called by the ancient Latins Othinus; and who is deduced by our
Antiquaries, as has been said, from the eldest Son of the Patriarch Noah,
and is accounted the most noble of all the Progenitors of the Saxon Kings,
insomuch as they, and especially the Angle-Saxons, our Ancestors, have (in
their superstitious conceit of such wodden gods) imagined Woden to be their
principal God of Battle; whose Woden esteemed a God. Frea the wife of Woden.
Wife named Frea, was by the like fancy held a Goddess, of whom more
hereafter.

(13) These had issue between them sundry Sons, Wodens five sons their names
and Seignioties.
and from five of them, all the Monarchs of the Englishmen have claimed to
have been descended. Wechta the first being reported to be the Progenitor to
the Kings of the Kentishmen: Caser the second, to the Kings of the East Angles:
Wethelgeat the third, to the Kings of the Mercians: Wegdeg the fourth, to the
Kings of the Dierians: and Beldeg the fifth, to the Kings of the South Saxons,
to the Kings of the Bernicians, afterward Kings of Northumberland, and also
the Kings of the West Saxons: only the Kings of the East Saxons, claiming to
descend of the same race, derive not their descents from any of the Sons of
the same men. This may suffice for the Originals of these three people; who, as
Cisner affirms, retained still the same manners after they were seated in
Europe, as they had Cisner.
formerly done in Asia. And what those were, let us hear the reports of
Tacitus, and other ancient Authors, who together with the Germans (among whom
they dwelled) do thus describe them.

THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE ANCIENT SAXONS. CHAPTER III.
THese Germans, and among them the Catti and Sueuians, (our Ancestors according
to Albertus Crantzius) were a people (says Crantzius.
Tacitus) well set, stern of Tacit. in descript. of Germany.
countenance, tall of stature, gray eied, and of a fiery aspect, and their
hair yellow. Unto whom, Witichindus the Monk adds and says, that They were
fair of Witichindus, lib. 9. cap. (...). Sauous described.
complexion, cheerful of countenance, very comely of stature, and their limbs
to their bodies well proportioned; bold of courage, hardy in fight, and very
ambitious of glory: for which parts (says he) the Franks had them in great
admiration, and wondered at their new and strange attire, their armor and
their bushie locks of hair, that from their heads ouer-spread their
shoulders, but above all, at their constant resolution and valiant courage.
Their heads and beards they suffer (says Tacitus) to grow at length, and never
put off that vowed ornament and bond of valor, until Tacit. descript. of
Germany.
they have slain an Enemy: but then upon blood and spoil, they uncover their
forehead, and say they have paid back the price of their birth, and think
themselves worthy of their Country and parents. Their curled locks (says he)
they bind up in knots, and standing on end, tie it in the crown only, that is
the harmless care they have of beauty, to seem more terrible to the Enemy.
And by Sidonius Apollinaris his testimony, they used to shave off the Sidonius
Apollin.
hair of their heads, reserving only a tuft in the crown, about which they
wore a hoope or plate of copper, which caused the hair to stand upright, as by
these his verses appears. Istic Saxona carulum vide^us,
Adsuetum ante Salo, solum timere:
Cuius verticis extimas per or as,
Noncontenta suos tenere morsus,
Altat lamina marginem comarum:
Et sic crinibus ad cutem recisis
Decrescit caput, additurque vultus.


In English thus:

There do we see the Saxosclad in blew,
Bold on the Sea, but fearful now on land:
Their heighted tops upon their crowns that show,
Are not content to hold their wonted band,
But raisd in tufts, where all the rest, does stand
Bare naked shau'd, and has no hair at all,
Which makes full faced, but heads seem passing small.


(2) And that they were indeed bold upon the Seas, Aegysippus witnesses. The
Saxons (says he) a Aegysippus.
most valorous kind of men, excel all others in Piracies. In imitation of
whom, Isidore affirms, that for their Isidore.
valor and nimblenes in service they had their name. A people (says he)
stout, hardy, and most valiant, and far out-stripping all others in
Piracies, seemed more fearful Saxons excelling all other in Piracies.
to live on Land then at Sea. Whose intrusions and sudden violence both France
and Britain with great damages felt: for in Gallia they seized into their
possession the Country of Baie^. Gregorius Turonensis.
Baiocasses, as is to be seen in Gregorius Turonensis, who thence terms them
Saxones * Baiocassions: and in Britain an Office of Charge was instituted to
defend the Coasts from their irruptions, the Captain whereof was commonly
called the Count or Earl of the Saxon Shore: of whose Piracies and savage
Cruelties, let us hear Sidonius in his Epistle to Numantius complain: So many
Rowers as you see Sidonius, lib. 8.
(says he) so many Arch-Pirates think you behold, they all of them together
so command, obey, teach and learn, to rob and steal. There is no enemy so
cruel as this, that sets upon others at unawares, and as occasion serves,
as warily slips himself away. He sets at naught such as encounter him: he
brings to naught those that take no heed of him: whom he courseth, he surely
ouertaketh: when he flies, he is sure to escape. To this service, Shipwrackes
inure him, they terrify him not. Be there a Tempest up, the same serves them,
and to assail others. They never weigh Ancour upon the enemies Coasts, but
with a resolution again to return: and their manner is to kill every tenth
Captive with a lingering and dolorous torment: for to such Saxons kill every
tenth Captive.
Vows they bind themselves, and with such Sacrifices they discharge their
Vows again, being indeed not so much purified by such Sacrifices, as polluted
with Sacrilege: and the bloody and abominable Murderers think it a religious
thing, rather to torment a Prisoner unto death, then to Saxons accept no
ransom.
set him free for a Ransom.

But when we shall hear these unhuman and barbarous reports either of the
old Britains or these savage Saxons our ancient Progenitors, let us neither
be offended at Gildas, or at the reports of these other foreign Writers, who
spoke thus of them as they were then Heathens, and knew not God: the time of
whose ignorance seeing God regarded not, as the Apostle teaches, let us
acknowledge with due thanks the goodness Act. 17. 30.
of a most gracious God, who has brought us to An admonition to the Read^.
a holier conversation, and has made us Judges of those sins in them, that
we might fly them in our selves.

(3) Their Apparel was much different from others, and seemed strange to the
Gauls, as Witichindus Witichindus, lib. 9. cap. 2. Tacit. Descript. German.
The Saxons vesture.
has told us: and Tacitus declares the manner thereof; which (says he) was a
kind of Cassocke, called Sagum, clasped, or (for want of a claspe) fastened
with a thorn, having otherwise no garments at all, but going stark naked.
Nevertheless, the richer sort were distinguished from others, by their
garments; which were neither large nor wide, as the Sarmates and Parthians use
to wear them; but strait and showing the proportion of every part of their
body: besides they wore Pelts made of beasts skins. The Man and Woman's attire
differd in nothing, says he, The homely fashion of the ancient Saxon women in
their attire. Paul. Diacon.
saving that the women use linen Garments trimmed and interlaced with purple,
and without sleeves, their arms bare, and bosoms naked and uncovered. Yet
Paulus Diaconus speaking of the Longobards, comparing them to the Saxons, says
that their Cassockes were large and worn loose, most of linen, trimmed and
set out with very broad Gards or welts purfleet, and embrodered with sundry
colors, and the richer sort with Pearls: their hair bound up in a copper
hoope, stood in tufts upon the crown, the rest curled and falling down upon
their shoulders: their beards they kept still uncut, till they had killed an
enemy; and for another note of ignominy, they wore an Iron Ring, as a sign
of bondage, till they had cast it from them by the Conquest of a Man. Great
Knives, or rather broad bending Swords, they trussed upon little Shields thwart
their Witichindus.
backs, from which (as we showed) Engelhusius avouches Engelhusius.
they had their appellation. He that abandoned or lost this shield in battle
(says Tacitus) was debarred Tacit. in descript. Germ.
from their public Sacrifices and Assemblies, the greatest disgrace that could
be; for very shame and grief whereof, many, many times hanged themselves. And
upon these Shields their manner was to lift up their new elected General, and
with acclamations so to carry him through Tacit. bist. 4. cap. 6.
their Camp.

(4) For Wars, the Germans by Tacitus are reputed the best, who for two
hundred and ten years held tack with the Romans. Not the Samnites (says he)
not the Tacit. descript. Germ. cap. 5.
Carthagenians, not the Spaniards, or the Gallois, no not the Parthians have so
much troubled us: for what can the East object against us, saving the death of
Crassus, when he had defeated Pacorus, before trodden down by Ventidius? But
the Germans having either slain or taken Carbo, and Cassius, and Scaurus
Aurelius, and Seruilius Cepio, and M. Manlius, have defeated also five
Consularie Armies, and Varus with three Legions in Caesar's time. Neither have
C. Marius in Italy, or Julius in Gallia, Drusus or Nero, and Germanicus
molested them at home in their Country, but to their more smart. And yet these
Saxons among those valiant Germans were accounted Saxons of all the Germans the
valiantest. Zosimu^.
the best for courage of mind, strength of body, and enduring of travel, as
Zosimus says. Terrible also they were, and full of agilitie, by the report of
Orosius: and for their sudden invasions, most feared of the Romans, says
Marcellinus. Marcel. li. 28. c. 7.


(5) Their fashion was to go forth singing to the Wars, (or rather they
especially are said to march to battle, Tacitus. The Saxons go singing to the
wars. The Saxons use first to try by single combat.
whereas others are said to go) carrying before them certain Images taken out
of their consecrated Woods. Their manner was before they joined Battle, to try
by single Combat (therein arming one of their own against some captiued enemy)
what success was to be expected: and this they kept as a Law inviolate, that
none might presume to bear Arms before he was solemnly admitted, The custom
of admitting their soldiers.
where in a frequent Assembly a Shield was given him by his Parents or
Kindred: and this was the pledge (as it were) of his first honor, he being
till then reputed but a particular of a Family, but thence-forward a member of
the Commonwealth. They are very sensible; wise; and considerate in their
service, in preferring choice Captains, in The Saxons wisdom in war.
following their Leaders, in observing their ranks, in taking the advantage
and benefit of the day, and intrenching in the night, holding Fortune ever
doubtful, but valor always certain. Their weapons, as testifies Ioannes
Pomarius, Ioannes Pomarius. The Saxons weapons.
were long Spears, broad Swords, and the Crosbow: these they held in such
esteem, that with a horse furnished, Shield, Sword, and Lance, their Virgins
were received in marriage, accounting them for the greatest bonds, and the very
Patron-Gods of Matrimony: which Their Ceremonies in marying. Tacitus.
custom might well be taken from their neighbors the ancient Saracens, whose
Maidens usually presented to their husbands a Tent and a Spear, in way of
Dowry at the entrance of their Nuptials. And among these Germans those
Martial habiliaments were in such use, that they did meet neither at Feasts
nor in Council, but in their Armor.

A People (says Tacitus) whom thou can not so easily Amian. Marcell. lib.
14. cap. 3.
persuade to manure the ground, as to provoke the Enemy, and adventure wounds;
holding small esteem of that which is gotten by the sweat of their brows,
when it might (...) been obtained by the expense of their blood. A strange
diversity (says he) that the same men should so much love sloth, and hate
quietness. It is with them a great shame for their Prince to be overcome in
Valor; but for any one to return alive from that Battle wherein the Prince
is slain, a perpetual infamy and reproach. And that their resolutions were
ever noble, and their Saxons their resolute courage.
courage not daunted in distress or bondage, it well appeared by a whole band
of them taken by Symachus, and designed for the Romans pastime of
Sword-plaiers, who the same morning that this spectacle was expected, strangled
themselves rather then they would ineurre such infamy and baseness, as to
make others pastime with the ignominious usage of their own persons.

(6) Their Laws were severe, and vices not laughed at, and good Customs of
greater authority among them, Tacit. descr. Germ.
then elsewhere were good Laws; no temporising for favor, nor usury for gain;
but bounteous in hospitality, and liberal in gifts, accounting both due to be
given and received, yea and that without thanks: no Nation freer from
adultery, or punishing that sin more severely. For the woman Saxons great
punishers of adultery.
offending, having first her hair cut off, was turned stark naked out of her
Husbands house, and that in presence of her own kindred; thence she was
scourged with whips through the Town, without regard of birth, beauty, age or
wealth, and never after could find another Husband. Those that were
unnaturally leaud of their bodies, their manner was to drown them in filthy
mud, and to cover them with hurdles. Yea and greater punishments then these the
Pagan-Saxons executed upon such offenders, as by the Epistle of Boniface an
Englishman, Archbishop of Magunce, which he wrote unto Ethelbald King of the
Chron. of Holland.
Mercians, in reproouing his adulterous life, is manifest. For (says he) in
the ancient Country of the Saxons (where there was no knowledge of God) if
either a Maid in her fathers house, or one having a husband, became a whore,
she should be strangled with her own hands closed to her mouth, and the
Corrupter should be hanged upon the Pit wherein she was buried. If she were
not so used, then her Garments being cut away down from the Girdle-steed, the
chaste Matrons did scourge and whip her, and did prick her with knives, and so
was she sent from Town to Town, where other fresh and new scourges did meet
and torment her unto death.

And their severe Laws a long time remaining in the days of Christianity,
do declare with what rigor (without regard of person) they both examined and
punished this offense: whereof that of Queen Emma, Ran. Higd. in Polyer. l^b.
6. cap. 23.
the mother of King Edward the Confessor, is a sufficient example, who being
accused for incontinencie of body with Alwyn Bishop of Winchester, was inioined
to pass over nine Plough-share Irons glowing red hot, Queen Emma her
punishment.
she being blindfold and barefooted; by which trial she is said to have
acquitted her self, insomuch that having passed them all before she knew it,
cried and said; O good Lord, when shall I come to the place of my purgation?
This punishment beginning in these Pagans, and continuing unto the year 750.
Stephen the Second, and most pontifical Pope of Rome, did utterly Stephen 2.
Bishop of Rome.
abolish, as too severe and ouer-rigorous for Christians to undergo.

The Virgins of these Saxons were never to be The Saxons Virgins married b^
once.
married but once, that they might have no other thoghts, nor further desire
but in case of matrimony: neither had the men plurality, excepting great
Personages, and they sued unto in regard of procreation, for to be without
Children, was to be without reputation. The Saxons did highly esteem of having
children.
So that the testimony of Saluianus, which lived among them, fitteth well our
purpose, saying; Though the Saxons are outrageous in cruelty, yet for chastity
they are to be honored. Saluia^.


(7) But as in these virtues they out-stripped most Pagans; so in the Zeal of
their heathenish superstitions and Idolatrous service, they equalized any of
them: for besides Herthus, the Mother-Earth, whom the Angli our ancestors
accounted for a Goddess of Aid: they worshipped Mercury under the name of
Tacit. descr. Ge^ cap. 6.
Woden for their principal God of Battle: after whose victories they usually
sacrificed to him their Prisoners Mercury worshipped of the Saxons for Woden.
taken in wars, and of him named one of the week days An old Manuscript.
Wodensday dedicated to King Woden. Friday dedicated t^ Queen Frea* Isis a
Goddess of the Saxons.
Wodensday, whereon he was chiefly worshipped: whose wife named Frea, was by
the like foolerie held to be Venus a Goddess, unto whom another of their
week days was assigned for name and service; which of us is called Fridaie.

Isis likewise with them was a Goddess of great account, so was Eoster, unto
whom they sacrificed in the month of April; whence it comes (says Beda)
that they called April Eoster-Moneth: and we still name Eoster a Saxon
Goddess. Beda de temporibus.
the feast of the Resurrection, Easter. The Images of all these they still bare
before them in battle, reputing no small confidence in their aides: and yet
(says Tacitus) they thought it unbeseeming to paint their Gods in the shape of
men; having even by Nature doubtless written in their hearts, a regard to that
demand of the Lord: To whom will ye liken me that I should be like him, says
the holy one Iehoua? They gave great heed also Esaias 40. 25.
to the neighing of their Horses, and to the flight and singing of Birds, as
ominous fore-shewers of future events.

(8) These Superstitions, Ethelward even in his days complained of: That they
had infected the Danes, Normans and Sueuians, with the worship of this God
wooden; unto whom those barbarous Nations offered sacrifices, that they might
be victorious where they fought. And as Crantz. records, Herald the first of
that name, and Norwaies King, was so far ouergone, that he sacrificed
Crantzius Nor. Hist li. 3. ca. 3.
two of his Sons unto his Idols, that he might obtain a tempest to disperse,
and put back the Armado, which Herald King of Norway his wicked sacrifice.
Herald King of Denmark had prepared against him.

This general defection of Gods true worship, Adam Bremensis makes mention of
in this manner: In a Adam Bremensis.
Temple, says he, called in their vulgar and native speech Vbsola, which is
made altogether of Gold, the people worship Vbsola a Temple of the Saxons all
of gold.
the Statues of three Gods, in such manner, as that Thor the mightiest of them
has only a Throne or Bed: on either hand of him Woodan and Frisco hold their
places. And thus The Saxone Gods in their Temple Ubsola, and their properties.
much they signify: Hence Thursday seems to be named.
Thor, say they, bears rule in the Air, and governs the Thunder and
Lightning, Winds, Showers, Fair weather, Corn, and Fruits of the Earth. The
second, which is Woodan, that is, stronger, makes Wars; and ministers manly
valor against Enemies. The third is Frisco, bestowing largely upon mortallmen,
peace and pleasure, whose Image they devise and pourtray with a great virtle
member. Woodan they engraue armed, like as we use to cut and express Mars.

(9) Their controversies and doubtful matters were decided by drawing of Lots,
which they ever made of some fruit-bearing tree, and was performed after this
manner: If there were public cause, the Priest; if private, the Goodman of the
house, or worthtest in the Tacit. in descript, Germ.
company, took those slitted slips, distinguished with certain marks that
had been scattered at hap hazard upon a white garment: and after prayers and
invocation on their God, with eyes fixed upon heaven, and three times lifting
the same lots aloft, gave their interpretations thereof according to the marks
therein inscribed; which was received and believed for a most sure Oracle: as
the like was observed upon other occasions, both by the inspections of Beasts
intrals, and singings of Birds, after the accustomed manner of other Gentiles,
that doted upon the auguration for things of future success.

(10) For the general government of their Country The government of the
Saxons.
they ordained twelve Noblemen chosen from among others, for their worthiness
and sufficiency: These in the time of peace rode their several circuits to see
justice and good customs observed, and they often of course at appointed times
met together, to Ioannes Pomarius.
consult and give order in public affairs: but ever in time of war one of
these twelve was chosen to be King, and so to remain so long only as the
wars Chron. Sax.
lasted: and that being ended, his name and dignity of King also ceased,
becoming again as before. And this custom continued among them, until their
wars with the Emperor Charles the Great: at which time Wittekind, one of the
twelve aforesaid, a Nobleman of Angria in Westphalia, ^bore over the rest the
name and Verstegam Restit. cap. 3.
authority of King; and he being afterward, by means of the said Emperor,
converted to the faith of Christ, had by him his mutable Title of King turned
into the enduring style and honor of Duke: and the eleven others were in like
manner by the said Emperor advanced to the honorable Titles of Earls and
Lords, with establishment for the continual remaining of these Titles and
Dignities unto them and their heirs. Of whose descents are since issued the
greatest Princes at this present in Germany. But though they observed this
said form of government elsewhere, yet here in Britain it was otherwise, as
hereafter will appear.

(11) And thus much out of my poor readings, I have observed of the original
beginnings, the names, manners, and customs, of our ancient Progenitors, the
worthy Saxons, without either amplyfying or impayring their glory: who being of
all the Germans so much deuouted to war, as that their only fame therein was
many times sufficient to daunt the Enemy, were thought upon by the downe-cast
Britains as the fittest to support their ruiued Estate, of whose Entrance
Conquests, and Kingdoms, we are now next addressed to speak.

THE SAXONS ARRIVAL INTO BRITAIN UNDER THE CONDVCT OF HENGIST AND HORSA.
CHAPTER IIII.
WHen the state of Britain was miserably torn by An. Do. 450.
the calamities of civil Dissensions, Famine, Death, and Robberies, the Romans
returned, their own Strength decayed, and their Afflictions daily augmented by
their wonted Enemies the Scots and Picts, no hope was left to their despairing
hearts, that of themselves they were able to defend themselves: and therefore
(as we have showed) they called to their aid the Saxons, a Nation fierce and
valorous, who to the number of nine thousand, under the Conduct of Hengist and
Horsa, two brethren, entered Britain at The Saxons enter Britain under Hengist
and Horsa. W. Malmesbury.
Ebsfleet in the I Will of Thanet, in the reign of Theodosius the second, and of
Valentintan the third, Emperors of the East and West, about the year of Grace
450. Received they were with great joy as Angels from Heaven, Beda 1. 15.
and saluted with songs after the accustomed manner of the Britains, who
appointed them the Island Thanet for their habitation.

(2) These Saxons in short time made proof of Saxons overcome the Enemy, and
free the Britains.
their Manhood. For ouercomming the Enemy even in Scotland it self, seated
themselves in some part thereof; so that their Conquest seemed absolute, and
the Britains freed from their former assaults. Peace thus settled, and the
Inhabitants freed, a friendly Composition was made betwixt these Nations,
wherein the A composition betwixt Saxon and Britain.
Saxons undertook to maintain the Field, and the Britains to sustain the
Charge. In which league they abode some certain time, faith Witichindus,
making use in a civil sort of the Britains.
Brets friendship: but so soon as they perceived the Country large, the soil
fertile, and the hands of the Inhabitants slow to practice feats of Arms: and
further considering with themselves, that themselves and the greatest part of
the Saxons had no certain place of abode, they found fault with their pay and
want of victuals, making that their quarrel, as both too mean, and too little
for their high deserts, threatening withal, as unkind Ghests, that shortly they
would reckon without their Hosts: and Witichindas.
thereupon sending over for more of their Nation, entered peace with the Scots
and Picts, who all together rose against the poor Brets.

(3) And Hengist, that by the gift of Vortigern Hengist had the whole
possession of Kent.
had got the whole possession of Kent, sent for more supply of Saxons unto his
aid, pretending employments of their service in other parts, but indeed to
make strong his own designs: and these swarming daily over into Britain got
the strength of munition Fabian.
and command of military affairs without impeach: For the King holding
himself now sure from all interceptions, gave his immoderate senses scope to
nourish more freely their sensual pleasures, and committed more audaciously
those vices, unto which his The King gives himself to security.
own corrupt nature was naturally addicted. This Hengist soon perceived, and
to add more matter fit for flame, fed still the humors of this vicious King,
outwardly showing his care and readiness for the Lands defense, his counsel
and love to the Nobles in estate, and his courteous carriage to the Commons in
general; but to the King an ouerseeming diligence, and servile obedience: by
all which, ere it was long, he gave fire to the train, that blew up the
foundations of the British policy.

(4) For feasting the King in the Castle of Tonnge, Io^ Stow. Hengist seasteth
the King.
commanded his daughter, a Lady of passing beauty, to attend the banquet,
whose excellent feature and seemly behavior, blew the sparks of desire so
right into Vortigerns wanton eye, that they presently kindled a flame in his
lascivious heart: for in the midst of his cups, Rowena (so was the damsel
called) with a low reverence and pleasing grace, saluted the King The King in
love with Rowena.
with a cup of gold full of sweet wine, incharming it with these words in her
language; Waes heal hla^po Cyning, which is in our English, Be of health Lord
King: he dema^ding the meaning, would be taught to answer to her own
understanding, and said, D^c heal, that is, Drink health; whereof when he had
pledged her (as we speak) this bowl infected his senses with no less
sottishness, then that of Belus is said to do Dido, In the Fictious of Virg.
(...). 1.
when Cupid played the child Ascanius betwixt Aeneas and her. And brought more
bale to the Land, then afterward did that which was presented to King John at
Swinsted Abbey by Simon the poisoning Monk: for Caxton (...).
notwithstanding that he had a Queen then living, (himself not young, having
sons at man's estate, in profession a Christian, whose Religion allows
neither polygamie nor adultery) did importunate Hengist that Rowena might be
his wife: which at first with Mark. 10. Vortigern would needs have Rowena to
wife. Will. Malmesb. de Regibus.
some show of excuse and unworthiness of person, was denied, but lastly
consented unto, and the Nuptials performed. And now Fortune casting occasion
daily into Hengists lap, he gave his aspiring thoughts no rest, till he had
got the Crown from Vortigerns head, and seized all under the Saxons power.

(5) Hengist and Horsa in their Language, as also Verstegan Restit. cap. (...).
in the ancient Teutonic Tongue, do both of them signify a Horse, unto which
beast the Saxons had great regard, and whose neighings (says Tacitus) were
their Tacit. destri. Cer. cap. 2.
presages, and being white, were employed in their sacrilegious ceremonies.
Virgil also makes the Horse to be a luckie Osse or foretokened success in
Battle, as in this his verse he does intimate and write:

Bello armantur equi, bella has armenta minantur.

And Crantzius tells us, that it was a usual thing with Crantzius.
the Pagan Germans, especially of their Noblemen, to take the names of Beasts,
some from the Lion, some Pagan Germans account of tyranno^s beasta.
from the Bear, some from the Woolfe, and some from the Horse, as here
Hengist and Horsa are said to signify.

(6) Which beast they bare in their shields of Arms at their entrance of
Britain, and was blazed, says Hengist and Horse their At^.
Verstegan, in this manner: A Horse Argent Rampant, in a Field Gules: which was
the ancient Arms, as he affirms, of the Princes and Dukes of Saxony. And
albeit those Dukes have of latter years changed that Coat, yet does Henry
Julius, now Duke of Brunswicke, a most ancient Saxon Prince, who sometimes bore
the White Horse in a Red Field, bear the White Horse for his The (...) of
(...) (...) Ar^.
Creast, having for his chief Coat of Armies, the two Leopards, which by
Richard Cordelion King of England was given unto his ancestor Henry the Lion,
Duke of Saxony, who had married Mathilda the said Kings sister, and by the
Emperor Frederic Barbarossa had been bereft of his Arms, and Titles of honor.
Moreover, Charles Emmanuel the now Duke of Sauoy, who is lineally descended
from the ancient Princes of the chief The Duke of Sauoy, his Arms.
house of Saxony, by Prince Beral, who came out of Saxony into Sauoy in the
year of our Lord 998. and was the third son of Hugh Duke of Saxony, which
Hugh was brother unto the Emperor Otho the Third, does yet bear for one of
his Coats the said Leaping Horse.

(7) This Hengist was doubtless a Prince of the chiefest blood and Nobility
of the Saxons, and by Chron. Sax. Hengist, his Country and parentage.
birth, of Angria in Westphalia, wherein unto this day a place retains the
name of Hengster-holt. He with his brother were the sons of one Wihtgisil,
whose father Floren. Wigoru. Beda hist. Ang. li. 2. ca. 15.
was Witta, and his father Vecta the eldest son of Voden, as Beda writes him,
of whose issue many Kings of sundry Provinces (says he) had their original.

He grown now into high favor with the King, by the marriage of Rowena, and
feared of the Nobility Hengist, his first rising.
for his strength and policy, bare himself great among all, and his supplies
daily arriving, pestred (if it not plagued) most parts of this Island. For says
Ninius and Beda, the riches of Britain, and the fertility of Ninius.
the soil, were such motives to their covetous and aspiring minds, that where
they got footing, there they kept standing, and picked occasions where they
were too strong. Among the^ that were sent for, by the advice of Hengist, two
principal Captains, Octa and Ebissa were chief, Octa and Ebissa a tettor to
the Britains.
who being embarked in forty Pinnaces, sailed about the Picts Coasts, wasting
the Isles that were called the Orcades, and got many Countries from them beyond
the Frith, whereby a further terror was stricken into the Britains hearts.

(8) The Nobility perceiving what was in working, and the mark whereat
Hengist set his eye to aim, The Nobilities complaint.
complained to the King of their dangerous estate, showing themselves agreeued
to be dispossessed of Offices and Charge, (as Guorong the Earl or Lieutenant
of Kent, by Hengist had been) the Land pestred with strangers, that sought
their subversion; reproouing him much for his match with that Infidel Kowena,
his own careless government and adulterous life, and in such manner, that
Vodine Archbishop of London, a man of great sanctity, feared not to tell him
that thereby he had endangered both his soul and Crown; Vortigern reproved by
the Bishop of London.
which words by Vortigern were so digested, that shortly it cost the good
Archbishop his life. But he still continuing in his lascivious and careless
idleness, was lastly taught by woeful experience, what misery wilful
rashness and neglected government do bring: He continues in his folly.
for the Britains his subjects no longer would be thus abused, to see
themselves wouen into greater danger by show of defense, then they formerly had
been by the hostility of the enemy; but forthwith disclaimed His subjects
disclaim their obedience.
their obedience to the King, when he had reigned the space of six years, and
chose for their Governor his They choose Vortimer.
son young Vortimer.

(9) His Son he was indeed by nature, but not his in conditions, who (besides
the quarrel of his Queen mother for Rowenas sake rejected) bare an inward
love to his native Country, and an outward hate to the strangers that daily
sought the subversion thereof, and presently encountered with them in a pitched
Battle near unto Ailsford in Kent, wherein Catigern and Horsa, brethren to
Vortimer and Hengist, in single fight hand to hand slew each other. Catigern
and Horsa their single fight.


In which place Catigern was buried, and a Monument in memory of him erected:
the stones whereof to this day appear, and stand upon a great plain John
Stowe, Cits-Cotihouse, Catigern his Monument.
in the Parish of Ailsford, and from Catigern as yet is corruptly called
Cits-Cotihouse. The like Monument the Saxons built for Horsa, which time has
now defaced, and whereof Beda makes mention, who says, that a tomb bearing
his name was in his days to be seen in the East part of Kent. The credit
whereof is continued Beda hist. Aug. lib 1 cap. 15.
to this day, where the Village Horsted is reported Horsted the place of Horsa
his Monument.
to have received that name from him, which stands in the very same place
where that Battle was fought, as the Inhabitants report.

(10) Three other Battles after this with variable success were fought betwixt
the Britains and the Saxons, The Battles between Britains and Saxons.
one at Craford, another at Weppeds-fleet, and the third upon Colmore; in which
last the Britains bare themselves so valiantly, that the Saxons were driven
into the Isle of Tanet (if not over the seas) so that small The Saxons driven
over Seas.
hope rested for them so long as this valiant Vortimer lived, who had
dispossessed them of all their footing in the Continent, and often assailed
them in Tanet, as Fabian says. After this Victory long he lived not, but was
made away by poison through the means of Vortimer poisoned by Rowena.
Rowena the mother of all this mischief, when he had sat King the space of
four years; and the father again reestablished.

(11) Vortigern now was no sooner restored, but that Hengist had notice
thereof, who was then in building Leiden Castle in Holland, begun by Hengist.
a Castle at Leiden in Holland, as their Annals do witness, and John Dousa
in his verses specify: where leaving all (as it were) at random, returned to
follow John Dousa.
his fortunes further in Britain, and with a mighty Hengists landing resisted
by the Britains.
Army of his Saxons thought to land without impeachment: but the Britains
grown bold by their former victories, and their blood not cooled since it was
heat in fight, admonished their reestablished King, Matthew. Westminster.
who with them went to withstand his ariuage. When Hengist therefore perceived
their courage, and knew their hatreds to him and his Saxons, he sought by
smooth words to gain the shore; and by some stratageme, Hengist uses
treachery.
his wished desire: therefore pretending only to visit his daughter, yea and to
rid the Land of her, if so he might have leave of the King and them; and
therefore desired a conference in friendly manner: after which, his Saxons
should depart the Land, and rest the like friends to the Britains as they were
when first they came in.

(12) This motion seemed reasonable to the Nobility, At Salisbury-Plain the
Britains and Saxons treat of agreement. Will. Malmesb. de regibus.
and the place and time appointed, which was the first of May, and upon the
Plain of Ambrij, now called Salisbury: whither upon equal terms (as was
thought) each party repaired, and a while conferred with friendly semblances;
but in the end the Saxons urging their wrongs, fell from words unto blows, the
watchword first given by Hengist their Leader. The Britains meant simply, and
ware no weapons, according The Saxons suddenly murder the Britains.
to couena^ts: but the Saxons under their long Cassocks had short Skeines hid,
with which, no sooner the words, Nem eowr Seaxes, were pronounced, but that
each slew him with whom he conferred, by which treason the Britains lost three
hundred of their disarmed Nobility, only Eldol Duke of Gloucester, as Randulph
Higden declares, with a Stake gotten from the Randulp. Higden. Polychr. li. 5.
cap. 1.
hedge, slew seventeen Saxons. The King they took prisoner; for whose
ransom, the Countries of Kent, Sussex, Suffolk, and Northfolke, were
delivered unto these Infidels, who shortly defiled the beauty of Christianity
Diverse countries delivered to the Infidels.
with their Paganism and heathenish cruelties. Then (says Beda) the fire of
Gods vengeance was kindled by these wicked Conquerors, and raged first upon
those Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Countries next adjoining, and afterward from the East Sea unto the West,
without resistance made to quench the Great spoil and desolation over all the
Land.
same, public and private houses were overthrown and laid level with the
ground, Priests were slain standing at the Altars, and Bishops with their
flocks were murdered; neither was there any to bury the dead. And these are
the times whereof wespake, and wherein the miserable Britains abandoned the
Land or hid themselves in caves, where in they either perished for hunger, or
redeemed The Britains abandoned the Land.
their lives with perpetual slavery.

(13) Neither were their calamities greater in outward afflictions then their
souls, polluted with the Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 17. Pelagianisme
brought into Britain by Agricola.
heresy of the Pelagians, brought by Agricola, the Son of Seuerianus a
Pelagian Bishop, that did foulely corrupt the faith of the Britains: to
redress which, Germanus Altifiodorensis, and Lupus Bishop of Trecassa in
France, were by the brethren desired, and sent unto their thus troubled and
declining estate. These pillars of Gods truth, after they had powered forth
prayers, and convicted the Heretics, lead an Army of The Heritikes convicted.
Britains against the Picts and Saxons, and gained the victory; after which
(like unto people that drew on Gods vengeance and their own destructions) they
fell to robberies and rapine, one City banding against another, and all laid
waste by the Saxons and themselves. These miseries does Gildas impute to have
happened to his Britains, because they took no care to preach the Gospel of
Christ unto those Infidels the English-Saxons, The principal cause of the
Britains miseries.
that in their heathenish cruelties sought the Lands destruction.

(14) Vortigern thus dispossessed, for his further Vortigern flies into Wales.
security betook himself into Wales, where among those vast Mountains he
built a strong Castle; of whose foundation, Merlin the Welsh Wizard, with the
Merlin the Welsh Wizard. He builded a Castle there.
future success that should afterward follow the Britains, have by way of
prophecy vainly spoken. This Castle most of our Writers have said to be in
South Wales, upon a rockie and solitary mountain called The differing
opinions where this Castle was built.
Breigh, or after others Cloarie, in the West of that Province, not far from
Radnor, and near unto the River Gnaua: but the inhabitants of North Wales
report (by the reports of their ancestors) that in old Bethkelert was that
Castle, which Vortigern built, and is yet called Embris, from Merlin Embris, as
they affirm. And surely (besides the craggie and solitariness of the place,
which seemed to me rather an entrance into the shadow of death, then to be the
Palace or Court of a King) the River Llynterrenny moves much, by which
Faustus his son, begotten of his own daughter Rowena, is said to spend his
life in continual Faustus spent his life in continual prayer.
prayers.

(15) But whilst Vortigern was busied in building this Castle, and the Saxons
making spoils wheresoever they came, the Britains under the conduct of
Aurelius Ambrosius, began to receive some breath of hopes, and to show
themselves out of their Caves. Aurelius Ambrosius Captain of the Britains.
Beda hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 1. ca. 16.
This Ambrosius (says Beda) was a gentle natured man, which only of all the
blood of the Romans remained then alive, his parents being slain, which had
borne the name of the King of the Country. He with his brother Vter, commonly
called Pendragon, returning out of Britain Aurelius Ambrosius and Vter
Pendragon return out of Britain Armorica.
Armorica, where they had remained from the Tyranny of Vortigerne, landed at
Totnesse in the West of this Island; unto whom resorted great Troops of
Britains.

His first Expedition was against Vortigern the scourge of his Country, and
murderer of his King: whose Castle straightwaies he besieged, and by the just
revenging hand of God, with wild fire consumed, wherein those adulterous and
incestuous persons were burned to ashes.

(16) Next, following the common Enemy, he gave battle to the Saxons on the
North of Humber, at a place called Maesbell, wherein Hengist was discomfited, A
Battle at Maesbell. Hengist discomfited. Geffry ap Arthur. Matthew. Westminst.
and in flight taken by Earl Edol of Gloucester, and beheaded at
Conningsborrow, says he of Monmouth. Howbeit, Matthew of Westminster makes
him fight another battle upon the River Dun, in Anno 489. wherein, says he,
Hengist was taken. And Polydore Polydore.
says, that in the same battle Hengist at the first onset was slain, with
many of his Germans: the fame of whose victory (says he) is had in memory
with the Inhabitants of those parts even unto this day. Yet Gildas, Beda, and
Ethelward, Writers of those ancient times, and two of them Saxons, mention not
the death of Hengist, neither this great victory of the Britains. And
Marianus the Scottish Monk seems to affirm the contrary, where he says,
that Hengist reigned thirty four years in Hengist reign.
great glory, and died peaceably, leaving his son Eske to succeed him in the
Kingdom of Kent. With whom also Florentius the Monk of Worcester agrees.
Howsoever, sure it is, had not the divine power of God otherwise determined,
the waning estate of Britain doubtless had recovered her former strength,
both by the prayers of Bishop German, the prowess of this last spoken of
Ambrosius, the valorous attempts of Vter Pendragon, and the worthy industries
of the Christian King Arthur. The famous resistances of this last mentioned
Arthur, the Monk of Monmouth Geffry ap Arthur, Arthurs acts augmented with
fables.
with such fables has augmented, that his Acts and Travels may be compared to
those of Hercules, or with the Conquests of Caesar himself; insomuch that he
has been accounted and ranged in the Catalogue of the worlds nine Worthies.
And surely (by the testimony of Malmesbury) he was a Prince of great worth,
and did often adventure with his small power to meet the Saxons in the face and
in Field.

But the Britains strength daily decreasing, and new supplies of these Saxons
daily arriving, brought the one in despair to enjoy their own right, and the
other to triumph in their intrusions of wrongs. For continually incroaching
forward, and enlarging their limits wheresoever they came, drove the
inhabitauts before them from their wonted possessions, and seated themselves in
the southern and best part of the Land, laying the stones (as it were) of those
foundations, whereupon in short time they raised their most glorious buildings.

(17) For every several Captain or Commander accounting that part his own,
wherein he first entered or made conquest of, with full resolution determined to
keep what he had got, and (as an absolute King) commanded his Province,
whereby the Land became burdened with seven of them at the first: as Hengist of
Kent; Ella, of those parts now called Sussex and Surrey; Cherdik, of the West;
Erchenwin, of the East; Ida of the North; Crida, of the Middle-land; Vffa, the
parts now Middlesex and Essex: which Kingdoms thus begun and erected, stood
not long unshaken by civil The Saxons often at dissension among themselves.
dissensions among themselves, each King envying his equals greatness, and
seeking to enlarge his own Dominions upon the next. In which combustions, few
or none of them came to the grave in due time, but were either slain in
wars, or treacherously murdered in peace, or else enforced to sheare himself
a Monk, and resign his Crown to another. To speak of all these together, I
hold would bring too great a confusion to our History, and a needless
surcharge to the Readers memory: To avoid which, I will briefly set down the
Conquests, Circuits, Acts, and Descents, that in every several Kingdom
happened while they stood in their Heptarchie, before they were united to an
absolute Monarchy; and then (according to my prefixed purpose) continue the
succession of GREAT BRITAINS Monarchs.

(18) For albeit the Land was divided into 7. several Kingdoms, and each of
them carrying a sovereign command within his own limits, yet one of them ever
seemed to be supreme of the rest; and that Prince who had the greatest power or
success in his wars, was ever accounted and called The King of the
Englishmen, The mightiest of the Saxon Kings always King of the Englishmen.
as Venerable Beda in the fifth Chapter of his second Book, and History of
England, ever terms them.

(19) Such therefore as held the rest under, either by Arms or alliance, in
amity or subjection, swaied the whole Monarchy, and were acknowledged as
Supremes in power over the rest, which succeeded not ever in the same Family,
neither continued in one and the same Kingdom without reuersement, but were
carried upon the Floods and Ebbes of variable success, or as destiny pleased
to alter the chance: whereof each of them (saving the East Saxons only) did
attain to Only the East Saxons intruded not on their neighbors dominions.
the height of that government, as to the haven of their wished desires. See
therefore (if you please) a general view of the whole, and afterward the
several Histories of every Kingdom apart, before we enter into the
Succession of the English-Saxons Monarchs.

Heptarchy. Kingdoms. Counties. Kings Successions. Kingdoms Continuance.
Kings first Christians. The Saxons Heptarchy. The Kingdom of Kent contained
Counties, Kent. Kings reigning, 1. Hengist, 31. 2. Eske, 24. 3. Octa, 20. 4.
Ymerick, 29. 5. Ethelbert, 56. 6. Eabald, 24. 7. Ercombert, 24. 8. Egbert, 9.
9. Lother, 11. 10. Edrik, 6. 11. Withred, 33. 12. Edbert, 23. 13. Edelbert, 11.
14. Alrik, 34. 15. Ethilbert, 3. 16. Cuthred, 8. 17. Baldred, 18.
Began in An. 455. Continued years 372. Ended in Anno 827.
Ethelbert. The Kingdom of Souh-Saxons contained Counties, Sussex. Surrey.
Kings reigning, 1. Ella, 32. 2. Cissa, 75. 3. Edilwach, alias Ethelwolf 25. 4.
Berthum. 5. Authum.
Began in An. 488. Continued years 113. Ended in Anno 601.
Ethelwolse. The Kingdom of West Saxons contained Counties, Cornwall.
Deuon-shire. Dorset-shire. Somerset-sh. Wilt-shire. Hant-shire. Bark-shire.
Kings reigning, 1. Cherdik, 33. 2. Kenrike, 26. 3. Cheulin, 33. 4. Ceaclik, 5.
5. Chelwold, 12. 6. Kingils, 32. Quithelin, 1.
7. Kenwald, 30. 8. Eskwyn, 2. 9. Kentwin, 9. 10. Ceadwald, 7. 11. Inas, 37.
12. Ethellard, 14. 13. Cuthred, 16. 14. Sigebert, 2. 15. Kenwolfe, 29. 16.
Brightrik, 16. 17. Egbert, 19.
Began in An. 519. Continued years 561. Ended in An. 1066.
Kingils. The Kingdom of East Saxons contained Counties, Essex. Middlesex.
Kings reigning, 1. Erchenwin, 34. 2. Sledda, 10. 3. Sebert, 21. 4. Sexred,
Seward, Sigbert, 7. 5. Sigebert, 23. 6. Sigibert, 13. 7. Swithelme, 14. 8.
Sighere. 9. Sebba, 30. 10. Sigherd, 8. 11. Seofrid, 12. Offa, 4. 13. Selred,
30. 14. Suthred, 38.
Began in An. 527. Continued years 281. Ended in Anno 827.
Sebert. The Kingdom of Northumberland contained Counties, Yorkshire. Durham.
Lanca-shire. Westmorland. Cumberland. Northumber.
Kings reigning, 1. Ella, Ida, 2. Adda, 7. Elappea, 5. 3. Theodwald, 1. 4.
Frethulfe, 7. 5. Theodrik, 7. 6. Ethelrik, 5. 7. Ethelfrid, 23. 8. Edwine, 17.
9. Oswald, 9. 10. Oswy, 28. 11. Egfrid, 15. 12. Alkfryd, 20. 13. Osred, 11. 14.
Kenred, 2. 15. Oswike, 11. 16. Ceolnuphe, 8. 17. Egbert, 20. 18. Oswulph, 1.
19. Edilwald, 11. 20. Alured. 21. Ethelred, 5/7. 22. Alfwald, 11. 23. Osred, 1.
Began in An. 547. Continuedyeers 379. Ended in Anno 926.
Edwin. The Kingdom of Mercia contained Counties, Huntington. Rutland.
Lincoln. Northampton. Leicester. Darby-shire. Nottingham. Oxfordshire.
Chesse-shire. Shrop-shire. Gloucestershire. Worcestershire. Staffordshire.
Warwickshire. Buckingham-sh. Bedford-shire. Hartford-shire.
Kings reigning, 1. Creda, 6. 2. Wibba, 3. 3. Cheorl, 34. 4. Penda, 30. 5.
Peada, 4. 6. Wolfere, 17. 7. Ethelred, 30. 8. Kenred, 4. 9. Chelred, 7. 10.
Ethelbald, 42. 11. Offa, 40. 12. Egfrid 4 monet. 13. Kenwolfe, 22. 14. Kenelme,
5. mon. 15. Chelwolfe, 1. 16. Bernulfe, 3. 17. Ludecan, 2. 18. Whitlafe, 13.
19. Bertwolfe, 13. 20. Burdred, 22.
Began in An. 582. Continued years 202. Ended in Anno 886.
Peada. The Kingdom of East Angles contained Counties, Suffolk. Norfolk.
Cambridge-sh. Ely-Iland.
Kings reigning, 1. Vffa, 7. 2. Titullus, 10. 3, Redwald, 44. 4. Erpenwald, 12.
5. Sigebert, 6. Egrik, 7. Anna, 13. 8. Ethelbert, 9. Ethwald, 9. 10. Aldwolfe,
19. 11. Afwald, 7. 12. Beorn, 24. 13. Ethelred, 52. 14. Ethelbert, 5. 15.
Edmund, 16.
Began in An. 575. Continued years 353. Ended in Anno 914.
Redwald.

THE KINGDOM OF KENT BEGVN BY HENGIST THE SAXON, WITH THE SVCCESSION OF THEIR
KINGS, THEIR ISSVES AND REIGNS. CHAPTER V.


KEnt, the first Dominion of the Saxons Heptarchie, was formerly in the days
1. An. Do. 455.
of Julius Caesar, the Seat of four several petty Kings, yet never called a
Kingdom, Kent in the days of Julius Caesar the Seat of four Kings.
before that Hengist, the first Saxon Captain, in favor of his Daughter
Rowena, got it by the gift of King Vortigern, about the year of Grace 455. and
in the seventh year after his first arriuage, here he first laid the
foundation of those fortunes which the Saxons his Nation in this Land
afterward attained unto: for having possessed the same with Victory and
Wealth the space of thirty one Hengist his reign and death.
years, (some add three more) he left it in peace to his son Eske; and the
rest of the Island so weakened by his means, that others of his Nation were
shortly planted in other parts thereof. It contained the Continent that lies
betwixt our East-Ocean and the River Of Hengist see more in the succession of
the English Monarchy, cap. 12.
Thames, being bounded upon the West with Sussex and Surrey.

ESke, the second King of Kent, is reported to be the second son of King
Hengist, who accompanying 2. An. Do. 488. Petrus Albinus. Eske the second King
of Kent. Retained prisoner in York.
his father into this Island, made proof of his great valor in all his Battles
fought against the Britains, and in one of them (as Geffrey of Monmouth
rereporteth) being taken prisoner, was for a time retained in York, but thence
escaping, he aided his father in the Battle of Crekynford; and after his
decease, succeeded him in the Kingdom of Kent, from whom His reign and death.
Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 5.
those Inhabitants (says Beda) were called Eskings, amongst whom he peaceably
reigned about twenty years, and died in the year of our Lord 512.

OCta the son of Eske began his reign over his Fathers Dominions, the year
of Christ's Incarnation 3. An. Do. 512. Octa his reign.
512. and reigned twenty two years, without mention of any memorable Act.

IMerik, the son of Eske, and the fourth King of Kent, reigned twenty five
years, says Stowe; twenty 4. An. Do. 532.
nine, says Sauil in his Table collected from our English Writers. He had
issue, Ethelbert the first Christian Florent Wig^. I^erik the son of Eske.
I^erik his children.
King of Kent, and a daughter named Rikell, married to Shedda the second King of
the East Saxons, the mother of Sebert and Segebald.

EThelbert, the son of Imerik, in the year of grace 561. succeeded him in
the Kingdom of Kent, 5. An. Do. 561. Ethelbert the son of I^erik.
who by reason of his young years, was sore molested by his neighbor Princes,
that sought to enlarge their Provinces upon his: for now the Saxons having made
full Conquest of the Britains, fell at variance among themselves, taking all
occasions to supplane each other, as Conquerours commonly can endure no equals,
and prosperity ever is looked at with an envious eye; whereupon Cheulin King
of the West Saxons, proud of his victorious successes over the Britains,
began to Cheulin in^adeth his Territors,
disdain all amity with his own neighbor Saxons, invaded the Territories of
this young Prince, and in a set Battle slew Oslaue and Cnebban, two of his
Dukes, discomfited the King, and won the day. This field was fought at
Wiphandun, in the year of our Redemption 567. and is noted to be the first
Battle betwixt the Saxons themselves since their first entrance into Britain.

But young Ethelbert grown unto years, repaired his losses with the
enlargement of his Kingdom to the banks of Humber, and was the fifth Monarch
of Ethelbert the fifth Monarch of the Englishmen. His first wife, and children
by her. In the life of Saint We^rg His second wife.
the Englishmen, as after we shall hear. His first Wife was Berta, the
daughter of Chilperik, King of France, by whom he had Edbald, Ethelburg, and
Edburg: a second Wife he had unworthy of name, for her incestuous and
abominable act, in matching her self in marriage with her Husbands Son, A
sin (says the Apostle) not to be named among the Gentiles. Of this King, as
also of all the rest that attained unto the glory, 1. Cor. 5. 1.
to be enstiled (per excellentiam) the Sovereign Kings of the Englishmen, I
purpose to be sparing in their particular Kingdoms, and to reserve the larger
relation of their Acts, Matches, Issues, and continuance, to the times of their
several Monarchies, whereby a more historical course may be carried, through
the successions of the English-Saxon Monarchs, and a needless repetition of
the same things avoided, which otherwise of necessity would follow. He
Repetition avoided in this History.
reigned in great glory fifty six yee^s, and was the First Saxon King that
received and established the Gospel. He died the four and twentieth day of
February, the year of Christ 616. after he had reigned 56. Beda Hist. Eccles
Angl. lib 2. cap. 5. He^r. (...).
years, and was buried at Canterbury, with this inscription upon his Tomb:
Rex Ethelbertus hic clanditur in Poliandro,
Fana pians Christo, ad Christum meat absque Meandro.
EDbald, the son of King Ethelbert, in the year of Christ 617. assumed the
Government of Kent, 6. An. Do. 617.
who no sooner, says Beda, had gotten from under the awe of his father, but he
refused to entertain the Doctrine Beda hist. ^ccles. Aug. lib. (...). cap. 5.
Edbald, his s^. there dead, refused the doctrine of Christ. He married his
Mother in Law.
of Christ, and so polluted himself with the foul sin of fornication, as
that he married his Mother in Law, the late Wife to his own Father: which two
heinous faults gave his subjects both occasion and impunity to return to their
former idolatry, who under his Father, for favor, or for fear, had yielded to
the Laws of the Christian Faith. But the scourge of God and vengeance from
Heaven wanted not to the punishment of this unfaithful King: for he was
plagued for a season with often frenzy of Edbald often plagued.
mind, and raging fury of an unclean Spirit; but by Laurence Archbishop of
Canturbury, he was at length Reclaimed from Idolatry by the Archbishop.
converted from his Idolatry and incestuous Matrimony, and being baptized,
endeavored to maintain the state of the Gospel. He married Emme, the daughter
His Wife.
of Theodebert, King of Austrasie, now Lorrayne, by whom he had issue a
Daughter named Enswith, who died a Virgin at Fulkestone, a Religious House in
Kent His Daughter.
of her Fathers foundation; and two Sons, whereof Ermenred the elder died
before his Father, and left issue Dompnena, who was married to a Mercian
Prince; His Sons, and their issue.
Ermenberg that died a veiled Virgin, Ermengith a mention; Ethelred and
Ethelbert, both murdered by their Cosin-german, King Egbert. His younger Son
was Ercombert that succeeded him in the Kingdom. This Edbald, his liberality
to the Church. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 6. His reign and burial.
Edbald built a Chapel within the Monastery of Saint Peter and Paul at
Canturbury, in honor of Mary the blessed Mother of God, endowing that Church
with sufficient maintenance; wherein, after the continuance of twentyfoure
years reign, he was buried near to King Ethelbert his Father, Anno 640.

ERrcombert, the Son of Edbald by Emme his Wife, 7. An. Do. 641.
succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Kent, in the year of grace 641. He
was a virtuous, religious, and Christian King: for the Temples of the Heathen
His care of Gods worship. Beda hist. lib. 2. c. (...) His Wife and issue.
Idols he suppressed, and commanded the fast of Lent to be observed. His Wife
was Sexburg, the daughter of Anna King of the East Angles, by whom he had issue
Egbert and Lothair, both Kings of Kent after him; Ermenhild, Wife to Wolfere
King of Mercia, and Erkengode a professed Nun in the Monastery of Saint
Brigets in France; where she died, and was interred in the Church of Saint
Stephen. In his days the state of the Church growing to a well settled form of
government, the Province of Kent was divided into Parishes by Honorius the
Archbishop, as testify the Kent divided into Parishes.
Records of Christ-Church in Canturbury. This King having reigned twenty four
years and odd months, His reign and death.
died in the year of our Lord 664.

EEgbert, the elder Son of King Ercombert, in the nonage of his young
Nephews, Ethelred and Ethelbert, 8. An. Do. 665.
(the sons of his Uncle Ermenred) obtained the Rule of Kent, and had not
their murder much blemished Egbert his murder.
his peaceable Government, he might well have held place with the worthiest of
those Kings: but thirsting after an absolute sovereignty, and fearing lest his
own power should diminish by their growths and rightful successions, he set
his mind on that bloody, traitorous, and unnatural attempt, and with the
assistance of one Thurne, found fit place and opportunity to work that
devilish design, casting their bodies into a River, that so their Murders
The fact revealed. Will. Malmesbury de gesti^ rerum Anglorum.
might not be known. But God (says Malmesbury) that searches the heart,
reueiled the act, by casting up their bodies on the shore, and to the open view
of the next Inhabitants, who with great reverence there buried them, and built
a small Chapel over their Monument, whose bones afterward were removed, and
new interred in the Abbey of Ramsey in Hantshire. The Lady Dompnena their
Sister, and next Heir to the Their bodies solemnly buried. Dopnena their
sister.
Crown, that was married to Merwald, a Prince of West-Mercia, and borne him
four Children, founded the Abbey of Minster in Kent: Wherein, says Stowe, she
became the first Abbess her self, and Mildrith Her religiousnes.
her daughter succeeded her therein, says Capgraue. This King in great
quietness reigned nine years, and died in the year of grace 673. in the
month of Egbert his reign and death. Beda hist. eccles. Ang. lib. 4. cap. 5.
July: leaving issue Edrik and Wigtred, both Kings of Kent, succeeding after
Lothaire.

LOthaire the brother of Egbert, by strong handobtained the government of Kent.
For notwithstanding 9. An. Do. 673. Lothaire intrudeth into the Kingdom.
Egbert left issue Edrik and Wigtred, (as is said) yet Lothaire taking the
advantage of their minorities, and the example of his brothers intrusions, made
himself King against his, as he had done against the Sons of Ermenred, but
did not enjoy the same with the like peace as he had done. For not only
Ethelred the Mercian warred strongly against him, but also Edrik, by the
assistance of the South Saxons continually sought to recover his right, whereby
the peace of the Matt. Westminst.
Kentish was much molested: and lastly, in a bloody battle was Lothaire shot
through with a dart, whereof he died under his Surgeons hand, the sixth day
of Lothaire slain.
February, in the year of Christ 685. after he had Beda hist. Eccles. Angl
lib. 4. ca. 5. and 26. His reign.
reigned eleven years and seven months. The punishment of the Murder
committed by his brother Egbert, was on him repaied, says Malmsbury, who
derided and made jests at the laments for young Ethelred Lothaire makes but a
^est of murder.
and Ethelbert, that were by the people held and accounted Martyrs. His body
was buried with his Predecessors, Kings of Kent, in the Monastery of S. Peter
and Paul in Canturbury, Anno 685. His burial.


EDrik, the Son of King Egbert, having slain his 10. An. Do. 686. Beda hist.
Angl. lib. 4 cap. 26. Edrik his reign. His death.
Uncle Lothaire in battle, succeeded him in the Kingdom of Kent, wherein he
sat only two years, and those in continual wars with his subjects; in
which civil broiles lastly he was slain, leaving the Kentish Kingdom so
torn with dissensions, that it became a pray to many Usurpers, and gave
occasion to Ceadwalla the West Saxon, to seek the annexion thereof to his own
Kingdom; who with his brother Ceadwalla and Mollo invade Kent.
Mollo entered Kent, and with fire and sword made waste where they came. To meet
these, the Kentish assembled, and getting the advantage, burned Mollo to death:
in whose revenge Ceadwalla persisted, and wasted Mollo burned to death.
the most part of that Province before he departed: so that after for six
years continuance no King reigned in Kent, but the Country lay exposed to the
tyrannies of oppressors.

WIgtred or Withred, seven years after the death 11. An Do. 693. Wigtred his
means of attaining the Kingdom.
of his Brother, took upon him the government of Kent, which he purchased
with the good opinion that his subjects conceived, and with a great sum of
money paid to King Inas for his peace. He entered his Kingdom the year of Man's
Redemption 693. the eleventh of November, and two hundred and five years,
after the death of Hengist the first Saxon. With him reigned one Swebharde, as
Beda declares: but without mention from whom, or upon what occasion. He
founded the Priorie of S. Martin at Dover, and behaved himself worthily both
in War His bounty to the Church. Beda Hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 4. c. 26. and
lib. 5. cap. 9. His reign and death.
and Peace: his reign was thirty years; thirty three, says Beda; and death
in Anno 725. leaving issue Edbert, Ethelbert, and Alrick, all three succeeding
successively in the Kingdom.

EGbert, the first Son of Withred, succeeded his Father in his Kingdom,
virtues, and valors, whereby 12. An. Do. 726.
a peaceable government is allotted him by all Writers of these affairs, for
the continuance of twenty Edbert a virtuous prince. His reign.
three years, without relation of any notable accident peculiar to himself
and Kingdom: besides the appearances of two fearful Comets, in Anno 729. Two
blazing Stars.
and fourth of his reign; the one arising immediately before the Sun in the
morning, and the other showing his fiery beams presently upon the Suns set,
both of them striking their gleames into the North, and by West, foreshewing
(it may be) the scourge and desolation that the Pagans intended, who were at
that instant entered into France and Spain. His Burial.


EThelbert, the second Son of King Withred, and Brother to the last King
Edbert, began his Reign 13. An. Do. 749. Ethelbert his reign.
over the Kingdom of Kent, the year of Man's Salvation 749. and reigned
without any memorable act either of his, or of his Kingdoms affairs, the
space of eleven years, leaving this life in Anno 759. and His death.
was buried, say some, in the Monastery of Peter and Paul in Canturbury,
without issue of his body to succeed His burial.
him: howbeit the Annals of Canturbury affirms him to be buried at Reculuers,
in the I Will of Tanet, whose Monument is showed at the upper end of the South I Will
in the Church, and is mounted with two Spires, if there be not a mistaking of
him for Ethilbert his Successor.

ALrick, the third Son of King Withred, by the 14.
death of his brother Ethelbert, obtained the kingdom of Kent, the year of
Christ's Incarnation 760. no other Alrik the last of lincall succession.
glory attending his affairs (says Malmesbury) besides his unfortunate fight
at Otteford against Offa King of the Mercians, wherein it seemed some honor
(though with his overthrow) to withstand so puissant and impugnable an enemy.
He is the last King of Kent that held the scepter in a lineall succession: the
All the Kings of Kent after Alrik usurpers.
rest that followed, both got and enioied it by tyranny and usurpation. This
King is said to reign thirty four years, and to die in the year of grace,
seven hundred ninety three.

EThilbert, surnamed Pren; usurped the Title and Authority over the Kentish
Dominions, when that 15. An. Do. 794.
Province was sore oppressed with the invasion of the Mercian Kenulfe, whose
wars against Kent, by succession from Offa, were continued with such rigor
and valor, that the Country lay desolate where he had been, and the people
distressed whither he came. This Pren, Kenulse took prisoner, and lead away
with His imprisonment.
him into Mercia: but at the dedicatio^ of a Church that he had then founded at
Winchcombe, in presence of ten Dukes and thirteen Bishops, he released him at
the High Altar, without either entreaty or ransom of redemption. The King
returning again into Kent, His releasement.
could not there be received, his place either being supplied by another, or
himself so disliked, as not worthy any longer to reign: and having had
experience of the worlds mutabilities, is left again to his private fortunes,
from whence he had stepped, having held his estate but for three years
continuance. His reign.


CVthred, says Malmesbury, was made King of Kent by Kenulfe King of Mercia,
when he had overcome 16. An. Do. 797.
and captiuated Ethelbert: notwithstanding he is accounted for an Usurper, and
bare the title of King His reign.
the term of eight years, without any other act worthy of remembrance,
inheriting his predecessors evil hap and calamity, through factions and
civil discords.

BAldred, after the death of this Cuthred, took upon him the princely dignity
of Kent, about the 17. An. Do. 805. Baldred took upon him the kingdom of Kent.
year of Christ's Nativity 805. But now the heavenly providence determining
to bring again together that which the Saxons had divided, raised from exile
little Egbert, to make him the Great Monarch of the Englishmen. His first wars
were against Bernulfe King Egbert, Monarch of the Englishmen.
of Mercia, and his second against this Baldred, King of Kent, whom in Battle
he vanquished, and forced him out of his Kingdom, after he had sat on that
princely Throne the space of eighteen years. This Baldred is said to have
fled over Thames, and to leave Kent to the will of his Conqueror, whither
again he never returned, neither yet was heard of after his This kingdoms
beginning, continuance, and end.
overthrow. This Kingdom then that was erected by Hengist, the year of man's
happiness 455. continued her government 372. and ended her glory in the year
827. being made a Province unto the West Saxons.

SOVTH SAXONS KINGDOM, THE CIRCVIT AND CONTINVANCE, THEIR KINGS, SVCCESSIONS,
ISSVES AND REIGNS. CHAPTER VI.


THE Kingdom of the South Saxons, containing the Countries of Sussex The
limits of this kingdom.
and Surrey, had on the East side Kent; on the South, the Sea and I Will of Wight;
upon the West, Hant-shire, and the North ^de inuerged with the river Thames.
This Kingdom was erected by Ella a Saxon-Captaine, that in the second year of
Hengists entrance, as some say, brought a supply of his Saxons into Britain,
with whom came An. D. 488.
his three sons, Kymen, Plenching, and Cissa, these landing at a place which
from Kymen was afterward called Kymenishore, and discomfiting the Inhabitants,
The Inhabitants chased into a wood.
that made resistance, became himself King of those Southern parts. But
doubtless there are many opinions of this man's first entrance and new erected
estate: for some (as M. Sauile in his Table) set it in the The diverse opinions
of Ellas first entrance.
second year of Hengists first arrival, Anno 452. Others in the second of
Aurelius, and no less then thirty years after that, Anno 482. Harrison will
have it forty three years after the Saxons first entrance, and fourth year
after King Hengist his death, Anno 492. And M. Ferrers in his Succession of the
English Monarkes, places it in the three and twentieth year of King Hengists
Kingdom, and in the fifth after his own arrival, the year of our Redemption
488. Of such uncertainty is the beginning of this South Saxons Kingdom, whose
Continuance and Successions are nothing cleerer; insomuch that Malmesburie
making several Chapters upon the other six, omitteth Man omitteth this Kingdom.
only this of the South Saxons: and therefore as we find them, let us have
leave to relate them, and for the present to leave Ella as he was King; till
we come to a fit place where more shall be spoken of him as he was Monarch;
whose reign is set by Stow to be Ella his reign and death.
thirty six years; by Sir Henry Sauile, twenty four; and by M. Henry Ferrers,
thirty two, and to hau^ed in the year 514.

CIssa the third and youngest son of King Ella, 2.
then only living at his fathers death, succeeded him An. Do. 514. Cissa
Succeeded.
in the kingdoome of the South Saxons, (leaving the Monarchy to Cherdike king
of the West Saxons, who had planted his kingdom between him and the
Britains, having taken the charge of war against them, for maintenance
whereof, Cissa yielded him a yearly contribution) and living himself in long
rest and peace, founded Chichester and Chisbury, the one a Chichester and
Chisburis founded by Cissa.
City for resort of his people, the other a place of repose for himself;
which last he fortified about with a strong Trench, for a further defense
against all dangers. Of any other his actions, little is recorded by Writers:
only in this they concur, that he was a Stow.
man of great age and small acts, some affirming that he reigned the space of
seventy six years. Cissaes Reign.


EDilwach (by some called Ethelwolf and Athelwold) succeeded King Cissa in the
kingdom of the 3.
South Saxons, and was the first Christian of that Nation, converted by Bishop
Wilfride, as some conceive out of Beda: yet Beda says expressly, that the King
was baptized before Wilfrides coming. And the History of S. Swithune says, it
was done by S. Berinus, Bishop of Liber Historialis S. Swithune VV^ion.
Dorchester, who usually preaching the Gospel in the kingdom of the Mercians,
in the City of Oxenford, and presence of Wulpherus King of Mercia, it happened
that King Athelwold, then a Pagan, was present, who by the endeavor of
Vulpherus, and instruction of Berinus, received the Beda. lib. 4. ca. 13.
lauer of Baptism, whom also Wulpherus received at the Font for his God-sonne,
and in sign of that adoption gave (...) Edilb^es Godfather.
unto him two Provinces, to be annexed to his former kingdom, that is to say,
the I Will of Wight, and the Province of Manures in the West of England; at which
time also Berinus by King Athelwolds permission, baptized the chief Dukes and
Nobles of that Province. His Queen Ebba Ebba the wife of VVolfere.
was baptized in her own I Will, the Province of the Viecians, being the daughter
of Eanfride, who was brother to Eanheres, and both of them Christians. But it
is generally held, that King Edilwach gave unto Wilfride the Peninsula (as the
Latins speak) of Seoleseu, Beda lo^o ci^ato. Selsee in Sussex.
now Selsee in the West, with the demaynes of eighty seven Tenements, wherein
he built the Monastery that bare the same name, and was his own Episcopal
Sea. Against this Edilwach, Ceadwald a valiant young Prince, of the
Bloud-royall of the West Saxons, being Cap. 15.
banished his Country, making head with the assistance of friends and
followers, entered his Territories with an impetuous incursion, and slew the
King as he made resistance, when he had reigned twenty five His reign and
death.
years: in whose reign and Country raged such an extreme Famine, that both
men and women in great Beda hist. l. 4. c. 13.
flocks and companies cast themselves from the Rocks into the Sea.

(4) Berthun and Authun, two Dukes of the South Saxons, maintained the Wars
and defense of their Country against Ceadwald, and by manly valor forced him
to retire. These Captains betwixt them Ceadwald driven back.
held the dominion of that Province, until such time as Ceadwald had gotten
the Kingdom of the West Saxons; who bearing in mind the remembrance of his
former proceedings, and thinking to enlarge his own Kingdom with the
subjection of the South Saxons, entered again that Province, and in Battle
slew Beda Hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Duke Berthun, harrying the Country miserably before him. Which State, unable
to withstand the West Saxons puissance, was by Iue, the next King succeeding,
made a subjected Province, their Government thence forward resting under his
Successors, after it had stood one hundred and thirteen years: and ended The
continuance and end of this Kingdom.
in the year of Christ 601. by ordinary computation. But whosoever shall
compare the times of the foresaid Kings, Wulpherus and Athelwold together, will
easily find, that it is not easy to find the certain concurrence of times,
in affairs so clouded in obscurity, and so far remote from our preseut
times.

THE KINGDOM OF THE WEST SAXONS, THE CIRCVIT THEREOF, AND SVCCESSION OF THEIR
KINGS UNTO EGBERT; WITH THEIR ISSVES AND REIGNS. CHAPTER VII.


THe Kingdom of the West Saxons, though in time later The West Saxons the
first that brought the Heptarchy to a Monarchy.
then the two former, yet in circuit and fame surmounted them both; whose
Monarch was the Maull that first brake the Scepters of the other six Kingdoms
in sunder, and made one Crown of these their several Diadems, more glorious
then they all, and that first worn upon Egbert the West Saxons heads, and the
Scepter swaied in his Imperial hand; until whose time and person we will
continue the succession of their Kings, beginning with Cherdik that first made
it a Kingdom, and briefly show their Acts, Florent. W^.
whilst it so stood in the Saxons Heptarchie.

THis Cherdik is said to have brought a second supply 2. An. Do. 495. The time
when Cherdik entered into Britain.
of Sax^s forces into Britain, in the year of our Lord 495. and fifth of the
Monarchy of King Ella: his landing being at a place on that occasion called
Chederik-shore, who with his son Kenrik, was encountered by the Britains,
under the conduct of Natanleod a British Prince, whose Country was then called
An. Do. 508.
after his name; whom he slew in Battle, with five thousand more of his
Britains: the fortune of which field gave resolutions and hopes of better
success; it was fought near unto a Brook upon that event called
Cherdiks-ford, now by contraction Chard-ford. Hereupon establishing his new
erected Kingdom, (which contained Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorsetshire,
Somersetshire, The circuit of this kingdom.
Wiltshire, Hantshire, and Barkshire,) he enlarged the same with the conquest
of the I Will of Wight, the government whereof was by him given to Stuff and
Withgar his Nephews, which later slew the Britains there inhabiting, and
named the place of his victory Withgarbirg, assuming the name of King, and was
buried at his City Withgar, in the same I Will. About seven years after Cherdiks
entrance, Porth a Saxon, with his two Sons, Megla and Beda, landed in the
West, at the place from him called Portesmouth, whose aid with Kent and Sussex,
assisted Cherdik in his Conquests. His reign is set to be thirty three years;
and The first Kings reign, issue, and death.
his death in the year of grace five hundred thirty five: having had two
sons, Kenrik and Chelwolf, the one of which died before his Father; and the
other succeeded him in his Kingdom. Chelwolf had issue Cuthgils, whose son
was Kenfridd, and his son Kensy, the Father of King Eskwin, who was the
Successor of King Kenwalk, and predecessor of King Kentwin, in the Kingdom of
the West Saxons.

KEnrik, the eldest Son of King Cherdik, having formerly made proof of his
prowess in the assistance 3. An. Do. 535. Kenrik his battles.
of his Father, was after his death also very fortunate in obtaining two
victories over the Britains; the one at Searesberige, and the other at
Beranbrig; whose reign beginning Anno 534. continued ^anbery in Oxsordshire.
twenty six years; ending in the year of our Redemption, five hundred sixty.
He had issue three Sons, of His issue, Cheaulin, Cuthwolfe, and Cu^.
which Cheaulin the eldest succeeded him in his kingdom; Cuthwolfe the second
assisted his Brother in his Wars, and was partaker with him of his victories,
who died Anno 672. leaving issue one only Son, named Chell, or Cearlike, who
proved nothing so virtuous and dutiful a subject as his Father had been: for
he rose in rebellion against his Uncle, and by Cearlike the son of Cuthwolfe,
rebelleth against his Uncle.
strong hand expelled him his kingdom.

The third Son of King Kenrik was Cuth, famous in his issue, though
mentionlesse for action in himself: for he had three sons, of which
Chelwolf the eldest, was King of the West Saxons (as shall be declared) Chell the
second, was father to Kingils the sixth (and first Christian) King of the West
Saxons, and Grandfather to Kenwall and Kenwin the seventh and ninth Kings of
that Kingdom: and Ched the youngest, was father of Kenbert, Grandfather to
Chedwall the most renowned King of the West Saxons; of whom we are presently
Chedwall, the most renowned King of the West Saxons.
to speak, and of them all in the succession of the English Saxons Monarchs:
and now to return again to the issue of King Kenrik.

CHeaulin his first son, entered upon the government over the West Saxons
Anno 561. and even 4. An. Do. 561. Cheaulin the time when he began to reign.
An unquiet and ambitious neighbor.
at the first began to disturb the quiet peace of his neighbor Provinces,
taking advantage at the young years of Ethelbert, who was made King of Kent in
the same year that Cheaulin was, whom he discomfited, and slew his two
Captains, Duke Oslaue and Duke Cnebba, at * Wibbandune, as we have said. Other
Wimbledon. cap. 5. Sect. 5.
Victories he obtained over the Britains, both at Bedford, Deorham, Gloucester,
Cirencester, and Bathancester. Stowe.
But the fortunes of wars being always variable, at length his success
altered, and at VVannes ditche in Overthrown by Cealrik.
Wilsthire he was overthrown, and dispossessed of his kingdom by Cealrik his
brother Cuthwolfs son, when he had reigned thirty three years. He had
issue, His reign. His issue, Cuth and Cuthwin. Cuth a va^nt vvarrior.
Cuth and Cuthwin: the former served valiantly in the wars under his father
at Wimbledon in Surrey, where King Ethelbert of Kent was chased, and his
soldiers slain: and with the like valor and victory he fought at
Fethanleygh against the Britains, notwithstanding that therein he lost his
life, the year of our Slain (...) Fethanleygh.
Lord 585. and the five and twentieth of his fathers reign. Cuthwin his
younger brother suruiued his father, but succeeded not in his Kingdom, being
then (by reason of his young years) unable to recover his right. He had two
sons, Kenbald and Cuth, the latter of which was father to Chelwald, whose son
Kenred had issue, Ine the eleventh King of the West Saxons, and Ingils his
brother, whose son was Eoppa the father of Easa, whose son was Alkenmud,
the father of Egbert the eighteenth King of the West Saxons, who reduced the
Saxons divided Heptarchie into an absolute Monarchy.

CEarlik the son of Cuthwolfe, who was brother to 5. An. Do. 592. Cearlik the
(...) King of the West Saxons.
this last King, succeeded in the kingdom by the eiection of his Uncle, and
was the fourth King of the West Saxons. He began his reign in the year of our
Redemption 592. and continued it the term of six years, without any memorable
act by him achieved His reigns continuance.
besides his Treason spoken of before.

CHelwolfe the son of Cuth, the son of Kenrik, 6 Chelwolfe when he began to
reign.
and Cosen-german to Cearlik the preceding King, began his reign over the
West Saxons, the year 598. on whose first entrance, this province of the
West Saxons was invaded both by the Britains, and also by West Saxons inusded
by three sundry Enemies. Hen Huntingd. His death.
the Scots and Picts: and the East Angles likewise molested his peace, under
the conduct of Redwald at that time Monarch of the Englishmen. But he wading
through these troubles, harried the Province of the South Saxons with invasions
and calamities, in the prosecution whereof he died, leaving the pursuit of his
wars and possession of his kingdom to Kingils his Nephew, that immediately
succeeded him, after he had reigned the space of fourteen years.

KIngils the Son of Chel, who was Brother to King Chelwolfe, succeeding his
Uncle in the kingdom 7. An. Do. 611. Kingils his coming to the Kingdom.
Quinchelinus his associate. Will. Malmsbury. Marianus. Florent. Wigorn. Their
victory over the Britains.
of the West Saxons, in the year six hundred and twelve, in his third year
associated unto him in his Government Quinchelme his Son, who jointly managed
the West Saxons affairs both of war and peace. And fighting with victory
against the Britains at Beandune, they there slew of them one thousand forty
six persons, and after that against Penda King of Mercia, near unto
Cirencester, about the fifth year of his reign, where lastly they came to a
conclusion of peace. This King at the preaching of Berinus (an Italian Divine,
afterward reputed for a Saint) Kingils converted to Christianity, the first of
all the West Saxons Kings. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3 cap. 7. Oswald a witness at
his baptizing. His gift to Kingils.
and by the persuasions of Oswald the most Christian King of Northumberland,
(who was a suitor to become his Son in Law, by the marriage of Kineburg his
daughter, and was made his Godfather by receiving him at the Font) received the
Word of Life, and became the first Christian King of all the West Saxons; in
witness whereof, he gave the City Dorchester, near unto Oxford, to his
Conuerter, who therein erected his Episcopal Sea. He reigned the space of
thirty one years, some say but seven and twenty, and had issue (besides
Quinchelinus, who reigned with him, and died before him) Kenwin and Kenwald,
that succeeded him; and Kineburg his Daughter married to Oswald, as is said.
Quinchelinus had a Son named Cuthred, that was baptized with his Father at
Dorchester, and is said by Stowe, to have reigned after the death of Kingils:
but I take it rather to be Kenwen, whom some suppose to be his Fathers
Associate the term of four years, but never sole King himself.

KEnwald, whom Beda calls Senwalch, succeeded his 8. An. Do. 643. Beda hist.
Angl. lib. 3. cap. 7. Kenwald re^th the Christian faith.
Father Kingils in the kingdom of the West Saxons. His beginnings by Matthew
of Westminster are compared to be with the worst, and his endings with the
best of those Kings. At his first entrance he fought with victory against the
Britains at (...), whereof he became most insolent, and refused not only to
receive the Christian Faith, but also put from him his lawful wife Sexburg,
the sister of Penda King of Mercia, whereby he became hateful to his own
Subjects, and sore assaulted by the Mercian King, who followed the revenge so
far, that he forced Kenwald He (...) out of his Kingdom.
out of his kingdom, who being driven to extremity, sought succor at the
mercy of Anna the Christian King of the East Angles, where he was both
courteously entertained, and at last (won to the Christian Ro^ ald won to
the faith of Christ.
Faith) was baptized by Bishop Foelix, whereupon he did recall his wife,
according to prescript of Christianity, and recovered again his former
Majesty, which he much advanced by his pious works. He founded His works of
devotion. (...). Malmsbury. His reign and death. Vita Alel. His Wife governs
the kingdom.
the Cathedral of Winchester, and the Abbey of Malmesburie, and when he had
reigned thirty one years, gave place unto nature in the year 673. leaving no
issue of his body to succeed him: whereupon Segburg his wife took upon her
the government of the West Saxons, the same year that Lothair was made King of
Kent, she being a woman of great spirit and understanding, An. Do. 674.
and sufficiently worthy to have managed the Kingdom, had she not been
prevented by death, or rather (as some write) by a religious devotion, that the
affairs of this present life might not hinder her zealous meditations of the
future, in desire whereof, she abandoned her Regencie, and built a house of
devotion in the I Will of Shepey, wherein her self became She becomes a Nun,
and is elected Abbess of Ely.
a Vowesse, and afterward was elected the Abbess of Elie.

ESkwin after the departure of Queen Segburg, succeeded in the kingdom of the
West Saxons. He 8. An. Do. 675.
was the son of Kensy, the son of Kenfrid, the son of Cuthgils, the son
of Chelwolfe, the son of Cherdik, the first King of that Province: his reign
lasted Eskwin his reign not long. Hear. Huntington. His battle with VVulfere.
but two years, in which time he fought a great Battle with Wulfere King of
the Mercians, at the place then called Bidanheaford, and wherein many of the
Saxons on both sides perished, leaving neither issue to He died without issue.
succeed him, nor other matters to be spoken of him, though (as it seems)
he had dispossessed Kenwin, who had more right to the Crown then himself; or
(as Beda and Malmesbury auerre) he reigned with him the space of two years,
and Kenwin alone for seven years more.

KEnwin the brother of Kenwald, and son to King Kingils, in the year 677.
became the ninth King 9. An. Do. 677. Kenwin, when he began to reign.
of the West Saxons, and reigned the space of nine years. He was a great
scourge unto the weak and ouer-borne Britains, making Conquests of their
possessions, and forcing them even to the Sea-shoare, being A great scourge to
the ouer-born Britain
a people allotted unto misery, and by these strangers pursued so vehemently,
that lastly they were driven into the West-Angle of this Island, and their lives
defended and maintained among those waste Mountains and hard Rocks, which
therein were more propitious and gentle then the stony hearts of their
Oppressors.

CEadwalla a valiant young man, and of the bloud-Royall of the Genisses, says
Beda, being banished 10. An. Do. 686. Beda hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 4. ca. 15.
from his Country through the envy of others, who maligned him only for his
virtues and worthiness, succeeded Kenwin his kinsman in the kingdom of the
West Saxons, and with greater glory reigned then any other in that Province
before him had done. He Ceadwall reigned with greater glory then any other.
was the Son of Kenbert, whose Father was Ched, the second Son of Cuth; and
Cuth was the third Son of Kenrik, who was the eldest Son of Cherdik, that
laid the first stone of this kingdoms foundation. His first brunt of fury was
against Edilwach, King of the His descent.
South Saxons, whom in field he slew: and in another battle Berthun, that had
made himself King of that His wars against the South Saxons.
State. The I Will of Wight also he almost quite wasted: and though he were
unbaptized, yet did he bind himself by vow to give the fourth part of the
spoil unto Gods use, and performed it accordingly unto Bishop His vow to God.
Wilfrid, who with Bernewine and Hildila converted the people from their
Idolatrous superstition, unto The last of the Saxons that were converted to
Christ.
the true service of Christ, it being the last part of the Saxons possessions
that was turned from their Pagan manners. Of which his specious devotion,
Malmesburie gives this censure: although we praise his affestion, (says he)
yet allow we not the example; for it is written, that who so offers unto God
the goods of the An unpleasing ^fice to God.
poor, does as it were sacrifice the son in the sight of the Father. Kent
also with grievous wars he twice afflicted, and therein spilt so much
Christian blood, that His great bloudthen in Kent.
nature her self was therein offended, and he at last as much lamented: in
repentance whereof, after he His repentance.
had reigned in great stoutnes the space of two years, in a zealous devotion
went to Rome, where of Pope Sergius he was baptized upon Easter Even (says
Beda, His baptizing.
the year of our Redemption 689.) by the name of Peter, and wearing as yet the
white Robes of innocence, put (as the rite then was) upon him at his lauer of
Baptism, fell sick, and the twentieth day of His death.
April following died, having had neither wife nor child that we read of. He
was buried in Saint Peter's Church in Rome, under a fair Monument, with this
His burial.
inscription thereon engraven: Here Cedwall, otherwise Beda hist. Eccles.
Angl. lib. 5. ca. 7.
named Peter, King of the West Saxons, is buried, who died the twentieth of
April, in the second Indiction, and lived thirty years or thereabouts, when
that noble and mighty Prince Justinian was Emperor of Rome, and had reigned
four years in the Empire, and Sergius a true pattern of the Apostles, had
sat two years in Peter's Seat. What has been written of this Ceadwall, King
of the West Saxons, by Beda the Saxon and his followers, The history of
Ceadwall attributed to Cadwellader by Geffrey.
has been attributed to Cadwalader King of the Britains, by Geffrey of
Monmouth the Britain, John Castor, and More, affirming him to be the same man,
and that upon the admonition of an Angel he went to Rome, took penance of
Pope Sergius, there died in the twelfth Kalends of May, and was there buried
with Book of S. Albans, part. 5. cap. 61. D. Powel History Ca^b. page 9.
the same Epitaph, and after the same manner. But the Writer of the History of
Cambria, of Cadwaladers going to Rome, and the other appendances, seems to be
doubtful, and says that it differed from the assertion of Bernardus
Guidonius, the neerenesse of the names being the very cause of the like
relations, and confidently affirms that it was Edwall the son of
Cadwalader, who in such devotion went to Rome, and there made such a religious
end, about the year of our Lord 720.

INe, whom Beda calls Hun, others Ina (the son of Kenred, the son of Cuth,
the son of Cuthwin, the 11. An. Do. 688. Floren. UU^gorn. j^e his descent.
son of Chelwin the third King of the West Saxons, the son of Kenrik the
second, and he the son of Cherdik the first King in that Province) after
Ceadwals departure to Rome, took upon him the government of that Kingdom,
which he managed with continual Victories the term of thirty eight years.
His first attempts were against the Kentish-Saxons, in revenge of his cosen
Molloes death, whose wrath Withred Ine his first ^ts.
pacified by the payment of thirty thousand Marks, says William of
Malmesbury. In the year of Grace seven hundred and eight, and twenty one of
Will. Malmsbury.
his own reign (as Matthew of Westminster has observed) he fought with the
Britains under their Captain Matthew. Westminst. His battle with the Britains.
Gerent, whom he victoriously subdued: and in his twenty sixth year, against
Cheolred King of Mercia, with doubtful victory, at the place then called
Wodenesbury: and in his thirty sixth, invaded the South Saxons with such
success, that he reduced the same His conquest of the South Saxons.
Kingdom into a Province, and annexed it in subjection to the West Saxons: and
manifesting his good desires both to the administration of Justice, and the
advancement of Divine Piety, he ordained many good Laws His love of Justice.
for the amendment of manners in his people, which are yet extant written in
the Saxon Tongue, and translated into Latin by the learned M. William Lambert.

He built at Wels a College dedicated unto God, and His zeal to piety.
bearing the name of S. Andrews: which afterward Kenulph, King of the
West Saxons made an Episcopal Sea. The renowned Abbey of Glastenburie most
stately he built to the honor of Christ, Peter and Paul (whereof Malmesburie
makes mention in his book of Glastenburies Antiquities) in a fennie place
sequestered from the road way, where formerly had stood the old Cell of Joseph
of Aremathea, and that being decayed Deuy Bishop of S. David's had thereon
erected a new; which time also having ruinated, twelve men well affected in the
North parts of Britain had repaired, but now by this Ina was quite pulled
down, and after a most sumptuous manner new built; the Chapel whereof he
garnished with gold and silver, and gave rich ornaments thereto; as Altar,
Chalice, Censor, Candlestickes, Basin and holy water, Bucket, Images, and Pale
for the Altar, of an incredible value: for the gold thereupon bestowed,
amounted to three hundred thirty three pound weight, and the silver to
twothousand eight hundred thirty five pound, beside precious Gemmes, embrouched
in the Celebrating Vestures. He instituted also a certain yearly payment to
the Sea of Rome, enioining every one of his subjects that possessed in his
house of one kind of goods to the value of twenty pence, that he should pay a
penny to the Pope yearly upon Lammas day: which at first was contributed under
the name of The Kings Alms, but afterward was called and challenged by the
name of Peter Pence. At length, by the instigation and earnest persuasion of
Ethelburga his Queen, he renounced the glittering glory of his present and
princely estate, wherein he had in great prosperity reigned His last estate
wherein he died.
thirty seven years and odd months; and professing a voluntary poverty,
(so great was the zeal, and so little the knowledge of that age) went to Rome,
where in the habit of a Religious Man he ended his life in poor estate; and
Ethelburga his wife became a veiled Nun, and was made Abbess of Barking
near London, wherein she ended her life. The brethren of this Inas, were
Kenten, whose son was Aldelme Abbat of Malmesbury and Bishop of Sherborne,
and Ingils that was the progenitour of Egbert the first Saxon Monarch of the
whole Island: and his sister Cuthburga, married into Northumberland, sued a
divorce against Osrick her King and husband, and in the habit of a Nun ended
His Wife.
her days at Winburne in the County of Dorset. 12. An. Do. 726. Matt.
Westminst. Ethelard terrified by the appearing of two blazing stars. The
continuance of his reign.


EThelard the kinsman of King Ina (whom he ordained his successor at his
departure to Rome) was the son of Oswald, and he of Ethelbald the son of
Kenbald, the brother of Cuth, and both of them the sons of Cuthwin, the son
of Cheaulin, the son of King Kenrik, the son of Cherdik, the first
West Saxon King. He began his reign the same year that King Edbert did his
over the Kingdom of Kent, and with him was terrified by the dreadful
appearance of two Blazing Stars: of whose Acts, no other mention is recorded,
saving that at his entrance into regal estate, Oswald a Norman of the
West Saxons blood, emulated his glory, and troubled the quiet peace of his
prosperous beginning: but not able to win fortune to favor his proceedings,
he quite abandoned his native Country, and so left Ethelard to rule the
Kingdom in peace, who therein quietly reigned the space of fourteen years,
without any mention of wife or issue.

CVthred, cosen to King Ethelard, succeeded him in his Dominions, and was much
disquieted by Edilbald 13. An. Do. 740. Hen. Hunting.
King of Mercia, both by open war and privy practices: but these two Kings
coming to a conclusion of peace, joined both their Powers against the
ouer-borne Britains, and in a bloody battle gave them a great overthrow. In
this time, says Beda, the bodies of the dead were permitted to be buried
within the walls of their Cities, which thing before was not lawful, but
their corpse were interred without in the Fields; many of whose Tombs as yet
are witnesses to us, that daily find them in the digging of the grounds
adioining, and reserve them for sight, or other necessary use.

The peace of this King was molested by his own subject, an Earl named
Adelme, who boldly encountered his Sovereign in Battle, and fought it out even
Adelme a rebel.
to the point of victory; but failing thereof, and forced to fly, his life
was pardoned. And he made General Vanquished by Cuthred.
against the Mercian Edilbald, Cuthreds ancient foe, wherein by his valiant
prowess, with the flight and discomfiture of the Enemy, he made a worthy
amends for guerdon of his life, and was ever after held Restored again to
favor.
in great favor and honor. This King reigned in great fame and victories the
space of fourteen years, Cuthred his reign and death.
and died in the year of our Lords Passion 753. He had issue one only son,
whose name was Kenrik, a valiant Matt. West. Kent ik his son.
young Prince, who in the ninth year of his Fathers reign was seditiously
slain in his Army, for bearing himself (as it may seem) ouer-rigorous
toward the Soldiers.

SIgebert obtaining the Principality of the West Saxons, reigned therein no
long time, and that without 14. An. Do. 754. Sigebert, his reign without
honor. Will. Malmsbury. Given to viciousness.
all honor or fame. His parentage is obscure and unknown, but his vices are
made apparent and manifest; for he wallowing in all sensual pleasures, added
exactions and cruelties upon his Subjects, setting aside all laws and rules of
true piety: from which vicious life, when he was lovingly admonished by his
most faithful Counselor a worthy Earl called Cumbra, so far was his mind
from abandoning his impious courses, as that he caused this Noble Personage to
be cruelly slain; whereupon the rest of the Peers seeing their State and
lives were every day in danger, and the common subjects, whose Laws were thus
violated, being incensed into fury, they rebelliously His subjects rise
against him.
rose up in Arms against him, and would acknowledge him no longer their
Sovereign. Sigebert, by nature as fearful as he was audacious unto vice,
fled into the woods as his only safeguard, where like a forlorn person he
wandered in the day, and in caves and dens lodged in the night, till lastly he
was met with by a Swine-heard that was servant to Cumbra, and of him known to
be Sigebert, was presently slain in revenge of his masters death, in the wood
that was then His death.
called Andreads Wald, when he had reigned not fully two years. His reign.


KEnwulfe, sprung from the bloud-Royall of the West Saxons, after the death of
wicked Sigebert was 15. An. Do. 755. Kenwulfe his descent. Hen. Hunting. His
victories against the Britains.
made King of that Province; and appeasing some tumults that were stirred for
Sigebert, obtained many victories against the ouermastred Britains: but had
not the like success against Offa King of the Mercians, who at Bensington gave
him a great overthrow. He founded the Cathedral Church of S. Andrews at Wels,
which afterward was an Episcopal See, and He founded a Cathedral Church.
in great honor reigned for the space of twenty four years; but then
Fourtune turning her face away from him, the rest of his reign did not suit to
that which was spent: for he giving himself to pleasure and security,
banished Kineard, the brother of his Predecessor Sigebert; who dissembling his
wrong, gave place unto time, and occasion being offered, made his use thereof.
For Kenwulfe coming to Merton, to visit his Paramore, was there set upon and
slain; and his body He is slain. Buried at Winchester. Simon Dan.
conveyed and buried at Winchester, after he had reigned twenty nine years,
leaving no memorial either of Wife or Children. 61 An. Do. 784. Hen. Hunting.
Matthew. West. Simon D^. Ran. C^st. lib. 5. cap. 25.


BRithie, lineally descended from Cherdik the first King of the West Saxons, a
man of a soft and quiet disposition, succeeded Kenwulfe in that Principality,
in the year of Christ's Incarnation 784. He married Ethelburga, the daughter of
great Offa the Mercian King, by whose power he expelled Egbert that ruled a
Lordship in his Province under him, whose fame increasing through his feats of
wars, drove many icalousies into King Brithries head, and the more by the
instigation of Ethelburga his Queen, who bearing her self great, because of
her parentage, practiced the downfall and destruction of them whom she hated,
and by her suggestions this Egbert was banished on suspicion of conspiracy. It
afterward chanced, that she preparing poison to make an end of one of the
Kings Minions, wrought thereby (though unwittingly) the Kings death: for he by
tasting the confection, ended his life, after he had reigned the space of
sixteen His reign and death.
years. Wherein, she fearing the just revenge of his subjects, fled into
France, and by Charles then King, was so courteously entertained, as that for
her great beauty there was offered her the choice of him or his son. But she
in her youthful and lustful humor, choosing the son, was debarred from
both, and His Wife.
thrust into a Monastery, in the habit (not the affection of a Nun) where not
long after she abused her body by committing of adultery, and was shortly
expelled, Roger (...).
and in beggarly misery ended her life, as by many that so saw her, we have
heard it reported, says Asserius mine Author. For this her most heinous crime,
whereby was procured the murder of her Husband, the West Saxons ordained a
Law, to the great prejudice of all their Queens succeeding; that none of them
should have either title, majesty, or place of roialtie; A Law against the
Saxon Queens.
which was severely executed for many years after.

In the days of this Brithrik, many prodigies appeared, and more perhaps then
will be believed. For it Asser.
is reported, that in his third year a shower of blood Will. Malmesb. The
prodigies that happened in this Kings time.
rained from heaven, and bloody crosses fell upon men's garments as they walked
abroad. And in his tenth year were seen fiery Dragons flying in the air.
Which wonders, some took to be presages of the miseries following, both by the
Invasions of the Matthew. Westminster. Her. Hunt. The Pagan Danes invade this Island in
this Kings time.
Pagan Danes, that in these times were first seen to arrive in this Island, and
the extreme Famine that afterward happened: howsoever, sure it is that the
Heptarchy now began to set in the West, and the rising Monarchy to appear in
King Egbert, whose acts and issue shall be further rehearsed, when we shall
come to the time of his succession among the English Monarchs.

THE EAST SAXONS KINGDOM, THE CIRCVIT, SVCCESSIONS OF THEIR KINGS, THEIR
ISSVES, AND KINGDOMS CONTINVANCE. CHAPTER VIII.


THe site of the East Saxons Kingdom, was the Country The site of this Kingdom.
of Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hartfordshire, and the Circuit so far as the
Diocese of London now extends. It was bounded on the East with the Ocean; on
the South with the Thames; on the West with the Colne; and on the North with
the River Stowre. The Kings thereof claim their descent from The descent of
these Kings.
Prince Woden, not as all the rest of the Saxon Kings, but only by a
collateral line; and Erchenwine became the An. Do. 527.
first King, which nevertheless he held as Feodarie to the Kings of Kent. For
which cause, it seems that Malmsbury mentions him not in the Catalogue of
Malmesb. de Gest. Angl. cap. 6.
those Kings, but makes his son Sledda the first, and tenth in descent from
Woden.

ERchenwine, is said to be the Son of Offa, the son of Bedca, the son of
Sigefuget, the son of 1. Erchenwine the first King of the East Saxons.
Sneppa, the son of Awpig, the son of Supig, the son of Seaxnod, from
whom all these Kings fetch their original: His Kingdom began about the year
His descent.
of grace 527. and in the fifteenth of Eske the second King of Kent; and his
reign long, but yet without any memorable acts; dying in the year 586. and
leaving his son to succeed in his place. His death.


SLedda the son of Erchenwine, succeeding in the East Saxons Kingdom,
reigned peaceably without 2. An. Do. 587. Sledda the second King. His marriage.
mention of any wars; for having married Ricula the daughter of Imerik King
of Kent, was thereby the more favored of them, and feared of others; and
nothing left (besides his quiet reign) to be recorded to posterities; neither
are many years of successions numbered, but as they are gathered from the
Computations of other princes, with whom they either lived, or were linked in
action. This Sledda died about the year of our Redemption 596. and left issue
by His death.
his wife Queen Ricula, Sebert, who succeeded him in the Kingdom, and
Segebald his brother whose Sons His issue.
afterward were Kings of that Province.

SEbert the son of Sledda and of Queen Ricula, began 3. An. Do. 596.
Sebert the time when he began to reign.
his Reign in the year of Christ's Incarnation 596. and in the thirty six
year of the reign of King Ethelbert of Ke^, his mothers brother, at that time
Monarch of the Englishmen; who in Seberts chief city London, a Princely
Mart Town, (says Beda) of many Beda Hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 3.
people ariuing thither both by sea and land; new built a Church, making it the
Cathedral of Bishop Miletus, and so wrought with King Sebert, that he
converted him to Christianity; and assisted him in that Foundation, where
formerlie (say some) had stood the Sebert converted to Christianity by
Ethelbert.
Temple of Diana. This Church these new Conuerts and Saxon Kings, either new
reared or enlarged for the honor and service of God, and dedicated under the
name of Saint Paul: which work Ethelbert further S. Paul's Church built.
confirmed with sufficient maintenance, as by this his Charter is seen,
containing these words: Aethelbert Rex, Deo inspirante, pro animae suae
remedio, dedit Episcop^ Mileto terram quae appellatur Tillingham, ad
Monasterium sieve Solatium scilicet S. Pauli. Et ego Rex Aethelbert ita firmiter
concedo tibi Praesuli Mileto potestatem eius habendi and possidendi, vt in
perpetuum in Monasterij vtilitate permaneat, etc. And that this was the Temple
of Diana, some have further confirmed unto us by the incredible number of
Oxe-heads there dug up in the days of King Edward the First, when the
east end S. Paul's Church aforetime the Temple of Diana. S. Peter's Church in
Cornhill built: a fore time the Temple of Apollo. Sulcardus.
of that Church was enlarged; which were supposed to be of those Beasts that
were there sacrificed to this Goddess Diana. These Kings likewise founded the
Church of S. Peter in the West of London, at a place called Thornye, where
sometimes stood the Temple of Apollo, as Sulcardus affirms; which being
overthrown by an Earthquake, King Lucius new built for the celebration of
Gods service; and that again being decayed, those Kings restored it to a
greater beauty, where Sebert, after thirteen years reign, (as some write)
with Aethelgoda his Queen were buried: Stowe.
whose bodies in the days of Richard the Second (says Walsingh.) were
translated from the old Church The. Walsingham.
to the new, and there interred. He had issue by the said Queen, Sered,
Seward, and Sigebert, whose lives and deaths were as follows.

SEred, Seward, and Sigbert, the sons of King Sebert, reigned as it seems,
together in the Kingdom of 4. Three Kings jointly sway the Kingdom. Enemies
to Christianity. Beda hist. eccles. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 5. They are put from the
Communion. Miletus fled into France.
the East Saxons; all three wicked irreligious men, and deadly enemies to the
Christian Profession. These contumeliously presuming to the Lords Table, and
holy Sacrament of his Body and Blood, were prohibited by Bishop Miletus,
because they were Idolaters and unbaptized: which repulse they took so
offensiuely, that they expulsed Miletus, who thereupon fled into France. But
their impiety was not long unrewarded: for fighting against Kingils, and
Qinchelinus his son, (Kings of the West Saxons) were by them overcome, and in
Rand. Cest. The three Kings slain.
battle slain about the year of Grace 623. as by the learned Sir Henry Sauile
is calculated, whose account for these times I altogether follow.

SIgebert the little, the son of Seward, the second 5. An. Do. 623. Segebert
the Little. Matthew. Westminst. The time when he began to reign. His successor.
son of King Sebert, entered his reign over the kingdom of the East Saxons,
the year of Christ 623. of whose affairs, little matter is left for us to
relate, saving that he having both a Brother and a Son, yet his Kingdom was
succeeded by neither, but by one Sigibert, his Cosen-German once removed.

SIgibert, the son of Segebald, the brother of Sebert, 6. Beda hist. Angl.
lib. 3. cap. 22. Sigebert his descent. He restored the Christian faith.
the son of King Sledda, and of Ricula his Queen, succeeded his kinsman in
the Kingdom of the East Saxons. This Sigibert reduced again his Province unto
the embracing of the Christian Faith, being daily instigated thereunto by Oswie
King of Northumberland, and received Baptism himself at the hands of Bishop
Finnan, and at the place called The Wall, procured He was baptized by Bishop
Finnan.
virtuous Cedda to be his assister for the plantation of the Gospel in his
Kingdom. He was murdered by Rap^o Cogshall. His death.
two of his kinsmen, who, as Beda says, were Brethren, no other cause moving
them, but his overmuch lenity and clemency. He reigned by the foresaid His
reign.
account, sixteen years, leaving issue a young son named Selred, that
succeeded Seofrid in that His issue.
Kingdom.

SWithelme succeeded his brother in the Province of the East Saxons, nothing
being mentioned of his 7. An. Do. 661. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 22.
Swithelme baptized.
life or reign, besides his Baptism by Bishop Cedda, and that his Godfather
at the Font-stone was Edelwald King of the East Angles.

SIghere, the son of Sigebert the little, entered his 8. An. Do. 664. When
Sighere began to reign.
reign over the Kingdom of the East Saxons, the year of our Lord 664. and
was the eighth King of that Province, in part whereof Sebba his nephew reigned,
with better commendations then Sigehere at his beginning had done; for Beda
reports, that upon a Beda hist. l. 3. c. 30
great mortality and plague, to appease the wrath of his Gods, Sighere became
an Apostata, and forsook the faith of Christ, whereas SEbba continued constant
with those in that Province under his Jurisdiction: yet by the diligent care of
Wulfere King of the Mercians, Sighere and his people were reclaimed, throwing
down Reclaimed by the King of Mercia.
the Temples and Altars erected to Idolatry, and opening again the Christian
Churches for the Saints assemblies, that so (says he) they might rather die
in hope of the Resurrection, then wallow in sin, and live in Idolatry. His
wife was Oswith the daughter of Edelfrith, King of Northumberland, whom
Capgraue His Wife.
makes a Saint, and Abbess of Berking near London, even in the days of her
husband.

SEbba, the Brother of Segebert the Little, and Son of Seward, (as we have
said) succeeded as sole King 9. An. Do. 664. W^ Mal^s.
in the Province of the East Saxons, and with much equity and administration
of Justice reigned therein thirty years: toward the end whereof, the better ^.
to prepare his mind for contemplation, he relinquished his Princely Robes, and
put on the Habit of Religious Profession in the Monastery of S. (...) in
London; as Radulphus de Diceto, with others at tirme. Rad. de Diceto.
Wherein this penitent King living a while in fasting and prayers, died the
year of Christ 693. whose body His latter end. His death.
was intombed in a Coffin of Gray Marble, the Cover copped, and as yet standing
in the North wall of the Sebba his Coffi^ (...) (...).
Chancell of the same Church.

A miracle thereof Beda reports, needless either Beda bid. Angl. lib. 4.
cap. 11. A miracle.
then to be wrought, or now of us repeated, were it not to point at the
blindness wherein even good men were then led; and thus it is: They having
prepared a Tombe-stone, to lay his body in, found it too short by the quantity
of an hands breadth, and hewing it longer, yet would not serve: therefore they
minding to bow up the knees, laid the body therein, and suddenly it lengthned
of it self with more then was sufficient. But surely howsoever this tomb was
then set on this Monkish tenter, it is now since shrunk again in the
standing, and exceeds not in measure five foot in length. His wife (but
unnamed) he likewise His Wife.
instigated to leave the momentanie pleasures of An. 1^o. 694.
princely State, for that which is permanent: which thing with much ado he
lastly obtained, leaving her to follow him in his virtuous devotions, and his
two sons to succeed him in his kingdom.

SIgherd, the Son of King Sebba, whom Beda makes a Monk with his Father,
followed him also in the succession of the East Saxons Kingdom; the time of
whose entrance is set in the year of Christ's Incarnation 694. and his death in
701. no other mention being made either of Acts, Wife, or Issue.

SEofrid, the Son of King Sebba, and Brother to King Sigheard, either jointly
reigned with him, or 11. Seof^d the son of King Sebba.
successively after him, of whom I find nothing mentioned worthy inserting,
having had neither Wife nor issue that are recorded.

OFfa, the Son of Sighere, and of Queen Oswith 12. An Do. 701. Rich Ci^st.
Beda hist. eccles. Angl. lib. (...). c. 20. His latter end. His Wife.
his Wife, a man noted for his comely feature and sweet countenance, succeeded
King Seofrid in the Kingdom of the East Saxons, the year of grace 701. He
both enlarged with buildings, and enriched with lands the goodly and beautiful
Church of Westminster, but after he had ruled eight years, being moved with a
supposed religious devotion, he abandoned Kineswith his wife (the daughter of
Penda the Mercian King) his lands, kin, and Country, and with Kenred King of
Mercia, and Edwine Bishop of Worcester, went to Rome, where he was shorn a
Monk, and in that habit died, leaving his Cosen Selred to succeed in his
kingdom. His wife Kineswith after his departure, (with the like penancie)
vowed her self a veiled Nun in the Abbey of Kineburg, whereof his sister was
Abbess, who had been wife to Alfrith King of Northumberland.

SElred, the Son of Sigebert the Good, who was murdered for his overmuch
clemency, attained to the 13. An. Do. 709. (...). Selred the son of Sigebert
the Good.
Kingdom of the East Saxons, in the year of grace 709. His reign was long,
though his acts are little spoken of, either that others worther affairs
filled the pens of those Story-writers, or that his time was so peaceable and
vnactiuely spent, that it ministered not matter whereof to indite. He reigned
38. His reign and death. He^. Hunting.
years, and died Anno 746. without relation either of Wife or Children.

SVthred, after the slaughter of Selred, was made 14. An. Do. 747. Suthred King
of the East Saxons.
King of the East Saxons, which title he retained, until that Egbert King of
the West Saxons, taking Arms against him, expulsed him out of that Kingdom;
as also the same year he did Baldred, King of Kent, which was in the year of
Christ's Incarnation 827. and made it a Province annexed unto the West Saxons,
West Saxons stood a Kingdom 281. years.
after it had stood in state of a Kingdom 281. years.

THE KINGDOM OF NORTHVMBERLAND, CIRCVIT AND CONTINVANCE, WITH THE SVCCESSIONS
AND ISSVES OF THOSE KINGS, UNTO THE LAST SVBVERSION THEREOF BY KING EGBERT.
CHAPTER IX.


THis Kingdom of Northumberland consisted at Northumberland how divided at
first.
first of two distinct Provinces; whereof the one was called Deira, and the
other Bernicia, and were governed sometimes by their Kings severally, and
sometimes under one, as success of war, or other casualties incident did
afford. The royal descents of whose Kings are brought by Florentius both from
the Fourth and Fifth Sons of Prince Woden, after this manner. Ella, under
whom the Kingdom of Deira Florent. Wig^rn. The pedigree of these Kings.
began, was the son of Iffi, who was the son of Wuskfrea, the son of
Wilgils, the son of Westorwalchna, the son of Seomel, the son of Suearta,
the son of Saepugell, the son of Seabald, the son of Siggeot, the son
of Suebdeg, the son of Siggar, the son of Weadeg, the fourth son of
Woden. And the descent of Ida, the raiser of the Bernicians kingdom, is
brought from Bealdeag the fifth son of Woden; for Bealdeag was father to
Brand, whose sons were Beorn and Freodegar, the latter of which twain was
the progenitour of Cherdik the first West Saxon King: and his brother Beorn
begat another Beorn also, and he Wegbrand the father of Ingebrand, whose son
was Alusa, the father of Angengeal, and this man's son Ingengeat, the father
of Aethelbright, whose son Oesa begat Eoppa the father of this Ida, the first
King of Bernicia.

These Saxon Captains Ella and Ida, about sixty years after the death of
King Hengist, changed the The time when this Province became a Kingdom. W^.
Malmsb.
title of this Province from a Dukedom to a Kingdom. For Hengist having given
the possession of those North parts unto Otho his Brother, and to Ebusain his
son, their Successors held it, with many hostile irruptions the space of 99.
years. But now the Britains subjected, and no resistance made, those
Captains divide the Province into two parts, intituling either by the name of
a Kingdom; the first Deira, This Province divided into two Kingdoms.
was possessed by Ella, which stretched from Tyne, to the River Humber; and the
second Bernicia, enjoyed by Ida, whose Continent lay betwixt the Tyne and Deira
and Bernicia.
the Frith of Edenborough. These together contained the Counties of
Westmerland, Cumberland, Northumberland, Yorkshire, Lancaster, and Durham, and
was bounded on the West with the Irish Seas, on the North with the Wall of
Scuerus, on the East with the German Ocean, and on the South with the Rivers
Mersey and Humber. Ida, says Malmsbury, reigned fourteen years: and Ella by
Matthew of Westminster, is said to succeed him for thirty years. The issue Ida
his reign. Malmsbury. Ella his reign. Ida his issue legitimate and
illegitimate.
of Ida legitimate, as Huntington records, were Adda, Bealrik, Thedrik,
Ethelrik, Osmer, and Thedred; illegitimate, Oga, Ecca, Oswald, Ailrik, Sogoe,
and Sogother. These (says Matthew of Westminster) arrived at Flemisburke with
forty Ships, and assisted their Father in many They arrive at Flemisburke with
forty ships. Ella his issue.
of his enterprises. The issue of Ella, by Florentius his record, were Acca,
Wife of Ethelfrid, King of Bernicia, and mother to the most Christian Oswald,
Monarch of the Englishmen, and Edwine the Monarch and first Christian King of
Northumberland. Ida is said to begin his reign Anno 547. And Ella in the
year 559. No other particulars ascribed unto either, besides Bamburge Castle
built by Ida and Ella.
the building of Bamburge Castle.

With Ella reigned the two sons of Ida, namely Adda and Thedrik, with three
others, Elappea, Theodwald, and Frethulfe, sprung from Eoppae the father of
Ida, all five his substitutes over the Bernicians: but because there is no
other mention of them besides their names and reigns, I will leave as I find
them, and proceed to the more worthy of recital.

2. Adda reigned 7. years King of Bernicia. 3. Elappea reigned 5. years 4.
Theodwald reigned 1. year 5. Frethulfe reigned 7. years 6. Theodrik reigned
7. years

EThelrik the son of King Ida, having outrun his youth in pernicious
obscurity, attained in his old 6. An. Do. 589. Ethelriks youth obscurely spent.
years to the government of both the Provinces, and whole Kingdom of
Northumberland, wherein his time was so spent (says Malmesbury) that had not
his son in the glass of his own worths showed the face of his fathers
remembrance, his acts and reign might easily have been forgotten. His issue
were Ethelfrid that succeeded him, and Theobald slain in Battle against Beda
hist. l. 1. c. 33. His reign and death.
the Scots. He reigned five years, and died, An. 593.

EThelfrid, a man very valiant, and thirsty for renown, succeeded his father
in the Northumbrians Kingdom. Him Beda compares to King Saul in Israel, 7. An.
Do. 593. Beda hist. eccles. Angl. lib. 1 cap. 33. Ethelfrid very thirsty of
fame.
excepting only in the knowledge of Gods true Religion: to whom (says he)
might be applied the saying of Jacob touching Benjamin, that like a ravening
Woolfe he devoured his prey in the morning, and divided the spoil thereof in
the evening. For he made greater Conquests over. the daily afflicted Britains,
A greater Conqueror then all the rest.
then all the Kings of the Angles had done; and peopling their possessions with
his Saxons, held the right owners under subjection and tribute. This his
prosperity, Or, Ed^. Marianus. Ed^den enuieth Ethelfrid.
Ed^aden King of the Scots greatly envied, and attempting to croppe it, and to
plant himself upon the root of like honor, he assembled a great and strong
Army against him, and at the place called Degsiston struck Battle with him,
wherein notwithstanding Edanade^ overthrown.
he was overthrown, and his Scots discomfited, yet with such loss to King
Ethelfrid, that Theobald his brother, with the part of the Army whereof he was
Theobald slain.
General, were all vanquished and destroyed. This battle went so sore against
the Scottish Britains, that (says Beda) no King of that Nation durst attempt
to meet the English in the Field for a long time after. And the fortune of the
day did so much augment both his fame, and also his haughty spirit, that
presently he reenforced Ethelfred proud of his victory.
his power against the Britains, that were at West chester.
Cairlegion, where of them he made a most lamentable slaughter, and that not
only of the Soldiers prepared for fight, but also of those religious and
harmless Monks, there assembled for prayer.

These Monks were of the Monastery of Bangor in North Wales, famous for
antiquity, form of discipline The description of Bangor Monastery.
and spacious circuit. It was situated in the fruitful valley now called the
English Mailor; and upon the Banckes of the River Dee, where it extended it
self as in the circuit of a walled City, containing within it the quantity
of a mile and a half of ground: two of whose Gates may at this day easily be
discerned, the one of them called Port Hogen, lying by North; and the other
Port Clais, situate on the South; the River Dee having now changed his
Channel, runs through the midst betwixt both the Gates, which stand
asunder five hundred paces. This Monastery, says Clariualentius, was the
Mother of all others in the World; who in memory of the * Seven Churches
Bernardus Clariualentius. Bangor Monastery the first in the world. Beda hist.
eccles. Angl. lib 2 cap. 2. Her Monks divided into seven portions. Lived by
the labor of their hands. Their prayer and fasting. Ethelfrid enquireth the
cause of their praying.
of Asia, did distribute into seven portions their Monks, every one numbering
three hundred souls, and all of them (as Beda says) living by the labor of
their own hands. Many of these assembling at Cair-legion, to assist their
Brethren Britains with their supplications unto God against this Ethelfrid,
surnamed the Wild, and his fierce Soldiers the Infidel Saxons; with three
days fasts spent their time in continual prayers. But King Ethelfrid
beholding their manner, demanded the cause; and understanding that they called
for assistance of their God against him and his Army, set first upon their
Guarder Brockmal, a man of Arms, who to save his own life, left all theirs to
the sword, wherein perished one thousand and two hundred Christian He slaieth a
great number.
Monks, besides the discomfiture of the Britains Host. Many of these were
interred in their own Monasteries, whose bodies, says Leyland, have been
found in the memory of man, in the rotten weeds wherein they were slain. But
as his fame increased daily abroad, so were his fears augmented continually
Ethelfrid in fear of Edwine.
at home. For Edwine the son of Ella, and third King of Deira, a gallant
young Prince, and newly seated in his Fathers Kingdom, wrought many suspicions
in Ethelfrids head; and though he was brother to his Wife Acca, yet the
neerenesse of that alliance, no whit diminished his jealous conceits, whom
therefore by privy conspiracies and apparent pursuits he so daily molested,
that he was forced to save his life by avoiding the Country, and tossed in
exile from place Edwine forced into exile.
to place, was lastly received and succored by Redwald, King of the
East Angles, who in his quarrel forthwith Succored by Redwald.
assembled his forces, and meeting Ethelfrid in the field, slew him near the
River Idle, after he had reigned twenty three years, in the year of Christ
Henry Hunt. Ethelfrid slain. His reign. Florentius. His issue. Job. Capgraue.
his Incarnation 617. He had issue by his Wife Acca, (the daughter of Ella)
Eanfrith King of Bernicia, Oslafe, and Oswald King of Northumberland, Oslake,
and Offa, with two Daughters canonized for Saints, Oswith and Ebba the Nun;
as also by his Concubine, Oswy, the tenth Monarch of the Englishmen.

EDwine thus raised by the help of King Redwald, 8. An Do. 617. Beda hist.
Eccles. Ang. lib. (...). cap. 12. The story of Edwines banishment.
returned to his Country, and was of the Inhabitants made King of
Northumberland, and afterward Monarch of the Englishmen; as in their succession
shall be declared. Beda (somewhat too much addicted to fabulous miracles) of
him reports this story: That whilst he lay banished in King Redwalds
Court, Ethelfrid instigated his receiver, by promises to take away his life; or
if he refused, threatened him wars: His life in danger.
for fear whereof, Redwald, partly inclining to this wicked purpose, revealed
the same to the Queen his wife; which a friend of Edwins hearing, told him of
his danger, and wished him to fly. Edwine thus perplexed, with troubled
thoughts in the dead of the night, Edwine in doubt what to do.
sat solitary under a tree in dumps, musing what was best to be done; to
suspect and fly from Redwald, that had honored him so much, he held it a
wrong; and to think himself safe in other Provinces against so powerful
pursuers, he thought it was vain. Thus distracted in casting what way might be
safest, suddenly One unknown came to him. demanding the cause of his sorrow.
approached a man unto him, utterly unknown, who after salutation, demanded the
cause why he sat at so unseasonable a time, in so uncouth a place, and
pensive manner? Edwine thinking him to be his Edwine his an^rrer.
deaths-man, resolutely answered; It nothing concerned him at all, either to
ask, or to know his estate. Oh Edwine (said he) think not but that I know thy
The man shows him his grief untold him.
sorrow, and the cause of thy sitting thus upon that stone; thy death is
pretended, and even at hand: but what would thou give to rid thee of that
danger, and to make King Redwald thy assured preserver? Any thing, quoth
Edwine, which is in my power. But what shall be his reward (said the other)
that shall set He demands what he would give to be eased.
thee upon the throne of thy Kingdom, and that with such glory, as none of thy
Progenitors ever attained unto? I would be thankful to that man, said Edwine,
in all things, and at all times, as reason required, Edwine his answer.
and of right I ought. But tell me Edwine, said he, what if the same man show
thee a more safe way to He promises to show him how to save his soul.
preserve the life of thy soul, then either thou at this present know, or
any of thy Parents ever heard of; will thou consent and embrace his counsel?
Yea, said Edwine, God forbid that I should not be ruled by him, that thus
should free me from this present danger, set me upon the throne of a Kingdom,
and after these great favors, should also teach me the way to an eternal
life. Upon this answer, laying his right hand on Edwines head, he said unto
him; When these things shall in order come to pass, then call to mind this
time, and what thou have promised, and so vanished He suddenly vanishes away.
from his presence. The young Prince thus left betwixt hope and despair, his
friend that had forewarned him of his death, came hastily to him with a Edwines
friend brings him good news.
more cheerful countenance, Come in Edwine (quoth he) and surcease thy cares,
for the Queen has not only changed Redwalds mind to save thy life, but he
also has granted to maintain thy right against Ethelfrid thine enemy. Which
shortly he did, and slew him, as we have said.

Edwine thus placed upon the Princely Throne, his first Wife Queenburg being
dead in his exile, received His wife a chaste Christian Lady.
in marriage Ethelburga, surnamed Tace, (a fit name for a woman) the Daughter
of King Ethelbert, and Sister to Edbald King of Kent, a most chaste and
virtuous Christian Lady, whose teacher was Paulinus, and both of them Gods
instruments for the Conversion of the Northumbrians to the imbracement of
Christian Religion. But because we shall have occasion to speak of this Edwine
as he was Monarch of the Englishmen, we will reserve his Acts, Issues, and
Reign, to be further related in the course of his Succession. He was slain
in battle against Cadwall King of the Britains and Penda King of the
Mercians, when he had prosperously His death.
reigned seventeen years, the twelfth of October, Anno 633. and was buried in
Saint Peter's His reign.
Church at Streanshall, after called Whitby. Upon whose His place of burial.
death, the Kingdom of Northumberland was again divided.

OSricke the Son of Alfrid (Edwines Uncle) succeeding 9. An. Do. 633. Osrike
King of Deria.
in the Province of Deira, and Fanfrith the Son of Ethelfrid the Wild, in
the Province of the Bernicians; these, with the rest of Ethelfrids Children,
for the continuance of Edwins Reign, had Eanfrith King of the Bernicians.
in banishment been preserved among the Scots and Red-shanks, and there had
received the Sacrament of Baptism: but after the death of their Enemy, these
Princes returned to their own Country, and former superstitions, renouncing
again the profession of They renounce the profession of Christ. Beda bist.
ce^les. Angl. lib 3 cap. 1. Cadwald Gods instrument to punish them.
Christ. Yet this their Apostasy (says Beda) remained not long unpunished:
For Cadwallader King of the Britains, with wicked force, but with worthy
vengeance, slew them both the next Summer ensuing. Osrike unprepared, and his
whole Army penned in the Suburbs of their own City, he miserably slew; and
possessing the Province of the Northumbrians, not as a King or Conqueror, but
rather like an outrageous Tyrant, destroyed and rent in tragical manner, all
things before him. Eanfrith unadvisedly with twelve chosen persons coming to
Cadwall.
Cadwallader to entreat upon peace, were cruelly put to death. This year
(says he) continues unhappy and hateful even unto this day, as well for the
Apostasy of these English Kings, as also for the Britain Kings furious
tyranny. Wherefore the Historiographers The British Kings tyranny.
of that time have thought it best, that the memory of these Apostate Kings
being utterly forgotten, the selfsame year should be assigned to the Reign
of the next following King, Oswald, a man dearly beloved of God.

OSwald, the son of Wild Ethelfrid, and brother to King Eanfrith, began his
reign over the Northumbrians 9. An. Do. 634. Oswald.
Anno 634. having first embraced Christianity, and received; Baptism in
Scotland, wherein he was secured all the reign of King Edwin, and had withal
learned some experience in war. He coming unlooked for with a small Army,
but fensed (says Beda) with the Faith of Christ, obtained against Cedwald King
of the Britains a great victory: the His conquest of the Britains.
manner whereof, with his other acts achieved, we will further declare in his
succession among the Monarkes Oswald the ninth from Hengist.
of the Englishmen, whereof he was the ninth from Hengist.

He sent for Aidan, a Scottish Divine, to teach his people the Doctrine of
Christ, enlarged his Kingdom, Hector B^t. His care of his people for religion.
His death.
and reconciled the Deirians and Bernicians, who were at mortal enmity. He
was slain, and cruelly rent in pieces by the unmerciful Pagan Penda the
Mercian, at Oswaldstree in Shrop-shire, quinto Augusti, the year of our Lord
642. when he had reigned nine years, Reign.
and was buried at Bradney in Lincolne-shire. His wife Burial. Wife.
was Kineburg, the daughter of Kingils King of the West Saxons; and his son
Ethelwald, young at his death, Issue.
and therefore defeated of his Kingdom by Oswy his Uncle, the Natural Son
of King Ethelfrid the Wild. Notwithstanding when Oswin King of Deira was
murdered by this Oswy of Bernitia, and he not past sixteen years of age,
entered by force upon Deira, and kept the same Province by strong hand so long
as he lived; and dying, left it to his cosen Alkfrid, the Natural Son of
the said King Oswy.

OSwy the illegitimate son of Ethelfrid the Wild, at thirty years of age
succeeded King Oswald his 10. An. Do. 643. Oswy the illegitimate of Ethelfrid.
brother in the Kingdom of the Bernicians; at whose entrance, Oswyne the son
of Osrik, that had denied the Faith, and was slain of King Cedwall, reigned in
Deira. This Oswyne was slain by King Oswye: after Beda bist. Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 1.
whose death, seizing all Northumberland, he spread his terror further into
other parts, and was the tenth The tenth Monarch of the Englishmen.
Monarch of the Englishmen, as in his succession we will further speak: His
wife was Eanfled, daughter to Edwine King of Northumberland, by whom he had
many His wife. Issue. Death. Beda lib. (...). ca. 5.
children. His reign was 28. years, and death the fifteenth day of February,
in the year of grace 670. and of his age 58.

EGfrid, the eldest son of King Oswy by Queen Eanfled, had been Hostage in
the Kingdom of 11. An. Do. 671. Beda bist. lib. 3. cap 24. Egfrid.
Mercia, and after his father was made King of Northumberland, in the year of
Christ 671. He warred, but with great loss, against Edilred King of Mercia,
near unto the River of Trent, wherein his younger brother Elswyne was
unfortunately slain, to the great grief of both the Kings, the one being his
own brother, Beda bist. l. 4. c. 21.
and the other his brother in law by marriage: whereupon a peace and
reconciliation was made. But Egfred being by nature of a disquiet disposition,
invaded the Irish, and destroyed those harmless and silly people, which (as
Beda says) had been great friends to the English. Their resistance consisted
chiefly in curses Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 26.
and imprecations for revenge, which though they could not open heaven, yet
(says he) it is to be believed, that for their cause he was cut off the next
year ensuing by the Picts or Red-shankes, against whom he prepared, contrary
to the advice of his Counsel, and by them was slain among the strait and
waste mountains, 20. Maij the year of man's felicity 685. and of his age
forty, His death.
after he had reigned fifteen years. His wife was Reign.
Etheldred the daughter of Anna King of the East Angles: Wife, who was both a
Widow and a Virgin.
she was both Widow and Virgin; first married to Tonbert a Noble man that ruled
the Giruij, a people inhabiting the Fenny Countries of Norfolk, Lincoln, Beda
bist. l. 4. c. 19.
Huntington, and Cambridge-shires; and after him also in virginity continued
twelve years with her husband King Egfrid, contrary to his mind, and the
Apostles precept, that forbids such defrauding either in man or woman,
except it be with consent for a time, and to 1. Cor. 7. 5.
the preparation of prayer; affirming elsewhere, that Marriage is honorable, and
the bed thereof undefiled, wherein Heb. 13. 4.
the woman does redeem her transgression, through faith, love, holiness, and
modesty, by beating of 1. Tim. 2. 15.
children. This notwithstanding, she obtained license to depart his Court, and
got her to Coldingham Abbey, where she was professed a Nun under Ebba the
daughter of King Ethelfrid. Then went she to Ely, and new built a Monastery,
whereof she was made Abbess, and wherein with great reverence she was
intombed: whose virtues and remembrance remained to posterities by the name of
S. Andrie, she being canonized among the Catalogue of English Saints. Canonized
for a Saint.


ALkfryd, the illegitimate son of King Oswy, in the 12. An. Do. 686. Alkfrid.
reign of his halfe-brother King Egfrid, whether willingly, or by violence
constrained, lived like a banished man in Ireland, where applying himself to
study, he became an excellent Philosopher, and (as Matthew. Westminst. A great
Philosopher.
Beda says) was very conversant and learned in the Holy Scriptures, and
therefore was made King over the Northumbrians: where with great wisdom,
though Beda 4. 26.
not with so large bounds as others had enioied, he worthily did recover the
decayed estate of that Province, ruling the same twenty years and odd
months, and departed this life, Anno 705. His Wife His reign. Wife. Issue.
Beda bist. l. 3. c. 21.
was Kenburg, the daughter of Penda King of the Mercians, and by her he had
issue only one son, that succeeded him in his Kingdom.

OSred, a child of eight years in age, for the hopes conceived from the
virtues of his father, was 13. An. Do. 705. Osred. Beda hist. l. 5. c. 19.
Will. Malmes.
made King over the Northumbrians; whose steps he no ways trod in, but rather
in filthy abuse of his person and place, wallowed in all voluptuous pleasures
and sensual delight, violating the bodies of veiled Nuns, and other
religious holy women: wherein His wickedness.
when he had spent eleven years more to his age, his kinsmen Kenred and Osrick
conspired against him, and in battle by his slaughter made an end of his
impious Reign.
life. His wife was Cuthburga, the sister of Inas King of the West Saxons, as
by the time may be gathered, Wife, who became a Nun.
from the computation of Marianus, and the Annals of the English-Saxons; who
upon a loathing weariness Marianus scotus.
of wedlock, sued out a divorce from her husband, and built a Nunnery at
Winburne in Dorset-shire, where in a religious habit she ended her life, and
he by Kenred and Osricke, leaving his Kingdom to them that wrought his death.

KEnred, the son of Cuthwyne, whose father was Leolwald the son of Egwald,
and his father 14. An. Do. 716. Kenred.
Adelm, the son of Oga, the natural son of Ida, the first King of Deira,
after the death of Osred reigned two years, no other remembrance left of him,
besides His reign.
the murder of his Sovereign Lord and King.

OSrick, after the death of Kenred, obtained the Kingdom of Northumberland,
and reigned therein 15. An. Do. 718. Osrick. His reign.
the space of eleven years, leaving to the world his name stained with blood
in the murder of young Osred, no other mention of parentage, wife, or issue of
him remaining; for want whereof, he adopted Ceolnulph, His adopted son. His
death.
brother to his predecessor Kenred, and died unlamented the year of Grace
seven hundred twenty nine.

CEolnulph, the brother of Kenred, after the death of King Osrike, was made
King of the Northumbrians; 16. An. Do. 729. Ceolnulph.
which Province he governed with great peace and victory the space of eight
years: but then forsaking the Royal Estate and Robes of Majesty, put on the
His reign.
habit of a Monk in the I Will of Lindesferne or Holy Island. A Monk.
These were the days (says Beda) wherein the acceptable time of peace and
quietness was embraced among the Gladsome times.
Northumbrians, who now laid their armor aside, and applied themselves to the
reading of holy Scriptures, more desirous to be professed in religious houses,
then to exercise feats of war, or of Arms. For not only Priests and Lay men
vowed and performed Pilgrimages to Rome, but Kings, Queens and Bishops also
did the like: so great Matthew. West.
(so blind I might say) a devotion was in their hearts, and so holy a
reverence held they of the place. Unto this King Ceolnulph, the said Venerable
Beda (a Priest in Bedaes book to K. Ceolnulph.
the Monastery of Peter and Paul at Werimouth near unto Durham) a great
Clerk, and Writer of the English History, dedicated the same his Work, which
he continued till the year seven hundred thirty one, and from the first
entrance of the Saxons, containing 285. years, according to his own account.

EGbert, the son of Eata, who was brother to King Kenred, succeeded his uncle
Ceolnulph in the Kingdom 17. An. Do. 738. Egbert.
of Northumberland, and ruled the same with the like peace and piety, the time
of twenty years; and then following his example, also forsook the world, His
reign.
and shore himself a Monk, as diverse other Kings in those days had done,
whereof Simon Dunelmensis writes, Simon Dunelm.
and notes their number to be eight: as Inas King of the West Saxons,
Ethelred and Kenred Kings of Diverse Kings that became Monks.
Mercia, Sigebert King of the East Angles, Sebbi and Off a Kings of the
East Saxons, and Ceolnulph and this Egbert Kings of the Northumbrians. These
forsaking the world (as they took it) left the Charge that God upon them had
imposed, whose authority in earth they swaied, and wherein they might much
more have advanced Gods glory and Christ's Gospel, then for a more easy and
private life, not warranted by his word, but rather disliked, and perhaps
foreshewed Will. Malmes.
by those heavenly creatures the Sun and Moon, Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
which in those days were fearfully darkened, and for a time seemed to have
lost their light: for Anno 733. 18. Calend. September. the Sun suffered so great
an Eclipse, that the earth seemed to be ouer-shadowed as with sackcloth. And
Anno 756. 8. Calend. December. the Moon being in her full, appeared both dark
and bloody; for a Star (though there be none lower then the Moon) seemed to
follow her, and to deprive her of light: but passing before her, she again
recovered her former brightness. This King Egbert had a brother that bore the
same name, and was installed Archbishop of York, where he erected a
beautiful Library (a work well befitting a Noble Prelate) and plentifully
stored it with an infinite number of learned books. His son was Oswulph,
that succeeded in the Kingdom. His issue.


OSwulph, when his father Egbert had put off the Robes of Majesty, and clad
himself with a 18. An. Do. 758. Oswulph. Simon Dunelm. Hear. Hunt. His reign.
Death.
Monks Cowle, ascended the Throne of Northumberland, and sa^e therein only one
year: for before he had made attempt of any memorable act, he was
traitorously murdered by his own servants at Mikilwongton, the ninth Kalends of
August, leaving the Crown undisposed of until the Nones of the same month in
the next year.

EDitwald or Mollo was then made King of Northumberland, and with great
valiancie defended his 19. An. Do. 759. Editwald or Mollo. Will. Malmes. His
reign. His death.
Subjects. Some say, that at the end of six years he resigned his government;
yet others affirm his reign to be eleven years, and lastly that he was
slain by Alured his Successor.

ALured, the murderer of his Lord and Master, began his reign over the
kingdom of Northumberland, 20. An. Do. 765. Alured. Simon Duncl^.
the year of Christ's Incarnation seven hundred sixty five, and continued the
same with such dislikes, that he lastly was expelled out of the Province by
his own subjects, and enforced to abandon the same. He was the son of Ta^win,
the son of Bie^hom, the son Flor. ^igor.
of Bofae, the son of Ailrick, the natural son of Ida, the first King of
Bernicia. And the sons of this Alured were Osred, afterward King of
Northumberland, and His issue.
Alhnud, slain by the Danes, and canonized a Saint.

EThelred, the son of Mollo, was advanced to the 21. An. Do. 774. Erhelred.
Mat^b. West.
Regiment of Northumberland, and in the fifth year of his reign, was driven
out of the same by Edelbald and Herebert, two Dukes that warred against him;
who having discomfited and slain his General and soldiers in a fierce
battle, so weakened the hopes of King Ethelred, that he fled his Country, and
left the Kingdom in a miserable estate, through the dissensions of those
ambitious Princes.

ALfwald the brother of the foresaid King Alered aspiring to the Sovereignty of
the Northumbrians, 22. An. Do. 778. Alfwald.
ruled the same in great Justice, to his worthy commendations: notwithstanding
the wickedness of his people was such, that without all guilt he was
traitorously murdered by the conspiracy of Siga, 23. Sept. His death.
the year of Christ's Incarnation, seven hundred eighty eight, after he had
reigned eleven years, and his His reign;
body buried at Hexhaem. His sons were Alfus and Alfwin, both slain by King
Ethelred. His issue.


OSred the son of King Alured, took upon him 23. An. Do. 789. Osred. His
reign.
the Rule of Northumberland, the year of grace seven hundred eighty nine, and
the same year finished his government thereof, being expelled by his subjects,
and deprived of all kingly authority.

EThelred the son of Mollo, revoked from exile An. Do. 794. Ethelred.
wherein he had lived the space of twelve years, was again restored to the
Crown; but he minding the injuries that his Lords had formerly done him, Will.
Malmesb. Ma^b. West^. He^y Hunt. Simon Dun.
sought the revenge by their deaths, as also to establish his Throne the surer,
slew Alfus and Alfwin, the sons of Alfwald, as we have said, the right heirs
to the Crown, and enticing Osred the former deposed King into his danger,
commanded him to be put to death at Cu^burge, the fourteenth of September, and
year of Christ seven hundred ninety two. And to strengthen himself the more
against all his opposites, the same year he married Lady Elfled, the second
Daughter to great Off a King of Mercia, forsaking his former Wife Randul.
Higden in Polyc^re.
without any just cause given on her part.

These things sat so near the hearts of his subjects, that after seven years
from his second establishment, they rebelliously rose in Arms, and at Cobre
miserably His reign.
slew him the eighteenth day of April, the year His death.
of Christ Jesus 794.

AFter whose death, the Northumbrians were sore molested with many intruders,
or rather Tyrants, 24.
that banded for the sovereignty the space of thirty years. The first whereof
was Oswald, that held the title Oswald King (...). days. The continuance of
this kingdom.
of King only twenty eight days, and then was forced to save his life by
flight unto the King of the Picts. Next, Ard^lfe a Duke, revoked from exile:
then Alfwold, E^red, Ethelred, Readulph, Osbert, and Elle, slain by the Danes
in York at a place, from Elle his slaughter called to this day Elle-Crofte,
and the Kingdom yielded to the protection of Egbert King of the West Saxons,
who was now become Englands first absolute Monarch, (as holding all the rest of
the Kings no longer for his Associates, but his subjects) in the year nine
hundred twenty six, after it had stood in form of a Kingdom three hundred
seventy nine years, and was made a Province, and joined with the rest unto the
English Monarchy.

THE CIRCVIT AND SVCCESSORS OF THE MERCIAN KINGDOM, UNTIL IT WAS SVBIECTED TO
THE WEST SAXONS. CHAPTER X.


THis Kingdom of Mercia contained more Counties, Mercia.
and the skirts of that royal Tent were spread with a wider compass then any
of the rest in the Saxons Heptarchie: for in the midst of the Island The
limits of it.
this Kingdom was seated, and from the verge of Northumberland touched some
part of Middlesex, which was the possession of the East Saxons: the North
thereof was bounded with Humber and Mersey; the East was enclosed with the
German Ocean; the West extended to Seuerne and Dee; and the South part nearly
touched the River of Thames; containing the Counties now known by these names,
of Cheshire, Darby-shire, Nottingham, Stafford, and Shrop-shire, Northampton,
Leicester, Lincoln, Huntington, and Rutland-shires; Warwick, Worcester,
Oxford, and Glocester-shires; Buckingham, Bedford, and part of Hertford-shire.
The first raiser of that Title and name of a Kingdom, was Crida, the son of
Kenwald, who was the son An. Do. 582. Crida.
of Cnebba, the son of Ichell, the son of Eomer, the son of Engengeate,
the son of Offa, the son of Weremund, the son of Withleg, the son of
Waga, Flor. Wigor.
the son of Wethelgeate, the third of the five sons of Prince Woden. This
man, without more fame of his further acts, is said to have reigned the space
of His reign.
ten years, and to have died Anno 594. His issue was Wibba that succeeded him
in his Kingdom, and a His issue
daughter named Quenburge, matched in marriage with Edwin afterward King of
Northumberland, with whom she lived in the Court of King Redwald in the time of
his troubles, and died before him in that his banishment. She bore him two
sons, Osfrid and Edfride, as in the succession of Edwins Monarchy shall be
showed: notwithstanding Beda reports this Quenburge to be daughter of Ceorle
the third King of Mercia, and grandchild to this first Crida.

VVIbba, the son of King Crida, not only held what his Father had gotten,
but also enlarged 2. An. Do. 593. Wibba. Mat^b. West. His issue.
his dominions by intrusion upon the weak Britains. His issue was Penda,
Kenwalk, and Eoppa, all three Progenitors of Kings afterward in that kingdom,
with a daughter named Sexburg, married to Kenwald, King of the West Saxons,
whom he without just cause divorced from him; for which cause great troubles
afterward ensued, as in the reigns of those Kings we Cap. 9. Sect. 7.
have said. He in great honor reigned twenty years, and giving place unto
nature, left his kingdom to be inioied by another. His reign. His death.


CEorl, not the son, but the Nephew of King Wibba, succeeded in the dominions
of the Mercians, about 3. An. Do. 614. Ceorl.
the year of grace six hundredth and fourteenth. He was son to Kinemund, the
brother of Wibba, the younger son of King Crida, who was the first King of
that kingdom. His reign is set to be ten years, without mention either of
Act or Issue. His reign.


PEnda, the son of Wibba, began his reign over the Mercians the year of
Christ's Incarnation six 4. An. Do. 626. Penda. His reign.
hundred twenty six, and continued the same the space of thirty years. He was
a man violent in action, and merciless in condition, cruel and unsatiate of
blood: he shook the Cities, and disturbed the borders of the Saxon-Kings, more
then any other in that Heptarchy before him had done. Against Kingils and
Quincheline, He^r. Hunt.
Kings together of the West Saxons, he joined battle near unto the City
Cirenchester, where both the Matthew. West^.
parties fought it out to the utmost, with the effusion of much Saxons blood:
but those coming to concord, he with Cadwallo King of the Britains, slew in
battle Edwine and O^wald, Kings of Northumberland, Sigebert, Egfrid, and Anna,
Kings of the East Angles, and forced Kenwald King of the West Saxons out of
Beda bist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 18.
his Country, in quarrel of his Sister. Of these his prosperities he became so
proud, that he thought nothing impossible for his atchieuement; and therefore
threatening the destruction of the Northumbers, prepared his Army for that
expedition. Oswy then reigning King of that Country, proffered great sums of
money, and most precious Jewels to purchase his peace: which being refused, and
the battle joined, more by the hand of God, then power of man, this Tyrant was
slain, and his whole Army discomfited. His death.
His Wife was Kinswith, and issue by her Peada, who after him was King: Vulfere
and Ethelred, both Monarchs Wife. Issue. Ingulphus.
of the English; Merkthel, a man famous for his great holiness, and Merwald
that governed some part of Mercia, whose Wife was Edburga, the foundresse of
Minster in Tanet, and daughter to Egbert King of Kent; by whom he had issue
Meresin, a man of noted devotion, Milbury, and Mildgith, both holy Virgins, and
Mildrith also Abbess of Tanet, all four canonized for Saints. The daughters
of King Penda, were Kineburg, the Wife of Alkfrid, King of Northumberland,
afterward a Votaresse in Kinesburg Abbey, and Kineswith, who married Offa King of
the East Angles, and became also a Nun with her sister Kineburgh.

PEada, the son of King Penda, in the days of his 5. An. Do. 656. Peada.
father, and with his permission, had governed the middle part of Mercia, and
after his death, by the gift of Oswy of Northumberland, all the South of that
kingdom from the River Trent, upon composition to marry his daughter, and to
embrace Christianity; which thing this Peada performed, and was the first Beda
hist. Angl. l. 3 c. 21.
Christian King of the Mercians. His Baptism received, to witness the first
fruits of his profession, he laid the foundation of a fair Church at
Medeshamsled, Hugo de Peterbor.
now called Peterborrow, but lived not to finish the same, for that he was
slain by the treason of Alkfled His wife. His death.
his wife in the celebration of Easter, (as Beda says) having had no issue by
her. But Robert de Swapham (an Beda hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 24.
Author of good antiquity, who saw the stones of that foundation to be so huge,
as that eight yoke of Oxen could hardly draw one of them) says, that Peada was
brought to his end by the practice of his Mother, and not of his Wife; as in
these his words is manifest. Peada (says he) laid the foundation of a
Monastery at Medeshamsted, in the Giruians or Fen-Country, which he could not
finish, for that by the wicked practice of his Mother, he was made away.
Whereby this blot is taken from this Christian Lady, and brands the face of her
that most deserves it. This King reigning as substitute to King Oswy of
Northumberland aforesaid, by some is not accounted for a Mercian King, his
regiment resting under the command of another.

VVlfhere, the Brother of murdered Peada, set up 6. An. Do. 659. Vulfhere.
by the Mercians against King Oswy, proved a Prince most valiant and
fortunate. For he expelled the Northumbrians Lieutenants forth of those
dominions; fought victoriously against Kenwald King of the West Saxons;
conquered the I Will of Wight, and attained to be sole Monarch of the Englishmen:
whereof more shall be said when we come to the times and successions of their
reigns.

This Vulfhere is said to reign in great honor for seventeen years, and his
body to be buried in the His reign.
Monastery of Peterborow, which he had founded. His Queen Ermenheld after his
death, became a Nun His wife.
at Ely, under her Mother Sexburg, and there died. His children were Kenred,
Vulfald, and Rufin, with a daughter, His issue.
named Wereburg, a Nun in the Monastery of Ely.

EThelred the third son of King Penda, in the nonage of young Kenred the son
of Vulfhere, (who 7. An. Do. 675. Ethelred. Simon Dunelm.
in his tender years rather desired a private life then any public authority
in the Commonweal) succeeded his brother both in the Kingdom of Mercia, and
Monarchy of the Englishmen. But when he had reigned thirty years, gave over
the Crown to his Nephew the said Kenred, and became a Monk in His reign.
the Monastery of Bradney in Lincolne-shire, where he died Anno 716. His Wife
was Osfryde, Daughter to Oswyn King of Northumberland: and issue, Chelred, that
His wife, His issue.
succeeded Kenred in the Mercian kingdom.

KEnred the son of Vulfhere, (his Uncle Ethelred changing his Princely Crown
for a Monks Coule) 8. An. Do. 704. Kenred.
began his Reign over the Mercians, and his Monarchy over the English, Anno
704. wherein he reigned the space of four years, and then with like devotion
of those times, addicted to an easy and quiet His reign.
Religion, abandoned both Crown and Country, Beda hist. Angl. lib. 5. ca. 20.
and went to Rome, where of Pope Constantine he received the tonsure and habit
of a Monk at the Apostles Tombs, and entering a Monastery, therein spent other
four years of his life to the day of his death, His death.
which was Anno 708. having had neither wife nor issue to revive his name, or
to rule his kingdom.

CHelred receiving the resignation of Kenred his Cosin-german 9. An. Do. 709.
Chelred.
when he went to Rome, and of sufficient years and discretion to have
succeeded Ethelred his Father, what time the said Kenred was ordained King,
reigned with great valor over the Mercians, and was likewise Monarch over the
Englishmen. His Monarch of the Englishmen.
peace was disquieted by Inas and his West Saxons, who for seven years
continuance invaded his kingdom. His Wife was Wereburge, says Marianus and
Florentius His wife.
the Monk, who ascribe to her a long life, and to die without Childten. This
Chelred reigned the space of eight years, and died the year of grace seven
hundred His reign.
and fifteenth: whose body was buried in the Cathedral Church of Lechfeild.
Death.


EThelbald, after the death of Chelred, was made King 1^. An. Do. ^10. (...).
of the Mercians, and Monarch of the English, the year of Christ's Incarnation
seven hundred sixteen. He was a Prince given to peace, but withal a most
lascivious Adulterer: insomuch that Boniface Archbishop of Mentz wrote his
Epistle unto him in reprehension of the same; which took such effect, that in
repentance of his foul facts, he founded the Monastery of Crowland, driving
in mighty Piles of Oak into that moorish ground, whereon he laid a great and
goodly building of stone. He was the son of A^wr, the elder son of Eoppa, the
second son of King Wibba, the brother of King Penda: and reigned forty His
reign.
two years, in the end whereof he was slain in a battle fought against
Cuthred King of the West Saxons, at Secondone, three miles from Tamworth, the
year of Christ, seven hundred fifty five, and was buried at Repton in
Darby-shire, having had neither Wife nor Children.

OFfa slaying Bernred the murderer of King Ethelbald, 11. An. Do. 758. Offa.
entered upon the government of the Mercians, and the Monarchy of the Saxons,
An. 758. He enlarged his dominion upon the Britains, overcame the Kentish in a
battle, put to flight the Northumbrians, and vanquished the West Saxons: the
East Angles also he seized upon, after he had murdered Ethelbert their King.
He reigned thirty nine years, and died at Ofley, the nine and twenty day of
July, the year of our Lord His reign.
seven hundred ninety four, and was buried without the Town of Bedford, in a
Chapel, now swallowed up by the River Owse. He was the son of Thingfryd, the
son of Eanulfe, whose Father Osmund was the son of Eoppa, the brother of
King Penda, and son of King Flor. Wigor.
Wibba, whose Father was Crida, the first King of the Mercians. His Wife was
Quendred, and children many; of whom, and of them we will further speak when
His wife. His issue.
we come to the time of his Monarchy.

EGfryde, the son of great Offa, was by him made King at his return from
Rome, being the only joy 12. An. Do. 796. Egfryde. Flacc^ (...).
of his parents, and heir apparent to the Saxons Monarchy, upon which he
entered the day after his fathers death, and lived himself but a hundred and
forty days after, deceasing the seventeenth of December, in the year of our
Lord God seven hundred ninety six, having had neither wife nor issue that we
read of, and his body honorably interred in the Church of the Monastery of
Saint Albanes, founded by Offa.

KEnwolfe, the cosen (a far off) to King Egfrid deceased, 13. An. Do. 797.
Kenwolfe.
and both of them removed in blood no less then six descents from Wibba the
second Mercian King, was the son of Cuthbert, (as the Monk of Worcester
deriues him) the son of Bassa, the son of Kenrowe, the son of Kentwin,
the son of Kenwalk, the son of Wibba aforesaid, and succeeded King Egfryd
in his Dominions. But of this Mercian Monarch more shall be written in the
succession and time of that his government. He reigned two and twenty His
reign.
years, and deceased the year of our Lord eight hundred and nineteen, and
his body interred in the Monastery of Winchcombe in the County of Gloucester,
being of his own foundation. His wife was Queen Elfryde, His wife.
the daughter (as some suppose) of Offa, who had been betrothed to Ethelbert
King of the East Angles, slain by her father; by whom he had issue, Kenelm,
Quendred, and Burgemhild, of whom more follows. His issue.


KEnelm, the son of King Kenwolfe, a child of seven 14. An. Do. 819. Kenelm.
years old, succeeded in the Kingdom of Mercia, but not in the Monarchy, as
his fathers had done, Egbert the West Saxon at that time being grown great in
his fortunes. This young King Kenelm reigned only five months, and then by the
ambitious desire of His reign.
Quendrid his sister, who seeking the government by Roger Higden.
the shedding of his guiltless blood, instigated one Askbert his Instructor,
by promises of great preferments and rich rewards, to make him away, who only
stood (as she thought) in her way to the Crown. This His death.
wicked practice was forth with as impiously performed: for having him forth
under pretense of hunting, he slew the innocent King, whose virtuous
inclination promised great hopes, and whose harmless years had not attained
to any worldly guile. His body he secretly buried under a bush, and (if we
will believe the Golden Legend, where his life is described) Legend... (...).
sol. 175.
was thus found out: A white Dove (which belike had seen the deed done) and
had got it engrossed in a scrole of parchment, posted therewith to S. Peter in
Rome, and upon the High Altar laid it to be read, where in the Saxon
characters thus it was found: In Clenc kon ba^ Kenelme Kinba^ne lie^ (...):
that is, At Clenc in a Cow pasture Kenelme the Kings child lies beheaded
under a thorn. But most true it is, that an obscure sepulcher the body had at
the first, and howsoever found out, was afterward with great honor and
ceremony translated to the Monastery of Winchcombe, which his father had
founded. The murderesse Quendrid, for grief and shame of so wicked an act,
ended her life, without the attaining of her ambitious desire, and has left
her name indeleblie stained with his innocent blood.

CEolwulfe, the brother of Kenwolfe, and uncle to this murdered young King, as
his nearest in blood 15. An. Do. 820. Ceolwulfe. Matthew. Westminst.
was elected their Governor by the Mercians: but his glory was not great, nor
his reign long, being still disquieted by Bernulfe, that sought his Crown;
and after one years Regiment was expulsed by his people, His reign.
and left the same to his pursuer, abandoning the Country for the safety of
his life. One daughter he had, named Elfled, who was the wife of Wigmund, the
son of Withlafe, the substitute King of Mercia, and His issue.
himself the last that held the Mercian Kingdom in a lineall succession.

BErnulfe obtaining what he so long desired, made 16. An. Do. 821. Bernulfe.
Simon Dunelm. Will. Malmes.
himself King when Ceolwulfe was gone, and was the more approved for his
valor in Arms, and the less resisted for his ancient descent, being sprung
from Osher, a man reputed to be of the Mercian royal blood. But Bernulfe
perceiving the fortunes of Egbert, accounted those his happy successes to be
his own shame, and by defiance challenged the West Saxons to the field: which
Egbert accepted, and upon Ellendon joined Battle with the Mercians, which was
fought to the much loss of both their bloods. Notwithstanding at last the
West Saxons prevailed, Bernulfe being forced to fly with shame. The
East Angles that then had yielded to Egbert, and but lately before had felt the
fury of Bernulfe, thought the time fit to repay him again, and therefore in
warlike manner assaulted his Territories, where he, in defending his Country
against His death. His reign. Henr. Hunt.
their attempts, was in a skirmish slain, after he had reigned not fully three
years.

LVdecan then was chosen King of the Mercians, whose blood was not down since
their last loss, 17. An. Do. 824. Ludecan.
neither revenge forgotten against the East Angles; and therefore the year
following made strength (sufficient to their seeming) to meet these their
enemies. But the State of Heptarchie now drawn to the period, and the
supporters thereof weakened by their own divisions, the Island declined to a
present alteration, and gave place to a more absolute kind of Monarchy, that in
Egbert the West Saxon was now begun; who aiding the East Angles against the
Mercians, Ludecan their King fought with no better success then Bernulf before
him had done; whose reign lasted not fully 2. His reign.
years, nor his memorial revived either in wife or issue.

VVIthlafe, the son of Oswald, the son of Osber, 1^. An. Do. ^26. Withlafe.
of the Mercian bloud-royall, intruding himself (as it seems) into the
government of Mercia, was unexpectedly vanquished by Egbert the Monarch that
had assumed from Bernulfe that Kingdom before: him he made his Substitute and
Tributarie, who so continued to Egbert and his son the time of thirteen
years, leaving no other relation of his acts. His issue was Wigmund, the
husband of Lady His issue. Job. Capgraue.
Elfled, the daughter of Ceolwulfe King of Mercia, the parents of Wystan the
Martyr, and of Lady Edburg, married to one Etheland an Earl in the Province of
Lincoln.

BErthulf upon the like composition of Tribute, 19. An. Do. 839. Berthulf.
Will. Malmesb. Berefred the causer of S. Wystans martyrdom.
and in the like terms of subjection to the West Saxons sovereignty, held the
kingdom of Mercia as a Substitute, and without any notable reports of his
Acts, so reigned the space of thirteen years. At this time the Sea-rouers out
of Denmarkc, that had often infested this Island with their many Invasions, got
the head so strong, and wing so far, even to the middle part thereof, (as
this of Mercia was) that they filled with terror the hearts of the Inhabitants,
and stained the soil with the blood of their sides, which in a most barbarous
cruelty daily they shed; whose rage was so great, and minds so insatiable,
that Berthulf was enforced to forsake the Country, and in a more private estate
to secure his own life. He had a son named Berefred, who was the causer of
Saint Wystans martyrdom.

BVrdred, the last Mercian King, was thereunto deputed 20. An. Do. 852. Matthew.
West. The Danes depart the Province. They return with 3. Kings.
by Ethelwolfe the West Saxon Monarch, as a shield of defense against the
raging Danes, that made desolations where they came. In continual imploiments
against them he spent his time, and that with such noble resolutions and
manhood, that Ethelwolfe held him worthy of his alliance, and made him his
son in law, by giving him Lady Ethelswith his daughter to Wife, the marriage
being solemnized at Chipnham in Wiltshire, with great estate. This Burdred with
Ethelwolfe, warred against the Britains with victory, and he with Alured
compelled the Danes under the conduct of Hungar and Vbba, to ^dislodge from
Nottingham, and depart the Province. Yet lastly, after twenty two years
reign, he was so ouerlaid with their daily supplies, that three of their
Kings (as our Writers term them) whose names were Godrun, Esketell, and
Ammond, wintred at Repton.
Ripindon, and sore wasted his Kingdom.

King Burdred at that time distressed, and himself Burdred and his wife fly
the land.
not able to withstand their rage, with his wife Queen Ethelswith fled the
Realm, and the same year in Rome ended his life, and was buried in the Church
He buried at Rome.
of our Lady belonging to the English College there erected. His Queen in the
habit of a Nun, fifteen years after his death, died at Padua in Italy, and
was there honorably buried, the year of our Lord eight His wife at Padua.
hundred eighty nine. And now the fatal circle of this Kingdom drawn to the
full compass, stayed the hand of all glorious motion from proceeding any
further, and with the lot of the rest fell under the government of the
West Saxons, after one years usurpation The kingdom of Mercia brought in
subjection to the West Saxons.
of the Danes, when it had stood in state of a kingdom the space of two
hundred and two years, and ended in title and regal authority, the year of
Christ's Incarnation eight hundred eighty six.

THE KINGDOM OF THE EAST-ANGLE, THE CIRCVIT OF THAT PROVINCE, WITH THE
SVCCESSION AND ACTS OF THEIR KINGS, SO LONG AS IT STOOD IN THAT REGAL ESTATE,
AND UNTIL IT WAS UNITED TO THE WEST SAXONS. CHAPTER XI.


THe Counties (as we now call them) that were subject The circuit af this
Province.
to this East Angles Kingdom, were Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge-shire, and
the I Will of Ely. The bounds whereof were limited in this manner: the East and
North sides were confined by the Ocean; the West, with Saint Edmunds Ditch, and
the South altogether with Essex, and some part of Hertfordshire.

The first raiser of the title and State of this Kingdom, was a Saxon Captain
named Vffa, about the 1 An. Do. 575. The first King of the East Angles. Beda
hist. Angl. lib. 2. Cap. 15.
year of Christ's incarnation five hundred seventy five, whose renown was
such, that he gave name not only to that his aspired Dominion, but also from
him, the Subjects thereof were a long time after called Vffines: though lastly,
it was reduced into the name and Kingdom of the East Angles. This Vffa (as
East. Angles called Vffines.
Florentius the Monk of Worcester has laid down) was the son of Withelin,
and he the son of Hrippus, Vffa his genealogy.
the son of Rothmund, the son of Trigils, the son of Titmon, the son of
Caser, the second son of Prince Woden. His reign is accounted only seven
years, without any mention of further matter, worthy the recording, and his
death to have happened in the year five hundred eighty one.

TItulus, the second King of the East Angles, and only son of Vffa that is
read of, began his reign 2 An. Do. 383 The second King of the East Angles.
His reign.
the year of Christ's Incarnation, five hundred eighty three, and continued the
same for the space of twenty years. And although the Writers of these times
have made no further mention of his Acts, yet may we well suppose that his
days were not altogether so quietly spent, both in the infancy of that newly
erected kingdom, and when such wars were commenced for the obtaining the whole
Island. His issue was Redwald, that immediately succeeded him, and from whom
other Kings of that kingdom were lineally descended. Florent. Worcest.


REdwald, the greatest of all the East Angles Kings, succeeded his father
Titulus in the Dominions of 3. An. Do. 593. Beda hist. l. 2. ca. 5. The third
King of this Kingdom.
the East Angles. and Ethelbert of Kent in the Monarchy of the Saxons. He
received and succored in his Court Edwyne with his wife in their Exiles, and
assisted him against Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, that sought his life, as
before we have showed, and Cap. 9. Sect. 7.
hereafter in the succession of his Monarchy we shall have further occasion.
He reigned Monarch eight See more of him in Chap 18. His reign.
years, and King of the East Angles thirty one (by the account and computation
of the Table annexed to Malmesbury, and others of our English Writers) and died
the year of our Salvation six hundred twenty-three.

ERpenwald, the younger son of King Redwald, (Reynhere his elder brother
being slain in battle 4 An. Do. 624 The fourth King of this Kingdom.
by Ethelfred, in the quarrel of distressed Edwine) succeeded his Father in
the Kingdom of the East Angles, the year of our Lord God six hundred twenty
four. He was the first King of that Province, that publicly The first of this
Province that publicly (...). Matthew West. Beda hist l. 2. c^ 15 The people
reject Christ.
professed the Christian Faith, which he received at the friendly motion and
zealous exhortation of King Edwine of Northumberland; but so much to the
coffeehouse and grudge of the people, as thereupon they presently entered
into conspiracy to practice his death, which a Paga^ Ruffian named Richebert,
not long after most traitorously executed. His reign is placed in the The King
slain by a Traitor. His reign.
foresaid Table of our Writers, (as it is compared with the other Kings of
those times) to extend twelve years; after whose death, those people returned
to their wonted Idolatry, and for three years continuance embraced their
former Gentility, from which John S^.
they were reclaimed by Sigebert his brother in law, who succeeded him in his
Throne, he having no The Subjects reclaimed by Sigebert.
issue, to whom it might be left.

SIgebert, the son of the second wife to Redwald, and by her born to a former
husband, whose name 5 An. Do. 636 The fifth King.
is unknown, was greatly mistrusted by his Father in law, King Redwald, that
he went about to aspire his Crown: the motives of which suspicion,
notwithstanding all the endeauours of innocent Sigebert, were still followed
with an envious eye, and his subiectiue Sigebert supected of treason against
Redwald.
semblances, as notes of popularity, were ever conceived to aim at the supreme
authority: which blot of jealousy, when it could no otherwise be wiped out,
he abandoned the Court of the King, and Country of his birth, and in France as
an exile, all the time of Redwald He goes into exile.
the Father, and likewise the reign of Erpenwald the son, spent his time in
study of good Literature, and contemplative exercises, where learning the truth
of Christ's Doctrine, and having received the lauer of Baptism, after the death
of this said Erpenwald his allied Brother, returned, and was made King of the
East Angles.

This man (says Beda) following the examples of Beda hist. Ang. l. 3. c. ^^.
France, brought the light of the Gospel into his Dominions, and by the
assistance of Felix Bishop of Dunwich, Sigebert with the assistance of a Bishop
does promote religion and learning.
for a more firm plantation thereof, built a School for the education of
children, appointing them Schoolmasters and Teachers after the manner of the
Kentish-men; who are * supposed to have at Will. ^mbert. in Peramb. of Kent.
that time the Liberal Sciences professed among them, in their Metropolitan
City Canterbury, which was the pattern (says that Countries Perambulator) that
this Sigebert followed in the erection of his; but whether at Cambridge or
elsewhere, he leaves for Doctor Caius of Cambridge, and M. Key of Oxford, to
Mr. Caius, and Mr. Key.
be disputed of. And indeed Beda assigns not the place for this foundation,
nor once names Cambridge, unless you will say, that out of the ruins of
Grantcester, an ancient City decayed in his days, the same arose, and whereof
he makes mention in his fourth Book, upon this occasion as follows.

Queen Etheldred (says he) that had been a Virgin, wife to Egfrid King of
Northumberland the term of Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 19.
twelve years, and Abbess of Ely for seven more, for her reputed holiness
after her death and burial, was thought worthy by Queen Sexburg her sister
(who had been wife to Ercombert King of Kent, and succeeded her Abbess in the
same Monastery) to be removed out of her wooden Tomb and mean place of
burial, into the Church and richer Monument: but for want of stone, which was
scarce in those parts, certain brethren were sent to find out some for that
use, who coming to (...), a little City lest desolate and uninhabited, found
by the walls a Grantcester.
Tomb of white marble very fair, and covered with a like stone. This they
thought to be found not without miracle, and therefore most fit to intombe her
corpse, which accordingly they did. But that this had been the place of
Sigeberts School, he mentions not. But whether by him or no, we know it
now the Beda makes mention of Grantcester, but not of (...) School there.
other University of England, a seed-plot of all divine and humane Literature,
and one of those springs whence issue the wholesome waters that do bedewe both
the Church and Commonwealth, both, famous The Universities of England, above
all other in Europe.
for the Arts, for Buildings, and Revenues, as their like is not to be found
in Europe (says Peter Martyr) and that most truly. But to return: Sigebert
being wearied with the weighty affairs of this world, laid the burden thereof
upon Egricke his kinsman, and shore himself Sigebert resigneth to Egricke, and
lives in a Monastery.
a Monk in the Abbey of Cumbreburge, which himself had built, and wherein he
lived, until that wicked Penda, the Mercian King, with his heathenish cruelty
molested the peace of the East Angles; who after long resistance, finding
themselves too weak, besought Sigebert, for the better encouragement of their
soldiers, He is constrained to resume it again, and is slain in battle.
to show himself in field; which when he refused, by constraint (says Beda)
they drew him forth, where in the midst of them he was slain in battle, using
no other weapon for defense, saving only a white wand; when he had reigned
only three years, and left no His reign.
issue to survive him, that is any where recorded.

EGricke, cousin to King Sigebert, and by him made King, as we have said, was
sore molested by the 6. An. Do. 638. The sixth King. Penda a cruel King of
Mercia. Egrick and Sigebert both slain by Penda. His reign.
continual invasions of Penda, the cruel King of Mercia; who lastly in a set
battle slew him with Sigebert, about the year of Christ his incarnation six
hundred fifty two. And when himself had reigned 4. years, deceased, without
mention either of wife or child, that is read of, further to revive his memory
to posterities.

ANna succeeded King Egricke in the Kingdom of the East Angles, the yeer^ of
grace six hundred 7. An. D. 642. The seventh King. Beda hist. Angl. li. 3. cap.
18. Malmesb. de gest is Regum Angl.
forty two, as the next in blood to Erpinwald, being the son of Guido,
says Beda, the son of Eni, says Malmsbury, who was brother to great
Redwald; and both of them the sons of Titulus, the second King of that
Province. This King, as the other two former had done, felt the fury of raging
Penda, with his merciless Mercians, that sore assaulted his Territories with
rapine and spoil. To withstand whose further proceedings, King Anna drew the
strength of his East Angles against them, and encountered Penda in a great and
mortal battle, wherein they were all discomfited and himself among them
slain, when he had Anna slain in battle by Penda.
reigned in continual trouble the space of thirteen years. His issue were
many, and those of great holiness Anna his issue. His reign. Firminus he^e
apparent.
or sanctity of life. Whereof Ferminus the eldest, and heir apparent, was
slain by Penda in the same battle with his Father, and was with him buried in
Blidribrugh, now Blibrugh, but afterward removed to S. Edmondsbury. His other
son was Erkenwald, Abbat of Chertside, and Bishop of London, that lies
buried in the South I Will, above the Quire in Erkenwald Abbat of Chertside, and
Bishop of London.
S. Paul's Church, where to this day remains a memorial of him. His daughters
were these; Etheldrid the eldest, was first married unto a Nobleman, whom
Etheldrid Abbess of Ely.
Beda names Tonbert, Governor of the Fenny Countries of Nothfolke, Huntington,
Lincoln, and Cambridge-shires: and after his death remaining a virgin, she was
remarried to Egfrid King of Northumberland, with whom likewise she lived in
perfect virginity the space of twelve years, notwithstanding his entreaty and
allurements to the contrary. From whom, lastly, she was released, and had
license to depart his Court, unto the Abbey of Coldingha^, where first she was
veiled a Nun under Abbess Ehba, and thence departing, she lived at Ely, and
became her self Abbess thereof, wherein lastly she died, and was interred;
remembered unto posterities by the name of S. Audrte. His second daughter was
Sexburg, who married Ercombert, King of Kent, unto whom she bare two sons, and
two daughters, as we in that Kingdoms succession have showed: after whose
death, she took the habit of a Nun, and succeeded her sister Etheldrid,
Sexburge Abbess of Ely after her sister. Withgith a Me^chion in Ely Abbey.
Abbess of Ely, wherein she died and was interred: and their youngest sister
Withgith, was likewise a Menchion with them in the same Monastery, and all of
them canonized for Saints. Ethilburge his third daughter was made Abbess of
Berking, near London, built by her Ethilburge Abbess of Barking. Beda lib. 4.
cap. 6.
brother Bishop Erkinwald, wherein she lived, and lastly died. A natural
daughter likewise he had, whose name was Edelburg, that with Sedrido the
daughter of Edelburge Abbess of S. Brigges in France. Beda lib. 3. Cap. (...).
his wife, were both of them professed Nuns, and succeeded each other
Abbesses in the Monastery of S. Brigges in France. Such a reputed holiness was
it held in those days, not only to be separated from the accompanying with
men, whereunto women by God were created, but also to abandon the Country of
their nativity, and as strangers in foreign Lands, to spend the continuance of
their lives.

EThelherd, the brother of Anna, the year of Christ's Incarnation six hundred
fifty four, was made 8 An. Do. 654 Ethelherd the eighth King.
King of the East Angles: the which it seems he had attempted in the reign
of his brother, for that he had assisted Penda in his wars against him; and
was the motive (says Beda) of the wars against Oswin Beda hist. Angl. lib.
3. cap. 24.
King of Northumberland, wherein siding with the heathen Penda, he was worthily
slain, the fifteenth day of November, when he had reigned only two years,
His reign.
leaving his name to the blot of infamy, and his Crown to be possessed by his
younger brother. His wife was Hereswith sister of Hilda, the famous learned
Abbess of Streanshale, and great grandchild to Edwyne Hereswith the wife of
Ethelhert
King of Northumberland, who bare unto him Aldulfe, Elswoolfe, and Beorne, all
three succeeding Edilwald Their children.
in the Kingdom of the East Angles.

EDelwald the brother of Ethelherd entered his government 9 An. Do. 656.
of the East Angles the year of our Lord six hundred fifty six, and continued
the same the 10 An Do. 664
space of nine years, without either mention of any other memorable act: from
whom (as is supposed) issued Ethelred that succeeded King after Beorne.

ALdulfe, the eldest son of Ethelherd and Queen Hereswith, after the death
of his uncle King Edelwald, obtained the Kingdom of the East Angles, and
therein reigned without any honor or honorable action by him performed: only
his name and time of his reign, which was nineteen years, is left of him by
Writers: and affords no further relation of us here to be inserted, besides
his Coin here set.

ELswolf the son of King Ethelherd, and bother to this last mentioned
Aldulfe, began his reign over 11 An. Do. 683
the Kingdom of the East Angles, the year of Christ his Incarnation, six
hundred eighty three, and continued His reign.
in the same, the time of seven years, without record of any memorable Act,
Wife, or Issue, to revive his name.

BEorne, the youngest son of King Ethelherd, succeeded his brother King
Elswolfe in the Kingdom 12. An. Do. 714 Beorn the twelfth King.
of the East Angles; no further mention being made of him, his wife, nor Issue,
which are altogether perished, and laid long since in their graves of oblivion.

EThelred, after the death of his cosen Beorne, succeeded 13 An. D. 714.
Ethelred the thirteenth King.
him in the Kingdom of the East Angles, issuing (as is supposed) from King
Ed^lwald the brother of Ethelherd, and of Anna, both of them Kings in that
Province. His reign by writers is said to be fifty two years, which
notwithstanding was passed over He reigned two and fifty years.
without any memorable note: for albeit that his government was long, and the
declining Heptarchie not unlikely to have ministered matters of remembrance to
posterities, yet is the same passed over by the silence of our Wrirers, and no
further mention made of him, besides the education of his younger son
Ethelbert, who proved a most worthy King. His wife, and the mother of this
virtuous son, was Leofrun, His son Ethelbert. His wife Leofrun. Flores
Wigor. Ioba Capgraue.
says the Writer of his life, without further mention of her parentage, or
other issue. This King deceased the year after Christ's nativity, seven hundred
forty eight, the same year that Ethelbert entered his Kingdom of Kent.

EThelbert, the son of King Ethelred, after his Fathers death was ordained
King of the East Angles, 14. An. D. 749. Ethelbert the foureteenth King.
whose days of youth were spent in learning and deeds of charity, and the
whole time of his government in continual tranquillity; for he is recorded
to be a Prince religious and charitable, sober, profound and wise in counsel.
This King being incited by Offa the Mercian (that still thirsted after
greatness) to marie Elfryd his daughter, a Lady of great Giral. Cambrensis
beauty, came upon that purpose to Offa his Court, then seated at Sutton
Wallis in the County of Hereford Ethelbert murdered by Offa King of Mercia.
and was by him there cruelly murdered at the instigation of Quendrid his
unkind (intended) mother in law, no other occasion ministered, but the greatness
of his Port, that much in her eyes ouer-heighted her husbands. His Bride-bed
the grave was first at Merden, Buried at Merden.
north from Sutton upon the River Lug. But afterward upon repentance, Offa
removed it unto Hereford; After at Hereford, over whom was built a fair
Church. John Capgraue.
over whom, Milfrid an under King of the Mercians built a most fair Church in
memorial of him, which yet bears his name, and is the Cathedral of that See.
His Bride, Lady Elfrid, much lamenting Elfrid his espousall vowed chastity.
Os^rt de Cl^e.
his contrived murder, withdrew her self to Crowland in the Fennes, and there
vowed chastity all the days of her life; notwithstanding some affirm that
she was wife to King Kenwolfe, the successor of her brother Egfrid. This King
reigned the space of forty five years, as is set in the Table of our English
Writers, and died the year of Christ's incarnation seven hundred He reigned
forty five years.
ninety three, the eighteenth day of May, and his Kingdom intruded upon by the
Mercians, having had neither wife nor children, that Historians make mention
of: after whose death the Kingdom of the East Angles was brought to decay, both
by the Mercians, West Saxons, and them of Kent; so that by means of their
violence, that Province was destitute of her own Governors, the space of
seventy seven years, until lastly the assaults of the Danes, a new-come Guest
and most dangerous Enemy, caused the other Kings to stand upon their Guards,
and rather to defend what they already had gotten, then to seek enlargement,
to the hazard of all: at which time, it is said one Offa, to whom the right of
that Crown belonged, upon a religious devotion, took his pilgrimage to Offa
heir to the Crown, adopteth Edmund the son of Alkmond.
the Sepulcher of Christ, and visiting in his way a kinsman of his, whose name
was Alkmund, at the City Norhenberge in Saxony, there made his will, wherein
he adopted young Edmund his heir, the son of Alkmond: and accomplishing his
voyage, in his return died at the Port Saint George, from whence he sent young
Edmund his Ring, and therewith ordained him King of the East Angles. Alkmund a
Prince of great power in those parts, maintained his sons rightful election,
and with a sufficient power sent him to claim the kingdom. These landing in
the East of England, at a place called Maydenboure, built a royal Tower, which
he named, and to this day is called, Hunstantone, situated upon the North-west
point of Norfolk, that bears likewise his own name.

EDmund thus arrived, was as willingly received and 15 An. Do. 870. Edmund the
fif teenth King The Danes invasion. Polydor. Virg.
by the East Angles made their king; in whose time Hungar and Hubba, two Danish
Captains, with an innumerable multitude of Heathen Danes, entered the Land at
the mouth of Humber, and from thence invaded Nottingham, York and
Northumberland, where (without respect of age or sex) they laid all wast, and
left the Land whence they departed like to a desolate Wilderness. From thence
they came with the like fury into Edmunds territories, and sacked Thetford. a
frequent City in those days: but he not able to withstand their violence, fled
into his Castle at Framingham, Fabian.
wherein he was of them besieged; and lastly, taken (says Abba Floriacens^s)
in a village then called Heglisd^ne, of a wood bearing the same name, or rather
yielded himself to their torments, to save more Christian blood; for it is
recorded, that because of his Edmund taken of the Danes, and put to death for
the faith of Christ.
most constant Faith and Profession, those Pagans first beat him with bats,
then scourged him withwhips, he still calling upon the name of Jesus; for rage
whereof, they bound him to a stake, and with their arrows shot him to death;
and cutting off his head, contemptuously threw it into a bush, after he had
reigned over the East Angles the space of sixteen years, having had neither
wife nor issue that is read of. His body and head, after the Danes were
departed, were buried Malmes. His reign.
at the same royal Town, as Abbo terms it, where Sigebert the East-Anglean
King, and one of his predecessors, at his establishing of Christianity, built a
Church, and where afterward (in honor of him) was built another most
spacious, and of a wonderful frame of Timber, and the name of the Town, upon
the occasion of his burial, called unto this day, Saint Edmondsbury. (...)
Church (...) S. Edmondsbury builded in honor of Edmund. This Church razed to
the ground by Suenus a Danish King.
This Church and place, Suenus the Pagan Danish King in impiety and fury burned
to ashes. But when his son Canute had made conquest of this Land, and gotten
possession of the English Crown, terrified and affrighted (as says the
Legend) with a vision of the seeming Saint Edmund, in a religious devotion to
expiate his Fathers sacrilege, built it anew most sumptuously, enriched this
place with Reedified and richly endowed by (...) (...) son.
Charters and Gifts, and offered his own Crown upon the Martyrs Tomb. After
the death of this Edmund the East Angles Country was possessed by the Danes,
and so continued about some fifty years, until that Edward surnamed the Elder,
expulsed these Danes, and joined that kingdom a Province to the West Saxons,
The Danes expulsed hence by (...).
after it had stood three hundred fifty three years.

A CATALOGVE OF SVCH BRITISH PRINCES AS WITHSTOOD THE SAXONS IN THEIR CONQVESTS
FROM VORTIGER'NE THEIR FIRST MAINTAINER, UNTO CADWALLADER THEIR LAST RESISTER.
CHAPTER XII.
NOw as we have spoken of every several Saxon King, that attained unto, and
Hither^ the Saxons Heptarchy.
held possession of any part in the East and South of this Island, until such
time as their Crowns were worn by their Conquerors, and the seuenfold divided
Heptarchy, united into an absolute Monarchy: so by order of History The British
Opposers.
it is required, that their opposers (the Britains) so long as they kept their
ground, and stood in defense of their own rightful inheritance, should be
showed: who with as great a disdain, and valorous resistance, underwent the
yoke of the Saxons subiections, as their ancient Ancestors had endeavored to
clear themselves from the chains of the Romans captivity. And until God and
destiny withdr^ from them the hand of defense, they mated the Saxons in all
their designs. For albeit that the Romans had robbed the Land of her strength,
and the aspired Vortigern, called in these Strangers for his defense: yet their
purposes being wisely perceived, the execution thereof was as presently
practiced, and as eagerly pursued, whilst the pillars (that supported the
frame of their government) stood upon their own Bases. But the groundwork
failing, and those props not many, Resisters of the Saxons.
the weight of all, fell upon some few, whose acts and manly resistance (Christ
assisting) shall further be related, as time shall bring them to the years of
their adventures, and carry our History through the affairs of their times.
Mean while, as we have recorded the names of their Ancestors, and worthy
forerunners, the resisters of the Romans: so now if you please, behold the
Catalogue of their Kings, from the foresaid Vortigern (the first subdued by
these Saxons) Vortigern the first and Cadwallader the last resister of the
Saxons.
unto Cadwallader the last of those British Princes; who left to them his Land,
and went himself to Rome: whose times and stories, according to those Guids
that lead us, we will declare, referring the credit thereof to our British
Historians; against whom howsoever some exceptions are, and may be justly
taken, yet are they not altogether to be cast off, in the affairs of these
ensuing Princes, especially Gyldas and Ninius, who lived in, and presently
after the times of those resisters. Neither is it to be doubted, but that many
others there were of that Nation, no less careful for transferring the
remembrance of their Ancestors actions to posterity, (no Nation living being
more zealously devoted in that kind,) though their writings have in Times
ruins been buried, and their remembrances preserved only by perpetuity of
traditions. and although we have showed the ancient Coins of the Britains,
and observed a series through the Romans succession: yet be not offended, that
I leave only Blanks for these latter Princes, as also the first Saxons,
wanting the Moneys of their own several Mintes.

Such therefore as I have found of any Kings stamp, reigning whilst the Land
was divided and enioied amongst A successiue Series of Great Britains Coins.
them, I have in the margent of their remembrances affixed, with the Arms
attributed to every several kingdom: and hence will observe the same order,
without any invention or fained inscription: which howsoever we want to
furnish their successions, yet this am I sure of, no Nation in Europe can show
the like, or can come to so true a series of their Sovereigns Coins, as
England is able at this day to do.

VORTIGERN. 1.


Vortigern among the many molestatio^s of the Scots and Picts, was ordained the
supreme Governor of these affairs; and to that end, with the Britains full
consent was elected their King. For as touching that Monkish Constantine, the
son of Constantius, who is said to be the brother of Aldreonus, King of
Little Britain in France, sent for and made King by these Britains, whose
simplicity this Vortigern is said to abuse, and lastly to cause his murder
and death; I rather think the story to be the same that happened above forty
years before, in the days of Honorius the Emperor; when Constantius among
other Conspirators, was raised upon a hopeful expectation conceived in his
name.

This Constantius indeed had a son that bare his name, a man of a soft
spirit, and no deep reach, and therefore in his youth was made a Monk. But
his Father risen to his aspiring honor, created him first his Caesar, and next
Augustus, till Fortune turned those smiles into frowns, and stained their
purple robes in both their own bloods. For not only the same names induces
this doubt, but the place, which was Winchester, and Abbey Amphibilus, where
this Imperial Monk was shorn, does not a little confirm the same; the
remains of which College, by that strong and thick wall standing to this day
at the West gate of that Cathedral Church, does not a little confirm. But
wanting better directions to our proceedings, we must follow for these times
men of latter years, and not without some suspect of uncertainty. The rather,
for that the Saxons as then the chief Actors in this Land, have purposely
concealed all Saxons have concealed all victories against themselves.
Victors and victories against themselves; neither but sparingly have recorded
their own.

This Vortigern, howsoever attaining the Crown, was ouer-awed (says Ninius)
by the Picts and Scots, stood The causes of Vortigerns fear, and his sending
for the Saxons.
in fear of the Roman forces, and dread much the return of Aurelius
Ambrosius, with his brother Vter, surnamed Pendragon: and therefore wanting
strength of his own to maintain his standing, sent for the Saxons, as we
have said. He (says the British Story) was Earl of Cornwall, of an honorable
Family and noble descent, his Beda lib. 1. cap. 14.
Lady every way answerable to both; by whom he had three sons, Vortimer,
Catigern, and (...) (...). (...). (...). (...). (...) His second wife (...).
His second wife, or rather Concubine, (having cast off this first) was Rowena,
the daughter of Hengist, which Pagan marriage proved not only the bane of the
Land, but so ruinated the Church of Christianity, that a Provincial Council
of the (...) was (...) sembled in Ann. 470. to repair those things that this
marriage had decayed.

By this Heathen Damsel he had a daughter, who (against the law of God and
Nature) was his third wife, His third wife (...) daughter.
that Kings (as he pretended, to excuse his ^est) might be descended from the
right issue of Kings, upon whom he begot his sad lamenting son Fausius, a
virtuous Fausius the son o^ (...) by his third wife.
Impe of those impious parents, that spent his life in a solitary place near
to the River Llynterrenny, as we have said; who abandoning the company of
men, among those mountains served God in continual tears and prayers, for
remission of the fault committed in his incestuous generation, for the
recalling of his parents to a better life, and for the restitution of his
Country to her former liberty.

This Vortigern reigned first sixteen years, and Vortigern how long he
reigned. Fabian. Chro. Vortigern deposed and imprisoned.
then deposed for his favors to the Saxons, was retained in durance all the
reign of Vortimer his son, after whose death reestablished, but oppressed by
his Saxons, and pursued by Aurelius, he withdrew himself into Wales, and among
those vast mountains built a He flies into Wales.
Castle by Merlins direction, whereof we have spoken, and more we would speak,
were those fantastic fictions underset with any props of likelihood or truth,
which Rand. of Chester in his days utterly rejected. Polychr. li. 5. ca. 1.


In this Castle, Vortigern with his incestuous wife, after he had secondly
reigned the space of six years, Vortigern and his wife destroyed by fire from
heaven. Henr. Hunt. Rand. Higd. 5. c. 1.
was consumed to ashes, by the just revenging hand of God, by fire from heaven,
as some have written; or else kindled by Aurelius and Vter, as his Ministers to
execute his wrath.

VORTIMER. 2.


VOrtimer, the eldest son of King Vortigern, through the abuse of his fathers
government, for which 2. An. Do. 454. Vortimer the second resister of the
Saxons.
he was deposed by his own subjects, was erected King of the Britains the
year from Christ's birth 454. a man of great valor, which altogether he
employed for the redress of his Country, according to the testimony of
William Malmesbury, whose words are these: Vortimer (says he) thinking not
good to dissemble the matter, for that he saw himself and Country daily
surprised by the craft of the English, set his full purpose Vortimer how long
he maintained war against the Saxons. Four chief battles, and the success
of the first.
to drive them out, and from the seventh year after their first entrance, for
twenty years continuance fought many Battles with them, and four of them with
great puissance in open field; in the first whereof, they departed with like
fortune, and loss of the Generals brethren Horsa and Catigern: in the other
three the Britains went away with victory, and so long until Vortimer was
taken away by fatal death.

Huntington, Monmouth, Randulphus, and Fabian, name both the places and
success of those Battles: The first was in Kent, and upon the Plain near
unto The place of the first battle. Beda lib. 1. ca. 15.
Ailsford, where the memorial of Catigern to this day remains; and Horsted
does as yet relish of Horsa there interred. The second Battle was fought
likewise in Kent at Crocanford, now Craford, where many perished The place of
the second battle.
as well Britains as Saxons. The third was at Weppeds Fleet, with great loss
to the Britains: and the The place of the third battle. The place of the
fourth battle.
fourth upon Calmore, where many of the Saxons, after long and sore fight, were
slain, and more drowned in flight, and lastly driven into the I Will of Thanet,
their first assigned habitation, (if not over the Seas) so that small hope
rested for them so long as this valiant Vortimer The Saxons quite dispossessed.
lived, who had now dispossessed them of all their footing in the Continent,
and often assailed them in the I Will of Tannet likewise, as Fabian confidently
affirms.

But destiny going forward for the downfall of Britain, removed these rubbes
out of her way: for Rowena, the mother of the Britains mischief, and the
maintainer of the Saxons residence, found the means Vortimer made away by
Rowena.
to make this worthy Vortimer away, and by poison caused the end of his life,
after he had valiantly reigned the space of four years; all which time, by
the Vortimer the continuance of his reign. Fabian. Chro. par. 5. cap. 89.
testimony of an old Chronicle that Fabian had seen, Vortigern the father
remained in durance, and under assigned Keepers in the City Caerlegion, now
Chester, and so demeaned himself toward his son (then his Sovereign) in
dutiful obedience and faithful counsel, that he won again the hearts of
the Britains, and was again re-established their Vortigern reestablished King.
King.

It is recorded by Ninius, that after his last victory over the Saxons, he
caused his Monument to be erected Ninius.
at the entrance into Tanet, and in the same place of that great overthrow,
which by the said Author Vortimer his monument the Stonar.
is called Lapis Tituli, of us the Stonar, where for certain it seems has
been an haven. In this Monument he commanded his body to be buried, to the
further terror of the Saxons, that in beholding this his Trophy, their spirits
might be daunted at the remembrance of their great overthrow. As Scipio
Africanus conceited the like, who commanded his Sepulcher to be so set, that it
might ouerlooke Africa, supposing that his very Tomb would be a terror to the
Carthaginians. But how that desire of Vortimer was performed, I find not, but
rather the contrary: for an old Manuscript I have, that co^fidently affirms
him to be buried in London: yet others from Ninius the Uortimer supposed to be
buried in London.
disciple of Eluodugus, hold the place to be Lincoln. But howsouer his grave
is forgotten, yet let this be remembered, that Sigebertus has written of him,
that Sigebertus.
is, After he had vanquished the Saxons (says he) whose drift was not only to
overrun the Land with violence, but also to erect their own Laws without
clemency, he restored the Christian Religion then sorely decayed, and new
built the Churches that those enemies had destroyed.

AURELIUS AMBROSIVS. 3.


AVrelius Ambrosius, verily descended of that Constantine who in the fourth
Consulship of Theodosius 3. An. Do. 466. The third resister of the Saxons.
the younger, was elected here in Britain, only in hope of his luckie name,
succeeded Vortigern the Father in the Government of Britain, and Vortimer the
son, in affection and defense of his Country. He with Vter (says Geffrey
Monmouth) when their brother Constantine was murdered by Vortigern, fled into
Galfrid. M^.
France, where they remained the years of his first reign; whose return (as
we have heard from Ninius) he greatly feared, and whose force at his last he
felt to his smart. For having again resumed his Crown, he lived in his old
sins, and suffered the Saxons to be Lords of his Land: to prevent which
(says Beda from Gyldas) the Britains by little and little began to Beda
hist. lib. 1. cap. 16.
take strength, and with some courage to come forth of their Caves, who with
one uniform consent, called to God for his heavenly help. They had (says he)
for their Captain a Roman called Ambrosius Aurelianus, a gentle natured man,
which only of all the blood of the Romans remained then alive, his parents
being slain, which bore the name of King of the Country. This man being their
Leader, provoked the Victors to the fight, and through Gods assistance
achieved the victory. From that day forward now the Britains, now the Saxons
did prevail, until the year that Bathe was besieged, which was forty four
years after their first coming into the Island.

His first expedition (as our British Historians report) was against Vortigern,
and his Castle in Wales, Geffrey Caxton, Polych.
wherein that incestuous King was consumed to ashes by lightning from heaven,
as we have said: and then following the Saxons, made toward York, and at
Maesbel beyond Humber, encountering Hengist, became his Victor: unto whose
mercy (say they) his son Occa yielded himself, and obtained in free gift the
Country in Gallaway in Scotland for him and his Saxons. But these his affairs
thus prospering against the common Enemy, was envied at by Pascentius, the
youngest son of King Vortigern, who not able either to mate the Saxons, or
after his Brethrens deaths to recover the Kingdom to himself, ambitiously
sought to prefer his base humor before the recovery of his Countries liberty,
which then lay gored in her own blood. For having gotten the aid of Gillamare
King of Ireland, whether he had fled upon the death of his Father, and now
returned into the west of Wales, first indammaged the City of S. David's, and
thence proceeded with fire and sword. Aurelius then sick in the City of
Winchester, sent his brother Vter to withstand his force, who slew both
Pascentius and the Irish King his partaker, in a set and sore battle fought
betwixt them. But before this battle, Pascentius had sent a Saxon, whose name
was Eopa, in show a Britain, and in habit a Physician, to minister poison in
stead of physic, which according was effected with Ambrosius his Hector
Boethius.
death.

Unto this Aurelius Ambrosius is ascribed the erection Aurelius Ambrosius
erected Stonhenge.
of that rare and admirable monument, now called Stonhenge, in the same place
where the Britains had been trecherously slaughtered and interred, whose
manner and form in our draught of Wiltshire we have inserted. The matter
being Stones of a great and huge bigness, so that some of them contain twelve
tun in weight, and twenty eight foot or The description of the Monument of
Stonhenge.
more in length, their breadth seven, and compass sixteen. These are set in
the ground of a good depth, and stand in a round circle by two and two, having
a third stone somewhat of less quantity laid gate-wise overthwart on their
tops, fastened with tenons and mortaises, the one into the other; which to
some seem so dangerous, as they may not safely be passed under, the rather for
that many of them are fallen down, and the rest suspected of no sure
foundation: notwithstanding, at my being there, I neither saw cause of such
fear, nor uncertainty in accounting of their numbers, as is said to be. The
stones are gray, but not marbled, wherein great holes are beaten even by force
of weather, that serve for Ravens and other birds to build in, and bring forth
their young. The ground-plot contains about three hundred foot in compass,
in form almost round, or rather like unto a horse-shooe, with an entrance in
upon the east side. Three rows of stones seem formerly to have been pitched,
the largest outward, and the least inwards; many whereof are now fallen down:
but those that stand, show so fair an aspect, and that so far off, that they
seem to the beholders to be some Fortress or strong Castle. A Trench also is
about them, which has been much deeper; and upon the plains adioining, many
round copped hills, without any such trench, (as it were cast up out of the
earth) stand like great hay-cockes in a plain meadow: In these, and
thereabouts, by digging have been found pieces of Ancient fashioned Armor
found at Stonhenge.
ancient fashioned armor, with the bones of men, whose bodies were thus
covered with earth that was brought thither by their wel-willers and friends,
even in their head-peeces; a token of love that then was used, as some imagine.

This Trophey, Aurelius Ambrosius (in memorial of the Britains massacre)
erected, and is worthily accounted for one of the Wonders of this Island, and
(...) in the verses of Alexander (...) called The Giants Da^nce, wherein this
Ambrosius was interred after h^e had reigned thirty two years, and whereof the
town Ambresbury bears the name. Others report, that the Britains erected
this most stately Sepulcher ^uer the body of Ambrosius there slain by the
sword of his enemies, that his Countries love, in such a costly piece of work,
might remain unto posterities in this, the Altar of his virtue and manhood:
for (...) says, that this man, in succouring his (...), (...).
took upon him the Imperial Robe, and aganist the (...) rage of those German
enemies, often times over (...) puissant armies, but was lastly slain by them
upon the plains of Salesburie. I cannot with silence let pass the ridiculous
reports of the bringing of the Stones out of Afric into Ireland, and from
thence, under the conduct (...). (...) Do^.
of Vter the brother of Ambrosius, unto this Plain, by the industrious means
of Merlin, surnamed Ambrose, borne in the ancient City Merd^n, and as Humfrey
(...) of Bri^e.
Lh^d says, of a noble virgin, whose father, for his skill in the
Mathematics, and wonderful knowledge in all other kind of learning, was by
the rude common people reputed to be the son of an Incubus, or a male Devil,
which in the similitude and likeness of men do use carnally to company with
women. But how this may agree with his divine mouth, that tells us the Spirits
have neither Luke 24 39.
flesh nor bones; and the whole Scriptures, that man is carnally begotten,
conceived and born, I leave for others further to dispute. Only I know, that
such begettings as Merlines is reported to be, without father, and Simon Magus
also, that before him would needs be the son of a Virgin, do not a little
contradict (...) in his (...).
our Christian Profession, who acknowledge only the conception of Christ to be
conceived without the seed of man, or of sin. But to our purpose: Ambrosius
Aurelius (by Panuinius accounted the last Emperor Aurelius Ambrosius, the
continuence of his (...).
of the British blood) is said to reign in Britain thirty two years, and to
die in that of Christ's Incarna^on four hundred ninety seven.

VTERPENDRAGON. 4.


VTer, surna^ (...), the brother of Ambrosius, succeeded him both in valor,
and in the Government An. Do. 498.
of Britain. His entrance was with troubles Mat. Westminster.
against the Saxons, who under the leading of Eske and O^a, the sons of King
Hengist, had passed with spoil to the City York, whither this new-made
General presently rep^d, and giving them battle, with the discom^ of the
whole Army, took both the (...) pri^ers, and committed them to safe cu^odie.

But the Brita^es (says (...)) becoming disloiall to their Prince, seldom
assisted him with preventing (...). (...).
counsel: and the Princ^ enamored upon the Duke of Cornwals Wife, consulted
more with Merli^ to transform himself from himself, then to give direction
against the common enemy. For coming to Tindagell Castle in Cornwall,
possessed by Gorlois, A^ex. (...). Uter (...) in love with La^ Igren.
Duke of that Province, beheld (in his eye) the Paragon of Nature, which was
Lady Igren, his Duchess and wife. Vter, whose thoughts till then had bin free,
and from his childhood had ever followed Mars in the field, was now surprised
so far with her love, that his Shield and Arms were both neglected and
vnworne, and all his thoughts set on work to purchase his most wis^ed desire;
which lastly, by Merline and Magic was effected, and that after this manner
(if we (...).
will believe him of Monmouth, who is the reporter.) His suites and hopes
failing (says he) to win her unto dishonor, Merline altogether new-moulded the
shape of King Vter, and printed in his face the feature of Gorlois her own
Lord, by which means, and without suspect the King dishonourably violated this
Ladies chastity, in which Bed of deceit, the famous Arthur An ancient
Manuscript.
was begot. The captive Captains Eske and Octa in these loose times of his
love, gat loose from their Keepers, and with their rattling armor roused Vter
from this wanton Lullaby; who with troops of strength, and trumpets of
defiance, met these Saxons face to face in the field, where betwixt them was
fought a most bloody battle, and that even almost to the last stroke, and
wherein, if fatal destiny had withdrawn her hand, the Island had been rid of
these Intruders for ever. For therein (say our Authors) the Saxons perished by
the Britains swords; upon whose Geffrey, etc.
points also Eske and Octa paid their escapes with the loss of their lives.
This field was at Verolam, whither Vter sick, and in his Horse-litter, was
borne among John Harding.
his Army, and after long and sore siege, won from them that City. Finally,
when this King had reigned Pendragon the continuance of his reign.
the space of eighteen years, he died by poison put into a well, whereof
usually he drank, and was buried at Stonhenge with his brother Ambrosius.

Of his surname Pendragon, these supposals are made: At his nativity (say
some) appeared a fiery Comet, in some part resembling a Dragons Head:
whereupon that great reputed Prophet Merline, attributed this heavenly Meteor
unto this Princely newborn Babe; and gave him the name of Vter-Pendragon.
Others for his serpentine wisdom, derive the surname of this Serpents Head,
who like unto that of Dan, bit Genesis 49. 17.
the Horse heels, so that the riders fell backward. For in all his wars
against the Saxons, he was most fortunate and victorious, with their great
overthrows. But others will have him so named from his Royal Banner, borne
ever before him, wherein was portraied a Dragon with a Golden Head; of which
Standerd since, neighbor Nations have had good experience, and in far Country
it has been displaied in the cause In gold and jewels, as Hardig says.
of Christianity, to the terror of the Pagans, as in Syria by that invincible
English King, Richard the first, surnamed Cur-de-lion; in Scotland and Wales by
that conquering Prince Edward the first, and the same as yet is in field borne
for an Imperial Standard in our English Camps.

KING ARTHVR. 5.


ARthur the son of Vter, begotten as is said of Lady Igren Duchess of
Cornwall, was crowned 5. An. Do. 516.
King at fifteen years of age, about the year of Christ five hundred and
sixteen; or as Matthew of Matthew. West^.
Westminster has it, five hundred and eighteen. His prosperous entrance was
envied at by Lotho King of the Picts, and by Couran King of the Scots, who had
Scotia Chron.
married his own Aunts, Anna and Alda, the two sisters of Ambrose and Vter,
each of them expecting the Crown before him, through the opinion and repute of
his bastardie, especially Lotho, who had issue by Anna, Mordrad, and Gawan: the
latter of which spent his life in the cause of that quarrel. His first
proceedings were against the common enemy the Saxons, whose Captain Colgerne,
he chased from Northumberland into York; which City likewise he girt with a
strait siege, notwithstanding Colgerne thence escaped into Germany, and of King
Cherdick got succor for his Saxons, who with seven hundred sail arrived in
Scotland. Arthur advertised of his great Matthew. West^.
power, raised his siege, and drew toward London, and thence sent for aid to
his Nephew Howel, King of Little Britain in France, who came himself in
person to join with his Uncle.

These from South-hampton marched to Lincoln, which City Cherdick had
strongly besieged, but was thence forced by Arthurs conquering sword. Twelve
battles he fought against these Saxons (as Ninius records) with great manhood
and victory. The first was at the mouth of the River Gleyne: the second,
third, fourth, and fifth, upon the Banks of Douglasse, in the County of
Lineux: the sixth upon the River Bassus; the seventh in the wood Calidon; the
eighth near to the Castle Guynien; the ninth in Wales, at the Town Cairelien;
the tenth at Trachenrith, or Rithowode upon the Sea side: the eleventh upon a
hill named Agned Cathergonien; and the twelfth at Bathe, or Bathen-hill, where
the Britains (as Beda says) gave the Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Saxons a very great overthrow; which (by Gyldas report) happened forty four
years after the Saxons first arriuage into Britain, the year wherein
himself was borne.

Of Arthurs success both at home and abroad, his great magnificence in Court
and Country, his Banners, and four Golden Swords borne before him, his Round
Tables, and challenges of Martial Honor, let Monmouth Monmouth. Will. Ne^.
Leiland.
the Writer, Newbery the Resister, and Leiland the Maintainer, be heard for me.
But certain it is (by the report of Malmesbury) that Arthur was a Prince Will.
Malmes.
more worthy to be advanced by the truth of Records in warrantable credit, then
by fables scandalized with poetical fictions and hyperbolicall falsehoods.
Whose Banner was so often spread for the cause of Christianity, and defense of
his Country, being the only proppe that vpheld the same. And lamentable it is,
that the fame of this puissant Prince had not been sounded by a more certain
Trumpet: for to say the truth of his Writer even in a Of Ieffrey Arthur, or
Monk of Monmouth.
word, he was well skilled in Antiquities of tradition, but as it seems, not
any of ancient credit, so many toies and tales he every where interlaceth out
of his own brain, wherewith he was charged while himself lived, insomuch as
he is now ranged among those Writers whom the Roman Church has censured to be
forbidden.

This hurt therefore those ouer-zealous Monks have done to the Subject whereof
they wrote, that through an overmuch conceited opinion, with the virtue and
fame of the person, they have mingled such matters as may justly be rejected,
whereby their worths are not only deprived of their truly-deserued honors, but
which more is, even their persons suspected to be naught else but fictions, as
Hercules in Ovid, or Hector in Homer. And so has Geffrey done by this most
worthy Prince Arthur, whose wars against the Saxons for defense of this
Island, he has enlarged with the Conquests of other Kingdoms and Countries,
wherein he never came: which has made not only his Acts to be doubted of, but
even his person to be called in question, whether any such Arthur ever ruled
in Britain. Yet with better regard to the Recorders of his spreading fame, we
grant both the man, and many honorable parts in him, though not in the like
manner as they have laid them down. Neither are we straied so far from the
steps of credulity, that we can believe no more then we see, or that seeing,
be fore-stalled with a preiudicate opinion: for though we consent not to the
fables of Homer, neither to the inventions that Euripides and Sophocles made
upon the Hom. Iliad. lib. 5. Euripides. Sophocles.
Battles of Troy, yet we deny not but that there were Wars and Battles at
Troy, wherein many Martial acts undoubtedly were performed: neither doubt we
of his person, as Seneca seems to do of Jupiters, but Seneca in his Morals.
acknowledge it with reverence for truth, yet with this reservation, that all
is not Gospel which is written in Greek. And had there not been a truth of
things whereupon Poets made their fables, there had been at this day no fables
of Poets in the world. And as Geffrey wondreth that neither Gyldas nor Beda do
mention Arthur nor his great deeds, so says Randulphus, may we at Geffrey,
that has augmented them above the pitch of credulity. But for the truth of
this Prince, besides a Charter exemplified under the s^ale of King Edward the
Third, wherein mention is made of King Arthur, to have been a great
Benefactour to the Abbey of Glastenbury, who as John Rouse reports, John
Rouse.
had given Bren-march and other Demaines, to the value of five hundred Marks
yearly, to the said Monastery. His Arms (being an Escocheon, whereon a
Cross, The Arms of Arthur.
with the Virgin Mary bearing Christ in her arms) cut in stone, and standing
over the first Gate of entrance as yet, is said to be the Arms of that Abbey.
And Joseph, the judicious Monk of Excester, who followed Josephus Isc^.
King Richard the First in his war for the Conquest of the Holy Land, in his
poetical verses extolleth Arthur with Alexander, Caesar, and Hercules; yea and
Ninius, far his ancient, calls Arthur an Iron Mall, that both bruised and
brake the Lions jaws asunder. Arthur an Iron Mall.


Therefore of his person we make no doubt, though his acts have been written
with too lavish a pen: neither consent we with those Historians that naturalize
him for a Britain, seeing that Ninius, Beda, Malmesburie, and himself seem
to speak the contrary: for Ambrosius being the brother of Vter Pendragon, as
we already from Beda have showed, was a Captain descended from the blood of
the Romans, whose parents says Ninius, had worn the Purple Robe, and both of
Ninius. Malmesb. de gest^ Reg. Angl.
them the sons of Constantine, whose father in Britain against Honorius the
Emperor had put on the said Robe. And by his natural descent from the Romans,
Arthur not only denied them Tribute, but also threatened to have a Tribute from
Rome: for in his Letters to that end sent unto the Senate, thus in an old
Manuscript we find it indicted: Understand among you of Rome, that I am King
Arthur of Britain, and freely A namelesse old Manuscript, chap. 154.
it hold, and shall hold; and at Rome hastily will I be, not to give you
tr^age, but to have tr^age of you: for Constantine that was Helenes son, and
other of mi^ Ancestors conquered Rome, and thereof were Emperors, and that
the^ had and held I shall have your^ Godd^s grace. Whereby is manifest his
blood was from the Romans. Let not therefore any of our Britains take
exceptions against me for this, neither that I enlarge not his fame, by the
enlargement of his Empire in Russia, Lapland, and in making Norway his Chamber
of Britain, as if that Kingdom and Title should be given him by the Pope,
that indeed cuts large thongs out of other men's Leather: his Conquests of
thirty Kingdoms, and killing of Denabus the huge Spanish Giant, and his combat
with Frolo Governor of France, and with Lucius Hiberus the Roman Legate, whose
slain body he sent to the Senate for the tribute of Britain by them
demanded: seeing that others before me, far more rip^ Historians, have made
both doubts and objections against them. And therefore I conclude with this
Arthur, as Saint Augustine with the Athenians, whose men (...). (...). 10.
(says he) were ever greater in fame then in deeds. And with Ninius will end
with his saying; Arthurus pu^a bat contra illos in diebus illis; and licet
multi ipso no^res essent, ipse tamen duodecies Dux belli fuit, Victorque
bellorum: Arthur made war against them in those days; and though many were
more noble then be, yet was he twelve times General in the Field, and
returned Conqueror. But more constant is the memory of his death, and place
of his burial, both which are reported upon warrantable credit: for Mordred
the son of Lotho, whereof we have spoken, affecting the Crown, upon a
pretense of right from King Vter, and supposed bastardise of Arthur, gave many
attempts, through the aid of his Picts, and assistance of the Saxons, to
dispossess him of that wherein he was seated: and lastly at Camel^ord.
Kamblan or Cambula in Cornwall (says Leland) this British Hector encountering
Mordred, slew him outright, and received of him his own deaths wound. The
witness of this Field as yet are those pieces of Armor, horse-harnesse, and
other habiliments of War, which are daily dug up in tillage of the ground;
unless those relics of Battle be the seals of that fight which Marianus
writes to have Marianus Scotus.
been in this place betwixt the Britains and Saxons, in the year of our Lord
eight hundred and twenty.

If then it be true that Arthur here died, this place we may say seems to
be consecrated unto Mars: for Tindagell Castle, standing hard by, first brought
into the world this glorious Prince, for one of her nine Worthies, and Cambula
again received his last blood. But from this place he was carried unto
Glastenburie in Somersetshire, where he died the one and twentieth of May, in
the year of our Salvation five hundred Wall. sonne^ Antiq. Glasten. Arthur the
continuance of his reign.
forty and two, after he had most victoriously reigned twenty six years. His
body was there buried, and six hundred years after was taken up, and found
upon this occasion: When Henry the second, and first Plantagenet, had swaied
the English Scepter to the last of his reign, it chanced him at Pembrooke to
hear sung to the Harp certain Ditties of the worthy exploits and acts of
this Arthur, (by a Welsh Bard, as they were termed, whose custom was to record
and sing at their Feasts the noble deeds of their Ancestors) wherein mention
was made of his death, and place of burial, designing it to be in the
Churchyard of Glastenburie, and that betwixt two Pyramides therein standing:
whereupon King Henry caused the ground to be dug, and at seven foot depth
was found a huge broad stone, wherein a leadden Cross was fastened, and in that
side that lay downward, in rude and barbarous letters (as rudely set and
contrived) this inscription written upon that side of the Lead that was toward
the stone: HIC IACET SEPVLTVS REX ARTVRIVS IN INSVLA AVALONIA.
Here lies King Arthur buried in the I Will of Aualonia.


And digging nine foot deeper, his body was found in the trunk of a Tree, the
bones of great bigness, and in his scull perceived ten wounds, the last very
great, and plainly seen. His Queen Guineuer, that had been near kinswoman
to Cador Duke of Cornwall, a Lady of passing beauty lay likewise by him, whose
The (...) tresses of hair my ^e saw in a coffin dug up in an old house
near Paul's in London, very beautiful in show, but being touched, was nothing
but dust.
tresses of hair finely platted, and in color like the gold, seemed perfect
and whole until it was touched, but then (bewraying what all beauties are)
showed it self to be dust. Giraldus Cambrensis, a worthy Author and an
eie-witnesse, is the reporter of this finding of Arthurs bones; and the Cross
of Lead, with the Inscription, as it was found and taken off the stone, was
kept in the Treasury or Reuester of Glastenburie John Stow.
Church, says Stowe, till the suppression thereof in the reign of King Henry
the eight, whose form and rude letters we have here expressed to thy sight.



The bones of King Arthur, and of Queen Guineuar Arthurs bones in ^ombed.
his wife, by the direction of Henry de Bloys, Nephew to King Henry the second,
and Abbat of Glastenbury, at that present were translated into the great new
Church, and there in a fair Tomb of Marble, his body was laid and his Queens
at his feet; which noble Monument among the fatal overthrows of infinite
more, was altogether raced at the dispose of some then in Commission, whose too
forward zeal, and over hasty actions in these behalfes, has left unto us a
want of many truths, and cause to wish that some of their employments had bin
better spent.

CONSTANTINE. 6.


Constantine the son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, and cosen to King Arthur by
his alliance in marriage, An. D. 542.
at his death was appointed by him to succeed in his Dominions, and most
ioifully received of the Brute book.
Commons, as the man, in the opinion of this worthy elector and themselves,
accounted most fit to defend the Land from the many oppressions of the Saxons,
who now began to spread the wing as far as to Tyne in the North, and to
set down the limits of their several Kingdoms; which notwithstanding, these
strangers daily enlarged upon the homebred Inhabitants, the civil wars of
the Britains giving way to the same, and that not only among themselves, but
by the Picts also, in the behalf of the two sons of Mordred, that sought to
dispossess him of the Crown. In which quarrel many battles were fought, but
with such success to the attemptors, that these two Competitors were forced
for refuge into London and Winchester, Gyldas. Ab^r suc^.
whither Constantine pursued them, they taking Sanctuary in the Churches, and
not far from the Altars he slew them: for which deed, the Priest Gyldas,
that flourished in those days, in his inuectiue reprehensions thus writes:
Britain has Kings (says he) but In his Book De excidio Britan. Hum. Lluyd.
Bre. Brit.
they are Tyrants: Judges it has, but they are wicked, pilling and harming the
innocent people; revenging and defending, but whom? Such as be guilty and
robbers. They have many wives, yet break they wedlock; many times swearing,
yet periure themselves; vowing, but for the most part with dissembling lies;
warring, but stillmaintaining unjust and civil broiles; abroad pursuing
thieves, and yet at home cherish them, even at their own Tables, and sometimes
also reward them. They give large alms indeed, yet heap they up sins high
as the Mountain. They sit in the Seat of sentence, yet seldom seek the rule
of right judgment, despising the humble and innocent persons, and extolling up
to Heaven proud and bloody Murderers, Thieves, and Adulterers, yea and if he
would permit them, the very enemies of God. Many they keep in prison, and load
them with irons, more to serve their own purposes, then for any guilt in the
person, taking solemn Oaths before and upon the Altars, and yet despise they
the Altars, as altogether vile, and but filthy stones.

Of this heinous and wicked offense, Constantine the tyrannical whelpe of the
Lioness of Deuon-shire is not ignorant, who this year, after the receiving of
his dreadful Oath, whereby he bound himself, that in no wise he should hurt
his Subjects, (God first, and then his Oath, with the company of Saints, and
his own mother being present ^did notwithstanding in the reverend laps of both
his Mothers, the Church, and her by nature, and that under the vesture of an
holy Abbat, devour with sword and spear, instead of teeth, the tender sides
and the entrails of two children of noble and Kingly race, and likewise of
their two Governors, yea and that (as I said) before the sacred Altars; the
Arms of which Persons so slain, not stretched forth to defend themselves with
weapons (which few in those days handled more valiantly then they) but
stretched forth to God, and to his Altar, in the day of Judgment shall set up
the reverend ensigns of their patience and faith at the Gates of the City of
Christ, which so have covered the seat of the Celestall Sacrifice, as it were
with the red Mantle of their cluttered blood.

These things he did not after any good deeds done by him deserving praise:
for many years before overcome with the often and changeable filths of
adultery, and forsaking his lawful wife (contrary to the law of God) being
not loosed from the snares of his former sins, he increases the new with
the old. Thus far Gyldas, for this time, and for the reign of Constantine;
whose life being no Constantines reigns continuance.
better, was cut off in battle by Aurelius Conanus, when he had reigned fully
three years, and without issue was buried at Stonhenge.

AURELIUS CONANVS. 7.


AVrelius Conanus, the Nephew of King Arthur, after 7. An. D. 545. Mat.
Westminster.
he had slain his Cosen Constantine in battle, was made King over the
Britains in the year after Christ's Nativity five hundred forty five. He was
of disposition free and liberal, but therewithal of a light credit, and very
suspicious, cherishing them that accused others, without respect of right or
wrong, putting some to death, and retaining others in perpetual prison, among
whom his own Uncle was one, whose two sons he caused to be slain, no causes
objected, but that these three were in truth betwixt him and the Crown: for
which, and other the like impious parts, the said Gyldas continues the tenor
of his vehement reprehension in this manner. And thou Lions whelpe (as speaks
the Prophet) Aurelius Conanus, what do thou? Gyldas.
art thou not swallowed up in the ^thy mire of murdering thy Kinsmen, of
committing fornications and adulteries, like to the others before mentioned, if
not more deadly, as it were with the waves and surges of the drenching Seas,
ouerwhelming thee with her unmerciful rage? do thou not in hating the peace
of thy Country, as a deadly Serpent, and thirsting after civil wars and
spoils (often times unjustly gotten) shut up against thy soul the Gates of
celestial peace? Thou being left alone, as a withering tree in the middle of a
field, call to remembrance (I pray thee) the vain youthful fantasy, and over
timely deaths of thy Fathers and thy Brethren: shall thou being set apart, and
chosen forth of all thy lineage for thy godly deserts, be reserved to live an
hundred years, or remain on earth till thou be as old as Meth^shela? nothing
less. And thus with exhortations for his amendment, turns his speech to his
Successor.

The reign of this King, among the uncertainties of other proceedings, is
ranged by our own Historians, as uncertainly. For some hold him to rule only
two years, and no more, being then cut off (...).
by the just revenging hand of God for his sins: others (...).
allow three years for his reign, wherein, as they say, most viciously he
lived: and yet Matthew of Westminster will have him continue in government no
less then thirty years; and John (...) the contin^ of his reign.
Stow adds three more: such extremes are weedriuen unto, that have our
relations only from them.

VORTIPORVS.8.


VOrtiporus, after the death of Aurelius, succeeded him in the Kingdom of the
Britains, which 8. An. Do. 578.
then was much scantled by the intrusions of the Saxons whom in many battles
(as says the British Historians) he vanquished, and valiantly defended his
Land and Subjects, from the danger of them and of their Allies: notwithstanding
these reported actions thus honorably achieved, yea and his Parentage with
succession of government, may be both suspected and justly called in question,
as by the words of Gyldas is manifest; who sufferd not this King also to pass
untouched in his Inuectiue and lamentable passions. And thou (says he)
Vortiporus the Tyrant of South Wales, like to the Panther in manners and
wickedness, diversely spotted, as it were with many colors, with thy hoarie
head in Gyldas.
the Throne full of deceits, crafts, and wiles, and defiled even from the
lowest part of thy body to the Crown of thy head, with diverse and sundry
murders committed on thine own kin, and filthy adulteries, thus proving the
unworthy son of a good King, as Manasses was to Ezechias; how chances 2.
King. 20. 21.
it that the violent streams of sins, which thou swallowest up like pleasant
wine, or rather art swallowed up by the^, (the end of thy life by little and
little now drawing near) cannot yet satisfy thee? What meanest thou, that
with fornication, of all evils as it were the full heap, thine own wife being
put away, with her death, which thou wroughtest, do oppress thy soul with a
certain burden that cannot be avoided?

By this testimony of Gyldas, this Vortiporus could not be the son of bad
Conan, as Geffrey Monmouth and Matthew of Westminster affirm him: his Father
being compared to godly Ezechias King of Judah, and himself continuing his
government, as is said the Uortiporus, the continuance of his reign.
space of four years, ended his life without issue to succeed him.

MALGO CANONVS. 9.


MAlgo Canonus, the Nephew of Aurelius Conanus, as some write, succeeded
Vortiporus in the Kingdom 9. An. D. 581. Mat. Westminster.
of Britain, a man of a most seemly presence, but withal, charged with many
unbeseeming and foul sins, by ancient Gyldas, the only recorder of the
Actions in these times; who calls him the Dragon of the Isles, greater in
power then many, but exceeding all in mischief and malice; a large gi^r, but
more lavish and prodigal in all sins and licentiousness: in Arms and
dominions more strong, and greater then any other British Potentate; but
stronger in the destruction of his own soul, in committing the grand abhorred
sin of Sodomie. In his youthful days, with sword and fire he brought to
destruction his Uncle by the mothers side (being then king) together with many
others, and after upon a shew-seeming remorse of Conscience, vowed the
profession and life of a Monk; but returned shortly after to his own vomit,
and became worse then he was before: for despising his first marriage, he became
enamored upon the wife of his brothers son, whiles he was living; and after
that he had kept her a certain time, murdered them both. In these sins he
Malgo Canonus, the continuance of his reign.
continued the term of five years, and dying without issue, left his Crown
to another.

By these reprehensions of Gyldas it should rather seem that these Princes
lived all together at one and the same time, unto whom he spoke personally,
and mouth to mouth, which could not be, if such successions and such years had
been expired, as here is laid down. And therefore not without cause some
have affirmed, that these Captains usurped authority together in diverse parts
of the Island, and not successively one after another; neither indeed as Kings,
but rather Tyrants, polluted with these grievous sins, as you have heard, and
are so termed by their own Historian, that brings If ^erdix be not another
whom beda calls a (...) King, lib. 4. cap. ^3.
one more to tyrannize, whom neither Monmouth nor he of Westminster has
spoken of, which is Cuneglasus, whom he calls, a Lion tawney Butcher, a
Bear, a Contemner of Religion, an Oppressor of the Clergy, that fought
against God with his many grecuous sins, and warred upon man with his
martial weapons. He (says he) did put away his lawful wife, provoked the
godly with many injuries, was proudly conceited of his own wisdom, and set
his whole hope in uncertain riches. If then the head was so sick, could the
body be sound, that (as Beda says) were so set to break all orders of truth
and justice, that scant any token or remembrance thereof remained? And for
witness against Beda hist. Angl. (...). 1. cap. 21.
them, calls their own Historian Gyldas, that accused them of many
impieties, and this not the least, that those Britains neglected the preaching
of the Gospel to the Saxons.

For these sins assuredly, God gave their Land to another Nation, and
themselves to exile, or to the swords of their enemies. Howsoever, some latter
Britain has rather excused their sins by the ouerrash zeal of Gyldas, whom
he terms a Pulpit-Priest Hum. (...). (...). Brit.
(but no perfect Historian) that beat down sins with an ouer-sharpe censure
of the sinners, as the manner of many Preachers is at this day. But (says he)
let the true renown of the Britains appear to the world: and surely so shall
it do for me. And again I return to my intended purpose.

CARETICVS. 10.


CAreticus succeeded Malgo in the government of Britain, as destitute of
virtue and fluent in vice, 10. An. Do. 586.
as any of these his preceding Kings: for it is recorded that he was a
nourisher of dissensions, and sowed civil wars among his subjects; a sin
odible to God and Man, and unto the unconstant Britains gave occasion of his
hatred: which when the Saxons perceived, was further instigated, and with the
assistance of Gurmund an Arch-pirate, and Captain of the Norwegians, followed
against the King, who not able to resist them, fled into the Town of
Chichester for safety, but by the device of his pursuers, certain sparrowes
being caught, and fire fastened to their feet, were let fly into the Town,
where lighting upon straw and Sc^ Cr^.
other matter fit for flaming, burnt in short space the whole City, and
Careticus flying beyond Seuerne, secured himself among the Mountains of
Wales, wherein he died, after he had vnprosperously reigned three years: and
from that time forth (says Randulphus) Careticus, the continuance of his
reign. Polych. lib. 5. cap. 6.
the Britains lost their whole Kingdom in the East part of the Island, and
were confined in the West by the Rivers Seuerne and Dee.

CADWAN. 11.


CAdwan, after four and twenty years civil dissension maintained among the
Britains, ever since 11. An. Do. 163.
they had forgone their Country, and betaken themselves to those vast, but
securing Mountains; of a Ruler only of North Wales, was made Governor of all
those parts, a man deserving well before he came Will. Malmesb.
to that estate, and being risen, maintained himself and subjects in great
honor and peace. His first affairs against the Saxons, was to revenge the
deaths of his Britains, and harmless Monks of Bangor, slain (as we have
said) by wild Ethelfrid, the mighty King of Northumberland, who in Field had
assembled all their powers, wherein the fatal end either of the Britains or
Northumbrians must needs have ensued, had not the quarrel been stayed by the
mediation of friends. These Kings, then, and there reconciled, embraced peace,
with such true friendship, that they continued amity together so long as
they lived.

Harding says, that this British King Cadwan, honorably received and worthily
cherished Acca, whom Cadwan, the continuance of his reign. John Harding. Chro.
cap. 90.
this King Ethelfrid had put from his bed, for the love he bare unto his
Concubine, but is deceived in making her the mother of Edwin, that was his
sister, and Cadwan to reign but thirteen years, whereas others Paulus
Diaconus.
allot him two and twenty.

CADWALLO. 12.


CAdwallo or Cadwallin, the son of Cadwan, was made King over the Britains,
the year of Christ's 12. An. Do. 635.
Incarnation six hundred thirty five. He warred most strongly against the
Saxons, and either by Conquest or Alliance joined amity with Penda the cruel
King of the Mercians, a Pagan Idolater, himself by the report of Beda,
although a Christian in name and profession, Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 20.
yet in mind and manners so rude and outrageous, that he spared neither
women's weakness nor childrens innocence, but put all to death with grievous
and bitter torments, to fulfill his cruel and unmerciful tyranny, wasting a
long time, and raging over the Provinces, purposed to exterminate out of the
borders of Britanny the whole Nation of the English, and to extinguish the very
name of them. Neither did he ought esteem any reverence or honor to the
Christian Religion, which those men embraced: so that ^en to this day (says
he) the Britains custom is to set light by the Faith or Religion of the
Englishmen; neither will they communicate with them more then with Heathens or
Pagans. These two cruel Kings slew the most Christian Edwyn King of
Northumberland, with his son Prince Osfride, in a great and bloody battle at
Hethfild, the year of Christ's incarnation six hundred thirty three: and the
year following, with wicked force (says Beda) but with worthy vengeance,
Cadwallo the Britain slew Osrike and Eanfrid, Kings of Deira and Bernicia,
that Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 1.
were become Apostataes from their Christian Faiths, and that with cruelty and
loss of the Saxons, as their own Historians held it fit neither to mention
their names in their monthly Calendar, nor register the year wherein they were
slain, in account of their government, but assigned it unto the reign of
their Successor King Oswald, which was so observed unto his days; so terrible
was this worthy Cadwallo, and odious the remembrance of this unfortunate
Battle. But this cursed Captain (says he) enioied not this felicity long:
for the said Oswald, to revenge his brothers death, came with a small power,
but strongly fensed in the faith of Christ, and near to the River Denise gave
him battle, wherein himself and late-victorious Host were all slain and
confounded.

But we must rememher that Beda was a Saxon, in whose behalf his pen has
somewhat passed the bounds of equity (if not verity) in charging this most
valiant Conqueror with tyranny, and his Martial Sword with cruelty, that was
drawn and struck in defense of his native Country, wherein the Saxons claim
stood only upon unjust intrusion. So likewise himself being a Monk and
Priest, has every where blamed the Britains for dissenting from the Roman
Church, in celebration of Easter and other Ceremonies; whereas in doctrine they
were as sincere, which is the true substance of the Gospel. But the Britains
record that this valiant Cadwall^ died not in Heuenfeild, Geffrey Monm.
neither by the hand of King Ofwald, but that he reigned in great honor the
space of eight and forty years, and in peace died 22. of November, in the
year Cadwallo or Cadwan, the continuance of his reign.
of Christ Jesus six hundred seventy seven. His body the Britains buried in
S. Martins Church in London, near Ludgate; whose Image great and terrible,
triumphantly riding on horseback, being artificially cast of Brass, they
placed upon the same West gate, to the further fear and terror of the Saxons,
as Vortimer before had commanded his at Stonar. But this relation, as also that
he married the sister of King Penda, as my often named Manuscript reports, I
leave to the best liking of my Reader.

About this time the most blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet began to infect all
the Eastern World. For although himself lived some nine years before the
government of this Cadwallo, yet presently after his death his doctrine was
more publicly embraced. He was borne in Arabia, of a poor and base stock,
and being fatherless, was sold for a bondslaue unto an Ismaelite, whose name
was Abdemonaples, a man of exceeding great riches, and in great trade of
merchandising, and Mahomet for his subtlety in wit, was his fit instrument,
and greatly in his favor. The Master dying, left Mahomet his chief Factor, who
having great riches in his keeping, married his Mistress, and so became heir of
all; with whom consorted one Sergius a Monk, which for heresy was fled into
Arabia, who instructed Mahomet in the heresy of the Nestorians, and now for
his wealth and Magical Arts, wherewith he bewitched the minds of the people,
assumed to himself the name of the great Prophet of God, and began to be
famously published for the doctrine which he taught: the which was none other
but a confused Chaos of all the heresies that had been before him: for with the
Sabellians he denied the Trinity; with the Manichies, he affirmed but two
persons to be in the Deity; with Eunomius, he denied the equality of the
Father and the Son; and with Macedone, taught that the Holy Ghost was a
creature. He borrowed of the Jews Circumcision; of the Nicholaitans,
pluralities of wives; and of the Gentiles, much Superstition; and more to
cloak his devilish invented fantasies, somewhat he took from the verity of
the Gospel. Of these compounded he devised a Law, and wrote this his Religion
in the book called his An. Do. 625.
Alcaron; and those his Professors he named Saracens, from Sara the wife of
Abraham.

He died of the falling sickness, which long time he had dissembled, saying
forsooth after his trances, that the Angel Gabriel had conference with him,
the brightness of whose glory he could not behold.

CADWALLADER. 13.


CAdwallader, the son of Cadwallo, and last King of the Britains, after the
death of his Father, succeeded 13. An. Do. 685.
him in his dominions, and with great valor fought against the Saxons, as he
of Monmouth affirms, of whom hear him speak in his own words. Cadwalader
(says he) reigning victoriously the time of Geffrey Monm.
twelve years, fell lastly into a dangerous sickness, with despair of
recovery, and unable to govern. Much debate and strife arose among his great
Lords, and others of high estate, insomuch that they warred each against
others, to the no small annoiance and detriment of the whole Country. At which
very time likewise, so great a dearth of corn and victual reigned, that
herbs and roots were the Commons chiefest sustenance: whose third calamity
was mortality and pestilence, reigning so sore, and so suddenly, that in their
eating, drinking, walking, and speaking, they were surprised with death, and in
such number, that the living were scarce able to bury the dead; which miseries
lasted no less then eleven years continuance, whereby the Land became
desolate, and brought forth no fruit at all, insomuch that the King and many of
his Nobles were driven to forsake their native Country, and to seek relief in
foreign parts. Cadwallader repaired to the Court of Alan his cosen, the King
of Little Britain in France, where he was honorably received and maintained.

But now the Ange^ (...) God sheathing his sword from slaughter, and (...)
earth answering man again with her former abundance, those Saxons that were
escaped, sent for more of their Nation to their further supply, who
replenished the Cities, and manured the Country, at this day called Lhoyger,
containing all the Land that lay on the East of Seuerne and Dee, dispossessing
the poor Britains of their rightful inheritance, and dividing their Lands
unto their own use. Cadwallader hearing of their daily arriuage, and their
unjust intrusion upon his homebred subjects, minded their redress by his
present return, and to that end had wrought King Alan, for his succor and
assistance. But see how it chanced: He being now ready to imbarke his Host, and
to hoise up his sails for Britain, and in the silent night much spent in
prayer and supplication, that God would prosper with good success these his
great affairs, behold an Angel appeared to him, or at leastwise to his
seeming he heard a voice, that forbade him the enterprise, declaring that it
was not Gods will that he should undergo that Voyage, or that the Britains
should rule their Land any longer; but contrariwise bade hie him to Rome, and
of Pope Sergius receive the habit of Religion, wherein he should die, and rest
in peace.

This dream (for I hold it no other) being told unto Alan, search was made
into the Books of both D. Powel. Chron. of Wales.
the Merlines, as also into the speech of the Eagle at Shaftesbury, pronounced
eight hundred and eighty years before the birth of our Savior Christ (if we
do believe these to be true) wherein it was prophesied forsooth, that the
Britains should lose their Kingdom, and that the same should be possessed of
others, until the time that the bones of Cadwallader should be brought from
Rome. By such toies and illusions in those days of darkness, the euer-erring
minds of men were content to be lead: for not only Cadwallader, a quiet and
meeke-spirited man, was possessed with this conceit, that it came unto him by a
divine providence, but also King Alan persuaded him to obey his Oracle; and
thereupon preparing for his Pilgrimage, gave over his expedition for Britain,
and left his distressed Subjects to be overrun by strangers, and the Land
to be enioied by a foreign Nation: and receiving the habit of seeming
Religion at the hands of Pope Sergius, died soon after in the year of our
Lord six hundred eighty nine, and there was buried in S. Peter's Church, being
the last King of the Britains blood, after they had held possession thereof the
space of one thousand one hundred thirty and seven years before the Nativity
of Christ, and six hundred eighty eight years after his Birth, as the
Chronicle of Wales, with other Britain Writers, have calculated, though (as is
said) after the largest size. But howsoever this sudden alteration was wrought
in Cadwallader, yet whiles he continued a King in health, he reigned (says
Geffrey) in great magnanimity, the term of three years, and fought many
Battles against Cadwallader, the continuance of his reign.
the Saxons, whose sword was ever sheathed with victory; for Lothaire King of
Kent he slew in the Field, and Edilwach also King of the South Saxons, with the
ruin of his Country, as the British Historians report, and would have it.

But Beda, unto whom more credit is herein to be given, tells us, that
Lothaire was slain by Edrik, his Beda histor. lib. 4. cap. 26.
Nephew and Successor, declaring the manner and day of his death; and that
Ceadwall, a young man of Cap. 15.
the West Saxons blood royal, being banished from among them, fell upon the
South Saxons, harrying the Country and killing their King. But afterward
lamenting the blood he had spilt, whereat even Nature her self seemed to be
offended, in great repentance abandoned his Kingdom, and pilgrim-like went
unto Rome, where of Pope Sergius he was baptized upon Beda hist. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Easter Even, the year from Christ's Nativity six hundred eighty nine. The
times thus agreeing, their names so near, their devotions alike, Sergius the
same ghostly father to both, their sepulchers in one and the same Church, do
strongly confirm that they both were the same and one only man, as we formerly
have said. But with this man Cadwallader, wheresoever he died, lay buried the
last blood of their Kings, their government, and immediately the very Name of
Britain, for many hundred years ensuing, as in the sequel of this History
(Christ assisting) shall be showed.

And now at last, according to my first intendment, I am come to speak of the
succession of Great Britains Monarkes, from which (upon the fore-shewed
occasions of the Islands division, the Saxons possessions, and these Britain
Resisters) I have been ouerlong stayed, and am forced to return again to
King Hengist, the first of the Saxons, that I may show their succeeding
succession in this English Monarchy: wherein of necessity I must desire the
patience of my Reader, if some things be again touched that formerlie have
been spoken, the Matter of History so much requiring, and the Method that to
my proceeding I have herein proposed, enforcing it.

THE SAXONS SVCCESSIONS IN THE MONARCHY OF GREAT BRITAIN, Saxon Monarchs.
WHEREOF HENGIST THE FIRST KING OF KENT BECAME THE FIRST MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XIII.


HEngist, a Prince of the English-Saxons, having the An. Do. 450. Beda. Malmsb.
Command over certain forces planted in the Lowcountries of Germany, in the
year of Christ's Incarnation four hundred and fifty, transported them over
into Britain, where the fifth year after his arrival, he began his Kingdom
in Kent; and having surprised his son in law King Vortigern, slain his
Britains, and seized into his possession the best of the Island, he laid the
foundation of a Monarchy, and deserves to be reputed the first Monarch of the
English Nation.

(2) He (as all the Saxon Kings besides) does claim his original from Prince
Woden, and his wife Fria, by Wechta the eldest of their ^uen sons, being the
Floren. Wigorn.
fifth in issue from them; as thus: Himself was the son of Withtgils, who
was the son of Witha, and he the son of Wechta, the eldest son of the
Deified Woden.

This Prince held the supreme Scepter of this Island for thirty four years
continuance, and therein died Hengist, how long he reigned.
honorably, says Marianus Scotus. But Peter de Ikham, Polydore, and others
say, that he was slain in battle, Maria. Scot. Peter Ikham.
or else taken by Edol, Earl of Gloucester, and beheaded at Conesborow. He
left issue behind him two sons and one daughter, whose names were Hatwaker,
Eske, Geffrey Mon. Polydor Uirgil.
and Rowena.

(3) Hatwaker his eldest son, is reported by Petrus Albinus of Wittenberg, a
great Genealogist and Petrus Albinus.
Hitoriographer also) to be Duke of the Saxons in Germany, and there left to
govern the people at his Fathers departure for Britain. And if Albinus
authority be sufficient, he was the Father of Duke Hatwegat, and grandfather of
^erik King of the Saxons, ancestor to the valiant Witikindus, the principal
progenitor of the most noble Family of the Dukes of Saxony.

(4) Eske, the second son of King Hengist, came over with his Father into
Britain, and was his assistant in all his wars, wherein he gave worthy
testimony of his valor: whose Kingdom of Kent after his death he enjoyed,
and gave name to that Countries Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 5. Eske, how long
he reigned.
Inhabitants, who were from him called Eskings, over whom he reigned peaceably
twenty years.

(5) Rowena, the daughter of King Hengist, was borne in Germany before her
Fathers departure, and afterward sent for by him into Britain, to further his
designs. At whose surpassing beauty and feature Vortigern so ^ lawful and
loving w^, to ^ Paganish bed, and to the ^ and grief of the Nob^, ^ cond wi^e,
and the ^ struction. By her he had a ^ all laws either of God ^ wife; by whom
he had i^ue ^ ly spent the days of his life, as he was ^ got in that wicked
bed.

This Rowena, whom some call Ro^a, by (...) (...).
is accounted the Niece, and not the Daug^ (...) ^gist. But seeing his opinion
is grounded upon (...) youth of Hengist, as not sufficient in years to (...) a
daughter so mariageable, I rather think and hold this bare testimony unable
to turn the great stream of other Writers out of their usual course and
(...) channel.

ELLA THE FIRST KING OF THE SOVTH-SAXONS, AND SECOND MONARCH E^, Mo^at.
OF THE ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XIV.


ELla a noble Saxon, being sent for by King Hengist, An. D. 581. Beda. hist.
lib. 2. cap. 5.
about the three and twentieth year of his reign, brought a fresh supply of
those Germans to the relief of his Countrymen, who with his forces landed at
the haven now called Shoreham in Sussex, where putting back the Inhabitants in
many skirmishes, lastly chased them into a great wood then called Matt.
Westminst.
Andredflege, whence often being assailed by the sudden assaults of the
Britains, wherein as may be thought, he lost the lives of his two elder
sons, was so hardly beset, that he sent for more aid of his Saxons, who came
to his supply.

(2) His strength thus augmented, and ambition still increased, he fought three
cruel and bloody battles, but the last of them most fatal against the
Britains, in the place then called Macrodes-burne, and besieging the ancient
and famous City Anared-Chester Henry Huntington
situated in the said great forest, and chief defensible fortress in all
those Southern parts, intercepted the Britains that came to their relief, and
entering the same by an assault, put to the sword all that were found within it.
After which great loss, the Britains sought rather to provide for their own
safety by flying into desert places, then by making open resistance to procure
their own too apparent destruction.

(3) Ella in this state continued the time of five years before he assumed the
name of King, o^ the limits An. Do. 488.
of that Province assigned under his government, but then without any show of
resistance laid the foundation of this Kingdom, which was the second of the
Saxons; and as Hengist held Kent, so he had Sussex and Surrey for his
Possession, wherein for six years space E^, how long h^ reigned.
with Hengist he lived, and that with such approbation of valor as that after
his death he became the second Saxon Monarch of the Englishmen, in the year of
grace 488.

(4) He is said to be the elder son of Osa, whose genealogy Florentius of
Worcester thus deriueth: Osa Florent. Wigorn.
(says he) was the son of Ether^ert, and he the son of Ingengeat, who was
the son of (...), whose father was Alusa, the son of Ingebrand, the son
of Wegbrand, the son of Beorn, the son of Beornus, the elder son of
Brand, the son of Bealdeag, the sixth son of prince Woden and of Lady Fria
his wife.

(5) His issue were Kymen, Plenching, and Cissa, three valiant sons, that
came over with him, and assisted him in his enterprises for Britain. From
Kymen, the port wherein they arrived, was called Kymenishore; by VVil. Malmsb.
the Britains, Cuneueshore, which time and seas has both shortened, and
altered: and now is it called Shoreham, a well known haven in Sussex. This
Prince came to his grave before his Father, either by the stroke of wars, or
by the course of nature, without further mention of his acts, and his
succession, cut off by his death.

(6) Plenching his second son, was borne unto him Florent. VVig.
in the Low countries of Germany, and with his brethren assisted his Father to
the attaining of the South Saxons Crown; but being cut off by untimely death,
whether by the hand of the enemy, or by natures appointment, is uncertain.

(7) The youngest son of king Ella, was Cissa, whom death spared to live a
long life; but fame as sparing to adorn it with memory of his acts: for
nothing of him is left memorable, besides the building of Chichester. Fortune
indeed set his fathers Crown on his head, but kept the Imperial Diadem in
her own hand, to adorn the head of a worthier bearer, which was Cherdik the
West Saxon, unto whom Cissa gave yearly contribution, to secure him from the
Britains, as before and after has been, and shall be showed.

(8) This Ella his entrance and erection of his Kingdom, for time is
uncertain; but his reign therein, as also in his Monarchy, is more
certainly known: for he was King of the South Saxons the Sea Chap. 6.
space of thirty two years, and Monarch of the Englishmen six and twenty,
dying in the year of Christ's Incarnation five hundred and fourteen, which
was the thirty sixth after his first arrival into Britain.

CHERDIK THE FIRST KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND THIRD MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XV.
Cherdik.


THe Saxons Sun, thus risen and high ascended upon 1. An. Do. 495.
the South of Britain, began now to spread his beams toward the West; for
Kent being quietly possessed by King Eske, and South-Saxia, with all the
subdued, at the dispose of great Ella, Cherdik a valiant Captain of the Low
Country Germans, thought himself as sufficient in wars, and as able to reach
at, to wear, and to weld a Crown of Estate, as either of them that had so
done before him: and seeing that Britain was now the seedeplot for Diadems,
set his affection and preparation that way.

(2) He with his forces entered in the West of that Island, where he in his first
battle so danted the Inhabitants, M^. (...).
that apparent signs of approaching glory were added to his aspiring hopes: for
therein he slew Natanleod, otherwise called Nazaleod, a mighty King of the
Britains, whereby an easy entrance was laid open Henr. Hunt.
to his desired Empire, and a more easy war left to his posterity. This
battle chanced about the year of Christ Jesus five hundred and eight, and was
fought in the region of Natanleod, (which Country bare the name of the King)
and near unto a brook of water in the West of Hampshire, which from Cherdik
began to be called Cherdiks-ford, where now a Town of the same name stands,
but by contraction and shortness of speech is called Chardford.

(3) Florentius of Worcester, the Saxons Genealogist Flor. Wigorniensis.
(as I may well term him) brings this Cherdik (as he does the rest of the
Saxon Kings) from the ancient Prince Woden, and that in this manner: Cherdik
(says he) was the son of Elisius, and he the son of Esla, the son of
Gerisius, the son of Wigga, the son of Friairin, the son of Freodegar,
the brother of Beorn, the progenitor of Ida the first King of Bernicia, and
both of them the sons of Brand, the son of Bealdeag, the fifth son of the
foresaid Woden.

(4) In the seventh year of Ella his Monarchy, was his arriuage, and six
years after he began his Kingdom of the West Saxons, seating himself and
foundation thereof betwixt the Britains and the South Saxons, for whose further
security, Cissa King of that Province, gave him an yearly contribution
toward the maintenance of his charge in war; wherein he got such
reputation, that after the death of Ella, and the thirteenth of his own
reign, he* assumed the Monarchy unto himself, and was both the first King
of the West Saxons, and the third Monarch of the Englishmen, wherein he
continued the space of twenty cherdik, how long he reigned.
one years, and deceased in the year of our Lord five hundred thirty five,
being the three and thirtieth of his Kingdom, and the fortieth after his first
arrival.

(5) His issue were two sons, Kenrik and Chelwolfe: the one immediately, and
the issue of the other collaterally attained to the same possession and title
that Cherdike here first laid.

(6) Chelwolfe his second son (for of Kenrik the eldest we are hereafter to
speak) has little mention made among our writers: more then that he was the
Ancestour of Eskwin the eight King of the West Saxons, that is to say, the
father to Kenfrid the father of Kensy; which Kensy had issue the said Eskwin,
who was the Successor of king Kenwalk, and predecessor of King Kentwin in the
kingdom of the West-Saxnos. See chap. 7.


KENRIK THE SECOND KING OF Kenrik.
THE WEST SAXONS, AND FOVRTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XVI.


KEnrik, the eldest son of King Cherdick (as is said) 1. An. Do. 534.
being borne in Germany, and following his father into Britain, valiantly
served under him, as well in the Battle fought against Mat. VVest^.
King Natanleod, the first day of his arriuage, as in other battles against the
Britains in other places; namely, at Cherdiksford, Cherdisley, and in the
Conquest of the I Will of Wight. Immediately upon the death of his Father, he
succeeded in his whole dominions, and was ordained the second King of the
West Saxons, and the fourth Monarch of the Englishmen, beginning his reign
over both at one and the same time, the year of Christ his Nativity five
hundred thirty four.

(2) And enlarging his confines upon the Territories of the Britains, gave
them two great overthrows; the one at Searesbery in Wilt-shire, and the other
at Banbury in Oxfordshire, which was fought the An. Do. 556.
two and twentieth of his reign, whereby his fame grew more renowned, and his
Kingdom in more quiet after. He reigned the space of twenty six years,
Kenrik, how long he reigned.
and left this life in the year of our Lord God five hundred sixty.

(3) He had issue three sons, Chenl^e, C^thwolfe, and C^th. Chelwin the
first, succeeded his father in the Monarchy, and West Saxons Kingdom.

(4) C^thwolfe, the second, assisted his brother in many victories, as
presently in his reign shall follow. And C^th, the third brother, famous in
his issue, though mentionlesse for action in himself, whereof more largely
has been spoken in the reign of Kenrik, In Chap. 7. Soft. 2.
as he was King only of the West Saxons.

CHEVLINE THE THIRD KING OF Cheuline.
THE WEST SAXONS, AND FIFTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XVII.


CHeuline, the eldest son of King Kenrike, served An. D. 561.
with great commendations under his father, in all his wars against the
Britains, and is specially mentioned at the Battle of Banbury in Oxfordshire;
and after his fathers death Matt. Westminster.
became the third King of the West Saxons, and the fifth Monarch of the
Englishmen. He much enlarged the bounds of his Kingdom, and increased the
power and glory of the West Saxons.

(2) For continuing the wars where his Father left, did not only subdue the
Britains in many Battles, Henry Hunting.
but also set himself against his own Nation the Saxons, and sought to impose
the scope of his power upon the South of the River Thames: for entering Kent
(whose King was then a child, by name Ethelbert, the son of Imerik) at
Wiphandun or Wimbledon.
Wilbandun in Surrey, in a set and sore Battle, defeated all his forces, whence
the young King was chased, and two of his greatest Captains, bearing the names
of Dukes, were slain, as we have said.

(3) Not long after this victory, he set his mind to enlarge his West Saxons
Dominions upon the possession of the declining Britains, and to that end
furnished forth a great Band of his Soldiers, whereof he made his brother
Cuthwin chief General. These marching to Bedford, gave Battle to the
Britains, where they slew them downright, and surprised sour of their
chiefest Towns, at that time called Liganburge, Ail^.
Eglesbourgh, Bensington, and Eusham, which they fortified, to their own
strength, and the Britains great loss.

(4) And following the Tract of his foregoing fortunes, about six years after
sent forth again his Saxons, under (...) conduct of the foresaid Cuthwin, who
encountered the Britains at Di^th or Deorham, with such valor and success,
that besides great slaughter of the British Soldiers, three of their Kings,
whose names were, Coinmagill, Candidan, and Farimnagill, fell in the Field,
with the surprizall of these three Matthew. West.
Cities, Gloucester, Bathe, and Cirencester. Then (says Gyldas.
Gyldas) evidently appeared the Lands destruction, the sins of the Britains
being the only cause, when neither Prince nor People, Priest nor Leuite,
regarded the Law of the Lord, but disobediently wandered in their own ways.

(5) But no greater were the sins of the Britains, then the insatiable
desires of the Saxons were to conquer: for Cheuline about the last of Malgoe
his government, met the Britains at Fethanleah, in the face of a The. (...).
Field, which was fought out, to the great slaughters of them both, and with
the death of Prince Cuth, King Cheulins son: notwithstanding the victory
fell on his side with great spoils obtained, and possessions of many
Provinces, which himself no long time enioied.

(6) For grown proud through his many prosperous victories against his
enemies, and tyrannizing over his own Subjects, the West Saxons, fell into
such contempt, that they joined with the Britains for his destruction. The
greatest against him, was disloyal Chell, or Cealrik, his nephew, the son of
Cuthwin his most loyal brother, whom both the Nations had elected for
General. Under him they muster and march into Wilt-shire, and at Wodnesbeothe
(now Wannes-ditch) pitch down their Standards. Cheuline that thought Leyland.
he lead fortune in a lease, with confident boldness built his present
proceedings upon his former success, and in the face of his enemies displaied
his colors. But the Battles joined, and the Field goared with blood, the day
was lost upon the Kings side, and he in distress saved himself by flight.
Here might you have seen the world, as it is, unconstant and variable; for he
a Mars, that had ouer-borne the Britains in so many Battles, and had raised his
Saxons unto so great a height, is forced to flee before his conquered Captives,
and to exile himself from the sight of his own Subjects, after he had
gloriously reigned thirty one years, or (as some will) thirty three, and as a
mean man, died in his banishment, the year of grace Cheuline, how long he
reigned.
five hundred ninety two.

(7) He had issue two sons, which were Cuth and Cuthwin, the elder whereof
had valiantly served in his fathers wars, namely at Wimbledone in Surry,
against King Ethelbert and his power of Kentishmen, in the year of Christ five
hundred sixty seven; and lastly in the Battle at Fethanleah, where the
Britains received a great overthrow. Notwithstanding, as he was valiantly
fighting among the thickest of his enemies, he was there slain, in the year
of our Lord five hundred eighty four, being the five and twentieth year of
his fathers reign, and that without issue.

(8) Cuthwin, the younger son of King Cheuline, suruiued his father, but
succeeded him not, because of his young years; or else (and that rather) for
the hatred that his father had purchased of his Subjects, which they repaied
him in his own expulsion, and in this his sons deprivation. But although the
wreath of the West Saxons did not adorn this Cuthwines head, yet shone it more
bright, and stood with greater majesty upon the brows of Ina, the warlike and
zealous King of West Saxons, and of Egbert the victorious and first sole
absolute Monarch of the English Empire: both of them in a right line issued
from this Cuthwin, as in the seventh Chapter we have said.

ETHELBERT THE FIFTH, AND FIRST CHRISTIAN KING OF KENT, AND THE SIXTH MONARCH
OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS WIVES AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XVIII.


THe flame of the West Saxons for a time thus quenched, An. Do. 561.
the Lamp of Kent began again to shine, and to assume the Title of the
Monarchy, after it had been suppressed in them through the reigns of VVil.
Malmes.
these four last Kings: for young Egberts entrance, with the great loss of
his Kentish, overthrown by King Cheuline, gave rather inducements to a
tributary subjection, then any apparent hopes to purchase an Empire.

(2) But such is the dispose of God in his hidden Counsel, that things of
least appearance many times become the greatest in substance, as in this Prince
it was evidently seen, who making use of his own youth and loss, got thereby
experience, both to defense himself, and to provoke others, and with such
victories abroad, repaired his losses at home, that as far as Humber he made
all subject to Kent.

(3) Thus grown to be the greatest of any Saxon before him, he sought to hold
it up by foreign alliance, Beda histor. lib. 1. cap. 25.
and to that end became suter for Berta a most virtuous Christian Lady, the
daughter of Chilperik King of France; unto whom by her father she was lastly
granted, but with these conditions, that she might reserve her Christian
Profession, enjoy the presence and the instructions of Luidhard her learned
Bishop, with the place of his Queen.

(4) These covenants concluded, and many French Christians attending her in his
Court, by their daily service of God, and continual practice of piety, drew
many of the English to favor their Religion, yea and the King also to be
inclined that way. And as these were working the salvation of Kent, behold Gods
proceedings for the conversion of the rest.

(5) It chanced great Gregory (then but Archdeacon of Rome) to see certain
youths of this Island brought to that City, to be sold for slaves: His
Christian heart pitying at such heathenish tyrannizing, and beholding
steadfastly their faces to be fair and Angellike, demanded of their Merchants,
of what Nation they came; who made him answer, that they were Angles, and by
that name were known unto other Nations. Indeed, said he, and not without
cause, for their resemblance is Angelical, and fit it is that they be made
inheritours with the Angels in Heaven. But of what Province are they? said
Gregory. It was replied; Of Deira, a Country situated in the Continent of
Britain. Now surely, says he, it is great pity but these people should be
taken from Dei ira, the ire of God. And farther asking what was the name of
their King, it was answered, that he was called Ella; whereunto he alluding,
said, that Alleluia, to the praise of God, in that Princes Dominions should
shortly be sung.

(6) And to that purpose himself, being afterward Pope, sent Austine a Monk,
with forty others, Austine comes into England.
for assistance, whereof Melitus, Iustus, and John were chief. These landing
in Tanet, in the month of July, about five hundred ninety and six years after
the Incarnation of Christ, and one hundred forty and seven after the first
arriuage of these Angles into Britain, had immediately access unto the
presence of King Ethelbert, but yet in the open Field, for he feared to
confer with them in any house, lest by sorcerie (as he fondly surmised) he
might be overcome.

(7) These preaching unto him the word of life, his answer was, that presently
he could not consent to their Doctrine, neither rashly forsake his ancient and
accustomed Religion. But seeing (said he) you tell us strange things, and give
us fair promises of after life, when this life shall be ended, we permit you
to preach the same to our people, and to convert as many as you can; and we
our selves will minister all things behoouefull for your liuelihood. Which
promise he instantly performed, and in Canterbury his Austine and his
followers maintained in Canturbury.
head City, allowed them fit places for residence, and sufficient provision for
their maintenance; wherein these religious men, following in some measure the
examples of the Apostles, spent their times in preaching and prayers, watching
for the peoples conuersions, and exercising the works of true piety, as
examples and motives unto others, to embrace the Gospel Beda hist. lib. 2. cap.
26. Beda hist. lib. 1. cap. 26.
which they sought to plant.

(8) Near unto the East part of the City, stood an ancient Church, built by
the Christian Romans, whiles they had dwelt in Britain, and by them dedicated
to the honor of S. Martin, and is so yet called. To this Church the Christian
Queen Berta, with her Communicants the French, daily resorted to pray, and
unto these, and in this Church, Austine and his fellows began daily to preach:
unto whose Sermons so many of the Kentish also resorted, that a plentiful
harvest in short time appeared, upon the seede-plot of their tillage; for it is
reported that ten thousand of the English people were baptized there in one
day, insomuch Gregory lib. 7. cap. 26.
that the King himself forsook his Heathenish Idolatry, and likewise
received the Sacrament of Baptism, unto his salvation in Christ: in witness
whereof, he gave the Lordship and Royalty of his chief City Canterbury,
unto Augustine, and resigned his princely Canturbury given to Austine.
Palace therein unto him, who in the East of this City laid the foundation of
that great, and afterward magnificent Church, dedicated to the service and
name of Christ, which at this day is the Cathedral of that Metropolitan See:
and Ethelbert to give him more room, withdrew himself unto Reculuer in Tanet,
where he erected a Palace for himself and his successors, the Will. Lambert
P^mb. of Kent.
compass whereof may be traced by an old wall, whose ruins remain there yet to
this day.

(9) Austine thus seated, and in the well deserved favor of King Ethelbert,
got one request more, which was this, that whereas by the Law of the Twelve
Tables, it was forbidden to bury the dead within the walls of any City, (the
practice whereof, we daily find by monuments taken up in the fields
adioining) it would please him to give to that use, an old Idoll-Temple
standing without the East Wall of the City, The burial of the dead granted
within the City.
wherein the King himself had wontedly worshipped his Idols. This obtained, and
the Church purged from that profane exercise, to the service of God, being
honored with the name of S. Pancras, King Ethelbert added thereunto a most
fair Monastery, built upon his own cost, and dedicated it unto the name of
Peter and Paul the Apostles, appointing it to be the place for the Kentish
Kings Sepulchers, and Austine likewise meant it for the burials of his
successors in that See. But first it became the Monument of his own name: for
in regard of the Procurer, both Pancras, Peter, and Paul were soon swallowed
up, and the whole called only by the name of S. Austines. In this place, eight
Kings of Kent had their bodies interred, and ten of their Archbishops
therein laid, until S. Austines Monastery.
that Cuthbert the eleventh in succession, in favor of S. John's, a new Church
by him erected, procured of King Egbert the son of Ercombert, that the
succecding Archbishops might be buried there. This Monastery, as all the rest
did, came to her fatal period in the days of King Henry the Eighth; whose
uncovered walls stood so long languishing in time and storms of weather, that
daily increased the aspect of her ruins, till now lastly they are made subject
to other public uses, and the whole tract of that most goodly foundation in
the same place no where appearing. Only Ethelberts Tower, in memory and
honor of Ethelberts Tower yet standing.
the man, as yet has escaped the verdict and sentence of destruction; whose
beauty, though much defaced and ouerworne, will witness to succeeding ages the
magnificence of the whole, when all stood complete in their glory together.

(10) These his happy beginnings, Austine signified by Letters to Rome, and
withal demanded directions, how he might further proceed: which questions,
were they not written by the Venerable Beda, Beda hist. lib. 1. cap. 27.
we could hardly believe that such idle conceits should have place in the
mind of a man so well and fruitfully busied: as, Whether a woman with child
might Austines questions to the Pope.
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, or in her monthly disease, the holy
Communion, or enter the Church: how long after her deliverance, the husband
ought to refrain her Bed: How the Gifts that were offered on the Altar, ought
to be distributed: and unto what degree of consanguinitie Christians might
marie: and many others such like, as though himself had never read either
Moses or Paul. But of the thing then more needful, for that at that time it
stirred most contention, it seems he was sufficiently instructed; neither
among his other questions is it once named: and that was, the due time for the
celebration of Easter: the difference whereof, betwixt the Britains and the
Romans was such, that it caused Lord-like Austen to prophecy (if not to seek)
their destructions; and they in their opinions, to hold him no better then the
Man of Sin: for thus the Story is reported.

(11) Austine, by the assistance and authority of King Ethelbert, called an
Assembly of the British Bishops Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. Rand. Cest.
Sigebertus. Galfr^d. lib. 8. cap. cap. 4.
and Doctors, that had retained the doctrine of the Gospel amongst them, even
from the first plantation thereof by the Apostles themselves, to be holden in
the Borders of the Victians and West Saxons, and at the place upon that
occasion called About Southh^oton as is thought.
Augustines Oak: thither resorted seven British Bishops, and many other
welllearned men (says Beda) out of their greatest Monastery at Bangor, where
at that time Dinoth was Abbat. These men now ready to go to the foresaid
Synod, came first to a certain holy and wise man, which lived thereabout an
Anchorets life, to ask his counsel, whether they ought at Austins preaching
and exhortation, leave their Traditions or no: The Anchoret replied, If he be a
man of God, follow him. But how shall we prove (said they) that he is a man
of God? The Anchoret answered, Our Lord says, Takeyee on you my Yoke, and
learn ye of me, for I am mild and humble of heart. If therefore this Austine
be mild and humble of heart, it is like that himself bears the Yoke of
Christ, and will offer you the same to bear. But if he be cursed and proud,
it is certain that he is not of God, neither must we much esteem his words.
Then they enquired, how they might know whether this Austine were proud or no:
Provide (quoth he) that he, and his company may come first The Ancho^es
counsel.
to the place of the Synod or Councell-house: and if it be so that when you
approach near him, he arise courteously, and salute you, their think him to
be the servant of Christ, and so hear him, and obey him: but if when you
approach, he despise you, and will not vouchsafe to rise at your presence,
which are the greater number, let him likewise be despised of you. And truly
(says he) as this Anchoret bade them, so did they: for it happened, that when
they came thither, S. Austine was already set in his chair, and stirred not:
which when they saw, forthwith waxing wroth, they noted him of pride, and
therefore endeavored to overthwart and gainsay whatsoever he proposed. And so
the Synod brake up without any thing done.

Thus then we see, that the substance of doctrine was embraced in Britain,
before the sending of Austin from Rome: only in ceremonies they dissented, as
the most of Christian Churches, without derogation to the Gospel, at this day
do. And this for the celebration of Easter, a matter of no great moment (if we
consider our Christian liberty, and the Apostles fear, Galla. 4. 9.
that the observations of days, months, times, and years, turn the hearts
after beggarly rudiments, bring again into bondage, and make his labors for
Christ in vain) yet for the different observation only of this Feast from the
Romans, how often are the Britains termed by Beda, a wicked people, a cursed
nation, and well deserving those calamities which the Lord did afflict upon
them? This controversy for Easters celebration, thus begun, continued no less
then ninety years after, and was lastly concluded in manner as follows.

(12) This variance (says Beda) made not only Beda hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
the people to doubt and fear, lest bearing the name of Christians, they did
and had run in vain, as the Apostle speaks, but also good Oswy King of
Northumberland, and learned Prince Alkfryd, with Queen Eanfled, were much
distracted and perplexed: for by this variance (says he) it often times
happened, that in one year two Easters were kept; for the King breaking up his
Fast, and solemnizing of the Feast, the Queen with Prince Alkfrid, continued
their Fast, and kept that day their Palme-Sunday. To conclude which
contrariety, a Synod purposely was called, and the Question disputed by their
best Divines. The place was Stranshalch or Whitby, whereof Hilda was Abbess.
Stranshalch Synod.
The chief parties for, and against the accustomed time of keeping that feast,
were King Oswy and Prince Alkfrid his son. The Disputers for Oswy and the
established orders, were Colman Archbishop of York, with his Scottish Clergy,
and Hilda the virtuous and learned Lady Abbess of the place. For Alkfrid and
the attempted alteration, were Agilbert Bishop of the West Saxons, Wilfrid
Abbat of Rippon, with James and Romanus, two learned men, and the reverend
Cedda newly consecrated Bishop, appointed Prolocutor of the Assembly.

The Convocation set, King Oswy made a solemn King Oswy persuades to union.
Oration, wherein he urged a necessity, that those people which served one
God, ought to celebrate his heavenly Sacraments alike, and should keep one
order and rule in the same: the truth of which service, and surcease of that
long unchristian variance, for the Christian celebration and time of Easter,
was then presently by those learned men to be handled, and by best
approouements to be determined; whereunto he requested their uttermost
endeavors, and to that purpose commanded his Archbishop Colman first to
speak: whereupon Colman with reverence stood up and said: The Easter which I
observe, I received Colmans speech to the Synod.
of my Forefathers, of whom I was consecrated, and sent hither for your
Bishop. They all (you know) were godly men, and observed the Feast as we do
now; neither think you they kept this tradition without sure warrant from
greater then themselves, which was S^lut John the Evangelist, and the Disciple
whom Jesus especially loved, who in the Churches which himself pl^ted,
celebrated the Feast of Easter, as we do now. Therefore knowing the man so
worthy, and the manner so ancient, I hope you will all confess, it is not safe
for us now to reject.

Wilfride the declaimer, appointed to answer, stood up and said: The Easter
which we observe, we our selves Wilfrides answer.
have seen observed in Rome, where the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul lived,
preached, suffered, and are buried: and in our travels through France and Italy,
either for study or upon pilgrimage, we have seen the same order kept: and we
know by relation, that in Afric, Asia, Egypt and Greece, nay thorowout all
nations and tongues in the world where Christ has his Church, that this our
time and order is observed. Shall then these obstinate Picts (I mean the
Britains) and these remote Islands in the Ocean Sea, and yet not all of them
neither, fondly contend in t^is point against the whole world?

But here Colman interrupted him, and said, I much marvel, brother, that you
term our doings a fond contention, Colmans (...).
seeing we have for our warrant so worthy an Apostle as John was, who only
leaned upon our Lords breast, and whose life and behavior all the world
acknowledges to be most wise and discreet.

Godforbid (said Wilfrid) that I should accuse John: but Wilfrids moderation.
yet we know that he kept the decrees of Moses literally, and according to the
Jewish Laws; and so the rest of the Apostles were constrained in some things
to do, for the weakness of them who accounted it a great sin to abrogate
these rites that God himself had instituted; and for that cause S. Paul did
circumcise Timothy, offered bloud-sacrifices in the Temple, shaued his head at
Corinth with Aq^a and Priscilla: upon which consideration also spoke James unto
Paul, You see brother how many thousand of the Jews have received the faith,
and all of these are yet zealous followers Act. 21. 20.
of the Law. But the light of the Gospel now shining through the world, it is
not lawful for any Christian to be circumcised, or to offer up bloody
sacrifices of Beasts. Saint John therefore, according to the custom of the
Law, in the fourteenth day of the first month, at even began the celebration
of Easters Festiuitie, regardlesse whether it fell upon the Sabbath day, or any
other of the week. But S. Peter preaching the Gospel in Rome, remembering that
our Lord arose from his grave the first day after the Sabbath, giving thereby
unto us certain assurance of our resurrection, observed the Feast of Easter
according to the Commandment of that Law he looked for, even as S. John did,
that is to say, the first Sabbath after the full Moon of the first month.
Neither does this new observation of the Gospel, and Apostles practice, break
the old Law, but rather fulfilleth it; for the Law commands the Feast of
Passover to be kept from the foureteenth day of that month, to the twenty
and one Exodus 12.
of the same. And this has the Nicene Council not newly decreed, but rather
confirmed (as the Ecclesiastical History Ruff^ lib. 10. cap. 6.
witnesses) that this is the true observation of Easter, and of all Christians
after this account is to be celebrated: and thereupon charged Bishop Colman,
that he neither observed it according to John nor Peter.

To this the Bishop replied, that A^tholius for his holiness much commended by
the said Ecclesiastical History, Colman.
and Columba a Father of like sanctity, by whom miracles were wrought, kept
the Feast according as he then did, from whose imitation he durst not digress.

Your Fathers, which you pretend to follow, how holy soever Wilfrid.
they be (said Wilfrid) and what miracles soever they have wrought, yet this I
answer, that in the day of judgment many shall say unto Christ, that they have
prophesied, Matthew. 7.
cast out Devils, and wrought miracles in his name, to whom our Lord will
answer, I know you not. And if your Father Columba (yea and our Father, if he
be the true servant of Christ) were holy and mighty in miracles, yet can he
by no means be preferred to the most blessed Prince of the Apostles, unto
whom our Lord said, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall Matthew. 16.
not prevail against it, and to thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Thus said, the King asked Colman, whether our Lord indeed spoke thus
unto Peter, who answered, He did. But can you (said he) give evidence of so
special authority granted to your Father Columba? The Bishop said, No. Then
(quoth the King) do you both agree confidently, that thesewords were
principally spoken unto Peter, and that unto him the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven were given? They all answered, It is most certain. Whereupon the King
concluded this great controversy, and said, Then will not I gain say The
Synod mild. lie dismissed by King Oswy.
such a P^rter as this is, but as far as I know, and am able, I will covet in
all points to obey his ordinante, lest perhaps when I come to the Doors of
Heaven, I find none to open unto me, having his displeasure, which is so
clearly proved to bear the keys thereof.

And with this so simple a collection of King Oswy, concluded this long and
great contention for the celebration of Easter; which here, as borne before
the time, I have inserted, to continue the narration thereof together, and to
avoid repetition of the same things, which I seek purposely to shun; and so
return again to King Ethelbert.

(13) Who now became an instrument himself for the conuersions of his Nation
the Saxons. The first fruits of his intendements were wrought upon Sebert King
of the East Angles, his own sisters son, whom not only he converted to
Christianity, but therein assisted him in the building of the Cathedral
Church of S. Paul for Miletus his Bishop; as also the Church of S. Peter's on
the West of London, then called Thorny, with the assistance of a London
Citizen, as Holinsh. hist. Ang lib 5 cap. 21. Beda ^or. lib. 2. cap. 3.
some have said; and himself at Rochester, built the Cathedral Church there,
which he dedicated to the Apostle S. Andrew.

(14) This noble King having a care for them that should come after, brought
the Laws of his Country into their own mother tongue, and left nothing VVil.
Malmes. Will. Thorn. Register Cant.
unattempted, that might advance the glorious Gospel of Christ, or with honor
adorn his own temporal reign; and is worthily an example to all succeeding
Princes, in all true piety, and heroical parts of a true Christian King. He
died the four and twentieth Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 5. Ethelbert, how long he
reigned.
day of February, in the year of our Lord God six hundred and sixteen, being
the one and twentieth of his Christianity, the three and twentieth of his
Monarchy, and the fifty sixth of his Kingdom of Kent, and was buried at
Canterbury in the Church of S. Peter and Paul, afterward called S. Augustines,
in the Chapel of S. Martines.

(15) His first wife was Berta, the daughter of Chilperik King of France, as we
have said, who was the son of King Clotayre, the son of Clodoue, the first
Christian King of that Country. She deceased before the King her husband, and
was buried in the Church of S. Peter and Paul at Canterbury, within the
Chapel of S. Martines there.

(16) He had a second wife, whose name is not recorded by any Writer, being, as
is thought, unworthy of remembrance, because of the unnatural contract and
marriage of Edbald her husbands son; a sin that both Law and Religion do
condemn: and lastly by her converted husband was forsaken, without either note
of her issue or death.

(17) The issue of King Ethelbert by Queen Berta were Edbald that succeeded
him in the Kentish Kingdom, Ethelburg, and Edburge two daughters.

(18) Ethelburg, the elder, was a Lady of passing beauty and piety, and
surnamed Tace, who greatly desired and intended a Virgins life, had not her
mind been auerted by the entreaty of her brother, the persuasions of Bishop
Paulinus, and the earnest suit of Edwine King of Northumberland; unto which
Edwine lastly she yielded to be his wife, in hope of his conversion, and unto
whom for that purpose Pope Boniface directed his Epistle from Rome, earnestly
exhorting Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 11.
her that she should be diligent for the Kings salvation: which she soon
after effected, to the great joy of both the Kings, and to the comfort and
increase of the Christian Faith thorowout England.

(19) Edburg, another daughter of King Ethelbert, is warranted only by the
testimony of John Capgraue, Capgraue.
a great traveler in Antiquities, and should be most skilful in his own
Country of Kent: notwithstanding he is to be suspected in this, that he
reports her to have been a Nun in the Monastery of Minster in the I Will of
Thanet, under the Foundresse Domnewe, being the daughter of her nephew
Ermenred, and that she succeeded in the government of that house, Mildred the
daughter of the same Domnewe. He reports also, that she died and was buried
in the same place, and that her body was from thence removed by the
Archbishop Lankfrank, to his Church of S. Gregory in Canterbury.

REDVVALD THE THIRD KING OF Monarch 7.
Redwald.
THE EAST ANGLES, AND SEVENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS WIFE AND ISSVE.
CHAPTER XIX.


REdwald, the son of Titulus, and the third King of An. D. 616.
the East Angles, had been a substitute under Ethelbert King of Kent, and
served a long time as his Viceroy over all his dominions, whereby he gained
such reputation to himself, that either for his own valor, or Edbalds vices,
(contemned of the people for his Apostasy, frenzy, and incestuous bed) became
the seventh Monarch of the Englishmen, about the year of Christ his
Incarnation six hundred and sixteen; and the twentieth and fourth of his
reign over the East Angles.

(2) This Redwald (says Beda) had received Baptism in Kent, but in vain, and
without zeal, as it afterward Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. ^5.
appeared. For returning to his Country, through the persuasion of his wife,
returned again to his superstitious worships; and in one and the same Temple,
after the manner of the old Samaritans, he erected an Altar for the service of
Christ, and another little Altar for burnt sacrifices to his Idols, which stood
unto the days of Beda himself. But as she was an instigator to the
East Saxons idolatry, so was she an instrument to the further spreading of
Christianity (though not by her so purposely meant) in saving the life of
Edwine, who afterward planted the Gospel in all the North parts of the Saxons
government.

(3) For Edwine flying the rage of wild Ethelfrid, was succored and
maintained in the Court of King Redwald, unto whom lastly, the Northumbrian
sent both threats and rewards to have him delivered, or else put to death: and
surely had not the Queen stood for his life, he had presently died. But she
alleging the law of humanity, the trust of a friend, and the royalty of a
Prince, prevailed so far, that Redwald did not only save his life, but
assi^ted him in battle, to the destruction of his enemy, and the gaining of
Northumberlands Crown. For upon the return of Ethelfrids Ambassadors, unto
whom Redwald Beda hist. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 12.
had yielded to make Edwine away, he with his power of the East Angles were at
their backs, and as an enemy made toward Northumberland.

(4) Ethelfrid, whose rage and revenge was ready enough upon lesser occasions,
with such sudden preparation as he was able to make, met the East Angles Henry
Hunting.
almost at Nottingham, and that not far from the River Idle, where boldly
encountering his unequal enemy, at the first brunt slew Reynhere the son of
King Redwald, to the great grief of him and his whole host: whose revenge was
so violently sought, that they slew King Ethelfrid in the field, and
established Edwine to be his successor; which was the second year of Redwalds
Redwald, his reign.
Monarchy.

(5) Wherein he reigned the space of eight years, and was King of the
East Angles thirty one, and deceased in the year of our Lord six hundred
twenty four; the eighth of Edbalds King of Kent; the thirteenth of Kingils
King of the West Saxons, and the eighth of Edwins over the Northumbrians.

(6) The Queen and wife of this King is not named by any of our Writers, but
that she had been the widow of a Nobleman, descended of the bloud-royall of
that Nation, and was a Lady that had deserved great commendations for the many
virtues by her possessed, had she been a Christian, or a fauorer of the
Christians, or had not been an utter enemy to their faith. Notwithstanding by
her first husband she had a son named Sigebert, that proved a learned and
most religious Prince, of whom we have spoken in Chapter eleventh.

(7) His issue were Reynhere and Erpenwald. Reynhere the elder, and Prince of
the East Angles, was slain as you have heard, in the battle that his father
fought against wild Ethelfrid, near unto the River Idle in Nottingham-shire.

(8) Erpenwald the younger succeeded his father Redwald in the Kingdom of the
East Angles, and was the fourth King of that Nation, whose life and reign we
have declared in the succession of the East Angles Kings: Chapter II.

EDVVINE THE GREAT KING OF Monarch. 8.
Edwine.]
NORTHVMBERLAND, AND THE EIGHTH SOLE MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN,
WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XX.


THe Monarch reuerted from the East Angles, was An. Do. 617.
next possessed by the Northumbrians, wherein it was held with greater glory
and for longer time. For Edwine in King Redwalds life grown very potent, after
his death became his successor in the English Monarch, and most worthily did
adorn the same by his civil justice and divine piety: his exile, visions,
and obtaining of the Northumbrians Crown, we have already spoken of, and
therefore without repetition will pass on to his end.

(2) This Edwine, the son of great Ella, the first King of the Deirians, was
the third King that possessed the same, the eighth of Bernicia, the second (and
first Christian) King of all Northumberland, at the age An. Do. 624.
of twenty three, and in the year of Christ six hundred twenty four,
succeeded Redwald in the Monarchy, and was the greatest King of all the Saxons.
For (as Beda says) he subdued all the coasts of Britannie Beda hist Angl.
lib. 2. cap. 9.
wheresoever any Provinces were inhabited, either of English or of Saxons,
which thing no King of the English before him had done; and added the * Meuian
Isles Hebrides.
unto his own Dominions. The first of them, and next the South, was large and
fertile, gave room for nine hundred and sixty of his English Families, and the
second, ground for above three hundred Tenements.

(3) His first wife dead, he became suitor for Lady Ethelburg, daughter to
Ethelbert King of Kent, deceased, and sister to King Eadbald then reigning:
whose Ambassadors were answered, that it was not lawful for a Christian
Virgin to be espoused to a Pagan, lest the faith and sacraments of the
heavenly King should be profaned, by the matching with that earthly King,
which knew not to worship God aright. But Edwine hearing of the Virgins
beauty, integrity, and Ethelburs good parts.
piety, was so far ouergone and ravished therewith, that he condescended,
she should with her place retain her own Christian Profession, and enjoy the
Christian society both of her men, women, Priests, and servants, to be her
attendants in his Court. These covenants thus confirmed, the Lady accompanied
with Paulinus the reverend Bishop, and an honorable retinue, all of them
Christian, came to King Edwins Court, and with great joy she was espoused his
Queen.

(4) The greatness and prosperity of this Northumbrian King, was both feared
by them a far, that reigned in no such power, and beheld by his nearer, with
an envious eye: among whom, Quinchelme that reigned with his father king over
the West Saxons, sent a desperate Ruffin, whose name was Eumerus, to murder
Edwin the next year of his marriage; who repairing to his Court, then resident
near the river Deruent, at the place that is now called Aldeby in Yorkshire, A
conspiracy.
with a double-edged short sword, the point thereof poisoned, and girt under
his garment, upon Easter day entered his Palace, as an Ambassador, and with
crafty speech retained the Kings attention, where getting occasion, and
stepping forward, drew his sword, which one Lilla the Kings servant saw, and
wanting wherewith to defend his person, put himself betwixt the King and the
sword: and through his body so slain, the same was so far run, that it
dangerously wounded the King with his point, and with the same sword, before he
could be beaten down by the Guard, slew another servant, whose name was
Fordhere.

(5) It happened the same night, being holy Easter Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
Sunday, that Queen Ethelburg was brought to bed of a daughter: for joy
whereof, and her safe deliverance, the King gave thanks to his Idols; which
Bishop Paulinus, then in presence, greatly reproved, and bade Edwin to give
thanks unto God, from whom only all goodness came; and spoke unto him of our
new birth in Christ: at which conference the King much reioiced, and promised
that he would ever after renounce all his Idols, and worship that Christ whom
he preached, if that God would grant him his Bishop Paulinus.
life, and give him victory against that King, who had sent this Manqueller to
murder him; in pledge whereof, he assigned Paulinus to baptize his daughter, the
which upon Whitsunday following was performed in her, by the name of Eanfled,
and she the first of the Northumbrians which received that Sacrament. At which
time also, Edwin being recovered of his wound so lately received, made an
Army, and marched forth against the West Saxons, and in battle either slew or
took prisoners al them that had conspired his death, and as a victorious
Conqueror, returned to his Country.

(6) Where continuing in honor, and his affairs prospering to his own
desires, he was yet in mind distracted, and his thoughts continually
perplexed, what God he should worship. The sanctity of the Christians moved
him much, and the ancient customs of his Ancestors sat near his heart,
betwixt whom there seemed a combat in himself. And in these dumps sitting one
day alone, it chanced Bishop Paulinus to have access to his presence, where
laying Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 12.
his right hand upon the kings head, demanded of him whether he remembered that
sign: whereat Edwine suddenly fell at the Bishops feet, whom he in haste and
reverence presently lifted up, and spoke unto him as follows.

Behold O Sovereign (said he) by the bountiful band and power of our God, you
have escaped the hand and vengeance of your most hated and dreadful enemy.
Behold also, by his most gracious goodness you have obtained the sovereignty of
reign and rule of the Kingdom. Remember now therefore the third thing which
you promised him, and defer no longer to accomplish the same by receiving his
faith Edwine put in mind of covenants.
and keeping his Commandments, who has delivered you from your temporal
adversities, and exalted you to the honor and Majesty of a King; whose holy
will if you hereafter obey, and do his precept which by me is preached, he
will also deliver you from the perpetual torment of Hell, and make you
partaker with him in his heavenly Kingdom and eternal bliss without end.

(7) Whereupon conferring with his Counsel, whereof Bishop Coyfi was chief,
for the establishing of the Gospel, and suppressing of Idolatry, it was then
concluded, that the true God should be worshipped, and the Altars of their
wonted Idols overthrown: unto which action, Coyfi himself became the first
man; for mounted on horseback in armor, Idolatry abolished.
with a girt sword and lance in his hand (all which was unlawful for those
Idoll-Priests) he brake down their Altars, Grates, and Bars, and destroyed
their Temples wheresoever he came. Some ruins thereof not far from York,
and near unto the rising of the river Derwent, remained to be seen unto the
days of Beda, and were then called Gotmund in Gaham. And king Edwine himself,
with all his Nobility, and most Beda hist. Angl. cap. 13.
of the Commons, received the lauer of Baptism, the eleventh year of his
reign, and of Christ's Incarnation six hundred twenty and seven, one hundred
and eighty years after the Saxons entrance into Britain. The king was
baptized the twelfth of April, being Easter Sunday, at the City York, in the
Church of S. Peter's, built then of wood, and was the kings Oratorie, which he
enclosed about with a deep foundation; and laying the walls with squared
stones, made it the Cathedral Church, and his Conuerter Paulinus Archbishop
of that See.

(8) The Gospel thus established in these Northern parts, spread daily
further into other Provinces, and with such fruit of peace, that in the reign
of this Edwin, and thorowout his Dominions, a weak woman with her newborn
babe might have passed Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 16.
without damage or danger over all the Island, even from Sea to Sea. And so
much did the King tender his Subjects, that his provident care was extended to
the wayfaring passengers, for whose use he enclosed clear Springs by the
ways, where he set great Basens of brass, both to wash and to bathe in; which
either for love or displeasure of the king, no man defaced, or took away.

And so great was the magnificence of this Monarch, that (according to Bid) he
had not only in Battle the Ensigns proper to battle borne before him, but in
his ordinary passages through the Cities and Towns of his kingdom, there
always went an Ensigne-bearer before him. And (to use the words of the same
venerable Author) he went not in any street, in which there was not borne
before him that kind of Standard which the Romans called Tufa, and the English
Tufa the Romans Ensign.
Thuuf. That the Romans had such an Ensign, as that which here is called Tufa,
Iustus Lipsius in his Commentary Iustus Lipsius.
upon that place in Vegetius (lib. 3. cap. 5.) where the several Ensigns of
the Romans are recited, does declare, correcting that place of Vegetius (where
Rufa was set for Tufa) by this place of Bid, and in the same showing, that
Tufa signified a Ball, as the Ball (by the example of Augustus) was an Ensign
of Monarchy, or absolute government.

(9) But as the Sun has his rising, his height and descent, and ever is
moving in the circle of his celestial orb; so man has his birth time,
being, and death, and till then is never stayed in one certain point. Kings
therefore, as they be Kings, are the Suns of their own world, but as they are
men, go to the shadow of death: neither can the strength of their power,
wisdom, or policy, love or applause, stay the hand here that holds the
fatal knife; for so in this King Edwin we see, raised above hope to attain
the Diadem, and ruling in love and liking of the people, was notwithstanding
cut off in the midst of his glory and greatness of strength.

(10) For Penda the stout Mercian envying his peace, and Cadwallo the Britain
seeking to receive his right, joined in friendship against this Monarch, and
met him as his enemies in the face of a Field. The plain was large, and called
Hethfeild, where after a long and most bloody fight, king Edwin was slain,
with prince Offryd his son, his whole Host put to the sword, or most
shameful flight: which chanced the fourth of October, the year of our Lord
six hundred thirty three, the sixth of his Christianity, the seventh of his
Monarchy, the seventeenth of his kingdom, and the forty seventh of his age.
His body was lastly buried in S. Peter's Church at Strea^shall, after called
Whitby.

His Wives.
(11) Quenburg his first wife, was the daughter (as Beda reports) of Ceorle;
but as all other Writers do witness, of Crida King of Mercia. She was married
unto him in the beginning of his youth, (and when he was dispossessed of his
inheritance by the Tyrant Etheifrid, as we have said) with him she lived a
great part of his banishment, and in the Court of Redwald King of the
East Angles deceased, before her husband could recover his Kingdom.

(12) Ethelburg, surnamed I^ce.
Tate, was the second wife of this King, who was the daughter of Ethelbert King
of Kent, and of Queen Berta his first wife. She was married unto him in the
year of grace six hundred twenty five, being the second of his Monarchy, and
was his wife six years: but suruiuing him, and desirous to live a religious
life, she returning into Kent, withdrew her self to a place not far from the
Sea side, called Lymming, wherein she built a Monastery of Nuns, and among
them spent the rest of her life, and therein died, and was there buried.

His Issue.
(13) Offride, the eldest son of King Edwine, and Quenberg his first wife,
was borne in the time of his fathers exile among the East Angles. He was
baptized in the faith of Christ by Paulinus the first Archbishop of York, and
was slain the same day, and in the same battle that his father was. He had a
son named Iffy, who was baptized also by Bishop Paulins; and after the death
of his father and grandfather, for fear of King Oswald, was conveyed over the
Seas into France, to be brought up in the Court of King Dagobert, where he
died in his childhood, and was there honorably interred.

(14) Edfrid, the second son of King Edwine and Lady Quenberg his first wife,
was borne in the time of his fathers exile, and baptized with his brother
Offrid by Bishop Paulinus. After his fathers death, for fear of King Oswald,
he fled to Penda King of Mercia, who was his fathers enemy, and his mothers
kinsman; by whom he was most treacherously murdered. He left behind him a son
named Hererik, who by his wife Bertswith had issue the virtuous and learned
lady Hilda, Abbess of Streansbalch: and Queen Hereswith her sister, the wife
of Ethelbere King of the East Angles brother to King An^a, by whom she had
issue Ald wolf, Elswold, and Beorne, all three succeeding Kings of the
East Angles.

(15) Ethelme, the third son of King Edwine, and the first of Queen Ethelburg
his second wife, was baptized by Paulinus Archbishop of York, not long after
his father and halfe-brethren; but in short space after his baptism, he
departed out of this world, even in the time that he wore the white attire,
which in those days was used to be worn by such as were newly baptized for a
certain space. His body was with all due funeral obsequies enterred within
the new Church of S. Peter in the City of York, which his father had newly
founded.

(16) Vskfrea, the fourth son of King Edwine, and the second of Queen
Ethelburg his second wife, and the last and youngest of them both, bare the
name of his fathers great grandfather. He was baptized by the Archbishop
Paulinus at one time with his brother Ethelme. After the decease of his father,
his mother carried him with her out of Northumberland into Kent; and from
thence conveyed him over into France with his Nephew Iffy, the son of his
halfe-brother Offrid, where he continued in the custody of King Dagobert,
being his mothers cosen-german, and there died, and was honorably buried in a
Church with his Nephew Iffy.

(17) Eanfled, the elder daughter of King Edwine and Queen Ethelberg his
second wife, was borne the Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 15.
night following that her father was wounded and baptized, he being a Pagan.
She was afterward married to Oswy, the fourth King of Northumberland, and
tenth Monarch of the Englishmen, as shall be said

(18) Etheldrid the younger daughter, the fifth and last-borne child to King
Edwine and of Queen Ethelburge, was baptized at the same time with Ethelwe and
Vskfrea her brethren. She died an infant, the white clothing not yet put off,
which in those days was usually worn at certain set times after their
baptism, and was with like funeral obsequies buried by her brother Ethelwe in
the Church of S. Peter's in York, which their father had founded.

OSVVALD KING OF NORTHVMBERLAND, Monarch 9.
AND THE NINTH MONARCH Oswald.
OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXI.


OSwald, the fifth King of Deira, the ninth of Bernicia, An. Do. 634.
the third of Northumberland, and the ninth Monarch of the Englishmen, began
his reign the year of Christ's incarnation six hundred thirty four. He with
Eanfrith and his brethren, the sons of wild Ethelfrid, and Osrik also the
son of Alfrid King Edwins Uncle had been secured in Scotland all his reign,
and among the Red-shanks lived as banished men, where they learned the true
religion of Christ, and had received the Lauer of Baptism. But Edwines death
wrought and divulged, these Princes return again to their Country, and the
Northumbrians Kingdom lately governed by one, was now again divided into two
several parts, as formerly it had been.

(2) Over the Deirans, Osrik was made king, and of Bernicia, Eanfrid assumed
the reign; but Gods justice over taking their Apostasy, neither their lives
nor this division lasted long. For Cadwall the Christian, and Penda the Pagan
were Gods instruments, that with worthy vengeance in the first year of their
government, cut the one off in battle, and the other Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3.
cap. 1.
by treachery; whose names and year of reign as unhappy and of hateful
remembrance, the Historiographers of those times would have to be omitted.

(3) But religious Oswald lamenting the effusion of his Countries blood, long
slept not, their revenge. For assembling his power, which was not great, he
suddenly and unlooked for came upon Cadw^, and at Deniseburne pitched down his
tents. The place (says Beda) stood near the wall that Seuerus had made, where
Oswald for the first day forbear to fight, and among his Soldiers for his
Standerd set up a Cross of wood; whereunto it seems those dawning days of
Christianity were overmuch addicted. Here Oswald making first intercession to
God, the only preserver of his people, in sore and long fight obtained great
victory, with the slaughter of Cadwallo, and of all his British Army: which so
accomplished, many have attributed the virtue of that Cross to be no small
cause of that great overthrow. This Cross so set up, was the first we read of
to have been erected in England, and the first Altar unto Christ among the
Bernicians, whose pretended miraculous cures, not only in the wood it self,
but in the moss and in the earth wherein it was set, let Beda report them, and
Stapleton urge them, yet for my part, I hold them no Article of our canonical
Creed.

(4) But certain it is, that Oswald himself was a most religious and godly
king, and took such care for the conversion and salvation of his subjects,
that he sent into Scotland for Aidan a Christian Bishop, to instruct his
Northumbrians in the Gospel of truth. And whereas the Bishops could not speak
their language, Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 3.
the king himself was interpreter at his Sermons, and gave his words in the
English, as he spoke and pronounced them in the Scottish, which language Oswald
perfectly spoke, having been there the space of eighteen years. Ho^. Boethius.


Thus the godly proceedings of the king and Bishop, produced such increase of
their heavenly seed, that it is reported in seven days space, fifteen
thousand Christians received Baptism; and many of the^forsaking the pleasures
of the world, to have betake themselves to a religious and solitary life.

(5) At this time the whole Island flourished both with peace and plenty, and
acknowledged their subjection Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 6.
unto king Oswald. For, as Beda reports, all the Nations of Britannie which
spoke four languages, that is to say, Britains, Redshanks, Scots, and
Englishmen, Became subject unto him. And yet being advanced to so royal
Majesty, he was notwithstanding (which is maruell^ to be reported) lowly to
all, gracious to the poor, and beautiful to strangers. The fruits whereof the
same Author exemplifieth in his bounty and humility toward the poor; who
upon a solemn feast day, seeing many such at his gates, sent them both the
delicates for himself prepared, and commanded the charger of silver to be
broken, and divided among them. The Bishop much rejoicing thereat, took the
king by the right hand, and prayed that it might never consume; as after his
death it did not, but was shrined in silver, and in S. Peter's Church at Bebba,
now Bambrough, with worthy honor was worshipped for the many miracles in cures
that it did, as likewise the earth wherein his blood was spilt: with such
lavish enlargements have those writers interlined the deeds of Gods Saints.

(6) But as the Sun has his shadow, and the highest tide her ebb, so
Oswald, how holy soever, or government how good, had emulators that sought his
life, and his Countries ruin: for wicked Penda the Pagan Mercian, envying the
greatness that king Oswald bare, raised wars against him, and at a place
then called Maserfeild in Shrop-shire, in a bloody and sore fought battle slew
him; and not therewith satisfied, in barbarous and brutish immanitie, did tear
him in pieces, the first day of August, and year of Christ Jesus six hundred
forty two, being the ninth Beda hister. lib. 3. cap. 9.
of his reign, and the thirty eighth of his age: whereupon the said place of
his death is called to this day Oswaldstree, a fair Market Town in the same
County.

(7) The dismembered limbs of his body were first buried in the Monastery of
Bradney in Lincolnshire, shrined with his standard of Gold and Purple erected
over his Tomb, at the industry and cost of his niece Offryd, Queen of Mercia,
wife unto king Ethelred, and daughter to Oswyn that succeeded him. From hence
his bones were afterward removed to Gloucester, and there in the north side of
the upper end of the Quire in the Cathedral Church, continues a fair
Monument of him, with a Chapel set betwixt two pillars in the same Church.

His Wife.
(8) Kineburg, a most virtuous Lady, and daughter to Kingils the sixth, and
first Christian king of the West Saxons, was the wife of king Oswald, who
became both his father and son in the day of her marriage, by receiving him at
the Font, and her of his gift. She was married unto him in the second year of
his reign, which was the year of Christ's Incarnation six hundred thirty six:
no other relation made of her besides the birth of his son.

His Issue.
(9) Ethelwald, the only child of king Oswald and Queen Kineburg his wife,
was borne in the year of our Lord six hundred thirty seven, being the third
year of his fathers reign; and but an infant at his fathers death, was
disappointed of the Northumbrian Kingdom by the fraud of his uncle Oswyn.
Notwithstanding at the death of Oswin king of Deira, and then not above
sixteen years of age, he took the same kingdom, and by strong hand held it
against his uncle so long as he lived, and at his death left it to his cosen
Alkefryd, the natural son of king Osuyne, as in the ninth Chapter we have
said.

OSVVY KING OF NORTHVMBERLAND, Monarch. 10.
AND THE TENTH MONARCH Oswy.
OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, WIFE, AND CHILDREN. CHAPTER XXII.


OSwye, the illegitimate son of King Ethelfrid, An. Do. 643.
surnamed the Wild, at thirty years of age succeeded Oswald his half brother
in his Dominions, being the fourth King of Northumberland, and the tenth
Monarch Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 24.
of the Englishmen, entering his government the thirteenth day of October, and
year of Christ's Incarnation six hundred forty three. His first beginnings were
much disquieted by Penda the Heathen Mercian, by the rebellions of his base
son Alkfrid, and by the oppositions of Ethelwold the son of King Oswald: but
none sat more near his heart then Oswyn Oswyes envy.
king of the Deirians did, whose virtuous government did much darken (as he
took it) his own, and the free love of those subjects, daily to lessen his
among the Bernicians.

(2) This Oswyn of Deira was the son of Osrike Oswyn King of the Deirians.
(who did apostate from his faith) and ruling his Province in plenty and peace
the space of seven years, Oswyn King of the D^tans.
was therefore greatly envied by Oswy of Bernicia, and lastly by him provoked
into the field. Their hosts met at the place then called Wilfares Down, ten
miles West from the village Cataracton, and there attended Cataracton. Village.
to hazard the day. But Oswyn finding himself too weak for Oswy, and to save
the effusion of Christian blood, forsook the field, accompanied only with one
Soldier, and went to Earl Hunwald his friend as he thought, to secure his
life. But contrary to trust, he delivered him unto King Oswy, who Oswyn
betrayed into the hands of Oswy.
cruelly slew him the twentieth of August, and ninth of his reign, at the
place called Ingethling; where afterward for satisfaction of so heinous an
offense, a Monastery was built, as upon like occasions, many the like
foundations were laid; whose stones were thus joined with the mortar of blood.

(3) Of this Oswine thus slain, Beda reports the Bedas his report of Oswyns
virtue.
Story following: Among his other rare virtues and princely qualities, his
humility (says he) and passing lowliness excelled: whereof he thus
exemplifieth: The reverend Christian Bishop Aidan using much travel to preach
the Gospel thorowout that Province, the King for his more ease, gave him a
goodly Gelding with rich and costly trapping. His gift to the Bishop Aidan.
It chanced one day, as the Bishop rode to minister the word of life, that a
poor man demanded his alms: but he not having wherewith to relieve him, and
pitying his distressed poor estate, presently alighted, and gave unto him The
Bishops Alms to a poor man.
his horse and rich furniture; whereof when the King heard, he blamed him, and
said, What meant you (my Lord) to give to the beggar the horse that I gaueyou,
with my saddle and trappings? Had we horses of no lower price to give away to
the poor? To whom the Bishop replied, And is the brood of a beast dearer in
your sight, then this poor man the child of God? The King (...) reproved,
turned himself toward the fire, and there ^dly pausing upon this answer,
presently gave from him his sword, and in haste fell at the Bishops King Oswins
repentance.
feet, desiring forgiveness in that he had said. The Bishop much astonished,
suddenly lift up the King, desiring him to sit to meat, and to be merry; which
the King immediately did, but the Bishop contrariwise began to be pensive and
sad, and the tears to trickle down his cheeks: in which passion he burst
out into these speeches, and said to his Chaplain in an unknown tongue, I
never till this time have seen an Bishop' Aidans testimony of King Oswyns
pie^e.
humble King; and surely his life cannot be long, for this people are not
worthy to have such a Prince to govern them. But to return to King Oswy.

(4) Who after many cruel invasions of the merciless Penda, was forced to sue
unto him for peace, Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 24.
with proffers of infinite treasure and most precious jewels: all which
rejected, and the Tyrant coming on, Oswy sought his help by supplication to
God, and with such zeal as then was embraced, vowed his young daughter Elfled
to be consecrated in perpetual virginity unto him, with twelve Farmers and
their Elfled the daughter of King Oswy.
lands, to the erection and maintenance of a Monastery: and thereupon prepared
himself for battle.

(5) The Army of this enemy is reported to redouble thirty times his, all
well appointed and old tried soldiers: against whom Oswy with his son
Alkfryd boldly marched, Egfryd his other son then being Alkfrid.
an hostage with Cinwise an under Queen of the Mercians: Ethelwald the son
of Oswald, took part with Penda, against his natural Uncle and native
Ethelwald.
Country: so did Ethelherd the brother of Christian Anna, side with this
heathenish and cruel Mercian.

(6) The battle was fought near to the river Iunet, which at that time did
ouer-flow his banks, so that Iunet River.
the victory falling with Oswy, more were drowned in the water then slain
with the sword. And herein proud Penda lost his life, with the discomfiture of
all his Mercian power. Herein also died Ethelherd, the Penda slain.
East Angles King, who was the only motive to these wars: and Ethelwald
escaping, returned with dishonor unto Deira. The day was thus gotten the
thirteenth Ethelwald his escape.
year of King Oswy his reign, the fifteenth day of November, and year of
Christ his Incarnation six hundred fifty five.

(7) After this victory, king Oswy reigned in great glory the space of three
years, subduing the Mercians, the south parts of the English, and made the
northern parts likewise subject unto him. He it was that decided the long
controversy for Easters celebration, and founded the Cathedral Church in
Lichfeild for a Bishops See: which City, with all South-Mercia, divided Liber
Lichfeild. Tho. Rudburne.
from the north by the river Trent, he gave to Peada the son of king Penda,
in marriage with his natural Oswy his gift to Penda.
daughter Alkfled, on condition that he should become a Christian: all which
the said king not long enioied, but was murdered in his own Court. And the
Mercians erecting Vulfhere his brother and their native countryman for king,
rebelled against Oswy, and freed themselves from a foreign subjection.

(8) Thus Oswy ending in troubles as he began in wars, reigned the space of
twenty eight years, and Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 5. The time of King
Oswy^ reign.
then falling sick, was so struck with remorse for the death of good Oswyn,
and blood which he had spilt, that he vowed a pilgrimage to Rome, in which
reputed holy place he purposed to have ended his life, and to have left his
bones therein to rest: but his disease increasing, and that purpose failing, he
left this life the fifteenth of February, and his body to remain in S. Peter's
Church at Streanshach, the year after Christ's birth six hundred seventy, and
of his own age fifty eight.

His Wife.
(9) Eanfled; the wife of this king, was the daughter Eanfled.
of Edwin and Ethelburg, king and Queen of Northumberland. She was the first
Christian that was baptized in that Province, and after her fathers death, was
brought up in Kent under her mother, and thence married unto this Oswy, whom she
suruiued, and spent the whole time of her widow-hood in the Monastery of
Steanshalch, where her daughter Elfred was Abbess, Steanshalch Monastery.
wherein she deceased and was interred in the Church of S. Peter, hard by her
husband king Edwin.

His Issue.
(10) Egfryd, the eldest son of king Oswy and of Egfryd the eldest son.
Queen Eanfled, was borne in the third year of his fathers reign, being the
year of grace six hundred forty five. In the twenty fifth year of his age,
and of our Lord God six hundred seventy one, he succeeded his father in
Northumberland, but not in his Monarchy: of whose life and acts, we have
further spoken in the seventh Chapter of this Book.

(11) Elswine, the second son of king Oswy, and Elswyne the second son.
of Queen Eanfled, was borne in the year of our Lord six hundred sixty one,
being the ninth of his fathers reign; at whose death he was nine years old:
Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 21.
and in the ninth year after, being the eighteenth of his age, was
unfortunately slain in a battle, wherein he served his brother Egfrid,
against Ethelred king of the Mercians, to the great grief of them both, the
year of Christ's nativity six hundred seventy nine.

(12) Elfled, the eldest daughter of king Oswy and queen Eanfled, was borne in
the month of September, Elfled his eldest daughter.
the year of grace six hundred fifty four, being the twelfth of her fathers
reign; and when she was a year old, by him committed to the custody and
bringing up of the renowned Lady Hilda, Abbess of Streanshall, wherein she
lived under her a Nun, and after her Hilda Abbess of Streanshall.
death did succeed her Abbess of the place, and in great holiness and virtue,
spent therein her life, unto the day of her death, which was the year of
Christ Jesus seven hundred fourteen, and of her own age sixty, being
interred in S. Peter's Church within the same Monastery.

(13) Offrid, the younger daughter of king Oswy and queen Eanfled, was borne
about the fifteenth Offryd the younger daughter.
year of her fathers reign, which was the year of our Lord six hundred
sixty seven: and when she was fully twenty, was married unto Ethelred king of
Mercia, the twelfth Monarch of the Englishmen, in the third year of his
reign, and of Christ six hundred seventy seven.

(14) Alkfrid, the natural son of king Oswy, did first succeed his cosen
Ethelwald, son of king Oswald Alkfryd a ^rall son.
his Uncle in part of Northumberland, and held the same by force against his
Father, which afterward he peaceably inioyed both with him and his half
brother King Egfrid, whom lastly he succeeded in the whole kingdom of
Northumberland, as more at large Chap. 7. sect. 1^.
in the same story we have declared.

(15) Al^fled, the natural daughter of king Oswy, borne before her father was
king, in the year of Al^fled a natural daughter.
Christ's incarnation six hundred fifty three, and the eleventh of her fathers
reign, was married to Pe^d: the son of Penda, that by his permission had
governed some part of Mercia, and by Oswy his gift with this Alfled, all the
South of that Province. She was his wife three years, and is of most writers
taxed to be the actor of his death, being wickedly murdered in the feast of
Easter, the year of grace six hundred fifty six, and the fourteenth of her
Fathers reign.

VVLFHERE THE SIXTH KING OF Monarch II.
Vulfhere.
THE MERCIANS, AND THE ELEVENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN, ACTS,
WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXIII.


VVulfhere, after the murder An. Do. 659.
of his brother Peada, advanced against Oswy by the Nobles of Mercia,
maintained his title and kingdom for twelve years continuance, in the life
time of that Northumbrian Monarch, and after his death translated the Monarchy
from those Kings, and Country, unto himself Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. ^4.
and his successors the Mercians, who now wore the Imperial Diadem without
reuersement, until such time as great Egbert set it upon the West Saxons head.

He was the second son of Penda King of Mercia, and the sixth in succession
of that kingdom, beginning Vulfheres parentage.
his reign the year of Christ his Incarnation, six hundred fifty nine, and
twelve years after, Anno six hundred seventy one, entered his Monarchy over the
Englishmen, and was in number accounted the eleventh Monarch of the Land.

(2) His entrance was with trouble against the Northumbrians; for unto Egfrid
their King he had lost the possession of the Island Linsey, and was expelled
Linsey Island lost to the Northumbrians.
the Country: yet three years after he fought against the West Saxons with
better success, whose Country with conquest he passed through, and wan from
Redwald their King the I Will of Wight? which Island he gave Beda hist. Angl. lib.
(...). cap. 12.
to Edilwach the South Saxons King, whom he received his God-sonne at the
font-stone: notwithstanding himself had lately been a profane Idolater, and
most cruel Heathen, as by the Liger book of the Monastery of Peterborow
appears, whose story is Lib. peter^.
this:

(3) King Vulfhere of Mercia remaining at his Castle in Vlferchester in
Staffordshire, and understanding Vulferchester Castle.
that Vulfald and Rufin his two sons, under pretense and color of hunting,
usually resorted to reverend Chad, to be instructed in the fruitful faith of
Christ Jesus, and had at his hands received the Sacrament of Baptism, at the
persuasion of one Werebod, suddenly followed, and finding them in the Oratory
of that holy man, in devout contemplations, slew Vulfhere slaieth his two
sons.
them there with his own hands. Whose martyred bodies Queen Ermenehild their
mother caused to be buried in a Sepulcher of stone, and thereupon a fair
Church to be erected, which by reason of the many stones thither brought for
that foundation, was ever John capgran^.
after called Stones, and now is a Market Town in the same County. But King
Vulfhere repenting this his Vulfheres repentance.
most unhuman murder, became himself a Christian, and destroyed all those
Temples wherein his heathen Gods had been worshipped, converting them all into
Christian Churches, and religious Monasteries: and to redeem so heinous an
offense, underwent the finishing of Now (...).
Medis^am, his brothers foundation, enriching it largely with lands and
possessions: notwithstanding he is taxed by William of Malmesbury with the
foul sin of Symony, for selling W. l. Mal^sbury.
unto Wyna the Bishopric of London.

(4) He reigned King over the Mercians the space of seventeen years, and
Monarch of the English fully four, leaving his life in the year of our Lord
six The time of his reign.
hundred seventy four, and his body to be buried in the Monastery of
Peterborow, which was of his brothers and his own foundation.

His Wife.
(5) Ermenhild, the Wife of King Vulfhere, was the daughter of Ercombert, the
seventh King of Kent, and Ermenhilds parentage.
sister to Egbert and Lothair, both Kings of that County. Her mother was
Sexburg, daughter to Anna, the seventh King of the East Angles, whose sisters
were many and most of them Saints. She was married unto him in the third year
of his reign, and was his wife fourteen years. After his decease, she went
to her mother Queen Sexburg, being then Abbess of Ely, Queen Sexburg Abbess
of (...).
where she continued all the rest of her life, and therein deceased and was
buried.

His Issue.
(6) Kenred the son of King Vulfhere and of Queen Ermenhild, being the heir
apparent of his fathers Kenred the first son.
possessions, was under age at his fathers decease; and by reason of his
minority, was withheld from the government, which Ethelred his Uncle entered
into, without any contradiction of this Kenred, who held himself contented to
live a private life: notwithstanding Ethelred taking the habit of a Monk, left
the Crown to him who was the right heir.

(7) Vulfald a young Gentleman converted to the Christian faith by Bishop Chad,
and martyred for profession of the same by King Vulfhere, is reported Uulfald a
supposed son. Water Wittlesey.
by Water of Wittlesey, a Monk of Peterborow, in a Register which he wrote of
that Monastery, to be the supposed son of King Vulfhere himself, and to have
been slain by him in his extreme fury before he was a Christian, or could
endure to hear of the Christian faith. He was buried in Stone, as we have
said, where his father built a College of Canons regular, which was afterward
called S. Vulfaldes. S. Vulfaldes College.


(8) Rufine the fellow martyr of Vulfald, is by the same Writer reported to be
his brother, and the supposed Rufine another supposed son.
son also of Vulfhere the King. Their murders, as he says, was committed
the ninth Calends of August, which is with us the four and twenty of July,
upon which day there was yearly celebrated a solemn memorial of their
martyrdomes in the same place, where they both suffered, and where their
Monument was then remaining.

(9) Wereburg, the daughter of King Vulfhere and Wereburg, the daughter of
Vulfhere.
Queen Ermenhild, was in her childhood committed to the bringing up of Queen
Etheldrid her mothers Aunt, in the Monastery of Ely, by whose persuasion she
professed virginity, and returning to her Country in the reign of King
Ethelred her Uncle, was by him made ouerseer of all the Monasteries within his
dominions. She deceased at Trickingham (now called Trentham) in Staffordshire,
and was buried at Hanbery. Buried at Hanbery.
Her body was afterward removed to Westchester, where Leafrik the Earl built
in honor of her S. Wereburgs Church.
a goodly Church called S. Wereburgs, which to this day is the Cathedral
Church of that City.

ETHELRED THE SEVENTH KING Monarch 12.
OF MERCIA, AND TWELFTH MONARCH Ethelred.
OF THE ENGLISH: HIS ACTS, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXIIII.


EThelred, the third son of An. Do. 675.
King Penda, and brother to the last declared Vulfhere, in the year of Christ
Jesus six hundred seventy five, began his reign in the kingdom of Mercia,
and at the same time in the Monarchy of the Englishmen, Circumstances belonging
to the beginning of his reign.
being the seventh King among them that ware their Diadem, and the twelfth
person that bare the Imperial title of the whole: his claim was not
immediately nor next in succession, young Kenred his Nephew standing betwixt
him and the Crown. But himself a child in years, and in them also addicted
unto a private life, he gave his Uncle way to undergo so public a charge,
which without contradiction was likewise accepted of the subjects.

(2) His entrance was with war against the Kentish Lothaire, whose Country he
destroyed, sparing neither (...).
Churches nor religious Abbeys, the King not daring to appear in field. The
City Rochester felt also his fury, whose Citizens were ransacked, their
buildings ruinated, and their Bishop Putta driven to such Putta Bishop of
Rochester.
distress, that he became a Teacher of good Arts and Music in Mercia, to
maintain his aged years from the necessity of perishing want. These stirs
(says Beda) happened in the year of grace six hundred seventy Beda hist.
Angl. lib. 4. cap. 12.
seven; and the next following, so fearful a Blazing star, as was
wonderful to behold, first discovered A blazing star.
in the month of August, and for three months together continued rising in
the morning, and giving forth a blazing pile very high, and of a glittering
flame.

(3) The remorse of conscience for the blood he had spilt, and the places of
Oratories by him destroyed, (besides his intrusions into another man's right)
struck so deep a wound into King Ethelreds breast, that ever he bethought
him what recompense to make. First therefore building a goodly Monastery at
Bradney, and that most fruitfully seated in the The occasion of founding
Bradney Monastery.
County of Lincolus, thought that not sufficient to wash away the scarres of
his foul offense, but determined in himself to forsake the world, for that
was the term attributed to the monastical life: wherein notwithstanding, in
less cares they lived, and their persons more safe from all dangers attempted,
then when they publicly administered their laws to their people, the just
executions whereof, many times breed the overthrow of their Princes, and their
Persons never secure amidst their own gards.

(4) But such was the religion then taught, and the godly zeal of the good
Princes then reigning, whose works have manifested their virtues to
posterities, and faith in Christ the salvation of their souls, in whose
Paradise we leave them, and Ethelred to his devout intent: who to reconcile
himself first unto Kenred, bequeathed the Crown solely to him, although
Ethelred res^gneth his Crown.
he had a son capable thereof: then putting on the habit of religion, became
himself a Monk, in his own Monastery of Bradney, where he lived a regular
life the term of twelve years, and therein lastly died Abbat of the place,
when he had reigned thirty years, the year of Christ's nativity, seven
hundred The continuance of his reign.
sixteen.

His Wife.
(5) Offryd, the wife of King Ethelred, was the daughter of Oswy, and of Lady
Eanfled, King and Queen of Off^yd. Be^a hist. Angl. lib 3. cap. 11.
Northumberland. She was married unto him in the year of our Lord six hundred
seventy seven, being the third of his reign, and the twentieth of her age.
She was his wife twenty years: and passing through the North parts of Mercia,
she was set upon and slain by the people of that Country, in revenge of Beda
in E^t. Off^yd slain.
the death of Peada their King, who had long before bin murdered by Alkefled
his wife, and her half sister, as we have said. And thus strangely came she to
her untimely end, the year of our Lord six hundred ninety seven, the twenty
three year of her husbands reign and the fortieth of her own age.

His Issue.
(6) Chelred the son of King Ethelred, and of Chelred the first son.
Queen Offryd his wife, was the heir apparent of his fathers kingdom, and of
sufficient years to have succeeded him, when he entered into religion; but that
it was his fathers will to make amends to his Nephew Kenred, son to his elder
brother King Vulfhere, that now he might reign before his son, who should
have reigned before himself.

KENRED THE EIGHTH KING OF MERCIA, AND THE THIRTEENTH Kenred.
MONARCH OF THE Monarch 13.
ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XXV.


KEnred the son of Vulfhere, because of his minority An. Do. 704.
at his Fathers death, was defeated of his dominions by his Uncle Ethelred, and
until it pleased him to resign his Crown, lived a private life, whereunto by
nature he was most inclined. But King Ethelred for the wrongs to him
committed, and to redeem the time that in war and wealth he had prodigally
The (...) pertaining to his ^trance into (...).
spent, yielded the Scepter unto his hand, and set his seeming ouer-heauy
Crown upon his Nephew Kenreds head: who began his reign at one and the same
time, both over the Mercians and Monarchy of the English^, which was the year
of Christ's Incarnation seven hundred and four.

(2) He is in account the eighth King of that Province, and the thirteenth
Monarch since Hengist the Saxon. He reigned in peace the space of four years;
then weary of government, and desirous of contemplation, The (...) of his
reign.
after the example of his Uncle, sought a more private and religious life: and
thereupon appointing Chelred his Cosen germane to rule in his place, in the
Beda hist. Angl. lib. 5. cap. 20.
fifth year of his reign, abandoned his kingdom and Country, and departed
for Rome, accompanied with Offa King of the East Saxons, and with Edwine Bishop
of Worcester; where both these Kings were made Monks in the time of Pope
Constantine the first, Justinian the younger then wearing the Imperial Crown:
and in a Monastery at that city, both these penitent Conuerts in the Coules
and Orders of Monks, spent the rest of their lives, and therein died Kenred and
Offa turn Monks.
and were enterred; this Mercian King Kenred having had neither wife nor child,
that I can read of.

(3) It is not greatly to be wondered at, in that these times to much
ouershadowed with superstitious zeal, the holy acts of men, which no doubt were
many, and the habit of Monks, the accounted holy garments of humility, were so
meritoriously respected and reputed in the devout hearts of the religious, when
by the Clergy (that are accounted the light of the world) in a Council at Rome
held under Pope Constantine the Bale.
first, it was decreed and commanded, that carved Images, which neither had
action, nor life, nor could save themselves from the stroke of destruction,
should be made to the memorial of Saints, and should be set up in Churches,
with respective adoration, contrary to Gods most express commandment, and
condemned for idolatry by the warrant of Leuit. 2^.
sacred Scripture.

CHELRED THE NINTH KING OF Monarch 14.
THE MERCIANS, AND THE FOVRTEENTH Chelred.
MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS REIGN AND SVCCESSION. CHAPTER XXVI.


CHelred, the son of King Ethelred, was of sufficient An. Do. 709.
years, and well able of rule, at such time as his father resigned his Scepter
unto his Nephew Kenred, had not the prick of that sin touched his
conscience, The appendances of his ingresse into government.
which made him to bestow the same as he did; notwithstanding the Crown being
too weighty for Kenred to wear, he as freely again gave it the son, as he
had received it of the father before, and relinquished his claim and title
thereto.

(2) Chelred thus advanced before he it expected, entered his government with
great applause of the Chelred worthy of the Crown.
people, in whose opinions he was held the only man worthy of their Crown.
Over the Mercians he reigned the ninth King, and of the English Monarchs the
fourteenth in number, beginning them both in the year of grace seven hundred
and nine, and the fourth of Justinian the younger, Empire.

(3) His quietness was disturbed by Inas the West Saxon, whose fame for his
fortunes began then to Inas King of the West Saxons.
grow great. For Kent he had forced to buy their peace with money: the Britains
subdued, and had enlarged his confines upon them. And now against Chelred this
new rise Monarch, he meant to try chance, whose glory he looked at with an over
envious eye.

(4) His greatness likewise Chelred suspected, who either to himself or
successors, (by the foundation Chelred prepares against Inas.
which he laid) would divert the Monarchy from him and his Mercians, and
entaile it to himself or his West Saxons. Hereupon great preparation was made,
and each set forward with all the powers, the one to attain, and the other to
keep, the glory and title that both of them so much thirsted after. At
Wodnesbury Henry H^^ting.
they met, and with undaunted spirits so fought, that the victory was
doubtful, for neither could say the battle was his, or that he departed with
the lesser Mat. Westminster.
loss.

(5) These emulations were followed betwixt these two Princes the space of
seven years, and longer had done, if Chelred had lived, or Inas not been
struck with remorse of conscience for his overmuch spilling of blood. Of this
Chelred, some Authors have censured, that he was marvelous in prowess, and
valiant of courage, but his Country miserable John (...).
by his untimely death, whose reign lasted only seven years: and death in the
year of our Lord seven The continuance of his reign.
hundred and sixteen: his body was buried in the Cathedral Church of
Lichfield: and he died without any issue.

His Wife.
(6) Wereburg the wife of King Chelred, is mentioned Inas wife. M^rian Scot.
by Marianus the learned Scottish Historian, and by Florence of Worcester, who
was the follower and continuer of his History, whom we may reasonably credit in
this matter, being not incredible, although she must of necessity be thought to
have been married very young, or to have died very old, because they record her
decease to have been in the year of Christ seven hundred eighty one, which
was almost sixty years after the death of her husband, She died sixty years
after her husband.
and toward the end of the long reign of King Offa.

ETHELBALD THE TENTH KING Monarch 15.
Ethelbald.
OF THE MERCIANS, AND THE FIFTEENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS REIGN AND
ACTS. CHAPTER XXVII.


EThelbald, cosen germane once removed unto King An. Do. 716.
Chelred, succeeded him in the kingdom of the Mercians, whereof he was the
tenth in number, and of the Monarchs over the Englishmen, the fifteenth in The
precedents of his reigns initium.
account. He began his reign in the year of grace seven hundred sixteen,
and with great honor reigned over all the Kings on the South side of Humber,
whose time for the most part was spent in peace; yet some wars he had, and
those with variable events.

(2) For in the eighteenth year of his reign, he besieged Sommerton, and
wanne it; and inuading ^and. Cestern.
Northumberland, without proffer of resistance, returned with great riches by
spoil. The Britains also that were joined confederates with the West Saxons,
he molested and overcame, for whose revenge King Cuthred gave him battle
near unto Burford, where he with his Mercians received the foil, and lost the
Banner, Henry Hunting.
wherein was portracted a Golden Dragon, the thirty seventh year of his reign.

(3) The sins of these times both in Prince and Chron. of Holl.
people, were many and great, as by the Epistles of Boniface an Englishman, and
Archbishop of Mentz, is most manifest, wherein he reproved his adulterous
life, who refraining to marry, wallowed in filthy lecheries; by whose example
the Noblemen of Mercia did the like: and their women, as well Nuns as others,
made away their chilaren borne out of wedlock, whereby To. ^i.
the graves were filled with dead bodies, as hell it self with damned souls.
And in another Epistle sent unto Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury, he
complains of the English Nuns, who wandering in pilgrimage under Nuns
infamy.
show of devotion, lived in pleasure and wanton fornications, through all the
Cities of France and of Lumbardy.

(4) This his Epistle took so good effect, that in repentance King Ethelbald
released and privileged the Church from all tributes to himself, and built
the Abbey of Crowland in Lincolnshire, for the pacifying Crowland Abbey buil^.
of Gods wrath toward his sins; when also it was enacted by Cuthbert and his
Clergy, in a Convocation held in his Province, that the sacred Scriptures
should be read in their Monasteries, the Lords Prayer and Creed, taught in the
English tongue: which accordingly was done. Which Council was held in the
thirty year of this Kings reign, and of Christ's incarnation seven hundred
forty eight.

(5) Finally, when he had ruled forty two years, fighting against Cuthred the
West Saxon, in a war not The continuance of his reign.
prudently undertaken, he was traitorously slain by his own subjects, at the
procurement of Bernred a Leader of them, who affecting the kingdom by this
stratagem of Treason, sought to attain it, but was himself slain by Offa the
Mercian, before that this ill sown seed could take any root. The place of
this Great Ethelbalds death, was Secondone, three miles from Ta^worth, in the
County of Warwick; and of Will. Mal^bury.
his burial, Rept^n in Darby-shire, where with honorable obsequies he was
enterred, the year of Christ's humanity seven hundred fifty eight, having had
neithe Wife nor Children.

OFFA THE ELEVENTH KING OF Monarch 16.
Offa^
THE MERCIANS, AND THE SIXTEENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, REIGN,
WIFE AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXVIII.


OFfa, the cosen of King Ethelbald, An. Do. 758.
after some time of Inter-regnum, succeeded him in his dominions of Mercia; a
man of so high stomach and stoutnes of mind, that he thought nothing
impossible for him to attain: and for virtue and vice, so equally composed,
that hardly could be judged to whither of them the scale of his carriage most
inclined, although Will. Malmsbury.
the Monk of S. Albans, and writer of his life, does blanch out his graces
with superlatiue praises. Liber M. S.


(2) His Parents he names Twin^reth and Mercella, and himself he says to
have been first named The parents of Offa.
Pinered, borne both lame, deaf, and blind, wherein he so continued unto his
man's estate. The rage of Bernred (says the same Author) had forced all three
into a solitary place, where suddenly by miracle Pinered was restored, and for
that cause called another Offa; who presently assailed, and in a great battle
manfully fought, slew the usurping Bernred. The Nobles Bernred slain.
of Mercia being rid of that Tyrant by the valor of Offa, gladly embraced and
received him for their King; who began his reign with greater show of glory,
then any Mercian before him had done, being in number the eleventh that had
reigned in that Province, and is accounted the sixteenth Monarch of the
Englishmen.

(3) His neighbor Kings foreseeing whereat his eye glanced, solicited by
Letters Charles the Great, King Charles the Great.
then King of France, against him, who wrote unto Offa in their behalf, and in
threatening wise commanded him to desist. But he was so far from fearing of
his threats, that to his contempt he was the more eager.

(4) The first that felt his fury, were the Kentishmen under Alrik their King,
whose overthrow was the less dishonorable (says Malmesbury) for that they
Malmsbury.
were vanquished by so great a Monarch. The place was Otteford, unfortunate to
them, where their King was slain by the hand of Offa himself, their forces
quite discomfited by the loss of this field, and their Country trodden down
under the feet of the Mercians.

(5) From South to North King Offa then marched, and beyond Humber made havoc
of all that stood against him; whence returning triumphant, he set upon the
West Saxons, that had formerly joined with his enemies: the place was
Bensinton, which Castle King Offa took, with the discomfiture of King
Bensinton Castle taken by King Offa.
Kenwolfe, and all his West Saxons; who sought their revenge by the aides of
the Britains in Wales. Their King (says mine Author) was then Marmodius,
Liber S. Albans, M. S. Marmodius a Welsh King.
betwixt whom some intercourse by letters passed, and great presents to King
Offa sent, only to protract time, and to work upon advantage.

(6) In this Interim of complements, for a further security, Offa caused a
great ditch to be drawn betwixt Offaes ditch.
his and the Britains borders, which work began at Basingwark in Flint-shire,
and North Wales; not far from the mouth of Dee, and ran along the
mountains Chron. Wallis.
into the South, and ended near Bristow at the fall of Wye; the tract whereof
in many places is yet seen, and is called to this day Clawdh Offa, or Offaes
ditch. Marmodius, who openly bare sail to this wind, and Marmodius treachery.
seemed to wink at Offaes intent, secretly called a Counsel of State, wherein
he declared how the Act thus in working, would soon prove the bane of liberty
unto their country, and the mark of dishonor to themselves and posterity for
ever; therefore his advice was, that by some stratagem it might be staid by
time.

(7) To this his Britains consented, the truce yet lasting, and the feast of
Christ's Nativity even then at The Britain^ accessory to it.
hand; in the celebration whereof was held the greatest advantage with least
suspect, to put themselves in action against it; and secretly working the
assistance of their allies the Saxons; both of the South, the West, and the
North, upon Saint Stephens day at night, suddenly Saxons assistance.
brake down the bank of this fortification, filling up again a great part of
the Ditch, and in the morning most furiously rushed into Offa his Court,
putting a great number to the sword, who were more intentive and regard full to
the Feast, then to any Offa^ ple (...).
defense from their cruel and merciless swords.

(8) These wrongs King Offa delaied not to requite, first making their hostages
his vassals and slaves, and then with a great army entering Wales, in a bloody
and sore-fought battle he overcame Marmodius and all his associates in the
field. Thus Marmodius vanquished by Offa.
then as a Conqueror over all his enemies triumphantly after ten years wars
abroad returned he to his own Kingdom, neither puffed with pride, nor
suffering his title to be enlarged according to his conquests: yet he was not
neglectiue of regal state, by the report of the Ligger book of S. Albans,
which says, that in regard of his great prerogative, and not of The Ligger of
(...). M. S.
any pride, he first instituted and commanded, that even in times of peace
also, himself and his Successors in the Crown, should as he passed through
any Cities, have Trumpetters going and sounding before them, to show that the
person of the King should breed both fear, and honor in all which either see
him or hear him.

(9) Unto King Charles of France he wrote in excuse of his wars, and desire
of his amity; whom King Charles congratulateth Offa.
Charles again congratulated with letters of gladness, both for his victories,
and the Christian piety in his land embraced; desiring of Offa safe conduct for
such his subjects, as came to his country in devotion to God, and withal sent
to him, (for a present) a Book of the Decrees of the second Council of Nice.
Which Synodall Book (to use Roger Houedens own words) was sent unto King
Charles from Constantinople, To. Houed. ^nal. part 1. The second Council of
Nice.
wherein (alas for pity) by the unanimous assertion of three hundred Bishops or
more congregated in that Council, were decreed many things inconvenient, yea
and quite contrary to the true faith; as is most especially the worshipping of
Images, which the Church of God does utterly detest. Against which Book
Alcuinm.
Albinus wrote an Epistle, admirably strengthened by the authority of the holy
Scriptures, which together with the foresaid Book himself presented in the
name of the Princes and Bishops of this land, unto the foresaid Charles King of
France. Such intercourse both for State and Church had this great Offa with
that great Charles.

(10) His last wars (according to mine Author) were against the Danes, whom
he forced to their ships Offa^ last wars.
with the loss as well of their booties, as of many of their lives; and then
(says he) with the spirit of humility, both to recall himself from the trace
of blood, and to the better establishment of his kingdoms peace, he joined in
affinity with his neighbor Princes, upon who^ he bestowed his daughters in
marriage.

(11) And making Egfrid his son a King with himself, in great devotion went
to Rome, where Offa went to Rome.
with the like zeal and example of Inas the West Saxon, he made his Kingdom
subject to a Tribute, then called Peter Pence, afterward Rom-Scot; besides
other rich gifts that he gave to Pope Hadrian for canonizing Albane a Saint: in
honor of whom, and in repentance of his sins, at his return (over against
Verolanium, in the place then called Holmehurst, where that Protomartyr of
Britain, for the constant profession of Christ, lost his head) Offa built a
magnificke Monastery in Anno 795. indowing it with lands and rich revenues for
the maintenance of an hundred Monks: upon the first gate of entrance in stone
stands cut a Salteir Argent in a field azure, and is assigned by the
judicious in Heraldry to be the Arms that he bare.

(12) Also in testimony of his repentance for the blood he had spilt, he gave
the tenth part of all his His repentance.
goods unto the Churchmen, and unto the poor. At Bathe he also built another
Monastery, and in Warwickshire a Church, where the adjoining town, from it and
him, bears the name Off-church.

(13) Finally, when he had reigned thirty nine years, he died in peace at his
town Off-ley the nine Off-ley Town.
and twentieth of July, the year of Christ Jesus, seven hundred ninety four:
and with great solemnity his body was buried without the town of Bedford in a
Chapel standing upon the Bank of Owse, which long since was swallowed up by
the same river: whose Tomb of lead (as it were some fantastical thing)
appears often (says Rouse) to them that seek it not, I(...) S Al^s M. S.
(...).
but to them that seek it, is altogether inunible.

His wife.


(14) Quendrid the wife of King Offa has not her parentage set down by any of
our Writers: notwithstanding, the recorder of this his life, says that her In
the life of S. Albane. prefixed before the Ledger book of that Abbey.
name was Drida, and that she was the kinswoman to Charles the Great King of
France, and by him for some offense banished his Realm, who arriving upon the
coasts of England in a ship without tackle, was taken thence, and relieved by
Offa, being then a young Nobleman, where she changed her name Offa affectioned
to Quend^d.
unto Petronilla; with whom he fell so far in love that he made her his
wife, contrary to the liking of his Parents. She was a woman of condition
ambitious, covetous, and cruel, as appeared specially in the death of
Ethelbert, King of the East Angles, that came to her husbands Court to marry
their daughter; whose port she so much envied, that she procured him to be
treacherously murdered: the Quend^d her treachery.
manner the foresaid Author declared to be by his fall into a deep pit,
purposely made in his bedchamber, and under his chair of estate. That his
head was cut off, and found by a blind-man, that the well which bears his name
sprung up presently in the place where it lay, that the blood thereof gave the
blind man his sight, and that Dryda died in the same pit which she had dug
for Ethelbert, I leave to the credit of my author, and the liking of my
Reader: but certain it is that Gods vengeance followed this heinous fact
within one year after the same was committed, by the death of her self, her
husband, and Quendred rewarded with the like pains.
her Son, and the translation of that Kingdom from the Mercians to the
West Saxons.

An ancient Saxon coin inscribed with her name, CENEDRED REGIN. we have found
and here placed, which the judicious suppose to be hers, and that not unlikely,
she being so powerful, proud and ambitious.

His Issue.
(15) Egfrid the only son; and heir apparent Egfrid the only son of Offa.
of King Offa and Queen Quendred, was the only joy and pride of his parents,
who succeeded his Father in his dominions and title, and in the same year also
in the shades of death.

(16) Ethelburga, the eldest daughter of King Offa Ethelburga the first
daughter.
and Queen Quendred was married to Brithrick the sixeteenth King of the
West Saxons: she was a Lady of passing beauty, but withal of an insolent
disposition, hating all whom her husband loved, and practicing the deaths of
them that she hated. She departed into France after the poisoning of her
husband, and for that her offense, a law was enacted to the great prejudice of
the West Saxons Queens, as in the reign of Brithrick we have declared. Cap.
7. Sect. 16.


(17) Elfled, the second daughter of King Offa, and Polycbr. ^sted the second
daughter.
Queen Quendred, by the report of Randulph Higden the Monk of Chester, was
the second wife to Ethelred King of Northumberland, who in regard of her had
put from him his former wife, for which his subjects rose in Arms against him,
and slew him in the last year of King Offa his reign.

(18) Elfrid the third and youngest daughter of Elfrid the third daughter.
King Offa, and Queen Que^dred, being promised in marriage, and assured unto
Ethelbert King of the East Angles, after the murder of her hoped Bridegroom,
with great lamentations, and prophesying threats of revenge, abandoned the
society of men, and withdrew herself unto the monastery of Crowland in the
Fennes, where in contemplation and solitary sadness she spent the remainder of
her life; and yet there are that suppose her to be the wife of King Kenwolfe,
who was the founder of Winchcombe Monastery, and the successor of his brother
Egfride.

(19) Fremund by John Capgraue is supposed to be the son of King Offa, who,
as he says, was traitorously John Capgraue.
murdered by one Oswy that envied his victories which he gat against the Danes:
his body was buried at Offchurch in Warwickshire, and near unto the Palace of
Offa; alleging for his Author one Burghard, who was at his death, and wrote
his life; yet some there are that think him mistaken, for Burghard.
that he calls him a young man, when as those wars happened an hundred
years after King Offa his life.

EGFRID THE TWELFTH KING Egfrid.
OF THE MERCIANS, AND THE SEVENTEENTH Monarch 17.
MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH. CHAPTER XXIX.


EGfrid, the son of King Offa, succeeded his father An. Do. 794.
in the Mercians Kingdom, whereof he was the twelfth in number, and in the
Monarchy of the Englishmen, ranked in account the seventeenth. He began his
reign the thirteenth day of July, in the year of Christ his nativity, seven
hundred ninety four. The first business that he undertook after he came to
the Crown, was the restoration of ancient privileges to the Church, which
his father had deprived them Egfrid restores antike priuiledger.
of; and great hope was conceived of his further proceedings, had not God cut
him off by untimely death. For having reigned only four months, he gave
place unto nature, and to another successor, the sins of the people deserving
no such Prince: for whose cause, and his fathers great bloodshed, as Alcuine
wrote to Osbertus, he was taken away so soon. Fl^ Albinus.


(2) He deceased the seventh day of December, and in the first of his reign,
having had neither Wife nor The continuance of his reign.
Issue that we read of. His body with all due obsequies was honorably buried
in the Abbey Church of S. Albans, of his fathers foundation.

KENVVOLFE THE THIRTEENTH Monarch 1^
Kenwolfe.
KING OF THE MERCIANS, AND THE EIGHTEENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER
XXX.


KEnwolfe, not so near in blood to king Egfryd, as An. Do. 794.
he was like him in all virtuous conditions, by him was ordained to succeed in
his Dominions, whereby he became the thirteenth King of the Mercians, and the
eighteenth Monarch of the Englishmen, in the year of our Lord seven hundred
ninety seven. At home he was an example of piety, peace, and religion, and set
the scale of Justice without respect Ke^olfes praise.
to all alike; abroad temperate; humble; and courteous, without vain
ostentation or ambitious conceits; in wars he was stout and victorious; in
peace studious to enrich his subjects: briefly, at all times so carrying
himself, that envy could not touch him with her tongue.

(2) Whether upon a new quarrel begun, or the old retained, (as inheritable to
the Mercians against those of Kent) I cannot say; but true it is, that in the
entrance of his reign, he entered that Province with a great host of men, and
in a fore fought field discomfited the Kentish, and carried away prisoner their
King, whose surname was Pren. His kingdom he gave to Cuthred, and kept him
captive in Mercia, to Will. Mal^b.
his great grief, and his subjects dishonor.

(3) But Kenwolfe in peace, and minding the works of true piety, gave himself
to the building of a goodly Winchcombe Mon^ry.
Church at Winchcombe in Glocestershire; where upon the day of dedication in
the presence of Cuthred (assigned his Viceroy in Kent) thirteen Bishops, ten
Dukes, many Nobles, and a great concourse of people, he led Pren this Kentish
captive up to the high Altar, and there without either his entreaty, or ransom
for Redemption, released and set him free; showing thereby his devotion to God,
and the heroical parts of a magnanimous Prince.

(4) His reign was twenty two years, and death in Anno eight hundred
nineteen, being solemnly (...) (...)
buried in the Church of the Monastery at Winchcombe aforesaid which himself
had founded.

His Wife.
(5) Elfryd, the wife of King Kenwolfe, has not her parentage certainly
reported by any of our Historians; Elfrid^ (...) vn^.
yet some later upon a likelihood of her name, the place and time agreeing;
have thought her to be the daughter of Off^, affianced to King Ethelbert, as
has been said: but in these obscurities* conjecture may wander astray.

His Children.
(6) Kenelm the son of King Kenwolfe, and of Queen Elfryde his wife, was
very young at his fathers death, and succeeded in the Mercians Kingdom, but not
in the Monarchy of the English; King Egbert the West Saxon King then grown too
great. And in the same year that he began his reign, by the treason of his
unnatural sister he was murdered, and first Ken^ does.
obscurely buried, but afterward solemnly removed and reposed near to his
Father in the Monastery of Winchcombe, as in the Mercian Kings successions we
Chap. 10. ^ct. 14.
have said.

(7) Quendred the eldest daughter of King Ken-Wolfe, and Lady Elfryd his
Queen, after the decease Qu^dred the eld^st d^ughter of K^wolfe.
of her father* ambitiously aspiring to compass the sway of the Mercian
Kingdom wholly to her self, wickedly conspired the death of her brother King
Kenelme, which was traitorously acted by Askebert her instrument, who had the
charge of him: but the same turning to her reproach; for very shame of so
damnable a deed, she within short time after ended her life, but not her
ignominy.

(8) (...), the younger daughter of King Kenwolfe, and of Queen Elfryd, has
not been so famous Burg^ild (...) younger daug^ter.
to posterity as her sister Quendred was for her infamous Act; notwithstanding,
she may reasonably be supposed to have lead a better life, and to have died a
better death; especially of us, who find her no^ s^ained with any aspersion of
misdeseruing.

EGBERT THE EIGHTEENTH KING Monarch 19.
Egbert.
OF THE WEST SAXONS, THE NINETEENTH, BUT FIRST SOLE AND ABSOLVTE MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXI.


THe Saxon Heptarchy drawing now to a period, the spring of an entire Monarchy
An. Do. 800.
began to show it self, and the glory of the Englishmen more clearly to
arise: for thongh they had weakened each other by their own wars, yet stood
their power strong in the possession of the whole, and the ouerborne Britains
held still at the worst.

(2) But such is the dispose of the sole disposer of Empires, that they have
their risings, their fuls, and their falls: never staying in one and the same
point, neither entailed to one and the same Nation, how strong, politic or
populous soever. The proof whereof is apparent in all the Kingdoms of the
earth, and this of ours as mutable as any; whose change of State unto, and in,
this seuen-fold Government The seven fold government mutable.
has hitherto been seen: the several Kings thereof long contending to
branch their own fountains furthest and fairest, lastly let them fall into one
stream, which so meeting, made a more famous confluence in this Monarchy, then
the seven heads of Nilus in the Egyptian Sea.

(3) Formerly, the Kentish, South Saxons, East Angles, Northumbrians, and the
Mercians, through no less then eight descents had worn the Imperial Diadem,
whose rays shone now so bright in the West Saxons eyes, that they again
sought to reestate West Saxons ambition.
themselves in so glorious a possession. For, whereas Brightrik was possessed
and contented with the West Saxon Crown, neither that worn without jealousy
and fear; yet others of the blood royal from Cherdik raised the wings of
their soaring thoughts much higher, among whom Egbert was one, neither the last
nor the least in the opinion of the people, or suspect of his Prince.

(4) This Egbert having command of some part of that Province, so carried
himself, that his fame grew fearful to Brightrik the King, and hateful to
the envious Ethelburg his most proud Queen, by Egberts exigents and reliefes.
whom he was enforced first to secure himself with the Mercian Offa; and
lastly constrained to fly into France: where under Charles the Great, he
turned his adversity into an occasion of his valor, by serving in his wars,
and learned by his politic government, how to rule a quiet or disturbed State.

(5) But King Brightriks death acted, and his Queen the contriuer banished,
Egbert is solicited to the wearing of the West Saxon crown, where he became
the eighteenth King in number, and nineteen years after the nineteenth
Monarch of the Englishmen; entering his reign the year of Christ Jesus, eight
hundredth, being the same year that Charles Simon D^el. says 80^. Mat.
Westminst^ says 801.
was made Emperor of the West, and Conwall then ruling over the Scots.

(6) His first wars were against the Cornish, and their associats the Welsh,
both of them a remnant of the old Britains, who had been oftentimes
vanquished, but never would seem to be subdued, and for fourteen years
continuance held side against Egbert; which their resistance so provoked his
fury that he enacted a most severe law against them, commanding that no
Britain should presume to pass over great Offaes ditch, and present death to
John B^.
them that durst set foot upon any English ground. Their great Caer-legion (now
West-chester) he took from them, and at London from their West-gate cast
down the brazen Image of Cadwallo there set up by the Britains for a terror
to the Saxons, as we have said. Chap. 12.


(7) His wars thus prospering, his puissance grew dreadful, and his glory
much envied at by the other Princes, whereof Bernulfe of Mercia was the first
attempter that sought to pluck the wing of this West Saxon Eagle, but thereby
wrought his own downfall; for Egbert joining battle with him at Ellenden
overthrew his power, and in that quarrel Chap. 10. sect. 16.
Bernulfe was lastly slain.

(8) Kent was the next, and fairest mark in Egberts (...), whose (...) not
gracious in his own subjects (...).
^ight, was the (...) to be subdued; him he chased over Thamisis, and added not
only that County, but also Sussex and Surrey, for Provinces unto his own
Kingdom: next were the East Saxons, the East Angles, and in truth all, both
upon the North, and the South of Humber gave him obedience; so that the bounds
of his Dominion were greatly enlarged, and his royal authority by those
several Kings acknowledged.

(9) Then he to confirm his estate called an assembly unto the City
Winchester, where causing himself to be solemnly crowned, became the first
Saxons absolute Monarch of the whole Island, so reducing Egbert the first sole
Monarch.
the Monarchiall title from the Mercians to the West Saxons, in whose Progeny
it continued without reuersement until the Danes first got, and again lost
it, and the Saxons issue failing, the same fell to the Normans Duke by
Conquest, as in continuance of our history, Christ assisting, shall be seen.

(10) His Coronation was at Winchester, and entrance in the year of Grace,
eight hundred and nineteen, An. Do. 819.
at which time by his Edict in that City dated, he caused all the South of the
Island to be called England, according to the Angles, of whom himself came,
and promising great felicity to his State and Successors, was therein not so
happy as in his affairs he had been fortunate.

(11) For those Saxons that by war and blood, had made themselves Lords of
other men's rights, and of one Kingdom no less then seven, are now endangered
to be made servants unto subjection, and by war and blood their seuen-fold
Kingdom brought again unto one; neither yet freed from the revenge of bloody
violence: for that a fierce and cruel nation (the Danes) ceased not
continually to invade them, till they had subdued and set the crown thereof
upon their own heads, who in King Brightrick days, and about the year seven
Floren. ^igorn.
hundred eighty seven, having with three vessels landed in the West of England,
at three several times, in so many several places, sought the ruin of the
land in the reign of this Egbert.

(12) The first was in his thirty third year, when with thirty five ships they
landed at Lindisferne upon Simon. D^n. Henry Hunting. Mat. W^st.
the North of England, where they were met and fought with at Carham, but with
such loss to the English, that two chief Captains, Dudda and Osmond, two
Bishops, Herefrid of Winchester, and Vigferd of Shirborne, with many Soldiers
were therein slain, King Egbert himself hardly escaping by the covert of the
night.

(13) Their second attempt was in the second year following, when in
West-Wales they landed, unto whom the Britains there joined, and in the place
called Hengistenton abode the King in field, where Egbert with prosperous
fortune vanquished and slew both the Danes and the Welsh.

(14) The third place of their arriuage was Sheepie in Kent, which Island they
sacked, and with much a do were expelled in the last of King Egberts reign,
and but the new beginning of their savage cruelties.

(15) This Egbert by Florentius of Worcester is said to be the son of
Alkemund, who was the son of Eafa, and he the son of Eoppa, the son of
Ingils, the brother of Ine, the eleventh King of the West Saxons, and both of
them the sons of Kenred, descended from Cherdik the first King of that
Province: he was but ^ow o^ (...), (...) strong of ^mme, very valiant, (...),
(...) skillful soldier, and as great in (...), (...) in war; he reigned over
the (...) (...) (...)
of thirty six years and seven (...), (...) (...) of the whole Island
seventeen: his does (...) fourth day of February, and year of Chr^s ^nation
eight hundred thirty six.

(16) His body was with all (...) solemnly buried at Winchester, and his bones
sin^ taken up ^maine with others in that Cities Cathedral (...), bestowed in
Chests set upon the Wall of each (...) the Quier, with these verses neither
ancient, nor (...), thereon inscribed: Hic Rex Egbertus pausat cum Rege
Kenulpho,
Nobis egregia munera vterque tulit.


His wife.
(17) Redburg, the wife of King Egbert, was the first of the West Saxons, that
by their new made law (...) (...)
was deprived of title, authority, or place of a Queen; notwithstanding it
seems she bare a great stroke with her husband, in that John B^uer the Monk
of Westminster reports, that she procured a law to be made against the
Britains, the penalty whereof was present death for any of them to set footing
within the realm of England, or to pass the Ditch that King Offa had made.

His Issue.
(18) Ethelwolfe, the eldest son of King Egbert; (...) (...) son^e.
and Lady Redburg his wife, was in his childhood committed to the charge of
Helmestan (...) of Winchester, under whom he was carefully trained up in
learning and virtue, who coming to man's estate proved also a perfect Soldier,
and had (...) leading of his fathers power against Baldred King (...) Kent,
whom he forced to fly over the Thamisis, and to abandon his Kingdom, which he
subdued to the subjection of his father, and afterward succeeded him in the
Monarchy of the Englishmen.

(19) Ethelstane, the younger son of King Egbert, E^an younger son.
and of the Lady Redburg his wife, was by his father deputed King over the
Kentishmen, the South Saxons, and the East Saxons after he had brought them
unto his subjection; which people he most valiantly defended against the
invasions of the Danes, defeating their forces both by sea and land, and at
Sandwich gave them a most memorable overthrow, in the year of our Lord eight
hundred fifty one, being the sixteenth of his brother King Ethelwolfes reign;
in whose time he deceased, and is reported to have left a son named Ostride,
who by reason of his minority succeeded not in his fathers dominions, which
Ethelbert the second son of King Ethelwolfe entered upon, and being Monarch
reunited these kingdoms inseparably unto the Monarchy.

(20) Edgith, commonly called Saint Edith the (...) a daughter.
daughter of King Egbert, was in her childhood by her brother Ethelwolfe
committed to the charge and bringing up of a Lady in Ireland, greatly renowned
for her holiness of life, named Modewine, by whom she was afterward
recommended to a Disciplesse of the said Lady, named Athea, and made Gouernesse
of a Monastery of the Ladies, by her planted in a place which the King her
brother had given her, called Pollesworth, situated in Arden in the north verge
of the County of Warwick, wherein she lived, died, and was honorably buried,
and the place in regard of her afterward called Saint Ediths of Pollesworth.

ETHELVVOLFE THE NINTEENTH Monarch 20
Ethelwolfe.
KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND THE TWENTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS
WARS, ACTS, WIVES, AND CHILDREN. CHAPTER XXXII.


EThelwolfe, the eldest son An. Do. 837.
of King Egbert, committed in his youth to the care of Helmestan Bishop of
Winchester; and by him unto Swithun a famous learned Monk of that time, took
such a liking unto the quiet and solitary life, (only enjoyed by men of
Religion, all other degrees molested to withstand the intruding Danes) that he
undertook the Monkish vow and profession, and was made Deacon; shortly after
which degree taken, Helmestan died, in whose place Prince Ethelwolfe was
consecrated, as Roger Houeden affirms, or at least elected, (as Roger
Houeden. John Brampton.
John Brampton Abbat of Iaruaux writes) Bishop of Winchester. But the death of
his Father King Egbert immediately following, by great entreaty of the Henry
Hunting. Mat. Westminster.
Nobles, and partly by constraint of the Clergy, he was made King, and was by
the authority of Pope Gregory the fourth, whose creature in both professions he
was, absolved and discharged of his vows.

(2) He entered his Monarchy the fourth day of February in the year of Christ's
Incarnation, eight Will. Malmsb.
hundred thirty seven, and was the nineteenth King of the West Saxons, and the
twentieth Monarch of the Englishmen. His Bishopric he gave unto Swithun his
Tutor, and according to his place, combined all his powers to withstand the
dangerous Danes, that attempted the utter subversion of his fair land: whose
fifth invasion in his first year happened; which drew the Saxons civil wars
unto a constrained peace, having more then they could well do to defend their
lives from their slaughtering swords, or to save their unjustly gotten land
from the spoils of those common enemies; who, not like Conquerors, but
destroying Caterpillars, left nothing vndeuoured wheresoever they came, and had
now begun their merciless depopulations in diverse places at once, so that
the distracted English were to seek where was most need first to withstand.

(3) At Hampton and Portesmouth many of these Norway Simon Dunelm. Henry Hunt.
Pirates had entered; at Hampton with their overthrow, at Portesmouth with
victory; and the same time at Carrum, a Troop of these Danes discomfited King
Ethelwolfes power. The next year at Merseware, Lindsey, in East-Angle, and
Kent, they did An. Dom. 838.
much mischief, and harried all the Country before them: yet in his tenth
year at Pedredesmouth, the Sommerset and Dorsetshire men gave them a memorable
overthrow, under the conduct of Earl Enwulfe, Bishop Adelstan, and Osred their
captains.

(4) But in the sixteenth year of this King, the great Planet Mars seemed to
praedominate continually, and Fortune to cast the chance of victory ever on his
side: for two hundred and fifty ships, (some reckon a hundred more) entered into
Thamesis mouth Henry (...). Ar^ ^iual.
and set on shore an infinite number of these destroying Danes. London and
Canterbury they had sacked and left wast, had pierced into Mercia, and chased
Berthulfe their King out of his Country, and now in Southery had pitched their
battle, as able and resolute to abide all the power of the English, whither
King Ethelwolfe with his son prince Ethelbald repaired, and took the field
at the place called Ocley; wherein after a long and sore fight, the victory
fell to the English, with such slaughter of these Norway inuaders, as is
incredible to report, and the same held as great and famous, as ever had happened
in the land before.

(5) With the like success his Brother Athelstan King of Kent, fought with the
Danes at Sandwich, where chasing them to sea, took nine of their ships; and in
Devonshire, Earl Ceorle at Winleshore so overthrew their whole power, that in
despair they withdrew themselves into the I Will of Thanet, where they made their
abode all the winter season; and if destiny had not withstood the English, the
Danes had been expulsed for ever. But the Saxons seeming cleared of this
common enemy, fell to their wonted quarrels with the ever depressed Britains,
against whom Burthred the M^rcian obtained the assistance of King Ethelwolfe in
his eighteenth year, Si^on Dun.
whose daughter Ethelswith he had obtained in marriage; whereby for a while was
increased the fame and power of that valiant, but unfortunate King.

(6) In this State the affairs of the land stood unto See Chap. 10. Sect. 20.
the nineteenth year of King Ethelwolfes reign, who now remembering his former
Ecclesiasticke profession, ordained that Tithes and Lands due to holy Church
should be free from all Tributes or Regal services; and in great devotion
went himself to Rome, where he was both honorably received, and entertained
the space of a whole year; in which time he new built the English School,
that Offa the Mercian before had there founded, and lately was fired, bearing
the name of Thomas the Holy; confirming also his Grant of Peter pence, and
further couenanting in lieu of his kind entertainment to pay yearly three
hundred marks to Rome, thus to be employed; one hundred to Saint Peter's
Church, an Will. Mal^sbury. Simon. Dun.
other hundred to Saint Paul's Light, and the third to the Pope: the Bride that
evermore must be kissed and largely paid.

(7) His return from Rome was through France, and being a Widower, he there
married Judith the most beautiful daughter of Charles the Bald then Emperor;
in honor of whom in his own Court, he ever placed her in a Chair of Estate,
with all other maiesticall complements of a Queen, contrary to the law of the
West Saxons for Ethelburgaes offense, formerly made. Which his doing so
disliked the Nobles, that Prince Ethelbald his eldest Son, Adelstan Bishop of
Shirborne, and Enwulfe Earl of Somerset, rose up rebelliously in Arms and
sought to depose him; yet by mediation of friends, the matter came to a
comprimize, and the land to be divided betwixt Will. Mal^s.
the Father and Son, but with such partiality that the better part westward
was allotted to Ethelbald: which vnequality gave great suspicion, that this
revolt was rather grounded upon ambition, then any inclination they had for the
defense of their laws, which commonly is the pretense and veil for all
disloiall attempts of seditious subjects against their sovereign Lords.

(8) Howsoever it was, long after this he lived not, but left his Monarchy unto
his eldest son Ethelbald: and by will appointed. Ethelbert his second, to be
King of Kent and Essex, which countries he had conquered. He reigned twenty
years, one month, and nine days, and deceased at a place called Ethelwolfes
time of reigning.
Stamrige, the thirteenth day of January, in the year of our Lord, eight
hundred fifty seven, being the twenty one of his Reign. His body was first
buried at the place of his decease, and afterward removed into the Cathedral
Church at Winchester.

His wives.
(9) Osburg, the first wife of King Ethelwolfe, was Osburgs parents.
the daughter of a Nobleman named Oslake, who had the office of Great Butler of
England, and was descended of the stock of Stuff and Withgar two brethren,
being nobleme^ of the people called Iutes, who were the first Princes of the
I Will of Wight, and Nephews to Cherdik, and cosen germans to Kenrik the first
and second Kings of the West Saxons, and the third and fourth Monarchs of the
Englishmen. She was the second Kings wife that was debarred of the title and
place of Queen. She deceased three years before the King her husband, in the
nineteenth year of his reign, being the year of Christ's Nativity eight
hundred fifty five.

(10) Judith his second wife, was the daughter of Charles the Emperor, and
King of Fra^e, as we Judith a second wife.
have said: her Mother was Queen (...), the daughter of Vodon Earl of
Orl^ance. She was a Lady of passing beauty, and married to this King in France;
and when she came into England was received with the title and place of a
Queen, in abolishment of the perverse law of the West Saxons, made against
the Kings VViues, as before was touched. She was his wife three years, and
suruiued him without any issue.

His Issue.
(11) Ethelbald, the eldest son of King Ethelwolfe, and of Lady Osburg his
first wife, was brought up in (...) the first Son.
his youth in the exercise of war, and served under his Father in the great
victory obtained against the Danes at Ocley in Surrey, in the year eight
hundred fifty one: afterward he turned his force against his Father; and at
his return from Rome, practiced to defeat him of his Kingdom, and was ready
to have given him battle, had not his Father parted with him his Dominion.

(12) Ethelbert, the second son of King Ethelwolfe Ethelbert the second son.
and Lady Osburg his first wife, was in the life time of his Father, after the
decease of his uncle Ethelstan, appointed and placed his Successor in his
Kingdom over the South Saxons, the Kentish, and the East Saxons, without any
mention or meaning (as it seems,) that he should intermeddle further with
any other part of England. Notwithstanding after the death of his brother
Ethelbald, it was generally holden of all men for law, equity, and reason, that
he should succeed him in the Monarchy: and so he did, with the consent of his
Brethren, and without resistance, or contradiction of any other.

(13) Ethelred the third son of King Ethelwolfe, Ethelred a third son.
and Lady Osburg his first wife, had by the disposition of his Father in his
last will, the one half of his Fathers proper inheritance; which was all such
land as King Egbert his Grandfather had before he was King, and was no part of
the Demaines of the Kingdom, and this was divided betwixt him and his brother
Elfred, as the kingdom was between their elder Brethren Ethelbald and
Ethelbert: with an intent that this Ethelred should succeed his brother
Ethelbald in the kingdom of the West Saxons; notwithstanding, his brother
Ethelbert, after the decease of King Ethelbald, entered into the other part,
adioining it to his former kingdom, and was king of the whole, and after left
it entire to this Ethelred, who succeeded him in the Monarchy.

(14) Elfred, the fourth son of King Ethelwolfe and of Lady Osburg his first
wife, was borne at Wantage Elfred a fourth son.
in Barkeshire, in the year of our Lord God, eight hundred forty nine; and the
thirteenth of his fathers reign. Being a child of five years old, he was sent
very honorably attended to the City of Rome, where Leo the fourth then
Bishop confirmed him, was his Godfather at the confirmation, and anointed
him to the expectation of a kingdom: grown in years, he grew so in
discretion, magnanimity and favor of all men, that in the successiue reigns
of his three elder Brethren, he ruled as a Viceroy or secondary king under
every of them, and after them at the last succeeded in the English Monarchy.

(15) Ethelfwith, the daughter of King Ethelwolfe (...) a daughter.
and Lady Osburg, was married to Burthred the twentieth King of Mercia, which
marriage was solemnized at the town of Chippinham in Wiltshire, in the month
of April, and year of Christ's Nativity eight hundred thirty five, and the
fifteenth of her fathers reign: but within twenty two years after, they were
both forced by the Danes to abandon their kingdom, and departed into Italy,
where the King died the same year in the English College at Rome: she lived
after him fifteen years in the habit of a N^ne, at the City of Pad^a, and
there died, and was honorably buried in the year of our Lord God eight
hundred eighty nine, which was the eighteenth year of her brother King Elfreds
reign.

(16) Ne^te, supposed by John Capgra^e the Legend writer, to be the son of
King Ethelwolfe, was in his Ne^ a suppos^d (...).
youth brought up at Glastenbery under Dunstan, who was afterward Arthbishop of
Canterbury. He proved a man of great learning, and was one of the first Readers
of Divinity in the University of Oxford, at the foundation, or as some will
have it, the restoration thereof by King Elfred; he planted a Monastery in
Cornwall, whereunto he used for devotion and studious meditations often to
withdraw himself, which of his abode there, was afterward called Neotestoke,
and when he was dead, his body was with great honor enterred in the County of
Huntingdon, at a place then called Anulfesbery, and afterward in regard of his
enterment, Saint Neotes, and now S. Need^s Town.
Saint Needs.

ETHELBALD THE TWENTIETH Monarch 21.
Ethelbald.
KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND THE TWENTY ONE MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS
ACTS AND REIGN. CHAPTER XXXIII.


EThelbald, the eldest son of king Ethelwolfe, having had An. Do. 857.
Floro^. Wigo^.
part of the kingdom in the life time of his Father, after his death entered
upon the whole, and was the twentieth King of the West Saxons, and the twenty
one Monarch of the Englishmen, beginning his reign in the year of Christ's
incarnation eight hundred fifty seven.

(2) His youth he had spent in the exercise of war, His wars against the Danes.
having made proof of valor in his service against the Danes in many battles;
and likewise attempted (though not in so good a cause) to have fought against
his own father. Which his assaies, as they seemed violent and unnatural, yet
being in the quarrel of the West Saxons law, enacted in prejudice of their
Queens, he was both sided and approved, as has been said.

(3) But howsoever unwilling he was this fair Queen should sit in state by
his fathers side, yet contrary to all laws either of God or man, he laid her
^l. (...).
by his own, and by nuptial rites, brought her to his sinful and incestuous
bed. Which act, though foul enough, some have made worse, in reporting his
Wife to be his own Mother, whom King Ethelwolfe kept for his Concubine. And
surely this his sin was not long unpunished by the shortness of his reign and
life, leaving no other memory of his acts, besides this foul blot to his fair
name. The time of his reigning.


(4) His reign was only two years and an half, and death chanced upon the
twentieth day of December, the year of Christ's assuming our flesh, eight
hundred sixty. His body was first buried at Sh^rburne in the County of Dorset,
where at that time was the Cathedral Church and Episcopal See; but afterward
was removed and enterred at Salesbury, in the County of Wiltshire.

His Wife.
(5) Judith, the Wife of King Ethelbald, was the widow of his own Father, a
most unlawful matrimony contracted against all law of God or of nature; 1.
Cor. 5. 1.
which being both dissolved and punished by the hasty death of the King, and
she returning toward her father and Country in Flanders, was ravished by
Baldwin the Forester of Arden in France, and by him forcibly kept until she
consented to become his wife, who in regard of that marriage, when he was
reconciled to the Emperor Charles her Father, was by him created the first
Earl of Flanders, by whom she had issue Baldwin the second, who espoused Lady
Elfrid, the youngest daughter of Elfred King of England, from whom, through
five descents lineally, Ma^d Queen of England, Wife to William the Conqueror
descended, and from her, all our Norman English Kings unto this day.

ETHELBERT THE TWENTIETH Monarch 22
Ethelbert.
ONE KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND THE TWO AND TWENTIETH MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISHMEN: HIS REIGN AND ISSVES. CHAPTER XXXIIII.


EThelbert, the second son of King Ethelwolfe, who had succeeded his Uncle
An. Do. 860.
Ethelstan in the kingdom of the South Saxons, Kentish, and East Saxons, and
for five years continuance, ruled those Countries with great equity and
valor, after the decease of his brother Ethelbald, succeeded him also both in
the West Saxons kingdom, and the whole Lands Monarchy: whereof he was the one
and twentieth King, and the two and twentieth Monarch.

(2) His reign began in the year after Christ's nativity, eight hundred and
sixty, and was disquieted from first to last by the invasions of the bloody
Danes. For presently after his coronation, these common enemies entered the
Land, ruinating all before them unto the City Winchester, which they sacked,
Hen. ^unting.
and left it trodden under their destroying feet, even to the ground. But in
their return were encountered by the Barkshire-men, under the leading of
Osrick, Earl of Hampton, by whom they were vanquished, the prey recovered, and
a great number of those Infidels slain.

(3) In his first year also a navy of Danes and Normans entered into the Island
Tanet, and began their wonted spoils among those people: whereupon the Kentish
compounded their peace for a great sum of The Kentishmen compound for their
peace.
money given. Notwithstanding these miscreants, which knew not God, gave little
regard to their promised covenants, and before the days of truce were expired,
like a sudden flood ouer-bare all before them. These their irruptions to
withstand, the Kentish then prepared, rather aduenturing themselves upon the
chance of battle, then to rest upon a seeming truce, wherein their destruction
was too apparent, and forthwith assembling all the powers together, set upon
those truce breakers, and with much slaughter forced them at length out of
their Country.

(4) But the date of King Ethelberts life being expired, he yielded his body
to the course of nature, Ethelberts ti^ of reigning.
and his Kingdoms to his next Brother, after he had reigned over the Kentish,
South, and East Saxons, the term of ten years, and had sat Monarch of the
whole only five. He died the year of grace eight hundred sixty six, and was
honorably buried in the Cathedral Church of Shirburne in Dorset-shire, by his
brother King Ethelbald.

Hi^ supposed Issue.
(5) Athelm, the brothers son of King Elfred, mentioned in the last will and
testament of the same Athelm the eldest son.
King, seems by all likelihood to be the eldest son of this King Ethelbert,
elder brother to the same King Elfred, although he succeeded not his father in
his Kingdom. For in those days, if the Kings son were under age, the
succession went to the next brother; and if that brother left his son at full
age, then it went unto him; otherwise it reuerted to the elder brothers son.

(6) Ethelwald, surnamed Clit^, which is a word of addition given to all the
Saxon Kings sons of England, Ethel^ld the second son.
is mentioned in King Elfreds will to be his brothers son, and is most likely
to be the son of this King Ethelbert, he proved a most deadly enemy to his
cosen King Edward, the son of King Elfrid his Uncle, destroying his towns in
Dorset-shire, and being driven out of England, joined himself with the Danes,
who made him their King in Northumberland, He^y H^ing.
and under his leading, grievously assailed the Countries of the East Saxons,
East Angles, and Mercians, wherein he was lastly slain, the year of our Lord
nine hundred and five, being the fourth of King Edward his cosen-germanes
reign.

ETHELRED THE TWO AND Monarch 23.
Ethelred.
TWENTIETH KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND THE TWENTY THIRD MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXV.


EThelred, the third son of King Ethelwolfe, after the An. Do. 866.
decease of his Brother succeeded him in his Dominions, and was in number the
two and twentieth King of the West Saxons, and the twenty third Monarch of the
Englishmen; he began his reign in the year of our salvation eight hundred
sixty and six, and for the time that he was King, reigned in continual wars
against the Pagan Danes, whose numbers now were greater, and footing surer in
this land then formerly had been.

(2) In the first year of his reign, there arrived upon the English coasts a
huge Army of these Danes, Hunger and Hubba.
whereof Hungar and Hubba, men of incredible strength and cruelty, were the
Captains: These wintred in East Anglia, made truce with the inhabitants upon
certain conditions, and forbear a time from their wonted ravening.

(3) But in the next year the King being busied to put back a fresh inrode of
Danes in the South and West of the Island then entered; these deuourers took
advantage upon the civil broiles commenced among the Northumbrians, who in
these turmoiled times sought to withdraw their subiections from the West
Saxons, and to set up Kings again of their own. The foresaid Captains Hungar
and Hubba, having The Danes march Northward.
in time of their truce strengthened themselves with new supplies of aid,
marched further into the North, where finding the people unprovided of
strength, and the two Kings Osbright and Ella of reconciled enemies to be made
no sure friends, they harried the Country before them, and entering York slew
the two Kings, with infinite number of the English; which City they consumed
with fire, and burnt therein all those that had fled thither for succor.

(4) The State thus standing, and their forces increasing every day, brought
new fears upon the inhabitants, when every late victory with increase of
Captives and rich spoils, ministered occasion and means of some other conquest
to follow; which these Pagans so pursued, till lastly they set a substitute
King to reign under them, over all the North Borders beyond the river Tyne;
and so retiring themselves out of Northumberland into Mercia, came to
Nottingham, which City they wanne, and therein wintred the third of King
Ethelreds reign, who with the aid of Burthred the Mercian King, constrained
Ing^s.
the Danes to sue for peace, and a safe departure, yielding the City, and
again retyring themselves over Tyne, remained in York all the next winter.

(5) The Summers opportunity approaching, An. Do. 870.
their wonted desire for spoil was with it increased, and to cut off long
travel these Danes by boats passed Humber, where Hungar and Hubba began
with fire and sword to lay all wast before them, sparing neither Person, sex
nor age. The places respected for public good, and sacred Temples consecrated
only to God, which all other Tyrants have forborne, these savage men as the
earths destroiers cast down and trampled under their profane feet: among
which for note were the goodly Monasteries of Bradney, Crowland, Peterborow,
Ely, and Huntington, all laid in level with the ground, and their Votaries,
as well the Nuns as the Monks, murdered with their unhuman and merciless
swords; to avoid whose barbarous pollutions, the chaste Nuns of Coldingham
defo^ed themselves to their lascivious eyes, by cutting off their upper lips
and noses; but to everlasting remembrance they Fl^es Histor.
remain most fair, and well beseeming faces of pure Virgins.

(6) These Pagans piercing further into the land, came into the territories of
the East Angles, wherein holy Edmund reigned King, whose Martyrdom in most
cruel manner they wrought, he constantly calling upon the name of Christ,
whereof we have already spoken, and shall be occasioned hereafter to speak.

(7) But in the last year of this Kings reign, their raging power was most
great: for with a new supply two Danish Kings Sreeg, and Halden, entered into
West-Saxia, and at Reading the Kings town entrenched themselves: these
forraging the Country, were encountered with at Engl^field by Ethelwolfe Earl
of Barkeshire, and his men, who in skirmish slew one of their leaders; and
chased the rest back to their Trench.

(8) These Danes fearing lest delays would prove dangerous, and knowing that
the first success is commonly seconded with further courage of hope; four
days after showed themselves in field ready to fight: their host they divided
into two battalians; whereof the one was guided by two of their Kings and
certain Earls were leaders of the other; which when the English perceived,
they also Assendon battle.
divided theirs, whereof King Ethelred had the leading of the first, and Elfred
his brother was General of the second; the place was Assendon, where their
Tents were pitched, and the day approached for battle: King Ethelred in his
Tent staid so long in prayers that Elfred upon a forward courage hasted to
encounter the enemy, and that with a most fierce and sharp fight, wherein
having spent the most of their strengthes; and ready to decline, and give
back: Ethelred manfully entered the battle, and so seconded his brother, and
ouer-tyred Soldiers, that he Scala Chronicon.
made way by dint of his sword through the thickest of their almost-conquering
enemies, and with such loss of the Danish blood, drawn from the sides of one
of their Kings, five Earls, and an infinite number of the common Soldiers,
that the streams thereof seemed as an ouer-swelling tide, altogether to cover
the face of the field, and is accounted for the noblest victory that the
English till then had gotten of the Danes.

(9) Yet were not these Pagans therewith discouraged, but gathering more
strengthes and supplies from other parts; foureteen days after, made head
again against the English, and pitching down Basing battle.
their standards at Basing, abode the coming of Ethelred and trial of
battle, wherein success was altogether altered; for herein the Kings part
was discomfited, and the Danes the winners of the day.

(10) Thus both sides borne upon rage and hope, in their heat of blood prepare
for new fight. The Danes power was augmented with a further supply sent from
beyond Seas, and the English confirmed with hope of success: These meeting at
Merton (two months after the battle of Basing) encountered each others both
boldly and bloodily; wherein at first the English prevailed, and the Danes were
chased; but their numbers the greater, and fresh supply maintaining their
(...), they r^uered themselves, and won the day; wherein King Ethelred
received his deaths wound, with such slaughter of his people, that little
wanted the end of all encounters, to have been afterward attempted (...)
any more by the English.

(11) Great was the valor and resistance of this King; for in his short time
of Reign, as Writers (...)
record, no less then nine set battales against the Danes he fought in one
year, to the great effusion of Christian blood, and to no little loss of the
Danish power; for in his reign fell of them one King, nine Earls, and of the
common sort without number.

(12) He died at Wittingham of his wound received the three and twentieth day
of April, in the year of our Lord God eight hundred seauenty two, and was
buried in the Collegiat Church of Winburne in Dorcetshire, where remains his
Tomb and his Arms unto this day, with this Inscription: In hoc loco quiescit
corpus Sancti Ethelredi Regis West-Saxonum Scala Chr^n. Marian. Scot.
Martyris, qui Anno Domini 872. 23. die Aprilis, per manus Dacorum Paganorum
occubuit.


His Issue.
Elfred, the eldest son of King Ethelred seems to be Grandfather to the
noble and learned Ethelward, Elfred the eldest son.
who being Kinsman, Counselor and Treasurer to King Edgar; wrote an history of
his Country, beginning at the first arrival of the Saxons into England, and
continuing unto his own time: which history he dedicated to his kinswoman, and
cosen germane the Lady Mande Abbess of Quedlingburg in Saxony, being the
daughter of the Emperor The Abbess of Quedlingburg.
Otho, by Edgith his wife, daughter of King Edward the elder, and sister of
Ethelstane, and Edmund Kings of England.

Oswald, a young son of King Ethelred, is mentioned Oswald a younger son.
in a Charter of his Fathers, by which he gave lands to the Monastery of
Abingdon near Oxford; and to which this son of his has his name set down
for a witness; which Charter is yet extant, recorded in a great Legiet-booke,
and Register of the Evidences of the lands, sometime belonging to the said
Monastery.

Thyre, the daughter of King Ethelred, is reported Thyre a daughter
by the histories of Ireland to be married to (...) King of the Danes, and to
have had issue King Harald, which Harald, by Queen Go^hild his wife, had
issue, Sweyn king of Denmark, Iringe king of Northumberland, and Gonhild
Queen of North Wales. King Sweyn by Queen Sigred his wife, had issue C^te
King of England and Denmark, Ostryde wife of Duke Wolf, and mother of King
Sweyn the younger, and Thyre the first wife of Earl Goodwin of Kent.

ELFRED THE TWENTY THIRD Monarch 24.
Elfred.
KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND TWENTY FOVRTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS
ACTS, REIGN, WIFE AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXVI.


ELfred, or Alfred, the fourth son of King Ethelwolfe, An. Do. 872.
though he had been anointed King at Rome by Marianus. Florentius.
Pope Leo in his young years and Fathers life time; yet reigned he in no part
of his dominions, before the deaths of all his Brethren, under whom he served
in most of their wars, assisting them likewise in all their counsels: the
land now miserably torn by the cruel incursions of the bloody Danes, was left
unto him, both to redeem, and to reign over, by the death and Testament of
King Ethelred his last brother.

(2) He began his reign in the year of his age twenty two, and of our Lord
God eight hundred seventy two, being crowned in the City of Winchester, the
twenty third King of the West Saxons, and the twenty four Monarch of the
Englishmen: but of some Historians he is famoused by the style of the first
absolute Monarch.

(3) His reign began with troubles and wars in defense of the land which the
Pagan Danes intended Asser.
to destroy; and though his powers were small, yet was he forced into the field
within one month after his Coronation; the place was Wilton in the County of
Wiltstire, on the south-banke of the river Wily: Speculum hist. Ricardus
Cirencestrencis.
where the Danes at first gave back and fled but seeing the fewnes of their
pursuers, reenforced their battle, and got the field, with whom the West Saxons
entered league, and compounded for their departure from among them.

(4) These Rouers then with their associates at Reading, got themselves into
London, where they wintred; with whom the Mercians likewise compou^ded for
their peace, which proved shortly to be the destruction of their princely
blood; and lastly, the lands subversion to a foreign nation. For the Mat. West.
Danes having got footing in the North, the West, and the South of this land,
(unto whose aid many new-come guests from their Eastern countries were
arrived, under the leading of other three Kings, Gurthrun, Esketel, and Ammond)
all together set their griping tallents with such fast hold upon Mercia, that
at Ripendon they constrained Burthred the King with his Queen Elswith out of
the land, and in his stead placed a King of their own choice, upon Polychro.
lib. 6. c. (...)
condition to deliver up the same again unto them when they would demand it.

(5) In the fourth year of King Elfred their armies divided themselves into
two parts, the one of An. Dom. 875.
them guided by King Halden, returned into Northumberland; where he bestowed
that Country among his followers, and therein remained for two years
continuance, doing much harms both to the English and Picts. The other part
led by the last new-come King, came to Granabridge, whence they wintered and
spoiled the Country, and there spreading themselves as Grasshoppers upon the
face of the earth, eat up all where they came; so that King Elfred was
enforced to compound for their departure Elfreds composition.
out of his own kingdom in West-Saxia; to which covenants they promised and
swore; yet contrary to both, took into Devonshire, and wintred at Excester,
unto whom a further supply by sea sought to join themselves, but met with such
boisterous blasts, that one hundred and twenty of their ships were cast away by
tempest at Swanwicke upon our coasts, and their land-army marching toward
Excester, were there welcomed with so sharp an encounter by King Elfred, that
they gave him both pledges and oath to depart with all speed.

(6) But Fortune ever dallying with them, whom she means to down-cast, set
the chance of loss presently upon the Saxons side: for now the three Kings
Gurthrun, Esketel, and Ammond thought it not good to let Elfred thus rest, and
thereupon drew their forces westwards toward him, where at Chipingham Three
Kings against Elfred.
(a Manor of his) they wintred, and compelled th West Saxons there, either to
yield, or to forsake the Country.

(7) King Elfred therefore, with such strength as he had, hasted toward them,
and seventeen miles An. Do. 876.
from Bristow pitched down his tents even in the face of the enemy; where
betwixt these fierce nations a great battle was fought, to the infinite loss
of blood on both sides, and that upon such equal departure, as neither could
challenge to be masters of the field; yet the report went, that King Elfred
was discomfited, which turned greatly to his advantage; for thereupon many of
the English hasted to his succor, lest the overthrow of him should be the bane
of them all; his strengthes thus renewed with an unexpected supply, no time was
detracted to stay the Danish rage, who were now returned further into the heart
of the land, and at Abington by Oxford had pitched their standreds for fight.
Abington.


(8) Thither the English repaired, and the next morning he ordered his Army;
neither were the enemies unprepared, but with braues stood ready to receive the
encounter. The battle joined, continued with such loss of blood, that it is
accounted one of the sorest that ever betwixt them before had been fought, and
only parted by the approach of the night, neither party challenging the honor
of the day, the loss being so great upon both sides.

Seven of these battles are reported to be fought in that year, whereby both
their strengthes were much abated, and their spilt blood so cooled Seven
battles in one year.
their livers; that lastly they concluded upon a peace; one article was this,
that the Danes should admit no more of their nation to arrive in this Island:
but how soon that was broken, the sequels did show.

(9) For in the year eight hundred seventy six, (says Simon Dunelmensis)
Rollo a nobleman of Denmark with a great Army entered into England, with An.
Do. 876. Simon Dunel.
no less spoil and destruction then other of those Danes before him had done,
notwithstanding the truce: with whom King Elfred met, and gave him so hot
welcome, that he liked not greatly his entertainment; and being warned
(forsooth) in his sleep, that better fortune attended him in France, he left
his countrymen to tugge with the English.

(10) The Danes then accounting the peace to be broken, like Bees from the
Hiue, infect all the Elfreds exigents.
land, insomuch that this undaunted King Elfred was ofttimes brought to such
extremities, that he hid himself out of sight, and in the Fens and Marsh
grounds was forced with such small companies as he had, to live by fishing,
fowling, and hunting of wild beasts for his food, having no more of his great
Monarchy left him, but Somerset, Hamton, and Wiltshires only, neither yet them
free from the incursions of the Danes.

(11) The solitary place of his most residency, was an Island enclosed with the
two rivers Those and Parret, at their meeting in the County of Sommerset,
Edelingsey Island.
commonly called Edelingsey, where he in very poor attire disguised, was
entertained into a Cowheards house (if not into his service,) where on a time
as he sat by the fire in trimming of his bow and Asser. S^. Hist^. Ric. Cir^.
shafts, a cake of dow baking upon the hearth before him, chanced to burn; the
Cowheardesse coming in, and seeing him mind more his bow then his bread, in a
great fury cast away both his bow and arrows, and checking him as her Groom,
said, Thou fellow, do thou see the bread burn before thy face, and wilt not
turn it? and yet art thou glad to eat it before it be half baked? little
suspecting him to be the man that had been served with more delicate cates.

(12) But this Prince, the very mirror of Princes, more minding the wealth of
his subjects, then Polydor. Virg.
the majesty of State, disguised himself in the habit of a common Minstrell,
and in person repaired to the Danes Camp, who lay like sena^, wallowing in
wantonness, and secure in their own (...).
conceit from impeach of danger; which Elfred a most skillful Musician, and an
excellent Poet, did not a little egg on by his sweet music, and songs of
their valor; so that he was suffered to pass uncontrolled into the company of
their Princes, at banquets, or else where: whereby he both saw their negligent
security, and by diligent observance learned the designs that in their
counsels they intended.

(13) Returning to his comfortless company, he told them the condition of the
hostile Camp, and how easy it was to recover again their decayed estates:
H^y Hunt. An. Do. 878
whereupon showing himself to his subjects, unto whose sight nothing could be
more joyous; on the sudden set upon the careless Camp of the Danes, and
made thereof a very great slaughter, to the great terror of others in other
parts, that had accounted him dead long since.

(14) Hubba, that had harried the English, and now rowzed upon the news of
King Elfreds victory and life; with thirty three ships sailed from Wales, and
arriving in the mouth of Tau, where it falls into the Seuerne Sea, assaied to
take there the then-strong Castle called Kinwith, unto whom the Devonshire men
gave battle, and slew eight hundred and eighty persons of their retinue; where
died the An. Do. 879:
Danish King Hubba, whose corpse being there interred under a great heap of
copped stones; gave name to the place, and was called Hubblestone. There and
Asser. (...).
then was taken the Danish much esteemed Banner, called Reafan, wherein a Raven
was purtraied wrought in needle-worke, (so Asserius Meneuensis reports) by
the three sisters of Hubba and Hungar the daughters of Lothbroke (that is
Leather-breach) the Dane: In regard whereof, as also for the opinion of good
luck, as they took it, it was cuer born before them in their wars.

(15) These adverse proceedings of the Danes designs, especially falling when
the game was near won, made them suspect, how fair soever the ball lay to
hand, yet fortune would serve it in the end to their loss: for Elfred now
flocked unto upon every Danes send for peace.
side, began to build fortresses behind his back, and forward to march with
his conquering sword: whereupon the Danes sent to him for Peace, and delivered
him hostages, upon assurance that they meant as they spoke: The conditions
were, that their King should receive Baptism, and the great Army of the Danes
quietly to depart out of the land.

(16) Whereupon Gurmound or Gurthrun the Danish King repaired to the new built
Castle of Edelingsey unto King Elfred, and in the place then called Alre, was
washed in the lauer of Baptism, whom Elfred received for his God-son by the
name of Athelstane, and gave him in free gift the Country of East Angles. In
the same fountain of Grace (says Simond Dunelmensis) thirty of the chief
Danish Nobility were initiated: Sl^ D^lm.
upon whom the truly Christian King Elfred bestowed many rich gifts: And that
the limits of the English might be free from their incursions, thus the
confines of King Elfreds kingdom were laid forth, as we find it in the end of
those Laws that Elfred published, whose words are these: Let the bounds of our
Deminio^ stretch from the river Thamesis, and from (...). Lambere in his book
of the old English laws.
thence to the water of Lea, even unto the head of the same water, and so forth
straight unto Bedford: and finally, going along by the river of Ouse, let them
end at Watling street.

(17) But so far were the Danes from performance of covenants, that in this
eight year of King An. Do. 879
Elfreds reign, and the eight hundred seventy nine after Christ, this Gurmund
and his company wintered Mar^.
at Chipnam in Wiltshire, and a new supply of these Pagans (known by the name
of the Wicci^gi) wintred at Fulh^m near London; yet after upon better advice,
the one went into their assigned circuit, and the other departed to the realm
of France; and so to his twelfth year the land took some rest, that had been
kept long waking by the loud sound of war.

(18) In the year of Grace eight hundred eighty five, these last retired Danes
finding France not fitting their purpose, returned into Kent, and put into
Medway, where on his East side they began a fierce siege unto the City
Rochester, before whose gate they built a strong Castle: Thither King Elfred
hasted, before whose power these Danes could not stand, but were forced to
their ships, and back again into France,

(19) Whereupon the King removed his siege unto London, whence all the Danes
fled (as Wolves abide An. Do. 889.
not the presence of the Lion) the inhabitants Asserius. Flo. Wigorn.
reioicing to see the face of their King: which City he restored to her former
liberty and beauty, and committed the custody thereof unto Ethelred Duke of
Mercia, that had married his daughter the Lady Ethelfred, Will. Malmsbury.
whose title the King had maintained against Colwolphus, made King thereof by
the Danes. Whereupon both Kent, the South Saxons, and West Saxons came
willingly, and submitted themselves to King Elfred. The East Angles being
governed, or rather spoiled by Athelstan the christened Dane, who after twelve
years reign there died, and was buried at Hadley in Suffolk.

(20) But in the one and twentieth of his reign, and of Christ's Incarnation
eight hundred ninety An. Do. 892.
two: those rouing Danes returned out of France, and again arrived in Kent in
the mouth of the river Limen, with two hundred and fifty ships, which they drew
four miles into the great wood, then called Andreads Weald, and there
destroyed a Castle that stood for defense, building another more strong at
Apulder, wherein they kept. At the same time likewise entered one Hastings, a
Nobleman of Norway, Si^ Dun.
with eighty ships; but with a fairer show as he intended, for he sent his
oath unto Elfred not to annoy any part of his dominions, and withal his two
sons to be baptized: which King Elfred accepted, himself becoming the
Godfather of the one, and Duke Ethelred of the other; and both they, and his
Ambassadors returned with rich gifts. Against these Kentish inuaders, King
Elfred fought a great battle at Fernham, near unto Aelesford, wherein he
Fernham battle
wounded their King, and forced his Army to flee over Thamesis; in passing
whereof, through overmuch have, and great fear many of them were drowned, and
they that escaped, fled to an Island called Breklesey enclosed about by the
river Colne.

(21) News then being brought into the East, that the Danes from
Northumberland had infested the West, and with a strong siege begirt the City
Excester. Elfred left for General his son in law Duke Ethelred; whilst he
with a strong power went to suppress their rage: who hearing of his coming,
brake up their siege, and were gone: upon the advantage of his absence,
perlured Hastings then wrought, who out of his new built Castle at Beamfield,
made spoil of the Kings people, and forraged all the Country * Bea^fles.
before him. Whereupon Duke Ethelred assembled a power, and first assailing his
well stored Castle, took thence his wife and two sons, with exceeding spoils
of gold, silver and garments; all which were presented unto King Elfred at his
return to London: who out of his princely magnanimity, sent back to Hastings
his wife and two sons; because (said he) Hastings wife and children set at
liberty.
she was no warrior, and his two sons were his God-children: whereupon
Hastings repaired his Castle, and joined with the other Danes that lay at
Apulder.

(22) Those then that had fled but lately from Excester, in their return met
with other their consorts, Excester and Chester besieged.
and rouing about the coast for their prey, fell lastly upon the ancient City
Chester, which presently they began to sack and burn. But the country
inhabitants coming to the rescue, begirt them about with their host, and
forestalled the passages of all supply of victuals; so that for want of food,
the Danes were constrained to eat up their horses, and upon composition thence
to depart.

(23) Thence fetching a compass all along the coasts of Wales, in the same
year they arrived in Essex, An. Do. 895. Flor^. Wigorn. Marian. Scotus.
being the twenty four of King Elfreds reign: and in the Winter following,
drew their ships by the Thamesis into the river Lea, by which they passed in
those light Pinnaces twenty miles Northward into the land, and built them a
fortress at the place called Ware.
Wear, thither forthwith the King repaired, and pitched his tets before his
enemies in the same place; who seeing their strength, and the danger of long
The river Lea divided and ^ade vnnauigable.
siege, did that by policy, which power could not so suddenly do: for he
divided the river into sundry streams, whereby the Channel was made
vnnauigable, and the Ships bedded in the mudde, lay rather to their annoiance
then defense; the former Henry H^ting.
experience of their hunger-starud besiege made the^ the more fearful to fall
into the like; and therefore in great have departed their fortress, leaving
their wives and children to the mercy of the English. Neither stayed they till
they came unto the borders of Wales, when at Cartbridge upon Seuerne they built
another Castle, and lay there all the next winter.

(24) Long there they stayed not, without dislike of their lodgings, and cold
entertainments, but that An. Do. 897.
they returned to their wonted spoils, and dividing themselves, some to
Northumberland, and some into East-Anglia, like Locusts eat up all as they
went: whose breath as it were, so infected the air, that for three years
following a great mortality reigned both upon men and beasts, and ended not
much before the death of this incomparable Prince: which happened to the great
sorrow of his subjects upon wednesday the twenty eight of October, when he had
reigned twenty nine years and six months, of his age fifty one, and year of
Christ Jesus nine hundredth and one.

(25) The virtues of this Prince are matchable to any that ever reigned before
him, and exceed the most that ever reigned after him, both in service of God,
whose Substitutes they are, in defense of his Country, which charge they all
bear, in providing Seal. Chr. Regist. Hyde. Tho. Rudburne. Reg. Hig.
good laws, the sinews of Kingdoms, and care of posterities, from which no
man is exempted:

The day and night containing twenty four hours, he designed equally to three
especial uses, and them observed by the burning of a taper set in his Chapel
or Oratory; eight hours he spent in contemplation, reading, and prayers;
eight, in provision for himself, his repose and health; and the other eight in
the affairs of his commonwealth and state. His Kingdom he likewise divided
into Shires, Hundreds and Tithings, for the better ordering Asserim Men.
and administering of justice, and for the abandoning of thieves, which had
formerly increased by the means of long wars; whereby, notwithstanding the
multitude of soldiers continually employed, it is reported that a Virgin might
travail alone in his days through all his dominions, without any violence
offered; and that bracelets of gold were hanged in the high ways, and no man
so hardy as to will. Malmsbury.
take them away.

He was a most zealous, and studious protector and prouider for the Clergy,
Widows, and Orphans, liberal of his goods, wise, temperate and just,
valiant, patient in adversities, and ever relgious in the service of God. A
most learned Prince, a skillful Musition, and an excellent Poet: the best laws
beefitting his Subjects he translated into the English tongue: as also the
Pasterall of Gregory, the history of Beda, and Boethius his consolation of
Philosophy, the Psalms of David (whose godly reign he proposed to Elfreds
good studies.
himself for imitation) he likewise began to translate, but died before he
could finish the same. And so great a desire had he unto learning, that (as
Alfredus Riuallensis witnesses) he published this Act: We Alfred^ Ri^essit
(...) in Apologia Oxen.
will and command, that all Freemen of our Kingdom, whosoever possessing two
hides of land, shall bring up their sons in learning till they be fifteen
years of age at least, that so they may be trained to know God, to be men of
understanding, and to line happily: for, of a man that is borne free, and yet
illiterate, we repute no otherwise then of a beast, or a brainelesse body, and
a very sot. And for the furtherance of this his royal intent, consorted with
Aserius Meneuensis, Grimbald, John Scot and others, neither Aserius. Grimbald.
John Scot.
permitted he any in office in Court, or elsewhere, unless he were learned,
which incited his Nobles to the earnest pursuit of learned Arts, and to train
up their children in good letters: his buildings were many, both to Gods
service, and other public use, as at Edelingsey a Monastery, at Winchester a
New-Minster; and at Shaftsbury a house of Nuns, wherein he made his daughter
Ethelgeda the Abbess. But the Annals of Winton Monast.
foundation of the University of Oxford (which he began in the year of our
Lord eight hundred ninety five, and whose lectures he honored with his own
presence) surmounteth all his others, to the continuance of posterities, a
living spring and gracious fountain, whence issue the streams of all
knowledge, that abundantly have watered both this and other kingdoms.

(26) His body was first buried in the Cathedral Church of S. Peter's at
Winchester, under a fair Monument Mal^s. de Reg. l. 2. (...). 4.
of most precious Purphory, afterward because the lewd-religious Chanons give
it out (to work some feat of their usual imposture) that his Ghost did walk
every night from house to house; both it and the Monument were taken up, and by
his son the Kings command (in detestation of those sorceries) removed into the
Church of the new Monastery: and lastly, his body, Monument, Church and
Monastery, were taken thence, and removed without the Northgate of the City,
since called Hyde.

(27) Some allege that the malice of those Chanons against him, was for
displeasure that he placed over the^ a rude Swineheard named Denewlphus,
Wigornensis. Th. Rudburne.
whom he made their Bishop; but the ground of that assertion seems
unwarrantable by the relation of Wigornensis, and also of Tho. Rudburne; the
first of which says, that Elfred caused him to be trained up in learning, and
the later, that after long study, he attained to the degree of a Doctor of
Di^inity in the University of Oxford, and was afterward made Bishop of
Winchester by the King. For doubtless at that time the Bishops of Rome had not
deuested our Kings of that prerogative-

His Wife.
(28) Elswith the wife of King Elfred was the daughter of Ethelred surnamed
M^hel, that is the Elswith.
Great, an Earl of the Mercians, who inhabited about Gainesborough in
Lincolnshire: her mother was Edburg a Lady borne of the Bloud-roiall of Mercia.
She was married unto this King in the twentieth year of his age, being the
second of the reign of his brother King Ethelred, and was his wife twenty
eight years, and living after him four; died in the year of grace nine
hundred and four, and was buried in the Monastery of Nuns which she had
founded at Winchester; out of which afterward King Henry the first took to his
wife Ma^d the daughter of Malcolme King of Scots, by whom the royal blood of
the ancient Kings of England became united to the Normans, whereby he wanne
much love of the English nation. Malcolme King of Scots.


His Issue.
Edward, the eldest son, and second child of King Elfred, and Queen
Elsewith, was borne about the Edward the eldest son.
beginning of his Fathers reign, in the year of our Lord eight hundred
seventy one: he was brought up in his Fathers Court, and carefully attended,
and instructed by men of great virtue and knowledge, in learning, and in all
other qualities, and exercises convenient for Princes. He was married, and had
diverse children: he was thirty years of age before his Father deceased, and
then he succeeded him in his Kingdom and Monarchy.

Ethelward; the second son, and fifth, and last child of King Elfred and Queen
Elswith, was borne about Ethelward the second son.
the midst of his Fathers reign, and about the year of our Lord eight hundred
and eighty. He was in his youth by his Fathers appointment, and for the
example of other young Nobles brought up in the Rudburne Annals (...).
study of good Arts, at the university of Oxford, where (says Th. Rudburne,
and the Annals of Winchester) he became a man very learned, and a great
Philosopher: he had of his Fathers gift by his last Will great livings in the
Counties of Deuon, Sommerset, South-Hampton: ^he proved a man of great
judgment and wisdom, and living until he was above forty years old; he
died the sixteenth day of October, in the two and twenty year of his brother
King Edwards reign, Anno nine hundred twenty two, and was buried at Winchester.

Elfleda, the eldest daughter and first child of King Elfleda the eldest
daughter.
Elfred, and Queen Elswith his wife, was married to Ethelred Duke of Mercia,
who in respect of this marriage was suffered to have all royal jurisdiction
over that Country, in as ample manner as the Kings thereof had enioied; and
after the decease of her husband, which happened in the year of our Lord nine
hundred and twelve: she continued the government in the same sort eight
years, with such resolution and valiant resistance of the common enemy (the
Danes) that she stood her brother Edward in great stead, as in the relation of
his life shall be further showed. She died the fifteenth of June nine hundred
and nineteen, and was buried in S. Peter's Church at Gloucester, leaving issue,
a daughter, named Elswin, whom King Edward her brother deprived of that Duchy,
which her own mother enioied, and he his crown by her assistance.

Ethelgeda, the second daughter and fourth child of King Elfred and Queen
Elswith, was never married, Ethelgeda the second daughter.
but took upon her the profession and vow of Virginity, and was by her fathers
appointment made a Nun of Shaftsbury in the County of Dorset, in the
Monastery there founded by him: who is also accounted the first of the Town it
self. She was afterward Abbess of the house, and therein spent, and ended
her life, and was there also buried.

Elfride, the youngest daughter, and child of King Elfride the yo^gest daughter.
Elfred (and Queen Elswith his wife, was married to Baldwin the second,
surnamed the Bald, Earl of Flanders, son of Earl Baldwin the first, and
Queen Judith his wife, the widow of King Ethelwolfe her Grandfather. She was
his wife thirty years and more; she suruiued him and was a widow eleven
years, she died the seventh of June, in the year of our Lord nine hundred
twenty nine, being the fifth of the reign of King Ethelstan her Nephew. She is
buried by her husband in the Chapel of our Lady; within the Monastery of S.
Peter, at the City of Gaunt. She had issue Arnulfe the third Earl of Flanders,
progenitor of all the Earls of Flanders since his time, and Ad^lfe Earl of
Bol^igne and Terwi^.

EDWARD SVRNAMED THE ELDER Edward
Monarch 24.
THE TWENTY FOVRTH KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND TWENTY FIFTH MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN; ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXVII.


NO greater were the griefs conceived for the death of worthy Elfred, then
were An. Do. 901.
the hopes of the people in his son Prince Edward, whose valor had been
often approved against the raging Danes, and whose virtues were both many and
princely; not so learned as his Father, neither so patient to undergo his
chance; but as glorious in martial prowess, and as fortunate in all his
fights, under whose hand the Danes every where fell, and under his Monarchy all
the English did stoop excepting the Northumbrians.

(2) He entered his reign the year of Christ's nativity, nine hundred and one,
and at Kingston upon Speculum hist. (...). Ciren.
Thames was crowned and anointed with holy oil. The Danish wars continuing
in a successiue manner, John Stow.
fell as it were hereditaryly from the Father unto the Son, and ripened daily
toward their wished harvest. Besides Ethelwald the son of Ethelbert, the
uncle to this King Edward, young at his fathers decease, Ethealwld his minority.
and therefore perhaps held incapable of government, showed now the blossoms
of vnder-sucking plants, whose fruits are neither plenteous nor pleasant in
taste; for his humors ever working upon discontents, drew his thought only how
to make the possessor fall.

(3) He then entering action of rebellion, took the town of Winborne near
unto Bathe, and besides the Winborne taken by him.
allegiance due to his Prince, in sacrilegious manner brake the hests of holy
Church, in deflowring and taking a Votarist to wife: Edward the elder so
called, (it may be in regard of this his Opposite) with a selected Army
repaired to Bathe, and thence prepared for the field: whose sight was so
cockatrice-like to his cosen-Germans eye, that in the night he bade his Nun and
Winborne adieu, posting to Northumberland, and proffering his service to the
Danes that lay for advantage of rapine and spoil. Henry (...).


(4) Him as a fit instrument they created their King, and forward in hope of
some prosperous success, passed through the East Saxons, the East Angles, and
the Mercians Countries: and laden with robberies came to Crikelade in
Wilt-shire, whence they departed over Thamesis to Basingstoke; and harrying the
Ran. Higd.
land before them, with triumph returned unto East-Anglia. Edward thus
endangered by these dreadful enemies, gave them no advantage by lingering
delays, but followed their tract unto Saint Edmunds S. Edmunds ditch.
Ditch, whence in his return, the Danes gave him battle, and obtained the
victory, though bought with the lives of Ethelwald and Cochricus their Kings,
and loss of many English, which made Edward the readier to enter a truce with
them about the fifth of his reign.

(5) That the English were most expert for war in these days, is witnessed by
their resistance of those sturdy Danes, against whom the Commons many times
with victory fought, without either King or Captain to guide them: and they
were likewise famous in other lands: for about this time it was, that the
Englishmen at the persuasion of the Goths, An. Do. 905.
besieged the great City Argilla in Barbary, which they wanne with such
slaughter of the enemy, and spoil of the town, that for thirty years after
it lay desolate without inhabitants, whereby it was hoped that the Saracens
would have departed Europe, as Ioannes Leo Afer has told us, who according to
the Ioannes Leo Aph^r in Descrip^. A^ric. lib. 3.
Saracens does refer this siege to the three hundred and foureteenth of
Mahomet Hegira, which meets with the year of Christ's Nativity, nine hundred
and five.

(6) The truce yet lasting, the Danes in Northumberland were nothing quiet, to
stay whose irruptions The Danes break truce with the English.
King Edward sent a great power, who harried the Country before them, and with
much slaughter returned victorious. These daliances of Fortune made the Danes
very desperate, and therefore to stay the rolling ball before it should pass
their goal, they gathered their powers and entered Mercia, where with victory
and spoil they raged for a time. But Edward to aid Ethelred his brother in
law, and Earl of that Province, mustered his men, and at Wodnesfield near
Wolfrune-hampton in Staffordshire gave the^ battle, wherein the English so
behaved themselves that the two Pagan-Kings Cowilfu^ and Healidine, the An. Do.
910.
two Earls Vter and Scurfa, besides other Nobles and Simon Dunelm. Two Danish
Kings slain.
Commons innumerable they slew: and now the clouds of these distemperatures
being driven back, King Edwards Monarchy ascended the Horizon, and the Sun
of his power began to shine very bright, therefore he seeking to hold what he
had got, set his thoughts to secure his towns with Castles and walls of
defense.

(7) These his proceedings caused him to be both beloved and feared; but his
mind still free from any ambitious pride, as may appear by the intercourse
betwixt Leolin Prince of Wales and himself, whereof Wall. Mapaeus makes mention
as follows. What Wall. Mapaeus.
time Edward the Elder (says he) lay at Austeline, and Leolin Prince of Wales
at Bethesley, intending a Parley, Leolin refused to come down, or to cross the
Seuerne: Whereupon Edward took boat and entered the river toward Leolin his
homage to King Edward.
him, which when Leolin saw, and knew who ^hee was, he cast off his rich roabe
wherewith he was clad, and which he had prepared for that royal assembly, and
entered the river breast-hie, where clasping the boat with an embrace,
submissiuely said: Most wise and sage King, thy humility has overcome my
insolency, and thy wisdom His admiration of King, Edwards mildnes.
triumphed over my folly; come, get upon my neck which I have (fool as I am)
lifted up against thee, so shall thou enter into that land which thy benign
mildnes has made thine own this day: and after he had taken him upon his
shoulders, he would needs have him sit down upon his royal roabe, and so
putting his hands jointly into his, did him homage.

(8) In the twelfth year of his reign, as Henry Huntington has it; Ethelred
Earl of Mercia, who had Hen. Hunting. An. Do. 912.
married Elfleda King Edwards sister, departed this life, she having borne him
one only daughter named Elfwen, whose travel in childbirth was so grievous,
that ever after she forbear the nuptial imbracements Elfleda dislike of
wedlock.
of her husband, alleging that it was an over foolish pleasure, which brought
with it so great pains; and thereupon changing the wonted affection of her
sex from the bed unto battle, governed Mercia eight years after her
husbands decease, as another Zenobia, and did not a little assist her brother
in his wars: for the Welsh she pursued as far at Breknoke, which she took
with their Queen: from the Danes she won the Connty of Darby, and
assaulting the town upon them, put herself in great danger; She wins
Brec^k and Darby
for enterprising to enter the Gate, she was resisted by whole multitudes of
Danes; notwithstanding, she persisted, and got entrance, in which encounter
many died, and four of her chief men of war, being Warders of her person-euen
fast by her side were slain.

The Danes in Yorkshire she constrained to be at her devotion, so that some
of them became her subjects, some vowed to attend in her aid, and some
promised to be pressed at her dispose. Her policy in war proved ever the
surest; her counsel of State was regarded with the wisest, and her providence
in building, and repairing Cities for the weale-publick, or fortifying places
for munition of war exceeded others: which she extended upon Chester,
Tamworth, Lichfield, Stafford, Warwick, Shrewsbury, Weddesb^ry, Many towns
planted by her.
Eadsbury, Finborow, Rimcorne, Brimsbery-Bridge and others.

This renowned Lady giving place unto Nature, left the wars to be continued
by her brother; her daughter at the dispose of her uncle, and her body to be
buried at Gloucester in the Monastery of S. Peter, which her husband and her
self had formely built.

(9) The last battle of this King against these unsatiate enemies, was in the
Country of the East Angles, Polydor.
whereof Edrick the Dane was King; for he intending new wars with the
English; sought to incite other Danes to his aid, whereof Edward having
intelligence, prevented his purpose, by his sudden approach into those parts.

Edrick therefore having all in a readiness, rashly Edrick his doings.
encountered with his enemy, and fought a fierce battle to the geeat loss of
his Army, and damage of his life; for returning to his Court after so foul a
discomfiture, became odious to his own subjects, who violently fell upon him
and murdered him; and them selves brought low by civil dissension were shortly
made subject to the English King Edward, and that Kingdom with Mercia, joined
unto his West Saxons. And now having reigned in great wars and honor the
space of twenty four years deceased at The time of King Edwards reign.
Faringdon in Barke-shire, the year of Christ's incarnation, 924. and was
buried in the new-Monastery of His death and burial.
Winchester, which his Father begun, and himself wholly finished.

His Wives.
(10) Eguina the first wife of King Edward, was the Eguina.
daughter of a mean Gentleman named Bercher, whose eye-pleasing feature and
alluring beauty made her to be educated above the degree of her birth, and was
brought up by the nurse of King Edward in tender affection and great esteem.
It chanced Prince Edward in kindness came to visit his nurse, where seeing the
admirable beauty of the Maid, fell so far in Prince Edward marries Sg^inae.
love, that he took her to his wife without the consent or knowledge of his
father: In which regard she is reputed by some Writers rather his Concubine
then his Queen, no other cause moving them but her mean parentage, and secret
making and keeping of this marriage, although there be some good histories and
many likelyhoods to induce that she was his lawful Queen.

(11) Elfleda the second wife of King Edward, was the daughter (as Matthew of
Westminster reports) of Elfleda.
an Earl named Ethelhelme, and Asser the Bishop of Sherborne makes mention of
an Earl in Wiltshire among the West Saxons of the same name, who was in great
favor with King Elfred, the father of this King, by whom he was sent
Ambassador to carry his Alms to Stephen the sixth, of that name Bishop of
Stephen the sixth Bishop of Rome.
Rome, in the year of our Lord 887 and by all probable conference of name,
time, and place, he seems to be the man that was father to this Queen.
Edgina.


(12) Edgina, the third wife of King Edward, was the daughter and heir of
Earl Sigeline Lord of Meapham, Culings, and Leanham in Kent, who was there
slain in battle against the Danes, Anno 927. She was married unto King
Edward about the fourteenth year of his reign, being the year of Grace, 916.
She was his wife ten years, and after his death she lived a widow all the
times of the reigns of King Ethelstan her son in law, of King Edmund, and
King Edred her own sons, of King Edwy her Two Kings her sons.
Grandchild, and was living in the Reign of King Edward another of her
Grandchildren, almost forty years after the death of her husband. It is writ
of her that in the year of Grace, 959. She offered her lands and evidences to
Christ upon his Altar at Canterbury. She deceased the twenty fifth of August in
the fourth year of the said King Edgar, and of Christ, 963.

His Children.
(13) Ethelstan, the eldest son of King Edward, and the Lady Eguina, was
borne and grown to good Ethelstan the first son.
years in the time of the reign of his Grandfather King Elfred, who with his
own hands gave him the order of Knighthood, after a very honorable manner of
creation, as William the Monk of Malmsbury, a great obseruer of such things,
has left in writing: Will. Malmsb.
who reports, that he put upon him a Purple Robe, and girt him with a girdle
wrought with pearl, and a Saxon sword in a scabard of gold, hanging at the
same. He was the Successor of his Father in the West Saxons dominions, and the
English Monarchy.

(14) Elfred, the second son of King Edward and the Lady Eguina, is warranted
by the testimony of Elfred the second son.
the story of Hyde, to have been loved of his Father above all his other
children, that he caused him in his own lifetime to be crowned King, and to
sit with him in his Seat of Estate, as his Partner in the Kingdom, and that he
enjoyed that great honor but for Crowned King in his fathers time.
a small time, deceasing shortly after his creation, and long before his
fathers death; and was buried in the New Monastery at Winchester, which
afterward was removed to Hyde.

(15) Editha (whom the Scottish Writers call Beatrite) the daughter of King
Edward and the Lady Editha the first daughter. Mat. Westminster. Po^dor.
Eguma; with great honor was married to Sythrick, the Danish King of
Northumberland, in the first year of the reign of her brother King
Ethelstane, being the year of grace 915. Within one year after her marriage,
her husband deceased, and his son Guthfrid succeeded him in his Kingdom.
Wherefore she forsaking that Country, obtained of her brothers gift, the
Castle of Tamworth, in the County of Warwick, Tamworth Castle.
where she began a Monastery of Nuns, and therein lived, died, and was
interred, and both the Monastery and Body afterward was removed from thence
unto Pollesworth.

(16) Elsward, the third son of King Edward, and the first of Queen Elfleda his
second wife, was born, as Elsward the third son.
it seems, about the beginning of his Fathers reign. He was carefully
brought up in the study of Liberal Arts, and in all other princely qualities;
so that it was expected he should have succeeded his Father in the Kingdom:
but presently upon his fathers decease, he deceased himself in Oxford, and was
buried at one time, and in one place with him in the New Monastery at
Winchester, in the year of Christ Jesus 924. Buried at Winchester.


(17) Edwine, the fourth son of King Edward, and the second of Queen Elfleda
his second Wife, Edwine the fourth son. Will. Malms.
was very young when his father was buried, and his brother Ethelstane crowned.
Notwithstanding a deep ielosie possessing the King, that his title was too
near the Crown, he caused him to be put into a little Pinnesse, without
either Tackle or Oars, one only page accompanying him, that his death might be
imputed to the waves: whence the young Prince overcome with grief, and not
able to master his own passions, cast himself headlong into the sea, and his
dead body being driven upon the coasts of Flanders, was taken James Maier, in
his Annals of Flanders.
up by Adulphe, Earl of Boloine, his cosen-germane, and honorably buried in
the Monastery of Saint Bertin, in the Town of S. Omers. Which fact was much
lamented by King Ethelstan, who grievously punished the suggestions of his own
ielosie, and the procurers of his brothers death; sending great thanks to the
Earl that buried him, and rich presents to the Monastery which entombed him,
and to appease the ghost of his innocent brother, built the Abbey of Mialeton
in the County of Dorset.

(18) Elfleda, the second daughter of King Edward, and the first of Queen
Elfleda his second Wife, entered Elfleda the second daughter.
into the orders of Religion, and took upon her the profession and vow of
Virginity, in the Monastery of Rumsey, situated upon the River Test, in the
County of Southampton. In which Monastery, she was R^msey Monastery.
first a Nun, and afterward Abbess during the whole time of her life, which
was there spent and ended, and her body in the said Abbey buried.

(19) Eguina, the third daughter of King Edward, and the second of Queen
Elfleda his second Wife, Eguina the third daughter.
was the second Wife to Charles the third, surnamed the Simple, King of France,
son to King Lews the brother of Judith, Queen of England before mentioned. She
had issue by him Lewis the third, surnamed Beyond Sea, because he was brought
up here in England with his Uncle King Ethelstan; and Gillet Duchess of
Normandy married to Rollo the Dane: who in regard of his marriage, was allowed
to be the first Duke of that Country. This Queen suruiued King Charles her
Husband; and afterward was remaried to Herbert, the younger Earl of
Vermandoys; which marriage Her marriage with Herbert disliked.
was taken for so great an indignity, because Earl Herbert the elder, father
to this Earl, had caused the King her Husband to die in prison, that King
Lewis her son presently pursued her, apprehended, and committed her to the
strait custody of Queen Gerberge his wife: so as she had no recourse unto
him, nor issue by him.

(20) Ethelhild, the fourth daughter of King Edward, Ethelhild the fourth
daughter.
and the third of Queen Elfleda his second Wife, followed the example of her
elder sister Elfleda, and became a Nun in the Monastery of Wilton, which was
sometime the head Town giving name to the whole County of Wiltshire, and
anciently called Ellandon.

(21) Edhild, the fifth daughter of King Edward, Edhild the fifth daughter.
and the fourth of Queen Elfleda, was married to Hugh surnamed the Great, Earl
of Paris, Grand-master and Constable of France, in the year of our Lord 926.
being the third of her brother King Ethelstanes reign. This Hugh was the son
of Robert, brother to Ends King of France, and father of King Hugh Capet,
progenitor of the Kings of France, eue^ sithence unto this day: but she died
before him without any issue by him.

(22) Edgith, the sixth daughter of King Edward Edgith the sixth daughter.
and the fifth of Queen Elfleda, was the first wife of Otho the first,
surnamed the Great, Emperor of the West, son to the Emperor Henry, surnamed
the Falconer. By him she had issue Ludolfe, Duke of Swabe, William Archbishop
of Mentz, Ludgard married to Com^d Duke of Lorrayn, and Mechthild Abbess of
Quedlingburg in Saxony: in which City she deceased the seven and twenty of
August, in the year of Christ's Nativity 947. the eleventh of her husbands
Empire, and the first of her brother King Edreds reign in England. She was
buried at the East end of the North side of a Chapel which her self had
founded in the same City.

(23) Elgiua, the seventh daughter of King Edward, and the sixth of Queen
Elfleda his second Wife, was Elgiua the seventh daughter.
by King Ethelstan her brother, with her sister Egith sent to the Court of the
Emperor, Henry the first King of the Saxons in Germany, who honorably
entertained her, brought her up with his own daughters; and after he had
married her elder sister to his eldest son, he placed her also in marriage
with a Duke of Italy obout the Alps, who is not named of our Writers, Married
to a Duke of Italy.
but may easily be coniectured by the honorable disposition of the maker of
the match, to have been a Prince of note and account, worthy of her estate and
parentage.

(24) Edmund, the fifth son of King Edward, and the first of Queen Edgiua
his third and last Wife, was Edmund the fifth son.
borne in the twentieth year of his fathers reign, being the year of the
worlds salvation 921. and at his fathers death little more then three years of
age, was notwithstanding by the careful provision of his mother, Three year
old at his fathers death.
brought up with all princely education convenient for his years and estate,
insomuch as there was generally a great expectation amongst the people
conceived of him in the life of his brother King Ethelstan, under whom he
learned some experience of service in war, and after whom he succeeded in
the Kingdom of England.

(25) Edred, the sixth son of King Edward, and Edred the sixth son.
the second of Queen Edgiua his third Wife, and the youngest son of them
both, was borne about the two and twentieth year of his fathers reign, and
year of grace 923. which was not long before the death of his father, who left
him a little infant in the custody of his mother, by whom he was carefully
brought up, and proved a Prince of so great virtue A good Prince.
and valor, as after the death of King Edmund his brother, in regard of the
minority of his Nephews, he was with the general consent, and liking of the
whole nation, chosen to be his brothers successor in the kingdom and
government over them.

(26) Edburg, the eight daughter of King Edward, and the first of Queen
Edgiua, in her childhood had Edburg the eight daughter. Ran. Higd. polic. lib.
6. cap. 4.
her disposition tried, and her course of life disposed by her Father in this
manner: he laid before her gorgeous apparel, and rich Jewels, in one end of a
chamber, and the new Testament and Books of princely instruction in the other;
willing her to make her choice of which she liked best: she presently took up
the books, and he her in his arms; and kissing her said, Go in Gods name
whither God has called thee, and thereupon placed her in a Monastery at
Winchester, wherein she did most virtuously spend (...) whole life, and in
that Abbey was bari^d.

(27) Edgiua, the ninth daughter of King Edward, and the second of his last
Queen, whose (...) the ninth daughter.
name thee bare, is reported in the history of the Monastery of Hyde by
Winchester, and other Writers of our Country, to have been married to Jews
Prince of Aquitane in France, which not long before had been a Kingdom of it
self, sometime allotted to the portion of Jews the third son of the
Emperor Charles the Great; of which house it seems this Jews was; afterward
it became a Dukedom, and the possession of an other Family, by whom it came to
be the inheritance after the Conquest to the Kings Aquitaine belonging to (...).
of England, which were descended of the house of Angeow.

ETHELSTAN THET VVENTIE FIFTH Monarch 26
Ethelstan.
KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND THE TWENTY SIXTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS
REIGN, ACTS, AND SVPPOSED ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXVIII.


EThelstan, the eldest son of King Edward (as has been said) for the great
hopes conceived of him, An. Do. 924.
was crowned with a greater solemnity then any of his ancestors ever before
him. The place was Kingston upon Thamesis in the County of Surrey, the year
Crowned at Kingston upon Thamesis.
of Christ Jesus 924. where, in the midst of the town a high Scaffold was
built, and thereon the coronation performed to the open view of all, by
Athelmus Archbishop of Canterbury, with shouts of joy as that of Solomon.

(2) His beginnings were with troubles, and that rather by reason of friends
then force of foes: for it is recorded, that Elfred a nobleman, either in
favor of Will. Malmsb.
King Edwards other sons, holding Ethelstan a Bastard, or else upon an
ambitious hope blinded of himself, intended at Winchester to have plucked out
the eyes of his Sovereign: but his treason being known, before the seed could
show blade, he was apprehended and sent to Rome to purge himself by oath:
where, before the Alta^ of S. Peter and Pope John the tenth, he there abiured
the act, and thereupon fell suddenly down to the earth, so that his servants
took and Pope John the tenth.
bare him into the English School, where, within three days after he died:
the Pope denying him christian burial until he knew King Ethelstans pleasure.

(3) These storms ouerpast, as great a cloud seemed to arise unto Ethelstans
sight, whose eye of jealousy ever followed the ascent, and his ear ever
opened unto the instillations of Parasites, amongst whom his Cup Bearer was a
chief; who brought daily more and more suspicion into the Kings head,
Parasites.
that lastly (as we have showed) he consented to young Edwins death, though
with too late a sorrow Edwins death.
he repented the same: for besides his seven years penance voluntarily
undergone, to pacify the ghost of his betrayed brother, he built the two
Monasteries of Midleton and Michelnesse, as for the The occasion of the
founding of Midleton and Michelnesse Monasteries.
most part such seed-plots were ever sown in the furrows of blood, which
happened upon this occasion: It chanced his Cup Bearer in his service upon a
festival to stumble with the one foot, and recovering himself with the
other, pleasantly to say, you see how one brother helps another; upon which
speech the King with grief and touch of heart, called to mind the death of his
innocent brother, and forthwith commanded execution to be done on him the
procurer, to repay his fact with deserved death: and His Cup Bearer put to
death.
himself was ever after more tender and careful toward his other brethren,
with a more respective regard, and bestowed his sisters most honorably in
marriage, as has been said.

(4) At his entrance of government, to discharge the expectations of his
subjects, he endeavored both by wars and allianuces to make them strong and
rich. First, therefore entering friendship with Sithricke the Danish King of
Northumberland, upon whom with condition that he should receive Baptism,
Sithrick. Will. Malmsbury.
he bestowed his sister Editha in marriage, he bent himself to ordain Laws
for the weale-publike, and those to bind as well the Clergy as the Layety, out
of which first sprang the attachment of Fellons, to A law against Fellons.
take hold of such as stole above twelve pence, and were above twelve years of
age.

(5) But Sithricke the Northumbrian dying the first year of his marriage, and
his Queen returning Godfrey and Anlasse the sons of Sithrick.
to a religious life, his sons Godfrey and Anlafe, offended that their
Pagan-Gods were neglected, and only by the means of this their fathers last
wife, stirred the Northumbrians to disquiet the English, which occasioned
Ethelstan to invade their country, and forced Anlafe into Ireland, and Godfrey
into Scotland, which last so wrought with Constantine their King, that he
undertook to side in his quarrel, with whom joined Ludwall says Malmsbury.
Howel King of Wales. These in a fierce battle he overcame and constrained
them to submit themselves to his will, who knowing the chance of war to be
variable, and pitying the case of these down-cast Princes, restored them
presently to An. Do. 937.
their former estates, adding withal this princely saying, that it was more
honor to make a King then to Mat. West. Rand. Higd.
be a King.

(6) This notwithstanding, the case of Godfrey so moved the spirit of King
Constantine, that he again assisted him in his inrodes into the English part,
King Constantine assisteth Godfrey.
which drew again King Ethelstan into the North: and coming to Yorkshire (as
he was a man much devoted to Godward) turned aside to visit the tomb of S.
John of Beuerley, where earnestly praying for Will. Malmsb. Simon. Dun. Ran.
Higden.
his prosperous success, for want of richer Jewels, there offered his knife,
vowing that if he returned with conquest, he would redeem it with a worthy
price, and thus armed with hope, proceeded forward pitching down his tents at
Brimesburie, his navy waffing along those seas.

(7) To the aid of Constantine came Anlafe, called by writers King of the
Irish, and of the Isles, who had Anlafe King of Ireland.
married his daughter, a man no doubt both hardy and desperate, as appeared by
the Action he underwent; Hector Boethius.
for it is recorded, that as Elfred the English had attempted to know the State
of the Danes: so this Dane at this place did to understand the English: for,
disguising himself like a Harper, he went from Tent to Tent, and had access
even into King Ethelstans presence, until he had learned what he most Anlafe
his policy
desired, and then returned again to his Camp, which part of his was no
bolder, or more wisely performed, then was kept secret, and after revealed by a
most faithful soldier: for Anlafe departed and free from pursuit, this
Soldier made the act known to King Ethelstan: who being sore displeased with
his enemies escape, imputed the fault unto him the reuealer: but he replying,
made him this answer: I once served Anlafe (said he) under his pay for a
soldier, Anlafe his soldiers fidelity.
and gave him the same faith that I do now unto you; if then I should have
betrayed his designs, what trust could your Grace repose in my truth: let him
therefore die, but not through my treachery, and by his escape secure your
royal self from danger; remove your Tent from the place where it stands, lest
at unawares he happily assail you.

(8) The King seeing the faith of his soldier, was therewith pacified, and
forthwith commanded his Tent to be removed, where presently a Bishop new
come to his Camp pitched up his own, and the night following both himself
and retinue were slain by the same Anlafe that sought the Kings life Will.
Malmsbury.
in assaulting the place; and pressing forward came to his tent, who awaked
with the sudden Allarum, boldly rushed upon his enemies, and encouraging his
Five Kings and twelve Dukes slain.
men, put them back with the death of five petty Kings, twelve Dukes, and well
near of the whole Army, which Anlafe had brought.

(9) The memory of this man is made the more lasting by a piece of ancient
Saxon coin of silver, inscribed with his name, ANLAF CYNYNE, which for the
antiquity of the thing, and honor of the man, we have here imprinted, and
placed though in the texture of our English Saxon Kings.



(10) To leave a memorial of King Ethelstans great victory, give me leave to
write what I find; namely, that near unto the Castle Dunbar in Scotland, he
Polier. lib. 6. cap (...). Dunba^ Castle.
praying that his right unto those parts might be confirmed unto posterities
by a sign, at one blow with his sword stroke an elle deep into a stone, which
stood so cloven a long time after, and undoubtedly was the whetstone to the
first Authors knife: but this is most certain, that he joined Northumberland
to the rest of his Monarchy, and returning to Beuerley.
Beuerley redeemed his own knife.

(11) From hence he turned his wars into Wales, The Princes of Wales tribute.
whose Rulers and Princes he brought to be his Tributaries, who at Hereford
entered covenant to pay him yearly twenty pound weight of gold, three hundred
of silver, and twenty five hundred head of cattle, with hawks and hounds to a
certain number, toward which payment by the statutes of Howell Dha, the King
of Aberfraw was charged at sixty Corn. Wall.
six pounds; the Prince Dineuwre, and the Prince of Powys were to pay the like
sums.

(12) The Britains, which to his time with all equal right inhabited the City
of Excester with the Will. Malmsbury.
Saxons, he expelled into the further promontary of Cornwall, and made Tamar
the confines of his own Empire; so that his dominion was the largest that any
Saxon before him had enioied, and his fame the Ran. Higd. in Polier. lib 6.
cap. 6. The King of France his Presents to King El^elstan.
greatest with all foreign Princes, who sought his friendship both with love
and alliance, by matching with his sisters, and presenting him with rich and
rare presents; for Hugh King of France besides other inestimable Jewels; sent
him the sword of Constantine the Great, in the hilt whereof (all covered with
gold) was one of the nails that fastened Christ to his Cross: he sent likewise
the spear of Charles Consta^ sword with (...) nail of the Cross sent into
England.
the Great, reputed to be the same that pierced Christ's side, as also part of
the Cross whereon he suffered his passion, and a piece of the thorny Crown
wherewith his blessed Temples were begoared, and with these came the Banner of
S. Maurice so often spread by Charles the Great in his Christian wars against
the Saracens: And from Otho the Emperor, who had married his sister, was sent
a vessel of precious stones artificially made, wherein were seen Lanskips
with vines, corn, and men, all of them seeming so naturally to move, as if
they had grown and retained life: And the King of Norway sent him a goodly
ship with a guilt stern, purple sails, and the deck garnished all with
gold. Holinshed.


(13) Of these accounted holy relics King Ethelstan gave part unto the Abbey
of S. Swithen in Winchester, and the rest to the Monastery of Malmesbury, S.
Swithens Abbey
whereof Adelme was the founder, and his Tutelar Saint, in honor of whom he
bestowed great immunities upon the town, and large endowments upon the Abbey;
he new built the monasteries of Wilton, Michelnesse, and Midleton, founded
Saint King Athelstans beneficence.
Germans in Cornwall, Saint Petrocus at Bodman, the Priory of Pilton, new walled
and beutified the City of Exceter, and enriched every famous Abbey in the land,
either with new buildings, Jewels, Books, or Revenues.

(14) As also he did certain Cities with the John Stow.
Mintage of his money, whereof in London were eight houses, at Winchester six,
at Lewis two, at Hastings two, in Hampton two, in Warham two, in Chichester
one, in Rochester three, two for the King, and one for the Bishop; at
Canterbury seven; four for himself, two for the Archbishop, and one for the
Abbat, although it appears the Archbishop had his before the reign of this
King. For among these ancient Ceolnothus coin. An. ^31.
Saxon-Coines, we find one of Ceolnothus, who sat there Archbishop in the
year 831. which both for the antiquity and authority of truth we have here
inserted.



(15) This Prince King Ethelstan was of an indifferent (...) virtues.
stature, not much exceeding the common sort of men, cheerful in countenance,
his hair very yellow, and somewhat stooped forward as he went, for valor
invincible, in resolution constant, and for his courtesy beloved of all, he
reigned in great honor The ti^ of his reign.
the space of fifteen years and odd months, and deceased in the City of
Gloucester, upon wednesday the seventeenth of October, and was buried at
Malmesbury the year of Christ's Nativity: 940. having never had wife mentioned
in our histories.

His supposed Issue.
(16) Leoneat, the supposed daughter of King Ethelstan, is reported by John
Rouse and Papulwick, writers John Rouse. Papulwick.
of the mistrusted story of Guy of Warwick to be married unto Reynburn Earl
of Warwick, and son to the same Guy, whose remembrance and reputation is
preserved and kept with no less renown among the common people, for the
liberty of England saved by his victory in single combat against Colbrand the
Dane, then was Horatius the Roman for the preseruatio of Rome, whose history
I will leave for others to enlarge that have more leisure and bettet invention.

EDMUND THE TWENTY SIXTH Monarch 27
Edmund.
KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND TWENTY SEVENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS
REIGN, ACTS, DEATH, WIFE AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXIX.


EDmund the fifth son of King Edward, borne unto him by Queen Edgiua his An.
Do. 940.
third and last wife, at the age of nineteen years succeeded his brother King
Ethelstan in his kingdom, and Monarchy: he began his reign the year of the
worlds salvation 940. and with great solemnity was crowned at Kingston upon
Thamesis, in the fifth year Si^ (...),
of Otho the first Emperor of that name, and his brother in law; his valor
had often been tried in the wars of King Ethelstan against those stout and
sturdy enemies the Danes, Scottish, Irish, and Welshmen, that often had assaied
to disturb his peace.

(2) Athelstan deceased, and the crown scarce set Will. M^.
upon King Edmunds head, but that the Danes in Northumberland, disliking
subjection, called again Anlafe out of Ireland to be their King; who now in the
infancy of Edmunds estate, with great power of men purposed to subdue all
before him; but Edmund as forward, with full resolution meant to keep what was
got, and so gathering his power, proceeded toward the North, and at Leicester
encountered with the Danes: howbeit, through the interceding of the Archbishops
of Canterbury and York, Odo and Wolston, the matter was mitigated before it
came to the uttermost.

(3) The next year of his reign, the said Anlafe (whom some hold to have
beeene the King of Norway) An. Do. 942.
being dead, an other Anlafe, son to King Sithrick, of whom we have spoken,
intruded upon Mat. Westminster
the Kingdom of Northumberland. These heads, as Hidras, springing up each after
others, drew King Edmund again into the North, who raging like a provoked
Lion, subdued, as he went, those towns where the Danes kept, and got from them
Lincoln, Leicester, Darbie, Stafford, and Nottingham, compelling them to
receive Baptism, and to become his Subjects; so that the Country was wholly
his unto Humber. These his proceedings caused Anlafe Will. Malms.
and Reinold the sons of the Danish Gurmo, subduers of York, to yield
themselves wholly to his devotion, offering him subjection, and withal to
receive the Christian faith; for performance whereof, they likewise received
Baptism, unto whom King Edmund was Godfather, to Reinold at his Confirmation,
and to Anlafe at the Font: but how soon they fell from both, the sequel
showed; for casting off the faith and fealty thus promised, they stirred the
Northumbrians to another rebellion, yet with no better success An. Do. 944.
Simon Dun.
then desert; for they were forced into a perpetual exile, and King Edmund
adioined that Country to his own government; without the admittance of any
Secondary or Viceroy to rule there under him.

(4) Cumberland also, which seldom was quiet, having been a Kingdom entire
of it self, and now King Dunmaile.
aided by Leolin King of Southwales, he utterly wasted: and apprehending the
two sons of Dunmaile King of that Province, commanded the eyes of those
ouer-bold Princes to be pulled out, and gave their inheritance to Malcolme King
of Scots, to hold the same by fealty from him. Thus by power and policy
clearing those coasts whence the sharpest storms had continually blown, he
returned into the South, and there set himself to ordain laws for the good
of his people, the which, left time the consumer of al things might chance to
obliterate, were by the labors of the learned Lambert translated into Latin,
and imprinted in the year 1568. next, to Will. Lambert.
show his love to God, and bounty to his Church, he gave the town of Saint
Edmondsbury with the liberties thereof, wholly to that Martyr, and to the Monks
that lived in serving at his Altars.

(5) But as each thing has his spring, growth, and decay; so all men their
dates, howsoever eminent in degree, and the shank of their Compass so set in a
center that the Circle of their lines are oftentime abrupt, before it be drawn
to the full round: for so with others, we may see in this Monarch, who being
safely returned from many great dangers of war, at peace in his Palace, came
to a lamentable and unexpected end: for at his Manor of Pucle-kerkes in the
County of Marianus.
Gloucester, whiles he interposed himself between his Sewer and one Leoue to
part a fray, was, with a thrust through the body, wounded to death the twenty
sixth of May, in the year of our salvation 946. when he had prosperously
reigned the space of five Will. Malms.
years and seven months, and his body, with no less sorrow then solemnity,
was buried at Glasenbury

His Wife.
(6) Elfgine, the only wife of King Edmund, has not her parents declared (for
ought I find) by any Elfgine.
of our Writers: but this is affirmed, that she was married unto him in the
first year of his reign, which was the year of Grace, 940. and that she was
his wife four years and upward, after whose slaughter she remained a
mournful widow all the rest of her life, which she spent with so great virtue
and opinion of the people, as by the writers of that age she is commended to
posterity by the name of a Saint. His Issue.


(7) Edwy, the eldest son of King Edmund, and Queen Elfgine his wife, was
borne in the second Edw^.
year of his fathers reign Anno 942. When his father died, he was but four
years of age, and in respect of his minority was not permitted to succeed him
in the Kingdom, but forced to give place to his uncle Edred, under whom he
lived nine years; and in the tenth, his uncle being dead, and himself then
grown to the age of thirteen, was admitted to the succession of the Monarchy.

(8) Edgar the second son of King Edmund, and Edgar.
of Queen Elfgine, was borne in the third year of his fathers reign, the
year of Christ Jesus 943, and was but three years old when his Father died;
notwithstanding, he proved afterward a Prince of great expectation, and in the
second year of King Edwy his brothers reign, being then but fourteen years
of age, he was chosen King by the Mercians and Northumbrians, both which people
he governed under the title of King of Mercia, for the space of two years
before his brothers death, and then succeeded him in the whole Monarchy.

EDRED THE TWENTY SEVENTH Edred.
Monarch 28
KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND TWENTY EIGHTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS
ACTS, REIGN, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XL.


EDred, the sixth son of King Edward, borne unto him by Queen Edgiua An. Do.
946.
his third and last wife, at the age of twenty three years succeeded his
brother King Edmund in the nonage of his children in all his dominions, and was
the twenty seventh King of the West Saxons, and the twenty eight Monarch of
the Englishmen. He began his reign in the year of Man's salvation 946. and was
anointed, and Polier. lib. 6. cap. (...).
crowned at Kingston upon Thames in the County of Surrey upon Su^day the
seventeenth day of August by the hands of Otho Archbishop of Canterbury.

(2) His Coronation robes scarsly put off; news was brought him that the
Northumbrians had revolted and stirred a dangerous insurrection;
notwithstanding the Covenants that his brother Edmund had made with Malcolme
King of the Scots to secure the same. Therefore lest delays might prove
dangerous, with a great Army he entered into the verge of Scotland, without
sight of enemy, or any resistance. But peace being concluded betwixt Edred,
Malcolme and the Northumbrians; yea and the Edred. Malcolme.
same confirmed strongly by oath, yet was it little regarded of the last named
lurers; for no sooner was Edred returned, but that they sent into Ireland for
Anlafe, the son of Gurmo the Dane, who had been expelled the Country as we
have said.

(3) Anlafe gathering a fleet and forces accordingly, came into
Northumberland, where he was with great joy received and made their King, which
Anlafe comes into Northumb.
title he maintained for four years continuance, banding against Edred, and
still holding him play, till lastly the Northumbrians disloiall to both, took
their feather out of Anlafe his plume, and sent him packing to the place,
whence he came, electing one Hericus King in his stead. Will. Mal^.


(4) Edred awaked with the wastes that they made, prepared a journey into those
parts, where with fire and sword he bare down all before him; and albeit he
was a man religiously bent, yet spared he not the Abbey of Rippon from flames,
but laid all unto ashes as he went, the enemy not daring to show the face. In
his return suspecting no peril, suddenly an host brake out of York, and
fell upon the Rere-ward of his Army, marching but carelessly, R^nd. Higd. S^ Dun.
and broken out of their array, whereby many perished before any complete order
of resistance could be made. The King seeing this bold attempt of these Rebels,
stroke down his standard, turning his face again to the North, and threatened
the revenge, with the Countries spoil and their lives.

(5) In this plot of sedition Wolstan Archbishop of Wolstan.
York had sown some seed of treason, both in the assistance of action, and
counsel for the enterprise, very ill beseeming a man of his rank: this Wolf
therefore having thus awaked the Lion from rest, was the only man that fell in
his paws; for the Northumbrians expulsing their statelesse Hericus with
submissiue tears and golden showers, so pacified the King, that their offenses
were therewith clean washed away: but he good man (a Saint at the least) was
mued up in prison (against whom accusations daily came, and namely, that he had
commanded sundry of the Burgesses of Thetford to be slain) where heeabode
till he was by Edred upon a reverent regard of his calling, released from
thence: for as this King is commended for his lenity toward the virtuous; so
is he no less for his justice toward the vicious, and for the practice of his
Religion, as Will. Malms.
forward as any, suffering not only his manners to be reproved and corrected,
(a quality truly royal, and best beseeming Princes) but also (so much below
the pitch of sovereign Majesty) his body to be chastised at the will and
direction of Dunstan Abbot of Glasenbury; unto whose custody, he also committed
the greatest part of his treasure and richest jewels to be locked in his chests,
and under the keys of this Monastery.

(6) The stately Abbey of Mich at Abington near Oxford built by King Inas, but
destroyed by the Danes, he newly repaired, indowing it with lands and (...).
fair revenues, and confirmed the Charters with seals of gold: he also
ordained Saint Germans in Cornwall to be a Bishops See, which there continued
till by Canutus it was annexed to the Episcopal See of Kyrton in Deuon, both
which Sees were afterward by King Edward the Confessor translated to the City
of Excester: but since the brightest day has his night, and the highest tide
his present ebb, what marvel is it, if then Edred in the midst of his
strength were seized upon by sickness and death, which surprised him after he
had reigned in great honor nine years and odd months, to the great grief
of his Subjects, who solemnly interred him in the old Minster within the City
of Winchester, the year of Christ Jesus 955. whose bones with other Kings, to
this day are preserved in a guilt Coffer, fixed upon the wall in the south side
of the Quier.

His Issue.
(7) Elfred, the son of King Edred, was borne before his Father was King;
neither find I mention Elfred.
of his Mother, or any act by him done; only in the sixth year of King Edred
his reign, which was the year of Grace, 952. he is mentioned for a witness
to his Fathers grant of lands in Wittenham, to Ethelwolfe a Duke of England in
those days, as appears by the Charter thereof, bearing date in the year
aforesaid.

(8) Bertfrid an other, and as it seems an elder son of King Edred, was
borne before his father Bertfrid.
was King, without any mention also of his Mother, who living in the second
year of his fathers reign, namely Anno, 948. was written for a witness in
the same year, to his grant of lands in Bedlaking, to Cuthred one of his
Barons, the Charter whereof is extant to be seen unto this day.

EDVVY THE TWENTY EIGHTH KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND Monarch 29.
Edwy.
TWENTY NINTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND DEATH. CHAPTER
XLI.


EDwy, the eldest son of King Edmund, after the decease of his uncle Edred,
An. Do. 955.
succeeded him in his dominions, and was the twenty eighth King of the
West Saxons, and the twenty ninth Monarch of the Englishmen: he began his
reign in the year of the worlds salvation, 955. and was anointed and crowned
at Kingston upon Thamesis, by the hands of Otho the 22. Archbishop of
Canterbury.

(2) Young he was in years, and vicious of life, if the Monkish Story-writers
of those times Edwyes (...).
his deadly enemies may be credited, not past thirteen when he entered
government, and that begun with a capital sin: for they report, that upon
the solemn day of his Coronation, and insight of his Nobles, as they sat in
Counsel, with shameless and vnprincelike lust, he abused a Lady of great
estate, and his near kinswoman, whose husband shortly after he slew, the more
freely to possess his incestuous pleasure: and to fill the pens of his
further infamy ready to their hands, that wrote his life, he was a great enemy
unto the Monkish orders (a sore in those days very tender to be touched, and
may well be thought the cause of many false aspersions on him,) whom from the
Monastery of Malmsbury Glasenbury and others, he expelled, placing married
Priests in their rooms: Dunstan likewise the M. Fox Acts and Monuments.
Abbot Saint of Glasenbury he banished the Realm, for his ouer-bold
reprehensions; if not rather for retaining the treasure delivered him by King
Edred, and demanded again in his sickness; when by the voice (forsooth) of
an Angel from heaven, his Will. Malmsb.
journey was staid, and those rich Jewels not delivered the King in his life; I
will not say kept back, lest Dunstan with Balaam (whose stories are not much
unlike) should be thought to follow (as he Iud. 1. 11.
did) the wages of deceit.

(3) Howsoever, the reverent opinion of the Monks single life, and the
conceived holiness of Abbot Dunstan in those misty times, did daily counterpoize
Abbot Dunstan.
young Edwy in esteem, which made his best acts construed, and recorded to the
worst; insomuch that his Subjects minds, ebbing as the Sea from the full, drew
back the current of their subiectiue affections, and set the eye of obedience
upon Prince Edgar his Brother: and albeit his young years may seem to clear
him from the imputation of so lustful a fact, as he is charged with, at the day
of his assuming the Crown; and the separation from his wife, (as too near in
consanguinity) wrought grief enough in his distressed heart, yet pitiless of
his estate, and careless of their own allegiance, the Mercians with the
Northumbrians did utterly cast off obedience, and swear their fealty to Edgar,
not fully fourteen years aged: Ed^ then reigning in a (...) decaying estate,
was he^d of such his subjects, in no ^.
better esteem, then was Iehoram of Judah, who is said to have lived without
being desired: for very grief whereof after four years reign he ended his
life, the year of our Lord 959: whose body was buried in the Church of the new
Abbey of Hide at Winchester, erected without the Wall in the North of that City.

His Wife.
(4) Elfgine, the wife of King Edwy, was a Lady of great beauty, and nobly
descended, yea, and by some deemed somewhat too near in the blood royal, to
be matched with him in spousall bed: her fathers name is not recorded, but her
mother was Etheigiue, whom some scandalized to have been his Concubine, and
the only causer of Dunstans banishment. The subjects disliking of this
unlawful marriage, and further instigated by the Monks, (whose humorous John
(...).
pleasures, or displeasures could very much sway the state in those days,)
failed by degrees to perform their duties to their King, and her they likewise
enforced to a separation, in the third year of his regardlesse government, and
of Christ Jesus, 958. without other mention of her life or death.

EDGAR SVRNAMED THE Monarch 3^
Edgar.
PEACEABLE THE THIRTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN; ACTS, WIVES
AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XLII.


EDgar, the second son of King Edmund having reigned An. Do. 959.
two years over the Mercians and Northumbrians, in the days of Edwy his
Brother, to the great impairing of King Edwyes reputation and esteem; after
his death at sixeteen years of age was chosen to succeed in all his dominions,
and was the thirtieth Monarch of the Englishmen, or rather now of whole
England, all other titles of Kingdoms falling under his scepter, and becoming
Provinces annexed unto his absolute Monarchy.

(2) He began his reign in the year of Christ's Nativity, 959. and was
crowned (as some write) the same year at Kingston, upon Thamesis, by Otho
(...). Ran. Hig^. W^ M^. Saxon (...).
Archbishop of Canterbury. But Randulphus Higden in his Polychronicon,
refers it to the twelfth year of his reign: William Monk of Malmesbury to
the thirtieth year of his age, and the Sax Chronicle of Worcester Church, to
the year of Christ, 972, and that in the City of Bath, he was anointed and
consecrated with great solemnity by Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury.

(3) The reign of this King is said to have been altogether in a calm
tranquillity, and therefore he was surnamed the Peaceable; his virtues were
many, Edgar the Peaceable.
and vices not a few, the one gloriously augmented, and the other fairly
excused, by those Monkish writers, unto whose professions he was most
favorable: his Guides were Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, Ethelwold Abbot
of Glasenbury, and Oswald Bishop of Worcester, three stout Champions against
the married Clergy, (for women in those days were great bugs in their eyes,)
therefore the married Priests he displaced, and brought in Monks of single life
to possess their rooms, whose sins of incontinency grew after to be great,
as the world did then witness, which caused Treu^sa the translator of Higden, to
blame King Edgar, charging him to be lewdly moved in following their counsel
against married Pol^er. lib. 6. cap. 9
Clerks.

(4) So do Malmsbury and Higden tax him with too favorable affections
toward the Danes, who Will. Malmsbury.
dwelled alike in every town with the English, though formerly they had sought
the destruction of all, and still lay in wait attending for the spoil of his
true subjects, who apt enough unto evil, learned the beastly sin of quaffing,
and emptying of cups, which King Edgar was enforced to redress, by enacting a
law against excessive drinking, ordaining a size by certain pinnes set in the
pot, with penalties to any that should presume to drink deeper then the mark.

(5) His policy was no less prudent (but much more successful) for the
destruction of Wolves, that in his days did great annoiance to the land; for
the tribute imposed upon the Princes of Wales by the English cap. 38. Sect.
(...).
King Ethelstan (as we have said) he wholly remitted, and in lieu thereof,
appointed certain numbers Cron. Wald.
of Wolves yearly to be paid; and Ieuaf, or Iage Prince of North Wales, did
for his part pay him yearly three hundred, which continued for three years
space, but in the fourth was not a Wolf to be found, and so the tribute
ceased.

(6) His Navy royal, containing three thousand and six hundred ships, he
divided into three parts, appointing every of them to a several quarter to
waffe the Seas, and secure the coasts from Pirates, and Marianus. Alred. (...).
Ran. (...).
foreign enemies, wherein himself every summer would sail with those in the
East parts, unto those in the West, and sending them back to their charge,
would with the West sail into the North, and with the northern fleet
compass again into the East, whereby the seas were scowred, and his Kingdom
exceedingly strengthened.

(7) The like custom used he in the winter season in his ieysts, and circuits
throughout his Country, Edgars honest vigilance.
so to take account of the administration of his laws, and the demeanor of
his great men, especially of his Judges, whom severely he punished, so often as
he found the execution of their places balanced either with bribery or
partiality; so that there was never less robbery, deceit or oppressions, the^
in the reign of this worthy King.

(8) His state thus flourishing in peace and prosperity, he caused diverse
Princes to bind themselves unto his allegiance, but perchanceit may justly be
doubted, whether in such performance of homage and service, as Malmsbury,
Florentius, Randulphus, Marianus, Houeden, and other writers affirm to have
Edgars league with diverse Kings.
been at the City Chester, where (they say) Kennadie King of Scots, Malcolme
of Cumberland, Maxentius an Arch-Pirate, with the petty King of Wales,
Duffnall, Griffith, Hunal, Jacob, and Indithil, did with oars row his Barge
upon the river Dee, from his Palace to Saint John's Church, and thence again
back to his Palace, himself the while steering the helm, and saying in his
glory that then his successors might truly account themselves Sovereign Kings
of England, when they enjoyed such a Prerogative of sublimity, and supreme
honor: although (says M. Fox) he might much better, and more Christianlike
have said, God forbid that Gal. 6. 14.
I should rejoice, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

(9) Wars he had none in all his reign; only toward the end, the Welshmen
moved some rebellion, which to prevent, he assembled a mighty Army, and
therewith entered into the County of Glamorgan, sharply punishing the
ringleaders thereof, Polychron.
but his soldiers doing great harms in the country, laden with spoils for the
return, the King out of his bounty commanded all to be again restored,
whereby he purchased singular love and honor of the inhabitants.

(10) To his magnanimity was joined much devotion, Monastery bulk by King Edgar.
but most especially toward the Monks, for whom, and for Nuns he built and
repaired forty seven Monasteries, intending to have continued their number unto
fifty, as himself testifies in these words of his Charter.

The Monasteries, as well of Monks as of Virgins have been destroyed, and quite
neglected throughout England, Ex chart. Reg.
which I have now determined to repair to the glory of God for my souls
health, and so to multiply the number of Gods servants and handmaides: and now
already I have set up forty seven Monasteries with Monks and Nuns in them,
and if Christ spare me life so long, I am determined in offering my devout
munificence to God, to proceed to fifty, even to the just number of a Iubilee.

And by this his Charter did not only approve the enlargement of S. Mary's
Monastery in Worcester, M Fox in his Acts and Monuments.
and the restoring of Votaries in stead of married Priests, but himself either
new founded or repaired many others, as the house of Ely, Glasenbury, Abington,
Burgh, Thorney, Ramsey, Wilton, Wenton, Winchorne and Thumstocke with great
cost, and large endowments, having the Clergy in an high and reverent esteem,
and most of all his Confessor Dunstan: but with this wheat, there were tares
growing, though the late Monkish Writers bind them up for good corn: for some
men tell (says Randulphus Higden) that Edgar in his beginning was cruel to
Citizens, R^. Higden.
and lecherous to maidens, whereof these his actions ensuing bear sufficient
witness.

(11) The first was committed against the virgin Wolfhild, a sacred Nun as
some affirm, though Will. Malmsbury. Matthew Paris. Mat. (...)
others somewhat mitigating that sacrilegious offense, have reported, that she
to avoid his fleshly and lascivious lust, was forced to take the habit of a
Menchion upon her, and in the same brought to his bed, wherein the chaste S.
Edith was begot, and for whom, say they, he underwent his seven years penance
Policr. lib. (...). cap. 9
without the wearing of his Crown.

(12) A like offense he committed against the virgin Ethelfleda, the daughter
of Ordmar a Duke among the East Angles, who for her surpassing beauty was
surnamed the White; on whom he begat his eldest son Edward; for which fact as
M. Fox affirms, he did his seven years penance inioined by Dunstan: and
indeed by Osberne it appears, that Edward was not legitimate, where he
writes, that Osbern in vit^ Dunstan.
the child begotten of the harlot, he baptized in the holy fountain of
regeneration, and so giving his name to be called Edward, did adopt him to be
his son. With whom agree Nicholas Trinet in his English story, Nicholas
Trinet. Joan. Paris.
written in French, Johannes Paris in his French story, written in Latin, both
of them calling Edward a son illegitimate; as also does Vincentius and
Antoninus, howbeit William of Malmsbury, Matthew Vincen^. Antonin.
Paris, Matthew of Westminster, Randulphus and others, will have her his first
and lawful wife, and Edward in true matrimony to have descended from them.

(13) An other instance of his lascivious life is produced by the forenamed
Writers, and thus both occasioned and acted. It chanced Edgar to hear a
Virgin and daughter to a Western Duke, exceedingly Edgar (...) with a damsel.
praised for her incomparable beauty, the touch of which string from his care
resounded to his heart, and as a bait it drew him presently into those parts;
where coming to Andeuer, commanded the damsel to his bed: The mother tender
of the Virgins honor, brought in the dark her maid, but not her daughter,
who, all as well pleased the King in his sinful dalliance: the day
approaching, this late laid maid made have to arise; but the King loath to part
yet with his supposed fair Lady, demanded why she made such have? who answered
him, that her task was great, and hardly would her work be done, if day
should prevent her ere she rose; but yet being stayed above her hour, upon her
knees she made this humble request, that she might be freed from her shrewde
dame, alleging, it was not fitting, that the woman who had tasted the
pleasures of a Kings embracements, should endure a servitude under the rule of
any other. The King perceiving the deceit, and therewith moved to wrath, yet
could not recall what he had done (or rather undone) and therefore turned his
conceived wrongs unto a jest; but so, that he both sharply checked the
deceiuer, and kept this damsel, (whose nightworke and pleasance had fully
won him) for his Concubine, whereby she ruled them that lately had the
command of her: and to use the words of Malmsbury, he loved this Concubine most
entirely, keeping true faith of his bed to her alone, until the time he
married for his lawful wife Elfrida the daughter of Duke Ordgarus.

(14) His last lascivious Act, was as David's joined with blood, and wrought in
manner as follows. Malms. de regibus.
Fames lavish report of beauteous Elfrida (the paragon of her sex, and wonder
of Nature) the only daughter of Ordgarus Duke of Devonshire, sounded so loud
Duke Ordgarus.
in those Western parts, that the Echo thereof was heard into King Edgars
Court, and entered his ears, which ever lay open, to give his eyes the scope of
desire, and his wanton thoughts the raines of will: to try the truth whereof,
he secretly sent his minion or favorite Earl Ethelwold of East-Anglia, who
well could judge of beauty, and knew the diet of the Ethelwold.
King; with Commission, that if the Pearl proved so orient, it should be
seized for Edgars own wearing, who meant to make her his Queen, and Ordgarus
the Father of a King.

Ethelwold a jolly young Gallant, posted into Devonshire, and guest-wise
visited Duke Ordgarus his Court, where seeing the Lady surpassing the report,
blamed Fames ouer-sight for sounding her praise in so base and leaden a
Trumpet; and wholly surprised with her love, himself began to woo the
Virgin, yea, and with her Fathers good liking, so as the King would give his
assent. Earl Ethelwold returning, related that the maid indeed was fair; but
yet her beauty much augmented by babbling reports, and neither her feature or
parts any wise befitting a King. Edgar mistrusting no corriuall in his love,
nor dreaming false fellowship in wooing, did with a slight thought pass over
Elfrida, and pitched his affections the faster another way. Earl Ethelwold
following the game now a foot, desired Edgars assistance to bring it to a
stand, pretending not so much for any liking to the Lady, as to raise his own
fortunes to be her fathers heir, to which the King yielded, and for his minion
solicited Ordgarus, who glad to be Edgar a suter for Ethelwold.
shrouded under the favors of such a favorite, willingly consented, and his
daughters destinies assured to Earl Ethelwold.

The marriage solemnized, and the fruits thereof a short time enjoyed; the fame
of her beauty began again to be spread, and that with a larger Epithet
then formerly it had been: Whereupon Edgar much doubting of double dealing,
laid his angle Edgars plot to discover Ethelwold.
fair to take this great gull; and bearing no show of wrong or suspect,
invited himself to ^unt in hi^ Parks, and forthwith repairing into those parts
(...) not a little grace his old servant, to the great joy of Ordgarus the
Duke: but Ethelwold mistrusting the cause of his coming, thought by one policy
to disappoint another: and therefore revealing the truth to his wife, how in
his proceedings he had wronged her beauty; and deceived his Sovereign,
requested her loving assistance to save now his endangered life, which lay in
her power, and of the means he thus advised:

Like as (said he) the richest Diamond rough and uncut, yields neither sparkle
nor esteem of great Ethelwolds speech to Elfrida
price, nor the gold vnburnished gives better luster then the base brass; so
beauty and feature clad in mean array, is either slightly looked at with an
vnfixed eye, or is wholly unregarded, and held of no worth; for, according to
the Proverb, cloth is the man, and man is the wretch: then to prevent the
thing that I fear, and is likely to prove my present ruin, and thy last
wrack, conceal thy great beauty from King Edgars eye, and give him
entertainment in the meanest attires: let them (I pray thee) for a time be
the nightly curtains drawn about our new-Nuptiall bed, and the daily clouds
to hide thy splendent Sun from his sharp, and too too piercing sight, whose
vigor and rays will soon set his waxen wings on fire, that ready are to melt
at a far softer heat. Pitch (thou see) defiles the hand, and we are forbid
to give occasion of evil: veil then thy fairness with the scarfes of
deformity, from his ouer-lauish and vnmastered eye; for the fairest face draws
ever the gaze, if not the attempts, and natures endowments, are as the bush for
the wine, which being immoderately taken does surfeit the sense, and is again
cast up with as loathing a taste. Of these dregs drunk Amnon after his fill of
fair Thamar, Herod 2 Samuel 13. (...). Virgil Aened. Amnon and Thamar.
of Mirami, and Aeneas of Dido; yea, and not to seek examples far off, King
Edgars variation in his vnsted fast motion does easily bewray it self: for
could either holy Wolfhild, beautiful Ethelfled, or the wanton Wench of
Andeuer, keep the needle of his compass certain at one point? nothing less,
but it was still led by the lodestone of his ever mutable and turning
affections. But thou will say, he is religious, and by founding of Monasteries
has expiated those sins. Indeed many are built; for which time and
posterities must thank holy Dunstan, from whose devotion those good deeds have
sprung: but is thy person holier then sacred Wolfhilds; thy birth and beauty
greater then Ethelfled the White, daughter also to a Duke? Wolfhilds Ethelfled.
the former, of an holy Votary, he made the sink of his pollution; and the
later is branded to all ages, by the hateful name of a Concubine, and her
son among us esteemed for a Bastard. These should be motives to all
beauteous and virtuous Ladies, not to sell their honors at so low and too-late
repented a price. Neither think (sweet Countess) that thy husband is jealous,
or suspects thy constancy, which I know is great, and thy self wholly complete
with all honorable virtues: but yet consider I pray thee, that thou art but
young, and may easily be caught, especially of him that is so old a Master of
the game; neither persuade thy self of such strength, as is able to hold out
so great an assault; for men are mighty, but a King is much more. I know thou
art wise, and enough has been said, only let me add this, that evil
beginnings have never good ends: and so with a kind kiss; hoping he had won
his Wife to his Will, prepared with the first to welcome King Edgar.

Lady Elfrida thus left to her self, began seriously to think upon this
Curtain Sermon, whose text she distasted, being taken out of an ouer-worne and
threed-bare cloth proverb, as though her fortunes had been wholly residing,
and altogether consisting in her parentage and apparel, but nothing at all in
any parts of her self

Has my beauty (thought she) been courted of Elfridaalone.
a King, famoused by report, compared with Helens, and now must be hid? Must I
falsify and belly Natures bounties, mine own value, and all men's reports, only
to save his credit, who has impaired mine, and belied my worth? And must I
needs defoule my self, to be his only fair foul, that has kept me from the
State and seat of a Queen? I know the name of a Countess is great, and the
Wife of an Earl is honorable, yet no more then birth and endowments have
assigned for me, had my beauty been far less then it is. He warnes me of the
end, when his own beginnings were with treachery; tells me the examples of
others, but observes none himself: he is not ielous, forsooth, and yet I must
not look out; I am his fair, but others pitch, fire, wine, bush, and what
not? Not so holy as Wolfhild, nor so white as Ethelfled; and yet that must now
be made far worse then it is. I would men knew the heat of that cheek wherein
beauty is blazed, then would they with less suspect suffer our faces unmasked,
to take air of their eyes, and we no whit condemnable for showing that which
cannot be hid, neither in me shall, come of it what will.

And thus resolving to be a right woman, desired nothing more then the thing
forbidden, and made preparation to put it in practice. Her body she endulced
with the sweetest balmes, displaied her hair, and bespangled it with pearls,
bestrewed her breasts Elfrid^ disloialtie.
and bosom with rubies and diamonds, rich Jewels glittering like stars
depended at her neck, and her other ornaments every way suitable. And thus,
rather Angel, then Lady-like, she attended the approach and entrance of the
King, whom with such fair obeisance and seemly grace she received, that
Edgars greedy eye presently collecting the rays of her shining beauty, became
a burning glass to his heart, and the sparkle of her fair falling into the
train of his love, set all his senses on fire: yet dissembling his passions,
he passed on to his game, where having the false Ethelwold at advantage, he
ran him through with a Iaueline, and took fair Elfrida to his wife.
Ethelwold slain.


(15) These were the virtues and vices of this King, little in personage, but
great in spirit, and the first unresisted Monarch of the whole Land, whom all
the other Saxons acknowledged their supreme, without division of Provinces or
title. He reigned sixteen years and two months in great tranquillity and
honor, and died upon tuesday the eighth of July, the thirty seventh of his
age, and year of Christ 975. whose body with all funeral solemnity was
buried The fifteenth, says Higden.
in the Abbey of Glasenburie.

His Wives.
(16) Ethelfled, the first wife of King Edgar, was surnamed in the Saxon
English En^a, in Latin Candida, which with us is White, because of her
exceeding great beauty. She was the daughter of a Duke amongst the
East Angles, named Ordmar, and was married Ethelfleds parents.
unto him the second year of his reign, and the eighteenth of his age, being
the year of Christ's Nativity 961. She was his wife not fully two years, and
died the fourth of his reign, in Anno 962.

(17) Elfrida, the second wife of King Edgar, was the widow of slaughtered
Ethelwold, of whom we Elfridaes second wife.
have said. She was daughter to Ordgarus, and sister to Ordulfe, both of them
Dukes of Devonshire, and the Founders of Tauestoke Abbey in that County: a
Lady of passing great beauty, and as ambitious as fair: for after the Kings
death, she procured the murder of King Edward her son in law, that her own
son Ethelred might come to the Crown: and afterward to pacify his and her
first husbands ghost, and to stop Will. Malmsbury.
the peoples speeches of so wicked a fact, she founded the Abbeys of Ambresbery
and Whorwell, in the Counties of Wiltshire and South-hampton.

His Children.
(18) Edward, the eldest son of King Edgar and Queen Ethelfled his first
wife, was born in the fourth Edward the eldest son.
year of his fathers reign, and a little before his mothers death, in the
year of Christ Jesus 962. He was a child disposed to all virtue,
notwithstanding great means was made by his mother in law for the
disinheriting of him, and the preferment of her own son to the succession of
the Crown; yet by provident care taken in the life time of his father, he
succeeded him after his death, as right heir both of his kingdom and
conditions.

(19) Edmund, the second son of King Edgar, and Edmund the second son.
the first of Queen Elfrida his second wife, was borne in the seventh year of
his fathers reign, being the year of grace 965. He lived but four years,
and died in his infancy, in the twelfth year of his fathers reign, and was
honorably enterred in the Monastery of Nuns, at Ramsey in Hampshire, which
King Edgar had founded.

(20) Ethelred, the third son of King Edgar, and Ethelred the third son.
the second of Queen Elfreda his second wife, and the last of them both, was
borne in the eighth year of his fathers reign, and year of salvation 966. He
was virtuously inclined, beautiful in complexion, and comely of stature; at the
death of his father being but seven years old, and at his brothers murder ten:
which deed he sore lamented, to the great coffeehouse of his mother, who for
his advancement had complotted the same, and wherein at th^se years he
unwillingly succeeded him.

(21) Edgith, the natural daughter of King Edgar, Edgith.
had to her mother a Lady named Wolfhild, the daughter of Wolshelm, the son
of Byrding, the son of Nesting, the two latter bearing in their names the
memory of their fortunes: the last of them being found in an Eagles nest, by
King Elfred as he was on hunting. This Edgith was a veiled Nun in the
Monastery of Wilton, and according to some Authors, made Abbess thereof by her
father at fifteen years of age, says her Legend. She died the fifteenth day
of September, the year of her age twenty three; the sixth of her brother King
Ethelreds reign, and of Christ Jesus 984. By all which accounts it is
manifest, that she was borne before Edward, and by Master Fox proved, that Acts
and Monuments, in vita Edgar.
for him, and not for her, King Edgar did his seven years penance. She is
greatly commended for her chastity and beauty, which later she somewhat
augmented with more curious attire then to her profession was beseeming: for
which Bishop Ethelwold Polychr. lib. 6. c. 9.
sharply reproved her; who answered him roundly, that God regarded the heart
more then the garment, and that sins might be covered as well under rags as
robes.

This Edgith, as John Capgraue reports, after the John Capgraue, in vita san^
Edi^.
slaughter of her brother Edward, the holy Archbishop Dunstan would have
advanced to the Crown, and invested her against Ethelred the lawful heir, had
she not by the late experience of Edwards fall, utterly refused that title,
which neither belonged to her right, nor was safe for her person to undertake.
Her body was buried at Wilton, in the Monastery and Church of Saint Denisse,
which her self had caused to be built.

EDWARD SVRNAMED THE Monarch 31
MARTYR THE THIRTY ONE Edward.
MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN, AND DEATH. CHAPTER XLIII.


GReat were the troubles and sidings that presently ensued An. Do. 975. Simon
Dunel. Roger H^en.
the death of King Edgar, about the election of one of his sons to succeed;
Queen Elfrida with Alferus Duke of Mercia, and many other Nobles combined for
young Ethelred, disauowing Prince Edward as illegitimate, and therefore not
reputable for succession: against them and Ethelred stood Dunstan and the
Monks, holding their states dangerous, and their new-gotten footing unsure, if
in the nonage of the King, these their opposites should rule all under him;
whereas Edward was altogether wrought in their Edward the son of Ethelfleda.
mould; whose title they abetted, as being lawfully borne, and begot in the
nuptial bed of Queen Ethelfleda. Their claims thus banded amongst these
Statesmen, began to be diversely affected among the Commons, and had put the
game to the hazard, if the wisdom of Dunstan had not seen to the chase; for
a Council being assembled to argue their rights, the Archbishop came in with
his banner and cross, and not staying for further debating de iure, did de
facto, present Prince Edward for their lawful King; and the assembly
consisting most of Clergymen, persuading peace, drew the approbation of the
rest, and so was the Prince admitted and proclaimed their Sovereign.

(2) He began his reign at twelve years of age, in the year of Salvation
975 and was soon after by An. Do. 975
Archbishop Dunstan crowned King at Kingston upon Thamesis: being the thirty
one Monarch (since Hengist) of the Englishmen. His beginning was miserably
afflicted with barrenness of the ground* (...) mine amongst his people,
morrai^ (...) their further terror, a fearefull^ (...): A bla^ng star.
which men thought to be signs from heaven, as sent from God, for the sins
committed against the married Clergy, whose cause was much pitied, especially
of the Nobles, and whose complaints of wrongs they instantly urged, that
without deserts they were expulsed from their ancient possessions; a thing
which neither God nor goodmen ever allowed, and was contrary to the prescript
rule of Christ, that wills Will. Mal^. Fox.
us to do, as we would be done unto: whereto the Monks answered, that Christ
respected neither the person nor place, but only them that took up the Cross
of Penance and followed him, as themselves in their single life pretended to
do. But they good men little knew the encumbrances of wiuing; for otherwise
they would have felt, that the condition of the married, was more truly a
suffering of the Cross, and enduring of Penance.

(3) These Church men thus divided and rent, were diversely sided as affection
did move, and that not only of the meaner sort, but even of the Nobles and
great Ones; for the Mercian Duke Alferus favoring Will. Mal^. Simon D^. Ra^.
Higd. John Capgra^. (...) in vita Edgari.
the just cause of married Priests, destroyed the Monasteries in his Province,
cast out the Monks, and restored again the ancient revenues to them and
their wives: contrariwise, in East-Anglia the Priests went to wrack, where the
Monks were maintained by the authority of Edelwin their Duke, who in their
quarrel, with the assistance of his brother Alfred, and of Brightuoth Earl of
Essex, raised a mighty Army, and stood with that power for their defense.

(4) The fire thus blown from a spark to a flame, was feared to mount higher,
if not quenched in time, and therefore by mediation, arms laid aside, the
cause was referred to be heard in Council, and at Winchester first the assembly
was held, where after long disp^ (...) ^ch against the Monks it was greatly
(...) ^ide had (...) ^own (...) ^at the mat^ ^ upon the refectorie Wall, where
the Council sat. To this great Oracle S. Dunstan, desired them deuoutely to
pray, and to give diligent ear for an answer: who, with as great bounty, as
they in devotion, made Dunstans counsel.
it not squemish to give them this advice; God forbid it should be so, God
forbid it should be so (said he,) you judged well once, and to change that
again is not good.

This was authority sufficient to suppress the Priests, who now with their
wives went down the wind; and indeed too blame they were to suspect this their
Judge, who never was heard to give wrong sentence before: but they unsatisfied
men, thought once more to blow the coal, though therewith they were likely to
burn their own lips; for persuading the people, that this was but a subtle
practice of the Monks, in placing behind the wall a man of their own, who
through a truncke uttered those The Priests suspicion of the Monks.
words in the mouth of the Roode; it was therefore instantly desired, that the
cause might once more come to scanning.

(5) This lastly was granted, and a great assembly congregated at Cleue in
Wiltshire, whither repaired An. Do. 977.
the Prelates with most of the States of the land, besides Gentlemen and
Commons an innumerable sort.

This Synod being set, and the controversy propounded, a hot and sharp
disputation ensued, and a while was maintained with many bitter inuectiues, ill
beseeming such persons: But whether through the weakness of the foundation,
or the ouer-presse of weight, or both, the ioysts of this vpper-loft, wherein
the Council was held, suddenly A heavy mischance.
brake, and down fell the floor with all the people thereon, whereof many were
hurt, and some slain outright, only Archbishop Dunstan then President, and
mouth for the Monks remained unhurt: for the Post whereon his chair was set
(and not without miracle) stood wholly untouched. Polychr. lib. 6. c. 12


Thus by this fall, fell the cause of the secular Priests; and the Monkish
foundations underpropped with more surer pillars, Dunstan vuburdened of many
imputations, the peoples affections drawn to the Monks, and the Priests at
liberty now to accompany their wives without any cure, though not without care;
and all this was wrought by the providence Priests without cure, but not
without care.
of Dunstan, and his strange preseruarion on the post; no less wonderful then
that which with the like truth is related of him, how when a huge beam of a
house was suncke out of the frame, and like to ruinate the whole building, with
only making of the sign of the Cross thereon, with his fingers he made it
return to his former place: so wonderfully potent was he in such wooden
miracles. To which, why should we not give credit, since the very Harp which
he had touched could work miracles? as when of it self it sounded
melodiously that Hymn, Gaudent in coelis animae Sanctorum, Will. (...).
etc. Yea since the blessed virgin Mary her self, is said to have come to
solace him with her songs, Cantemus Domino Sociae, etc. For, as for Angels
Mal^s. de gestis Ponti. ^1.
singing familiarly unto him, and Diuelsin shape of dogs, foxes and bears,
whipped by him, that was but ordinary; as likewise his making the shee-diuel to
roar, when coming to tempt him to dalliance, (...).
in shape of a beautiful less, he caught her by the nose with hot burning
pincers, and so spoilde a good face. But to leave those figments wherewith our
Monkish stories are stuffed to the deluding of their Readers, and dishonouring
of those, whom thereby they think to magnify; let us look back to young
Prince Edward.

(6) Who in all princely parts was an imitator of his Father, and for his
modest gentleness worthily favored of all men: but as envy is always the
attendant of virtue; so had he them that much maligned his life, namely, the
favorites of Prince Ethelred, whereof Queen Elfrida his mother was chief,
who lastly betrayed him, and that in this manner.

(7) King Edward for his disport was hunting in Will. Mal^. Polyd^: Rand Chest.
(...) P^.
a forest near unto the sea, upon the south-east shore of the County Dorset,
and in the Island Purbeck; not far off, upon a small river, stood pleasantly
seated a fair and strong Castle called Corfe, where his mother in law Queen
Elfrida, with his brother Prince Ethelred, were then therein residing: Edward
that ever Alfredus (...). Flares Histor. Rich. Cirecest. Speculum hist.
had been loving to both, held it a kind office, now being so near to visit
them with his presence, and thereupon either of purpose or chance singled from
his attendants, he secretly stole from them all, and came alone to the castle
gate.

(8) The Queen who had long lain in wait for occasions, now took this as
brought to her hand, Queen Elfrid^ perfidie.
and therefore with a face as meaning no guile, she humbly and cheerfully
gave the King welcome, desiring him to grace her and her son with his
presence for that night; but he with thanks refused the offer, as fearing
least his company would soon find him missing, and craved only of his mother
a cup of wine, that in his saddle he might drink to her and his brother, and
so be gone. The cup was no sooner at his mouth, then a knife in his back,
which a servant appointed by this treacherous Queen stroke into him; who
feeling himself hurt set spurs to his horse, thinking to escape to his more
faithful company.

(9) But the wound being mortal, and he fainting through loss of much blood,
fell from his horse, and one foot entangled in the stirruppe, he Mat
Westminster. Simon D^l. Fabian.
was thereby rufully dragde up and down through woods and lands; and lastly
left dead at Corfes-gate: which happened the eighteenth day of May, after he had
reigned three years and six (some say eight) months, the year of his age
sixeteene, and of Christ Jesus 979. His body found, was first buried Polydor.
Will. Mal^.
at Warham without all funeral pomp, but after three years by Duke Alferus
removed, and with great celebrity enterred in the Minster of Shaftesbury: and
for this untimely death, he gained the surname of Martyr.

(10) Queen Elfrida sore repenting her cruel and step-motherly fact, to
expiate her guilt, and pacify Almesbury and Worwel Monasteries founding.
the crying blood of her slain son, built the two said Monasteries of
Almesbury and Worwell in the Counties of Wilt-shire and Southampton, in which
later she lived with great repentance and penance until the day of her death,
and in the same lies her body enterred.

These and other the like foundations built upon the occasion of rapine and
blood, howsoever they may show the sorrowful repentance of their founders: yet
their stones being laid with the simmond of murder, and the mortar tempered
with blood, have felt the wrath of him, who by his Prophet has pronounced,
that from the wall the stone shall cry, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it; Woe unto him that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a City
by iniquity. Habacuc (...). 11.


ETHELRED COMMONLY CALLED Ethelred.
Monarch 32.
THE UNREADY, THE TWO AND THIRTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS WARS,
REIGN, WIVES AND ISSVES. CHAPTER XLIIII.


EThelred the son of King Edgar, and brother to King An. Do. 979.
Edward the Martyr, at the age of twelve years entered Will. Malmsbury. Spe^l,
Histor.
his government over the Englishmen, the year of man's salvation, 979, and was
the two and thirtieth Monarch since King Hengist: he was crowned King at
Kingston upon Thamesis the foureteenth of April, being Easter day, by the hands
of Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, who did it much against his will.

(2) He was a man neither forward in action, nor fortunate in proceedings, and
therefore commonly called the Unready: his youth was spent in idleness, feeding
his senses with all voluptuous baits, his middle years with a careless
government, maintaining (...) life, maliciously reported.
civil diss^nsions, and his latter end deseruingly in continual resistance of
the bloodthirsty Danes. With these imputations by writers he is taxed, though
we find no such just cause in recording his life; but to such extremes are
even great Monarchs themselves brought, that their breath and dignity once
left and laid down, they are subject to the censures of every affectionate and
malignant reporter. And that this King lay liable to such men's humors, the
working of Dunstan ever against him, is a sufficient witness, who not only did
refuse to act his Coronation, but would have preferred Lady Edgith a bastard
before him to the Crown, as we have said. And besides the general (...).
quarrel of the Monks and married Priests, to which later himself and his
Abetters were better inclined; his just indi^nation conceived against the
Bishop of Rochester, ^d that not pacified without the Bishops Bishop of R^ester.
submission and payment of money, was cause enough for those Monkish Writers to
brand the Lords Anointed with their marks of infamy, unto whom they impute
the miseries of those times, and the destruction of the English by the
intruding Danes.

(3) These Danes had kept quiet ever since the disliked reign of King Edwy,
without any notable attempts, for the space of twenty two years: but now
perceiving the hearts of the subjects to be drawn from their Sovereign, they
thought it a sufficient occasion to forward their intendements; and omitting no
time, in the second of his reign with An. Do. 980.
seven ships they arrived upon the coast of Kent, spoiling the Country; but
most especially the Island Th^at, from whence they did great hurt likewise to
the town of Southampton.

The English led in dislike of young Ethelreds government, were the rather
drawn to impute these and other adversities to this unfortunate Prince, by
reason of a prediction of Dunstan, who had prophesied, That they should not be
free from blood and sword, ^lyer. lib. (...). (...). 13
till there came a people of an unknown tongue, that should bring them to
thraldom: and that opinion was skrewed deeper into their fearful conceit, by
a cloud appearing of blood and fire, immediately after his unaffected
Coronation.

(4) The next year, those ^ouing Da^es entered the British Seas, and coasting
to Cornwall destroyed An. Do. 981.
there the Abbey of Saint Patrick, P^land in De^shire, Si^ D^.
and many other places upon those shores; the like was done unto Cheshire by
the Norway-P^rates, which broke into those parts in the same year. (...).
(...).


(5) And these calamities were seconded with others as fe^full; for in the
year 982. the City London was mise^bly destroyed and defaced by fire, An. Do.
982.
whose beauty then chiefly extended from Ludgate T^. (...). (...).
westward; for, that within the walls, and where the heart of the City is now,
was then neither beautiful, nor orderly built; what time also raged a sickness
till then unknown in England, which was a strong burning fever, and bloody
flux, as also scarsity of victuals, and murraine among cattle. This hand of
Polychron. lib. 6. cap. ^3.
God thus correcting the sins of all, was received as sent for the offenses
of some few, and wholly imputed to the King and his Raisers; Dunstan still
prophesying further woes to the land, when himself should be dead.

(6) The Danes hereupon more boldly assaulted each shore, and in so many placcs
at once, that the Will. Malmsbury.
English were to seek, where first to withstand. In Mat. Westminster
the West they were encountered by Goda Earl of Devonshire, as says Simon
Dunelmensis, by whom they Simon Dun.
were overthrown, though with the loss of his life, An. Do. 989.
as also of Sternwold a man of great esteem and valor in those parts, who
served there under him.

(7) In the East their leaders Iustine and Guthmond warred with better
success; for at Malden An. Do. 991.
in Essex they gave Brightnod the Earl, a great and bloody battle, wherein
himself with most of his people were slain. The Danes thus prospering, more
boldly went forward; and where they set their tallants, there they held fast,
and lay on the land like unto Grasshoppers. These evils King Ethelred could not
redress, his strengthes being small, and his subjects affections less;
therefore calling to Counsel his Statesmen and Peers, demanded their advice
what was best to be done. Some few of these proffered the King their
assistance, but more of them persuaded unto a composition, whereof Siricius
Archbishop of Caterbury was chief; and in fine, Malmsb. de gest. Pontif. l. 1.
Polycr. lib. 6. (...). 13.
ten thousand pounds paid to the Danes for their departure.

(8) This golden Mine once entered, was more eagerly dug into, by these
still-thirsting Danes, who finding the branch so beneficial at first, hoped
the vein in following, would prove far more bountiful, and therefore
regardlesse of promise, the next year prepared themselves again for England,
and with a great fleet dispatched to sea: the news An. Do. 992.
whereof struck such terror into the English hearts, Will. Malmsbury.
that despairing of hope, they accounted themselves the bond-slaues of misery:
The King therefore with much ado prepared a Navy, whereof he made Elfrick
Earl of Mercia Admiral; who setting from London unto the seas, had power
sufficient to put Elfrick Earl of Mercia.
back the enemy: but he once a traitor could never prove true; for, having
been banished, forgiven, and now taken into favor, found means to be false,
and to betray his charge; and sending the enemy intelligence of his power and
intents, gave the way to their escape; and another fleet of Danes encountering
with the Kings, at first he fainedly and faintly fought against; and lastly,
turned to their side; through which treason many Englishmen died, and the Kings
Fleet and power was greatly weakened; but he escaping due punishment himself,
left his son to answer the fault, whose eyes King Ethelred caused to be put
out.

(9) About which time also another Danish Fleet entering Humber, wasted the
countries of Yorkshire An. Do. 993.
and Lyndsey: against these King Ethelred sent his power, under the charge of
three valiant but treacherous Simon Dun. Polydor. Mal. West.
Captains, namely, Frena, Godwin and Fredegist; for the battle but begun,
these with their followers fled away, which was the occasion of a great
overthrow of the English; notwithstanding the country people not able to
digest their intolerable dealings, fell upon the Danes, slew some, and chased
the rest. At what time also other of the Danes with ninety four ships sailed
up the river Thamesis, and A Fleet of Danes on the Thames besiege London.
laid their siege against London, giving it a great assault; but the Citizens
thereof so manfully defended themselves, that they chased the Danes thence to
their shame and great loss: yet fell they so foul upon Essex, Kent, Sussex,
and Hampshire, that the King was enforced to compound a peace, with the payment
of sixteen thousand pounds: for confirmation whereof, Ethelred sent to
Southampton for Anlaf these Norwegians King, and honorably entertained him at
Andeuer, where the same time he received Baptism, King Ethelred taking him at
the Matt West. Simon Dun.
Font for his God-sonne, and with great gifts returned into Denmark without
any further harm done to the English.

(10) But God and destiny suffering it, (that would have the Saxons to fall
before the Danes, as formerly the Britains had done before them) no covenant
could be so surely made, but was as slackly in the^ performed; for albeit this
Anlaf honorably kept both faith and promise, yet others of his Country
continued their invasions, and as an other Hydra showed their still-reuiuing
heads.

(11) For the nineteenth year of King Ethelreds An. Do. 997.
most troublesome reign, and of our salvation 997. the Danes with a great
fleet sailed about Cornwall, and came into the mouth of Seuern, robbing, as
they went, Devonshire, Cornwall, and South Wales: and marching further into the
Continent, consumed Lydford, and the Abbey of Saint Ordulfes at Essingstocke,
thence passing through Dorsetshire with fire and sword, found not a man in the
way to resist them, and wintering in the Wight lived by spoils gotten in
Hampshire and An. Do. 998.
Sussex.

(12) The next Spring they put into the mouth An. Do. 999.
of Thamesis, and so by the river Medway arrived at Rochester: thither the
Kentish with their strengthes repaired, but unfortunately fought, and left the
field to the Danes, who shortly after hoised their sails, and with a merry
gale arrived in Normandy.

(13) King Ethelred thus rid of these his unlooked An. D. 1000.
for guests, sought to remove those leigers that lay in Cumberland, whither he
repaired, and with sore war wasted the Country, before whose sword the Danes
were notable to stand; which somewhat encouraged the spirits of his people, and
bettered their conceits toward him: but far this sun past not without a
cloud, nor was his success entailde to be fortunate.

(14) For the next year, those Danes that departed from Kent, came now from
Normandy with their full sails, and landing in Exmouth, their first and
greatest fury was against the City of Exceter, which when they fiercely
besieged, they were so valiantly Roger Houed. Annal. pars pr^.
beaten by the Citizens, as that enraged above measure with the ignominy of
that repulse, they thence as a sudden flood bare down all that stood in their
way; and then plainly began to appear the rise of the Danes, which every
where lorded it, where they had to do, and the fall of the Saxons, whose
ouertopped Monarchy, and weak walls now wanted props to hold up the weight;
for the Captains of the English (says Higden) wanting lore in deeds of Arms,
their direction never prospered; if ships were made they never sped well, but
were either chased of the enemy, or destroyed by tempest; if the Nobles ever
assembled to consult of the State, that time was rather spent in whetting the
spleen each against other, then jointly agreeing how to redress their present
danger, or to repress the common enemy: for most of the Nobles were allianced
into the Danish Higden. (...).
blood, whereby not only the secret of those consultations were revealed, but
being employed in service, many of them revolted to the enemy. The Clergy as
backward as any, denied the King their The Clergies coustousnesse.
assistance, pleading their exemptions from war, and privilege of the
Church, when the land lay bleeding and deploring for help, and scandalized all
his other proceedings for demanding their aid: to these were joined scarsity,
hunger and robberies. These miseries caused the sums of their compositions to
be augmented, whose last was sixteen thousand, now twenty thousand,
immediately twenty four, then thirty, and lastly, forty thousand pounds, until
the land was emptied of all the coin; the Kingdom of her glory; the Nobles of
courage; the The effects of it.
Commons of their content, and the Sovereign of his wonted respect and
observance.

(15) The Danes thus prevailing; did not a little glory in their fortunes, and
grieved the poor English, whose service they employed to ear and till the
ground, whilst themselves ^ate idle, and eat the fruit of their pains,
abusing the wives and daughters of their hosts where they lay, and yet in every
place for fear and reverence were called the Lord-Danes, Hector Boethius.
(which afterward becam a word of derision to such sturdy and lazy lozels) so
that the like days of misery the land never felt. To redress which, the
careful King Ethelred was far too weak, and therefore intending to do that
by policy, which he could not by strength, he devised a desperate stratagem
that proved the destruction of the Saxons royal blood, and Ethelreds bad
policy.
conquest of the land to another nation.

(16) For seeking to disburden the Realm of these devouring Danes, which by
open force he could no ways do; he attempted in a bloody massacre to destroy
them, giving a secret commission unto every City within his dominions, that at
an appointed time they should set upon, and kill all the Polycr. li. 6. ca. 15.
The massacre of the Danes.
Danes; the day was the thirteenth of November, being the festival of S.
Bricius, the year of Christ Jesus 1002, and presently after his marriage with
Emma, the flower of Normandy; in confidence of which affinity, he presumed to
do what he did. His Henry Hunting.
command was accordingly performed, and with such rigor, that in Oxford the
fearful Danes for refuge took into the Church of S. Frideswyd, as into a
Sanctuary of venerable antiquity and privilege among ancient Kings; but they
in fury regarding neither place nor person, set the Church on fire, Matthew. West.
wherein were burned a great sort of those Danes with many rich ornaments, and
the Library thereof utterly Register of S. Frideswydes.
defaced. At which time (if Malmsbury say true) King Ethelred himself was in
that City, and had summoned Malmsb.
a Parliament both of Danes and English, with which even the King was much
grieved: and therefore at his very great co^ beautifully repaired the Church,
and all the losses accruing by the fire, endowing it with large privileges and
donations, as appears by his own Charter, mentioning the (...) Charter
tenor of that Danish slaughter.

In this massacre, Lady Gunhild, sister to Swain King of Denmark, a great and
continual friend to the English, with her husband and son, together were
slaughtered, although she lay in hostage upon conditions of peace, whose
husbands name was Palingus (says Malmsbury) an Earl of great might, and both
of them Christians.

(17) News brought into Denmark of this sudden stratagem, no need there
was to urge them to Hen. Hunting.
revenge, or to add more fuel unto that over kindled Simon Dun.
fire; for preparation being made, the year ensuing, Swain with a great Navy
landed in the West, spoiled King Swains invasion.
the Country, and gave assault to the City of Exceter, which by the treachery of
one Hugh a Norman (whom An. D. 1003.
in the favor of the Queen, King Ethelred had made Governor of that City) he
razed and leuelled with the ground, all along from the Eastgate to the West.

This treason and stirs great of themselves, but made much more rufull in the
relating, caused Ethelred presently to muster his men; over whom he made Earl
Edrik (for his covetousness surnamed Streton) Earl Edrick for his avarice
surnamed (...).
his General, who bare a brave show till it came to the push, and day of
battle: but then to cover his treason, he fained himself sick, and left his
soldiers to shift as they could. The Danes hereupon rifled Wilton, and passing
forward took Salisburie in their way, to which they were as welcome as water
into ships; but hearing that the King himself in person was preparing to give
them battle, they left the land, and took again to sea.

(18) The next year following, (which was the twenty four of King Ethelreds
reign, and of grace, An. D. 1004.
one thousand and four,) King Swain with a mighty Simon Dun.
fleet of ships arrived upon the coasts of Norffolke, where landing his men,
he made spoil of all before him, and coming to Norwich sacked the City,
Norwich raced.
with great slaughter of the Citizens; then took he Thetford, and set it on
fire, notwithstanding he had entered a truce with them: but for want of
victual which then was scarce in the land, he returned to sea, and so into
Denmark. An. D. 1005.


(19 Where making preparation for another expedition, increased his Navy and
number of men, Henry Hunt.
and the next Spring arrived at Sandwich, miserably desolating the Countries
along the sea side, never An. D. 1006.
staying in any certain place, but to prevent the Kings Forces roued from coast
to coast, ever carrying to their ships their booties and prays, and to
increase the calamity, the harvest was neglected, and in many places spoiled,
both for the want of laborers, and by the feet of the soldiers which lay in
field all that season, who from place to place travailed, although in vain-

Toward the Winter the Danes took into the I Will The Danes in the I Will of Wight.
of Wight, and in the deepest time thereof, passed through Hampshire, into
Barkeshire, unto Reading, Wallingford, Colesey, and Essington, making clean
work wheresoever they came; for that which they could not carry they consumed
with fire, with triumphs ever returning to their ships.

(20) The King lying in Shrewsbury, unable to resist, An. D. 1007.
called to him his Council, to consult what was best to be done; whereof
Edrik was a principal, and in so high esteem with the King, that he created
him Duke of Mercia, and gave him his daughter Edrick an untrusty Councellor.
Egith in marriage: notwithstanding, these gluts of favors wrought only the
disgestion of falsehood in him, who could taft nothing unless it was saused
with treason. This man, then the Kings only Achitophel, persuaded him to pay
thirty thousand Simon Dun.
pounds to the Danes for their peace, whereof no doubt some fell into his own
Coffers.

(21) This intolerable imposition extorted of the Subjects especially at that
time when the land was least able, made many suspect great matters against
Edrik, and some did not fear to accuse him to his face, to be the only
causer of this payment; charging him as ouer-affectionated to the Danes, and to
have bewraied the Kings secrets and designs unto His accusations.
them: but he seated in the heart of his Sovereign, rubd off this stain with
a few fawnings, and a fair show, being (...) in wit subtle, in speech
eloquent, His subtilty.
and for riches inferior to none, (a stone that could turn even great
streams aside) so that these supposals of treasons (as proceeding from envy to
him for his good services) wanne him greater trust, and sent he was Ambassador
to the Danes to mediate for peace: where revealing the weakness of the land,
and the fears which the English conceived of a conquest, treacherously
dissuaded them from giving His treachery.
ear to any motives of Truce.

(22) The State of the land thus standing, or rather An. D. 1008. An. Reg. 30.
hanging at suspense, King Ethelred gave order, that out of every three hundred
and ten hides of land a ship should be built, and of every eight hides a
complete Armor furnished. These meeting at Sandwich, and furnished with
soldiers, made Henry Hunting. Simon Dun.
show of such resistance, as had not been seen, although the event was
nothing but a show. For Will mot a Noble man of Sussex (banished for some
offense by King Ethelred) with twenty Sails roued Matthew. West.
upon the coasts, and by Piracy did much hurt among the English Merchants:
wherefore Brithrik the brother of Edrik to win himself honor, got the Kings
consent to pursue this grand-Pirate, with fourscore sail of the foresaid
ships, threatening to bring in Wilmot either dead or alive: but his sails
Brithrick (chasing Wilmot) crossed by tempest.
being spread under a fair wind, a violent tempest suddenly arose, and
outragiously drove his ships upon shore, where distressed and torn, their
beaten huls lay unable to recover themselves, or the Sea: Wilmot taking
advantage of this present mishap, fell (...) upon them, and after much
slaughter of their weather-beaten warders, set them all on fire; so that all
this preparation proved not only vain, but also very hurtful.

(23) At the receipt of the said thirty thousand Money paid the Danes.
pounds, the Danes departed, in semblance satisfied, and friends with the
English; but how long that lasted the sequel showed: for the next harvest, and
year of salvation 1009. a great fleet of their ships An. D. 1009.
strongly appointed landed at Sandwich, under the conduct of three Danish
Princes, Turkil, Henning and Three Danish Captains.
Anlafe: these coming to Canterbury, were compounded with by the Citizens,
paying a thousand Money paid the Danes.
pounds for their departure; who thence in the Wight, Sussex and Hampshire made
hauoke of all. Three thousand Pound. ^aith Simon Dun.


King Ethelred seeing no truth in their promises, nor quietness; in State, his
land thus exhausted of provision and coin, thought it best to adventure once
for all, and to commit his cause unto God, by the fortune of war. To which
end he gathered his power, and coming unlooked for, when the enemy was
altogether unprepared, and taken at disadvantage, he had made an end of the
quarrel if wicked Edrick had not persuaded him from fight, and put him into a
causle sse fear with his forged tales. The Danes thus escaping returned to
Kent, and the Edrick again perfidious.
winter following lodged their ships in the river Thamesis, whence often they
gave assaies for London, though to little purpose.

(24) Then took they through the Chiltern woods unto Oxford, which they fired,
and in their return wasted all the countries on both sides of Thamesis, An. D.
1010.
but hearing that London was prepared against them, they crossed over at
Stanes, passing through Surrey into Kent, where they fell to amending their
ships, and thence sailing about the coasts of Suffolk, took Ipswich, and
pitched their battle upon Rigmer, against Vikel (Governor of Norffolke) and
his English, Henry Hunt.
upon the fifth of May; where they won the day with a great slaughter made of
the Suffolk, Norffolke, and Cambridge-shire men, and after harried those
Countries with the borders of Lincoln and Huntingtonshires; burning Thetford
and Cambridge, and rifling all the Abbeys and Churches that stood in their way,
and then through Essex returned unto their ships.

(25) Neither rested they there long in quiet, ere, The Dene^ forage the
Countries before them
as people wholly devoted to spoil, they brake into Buckinghame, Bedford, and
Northampton-shiers, the chief Town of which last, they set on fire after much
slaughter of the Inhabitants; and thence entering Wiltshire depopulated all
before them, which was the seventh Shire in number that they had laid wast
like a solitude.

(26) And now not satisfied with spoil nor bloudspilling, they prepare a new
expedition for Canterbury, An. D. 1011. Henry Hunt. Vincentius.
and in September beleagered the City, which by treason of a Churchman they
won, took Elphegus the Archbishop, and slew nine hundred Monks and men of
Religion, besides many Citizens, without all mercy: for they tithed the captive
multitudes after an inuerted order, slaying all by nines, Addit. ad Asseri^.
and reserving only the tenth to live; so that of all the Monks in the town
there were but four saved, and of the lay people four thousand eight hundred,
by which account M. Lambert collecteth Will. Lambert. in Peram.
that there died in this massacre forty three thousand and two hundred persons.

The Archbishop Elphegus, for that he refused to charge his Tenants with three
thousand pounds to Polychr. li. 6. c. 16. An. D. 1012.
pay for his ransom, they most cruelly stoned to death at Greenewith the
nineteenth of April following.

Turkillus the Leader of these murderers, took into his possession all
Northfolke and Suffolk, over whom he tyrannized in most savage manner. The rest
compounding with the English for eight thousand pound soiourned a while quiet
among them. Money paid the Danes


(27) But King Swain hearing of the dissensions, and weakness of the land,
in the year of Grace, An. D. 1013.
1013, with a great number of ships arrived in the mouth of Humber, and entering
Trent landed at Simon Dun.
Gainsborough; whose terror stroke so deep into the Northumbrians conceits,
that they with them of Lyndsey yielded themselves to the yoke of his
subjection, so that now over all the North from Watling street he reigned sole
King, and exacted pledges from them for their further obedience. From the North
he sought to spread his wings further into the South, and leaving his son
Canute to take Canute.
charge of his ships, and new conquered countries, sped himself through
Mercia to Oxford and Winchester, bringing all under the power of his command:
with which gales of his fortunes, he was so pusfed up, that thinking nothing
impossible for him and his Danes to do, in the heat of his courage he came
unto London, and presently begirt the walls London besieged
with a strait siege.

(28) In the City lay unfortunate King Ethelred, who (as Simon Monk of Durham
reports) had Simon Dunel. Mat. Westminster. Henry Hunt.
with him, and under his pay Turkillus the Danish Prince before spoken of, and
forty five Danish ships to defend the coasts. King Swain at his first coming
fiercely assaulted the City, hoping his fortunes would have proved as before;
but the presence of the King, and London the eye of the land, made the Poly^
Citizens above measure courageous, who beat the Danes from their walls, and
sallying forth of the Gates, slew them on heaps, so that Swain himself was in
great danger, had he not desperately run through the midst of his enemies,
and by flight escaped their swords; marching both day and night in great fear
until he had entered Bath, where Ethelmere Earl of Devonshire with his
Western people submitted themselves unto him. But this last Will. Malms. Mat.
Westminster.
overthrow, and want of victuals, caused him after he had received a certain
sum of money, to have into Denmark, minding with more power, and better
advantage to prosecute the quarrel.

(29) Not long it was ere he returned, and immediately was met by the English,
where betwixt them was struck a fierce battle, which had been A Battle
between Danes and English.
with good success, had not the treasons of some hindered it, in turning to
the Danes. King Ethelred therefore seeing himself, and land betrayed in this
manner, to those few true English that were left, he used this speech as
follows.

(30) If there wanted in me a fatherly care, either Ethelreds Oration.
for the defense of the Kingdom, or administration of justice in the common
wealth, or in you, the courage of Soldiers for the defense of your native
Country; then truly silent would I be for ever, and bear these calamities
with a more dejected mind: but as the case stands (be it as it is) I for my
part am resolved to rush into the midst of the enemy, and to lose my life for
my Kingdom and Crown. And you (I am sure) hold it a worthy death that is
purchased for the liberties of your selves and kindred; and therein I pray you
let us all die, for I see both God and destiny against us, and the ruin of the
English nation brought almost to the last period; for we are overcome not by
weapons and hostile war, but by treason and domesticke falsehood; our Navy
betrayed into the Danes hands, our battle weakened by the revolt of our
Captains, our designs bewraied to them by our own Counselors, and they also
enforcing compositions of dishonorable peace, I my self disesteemeed, and in
scorn termed Ethelred the unready; your valor and loialties betrayed by your
own leaders, and all our poverty yearly augmented by the payment of their
Dane-gilt, which how to redress God only knows, and we are to seek; for if
we pay money for peace, yea, and that confirmed by oath, these enemies soon
break it, as a people that neither regard God nor man, contrary to equity and
the laws of war, or of nations: and so far off is all hope of better
success, as we have cause to fear the loss of our Kingdom, and you the
extinct of the English nations renown; therefore seeing the enemies are at
hand, and their hands at our throats; let us by foresight and counsel save
Pains taking for safety.
our own lives, or else by courage sheath our swords in their bowels: either
of which I am willing to enter into, to secure our estate and nation from an
irrecouerable ruin.

(31) This lamentable Oration delivered from the passions of a iustly-pensiue
King, touched the hearers to the hearts, and as much distracted their afflicted
minds: to abide battle they saw it was bootlesse, the treason of their
leaders so many times defeating their victories; to yield themselves to the
enemy, would but begin their servitude and misery; and to flee before them,
their eternal ignominy and reproach.

Thus their opinions were canuased, but nothing put in practice, whereas mean
whiles the Danes went forward with victories, and had got the most part of the
land, yea and London also by submission; wherewith unfortunate Ethelred more
and more dejected, Henry Hunting. Simon Dun.
sent his wife Emma with his two sons by her, unto her brother Richard Duke
of Normandy, and for his own safest refuge committed himself unto Turkil the
Dane, in whose ships he remained a while at Greenewich, and from thence went
into the An. D. 1014. An. Reg. 35.
Isle of Wight, where he abode most part of the winter, and thence sailed into
Normandy to his wife and brother, leaving the Danes lording it in his realm.

(32) These were the days of Englands mourning, she being unable to maintain
her defenders, and yet enforced to nourish and cherish her deuourers: for the
Danes in two factions most cruelly Swain and Turkils domineering.
afflicted the land like two milstones crushing and grinding the grain. Swayn
as an absolute King, extorted of the English both victuals and pay for his
soldiers: and Turkil on the other side, in defense of the English, commanded
the like for his ships and men; so that the Danes had all, and the English
maintained al. Neither were churches free from their spoils, (whom other
Conquerors have held most impious to violate,) but either suffered the flames
of their consuming fire, or were forced to purchase their standings with great
sums of money. Such composition King Swain demanded for the preservation of
S. Edmunds Monastery in Suffolk; which because the Inhabitants refused to pay,
he threatened spoil both to the place, and to the Martyrs bones there enterred;
in the midst of which iollity (says Houeden) he suddenly Houeden. Annal.
pars prior. Fabian. Chron. par. 6. cap. 200. Polychron. lib. 6. cap. 10.
cried out that he was struck by S. Edmund with a sword, being then in the
midst of his Nobles, and no man seeing from whose hand it came; and so with
great horror and torment, three days after upon the third of February ended
his life at Thetford (others say at Gainsborough:) but with his death died not
the title of the Danes, who immediately advanced Canutus his son for their
King.

(33) The English that liked nothing less then bondage, especially under such
tyrannizing intruders, An. D. 1015
thought now or never the time to shake off the yoke; and therefore with great
joy and have sent into Normandy for their native King. Ethelred now not
unready for the recovering of his right, foreslowed no means either to hasten
or strengthen the enterprise, and having the assistance of his brother of
Normandy, in the Lent following landed in England, unto whom resorted the
people from all parts, accounting it their greatest joy to see the face of
their King.

(34) Canutus then at Gainsborough, Souldier-like mustered and managed his men,
and holding it good Canutus wins love of the English.
policy to keep that by bounty, which his father had got by tyranny, made no
spare to purchase the hearts of the English; by which means those of Lyndsey
became his Creatures, with an agreement to find him both horse and men against
their own King and Country.

Ethelred therefore now raging for revenge, with a mighty host entered Lyndsey,
where he burnt all the Country, and put the inhabitants to the sword. He is
chased by (...).
Canute not able to resist this puissant Army, held the sea more safe for him
then the land, and entering Humber, sailed to Sandwich, where being sore grieved
at the miseries of these his confederates, requited King Ethelreds friends with
the like, and commanded that those pledges which had been Matthew. West.
delivered by the Nobles unto his Father, should Will. Mal^.
have their noses slit, and their hands cut off: which cruelty acted, he
sailed to Denmark, as hopeless of any good issue in England.

(35) But Turkil the Dane, retained (as we said) into King Ethelreds pay,
seeing success so suddenly altered, sore repented him of his revolt from the
Turkil inciteth Ca^ against, England.
Danes, and knowing now the time to recover his reputation, with nine of his
ships sailed into Denmark, instantly importuning Canut to address again
for England; alleging the fears and weakness of the people, the beauty and
fertility of the land, an Eden, in respect of their own barren seat, and
(which did most move) himself would assist, when the English least thought it:
with these and the like he spurred him on, who of himself was forward in a
full curriere.

Canutus therefore with the aid of his brother Harrold, rigged forth a Navy
of two hundred sail, all furnished with soldiers and abiliments of war,
whose terror landed in England before him, and his Canutus and his Navy.
power by report made greater then it was; and to increase the terror of this
fearful enemy, the sea with a springtide brake into this land, and destroyed
both towns and many inhabitants; a sign foreshewing (as was thought) the
success of that fleet, borne hitherward upon those waves; and to increase the
English miseries, thirty thousand pound was Money collected for the Danes.
then collected by way of Tribute to pay the Danish auxiliary Navy lying before
Greenewich. The States also conuening in a grand Council at Oxford to
determine upon the great affairs of the Kingdom, were divided into factions,
and two Noblemen of the Danes there murdered by practice of Edrick the
Traitor. These (I say) were accounted ominous amongst the English, that made
each molehill to seem a mountain, and every shadow the show of an enemy.

(36) In the mean while Canutus had landed at Sandwich, and given a great
overthrow to the English; Will. Malmsbury. Henry Hunt. Mat. Westminster. Simon
Dunel.
entered Kent, and by his sword had made way through the Countries of Dorset,
Sommerset, and Wilton.

Ethelred lying dangerously sick at Cossam, the managing of these wars was
transferred to Prince Edmund his son, who preparing to meet the enemy with
his Army in the field, had suddenly notice that Edrik his brother in-law meant
to betray him into his enemies hands; which news struck a great astonishment
unto his heart, and caused him to retrait his host into a place of security;
whereby Edrik perceiving his treacherous purposes were Matthew. West.
disclosed, gave more open proof of his intendments, flying to the enemy with
forty of the Kings ships; whereupon all the west Countries submitted
themselus unto Canutus. Simon Dun.


(37) By this time King Ethelred had recovered his sickness, and minding
revenge on his most wicked son Edrik, with purpose to try his last fortunes
An. D. 1016.
by hazard of fight, summond all his forces to meet him at a certain day and
place; where being assembled, he was instantly warned not to give battle, for
that his own subjects meant to betray him.

King Ethelred ever unfortunate in this, to find treasons amongst them that
ought him most trust, Londons fidelley.
withdrew himself to London, whose service against the Danes he had lately
seen, and therefore accounted his person most sure in their walls. Prince
Edmund with his power posted over Humber, where obtaining Earl Vtred to side
in his quarrel, entered the Countries of Stafford, Leicester, and Shropshires,
not sparing to exercise any cruelty upon these inhabitants, as a condign
recompense for their revolt. Neither did Canut for his part spare the Kings
subjects, but through Buckingham, Bedford, Huntington, Canutus deuastatio^s
Nottingham, Lincoln, and Yorkeshires, made spoil of all, so that the
miserable English went to wrack on all sides; insomuch that Vtred also
forsaking Edmund, became subject to Canut: whereupon Edmund hasted to London to
join his strength with his Fathers, and Canute with no less speed sailed
about the Coasts into Thamesis, preparing his Army for the siege of London.

(38) At which time King Ethelred, either fallen into relapse of his last
sickness, or tired with the many Ethelred dies.
troubles, and daily renewed treasons against him, gave up his ghost, and found
rest by death, which never he could attain by li^e, the twenty third of
April, and year of our Salvation 1016, when he had most unfortunately reigned
thirty seven years, and nine days: his body was there buried in the
Cathedral The time of his reigning.
Church of S. Paul, and bones as yet remain in the north-wall of the Chancell
in a chest of grey-Marble, reared upon four small pillars, covered with a
copped stone of the same, adioining to another His Tomb in S. Paul's in London.
of the like form, wherein Sebby King of the East Saxons lies intombed.

(39) Of Parsonage he was very seemly, and of countenance gracious, affable
and courteous to his Subjects, and a maintainer of justice among them, as by
his excellent Laws which himself made, and by his sharp, but godly and wise
censures against Fox M^yrologe in King Egelreds life ex Hist. Ior^lens.
unlearned, bribing, delaying, partial Judges and Lawyers, and their
purloining officers (at large set down by M. Fox) is very apparent. Very loving
and tender affectionated he was to his brother King Edward; for whose death he
made such lamentation, that his mother beat him with a taper of wax that stood
before her, yea and so sore that he could never after well endure the sight of a
taper. Favorable he was to the married Priests, and least esteemed the opulent
and idle lives of the Monks, whose pens therefore (as in such cases we ever
find them partial) have been Polycr. li. 6. ca. 13.
very lavish in his dispraise, accusing him with sloth and unreadiness of
Arms, of voluptuous^es and lechery, covetousness, pride and cruelty: whereas
in following the records of his life, laying aside the Danish massacre, we find
no such sins, neither any mention of Concubine that ever he kept, or name of
child unlawfully begot, having had many by his wives, which were as follows.

His Wives.
(40) Elgiua, the first wife of King Ethelred, was the daughter of an English
Duke named Thored, Elgiua the first wife, by some called Elflede.
who is reported in the history of that time, to have done great service
against the Danes. She was married unto him when he was seventeen years of
age, in the sixth of his reign, being the year of grace 984. and was his wife
seauenteene years, who dedeceased in the twenty four of his reign, and of
Christ Jesus, 1003.

(41) Emme, the second wife of King Ethelred, was the daughter of Richard the
second Duke of Emme the second wife.
Normandy, and sister of Duke Richard, and Duke Robert Father to William the
Conqueror; her mother was sister to Herfast the Dane, Grandfather of William
Fitz-Osbert afterward Earl of Hereford. She was a Lady of passing beauty, and
therefore commonly called the flower of Normandy; married unto him in the
twenty and fifth year of his reign, and year of Salvation, 1003. with whom
she lived thirteen years, and suruiuing him was remarried to King Canute the
Dane.

His Issue.
(42) Ethelstan, the eldest son of King Ethelred Ethelstane the eldest son.
and of Queen Elgiua his first wife, was borne about the eight year of his
Fathers reign, and year of Christ, 986: he lived unto the age almost of
twenty five years, (being then by great likelihood) cut off by untimely death
in the wars of the Danes, raging then most extremely, which was the thirty
third of his Fathers reign, and of Christ's Nativity 1011.

(43) Egbert, the second son of King Ethelred, and Queen Elgiua his first
wife, seems to have Egbert the second son.
been borne two years after his brother Ethelstan, in the tenth year of his
Fathers reign, and year of our Lord 988, and to have deceased in the very
prime of his youth before the death of his father, or of his elder brother, and
before he had done any thing in his life worthy of remembrance after his death.

(44) Edmund, the third son of King Ethelred and Edmund the third son.
Queen Elgiua his first wife, was borne in the eleventh year of his fathers
reign, and of Grace 989 and of all his fathers Children proved to be the only
man that set his helping hand to the redress of the estate of his Country
distressed by the miserable oppressions of the Danes, which he pursued with
such exceeding toil, and restless hazards of his body, as he was therefore
surnamed Iron-side; and when he had followed those wars with great courage
the space of seventeen years under his Father, being come to twenty seven of
his own age, he succeeded him in his Kingdom and troubles, as presently
shall be showed.

(45) Edred, the fourth son of King Ethelred, and of Queen Elgiua his first
wife, was born about Edred the fourth son.
the foureteenth year of his fathers reign, being the year of Grace 992. His
name is continually set down, as a witness in the testees of his fathers
Charters, until the thirty fifth year of his reign, by which it appears
that he lived unto the two and twentieth year of his own age, although I
find no mention of him, or of any thing done by him in any of our histories,
and it seems he died at that time, because his name is left out of the
Charters after that year.

(46) Edwy, the fifth son of King Ethelred, and Edwy the fifth son.
Queen Elgiua his first wife, suruiued his father and all his brethren, and
lived in the reign of Canute the Dane, who being jealous of his new-gotten
estate, and fearful of the dangers that might accrue unto him by this Edwy,
and such others of the English blood royal, practiced to have him murdered,
which was accordingly done by them, whom he most favored, and least
suspected, the year of our salvation, 1017.

(47) Edgar, the sixth son of King Ethelred and of Edgar the sixth son.
Queen Elgiua his first wife, was borne about the twentieth year of his
fathers reign, being the year of our Lord God nine hundred ninety and eight.
He seems by the Testees of his fathers Charters, to have been living in the
one and twentieth of his reign, but being no more found in any of them after,
may be supposed by all conjectures, to have died in, or, about the same year,
being but the eleventh after his own birth, and the seventh before his
fathers death.

(48) The eldest daughter of King Ethelred and The eldest daughter.
Queen Elgiua his first wife, although her name be not to be found in any
writer of those times, appears notwithstanding, to be married to one
Ethelstan, a Noble man of England, who was the principal Commander of
Cambridge-shire men, at the great battle fought between them and the Danes,
wherein the Englishmen had the overthrow; and this son in law of King
Ethelred, with the rest of the chief Leaders, were slain in the year of
Christ's Nativity 1010. being the two and thirtieth of his father in laws
reign.

(49) Edgith, the second daughter of King Ethelred Edgith the second daughter.
and Queen Elgiua his first wife, was married to Edrik Duke of Mercia, who for
his covetousness in getting was surnamed Streattone: This Edrik was the son
of one Egelrik surnamed Leofwin, an elder brother to Egelmere the grandfather
of Goodwin Duke of the West Saxons; and being but meanly borne, was thus
highly advanced by this King; notwithstanding he was ever a traitor to his
Country, and a favorer of the Danes, betraying both him, and King Edmund his
son to King Canut, that he thereby might get new preferments by him, who
worthily rewarded him as a traitor and put him to death.

(50) Elfgine, the third daughter of King Ethelred and of Queen Elgiua his
first wife, was the second Elfgine the third daughter.
wife of Vtred surnamed the Bold, son of Earl Waldefe the elder, Earl of
Northumberland, by whom she had one only child, a daughter, named Aldgith,
married to a Nobleman called Maldred, the son of Crinan; she was mother of
Cospatricke, who was Earl of Northumberland in the time of William the
Conqueror, and forced by his displeasure to fly into Scotland, where he abode
and was ancestor to the Earls of Dunbar and of March in that Country.

(51) Good, the fourth and youngest daughter of King Ethelred and Queen Elgiua
his first wife, was Good the fourth daughter.
first married to one Walter de Maigne a Nobleman of Normandy, greatly
favored by King Edward her brother; who lived not long after the marriage, and
left issue by her a son named Rodulfe, whom King Edward his uncle created
Earl of Hereford. This Earl Rodulfe, died the one and twentieth of December,
in the thirteenth year of his uncles reign, and was buried at Peterborough;
leaving issue a young son named Harrald, created afterward by King William
the Conqueror, Baron of Sudeley in the County of Gloucester, and Ancestor to
the Barons of that place succeeding, and of the Lord Chandois of Sudeley now
being. This Lady Good, after the decease of the said Water de Maigne, was
remarried to Eustace the elder, Earl of Bulloigne in Picardy, a man of great
valor in those parts of France, and a most faithful friend to King Edward her
brother; which Earl was grandfather to Godfrey of Bulloigne, King of
Jerusalem, albeit it seems he had no issue by this Lady.

(52) Edward, the seventh son of King Ethdred, and his first by Queen Emme
his second wife, was Edward the seventh onne.
borne at Islipe in the County of Oxford, and brought up in France all the time
of his youth, with his uncle Richard the third of that name, Duke of Normandy,
mistrusting his safety in England under King Canute the Dane, although he had
married his mother; but he found the time more dangerous by the usage of his
brother Elfred, at his being here in the reign of King Harrald son of the
Dane. Notwithstanding he returned home, when Hardiknut the other son (being
his half brother) was King, and was honorably received and entertained by
him, and after his death succeeded him in the Kingdom of England.

(53) Elfred, the eight son of King Ethelred, and Elfred the eight son.
his second by Queen Emme his second wife, was conveyed into Normandy for
fear of King Conute, with his eldest brother Edward, and with him returned
into England to see his mother, then being at Winchester, in the second year
of King Harrald surnamed Harefoote; by whose practice he was trained toward
London, apprehended by the way at Guilford in Surrey, deprived of his
eie-sight, and committed prisoner to the Monastery of Elie: his Normans that
came with him most cruelly murdered, and he himself soon after deceasing,
was buried in the Church of the said Monastery.

EDMUND SVRNAMED IRONSIDE Edmund.
THE THIRTY THREE MONARCH Monarch 33
OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS WARS, ACTS, REIGN, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XLV.


EDmund, the third son of King Ethelred, and the eldest living at his Fathers
An. D. 1016.
death, succeeded him both in his dominions, and in his troubled estate against
the Danes; entering his government in the month of April, and crowned at
Kingston upon Thamesis, by Liuingus Archbishop of Canterbury, the year of man's
salvation 1016. Notwithstanding, a great part of the English, considering the
puissance of the Danes, both feared and favored Canut, especially, a great
part of the Clergy, who at Southampton ordained him their King, swearing to him
the fealty of true subjection; but the Londoners stood most firm to Prince
Edmund, and were principal Polycr. lib. 6. (...). ^7.
Actors for his election.

(2) In revenge whereof Canutus who had besieged the City before the death of
King Ethelred, caused his ships now to be towed, and drawn up the Henry
Hunting. Simon Dun.
Thamesis unto the west side of the bridge, and from the river with a deep and
large Trench encompassed the City, shutting up all entrance or egresse of any:
but the Citizens manfully stood in resistance, whereto the coming of their new
King for their succor, did not a little encourage them, and daunted the Danes,
who now thought it best to break up their siege and be gone: and the rather
(says the Author of Encomium Emmae) for that King Edmund sent Canute a
peremptory challenge of single combat, which he neither accepted, nor Proffer
of single combat.
yet stayed the siege to try his chance; but waying his anchors sailed along
the Coast to the I Will of Sheepie, where he wintred with his Navy and men.

(3) But loath to lose opportunity, when time served for war; on the sudden
he assailed the west of England, and brought much of those parts under his
command: to meet whom the restless Ironside prepared, and with such small
power as his leisure would admit to leauie, he hasted into Dorsetshire, where
Cannut was forwarding his own fortunes, and at Penham near Gillingham, each
met other An. D. 1016. In the Rogation (...).
in the field, wherein a sore battle was fought, and bloody to the Danes,
where many of them were put to the sword, and the rest to flight.

(4) Canute immediately took into Winchester, to secure himself from danger,
and the rest escaped toward Salisbury, and there begirt the City with a
Polydor.
strait siege. King Edmund as ready to save, as they to destroy, made presently
thitherward with his small and ouertired company; whom Canut, waiting for
advantage, followed with a great host, and in Worcestershire, at a place called
Sherostan, in the sight of his enemy pitched his battle. To the aid of
Edmund came many of the English, so that his Army was greatly increased, and
their courages inhaunsed, which made the Danish soldiers somewhat to droope.

(5) Notwithstanding, upon the twentieth of June, 1016. their battles joined,
and with equal fortune continued all the day, until the night constrained
them to part. Simon Dun. Matt. West.


(6) But their blood not cold, the next day they buckled together again with
no less courage then before, till at length the Danes were going down, and the
English in great forwardnes of victory: which when the Traitor Edrik
perceived, he cut off the head of a soldier, whose name was Osmearus, like
unto King Edmund both in hair and countenance, and shaking his bloody sword
with the halfe-gasping Will. Malmsbury. Edrick^ (...).
head, cried unto the host of the English: Fly ye wretches, fly, and get
away, for your King is slain, behold here is his head, therefore seek now to
save your own lives.

(7) But Edmund having present notice of this treacherous stratageme, and
seeing his men ready to give over the fight, hasted himself where he might be
best seen, encouraging his Army to stand to it like true Englishmen, and
posting from rank to rank, both performed the parts of a wise General, and
underwent the dangers of the meanest soldier: his men seeing his presence, and
the apparent treachery of Duke Edrik, bent their bows against the traitor, and
had shot him to death, had he not presently avoided to the enemy: but the night
approaching, parted again the battle of this second day: Duke Edrik excusing
his fact, as being merely mistaken in the countenance of the man, and
thirsting to save the blood of the English; was taken again into favor, (...).
and bare himself outwardly fair for his Country.

(8) The third day appearing, both the Armies prepared for battle, but yet
stood still without any attempt, only refreshing their wearied, and almost
tired bodies, and burying the dead slain in the two days fights before.

(9) The night following, Canutus in great silence brake up his Camp, and
marched very fast toward London,, against whose Citizens he carried Canut
marches to London.
great spleen, and most earnestly desired the conquest of the City, which in
a sort was still besieged by the Danish ships.

(10) The Sentinels the next morning certified King Edmund (who was addressing
himself for the battle) of the sudden departure of his enemies, whereupon
he as ready to prevent their designs, followed them by tract even unto
London: where with small ado, he removed their siege, and entered the City in
manner of triumph. The Danes Dislodged by Edmund.
thus discomfited, great hope was conceived, that these fair proceedings would
have a prosperous end.

(11) Edmund, therefore following the advantage of their discouragements, two
days after at Brentford bad them battle, and that with their great
overthrow; notwithstanding, in passing the Thamesis at the same place, he lost
many of his men, who were drowned before they could re^ouer the shore: upon
which loss the Traitor Edrike played, who erst had much feared the downfall
of the Danes. For hereupon he persuaded his brother in law King Edmund to come
to truce with Canute, which Edrik^ wicked counsel.
as he confidently affirmed, should be to the great benefit and contentment of
Edmund: Canute himself so plotting it, that by his means he might continue
his hopes, and bring his enemy into his Henry Hunt.
danger.

(12) The affairs thus standing, King Edmund returned into the West, and
Canute with spoils unto his ships that were in Medyway, not far from
Rochester, where he a while lay still to learn what Edmund meant to do; who
contrariwise loving Edmunds preparations.
nothing less then to linger his businesses, made preparation against those
truce breakers that had wasted the Country in their return, and with a great
Army entered Kent, where he pitched down his tents near unto Oteford.

Canut, who had prepared himself in most warlike array to meet his approach,
began the battle in a furious manner, which continued very bloody for
four hours space, until the foot of his vaward began to shrink, which
when he perceived, he drew his horsemen for their aid; but whilst the one
gave hastily back, and the other made Polyd^. Fabian. Ran. Higd. Mat.
Westminster. Henry Hunt. Will. Malms.
as slowly forward, the array of the whole army was broken, and the Danes
slain on all hands: for it is reported that Canute lost four thousand five
hundred men, and King Edmund only six hundred; the rest of these Danes
trusting to their legs: whom if Edmund had pursued in chase, it is thought,
that day had ended the wars betwixt those two Nations for ever: but Destiny,
that would have the Saxons down, who had raised themselves by the falls of the
Britains, made Edrik her instrument, and mall of the English, who kept King
Edmunds hasty foot from following his enemies, by guilefull urging the danger
of ambush, and the ouer-wearied bodies of his soldiers, so that Canute thereby
had leisure in safety to pass over into Essex.

(13) Where beginning again, with the increase of his power to despoile all the
Country before him, A battle between Edmund and Canute.
brought fear to the inhabitants, and to himself submission of many English.
King Edmund therefore made preparation thitherward, and at Ashdone three miles
from Saffron-Walden, gave battle to Canute, wherein a bloody slaughter
ensued, though a while with equal chance of foil or of victory, until lastly
the Danes began to give back, which when the euer-traiterous Edrik
perceived, he went with his strength, unto their side, and maintained their
battle, which otherwise was at point to be lost, whereby the Danes regained
the day, and the betrayed English, the overthrow. There died of Edmunds
Nobility, Duke Alfred, Duke Goodwin, Duke Athelward, Duke Athelwin, and Earl
Vrchell, Will. Malmsb. Simon Dun. Ran. Higden.
with Cad^th Bishop of Lincoln, and Wols^y Abbot of Ramsey, besides other of
the Clergy that were come thither to pray for the preservation of the King and
his Army. The remembrance of which field is retained unto this day, by certain
small hills there remaining, whence have been dug the bones of men,
Armor, and the water-chaines of horse-bridles.

(14) King Edmund thus traitorously forced to retire from the field, on foot
marched unto Gloucester with a very small Army, leaving Canut ouer-swollen
Edmund put to retire.
in conceit for this his great victory, unto whom then the Londoners
submitted, and so did London yields to Canute.
many other great towns of Name; after which he followed Edmund into the
West; who now like a Tygar robbed of her Whelps, seeking the revenge of his
lost day, gathered a most puissant Army, meaning to try the uttermost chance
of Fate, or Battle. Their hosts meet at Dearhurst near unto the river
Seuerne, where they Mat. Westminster. Polydor.
were resoluedly bent to establish the ones title with the others downfall;
and now being ready to join, a certain Captain of uncertain name, stepped
forth (as is reported) betwixt the two Armies, and uttered in effect this
speech.

(15) Many battles have been fought, and too much blood already spilt for
the soueraignitie The advice of a Captain for single combat.
of this Land, betwixt these two fierce Nations, and the valors of the
Generals, Captains and Soldiers sufficiently tried; wherein even fortune her
self seems to have been conquered; for if one Battle were won, it was
not long kept, neither the loser so weakened, but that he had both courage and
power to win the next: what is the mark then that you aim at? is it honor
and fame? Titles indeed which accompany war; but neither long enjoyed, nor much
attained unto by the common Soldiers, by whose valors and blood it is for the
most part won. Let him therefore that would wear the Diadem, bear the
hazard himself, without the confusion of so many men, and either try the
fortune of a single combat, who shall command, and who obey, or divide betwixt
them the Kingdom, which may suffice two, that has maintained seven.

(16) Some affirm that this speech was Duke Edriks; but I hardly believe so
good a motion Matthew. West.
should proceed from so bad a man; by whom so ever uttered, it was acceptably
received by Edmund and Canut, who thereupon in sight of their Armies, entered
into a small Island, embraced about with the arms of Seuern, called Alney,
adjoining unto the City Gloucester, where those princes in complete Armor at
first assailed each other most Edmund and Canute at single fight.
dangerously on horseback, and after as valiantly on foot. The Ironside was
strong, and fought for his Kingdom; the Dane not so tall, but every way as
stout, fought for his honor, and so the combat continued with an absolute
resolution, till at length Canute having received a dangerous wound and seeing
himself ouermatched in strength, wished Mat. Westminster.
a comprimise, and thus spoke to Edmund with a loud voice.

What necessity should thus move us most valiant Prince, that for the obtaining
of a Title, we should (...) ^o (...).
thus endanger our lives? better it were to lay malice and Armor aside, and to
condescend to a loving agreement: let us therefore now become sworn brothers,
and divide the Kingdom betwixt us, and in such league of amity, that each of
us may use the others part as his own; so shall this land be peaceably
governed, and we jointly assistant to each others necessity.

Whereupon they both cast down their swords, embracing as friends with the
great joy and shouting of both their Armies, who stood before doubtfully
wavering betwixt hope and fear, and looking for their own fortunes, according
to the success of their Champions.

Thus was the Kingdom divided betwixt those two Princes; Edmund enjoying that
part that lay The Kingdom parted between them.
coasted upon France, and Canute entering upon the rest.

(17) Thus then the Saxon Monarchy spent to the last period, and their
tottering crown fast grasped with a hard Danish hand, was suddainelyy torn
from the Ironssides helmet, by his complotted and hastened death. For Duke
Edrick a very compound of treasons, glutted with the favors of both these
Kings, to scrue himself deeper into Canut his conceit, contrived the end of
renowned Edmund: who being retired to a place for natures necessity, was Edmund
murdered.
thrust from under the draught into his body with a sharp spear; which done,
the treacherous Edrick A Spit, says Higden.
cutting off his Sovereigns head, presented it to Canut with these fawning
salutations. All hail, thou now sole-Monarch of England; for, here behold the
head of thy Copartner, which for thy sake I have adventured to cut off.

Canut, though ambitious enough of soueraignety, (...) punishes the trai^
yet of princely disposition, abashed, and sore grieved at so unworthy and
disloiall an attempt, replied, and vowed, that in reward of that service, the
bringers own head should be advanced above all the peers of his kingdom.
Which high honor whiles this prodigious Will. Malmsbury.
wretch greedily expected, (and indeed for a time, says Malmesbury, he found
some show of favor with the King:) soon after, by the Kings command, his
head bad his shoulders farewell, and was placed upon the highest Gate to
ouerlooke London.

(18) The traitorous death of this worthy Prince, Old Man^st. Fabian. Ran.
Higden.
as some affirm, was acted at Oxford; yet the Author that wrote Encomium
Emmae, and lived the same time, blancheth the matter, saying that he died of a
natural death in London: God minding his own doctrine, that a Kingdom
divided in it self, cannot long stand, and pitying the English, took away
Edmund, lest if the Kings had continued long together, they should both have
lived in danger, and the Realm in continual trouble.

That he died in London, Simon the Monk of Simon D^el. Marian. Scotus. Ed^ds
reign. Polychr.
Durham agrees, and says further, it chanced about the Feast of S. Andrew:
and Marianus is of the same opinion, being the year of Christ, 1016.
Whenever, or howsoever, his Reign was but seven months, and his body
buried at Glastenbury; near unto his Grandfather King Edgar.

(19) He was of personage tall, for courage, hardy, The feature of Edm^nd.
strong of limbs, and well could endure the travels of war, insomuch that
some deem the surname Ironside, given him only upon that occasion^. With him
fell the glory of the English, and the aged body of their sore bruised Monarchy
seemed to be buried with him in the same Sepulcher.

His Wife.
(20) Algith, the wife of King Edmund, was the widow of Sigeferth, the son of
E^grin a Danish Algi^.
Nobleman of Northumberland; which Sigeferth, with his brother Morcar, was
murdered at Oxford by the treason of the neuer-faithfull Edrick: and this Lady
being of great beauty, and noble parentage after the death of her husband, and
the seizure of his lands, was by King Ethelred, committed in charge to the
Monastery of Malmesbury, where Edmund seeing her, grew in great love, and there
married her against the liking of his father, in Anno 1015.

His Issue.
(21) Edward the eldest son of King Edmund, and Queen Algith his wife, was
surnamed the Outlaw, because Edward the outlaw.
he lived out of England in Hungary as a banished man, through the reign of
C^t, and of his sons the Danes. But when his uncle King Edward the Confessor,
had obtained the English crown, he was by him recalled, and most honorably in
his Court enterained, till lastly, he was taken away by death in the City of
London, the year of Christ, 1057. He married Agatha sister to Queen Sophia,
wife to Solomon King of Hungary, and His wife.
daughter to the Emperor Henry the second; by whom he had Edgar, surnamed
Etheling, confirmed heir apparent by Edward Confessor, his great Uncle; which
title notwithstanding, proceeded no further, for that he was deprived thereof
by Harold his Protector.

The daughters of this Edward, as after shall be said, were Margaret and
Christian, the younger of which became a valed Nun at Ramsey in Hampshire,
His daughters.
where she in that devotion spent her life, and was there interred.

Margaret the elder, and afterward sole heir unto the Saxon Monarchy, married
Malcolme the third of that name, King of Scotland, and commonly called Canmore:
from which princely bed in a lineall descent, our high and mighty Monarch, King
JAMES the first, does in his most royal person unite the Britains, Saxons,
English, Normans, and Scottish imperial Crowns in one.

(22) Edmund, the second and youngest son of King Edmund, and of Queen Algith
his wife, after his fathers decease being a Child, was with his brothe Edmund.
Edward, sent by Canute to Olaue King of Swedon his half brother, to the
intent, that he by murder should make them both away: but this King taking
pity on the innocent Childrens estate, sent them to Solomon King of Hungary,
to the intent to have them saved, where they were received with great favor
and honor: and Matthew of Westminster reports, that this Prince married the
daughter of the same King; and other Writers of these times, that he died Mat.
Westminster
in the same Country without any issue of his body.

(23) These two sons of the Ironside thus posted away, and the crown already
set upon the Danes head, had not the means of themselves to displace it, nor
the English, hearts to assist them to their right: so that they rather secured
themselves from violent deaths in this their exile, then made claim to that
which was unrecoverable; and left the Danes quietly to possess the land, which
so long they had molested with their sturdy Arms.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE ORIGINAL OF THE DANES, THEIR MANNERS, RELIGION, AND INVASIONS OF ENGLAND,
THE REIGNS OF THEIR KINGS HERE, UNTIL THE CROWN REVERTED AGAIN TO THE
SAXONS; WORN BY KING EDWARD THE CONFESSOR, AND AFTER HIM BY HAROLD THE LAST
KING OF THEIR RACE.
CHAPTER I.
THe Spirit of God in his sacred writings, to show his all-commanding power
over Kingdoms and Nations, compares the transmigrations of people from
country to country, unto the transfusion of wine from vessel to vessel: and
those that are at Ier. 48. (...).
rest with sin, to the settling upon their lees, as Moab did, against whom he
cursed that hand that was negligent in his work of revenge, and the sword that
was not sheathed in their blood. Even so the sins of the Saxons grown now to
the full, and their dregs as it were suncke unto the bottom, they were emptied
by the Danes from their own vessels, and their bottles broken that had vented
their red and bloody wines: in lieu whereof, the Lord then gave Esaias 51. 17.
them the cup of his wrath, whose dregs he had formerly (by their own hands)
wrung out upon other nations.

(2) For these Saxons that had enlarged their kingdoms by the blood of the
Britains, and built their nests high upon the Cedars of others, (as the
Prophet speaks) committed an evil covetousness (...). 2.
unto their own habitations, and were stricken by the same measure that they
had measured unto others. When as the Danes often attempting the lands
invasion; and the subversion of the English estate, made way with their swords
through all the Provinces in the realm; and lastly advanced the crown upon
their own helmets; which whiles it so stood, was worn with great honor,
especially of Canutus the first and their greatest.

(3) As touching this Nations original, and first place of residing, seeing
themselves know nothing at all, we cannot determine, but supposing them with
Franciscus Irenicus, to be a branch of the ancient Germans, and knowing them by
the testimonies of al others, to inhabite^ in the same Country among them, we
need not to doubt, but that their conditions and customs were much alike. Of
the former, what we have observed, is already set down, where we spoke of our
Saxons; and now of these later, what is supposed for truth shall be produced.

(4) These Danes so often mentioned by our historians, And. (...).
for the great afflicters of the English state and peace, were a people
descended from the Scythians, Dudo. S. Quint.
as Andrew Velley a learned Danish Writer reports: but Dudo of S. Quintin (an
ancient Author) will have them to come from Scandia, an Island situated
northward, not far from the continent of Denmark: which his opinion seems
unto some to be strengthened by Ptolemie the Alexandrian, who in his Geography
places the people Da^ciones (the supposed Ptol. Geograp. where some read (...).
Ancestors of those Danes) in this Island Scandia, at such time as himself
wrote, which was in the reign of Hadrian the Emperor, and about the year of
Christ's nativity 133. But wheresoever the root had beginning, the branches did
far spread themselves into the upper Germany, and parts of Norway, and
Sweyden, whose fair fruit more particularly filled that promontory, which
tongue-like lies into the Ocean on the north, being anciently called of the
learned, Cimbrica Chersonessus, where, (as Tacitus Tacit. (...). (...).
says) was the uttermost end of Nature, and of the world; a strange conceit
indeed; and yet more strange was their opinion, who were persuaded that the
sound and noise of the Sun was there heard at his daily rising and setting
in those seas. But from more warrantable witnesses it is reported, that this
was the very place which the Iutes and Angles abandoned, when they removed
their Colonies for Britain.

(5) In this place then the Danes laid first the foundation of their Kingdom;
which, from the word Mars, signifying not a limit, but a region, was named
Den-marc. But touching the former part of that compounded (...).
name, the truth and original occasion is not so soon found out: for the
searching eye of truth has long since seen into the received fable of Damarc
their first King, and Giant-like son of Humblus; though Verstegan of late
holds it more certain in the search of originals, to follow the grounded
opinion Verstegan. Ant. cap. 6.
that ancient Tradition has held, then at random to seek them elsewhere: as
these Danes (says he) from Dan, and the Britains from Brute; which truly for
truth I hold much alike, and will herein make doubt as many more of riper
judgment before me have done.

(6) For Goropius Becanus deduceth the name Dane from Da-hen, signifying a
Hen, or rather (as some will) a fighting Cock; Iunius, from Den, signifying
Firre-trees, which do there abound. Andrew Velley from a people in Scythia
named Dahae, of whom Josephus makes mention in his eighteenth Josephus Antiq.
lib. 18. cap. 6.
book, and places them by the Sacae.

Ethelward our English historian will have them named from the fair City
Donia. And Jonas Iacobus Venusinus, a diligent searcher of Antiquites, out of
Pomponius Mela, finds the names of certain Jonas Jacob.
Bays, opening into those parts, which now the Danes inhabit, to have been
ancientlie written CDAN and CDANONVM; which Orthographie and Pronuntiation to
the Latins was both harsh and hard, and therefore they added a vowell, and
wrote it CODANVM and CODANONIA, whereof (it may be thought) these people given
much to piracies, were known and called by that name, as breaking out of those
Codanian seas. Some others from Ptolomie have thought, that from his Daeuciones
placed in Scandia, and corruptly so Cambd. Brit.
written for Danciones; the name of these Danes has been derived; whereto the
neerenesse of the place induces much.

(7) For Nations Originals may well be compared unto a spring, whose current
surcharged with continual supply of more, first fills the near Channels;
which done, they pass further, and at length are (oftentimes) divided into
many and great streams: and even so these Danes, (says Dudo of S. Quintins)
after they had in heat, and lascivious Dudo.
lust engendered an innumerable offspring, swarmed out of Scandia like bees out
of their hiues, and that both on diverse occasions, and in very barbarous
manner; for grown to ripeness of years, and falling at strife with their
Fathers and Grand-sires, yea, and most commonly, among themselves for lands and
liuely-hood, necessity compelled them to disburden the land thus ouerflowed,
for the better maintenance of the residue, and to banish by lot (after their
ancient custom) a multitude of their youth, that might conquer by their
swords, in foreign Realms, places to live in.

These then thrust out of their own, fell upon other lands with no less
danger then the falling of a sword out of the sheath, or rather, as the
breaking in of a tempestuous sea upon the neighboring grounds, sore
distressing their neighbor nations, and among them England not the least, as
shall be said.

(8) And yet their name was not much notified to the world before the reign of
Justinian the Emperor, Cambd. Britan.
about the year of man's salvation, 570, but then rouing upon the coasts of
England, and France; in exercising Piracies, were noted by writers by the name
Wiccingi, for that Wiccinga in the Saxon tongue, as Alfricus witnesses does
signify a Pirate; they were also called Pagani, for that they were not
Christians; but by the English Deniscan, and also Heathon-mon, as being
Ethnicks.

(9) The manner of their Religion, or rather superstition and Idolatry, was
much like unto the other The Religion of the Danes.
Germans and Saxons, whose principal God and National reputed-Patron, was
Thur, unto whom the fourth day of the week for his service was assigned,
whereof as yet it bears his name Thursday; who in his robes was set upon a
sumptuous bed, the Canopie whereof was bespangled with stars of gold; unto
him they performed their chief devotions, Verstegan.
and ascribed all their fortunes in their affairs; as the foresaid Dudo does
more particularly relate. They (says he) sacrificed unto Thur, whom they
worshipped in old time as their Lord, for whom they killed not Dudo.
many sheep, oxen, or other cattle, but offered unto him men's blood, thinking
that to be the most precious oblation of all others; whom, when the Priest by
casting of lots had destinated to death, they were all at once deadly smitten
upon the head with oxeyokes; and every one thus chosen by lot, having at one
stroke his brains dashed out, was laid along on the ground, and there with a
narrow prying was sought out the Fibra, or vein of the heart on the left side,
whence drawing the blood, as their custom was, and therewith besmearing the
heads of their dearest friends, forthwith they hoise sails, thinking their
Gods well pleased with such sacrifices, and fore-deeming happy success to
their intended voyage.

(10) Ditmarus the Bishop (somewhat ancienter then Dudo) records another
detestable superstition Cambd. Brit.
used by the Danes to purchase the favor of their Gods. Because (says he) I
have heard wonderful reports of the ancient sacrifices which the Danes and
Normans used, I will not let them pass untouched. In those parts there is a
place, and the chief it is of that Kingdom, called Lederum, in a Province
named Selon, where every ninth year, in the month of January, after the time
in which we celebrate the Nativity of our Lord, they all assemble together, and
there they kill and sacrifice unto their Gods ninety and nine men, and as many
horses, with dogs, and also cocks, in stead of hawks, assuring themselves that
hereby their Gods are fully pleased and pacified. And thus much may serve for a
taste and view of their customs, names and originals.

THE DANES FIRST ATTEMPTS AGAINST ENGLAND. CHAPTER II.
THough many were the Piracies of the Danes on An. Do. 787.
the coasts of France and this our Island in former times; yet their arrival
here, which gave first breath to their ensuing conquests, was not till the
wane of the Saxon Monarchy, about the year of Christ's Incarnation seven
hundred eighty seven, in the reign of Brightrik King of the West Saxons: in
whose dominions, after some proffer at Portland, they first came to land at
Teigne-mouth in Deuon-shire; being Cambden in Dan^. John Stow. Lambert in
Per^. mentions their Landing at Ty^mouth in the North, the neernesse of the
name (it seems) deceived him.
sent then with three Ships only, to epsy the wealth of this Country, the
forces of the Inhabitants, the commodities of the Havens, and advantage of
arrival for a greater power, which was to follow them. The Kings Lieuetenant
and Prefect for that place, understanding of their landing, went himself to
demand the reason thereof; and attempting to lay hands on some to carry them
to the Kings presence, he was there slain; which they took as a fortunate
presage of the victories wherewith they afterward ouerranne this Kingdom;
though for the present the inhabitants enraged with the loss of their Chief,
addressing them in great numbers to revenge, forced some to lose their lives by
the sword, the rest to save them by flight to their ships.

(2) Notwithstanding their former preparations, they were contented to defer
their return till An. Do. 800.
the days of King Eghert; whose reign (as elsewhere See the seventh Book
chap. 31.
we have touched) they disquieted with three several invasions; the first in
the North,, the second in Wales, the last in Kent; in all which, the King
though with many losses, and hazards of his own person, yet with great
resolutions persisted, till he had disburdened his land of so dangerous
guests. But those Flesh-flies having once tasted the sweet, though often beaten
off, would not long be kept away, (...). l. 5. c. 1
but could easily take, or make occasions of fresh attempts; insomuch that
after their first footing they continued here their cruelties, rapine and
spoil the space of two hundred and eighteen years, never Fabian. cap. 158.
in termitting, till they had got the garland upon their own heads. The way
whereunto was made upon this ensuing occasion.

(3) Osbright a Northumbrian Viceroy, deputed by the West Saxons; by chance, as
he followed his disport in Hunting, came to the house of a Noble man, named
Beorn-Bocador, whose Lady of passing feature (in his absence) gave him
honorable entertainment, and entreated both himself and train, to repose
themselves there a while, after their wearisome delights. The Viceroy already
ensnared with her beauty, accepted her courteous offer, not so much to taste her
meats, as to surfeite his eyes with her rare beauty, and lasciuiously to dote
in his own affections. The dinner ended, and all ready to depart, as though
some weighty matters were to be handled, he commanded an auoidance from the
Presence, and taking the Lady into a withdrawing Chamber, under pretense of
secret conference, greatly tending to the advancement of her Lord and self,
most vnnobly, being not able to prevail by smooth persuasions, did by force
violate her constant chastity. Which dishonor thus received, and her mind
distracted like to Thamars, at her husbands return, 2. Sam. 13. 1^.
all ashamed to behold his face whose bed had so been wronged, with floods of
tears she thus set open the sluices of her passions.

(4) Had thy fortunes accorded to thine own desert, or thy choice proceeded as
by vow was obliged, then had no stain of blemish touched thine honor, nor
cause of suspicion once approached thy thought: or had my self been my self,
these blushing cheeks had not invited thy sharp piercing eye to look into my
guilty and defiled breast, which now thou may see disfurnished of honor, and
the closet of pure chastity broken up; only the heart and soul is clean, yet
fears the taineture of this polluted caske, and would have passage (by thy
revenging hand) from this loathsome prison and filthy truncke. I must confess
our sex is weak, and accompanied with many faults, yet none excusable, how
small soever; much less the greatest, which shame does follow, and inward
guilt continually attends; yours, is created more inviolable and firm, both
against allurements and enforcements: by whose constancy as our flexible
weakness is guarded, so our true honors by your just Arms should be
protected. O Beorn, Beorn, (for husband I dare not call thee) revenge therefore
my wrongs, that am now made thy shame and scandale of my sex, upon that
monster, nay Devil, Osbright, (O that very name corcorrupts my breath, and I
want words to deplore my grief) who has no law but his lust, nor measure of
his actions but his power, nor privilege for his loathsome life, but his
greatness, whiles we with a selfe-feare, and servile flattery mask our
baseness with crouching obedience, and bear the wrongs of his most vile
adulteries. Thou yet art free from such dejected and degenerate thoughts, nor
have thou smoothed him in his wicked and euer-working vices: be still thy self
then, and truly Noble as thou art. It may be for his place thou owe^t him
respect; but what? therewith the loss of honor? thine affection, but not thy
bed; thy Love but not thy beloved, yet have thou lost at once all these, and he
thy only bereauer: thou wast my stay whilst I stayed by thee; and now being
down, revenge my fall: the instinct of nature does pity our weakness, the
law of Nations does maintain our honor, and the sword of Knighthood is sworn
by to be unsheathed for our just defense; much more the link of wedlock
claims it, which has locked two hearts in one; but alas, that ward is broken,
and I am thy shame, who might have been thine honor. Revenge thy self
therefore both on him and me, else shall this hand let out the Ghost that
shall still attend thee with acclamations, till thou revenge my stained blood.

(5) Beorn unwonted thus to be welcomed, much amazed at his wives maladies,
with gentle words drew from her the particulars of her inward grief, who
revealed (as well as shame, and tears, and sobs, would suffer) the manner of
the deed, still urging revenge for the wrong. Beorn touched thus to the quick,
to pacify his distressed wife, did not a little dissemble his wrath, and
excusing the fact, with the power of a Prince that might command, and her own
weak nesse unable to resist the strength of a man: Commended much her love and
constancy; and alleging his wrongs to be equal with hers, if not greater,
in regard of their sex, willed her to set her string to his tune till sit
opportunity would serve to strike: but she distasting that sweet consort,
wrested her passion into so high a strain, that nothing couldbe heard but
revenge and blood.

(6) Beorn thus instigated by the continual cries of his wife, whose rape
already of it self had given sufficient cause of wrath: first consulting with
his nearest friends, was offered their assistance against that wicked and
libidinous Prince, and then repairing to his Court, in presence of them all,
made known his insufferable wrongs, and with utter defiance departed,
threatening his death.

This Nobleman in his youth had been brought up in Denmark, and is reported to
have been allied into the Danish royal blood. He therefore accounted this
nation the surest unto himself, and the fittest in will and power to enter his
quarrel: so coming to Goderick King of that Country, made his case known,
instantly desiring his aid against the villainy of Osbright.

Godericke glad to have some quarrel to enter Britain, levied an Army with
all speed, and preparation made for all things necessary, sends forth Inguar
and Hubba two brethren to command in chief, over an innumerable multitude of
his Danes: which two he thought at this time the fittest for the attempt, not
only for their well approved resolution and valor, but also for that he knew
them to be, on particular motives (which usually more affect then does a
common cause) implacably enraged against the English, on an occasion
unfortunately happening, but most lamentably pursued: which it will not be
amiss here to annexe.

(7) A certain Danish Nobleman of the royal lineage named That is
Leather-brichs.
Lothbroke, Father to this Inguar and Flores historiarum
Hubba, being upon the shore, his Hawke in flying, the game fell into the Sea,
which to recover, he entered a little Schiffe or Cock-boat, nothing foresecing
the danger that immediately did ensue: for a sudden tempest arising, carried
the boat into the deep, and drove him upon the coast of Norffolke, where he
came to land at the Port called Rodham, and was no sooner seen, but he was
taken for a spy; and presently sent to Edmand, King then of that province, who
in his answers sufficiently cleared that suspicion, when also declaring his
birth and misfortune, he was honorably entertained in the Court of the
East Angles: whom the King much esteemed for his other good parts; but for his
dexterity and expertnesse in hawking, held him in a special regard; insomuch
that the Kings Falconer named Bericke, conceived both such secret envy and
deadly hatred thereat, that hauiug him alone in a wood, he cowardly murdered
him, and hid his dead body in a Bush.

(8) Lothbroke in the Kings presence and Court was soon mist and diligent
inquisition made could not be found until his Spaniell, which would not
forsake his dead Masters corpse, came fawninglie Murder will out.
unto the King, as seeming to beg revenge on so bloody an Act, which he did
more then once, and at length being observed, and followed by the trace, the
dead body was found; and Bericke convicted for the murder, his judgment was
to be put into Lothbrokes boat, and that without either tackle or Oar, as he
therein arrived, and so left to the'seas mercy to be saved by destiny, or
swallowed up by just desert.

But behold the event; the Boat returned to the same place, and upon the same
coast arrived from whence it had been driven, even in Denmark, where Bericke
being known, and hands laid on hm, to free himself from the punishment of his
butcherly fact, he added treason to murder, laying it to the charge of
innocent King Edmund.

(9) In revenge whereof, and likewise in Godericks quarrel, Inguar and Hubba,
sons to the murdered Prince, being now made Generals of the Army of the Danes,
first arriving at Holdernesse, burnt up the Country, and without mercy
massacred all before them, sparing neither sex, nor calling, nor age; and
surprising York, which Osbright had taken for his refuge, there slew that
lustful Prince with all his forces, and possessed that City; and afterward
bursting into Norfolk, sent this message unto King Edmund. That Inguar the
most victorious Prince, dread both by sea and land, having subdued diverse
Countries unto his subjection, and now arrived in those parts where he meant
to winter, charged Edmund to divide with him his riches, and to become his
vassaile and servant.

The King astonished at this strange and unexpected Embassage, consulted with his
Council, where one of his Bishops (then his Secretary, and a principal man)
used persuasions to him to yield, for preventing greater mischief; who
notwithstanding returned this answer: Go tell your Lord, that Edmund the
Christian King, for the love of this temporal life, will not subject himself
to a Heathen and Pagan Duke. Whereupon Inguar and Hubba, with the furious Rob.
Fabian. cap. 169. Polycr. li. 5. ca. 3^. Abbas Floriacensis.
troops of their Danes, pursued the King to Thetford; and (as Fabian says) to
Framingham, others to Halesdon; where he pitying the terrible slaughter of his
people, yielded himself to their persecutions; and for that he would not deny
Christ, and his Christian faith, was bound to a tree or Stake, and with their
arrows so shot to death: whose body was afterward there buried, and thereupon
took the name of S. Edmunds-bury; as we have formerly touched in his reign,
Lib. 7. cap. 11.

(10) Whether these were the very true causes, or some other, which drew these
Danes hither, most certain it is and too lamentable experience showed, that
hither they came (by Writers account) about the year of Christ eight hundred,
and in the days of King Brightrick. Neither want there Authors who ascribe
certain predictions to have forerunne the year 800. made unfortunate by their
first attempts; fore-shewed seven years before, by showers of blood falling
from heaven, and bloody Crosses marked therewith upon the garments of men,
reported by the learned Alcuinus, who was instructor Alcuinus.
to Charles the Great, and borne in the county of York, where this wonder
happened: which himself saw and testified unto Ethelbert King of that
Province, as Malmsbury has written, and was Will. Malmsb. Roger Houed. Ran.
Higden. Rob. Fabian.
thought by Houeden, Higdon, Fabian and others, to have been sent for signs
before their bloody assaults, which began at the dayspring of the Saxons
Monarchy, when it promised a most fair ascent to their heirs succeeding, but
mounted to the highest, again declined as the setting Sun, and fell under
the clouds of their own ruins, so carried by the just revenging hand of God:
for those Saxons having by blood and war vnseated the Britains of their land
and right, by blood and war, were by these Pagan-Danes so incessantly
molested, that no place was freed from their tyranny, nor any state sure, long
to hold that, which they enjoyed, nor their lives secured from a daily
expectation of their Blood revenged with blood.
savage swords.

(11) Whose many invasions and cruel proceedings against this land and nation,
are already showed in the reigns of these Saxon Kings, who then felt their
heavy strokes in war, having nothing almost memorable otherwise, to enlarge
their fames and stories with, besides these their valors in resisting so
mighty and almost vnrepugnable an enemy. Therefore omitting to repeat such
things as in their successions are handled, we will fall nearer the time of the
wished harvest of their full Conquests: some what remembering the Reader here,
of those bloody affairs, which the English at several times felt and endured.

(12) Such was the murder of holy Edmund King of the East Angles, with Danish
arrows martyred to death as he stood bound unto a stake, euer-calling on the
name of Jesus: Of Ella and Osbright Governors of Northumberland by them
slain, and that Province for a long time after by them enioied, and made
subject to their furies: Of Burdred King of Mercia, by them expulsed, who with
his Queen Ethelswith, were forced to abandon their Kingdom, leaving it to the
possession of these Pagan intruders, and to seek their securities in foreign
Countries, where at Rome in Italy he died, and at Padua his wife, as has
been said: Of Ethelred King of the West Saxons, that in one years continuance
fought nine bloody battles against them; in the last whereof at Merton he
received his deaths wound, and this Kingdom an incurable blow: Of Elfred that
most famous and learned King of the West Saxons also, driven by them to such
distress, that he was forced to leave his Princely Court, and to remain
secret in a poor Cow-heards house unknown and disguised, in the Isle of
Ethelingsey in the County of Sommerset, and thence to adventure himself among
the Danish host, as a base Minstrell and Contemptiblemakesport, Henry Hunt.
(...). Angl. (...). 15. Rand. Hig
till he had perfectly learned their secrets, and after with his sword through
the thickest of those Enemies, made a way to his own most glorious Monarchy.

(13) To speak nothing of the desolations left in every Province, Town, and
Place, where they came, laying all leauell with the ground, as prints of their
foote-steppes where they had trodden: Their cruel and merciless dealings
toward holy and religious persons, with the ruination of Churches, and other
places for Oratorie, is most lamentable to be rehearsed or remembered: and
among many others, the fair and beautiful Monasteries of Bradney, Crowland,
John Stow. Flores bister.
Peterborow, Ely, and Coldingham, were made subject to their desolations: In
the last whereof, Lady Ebb with her chaste Nuns, to avoid their savage and
filthy pollutions, cut off their own noses and vpper-lippes, least the
bait of their beauties should prove the bane of their honors and honesty.

The most grievous tribute and exactions laid Some say forty eight thousand.
Languet says fifty.
upon the poor Inhabitants in general, and great sums of money, paid in such
afflicted and unseasonable times, imposed by the name of Dane-gilt, did from
ten thousand, arise to forty thousand pounds, yearly gathered for them in
England. Their sturdy behavior and Lord-like carriage against the English, in
all places where ever they soiourned, was with such subjection of the poor
Owners, that they abused both wife, daughter, and maid, and were of all called
the Lord-Dane, till lastly they were Lords indeed of the Land, and swaied the
Scepter at their own pleasures; which how it was attained unto, we have
before declared, and how it was worn and continued, we are now presently to
speak.

CANVTVS THE FIRST DANISH KING REIGNING INENGLAND AND THE THIRTY FOVRTH
MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, REIGN, WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER III.


THe sails of the Danes thus ouer-filled with the gales of their swelling
fortunes, An. D. 1017.
and themselves arrived at the Port of their long sought soueraignety, cast
anchor as it were at the haven of their wished desire, and prepared themselves
to a settled rest: for Canutus possessed of half the Kingdom by composition with
Edmund, now after his death seized upon the whole; and that all things (as was
pretended) Polychr. li. 6. c. 18.
might proceed with justice, and concord, he called a Counsel of the English
Nobility at London; wherein was propounded, whether, in the agreement betwixt
Edmund and him, any claim of title to the Crown, had been reserved, for King
Edmunds brethren or sons. The English that had paid a very dear rate for
their ouerbold resistance before, not daring now to buy, with too late
repentance, the wrath of this Dane, absolutely answered, No; and having learned
Fear makes flatterers.
to appease Princes with flattery, offered their swords against any such
claims, and took themselves the Oath of alleagiance unto Canutus; who being
a very wise and politic Prince, thought never the better of them for such
their doings; whose truths thus failing toward their natural Princes, could
never (he well knew) stand firm for him or his foreign posterity.

(2) But being thus cleared of all other opposites, he prepared with great
roialty for his Coronation, which was performed at London, by the hands of
Lyuingus surnamed Elstane, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year of Christ
Jesus 1017. being the second King of Denmarks of that Name, the first of
England, and the thirty fourth Monarch of this Land. His first designs for the
establishment of the Crown to Canutus ear and policies to (...) his Crown.
himself and Danish issue, was a care to prevent others near unto the claim,
and therefore, taking counsel with Edrike, banished Edwin, who for his
melancholy and regardlesse deportment, was commonly called, the King of
Charles, son of King Ethelred, and brother of Edmund; notwithstanding, he was
guilefully recalled, and treacherously murdered by his own men, whose body
they buried at Tauestocke in Deuon-shire.

(3) One cloud thus ouer-blowne, two others appeared, far more dangerous in
Canutus sight; namely Edward and Edmund the sons of the Iron-side, whom
albeit their yongue years might have freed from suspicion of conspiracies, and
their gentle dispositions from envying his glory, yet the bright rays of a
Diadem so dazeled his ielous eye, that ever he saw (to his own seeming) the
reflection thereof shine from their faces: but ashamed (says Higden) to lay
hand on them himself, sent them to his half brother of Sweden, to be made
away, as we have said. In Book 7. cap. 44. sect. 20.
the doubtful times between Edmund and Canute, when the scale of war was
held of either hands alike, Queen Emma had sent Edward, and Alfred (her Will.
Malms. Henry Hunt. (...). Fabian.
sons by King Ethelred) unto her brother Duke Richard of Normandy; whereby
(we see) the Land was emptied of the English blood Royal, and the Crown left
for the Dane without competition.

(4) Who now seeking to hold fast the Scepter thus grasped, sought the alliance
of the Norman Duke Canutus marries Queen Emma.
by the espousing of his sister, fair Emma; a suite sounding but harshely in
the ears of the English, yea and most of all unto her self, as deeming the
link of love very slender, that might be broken by the same hand, which was
the death of her Husband: Notwithstanding, after good deliberation, knowing him
childlesse of any lawful successor, upon covenants agreed, that the issue of
her body by him, should inherit the English Crown: the suit was granted, Emma
a very prudent Lady.
hoping also, if that failed betwixt them, to establish her other sons by
King Ethelred.

This provident respect so pleased the subjects, that it both drew the hearts
of the English unto Canutus, and their love unto Emma in a surpassing measure,
as the book penned to her praise, and written in that age, entitled Encomium
Emmae, sufficiently does show.

(5) Neither was her loving care limited only to her sons, but further
extended toward the Matthew. West.
Commonwealth, being much pestred then with his Danes, that lay lazy and idle
as drones in the hiue: who at her instigations were sent into Denmark; and
lest they should through discontents make any stirs either here or there, had
a largess (to buy their contentment) of fourscore and two thousand pounds.

(6) Canutus his next care for the maintenance of his own safety, and the
continuance of his new got Empire, was the establishment of good laws (which
if duly executed, are the very sinews and strongest guards of all States) to
be administered and practiced A Parliament at Oxford.
both on the English and Dane alike: wherefore calling a Parliament of his
Peers unto Oxford, there established many wholesome Acts both for the Clergy and
Laity to observe; some of which were diuulged Will. Lambert.
by the praiseworthy care of a studious Antiquarie, and a few as touching
Religion, as a relish of the rest, we think it not amiss to give the Reader a
taste of. Canutus his godly Laws.


(7) And first, for the celebration of Gods most divine service it was
ordained, that all decent ceremonies tending to the increase of reverence and
devotion, should be used, as need required.

That upon the Lords Sabbath, public Faires, Markets, Synods, Conuenticles,
Huntings, and all secular actions should not be exercised, unless some
weighty and urgent necessity required it.

That every Christian should thrice in the year address himself to the
receiving of the blessed sacrament of the Lords Supper.

That if a Minister of the Altar killed a man, or else committed any notorious
crime, he should be deprived both from his order and dignity.

That the married woman convicted for adultery should have her nose and ears
cut off.

That a widow marying within the space of twelve months after her husbands
decease should lose her iointer.

(8) These and many other were made, whereby sin was much restrained, and this
realm peaceably and justly governed. As likewise sundry other Countries were
by his godly and royal care; as in especial is recorded of a young Gentleman
of the Danish royal blood, named Odi^, whom King Canute brought over with him
into England, to be here trained up in learning, where he profited so well, as
also by his travail through France (whereby he much (...).
increased both his knowledge and experience) that he attained the surname of
Sapient, and the Philosopher, and therefore was called Odin-char, for the dear
esteem wherein all men held him. This man by his preaching in Finland, Zeland,
Scandia, and Sweuland, converted great multitudes to the faith of Christ.

(9) But in Denmark things proceeded not so well; for in the absence of
Canutus, and year of Christ's humanity An. D. 1019.
1019. the Vandals sore annoied his subjects: he therefore, in the third of
his reign, with a Will. Malmsbury.
great host of the English passed over the seas, and bad Mat. Westminster.
his enemies battle, which, as Matthew of Westminster writes, went sore
against him the first day; and preparing again for the next, Earl Goodwine,
Earl Goodwins good service to Canutus.
who was General of the English, attempted a great enterprise: for in the dead
of the night, he with his soldiers set upon the Camp of the Vandals, and
with a great slaughter of their soldiers, made the two Princes, Vlfus and
Anla^e to fly the field.

Canute ignorant of this acted enterprise had notice in the morning that the
English were fled, for that their station was left, and not a man found:
wherefore following the tract, even to the enemies camp, by streams of blood,
and dead bodies of the Vandals; Henry Hunting. (...). Fabian.
he saw the great overthrow that the English had given them, for which he ever
after held them in great estimation.

(10) Albertus Krantius, the Danish historian, reports that Olanus King of
Sweyden, having assisted Canute Alb. Krantius.
against Edmund the Ironside, and seeing himself to be neglected in the
composition betwixt them, moved such stirs in Denmark, that Canutus was
forced thither again; where by the prowess of his English he repulsed
Olanus, who lastly was slain by his own subjects.

(11) William of Malmesbury and Matthew of Westminster record, that in the year
1032. he undertook An. D. 1028. Will. malmsbury. Mat. Westminster
an expedition into Scotland, with prosperous success against Malcolme the
King thereof, with two other Princes called Melbeath and Ieohmare. But being at
length ouerburdened as it were with his own greatness, and surfeited with
glory, which sometimes he had so greedily desired (as even the greatest earthly
delights have their fulness) he resolved on a more placable course of life, and
to affect a higher and heavenly glory, which has never satiety or end. And
therefore his devotion being great unto Godward, on a zealous intent, (such a
zeal as S. Paul Romans 10. 2.
commended in the devout Israelites) he took a journey to Rome, to visit the
sepulchers of S. Peter and Paul in the fifteenth year of his reign; and thence
sent his letters to his English Bishops and Nobility, beginning thus.

(12) Canute King of all England, Denmark, Norway and Sweyden, to Ailnothus
Metropolitan, etc. Will. Malmsb.
Wherein having first set down the reason of his pilgrimage to Rome, which was
especially to honor S. Peter, as he had been taught by Wisemen, that S.
Peter had received from Christ the great power of binding and loosing, and was
also the Key-bearer of heauen-gates, for which cause (left S. Peter should not
open the same unto him when he should come thither) he held it most behouefull
for him to procure his Patronage more then all the rest of Saints; then making
relation of his honorable entertainment with the Emperor, Pope, and other
foreign Princes, shows what complaint he had made against Canutus
complains of the Pope^ extortions in England.
the excessive exactions and huge sums of money extorted by the Pope from the
English Archbishops, at such time as they received their Palles from Rome; for
redress whereof, and of other abuses, the Pope in a solemn assembly of four
Archbishops, twenty Bishops, and an innumerable multitude of Princes and
Nobles obliged himself: And thence proceeds in vowing the whole remainder of
his life and reign, His godly resolution touching his own actions*
to the only service of God, and due administration of Justice to his people;
to which end, he first gives command to his Counselors, that thence forward
Touching his Counselors.
they dare not, for whatsoever respect, to give way or conniuence to any the
least injustice in his Kingdom; and next to his Officers of Justice, that as
they tender his royal favor and their own lives, they swerue Touching his
Judges and Iustitiaries.
not from Equity in execution of their places, in respect of any man whosoever,
no not, for the enriching of the Kings own Cophers, because (says he) I hold
it not needful, that treasure should be heaped together for me, by any
unjust exactions: and so concludes Touching his Treasure.
with a strict charge to all his Bishops and Justices, upon their allegiance
both to God and himself, to take order in his absence, that Gods Church, and
his Ministers, be not defrauded of their Tithes and Touching God^ Church.
rights, whereof he vows at his return to take a most severe account.

(13) By this his great care of his own salvation, and his peoples
tranquillity, we may see the zeal of those dark days, to have been
accompanied with the works of true piety; whose carnal applications of the
spiritual texts, may well condemn these cleerer times, and days of more
brightness, wherein we know, that this Key-keeper of heaven, is no other but
Apocal. 3. 7.
the very Christ, who has the Key of David, which opens and no man
shuts, and shuts and no man opens. And that this Kings zeal might be
further seen, by his magnificke works, he began to manifest it even at
Rome, where giving many large gifts His Munificence
unto S. Peter's Church, he also made free the Saxons School from all tributes.

(14) In Essex he built the Church of Ashdon, where he had the victory
against King Edmund. In His magnificent buildings, etc.
Norfolk the Abbey of S. Benets, which Saint he greatly reverenced; and in
Suffolk with an especial devotion built and endowed the Monastery of S.
Edmund, which Saint he most dreadly feared: for it is reported, that the
seeming-ghost of Edmund often affrighted him; for which cause, as also to
expiate Iosselin. de Br^klond.
the sins of his father, who had done great damage to his possession, he
inuerged the same with a deep ditch, and offered up his Crown upon the
Martyrs Tomb. Most rich and royal Jewels he gave the Church of Winchester,
whereof one, is recorded to be a Cross, worth as much as the whole reuenew of
England amounted to in one year: unto Couentry he gave the Arm of S.
Augustines arm at a high rate.
S. Augustine the great Doctor; which he bought at Papia in his return from
Rome, and for which he paid an hundred talents of silver, and one of gold.

(15) The magnificent greatness of this glorious King, so ouerflowed in the
mouths of his flatterers, Canutus his flatterers.
that they extolled him, with Alexander, Cyrus, and Caesar, and to be possessed
with power, more then humane: to convict these his fawning ouerprizers, being
then at Southampton, he commanded (says Henry of Huntington) that his chair
should be set on the shore, when the sea began to flow, and then in the
presence of his many attendants; spoke Henry Hunt.
thus to that Element. Thou art part of my dominion, and the ground whereon I
sit is mine, neither was there ever any that durst disobey my command, or
breaking it, escaped unpunished; I charge thee therefore presume not into my
land, neither wet thou these robes of thy Lord: but the Mat. (...). 16. 17.
Exodus 14. 21.
Sea (which obeys only one Lord) giving no heed to his threats, kept on the
usual course of tide, first wetting his skirts; and after his thighs; when
suddenly rising to give way for the still approaching waves, he thus spoke in
the hearing of all: Let the His h^ility.
worlds inhabitants know, that vain and weak is the power of their Kings; and
that none is worthy the name of King, but he that keeps both heaven, earth and
sea in obedience, and binds them in the everlasting law of subjection. After
which time he would never suffer the Crown to be set upon his head, but
presently crowned therewith, the picture of our Savior on the Cross at
Winchester: unto such strong illusions were those godly Princes lead, by the
guides that ever made gain of their devotions.

(16) From the example of this Canutus (says Peter Pictaniensis Chancellor of
Paris) arose the custom to hang up the Armor of worthy men in Churches, Peter
Pictan.
as offerings consecrated unto Him, in whose battails they had purchased
renown, either by victory and life, or in their Countries service attained to
an honorable death. And surely, howsoever this King is taxed of ambition,
pride and vainglory, for which some have not stuck to say, that he made his
journey to Rome, rather to show his pomp and riches, then for any humble
devotion or religious intent, John Castor.
yet by many his intercurrent actions and laws of piety enacted, he may
justly be cleared of that imputation; as also by the testimony of Simon Monk
of Durham, who reports his humility to be such, Simon Dun.
that with his own hands he did help to remove the body of S. Aelphegus at
the translation of it from London unto Canterbury, whom the Danes
(notwithstanding his Archiepiscopall and sacred calling) before had martyred at
Greenwich: and by the testimony of Guido, Polydore, Lanquet, and others, he was
a Prince Polydor hist. Angl. lib (...). Lanquet.
of such temperance and justice, that no other in this West of the World was so
highly renowned, or might be compared unto him in heroical virtues, or true
humility.

(17) Saxo Crammaticus, and Albertus Krantius the Writers of the Danish
histories, deduce Canutus by a Saxo Grammaticus. Alber. Crantius.
lineall succession through the line of their Kings in this manner: He was
(say they) the son of King Swain (surnamed Tingskeg) by Sigred his wife, the
widow of Erick, by whom she had Olafe Scotconning King of Sweyden: unto which
Sweyne she bare also Ostrid a daughter, the mother of Thira, the mother
Aimundus. Bremensis.
of King Sweyne the younger. The elder Sweyne was the son of King Harold,
surnamed Blaatand, by Gonhild his Queen, who bare him also Iring King of
Northumberland, and Gonhild Queen of North Wales. The father of Harold was
King Gormo^d, whose Queen was Thira the daughter of King Ethelred, the twenty
third Monarch of England, who bare unto him the said Harold, and another Canute
both most valiant Princes; which two Gallants inuading this land, were (for
their brave resolutions) by their Grandfather proclaimed heirs apparent to all
his dominions: the credit of which relations I leave to my forenamed Authors;
but Canute (the elder brother) died very soon after, being deadly wounded in
the siege of Dublin in Ireland; Holinsh. invasion of Ireland.
where perceiving death at hand, he gave strict charge to his attendants, to
keep the same very secret till the City were taken, that so neither his own
Army should be daunted, nor the enemy encouraged by the loss of the General.
Gurmo, his aged Father, (to digress but in a word) so incredibly loved him,
that he had vowed to kill with his own hands any person whosoever that should
tell him the news of his sons death: which when Thira his mother now heard
of, she used this policy to make it known to the King her husband. She
prepared mourning apparel for him, and all other things fitting for funeral
exequies, laying aside all Regal robes, and ceremonies of princely state,
without intimating any cause of this sad solemnity; which the old King no
sooner perceived, but he lamentably cried out, woe is me, I know my son is
dead; and with excessive grief he presently died. But to return from that
Canutus, to close up the reign of this our Monarch in hand.

(18) In whom the Danish glories having ascended to the highest, began now
again to decline toward their wane by the death of this great King; who,
after he had in great glory reigned above nineteen years, deceased at
Shaftesbury in the county of Dorset the twelfth of November, the year of
Christ's Incarnation, 1035, and was buried in the Church of the old Monastery at
Winchester, which being after new built, his bones with many other English
Saxon Kings were taken up, and are preserved in guilt coffers fixed upon the
walls os the Quire in that Cathedral Church.

His Wives.
(19) Algiue, by most writers, a concubine to King Canutus, was the daughter of
a Mercian Duke named Albert. Cram^.
Elfhelme, who is said to have been Earl of Northampton; and her Mothers name
was Vlfrune, Inheritrix of the Town Hampton in Staffordshire, from her called
Vlfrun-Hampton, now Woller-hampton: This Lady Alfgiue to make Canutus more
firm to her love, her self being barren, is reported to have fained
Childbirth and to have laid in her bed the son of a Priest, whom Canute
took to be his own, and named him Swain; him afterward he created King of
Norway, which lately he had conquered from Olaffe called the Martyr. The like
policy, says Higden and others, she used in bringing forth Harold her second
son, who was (say they) the son of a Sowter; notwithstanding I think the
condition of the mother, who lived in disdain, and died in disgrace, rather
caused this report to be blazed, then any such baseness of birth in the sons.

(20) Emma, the second wife of King Canute, was the widow of King Ethelred the
Unready; and from the time of her first marriage was called in England,
Elfgiue, after the name of most of the former Queens, which had succeeded Saint
Elfgiue. She was married unto him in the month of July, and year of Christ
Jesus one thousand and seventeen, being Polychr.
the first year of his reign: whose wife she was eighteen years, and
suruiuing, kept still at Winchester, unto which Church she gave nine Manours,
according to the number of those fiery Plow-shares Ran. Higden. lib. (...). cap.
23. Will. Malmsb.
that she was forced to go upon, for her purgation, in the reign of Edward
her son, as shall be said. This Church she adorned with many goodly
vestures, and very rich Iewelles: and deceasing in this City the sixth of
March, the year of Grace one thousand fifty and two and ninth of her son
King Edwards reign, was buried in the Church of S. Swithine near unto Canutus
her husband.

His Issue.
(21) Sweyn, the eldest son of Canute by Lady Alfgiue, was borne before his
father was King of Albert. Crant.
England, and before his fathers death, was constituted King of Norway, lately
conquered from King Olafe the Martyr; where he began his Reign; in the
year of man's salvation one thousand thirty and five, being the eighteenth of
his fathers Reign in England; and after he had with dislikes ruled that
Realm, the space of five years, he was rejected of the Norwegians his
subjects, and deceasing without heir of his body, left the Kingdom to the
native heir, Magnus, the son of Olaffe, who had been wrongfully
dispossessed by Canute.

(22) Harold, the second son of King Canute and of Lady Alfgiue, was also
born before his father obtained the English Crown, and for his exceeding
swiftnes was surnamed Hare-foote: He remained with his father in England, after
he had disposed of Denmark to Hardi-canute, and Norway to Sweyne, his brethren,
expecting something in reuersion. But perceiving at his fathers death, that
England was also appointed to his brother Hardi-canute, he took the advantage
of his absence, and assumed the Soueraignety of this Kingdom to himself.

(23) Hardi-Canute, the third son of King Canute, and his first by Queen
Emma his wife, was borne about the beginning of his fathers Reign, and toward
the end of the same, was constituted King of the Danes, and designed to
succeed him after his death in the Kingdom of England: But being absent then
in Denmark, was disappointed by his brother Harold, who succeeded his father,
after whose death he also succeeded him.

(24) Gunhilda, the daughter of King Canute, and of Emma his Queen, was the
first wife of Henry the Third, Roman Emperor, son of the Emperor Will.
Malmsb. de (...). Augs. cap. ^2.
Conrad, the second of that name surnamed Salike: she was a Lady of a
surpassing beauty, which either moved her husbands mind unto jealousy, or the
ouer-lauish report thereof to breed surmize of incontinencie; for accused she
was of adultery, and to defend her cause by combat, none could be found, till
lastly her Page, brought with her from England, seeing no other would adventure
for her innocence, entered the list, himself but a youth, in regard of the
other Combatant being a Giant-like man; yet in fight at one blow, cutting the
sinews of his enemies leg, with another he feld him to the ground, where
Ran. Higden. in Polycr. lib. 6. ca. (...).
presently with his sword, he took his head from the shoulders, and so
redeemed his Ladies life. After which hard usage, the Empress Gunhilda
forsook her husbands bed, and by no means could be brought again unto the
same, but took the holy veil of a Nun in the Town of Burges in Flanders;
where she spent the rest of her life, and after her Henry Hunt. lib. 6. Marian
Scot. Rob. Fabian.
death was buried in the Collegiate Church of S. Donatian, being the principal
of that town, where her Monument remains besides the north door of the same
Church unto this day.

(25) Another Lady of the like sanctity, is reported to be the daughter of King
Canut, and the second wife of Godescalke Prince of the Vandals, by whom he had
Henry King of that Nation. They both are said to have suffered Martyrdom for
the faith of Christ; he first at the City of Lenzim, and she after at
Michelenburg, being most cruelly tortured to death with whips. This Lady upon
sundry strong inducements cannot be reputed legitimate, which moved Andrew
Velley, a Danish Writer in our time, to be therein of a diverse opinion from Adam
of Breme, and Helmoldus who lived five hundred years before him.

HAROLD, THE SECOND DANISH KING REIGNING INENGLAND, AND THE THIRTY FIFTH
MONARCH OF THE LAND, HIS REIGN, AND ACTS. CHAPTER IIII.


CANVTVS being dead, and Hardicanute his son by An. D. 1036.
Queen Emma then in Denmark; Harold his Mat. Westminster.
elder (but base brother) foreslowed not the opportunity Will. Malms.
offered; for seeing himself in his fathers life time neglected, and by will
at his death, England with that of Denmark heaped upon Hardicanut: as quick
in apprehension, as he was of footmanshippe Peter de Johan.
(whereof arose the surname Hare-foot,) made strong his side by the Londoners,
and Danes, Mercians, and Northumbrians very many, yea and some great Personages
amongst them, affecting his claim: but Goodwin of Kent who had the Queen and
her treasure in keeping, stood in his way, pretending Henry Hunt.
himself Guardian of her Children, and the will of Canutus, who appointed his
son by her to succeed.

(2) The opposition grew strong, and the factions ripened, even ready to seed,
only the lingering of Hardicanute gave leave unto Harold to better his side by
daily supplies, and the fears of civil sedition moved the Nobility to argue
with words and not weapons, the title depending betwixt these two brethren. At
Oxford they met, where the presence of the one, downe-peized the absence of the
other, so that their voices went only with Harold, and presently proclaimed
and consecrated him King.

(3) He began his reign the year of Christ's Floriacensis.
humanity, 1036. and was very solemnly crowned at Oxford by Elnothus
Archbishop of Canterbury, though for a time, he was very unwilling to
perform that service; for it is reported, that he having the regal scepter
and Crown in his custody, with an oath refused to consecrate any other for
King, so long as the Queens children were living; For (said he) Canutus
committed them to my trust and assurance, and to them will I give my faith and
allegiance. This Scepter and Crown therefore I here lay down upon this Altar;
neither do I deny, nor deliver them to you; but I require by the Apostolic
authority, all Bishops, that none of them presume to take the same away,
neither therewith that they consecrate you for King: as for your self if you
dare, you may usurp that which I have committed to God on this his Table.

Notwithstanding that great thunder clappe was allaied with the showers of
golden promises, of his just and religious Government intended, though present
experience manifested the contrary.

(4) For says the ancient Writer of the book called Encomium Emmae: Harold
no sooner was established Encom. Emma.
King, but that he sought means how to rid Queen Emma out of the way, and that
secretly, for openly he durst not attempt any thing against her: She in
silence kept her self quiet, looking for the issue of his designs. But Harold
maliciously purposing, took counsel how he might train into his Hay the
sons of Queen Emma, that so all occasion of dangers against him might at
once for all be cut off: many proiects propounded, this lastly took effect;
that a letter should be counterfeited in Queen Emma's name, unto her sons
Edward and Alfred, to instigate them to attempt the crown usurped by Harold,
against their right, the tenure whereof we have thought good here to insert.

(5) Emma, Queen only in name, to Edward and Alfred her sons, sends
motherly greetings. Whilst severally we bewail the death of our Sovereign,
my Lord and your Father, and your selves (dear sons) still more and more
dispossessed from the Kingdom, your lawful inheritance; I greatly marvel
what you determine to do, since you know, that the delay of attempts gives the
usurper more leisure to lay his foundation, and more safely to set thereon his
intended buildings; for incessantly he posteth from town to town, and from
City to City, to make the Lords and Rulers thereof his, either by threats,
prayers, or present rewards. But this in private they signify, that they had
rather one of you their Natives should reign over them, then this usurper and
Danish stranger. Wherefore my desire is, that either of you secretly, and with
all speed come unto me, whereby we may advise together what is to be done in
this so great an enterprise: then whose good success, I desire nothing more.
Fail not therefore to send word by this my messenger, how you mean to
proceed: and so fare ye well, my dearest bowels, and very inwards of my heart.

(6) These letters thus carried and cunningly delivered, were digested as
sauouring of no falsehood; and by the bringers, others returned, that Alfred
should come shortly over to attend his mothers designs: these, brought unto
Harold, the coasts were fore-laid, and longing expectation attended the prey.
Alfred as forward to set on his voyage, made Baldwin Earl of Flanders his; and
some few (...). (...).
Bullogners increasing his Fleet, he took the seas for England: where coming
to shore, Earl Goodwin met him, and binding his assurance with his corporal
oath, became his liege-man, and guide to Queen Emma; but being wrought firm
for Harold, trecherously led these strangers a contrary way, and at Guilford
lodged them in several companies, making known to the King what he had done:
who forthwith apprehended them even in their beds, and in the morning as
chained prisoners, committing them to slaughter, contrary to the wonted manner
of military decimation, did spare and exempt only every teath man for service
or sale: Prince Alfred himself was sent prisoner to Rand Higden, (...)
Polychr. (...). (...). cap. 21.
the Isle of Ely, where having his eyes inhumanely put out, lived not long
after in torment and grief.

(7) Some add unto the former, an other, much more horrible kind of cruelty,
as that his belly was opened, and one end of his bowels drawn (...). (...).
out, and fastened to a stake, his body pricked with sharp needles, or
poinards, was forced about till all his entrails were extracted, in which most
savage torture he ended his innocent life.

(8) Harold thus freed from one, the other he thought would no further
attempt; and therefore Henry Hunting.
the more boldly set himself against their mother Queen Emma, whose goods he
confiscated, and banished her out of the Realm: who thus distressed, was
honorably received, and for three years space maintained by Baldwin Earl of
Flanders.

(9) The Dane then seeing his hazards thus prevented, sought so to secure
himself, and with sixeteene ships of the Danish Fleet kept the seas, which
continued ever in a readiness, and waffed from Port to Port; to the
maintenance whereof, he charged the English with great paime^ts, to their no
little grudge and repining; whereby he lost the love of his subjects before it
had well taken root in their hearts.

10) Neither yet held he on long in these disroiall courses, for that his
speedy death did cut off the infamy of a longer life; and is said to have died
Malmsb. Hen Hunting. Stow.
at Oxford in the month of April, the year of Christ Jesus, 1040, after he
had reigned four years and some months: whose body was at first interred at
Westminster, having been neither in wars so hardy, nor in government so
prosperous, as his Father Canut before him had been, not left behind him
either wife or children, to survive his person, or revive his name.

HARDICANVTE, THE THIRD DANISH KING THAT REIGNED IN Monarch 36
Hardi-Canut.
ENGLAND, AND THE THIRTY SIXTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN, AND
DEATH. CHAPTER V.


THe States of the land, as well English as Danes, that had stood for Harold,
both An. D. 1040.
in obtaining and keeping Simon D^nel.
the Crown, now seeing Mat. West^.
him fallen, thought it best to make way for their peace, before Hardicanut by
his sword should purchase their subjection; therefore with all have they sent
into Denmark, with proffers of the scepter, and their forward allegiance only
unto him. Those parts beyond seas, were not then so subiectiue, as to build his
hopes there upon any sure ground; for the Norwegians had thrust out his
halfe-brother Sweyne, and had elected Magnus the son of Olaffe for their King;
so that small assurance could he perceive of any quiet commonweal among them:
and therefore fore-slowing not the offer, immediately embarked his men of
war, and with so favorable a wind took seas, that he arrived upon the coast
of Kent, the sixth day after he had set sail out of Denmark; and with great
pomp conveyed to London, was there proclaimed Englands King.

(2) He began his Reign in the year of Grace one thousand and forty, and
was crowned in London by Elnothus Arch-bishoppe of Canterbury, being the
thirty sixth Monarch of the Englishmen: his reign was spent in doing nothing,
unless you will say, in doing evil he did something.

(3) For no sooner had he a power to command, but he forthwith commanded the
body of his halfe-brother the deceased King, to be dug up, and with
spiteful disgrace to be thrown into Thamisis, where it remained until a
Fisherman found it, and buried it in the Churchyard of S. Clement without
Temple-Barre, commonly called Saint Clement-Danes, for that (says Stow) it was
the burying place John Stow. in his Survey of London
of the Danes: this cruelty showed, was pretended for the hard usage of Queen
Emma his mother, though partly spiced with revenge for his usurpation of the
Crown against him.

(4) Yet is worthily to be commended, for the reverent regard he bare to his
Mother, and loving affection to his Brother; for no sooner was he risen out of
the throne of his Coronation, but that he sent honorable Embassage unto Earl
Baldwine, with many thanks to him, for her princely usage, and for her to
return into England to her former estate, and place of Queen. His brother
Prince Edward coming over to visit them both, was most honorably received;
retained, and dismissed; and these are the virtues regardable in this King.

(5) But his vices were more, and concerned more persons; for a great Epicure
he was, and given much unto Cups, whereby he trained the body to belly
cheer, and sense to be subject to sloth and drunkenness; four times every
day were his tables spread, and plenteously with all Cates furnished, ever (...).
commanding that his courtiers, guests, and servants, Will. (...). d^ (...).
Aug. R^. (...). (...) Polyer. (...). (...). (...). (...).
should rather leave, for superfluity, then call, for lack: which howsoever it
was in him accounted for Royal bounty, yet it caused in the people (who use to
praise the Sovereigns virtues, but imitate his vices) a riotous looseness,
and the Commonweal to lie sick of consumptions, bred by such excess of
those gross humors in her body.

(6) This wrought in him a careless neglect of government in State, so that
^he whole managing thereof was committed to his mother Queen Emma, a woman
extremely covetous, and to Goodwin, the rich and politic Earl of Kent; who
seeing the Will. Mal^bury.
present state carried wholly away with present pleasures, thought that a fit
subject for him to work upon; for the King not married (unless it were to his
lewd will) and Edward likely to succeed, of an over soft temperature; he
thought these both might prove aduantageous to his ambition, and therefore
bethought him, how the crown might be worn by him or his.

(7) Therefore, to separate the hearts of the subjects from the Prince (then
which, there can be no Goodwins devilish policy.
greater a wound unto both,) he caused the King to impose heavy tributes upon
the English, only to pay the Danes in his Fleet, appointing every Henry
Hunt. Will. Malmsbury. Mat. Westminster Simon Dun.
common Soldier and Mariner, to receive eight marks in money, and every
officer and Master twelve; which amounted to the sum of thirty two thousand,
one hundred forty seven pounds: for the payment whereof, there was so great a
grudge, that two of the Collectors, Thurstane and Feader were slain by the
Citizens of Worcester; which caused their City to be burnt, and part of the
country spoiled by the Kings command, and their Bishop Alfred expulsed the Sea, till with money he had purchased his peace. This Bishops hands (as was
said) were deep in the murder of Prince Alfred, the Kings half brother, whom
we spoke of; yea, and Goodwin himself was put to his purgation by oath, for
the clearing of his suspicions in that treacherous and brutish fact: which oath
was the lighter urged, and the easier received for his rich and bounteous
gifts, immediately before presented to the King, and that was a ship, whose
stern was of gold, with fourscore Goodwins gifts.
soldiers therein placed, all uniformly and richly suited. On their heads
they al wore guilt Burgenets, and on their bodies a triple guilt habergion, a
sword with guilt hilts girded to their wastes, a battaile-axe (after the manner
of the Danes) on their left shoulders, a target with guilt bosses borne in
their left hands, a dart in the right, their arms bound about with two
bracelets of gold, containing sixeteene ounces in weight.

(8) Aimundus Bremensis writing the Stories of those times; shows, that the
three sons of Canute Aimundus Bremensis, M. S. cap. 108.
were possessed of the three Kingdoms, England, Denmark, and Norway, though
the father by Will, had disposed of the first otherwise; which moved
Hardi-Canute much to malign the roialtie of Harold, whose Crown by birth and
covenant belonged to him; and therefore with great preparation, intending to
recover his right, he entered the Sea, and came into Flanders, where having
notice of the usurpers death, his rage was stayed, and he peaceably came in,
and received the Crown.

(9) And that Swein (called the Younger) King of Denmark, to assist his uncle
Hardi-Canute against Harold the usurper of Englands Crown, with a great Army
prepared thitherward; and taking the Seas, were by tempest driven upon the
coasts of Hadel^, where his Army doing some hurt, was set upon and discomfited
by the soldiers of the Arch-bishoppe: Idem. cap. 109.
himself amongst them being taken prisoner, and brought into the presence of
the Archbishop, was by him most honorably received, and conveyed unto Breme,
who there entered a league with him, and with gifts and other complements,
after a few days; suffered him to depart; who likewise hearing of the death of
King Harold, returned back to his own Country, where shortly after he was
much molested by Magnus the son of Olaf, then reigning King over the
Norwegians.

(10) Hardi-Canute in England, hearing of those stirs, thought it his part to
aid his Nephew King Idem. (...).
Sweyn, against the invasions of Magnus: and therefore he sent one Sueno his
kinsman, with an Army of the English, to reestablish King Sweyn in his Throne.
These entered Norway, and the Field against the Norwegians, but by them were so
ouerlaied, that he left Magnus the vanquisher, and returned again for
England; but before he could arrive the Shore, King Hardi-Canute was dead,
with whom dyed the issue of that war; whose death was sudden, and after
this manner.

(11) At the celebration of a great marriage, contracted Si^ D^. Matthew. West.
betwixt a Daenish Lord, called Canut-Prudan, and Lady Githa, the daughter of a
Nobleman, whose name was Osgot Clappa; in a solemn assembly, and banquet at
Lambeth the eight of June, reuelling and carousing amidst his cups, he
suddenly feldown without speech or breath: whose loss was the less lamented
for his excess, riotousnesse, and unwonted exactions: but chiefly because a
much better was then to succeed him; having himself had neither wife nor
child that is read off. Yea, so far were all sorts from bewailing him, that
in regard of Lambert. (...). in (...).
the freedom from the Danish yoke, which they attained by his decease, ever
since among the common people; the day of his death is annually celebrated with
open pastimes in the streets (as the old Romans kept their fugalia; for
chasing out of their Kings,) which time is now called Hoctide or Hucxtide,
signifying a time of scorning or contempt, which fell upon the Danes by his
death.

His body with all due obsequies was interred at Winehester by his fathers,
after he had voluptuously reigned two years lacking ten days, and departed
his life and kingdom the year of Christ Jesus, 1042.

(12) With the death of this King died all rule of the Danes in this land, and
the sacred spark of the Saxons fire (through three of their successions)
buried in their own ashes, began now to take flame and to burn most bright,
which was Prince Edward (now commonly called the Confessor) the son of King
Ethelred; and albeit there were others betwixt him and the crown, as namely,
Edward and Edmund the sons of the Iron-side, yet the one dying in Hungar^
without issue of body, the other there living as a banished man (by surname the
Outlaw) was neither so well regarded, nor thought so worthy of (...) book^ 7.
cap. 44. (...). (...).
government, as this other Edward was, whom therefore they sent for, and with
so great applause and acclamations proclaimed, that the present joy seemed to
prognosticate a perpetual happiness to the English, who had been most
miserably afflicted by the Daenes, for the space of two hundred forty two
years; though this line again failed, before it was well begun.

EDWARD THE CONFESSOR, SON OF KING ETHELRED, THE THIRTY SEVENTH MONARCH OF
THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS REIGN, VERTVES, AND MARRIAGE. CHAPTER VI.


EDward, the Third of that Name before the Conquest, An. D. 1042. Henry Hunting.
halfe-brother to the deceased Hardi-Canute, and son to King Ethelred by
Queen Emma his wife, was by the provident care of a Mothers affection, (when
the variable success of War, doubtfully depended betwixt Edmund the English,
and Canutus the Dane) sent into Normandy to Duke Richard Polydor.
her Brother, there to be secured from all domestical stirs: and now,
before the dead corpse Rand. Higden.
could be enterred, wi^ general consent of the Nobles was elected their King.

(2) I know well that in the legend of this holy man's life, more things are
recorded, then with safety Legend. Aur. in vit. S. Edward.
of truth may be either believed, or delivered; as that he was chosen King by
consent of Parliament, when as yet he was in his mothers womb, Ethelred his
Father at the same time having many other sons alive; as also when the
destroying Danes had extinguished by their wars almost the whole Royal issue
of the English, the holy Monk Brightwold, of Glastenbury deploring their
loss, and the Lands miserable estate, had Will. Malmsbury. Henry Hunt. lib.
(...). Polycr. li. 6. ca. 18.
in vision this Edward, then an Exile, presented unto him by the Apostle S.
Peter himself, who then anointing him King in his sight, telling him that his
Reign should be peaceable, and twenty three years for continuance; Brightwold
yet unsatisfied who should next succeed, demanded the resolution, and was
answered by Peter, that the Kingdom of England was Gods own Kingdom; for
whose successors himself would provide. With such vain predictions our
otherwise true Stories are ouer-charged; which moved Comineus the worthy French
Historian, to tax the Philip (...).
English with over much credulity that way.

(3) But most true it is, that the English Nobility disclaiming all Danish
subjection, presently upon the death of King Harold, enacted, That none of
their blood should any more reign over them: putting this their decree in
execution by cassiering all Danes from the Castles, Forts, and Garrison Towns
throughout all the Land, whence some even of their Blood Royal were forced to
depart. Then sending security into Normandy, with proffer of the Crown unto
Prince Edward, had his consent, and assistance of Duke William his cosen
germane.

(4) This Edward (as elsewhere has been said) was borne at Islip near unto
Oxford, and tenderly educated by Queen Emma his Mother; and after his Fathers
death, for safety sent into France; where, by his sweet conversation he gained
the love of all, and as much himself affected those strangers, which was some
blemish of policy in the face of his government, when he had got the Diadem,
as being of disposition ouer-soft, and ever too pliant (an imperfection in a
Sovereign) to take the impresse of any stamp. In which mould, the aspiring
Goodwin Earl of Kent, does cast the fabric of his own designs; who had made
away Alfred, his younger, but of a more resolute spirit, that so the basis of
his own pillar (whose top in time he hoped to crown) might be set, if not
upon, yet with the nearest to the Throne.

(5) He therefore, the foremost both in will and power, used both to establish
Prince Edward in his Rand. Higden. Marian. Scotus.
right, being seconded by Leofrick Earl of Chester, and Lyuingus Bishop of
Worcester, and indeed with the general assistance of all the English; who now
were so jealous of all foreign powers, that they forbad an ouergreat train of
Normans, (though coming for his aid) to attend their new-chosen King.

(6) His Coronation was at Winchester, with great concourse of people, and the
celebration performed Alfred Beuerel. John Rouse.
by Edsine, Archbishop of Canterbury, upon the very day of Christ his
resurrection, (being also a newrising day to the English Nation) the year of
grace 1042. himself being aged then toward forty, and was in number the
thirty seventh Monarch of England, where he reigned with such Justice and
Piety, that he obtained the venerable name of Saint, and unto posterities is
distinguished from the other Edwards, by the adiunct Confessor.

(7) In the entrance of his government, to witness his love to his people, he
sought every way the furtherance Rand. Higden, in Polychr. lib. 6. cap. 24.
of their wealth, and afterward remitted the most heavy Tribute of forty
thousand pounds yearly gathered by the name of Dane-gilt, which had bin imposed
by his Father, and paid for forty years continuance, out of the lands of all,
except only the Clergy, because, (say our ancient laws,) the Kings reposed
more confidence in the prayers of holy Church, then in the power of Armies.
Then, from the diverse Laws of Cambd. Britan. de Danis.
the Mercians, West Saxons, Danes, and Northumbrians, he selected the best, and
made of them one body certain, and written in Latin, (that all men of any
learning might know whereon to rely) to be the touch of his Commonwealths
Pleas, and the squire by which he would have every right to be measured; being
(in a sort) the fountain of those, which at this day we term the Common
Laws, though the forms of pleading and process therein, were afterward
brought in by the Conquest.

(8) The reign of this King by most writers records, was more spent in peace
and works of true piety, the^ in wars, and blood, though some dissensions
happened both domestical, and foreign: for about the year one thousand forty
five, and third of his Reign, a royal Navy was rigged in Sandwich haven,
against Magnus King of Norway, who then intended to invade England, and indeed
had so done, if the wars of Sweyn king of Denmark had not diuerted his purpose.

(9) This Sweyn was the son of Duke Wolf by Ostryd his Duchess, sister to
Hardi-Canut, who as I find Albert. Crantius,
written in the manuscript of Aimundus Bremensis, being in possession of two
kingdoms, prepared his Navy Aimund^ Bremensis.
for the conquest of England also. But, (says he) King Edward governing that
Kingdom with great Justice and Love, chose rather his peace with proffers of
Tribute, and promises that after his death the Crown should be his, yea though
himself should have children: how beit this seems not to sound for truth;
For Sweyn sending his Ambassadors unto Edward to crave aid against Magnus (his
grievous and mortal Enemy,) could obtain none; and Harold Harfager, the
successor of Magnus, and enemy to Sweyn, presently thereupon sent unto Edward
for a league of amity, which was ratified firmly betwixt them.

(10) Neither may we think that ever he meant his Crown that way; for that
besides the decree enacted against all Danish claims, his desire to establish
it in the English blood is most manifest, by sending for Edward his Nephew, the
son of Edmund Ironside, remaining in Hungary, and that so long out of Matthew
West.
England that he was called the Outlawe; who coming over, brought with him
his wife Agatha, and children, Edgar a son, and Margaret and Christian his
daughters; him Edward meant to have made King Edward de signeth the (...)
Eng^sh-man.
heir to the Crown, had he not been prevented by hasty death, whereupon the
King designed young Edgar, his son, the heir apparent, and gave him the
surname of Adeling, a name of great honor appropriated to the Princes of the
blood, and men capable of the Crown.

(11) Besides these former attempts, certain Danish ^
Pirates entered the Port of Sandwich, which with all the Seacoasts of Essex
they spoiled, and in Flaunders made Merchandise of their prey. The Irish
likewise with thirty six ships entered Seuern, and with the assistance of
Griffith king of South Wales burnt or flew all that they found; against whom
Alfred Bishop of Worcester went and fought, but with such success, that many
of his Soldiers were slain, and the rest put to flight, which made the
Welshmen far more bold, and Rese, the brother of Griffith, make many incursions
An. D. 1053. Mat. Westmin^er. Chron. of Wales.
to fetch preyes out of England, till at length he was slain at Bulerden, and
his head presented to king Edward at Gloucester.

(12) His domestical molestations, were chiefly by Earl Goodwin and his
sons; and those first springing upon this following occasion. Eustace the
elder, Earl of Bulloigne, who had married Gods, sister Will. Malmsbury.
by the fathers side to King Edward, came into England to visit him then lying
at Gloucester, and returning homeward, at Canterbury his Herbinger dealing
roughly with a Burgess for lodgings, caused his own death; which when his
Lord heard of, thirsting Rand. Hig.
for revenge, he slew eighteen Citizens in the heat of his fury: the
Canterburians in as great a rage got them to armor, and slew twenty of his
retinew, wounding many more, and made the Earl to recoile; whose grievous
complaint coming to the King, he commanded Goodwin to see execution done upon
the offenders. Earl Goodwin not hasty to follow his commission, advised the
King to examine the cause before he massacred his true subjects at the
instigation of Strangers; whereat King Edward was highly offended, and Goodwin
thereby gained great love of the Commons. This occasioned Robert Gemeticensis a
Norman, first made Bishop of London, and after Archbishop of Canterbury, to
spread the Curtain of disfavor betwixt Goodwin and the King, urging his
refusal as an Act of Contempt, wherein more dangers might lie hid then were to
be suffered; whereupon Edward called an assembly of Estates, appointing a day
of meeting at Gloucester.

(13) The Commons (whose common guise is, deadly to hate all strangers, though
many times well Malmsb.
deserving) now seeing Earl Goodwin in danger for their good, were easily
drawn to assist him and his cause, and in warlike manner guarded his person, at
Beuerstane not far from the King. The Estates assembled, and Goodwin sent
for, he refused to come, pretending service against the Welsh, then ready to
make inroades, and that his presence was more needful there, then at Court;
albeit the Welsh-men cleared themselves by sending their Ambassadors unto the
King. The suspicions increasing, great preparation on both sides was made; to
assist the King came Leofricke the worthy Earl of Chester, Siward the stout
Earl of Northumberland, and Rodulfe Earl of Hereford his sister Godas son,
by her first husband Walter de Maigne.

(14) To Goodwin repaired his people of Southerie and Kent, and to him were
brought by Swain his Rand. Higden. Matt. West. Si^on Dun.
son, the men of Oxford, Sommerset, Hereford, Gloucester, and Berk-shires;
unto whom, Harold his other son, joined those of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk,
Cambridge, and Huntingdon-shires, so that his host was exceedingly great, and
his mind thereby so inflated, that from Langton, where he lay, he sent a bold
and Traitorous demand to the King, to have Earl Eustace of Bulloigne with all
his French and Normans (that kept then in the Castle of Dover) to be delivered
unto him, and his sons: which being (as good reason was) refused, the Battle
was prepared, and brought to the very point of hazard and ruin of all: For in
that quarrel were assembled the greatest Peers, and Lords of the Land, the
Kings love swaying very much with many, but yet the hatred toward Strangers
possessing the hearts of more. The beginning thus doubtful, and the end like
to prove dangerous; the matter both with great foresight and providence was
referred unto Parliament, to be holden at London with all convenient have,
whereunto pledges were both given and received on either parts.

(15) King Edward strongly guarded with an Army of the Mercians and
Northumbrians, entered London, and Goodwin with his sons in warlike manner
came into Southwarke to his own house. But his Army wavering, and (as bad
causes and consciences make men do) suspecting the worst, by little and little
shrunk away from him; which known to the King, he presently pronounced
sentence of banishment unto Goodwin and his five sons, without further
proceeding by way of Parliament, as was determined. Goodwin therefore with
great riches and his three sons, Swain, Tostie, and Girth, sailed into
Flanders, and Harold with his brother Leofwine, from Bristow passed into
Ireland; who were no sooner gone, but the King proclaimed them Out-lawes, and
gave the Earldome of Harold unto Algar, the son of Leofrick, Earl of Chester.
This Leofricke is he, which at his Countesses request freed the City Couentrie
of their importable tribute imposed, as we have elsewhere said. Book 1. chap.
27.


(16) In the second year of Goodwins banishment, both himself and those his
sons with him, having Henry Hun^.
gotten ships convenient for war, in manner of Pirates came upon the coasts of
Kent and Sussex, doing much harm, and returning with spoils: the like did
Harold and Leofwin from Scotland, upon the western coasts of Sommerset and
Deuonshires, who thence coasting about the point of Cornwall, joined their
Fleet with their Fathers, in the I Will of Wight. Simon Dunel.


(17) Against them King Edward prepared, and himself, though aged, with a
Navy of sixty ships well furnished for war, meant to have made an end of
that business, by the destruction of his adversaries: but the Nauies ready to
join battle, God took the cause into his own hand, and with a thick fogge
so ouer-spread the seas, that one Fleet could not thereby see another; in
which, Goodwin and his accomplices by contrary winds were driven to the place
from whence they came. King Edward still in jealousy of Goodwins return,
rigged forth forty tall ships to secure the seas, which kept not so strong a
watch, but that Goodwin got by them, soliciting the people of Kent, Sussex,
and Surrey unto his aid, and entering Thamesis, did the like unto them in
London, who accepted of his arriuage, though King Edward lay there: so that
without disturbance his Navy fell up with the tide, through the south Arch of
the Bridge, and a mighty army to his aid mustered upon the same side of the
river.

(18) The Nobility then seeing side against side, and all of them mere
English, ready to hazard their blood in the quarrels of strangers, wrought so
with Edward and Goodwin, that they came unto peace, and pledges were again
delivered for the performance, whereof Wilmot the son of Earl Goodwin, and
Hacun the son of Swain his eldest, were sent to Duke William of Normandy; so
great a trust he ever reposed in strangers. This Swain, upon a remorse of
conscience Will. Malmsbury. Ran. Higden. Mat. Westminster. Simon Dun.
for the blood he had spilt, and especially for the slaughter of Beorne his
cosen and intercessor, who sued to the King for his peace, undertook a
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and in his return died in Licia, whether through an
extremity of cold, or by the hands of Saracens, that spoiled all they met, it
is uncertain.

(19) Goodwin now restored, and in great credit with the King, cast the eye of
disdain upon the Archbishop Robert (as commonly fauorits emulate each
others,) and himself being a man eloquent and politic, so possessed the King
both against him and his Normans, that he requited his own banishment, with all
theirs out of England, some few excepted, that were favored by the English:
and now promising himself much honor and authority; was suddenly cut off by
the stroke of death, surprising him as he sat at Table with the King upon
Monday in the Easter week, but died not till the Thursday following, which
happened at Winchester, where he was buried.

(20) Besides these former foreign and civil molestations, other calamities
happened to the land; for in Ran. Higden.
the year of Grace 1047. and month of January, there fell so great a Snow,
which covered the ground unto the middle of March, that Cattle and Fowls
perished abundantly: and on the first day of that Month the year following, a
strange and terrible Earthquake happened, which seemed to rent the ground
asunder, and withal such Lightnings, as burnt up the Corn, growing in the
fields, whereby an excessive Dearth followed: so that his reign was neither so
peaceable nor prosperous, as Brightwold the Monk dreamed it should be. But as
all these were scourges sent from God upon the Land for sin, so both Prince,
Pastors, and people, had all severally their part thereof, as being jointly the
causers of the same.

(21) For the King, in case of these Strangers, put the Land more then once in
danger to be lost: and himself refraining the bed of his virtuous wife
committed thereby the offense forbidden by the Apostle, and caused her his
Queen, either to commit or be accused to have committed adultery. The Clergy
1. Cor. 7. 5.
likewise altogether unlearned, wanton, and vicious: for the Prelates neglecting
the offices of Episcopal function, which was to tender the affairs of the
Church, and to feed the flock of Christ, lived themselves idle, and covetous,
addicted wholly to the pomp of the world, and voluptuous life, little caring
for the Churches and souls committed to their charge: and if any told them
(says Higden) that their Holinsh. Rand. Higden in Polycr. lib. 6. ca. 2^.
lives ought to be holy, and their conversation without Covetousness, according
to the sacred prescript, and virtuous examples of their Elders, they would
scoffingly put them off with, Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tempore mores; Times
have mutations, So must men's fashions: and thus, (says he,) they plained the
roughnes of their doings with smoothnes of their answers. Briefly, the whole
people were so loose and riotous, that as Geruasius Dorobornensis records,
they fell so fast to Geruasius of Canturbury.
commit wickedness, as to be ignorant of sinful crimes, was then held to be a
great crime it self. And by the testimony of Malmesbury, the sins of those
times evidently foreshewed a general destruction: for the Will. Malm^b.
Englishmen (says he) transformed themselves into the strange manners of the
French, and that not only in speech and behavior, but in their deeds, and
Charters: their use was then to go fantastically appointed, their garments
reaching but to the mid knee, their heads shorn, and their beards shaven all
but the upper lip, which grew with long mustaches; continually wearing massy
bracelets of gold about their arms, carrying marks upon their skin pounced
in of sundry Colors; and the Clergi^ contenting themselves with triuiall
literature, could scarcely hacke and hew out the words of the Sacrament. These
then were Englands dolorous times both of blindness and lewdriesse, drawing
down Gods wrath for their destruction.

(22) But howsoever this King is reported to be loving and facile toward
strangers, (which in it self is a princely virtue if it be opportunely and
warily used:) yet to his own Mother, and Wife, unnaturally over rigorous,
imprisoning and bereauing them both of all Prince-like honor. Against Queen
Emma, his Mother, were instigators Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, and Earl
Goodwin of Kent, the two greatest favorites of the King. The causes objected
were, her marriage with Canut the Capital enemy of England; her regardlesnesse
of succouring himself and his brother Polycr. li. (...). ca. ^4. Scal. Chron.
in their exiles, whom (as was alleged) she contrived to have made away; and
that under color of private devotions, she had used the company of Alwine
Bishop of Winchester over familiarly, to her great dishonor and the Kings
disgrace: for these and the like, he took away all her Jewels, and other
substance, and committed her to safe custody in the Abbey of Werwell.

(23) Indeed Malmsbury does tax her to have been insatiably covetous, and that
she was more tenderly Will. Malms.
affectionate to her Danish, then English children, whereby her love was
measured to their fathers. But for the imputation of her incontinencie, she
washed it off with as sharp a trial as any that is recorded for truth, by
undergoing that ouer-hard law Ordalium, Ordalium, a trial of offenders by fire.
when in presence of the King her Son, and many of his Peers, she passed over
between nine plough-shares glowing red hot, barefooted and blind-folded,
without any hurt; using this speech to her leaders, as not knowing she was
past all danger, O Lord when shall I come to the place of my purgation: but
having her eyes Rand. Higd.
uncovered and seeing her self clearly escaped, fell upon her knees, and with
tears gave thanks to her Deliverer, whereby she recovered, both the love and
her former estate of the King, with the good esteem and applause of the
people: in memory whereof she gave nine Manors (according to the number of
plough-shares) to the Minster of Winchester, (wherein she had that trial,) and
adorned the same with many rich ornaments; as likewise the King repenting the
wrong he did her, bestowed on the same place the Island (so then it was) called
Portland in Dorsetshire, being about seven miles in compass: for so the
chance, in those days, was set, that whosoever lost, the monks did win.

(24) Neither were this Kings proceedings better Will. Malmsb. vita Edwardi.
Marian. Scot. 1. Cor. 7. 5. Egitha some call her.
with his own Wife, howsoever some have cloaked that Fraud (so the Apostle
terms it) under the fair robe of Chastity. For he marrying Editha, a Lady
incomparable both for beauty and virtue, in whose breast (says Malmesburie)
there was a School of all Liber all Sciences, refused her Bed: but whether it
were for his debility, or hatred to Goodwin her father, or love of Virginity, I
determine not; but am fully persuaded, that the accusation of Adultery
wherewith Robert the Archbishop did charge her, Chr^. W^l.
was more upon envy to her father, then truth of so foul a fact in her, whose
virtues were so many, and so memorable, by report of Authors, that were
eiewitnesses themselves; for Ingulphus that had oftentimes conference with her,
does thus of her relate.

There was given (says he) unto King Edward for his Queen and Wife, the
daughter of Goodwin, a most Ingulphus in hist.
beautiful Damsel, Egitha by name, excellent well learned; in her demeanure,
and whole course of life a Virgin most chaste, humble, and unfeignedly holy, no
way sauouring of her Fathers, or Brethrens barbarousnesse, but mild, modest,
faithful, and innocent, nor ever hurtful to any; insomuch, that this verse
was applied to her: Sicut Spina Rosam, genuit Godwinus Egitham.
From prickled stalk, as sweetest Rose:
So Egith fair, from Godwin grows.


All these notwithstanding, the King expulsed her W^l. Melm^b.
his Court and Bed, and that with no little disgrace; for taking all her goods
from her, even to the uttermost farthing, committed her prisoner to the
Monastery of Wilton, attended only with one maid, where she, for a whole
years space almost, in tears and prayers expected the day of her release and
comfort: All which vnprincelie, and vn-Spouslike usage, as the King pretended,
and said, was, because she only should not live in comfort, when as her
Parents and Brethren were banished the Realm: an unjust sentence surely, and
unbefitting a Saint, thus to punish the sins of the fathers upon their
children, contrary to the prescript rule of God, who by his Prophet complains
against such injustice, and regulateth it with this just verdict, That soul
that sins shall die: and for her pure and unviolated Ezekiel. 1^. 4.
chastity, himself on his deathbed spoke, saying, that openly she was his
wife, but in secret imbracings Edwardi vitae.
as his own sister.

(25) Yet behold the blindness, and partiality of those times, wherein for
this his only refusal of nuptial duties, the penciles of those that should
have showed his true face to posterities, have so enbellished the portraiture
and lineaments, that unto the beholder he seems now no mortal creature; his
miracles and foresayings answerable to most of the Prophets. Which here to
insert in so worthy a subject and holy Kings life, were both to fill up with a
needless surcharge, whole leaves of Times waste abuses, and to breed a
suspicion of those other things in him, which we know for sound truth; as was
his gift from God, through his holy inuocations, and touch of the place
affected, to cure the disease called Struma, now the Kings Evil, which unto
this day in his successors, has been experienced upon many such healings, by
the touch of those gracious hands who have held the Scepter, as Gods
Vicegerents of this most blessed and happy Kingdom. That he had the spirit of
Prophecy, many have thought, as also the notice of his own death, some
constantly affirm; by a Ring sent him from Jerusalem, the same that he long
time before had given to a pilgrim: but these with his other miraculous cures,
his sight of the Danes destruction, and the Seven Sleepers in the Mount Cellion
besides Ephesus, Edwardi legend. eiusdem vit^ M. S.
with infinite others, I leave to his Legend-writers, and Aluredus Riualensis
to relate, who have written his many miracles with no sparing pen. Most true it
is that of a little Monastery dedicated to S. Peter in the west of London by
the river of Thames, he made a Saint Peter himself came down from heaven to
the first dedication of that place, if the foresaid M. S. er not, T. Cliff^rd.
most beautiful and fair Church, where he likewise provided for his own
Sepulcher; and another dedicated to S. Margaret, standing without the Abbey:
this of Westminster he endowed with very rich revenues, and confirmed their
Charters under his Broad Seal, being the first of the Kings of England, who
used that large and stately impression in their Royal Charters and Patents:
the very true form whereof, according to the rude sculpture of those elder
times, we have portraited in the front of this Chapter, as we intend likewise
to do in the rest succeeding; whereof this use at least, (if no other) may be
made, that by benefit of those paterns, men may know from what Princes they
first received the Charters of their ancient possessions, and Patents of their
honors, which the Princes style (many being of one name) cannot sufficiently
make known.

The said Church of Westminster he built for the discharge of his vowed
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and that in Simon D^n.
such sumptuous manner, that it was in those days the Pattern to all other
stately buildings. He founded also the College of S. Mary Oterie in the
county of Deuon, King Edward the founder of S. Mary Otery College. S^w 124.
and gave unto it the Village of Otereg, and removed the Bishops See from
Cridington to Excester, as a place of far more dignity; where the King taking
the right hand, and the Queen the l^, led Leofricke from the high Altar, and
installed him the first Bishop of that See: Finally, when he had reigned the
sp^e of twenty years, six months, and twenty seven days; he died the
fourth of January, the year of Christ Jesus one thousand sixty six, and was
with great lamentations and solemnity buried in his Church at Westminster, the
morrow after the feast of the Epiphanie.

He was of person well proportioned, of countenance sober, and of complexion
fair; naturally courteous and gentle to all (and thereby too prone and
credulous to suggestions) loving to his subjects, and ouer-louing unto
Strangers. A Prince of much virtue and integrity of life, notwithstanding
which, had it not been veiled under the faire-shew of Chastity, he had not so
easily been canonized for a Saint; wherein yet the seeming wisest taxed his
wisdom, whilst under a goodly pretext of Religion and vowed Virginity; he
cast off all care of having issue, and exposed the kingdom for a prey to the
greedy desires of ambitious humors.

His wife.
Editha, the wife of King Edward, was the daughter of Goodwin, Duke of the
West Saxons, and Earl of Kent: her mother was Gith the sister of Sweyne the
younger, King of Denmark; she was married unto him the year of Christ's
humanity, 1045. and fourth of his reign. She was his wife eighteen years;
and suruiuing him lived a widow eight more, and in the eight year of King
William the Conquerours reign, died in December, the year of Christ's birth,
1074, and was buried by her husband in S. Peter's Church at Westminster.

HAROLD THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, THE SON OF EARL GOODWINE, AND THIRTY EIGHT
MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS LIFE, REIGN, ACTS, WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER
VII.


THe people sorrowing for the death of their King, and the Statesmen perplexed
for choice of a new, Edgar Athelings title was worthy of more impartial
respect then it found: for him they held too young for government: besides, a
stranger borne, scarce speaking English: and withal, the prophecies of Edward
touching the alienation of the Crown, the Interest of the Danes, and the claim
that (...).
Duke William made, (both by gift and consanguinity,) bred great distraction of
desires, and opinions; but nothing concluded for settling the State; no man
either assuming or profering the Monarchiall diadem, because none had the
power, or right to adorn therewith his own head. In this Calm conference a
sudden gale arose, which blew all the sails Mat. W^st. Polyd^r.
spread for that wind into one Port. And that was Harold son to Earl
Goodwine, a man (duly prizing his many worthy parts) not unmeet for a kingdom,
who first succeeding his father in his Dukedom, and next Edward (his brother
in Law) in his Kingdom, in Vit. S. Edward.
patience, clemency, and affability bare himself most approuedly toward the
virtuous, but with a Lions courage, and fierce countenance chastised the
disordered, and indeed became another Maccabeus unto the distressed Land.
Whose kingly state before we touch, it shall not be amiss to lengthen his
short reign with his Acts and Life, as he was a Subject, both with, and
against his Lord and Predecessor.

(2) That he took part with his Father against Eustace of Bulloigne, and King
Edwards hasty commission, we have showed; himself then enjoying the Earledom
of Oxford, and so affected by those of Essex, Suffolk and Norfolk, Cambridge
and Huntington-shires, that they sided in his cause against the King; But these
designs failing, (as commonly it is seen all attempts of Subjects against
their Sovereigns do) he learned by banishment, what was the loss of true
honor, and by forbearance of battle (when half the Kingdom stood for him,)
his duty obliged unto the Commonwealth. And grown again into favor with
the King, carried himself answerably unto both.

(3) Some iealousy conceived, Edward without any cause, banished Algar the son
of Leofrike Earl of An. D. 1055 Matthew. West. Simon Dun.
Chester, who with the help of the Irish and Welchmen, under the conduct of
Gruffith ap Llewelyn Prince of North Wales (who had married his daughter,) did
much hurt to the English, putting Rodulph Earl of Hereford to flight, with the
slaughter of five hundred men, spoiled the City, burnt the Minster and became
Masters of mis-rule in those parts. Against these was Harold sent, and with
such manhood pursued his flying enemies, that passing through North Wales, upon
the Snow-downes he pitched his Field: The Earl, and Prince Gruffith, not
daring to abide his presence, fled thence unto South Wales, and again took
into Hereford; whereof Harold having intelligence hasted thitherward (leaving
sufficient in the Snow-downes to mate the Welsh), and recovering the City, with
a deep trench and high rampire fortified it about, where for the saving of
more blood (and not ungrateful to Algar, who without grudge had resigned to
him his Earldome, and whole Revenues at his return from exile) a peace was
concluded, and at Harolds request, Earl Algar and Prince Gruffith were
pardoned.

(4) But Algar being again accused, and again aided by his old associate
Gruffith, recovered his Earldom by An. D. 1058
force, whereat King Edward was highly displeased, but most against Gruffith,
who ever was ready to assist Simon Dun.
any against him: whereupon Harold the second time appointed General, with a
great host entered North Wales, without sight of enemy, where he only burnt
down the stately Palace of Prince Gruffith, and so returned to the King. But
long the Welsh were not quiet, nor the Prince pleased of the harms to him An.
D. 1063.
done. Wherefore making his forces very strong he again molested the English.

(5) To restrain whom once more was Harold set forth, who with such terror
burst into Wales, that Mat. West.
Prince Gruffith, in secret stole from his Camp, leaving his Soldiers (if
they would) to fight for themselves, whereupon his whole army yielded
themselves Chro. Wall.
to Harolds mercy, and having Prince Gruffith in their hands, cut off his head,
and sent it to Harold, giving him pledges for assurance of p^ce, and the
payment of the ancient tribute which for a time had been retained: yet ever
after he carried so heavy a hand on the Welsh, that as John of Salisburie in
his Policraticon writes, he ordained a law, that what Welsh-man soever, should
with weapon pass over Offaes ditch, should have hi^ right hand cut off by
the Kings officer.

(6) All now in quiet, and Harold withdrawn to his Manor of Boseham upon the
riuage of the sea Will. Malms. Mat. Westminst^r.
in the confines of Sussex, there for his recreation, one day he took into a
Fishers boat with small attendants, neither those very skillful Mariners, when
no sooner were they lanched into the deep, but a contrary wind came about, and
drove the boat upon the coast of Ponthieu in France, where he was taken by the
Country people, and presented to Guido their Earl, who a while retained him
his prisoner, in hope of gain by his ransom, but Duke William requiring it, he
was conveyed into Normandy, where he cunningly persuaded the Duke, that his
secret coming out Matthew Paris, in Will. Hen. Hunting.
of England, was purposely to enter a league of amity with him. The Duke then
having present wars with the Britains in France, took this his new friend and
guest with him for his companion at Arms; whose ready policies followed with
forward practice, wan him great estimation with the Duke; whereupon betwixt
Rand. Higd.
them a covenant was made for the reservation of the English Crown to the
Norman, if it chanced King Edward to die without children; and the same
ratified by Harolds corporal oath, with the affiancing of Lady Adeliza, the
Dukes fifth daughter, Gemeticensis.
then a child and Harold a widower; which afterward fell to his own
destruction, and the lands subversion, as shall be said.

(7) His last imploiment by holy King Edward, was against the tumultuous
Northumbrians which Will. Malmsbury.
had expulsed Tosto their Earl, and Harolds own brother, where a peace was
concluded without shedding blood, but with condition that Tosto should lose his
Earledom: whereupon in great displeasure, he with his wife and children fled
into Flanders, and ever after hated the person, and emulated the glory of
Harold. The original of these two brethrens quarrels began at Windsor, where
in the presence of the King they fell from words unto blows, and that in such
manner, as if rescue had not come, Tosto had died; for which disgrace, he
secretly hied him into Mat. Westminst.
the Marches of Wales, and near the City Hereford at Portaflyth, where Harold
had a house, then in Marian. Scotus. Mat. Westminster.
preparing to entertain the King, he slew all his brothers servants, and them
cutting peecemeale into gobbets, salted some of their limbs, and cast the rest
into vessels of the mead and wines, sending his brother word, that he had
furnished him with poudred meats against the Kings coming thither; which
barbarous act caused deservedly his name to be odious unto his Northumbrians,
and was lastly repayed with his own death.

(8) Now albeit some Heralds make Harold by M. Thom^ Mille^ in Harold.
birth but a Gentleman of one, and the first descent, which, were it so, should
no whit blemish him who was more truly enobled with princely virtues; yet
therein also it may seem he is mis-esteemed, seeing his Father was Goodwin a
Duke by degree, the son of Wolnoth, and he the son of Egelmar, who was the
son of Egelricke, surnamed Leofwine, and brother of Edrick Duke of Mercia,
that married the daughter of King Ethelred of England, of whom we have spoken.

The mother of Harold was Githa the daughter of Duke Wolf, and sister to
Sweyne the younger, King of Denmark, by Estrich his wife, who was sister to
Canute the great King of England; and himself the second son of her borne;
whose elder brother was Sweyne, that died on pilgrimage in his return from
Jerusalem; and his younger were Tosto, Wilnod, Grith, and Leofrick.

(9) A former wife Earl Goodwin had, whose Will. Malmsb.
name was Thira, the sister of Canute, a woman sold unto wickedness for making
merchandise of Englands beauteous virgins into Denmark; she sold them there
at dear rates, to satisfy her own unsatiate avarice, and the lusts of the
lascivious Danes, till a just reward of Gods wrath fell on her by a thunderbolt
falling from heaven, wherewith she was slain, Rand. Higden, in Polychr. lib.
6. cap. 25.
to the great terror of the beholders. One son by her Earl Goodwin had, who
when he was past child's age, riding upon a horse (the gift of his Grandfather
the King,) proudly giving him the reine and spur, was violently borne into
the river Thamesis, and so suddenly drowned. Thus much being premised of
Harold before he was King; his reign, life and death, we will now address
to declare.

(10) Edwards life ended, and nothing determined touching his successor, Harold
the second day Alur. Ri^l.
after, being the day of his burial, made himself King, none of the Nobility
disliking what he had done; for courteous he was of specch and behavior, and
in martial prowess the only man, as Wales well witnessed, more then once;
friended by affinity with many of the Nobles, and by his new marriage with
Edgitha the daughter of Algar (sister Ran. Higden. Polyer. lib. 6. ca. 29
of the Earls Morc^r and Edwin, and late wife to Gruffith ap Lhewelyn Prince
of Wales) he expected to be both sided and assisted, if his cause came either
to trial or voice.

(11) And the time he well saw fitted his entrance; for Sweyne King of
Denmark (most dread by the English) was entangled with the Sweden wars; and
William the Norman (that made claim from King Edward) at variance with Philip
the French King; the friends of Edgar in Hungary, and himself a stranger,
over young for rule: all which concurrents made Harold, without deliberation,
or order from the State, to set the Crown on his own head, regardlesse of all
ceremony and solemn celebration; for which his act, as a violator Matthew. W^st.
of holy rites, he too too much offended the Clergy.

(12) The day of his Coronation was upon Friday, the fifth of January, being
the feast of the Epiphany, and year of Salvation 1066: none either greatly
applauding, or disapprouing his presumption, except only for the omission of
manner and form; to redeem which, and to re-gaine the good will of all; no
sooner attained he the seat royal, but he remitted or diminished the
grievous Si^ D^. Hol^sh.
customs and tributes which his predecessors had raised, a course ever
powerful to win the hearts of the Commons; to Churchmen he was very
munificent and careful of their aduancements; and to grow more deeply into
their venerable esteem, he repaired their Monasteries; but most especially
that at Waltham in Essex, which he most sumptuously new built, and richly
endowed, giving it the name of Holy Cross; upon occasion that such a Cross
found far westward, was brought thither by miracle, vt tradunt: and therefore
he chose out this place to power forth his supplications, before he Camb.
Brit.
marched to meet Duke William in the field. Moreover, to satisfy such Nobles
as affected young Edgars iuster title, he created him Earl of Oxford, and held
him in special favor: in brief, unto the poor, his hand was ever open, unto
the oppressed he ministered justice, and unto all men was affable, and meek:
and all to hold that upright which on his head he had set with an uneven hand:
and deprived him of, unto whom he was Protector.

(13) Three several reports are affirmed of Edwards dispose of the Crown: the
first was to the Norman Duke, who made that the anker-hold of Alfred Benerl^y.
Spec^ Histor. Rich. C^st. Flor^ Histor.
his claim; the second was to young Edgar, unto whom he was great uncle; and
the last unto this Harold himself: for so says Edmerus, and also Marianus,
who lived at the very same time, and writes Ed^. Maria^. Polyer. (...). (...).
ca. 2^.
that Harold thereupon was sacred and crowned by Aldredus Archbishop of York;
so that hereby he is freed by some from the imputation of intrusion and wrong.

(14) His State thus standing, and his subjects contentment day^y increasing,
presently it was somewhat perplexed by an Embassage sent from the Norman,
putting him in mind of his covenant, and oath, as well for the custody of the
Crown to his behoof, as for the solemnazion of the marriage contracted betwixt
his daughter and him.

(15) Harold, who thought himself now surely seated in the hearts of his
Subjects, and therefore also sure in his Kingdom, answered the Ambassadors,
Subjects love the Sovereigns strength.
That he held their Masters demand unjust, for that an oath extorted in time
of extremity, cannot bind the maker in conscience to perform it, for that were
to join one sin with another; and that this oath was taken for fear of
death or imprisonment, the Duke himself well knew: but admit it was
voluntarily, and without fear; could I (said he) then a subject, without the
allowance of the King, and the whole State, give away the Crowns succession to
the prejudice of both? surely a Kingdom is of a better account then to be so
determined in private only betwixt two. With which kind of answers he sent
the messengers away.

(16) The Norman, who till then thought England sure to be his, and had devoted
his hopes from a Duke to a King, stormed to see himself thus frustrated on the
sudden, and in stead of a Crown to have scorns heaped on his head; therefore
nothing contented with this slight answer, returned his Ambassadors again
unto Harold, by whom he laid his claim more at large; as that King Edward in
the Court of France had faithfully promised the succession unto him, and again
afterward ratified the Rand. Higden in Polyc. lib. 6. cap. 29
same to him at his being in England, and that not done without consent of the
State, but confirmed by Stigandus Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earls
Goodwin and Syward, yea and by Harold himself, and so firmly assured that his
Brother and Nephew were delivered for pledges, and to that end sent unto him
into Normandy: that he had no way been constrained, he appealed to Harolds
own conscience, who besides his voluntary offer to swear, contracted himself
to Adeliza his daughter (then but young, and now departed life) upon
Gemeticensi^.
which foundation the oath was willingly taken.

(17) But Harold who thought his own head as fit for a crown as any others,
meant nothing less then to lay it down upon parley; and therefore told them
flatly, that howsoever Edward and he had tampered for the Kingdom, yet Edward
himself coming in by election, and not by any title of inheritance, his
promise was of no validity; for how could he give that whereof he was not
interessed, nor in the Danes time was ever like to be? And tell your Duke (said
he) that our kingdom is now brought to a settled estate, and with such love and
liking of the English, as that they will never admit any more a stranger to
rule over them. And as touching the contract with his younger daughter, he well
sees, that God has taken away that occasion of alienating the Crown; and
surely his Law has likewise provided remedy against such rash v^ws; whose
precepts I mean to follow: and therefore (said he) will your Duke to weigh my
estate with his own, both his and mine now in quiet, and sufficient for two,
and either of them, employment enough for one man's Government, and therefore
both of them too much to be well governed by one, seeing that God himself had
set a sea betwixt them. With these and the like speeches he shifted off the
Dukes Ambassadors; without all princely entertainements, or courteous regard.

(18) The messengers returned, and Harolds answers declared, William lion-like
enraged, casts his thoughts about plotting revenge, and making some odds
even that might impeach his designs, prepared all things for open war.
Harold likewise not sleeping his business, made ready his Fleet, mustered his
soldiers, and planted his Garris^s along the Seacoast. But in these his
procee^gs, Bishop of (...).
behold^ great and fearful Comete appeared (seldom a figne to Princes of
fortunate success) upon Roger Ho^d. Si^ Most of Dur^am. ^lter Co^.
the twenty fourth of April, and lasted only seven days, which drew the
minds of the English, into great suspense, now ready to enter into a double
war.

(19) For as (...) the Norman for his part claymed England by gift; so Harfager
the Da^e did by succession; the rumors of both which, greatly terrified the
hearts of the inhabitants: and yet behold, a third terror unexpected,
contrary to nature, and most men's opinions, suddenly arose: for Tosto the
cruel Earl of Northumberland, and brother to Harold, expulsed by his people,
and proscribed by King Edward, fled into France, where by the instigations of
William, whose wives sister he had married (both of them the daughters of
Balwine Earl of Flanders,) he got for his revenge a Fleet furnished Mat.
Westminster.
with men at Arms; and thus prepared, his first fury was showed in spoiling
the I Will of Wight; then coasting the shore, shrewdly endammaged Ran. Higden.
Kent, whence hois^ng sail, fell foul upon Lincolnshire; where Morcar and
Edwine Earls of Chester and Yorkshire, aided with the Kings Navy, drove him
from thence, though with some loss of their Will. Malmsb.
men.

(20) Tosto for more succor fled into Scotland, where of King Malcolme he had
but cold comfort, himself being busied with civil broiles; but howsoever his
expectation there failed, yet his purposes Mat. Westminster. Simon Dunel.
were continued with the assistance of Harold Harfager (that is, the
Faire-lockes) King of Denmark, who with three hundred ships had entered the
river Tyne for Englands invasion, after his conquest of the Isles of Orknes.
Tosto therefore ioining his Fleet to these Danes, in warlike bravery, both of
them enter the mouth of Humber, and drawing up the river Ouse, at Richhall
landed their men, making spoil of the Country wheresoever they came. To meet
with these, the foresaid Earls Edwin and Morcar, in a tumultuous have raised
their powers, but were so ouerlaid by the Norwegians, that many were slain,
and more drowned, in passing over that river.

(21) The enemy grown proud by this late victory, hasted toward York, the
chief City of the North; where planting his siege, it was presently yielded
up, and hostages delivered upon both parts for the performance of covenants.
The Danes thus prospering, had most strongly encamped themselves; for backed
they were with the German Ocean, flanked on the left hand with the river
Humber, wherein also their Fleet rid at Anchor, and had on their right hand and
afront the river Derwent; so that it seemed impossible to raise this siege.

(22) But Harold thinking the coasts clear from all danger, the Equinoctial
at hand, and Navigations now past, the victuals in his Fleet spent, and notice
from Earl Balwin of Flanders, that Duke William meant not his voyage that
year, was about to disband his Army. When this sudden news from the North
pierced his ear, no need it was then to bid him make haste thither, the case
standing so near him as it did. Therefore recalling his Army, posted to York,
and from thence marched against the Norwegians, who lay secured with such
advantage, as we have said. Notwithstanding Harold courageously ordered his
battle, and assaied to pass the Bridge called Will. Malmsb. Henry Hunting.
Mat. Westminster.
Stamford, built over Derwent, which one only Dane made good for a time
against his whole host, and with his Ax slew forty of his men, till lastly this
Dane was slain with a dart.

(23) The Bridge gotten, and the English reduced into their ranks, Harold most
boldly set upon his enemies even in their Camp; where the battle with equal
valor and fortune, was maintained a time, till lastly the Norwegians
disarraied and scattered, were slain outright; and among them the two
Chieftaines, Harfager and Tosto, with may others of worth and account, lost
their lives. Olane the son of this Harfager, and Paul Earl of Orkeney, who
kept their Fleet and Seas, whilst his Father and followers fought upon land,
were brought to King Harold, and to have their lives spared, abiured the Land,
and thenceforth to attempt no hostility against the English peace; and with
twenty small vessels to carry away their slain and hurt, were suffered to
depart, Simon Dun.
bringing heavy news into Denmark of the loss of their King, and overthrow
of his Army. Mat. Westminster.


(24) By this victory thus happily obtained, fell unto Harold an exceeding rich
booty, both of gold and silver, besides the great Armado of Tosto and Harfager;
whereby his mind was soon set aloft, and he began to grow both proud, and
odious unto his Army, the rather; for that he divided not the spoils unto them
that had deserved it; a wrong that the common Soldier does continually murmr
at, and commonly endure.

(25) Now in this current of King Harolds fortunes, William the Norman had the
more leisure to strengthen his own, and often conferring with his Cambd. Brit.
Captains about Englands invasions, found them ever resolute and cheerful
that way; the difficulty only rested, how to provide money enough, the very
sinews whereby the vast body of an Army must be knit, and strengthened: for a
subsidy being propounded unto the assembly of the Norman States, it was
answered, that a former war against the French had empouerished much of their
wealth, that if new wars were now raised, and therein their substance spent to
gain other parts, it would be thereby so wasted, as that hardly it would be
sufficient to defend their own; that they thought it more safety to hold what
he had, then on hazard of their own to invade the territories of others; and
that this war intended, just though it were, yet seemed not necessary, but
exceeding dangerous; besides (said they) the Normans were not by their
allegiance bound to Military services in foreign parts, and therefore such
paiments could not be assessed upon them. And although William Fitz-Osberne, a
man in high favor with the Duke, and as gracious among the people, endeavored
by all means to effect it, yea, and (to draw on others by his example)
proffered to set out forty tall Ships upon his own Charges toward this war;
yet would it not be: Therefore Duke William bethought him on another way.

(26) The wealthiest men among all his People he sent for, and severally one by
one conferred with, showing them his right and hopes of England, wherein
preferment lay eue^ to the meanest amongst them, only money was the want, which
they might spare; neither should that be given, nor lent without a plentiful
increase: with such fair words he drew them so on, that they strove who should
give most, and by this policy he gathered such a mass of money, as was
sufficient to defray the war. Then went he to his neighbor Princes, namely
to the Earls of Anion, Poictou, Main, and Bulloigne, promising them fair
possessions in England; yea and unto Philip the French King, in case he would
aid him, he voluntarily offered to become his vassal and Leige-man, and to
hold England by oath and fealty under him. But it being thought nothing good
for the State of France, that the Duke of Normandy, who already was not so
pliable to the French King as was wished, should be bettered in his estate by
the addition of so mighty a Kingdom (the power of Neighbor Potentates being
ever suspected of Princes) so far was the King from yielding any help, that
he secretly maligned, and openly dissuaded this his attempt of inuading
England. This French iealousy, the Norman soon perceived, which made him to
cast about yet another way.

(27) For making his claim known unto Alexander the second, then Pope of
Rome, with the wrongs done unto Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, by Harold and
his Father, (a text that might not be read Henry H^.
without a gloss,) he was so favored of his Holiness (whose See was ever
glad to interest it self in disposing of Crowns, that he both allowed well of
his enterprise, and sent him a consecrated Banner, (Saint Peter himself had
none such in his Boat) to be borne in Fox. Acts and Monumenta.
the Ship, wherein himself in that expedition should take sail for England;
and accursed al them that should oppose themselves against him: for even then
the Popes had began to usurp authority over Princes, and with their leaden
blades to hacke into the iron swords of Emperors.

(28) Thus furnished on all sides, he assembled his forces, and with a mighty
Navy came to the Town of Saint Valeries; which stands upon the mouth of the
River Some: where a long time he lay wind bound to his great coffeehouse,
and with many vows importunating the favor of that local Saint, heaped Rand.
Higden.
daily a number of gifts and oblations upon his Altar; till lastly his desire
was obtained, and then with three hundred Ships fraught full of his Normans,
Flemings, Frenchmen, and Britaignes, waighed Anchor, and with a gentle gale of
wind arrived at Peuensey in Sussex, upon the twenty eight day of September,
where Landing his men, to cut off all occasion or hope of return, he fired his
own fleet, and upon the Shore erected a Fortress to be if need were,
(...) retiring place for his Soldiers.

(29) At his arriuage from Sea, (...) our Historians Rand. Higden in Polycbr.
li. 6. c. 29.
report, his foot chanced to slip, so that not able to recover himself, he
fell into the mud, and all to bemired his hands; which accident was presently
construed for a lucky presage: for now (said a Captain) O Duke, thou have
taken possession, and hold that land in thy hand, whereof shortly thou shall
become King: As Caesar is said to have done, when he entered into (...) in vita
Caesar.
Africa, who from shipboard at his landing fell into the sands, and merrily
said, I do now take possession of thee, O Africa.

(30) From Peuensey Duke William departed toward Hasting, where raising
another fortification, diuulged to all the causes of his coming, as pretending
to revenge both the death of his Normans, slain by the treachery of Goodwin and
Harold, and the wrongs and banishment of Robert Gemeticus Archbishop of
Canterbury, pretenses very slender, and enforced out of season: but surely had
not a third sat nearer his heart, the two former would have passed without the
spleen of revenge; namely, the donation of King Edward deceased, whereon he
built his claim to the English Crown. And there also by his Edict, he
straitely charged his soldiers not in hostile manner, to wrong any of their
persons, who shortly were to become his Subjects.

(31) Harold in the North hearing of these news, hasted with his Army (whose
Armor yet reaked with the blood of the Norwegians) toward the south and with
such power as possible he could make, enters London, where immediately a
messenger from Duke William was presented unto him, demanding no less then
the Kingdom, and Harolds vassalage; urging the same with such instant
boldness, that Harolds furious indignation could hardly forbear, against the
law of Arms, to lay violent hands upon the Ambassador; so great a pride and
confident hope had entered the heart of this late Victor: to show both, with
very great boldness, he dispatcheth his Ambassadors to William, and by way of
irefull checkes menaceth him, unless forthwith he departed back into
Normandy: when presently mustering his men at London, he found them much Will.
Malmsb.
lessened by his battle against the Norwegians; notwithstanding, many Nobles,
Gentlemen, and others, whom the love of their native Country inflamed, did
engage themselves for the field, against his common and dangerous enemy. He
therefore with an undaunted courage, led forth his Army into Sussex (against
the importunate suite of his mother, who sought by all means to stay him)
where on a large and fair plain, scarce seven miles from the enemy, he
pitched down his battles, and sent forth his Espials to descry his power.

(32) These coming into danger, were caught by the Normans, and presented to
their Duke, who commanded them forth with to be led from Tent to Tent, to be
feasted, and dismissed, without any harm or dishonor done. These returning to
Harold Mat. Westminst. Rand. Higden.
told what they had seen, commending the Duke in his Martial Provisions, and
his clemency to themward, only said they, his Soldiers seem to be Priests, for
their faces were all shaven, whereas the use of the English was then to reserve
only the upper lip uncut, retaining or renewing the old manner of the
ancient Britains so described by Caesar: but King Harold, who had bin in that
country, well knowing their Caesar in Comment.
error, replied that they were men of great valor and stout Soldiers in
fight. Upon which speech, Girth, his younger brother, a man much renowned for
martial exploits, took occasion to advise the King from being present at the
danger of the Field: for (said he) it stands not with the rule of policy, to
hazard all in the trial of one battle, nor to depend upon the event of war,
which ever is doubtful, victory being as often gotten by fortune, as valor;
mature deliberatio^ does often produce the safest issues, and a prouide^t delay
is held to be the greatest furtherer of martial proiects; neither will any
thing strike greater terror. into the Normans, then thou to be leuying, and
enrolling a new Army, whereby they may ever expect, and fear succeeding
Battails. Again (said he) thou best know what oath thine own mouth has
made unto William; if lawful, and willingly, then withdraw thy self from
field, lest for that thy sin the whole Host perish; for there can be no
power against God. I am free from such guilt, and therefore may the bolder
fight, and either defeat this dangerous enemy, or more cheerfully dye in the
defense of my country; and if thou will commit the fortune of Battle into my
Governance, assure thy self I will perform to thee the part of a loving
Brother, and to my Countrymen of a valiant Captain.

(33) This wise advice notwithstanding, destiny so driving him, he gaine-stood,
imputing it a part of dishonor, and not befitting a Soldier, (as he always
had been,) to leave the field Coward-like, when greatest glory was to be
won, or in case of fortunate success, to be deprived of a part, and
therefore reproved his brother for making this motion, and with disdainefull
speeches, undervalued and embased the worth of the Normans.

(34) Duke William now entered the field, and both the hosts standing ready for
fight, the Norman, to spare the effusion of Christian blood, upon a pious
affection sent a Monk as a Mediator for peace, with offers to Harold of these
conditions, either wholly to resign the Kingdom unto him, and from thence
forth to acknowledge the Duke for his Sovereign: or else in single combat to
try the quarrel with him, in sight of the Armies; or lastly, to stand to the
arbitrament of the Pope, touching the possession and wearing of the English
Crown. But Harold, as one whom the heavens would depresse, accepting neither
domesticke counsel, nor the Normans offers, referred the deciding of the
matter unto the Tribunal of God, and answered, that it should be tried the
next day with more swords then one.

(35) That next day was the 14. of October, which upon a credulous error, he
held ever to be fortunate, because it was the day of his Nativity, and with
hopeful assurance, desired greatly the approach of the same: His soldiers
likewise as men whose heads were to be crowned with the Laurels of victory,
gave themselves to licentious revels, and in riotous banquets, with clamor,
and noises, spent the night; whereas contrariwise, the Normans, more wisely,
and seriously weighing the business in hand, bestowed the time in prayers and
vows, for the safety of their Army, and victorious success: neither had the
morning sooner spread it self but their battle was ordered, and prepared for
fight.

(36) Harold also with the like forwardnes, marshalled his battle, placing in
the Vant-guard the Kentish Tho. Ni^s.
men (who by an ancient custom had the front of the battle belonging to
them) with their heavy axes, or halberts. The Middlesex-men and the Londoners
were in that squadron, whereof himself with his brother had the leading.

37 His enemies Vanward was led by Roger of Mountgomery, and William
Fitz-Osberne, the same consisting of Horsemen out of Anion, Perch, and little
Britain. Their Maine-Battaile consisted of Poictouins and Germans, Geffrey
Martell, and a Germane Pensioner commanding them: In the Rere-guard was the
Duke himself with the whole manhood of Normans, and the flower of his Nobility
and Gentry; all which battallio^s were intermingled with companies of Archers.

(38) The Normans without any confused, or disorderly shout; sounded the
battle, and advanced forward, discharging a fierce volley of arrows like a
tempestuous hail, a kind of fight both strange, and terrible unto the English,
who supposed their enemy had been already even in the midst amongst them;
when presently a furious charge was given to the Va-ward of the English, who
resolutely had determined to cover the place with their bodies rather then to
give one foot of ground, and bending all their forces, kept themselves close
together, whereby they valiantly, and with the slaughter of many, put back the
enemy: which was so far from daunting the Normans, that by it they were more
whetted to re-enforce themselves upon them: when with an horrible noise, the
battles of both sides gave the stroke; and now come foot to foot, and man to
man, coped together in a most cruel fight. The English standing thick, and
close, as if they had been stuck one to another, abode the brunt, and charge
of the Normans, and with such welcomes, that after many a bloody wound
received, they were at point to recoile, had not Duke William, whose crown lay
now at stake, both bravely performed the part of a Leader, and with his
presence, and authority restrained them. The fight thus continuing, the Normans
horsemen brake into the troops of the English, and sore distressed the
Soldiers on foot, yet notwithstanding they still held out, and kept their
array unbroken: for Harold (no less careful to keep, then the other to gain
a diadem,) as a most valiant Captain bare himself worthily every where. The
Duke well perceiving that with fine force, and true valor, no good end could
be got, betook himself to a stratageme, and commanded his men to sound Will.
Malmsb. Henry Hunting.
the retreat, but kept them still in such order of array, that they gave back
in as good discipline as they came on.

(39) The English supposing the Normans to have fled, and themselves the
masters of the field, began in eager pursuit carelessly to untwist, and display
their rancks; when on the sudden, the Normans having their wished opportunity,
and winding about, charged the enemy a fresh; who now being scatteringly
disranked, and out of all order, were slain down on all sides, not able to
recover their battle: many thus borne down, and slain, none by flight
sought to escape the field, but rather to maintain their honor in Arms, cast
themselves into a round, choosing there to die in the cause of their Country,
then cowardly to forsake the Standard of their King: and therefore with bold
resolutions encouraging one an other, they turn head and resist a long time:
but showers of arrows like a stormy tempest falling thick among them, one,
most fatal, and unlucky Chron. de (...). Will. Ge^.
for the English, wounded Harold into the brains through the left eye; so that
falling from his horse to the ground, was under his own standard slain. Mat.
Westminster.


(40) And yet Giraldus Cambrensis (I know not by what inducement,) relates the
issue of this Battle somewhat otherwise, affirming, that Harold with loss
Giral. Cambr.
of his Eye, but not of his life, from the field fled to the City of
Westchester, and there long after led a holy life, and made a godly end, as an
Anchoret in the Cell of Saint James, fast by the church of S. Io^. With Harold
died his Brethren Gyth, and Leofwin, with most of the English Nobility, besides
the slaughter of sixty seven thousand, nine hundred seventy four of their Io^n
le Tai^ in his history of (...). (...). Bremensis. cap. 169. Maria^.
Soldiers: Bremensis says an hundred Thousand.

(41) Duke William in this Battle had three horses slain under him; God (says
Marianus) so defending his person, that though multitude of darts were thrown
against him, yet not a drop of his blood was spilt by the Enemy, and this
Battle won with the loss only of six thousand, and thirteen of his men.
Whose wodden bows (as John Rouse is of opinion) gained the Normans that great
victory; for the Arrows I^: Rest.
shot level, or directly forward, wounded the English that stood in the front,
and upright; the other shot on high, galled at the fall, those that were more
remote, and the backs of such as stooped to shun the danger.

(42) This battle was fought in Sussex 7. miles from Hastings, upon Saturday
the fourteenth of October, and year of Grace 1066. Wherein the doleful
destruction of the English fell, and the glorious Sun of the Normans even in
the shutting of the day did arise; when perished the Royal blood of the
Saxons, whose Kings first had made this Kingdom into Seven, Math. Part.
and afterward of them so glorious a Monarchy, that it was not inferior to any
in Europe, and her Monarchs so renowned for princely magnanimity, as that many
of them were ranked with the best in the world: But now the all-ordering hand
of God (unto whose beck not only this Ball of the Earth, and the Rulers
thereof, but even the Heavens themselves, and all the powers thereof must bow)
either for the sins of the English which were many, and great, or to graffe
one more fair and lo^ger-continuing bud upon this dried, and decayed stock,
brought that foreign offspring into this his nursery of Britain, whose
branches, as the vine, have spread both fruitful and far; and whose roots
are fastened as the trees of Libanon: the Kings thereof, even from the loins of
this Great Conqueror, holding on a royal succession for the space of these
five hundred forty five years, their Host. 14. 6.
issues topped with the highest Cedars of the world, and their branches spread
thorowout al Christendom, which we pray may still proceed and continue,
whilst the Sun and Moon have their being.

(43) This victory thus obtained, Duke William wholly ascribed unto God, and by
way of a solemn supplication or procession gave him the thanks; and pitching
for that night his Pauilio^ among the bodies of the dead, the next day returned
to Hastings, there to consult upon his great, and most prosperously begun
enterprise, giving first commandment for the burial of his slain Soldiers.

(44) But Morcar, and Edwin, the unfortunate Queens Brethren, by night
escaping the battle, came unto London, where with the rest of the Peers, they
began to lay the foundation of some fresh hopes, posting thence their
messenger^ ^o raise a new supply, and to comfort the English (who through all
the Land were stricken into a fearful astonishment with this unexpected news)
from a despairing fear, showing the chance of war to be mutable, their
number many, and Captains sufficient to try another Field. Alfred, Archbishop
of York, there present, and President of the Assembly, stoutly, and prudently
gave his counsel forthwith to consecrate, and crown young Edgar Atheling (the
true heir) for their King; to whom consented likewise both the Sea-Captaines,
and the Londoners. But the Earls of Yorkshire and Cheshire, Edwin and Morcar
(whom this fearful state of their country could not dissuade from dissoyaltie
and ambition) plotting secretly to get the Crown to themselves, hindered that
wise and noble design. In which while, the sorrowful Queen their sister was
conveyed to West-chester, where, without state or title of a Queen* she led a
solitary and quiet life.

(45) (...) ^other of the slain King did not so well moderate (...) womanly
passions, as to receive either comfort, or counsel of her friends: the dead
body of her so^e she greatly desired, and to that end sent to the Conquer^ two
sage Brethren of his Abbey at Walt^ who had accompanied him in his unfortunate
(...). Their names (as I find them In the (...) of the learned Knight, Sir
(...).
recorded in ^n (...) Manuscript^ were Os^god and A^rie, whose (...) to the
Conquer^ not without abundance of tears, and fear, is there set down in the
tenor as follows.

(46) Noble Duke, and ere^ong to be a most great and mighty King; we thy most
humble servants, destitute of all comfort, (as we would we were also of life)
are come to thee as sent from our brethren, whom this dead King has placed in
the Monastery of Waltham, to attend the issue of this late dreadful battle;
(wherein God favoring thy quarrel, he is now taken away, and dead, which was
our greatest Comforter, and by whose only bountiful goodness, we were
relieved and maintained, whom he had placed to serve God in that Church.
Wherefore we most humbly request thee (now our dread Lord) by that gracious
favor which the Lord of Lords has showed unto thee, and for the rel^ife of
all their souls, who in this quarrel have ended their days, that it may b^e
lawful for us by thy good leave, safely to take and carry away with us the
dead body of the King, the Founder and builder of our Church and Monastery: as
also the bodies of such others, as who, for the reverence of him, and for his
sake, desired also to be buried with us, that the state of our Church, by their
help strengthened, may be the stronger, and endure the firmer. With whose so
humble a request, and abundant tears, the victorious and worthy Duke moved,
answered.

(47) Your King (said he) unmindful of his faith, although he have for the
present endured the worthy punishment of his fault, yet has he not therefore
deserved to want the honor of a Sepulcher, or to lie unburied: were it but
that he died a King, howsoever he came by the Kingdom, my purpose is for the
reverence of him, and for the health of them, who having left their wives and
possessions, have here in my quarrel lost their li^es, to build here a Church
and a Monastery, with an hundred Monks in it to pray for them for ever; and in
the same Church to bury your King above the rest, with all honor unto so great
a Prince, and for his sake to endow the same with great revenues.

(48) With which his courteous speech and promises, the two religious Fathers
comforted, and encouraged, again replied.

(49) Not so, noble Duke, but grant this thy servants most humble request, that
we may, for God, by thy leave, receive the dead body of our Founder, and to
bury it in the place which himself in his life time appointed; that we cheered
with the presence of his body, may thereof take comfort, and that his Tomb may
be unto our Successors, a perpetual Monument of his remembrance.

(50) The Duke, as he was of disposition gracious, and inclined to mercy,
forthwith granted their desires: whereupon they drew out store of gold to
present him in way of gratulation; which he not only utterly refused, but also
offered them plenty to supply whatsoever should be needful for the pomp of
his funeral, as also for their costs in travel to and fro; giving strait
commandment that none of his Soldiers should presume to molest them in this
their business, or in their return. Then went they in haste to the quarry of
the dead, but by no means could find the body of the King, for that the
countenances of all men greatly alter by death; but being maimed and imbrued
with blood, they are not known to be the men they were. As for his other
regal Ornaments, which might have showed him for their King, his dead corpse
was despoiled of them, either through the greedy desire of prey, (as the manner
of the Field is) or to be the first bringer of such happy news, in hope of a
Princely reward; upon which purpose many times the body is both mangled and
dismembered: and so was this King after his death by a base Souldire, gasht and
hackt into the leg, whom Duke William rewarded for so vnsouldier like a deed,
casshiering him for ever out of his wages and wars. So that Harold lying
stripped, wounded, bemangled, and goared in his blood, could not be found or
known, till they sent for a woman named Editha, (for her passing beauty
surnamed Swan-shals, that is, Swans-necke, whom he entertained in secret love
before he was King, who by some secret marks of his body to her well known,
found him out; and then put into a coffine, was by diverse of the Norman
Nobility honorably brought unto the place, afterward called Battle-bridge,
where it was met by the Nobles of England, and so conveyed to Waltham, was
there solemnly, and with great lamentation of his mother, roially interred,
with this rude Epitaph, well beseeming the time, though not the person. Heu
cadis host fero, Rex a Duce Rege futuro,
Par paris in gladio, milite and valido.
Firmini iusti lux est tibi, lucc Calixti;
Pronior hinc super as, h^c superatus eras.
Ergo tibi requiem deposcat vtrumque perennem:
Sicque precetur eum, quod colit omne Deum.
A fierce foe thee slew; thou'a King, he King in view;
Both peers, both peerless, both feared, and both fearles;
That sad day was mixed, by Firmin and Calixt,
The One help thee to vanquish, the other made thee la^guish;
Both now for thee pray, and thy Requiem say;
So let good men all, to God for thee call.


(51) This Kings reign was not so full of days as of great troubles: being but
the space of nine months Sigebertus Will. Gemitticen G^lt. Couen. (...).
Woodbridge.
and nine days, in whom was completed the Period of the Saxons Empire in
Britain, after they had continued from their first erected kingdom by Hengist
in Kent, the space of six hundred and ten years, without any reuersement or
interruption saving the small Inter-Raignes of these three Danish Kings, of
whom we have spoken. And although Aimund of Breme, in the favor of his Danes,
sharply taxes this Aimund. Brem. chap. 1^9.
Harold as being an impious man, and for that by usurpation he aspired to the
Crown, yet does Ealred the Abbot of Riuanxe, (the Legender of S. Edwards life)
much commend him for his courteous affability, Allured Ri^lle (...).
gentle deportment, and Justice, and for his warlike prowess none matchable
unto him; and was reputed (says he) verily a man passing well furnished with
all virtues befitting a Sovereign commander, and borne even to repair the
decayed state of England; had he not, in the haughtiness and opinion of his
own valor and prudence, so much addicted himself to his own resolutions, and
too much neglected the wise deliberations of his best friends and counselors.

His Wives.
(52) The first wife of Harold, whom he had married and buried before he was
King, I find not named by any of our writers; but that he had such a one,
appears, where it is recorded that he was a Widower, what time he contracted
the Conquerors daughter; and that also he had children of such age, that they
made wars against King William in the second of his Reign; which it is
probable, he had not by Editha, his Swannes neck, but were legitimat, and by
this lawful, though namelesse Mother.

(53) Algith, the second wife to King Harold, was the widow of Gruffith ap
Lhewelyn King of North Wales, the sister of Edwine and Morcar Earls of
Yorkshire, and Chester, and daughter of Algar son of Leofrick, son of
Leofwine, all Earls of Chester, Leicester and Lincoln: She was married unto
him being then but Duke, in the last year of Edward Confessors reign, and of
Grace 1065. neither did she long enjoy him, or her Queenly title, after his
aspiring to the Crown; for being resident in London when he was slain, from
thence she was conveyed by her brethren to Westchester, where she remained in
mean estate, and in good quiet (which usually most attends the meanest)
without any princely show or name, during the rest of her life, which lasted a
great part of the Conquerors reign.

His Issue.
(54) Goodwine the eldest son of King Harold, being grown to some ripeness
of years in the life of his Father, after his death and overthrow by the
Conqueror, took his brother with him, and fled over into Ireland: from whence
he returned, and landed in Sommersetshire, slew Ednoth (a Baron sometime of his
Fathers) that encountered him, and taking great preyes in Deuon-shire and
Cornwall, departed till the next year. When coming again, he fought with
Beorn an Earl of Cornwall, and after retired into Ireland, and thence went
into Denmark to King Swayn his Cosen-German, where he spent the rest of his
life

(55) Edmund, the second son to King Harold, went with his Brother into
Ireland, returned with him into England, and was at the slaughter and overthrow
of Ednoth, and his power in Sommersetshire; at the spoils committed in
Cornwall and Devonshire; at the conflict with the Cornish Earl Beorn; passed
and repassed with him in all his voiages, invasions and wars, by sea and by
land, in England and Ireland; and at the last departed with him from Ireland to
Denmark; took part with him of all pleasure and calamity whatsoever, and
attending and depending wholly upon him, lived and died with him in that
Country.

(56) Magnus the third son of King Harold, went with his brothers into Ireland;
and returned with them the first time into England, and is never after M*
Ferres Ca^b. in Sussex.
that mentioned amongst them, nor elsewhere, unless, (as some do conjecture))
he be that Magnus who seeing the mutability of humane affairs, became an
Anchoret, whose Epitaph pointing to his Danish original, the learned
Clarenciaux discovered in a little desolate Church at Jews in Sussex, where in
the gaping chinks of an Arch in the wall, in a rude and ouerworne Character,
certain old imperfect verses were found, which he supposes should be thus
read; Clauditur hic Miles Danorum regia proles,
Magnus nomen ei, magnae nota Progenici.
Deponens Magnum, prudentior induit agnum*
Pr^pete pr^vita, fit paruulus Anachorita.
H^re lies a Knight of Danish regal^;
He Gr^.
Magnus hight; great name note of great place:
But Magnus left, an A (...).
Agnus mild he prou^de,
From world bereft, an Anchorite beloved.


(57) Wolf the fourth son of King Harold, seems to be borne of Queen
Algith his second wife for that he was never mentioned among his other
brethren, and having better friends by his mothers side, was left in England,
whereas they were forced thence; neither is he spoken of, during all the reign
of the Conqueror, and therefore at his entrance may probably be thought to
have been but an Infant: yet after his death he is named among his prisoners
with Earl Morcar (his uncle, if Queen Algith were his mother) and was by King
William Rufus released, and honored by him with the Order of Knighthood.

(58) Gunhild a daughter of King Harold is mentioned by John Capgraue (the
Writer of the English John Capgraue.
Saints) in the life of Wolstan Bishop of Worcester, reporting her to have
been a Nun in a Monastery of England; who, among the many miracles done by
the said Wolstan, (which he numbreth by tale, according to the superstitious
manner of the time wherein he lived) declares, how he restored this Lady to
her perfect eyesight, whereof by a dangerous infirmity, she was almost wholly,
and in most men's opinions, vncurably deprived.

(58) Another daughter of King Harold not named by any Story-writer of our own
nation, is mentioned by Saxo Gra^maticus in his Danish history, to have come
Saxo Gram^aticus lib. 11.
into Denmark, with her two brethren; to have been very honorably entertained
by King Swain the younger, her kinsman: and afterward to have been as
honorably placed in marriage with Gereslef, called in Latin Iarislaues, and of
the Danes Waldemar, King of the Russians: and by him to have had a daughter,
that was the mother of Waldemar, the first of that name King of Denmark, from
whom all the Danish Kings for many ages after succeeded.

The end of the eighth Book.
A CATALOGVE OF THE ENGLISH MONARCHS FROM WILLIAM THE CONQVEROVR, UNTO KING
JAMES, NOW SO LE MONARCH OF GREAT BRITAIN, WHOSE ACTS ARE ENTREATED OF IN
THIS ENSVING HISTORY.
KINGS. BEGINNINGS. REIGN. DEATH. BVRIALL. Years Months Days years months
days Years Months Days WILLIAM I. 1066. Oct. 14. Sat. 20 10 26 1087 Sept. 9
Thurs. Cane. WILLIAM II. 1087. Sept. 9. Thurs. 12 10 22 1100 Aug. 1 Wedn.
Winchester. HENRY I. 1100. Aug. 1. Wedns. 35 3 1 1135 December. 2 Mon. Reading.
STEPHEN. 1135 Dec. 2 Monday 18 9 17 1154 October. 25 Mon. Feuersham. HENRY II.
1154 Oct. 25. Mon. 34 8 12 1189 July 6 Thur. Fonteuerard. RICHARD I. 1189 July
6 Thursd. 9 8 00 1199 April 6 Tues. Fonteuerard. JOHN. 1199 Apr. 6 Tuesd. 17 7
13 1216 October. 19 Wedn. Worcester. HENRY III. 1216 Oct. 19. Wedn. 56 0 27 1272
Nou. 16 Wedn. Westminster. EDWARD I. 1272 Nou. 16. Wedn. 34 7 21 1307 July 7
Frida. Westminster. EDWARD II. 1307 July 7 Friday 19 6 15 1326 depo. Ian. 22.
Sa. Gloucester. EDWARD III. 1326 Ian. 25 Satur. 50 4 27 1377 Inn 21 Sund.
Westminster. RICHARD II. 1377 June 21 Sunday 22 2 7 1399 dep. Sep. 29. (...).
Westminster. HENRY IIII. 1399 Sept. 29 Mond. 13 5 21 1412 March 20 Sund.
Feuersh^m. HENRY V. 1412 Mar. 20 Sund. 9 4 11 1422 Aug. 31 Mun. Westminster.
HENRY VI. 1422 Aug. 31. Mon. 38 6 4 1460 deposed. Mar. 4 Windsore. EDWARD IIII.
1460 Mar. 4. 22 1 5 1483 April 9 Windsore. EDWARD V. 1483 April 9 00 1 12 1483
^thered. Tower of Land. RICHARD III. 1483 June 22. 2 1 0 1485 slain Au. 29 Mo.
Leicester. HENRY VII. 1485 Aug. 22 Mon. 23 7 0 1509 April 22 Sund.
Westminster. HENRY VIII. 1509. April 22 Sund. 37 9 5 1546 Ian. 28 Thur.
Windsore. EDWAD VI. 1546 Ian. 28. Thurs. 6 5 9 1553 July 6 Thur. Westminster.
MARY. 1553 July 6 Thursd. 5 4 11 1558 Noue. 17 Thur. Westminster. ELIZABETH.
1558 Nou. 17. Thur. 44 4 6 1602 March 24 Thur. Westminster. JAMES. 1602 Mar.
24. Thur. NOS, T^ FLORENTE, BEATI.

THE SVCCESSION OF ENGLANDS MONARCHS FROM THE ENTRANCE OF THE NORMANS UNDER
WILLIAM THE CONQVEROR: UNTIL THE REGAL RIGHTS OF THE WHOLE ISLAND WERE BY GODS
PROVIDENCE UNITED UNDER ONE IMPERIAL DIADEM, IN THE PERSON OF OUR PRESENT
SOVEREIGN KING JAMES, SOLE MONARCH OF GREAT BRITAIN: THEIR SEVERAL ACTS,
ISSVES, REIGNS, ARMS, SEALS, AND COINS. CHAPTER I.
WHat has been spoken touching the Originals, Laws, and Customs of the
Saxons, and Danes, the ancient Conquerours, and possessors of this our Island,
may in like sort be said of the Normans (being abra^ch from the same root) of
whom we are now to write, saving only that the name is not so ancient, and
therefore their Manners may be thought more civil. Through the misty-darke
times of which Stories, together with that of the Romans, and of our Britains,
(wherein no brighter Sun did shine unto us) by the assistance of the all-seeing
power which brings light out of darkness, I am lastly approached to these times
of 2. Cor. 4. 6.
more light, and unto affairs of more certain truth: whose Current to my
seeming is made now Nauigable, by the many writers that have emptied their full
channels into this Sea: wherein, though in respect of my own defects, and that
so many Master-Pilotes have sailed before me, it may seem but presumption for
me to direct another course, with a purpose to better what they have so well
performed: yet to make a complete History from the first to the last* give me
leave to continue, as I have begun.

(2) These Normans then, being anciently a mixed Nation with the warlike
Norwegians, Swedens, and Danes, took their Name of that Northern Climate from
whence they came first, which was that Coast of ^many, anciently called
Cimbrica Chersonesus, (...) Nor-way, for that it tends in respect of
situation (...) far Northward; and from hence, and the part^jacent, the
Saxons, Iutes, Angles, and lately ^e D^s, made their incursions into this Land.

(3) This Tract therefore as the womb of co^ception, by the dispose of the
Omnipotent, after it had produced those Nations which formerly made Co^quests
of Brita^, now again brought forth (as it were) her lastborne Benjamin, who
devouring the pray in the morning, has divided the spoil in the Evening, and
hitherto continued Genesis 49. ^7.
their glorious fame achieved; which I pray, may extend to the last period of
Times being: For these Normans first by force got footing in France with the
Dominion, and Style of a Duke, and next the Diadem of this fair Empire, the
last and most famous Monarchs of the same.

(4) These, formerly practizing Piracies upon the Coasts of Belgia, Frizia,
England, Ireland, and France, proceeded in their hardy courses even to the
Mediterranean Sea: insomuch that Charles the Great seeing their roauing tall
Ships, and considering the bold attempts they vndertkooke, with a deep sigh,
and abundance of tears, is reported to have said: Heavy am I at the very
heart, that in my own life time, these Pirates dare to come upon my Coasts,
whereby I foresee what mischief they will work upon my Posterity. Which
indeed proved so great, that in their public Processions, and Letanies of the
Church, this Petition was added, From the rage of the Normans, Good Lord
deliver us. This fear, and prayer notwithstanding, they C^bd. Brit.
dra^e the French to such extremity, that King Charlet the Bald was forced to
give unto Hasting a Norman, Arch-pirate, the Earldom of Ch^ters, for to
assuage his fury exercised upon his People; and again; King Charles the
Gross, granted unto Godfrey the Normane part of Neustria, with his Daughter in
marriage: Yet all this sufficed not, but that the Normans by force of Arms
seated themselves near unto the mouth of Sein, taking all for their own that
lay comprised betwixt that River and the River Loyre: which * Country
afterward took the name of (...) (...)* de Nor^ (...).
from these Northern Guests, at what time King Charles the Simple, confirmed it
unto Rollo their Captain.

(5) This Rollo, as say the Danish Historians, was the son of Guion, a great
Lord in Denmark, who with Ro^. Albert Krant.
his brother Gouri^ were appointed to depart the Country (according to the
Danish customs) to seek their adventures abroad, and leave more room for the
rest at home; but these refusing the order made Polyer. lib. 6. (...). 1.
(...) upon the King, in which, both Guion the Father and Gourin the son,
were slain, and Rollo forced to fly for safeguard of his life, with whom went
a number of Gallants to seek Fortunes Court, and not a few misdoers or
out-lawedmen: whose Acts in England registered by Albertus Kranti^s, seeing they
vary from our own historians in circumstances of times; and ^es, I have chosen
in this place to insert, leaving the credit thereof to him the Reporter.

(6) Rollo, a Nobleman of Denmark, (says he) and too powerful in his Kings
eye, was forced with a Navy to adventure his Fortunes into foreign p^ts, whose
first arriuage, as he says, was in England, where many of the Danish nobility
had formerly tried their valors, and some of them attained to the Scepter,
(...) not of the whole, yet of a great part of that ^ngdom. Indeed, (says he)
England from the begi^g was (...) governed by one King, as now it is, for the
Angle-Saxons had their province, and the Mercians theirs, both governed by
Provincial Deputies, but the Northumbrians had a King; as the Scots and Picts
also, in the same Island, had kept their own limits under the like Government.
Amongst these Northumbrians the Danes had their cheifest abiding, and in this
Province Rollo the Dane brought first his men on Land, where making war upon
that Nation, he built both Castles and Fortresses to fortify himself, his
Navy lying upon the Seas: and proceeding forward into the Continent, took
great booties both of men, cattle, and other spoils, lading their ships as
they lay at Anchor: the Inhabitants of the Country making head against him, had
still the worst.

(7) Rollo yet doubtful and in suspense what to do, desired indeed to return
to his Country, but that the Kings indignation was an obstacle that way: next
he affected to try his Fortunes in France, yet feared the issue would be
dangerous, the People being exasperated against him, for the harms he had done
them: but chiefly the Diadem of England ran most in his mind, though he
knew the hazard was great, to match his small Forces with an host of a King: in
which perplexed thoughts, it chanced him (says my Author) to fall into a sweet
slumber, and in his sleep he seemed to sit in the Kingdom of France, upon a
high hill, Rollo his dream.
bending his headforward to a River which issued from the top of a mountain,
at the foot whereof beneath him, he Alb. Crantius.
saw many kinds of Birds, which washed their ruddy left wings in the same
water, where they all fed together, flew about, built their nests, and at times
appointed, brought forth their young.

(8) Rollo awaking from his pleasing dream, imparted the same unto his
consorts, desiring their judgments for interpretation; which no way satisfying
him, he called a Christian of his English Captives, a man industrious, and of
great Capacity, and of whose deep understanding he had a great opinion: this
captive then boldened, (and willing in likelihood, to divert Rollo from
infesting England) told him, that his dream was significant and good, and did
prognosticate the happy success of himself and whole Nation: for by The
dream expounded by an English Christi an Captive.
this he saw that he was shortly to receive a quiet possession, and a land of
great renown in the Continent of France, and that himself should be cleansed
in the Lauer of Baptism, wherein also the ruddy sins of his People should be
washed away, as the water had done the wings of the Birds.

(9) This interpretation pleased Rollo well, and he easily believed that which
he most affected, as in the like kind dreamers commonly do: therefore
providing all things for France, he set his countenance only that way; yet
because he had already performed great matters in England, he thought to follow
Fortune for his best Leader, and before he departed from so fair a Rollo
sends to sound King Alstan.
land, intended to sound the King by an Embassage, that so, if he might find
him inclinable to a league, he might have a refuge against future chances; if
not, then was he resolute to go forward with his journey: therefore making
choice of certain active persons, sent them to the English king Alstan, a
Prince of a special religion and holiness of life: these having audience,
uttered their message as follows.

(10) We being men distressed, and driven from our Country, sought out in
banishment an habitation to restin, and going forth, very many followed us, who
encouraged us to seek and win a land by Conquest, supplying us with
strength, and giving us great hope of victory: which thing when we resolved to
take in hand, a Tempest of weather drove us (O King) into these English Ports,
where staying a fit season to put again forth, the Winter withheld us, and our
wants made us to seek further into the Land: whereupon our men, evermore
brought up to the war, being evil entreated of those inhabitants, where
moved by such injuries to provide for their own defense; wherein some small
skirmishes have passed betwixt them. Our Prince therefore and General Rollo
does humbly require peace of thee, and to be permitted to soiourne in thy Land
for a time, and to relieve his company with things necessary, we paying
sufficiently for it: these things when thou shall grant, he shall rest content
and pacified, until the next spring, at which time he means to take his
intended voyage.

(11) Alstenus, not ignorant of the Danish cruelty, and with how great Armies
they might oppress the English shoares, did readily grant what they required:
And also added a further courtesy, saying withal, I do greatly desire to see
your Duke himself: and let him not think much to repair to our mansions, for
he shall find none amongst us but his most loving friends. When this Rollo
comes to Alstans Court
was signified to Rollo, choosing out the tallest and goodliest persons of his
company, and such as were of greatest wisdom, with them he very joyfully
meets the King, is entertained, presents him with great gifts, but receives
greater: Then sitting down to talk and commune:

(12) I am (says King Alstenus) right glad, most worthy Duke Rollo, to see
you in this my Court. The renown of your Nation has been related to me, a
Martial kind of Peopleyee are, and infight unconquerable. And you your self
also for your prowess, are not unnoted among the rest of your famous Worthies:
your valiant exploits are well known unto us: It is right pleasing unto us to
enter Will. Gemetic. lib. 2. cap. 6. Alstans bounty to Rollo.
with such men into amity. Behold our whole kingdom is before you, choose out
a seat for your self, and your people wheresoeur you best like, for we will
have an everlasting league between us.

(13) Rollo, glad of so fair promises, replied: Most worthy and renowned King,
I highly esteem of your bountiful and most liberal proffers: God grant a
happy success of our affairs. I do think myself most bounden and devoted
to your worthiness; and if destiny ever answer to our desires, we will not be
unthankful for this your so great benignity. To seat ourselves in your
kingdom, though indeed we are very willing, and your Royal proffers do much
more incite us, yet Fate does not permit it. I have determined (and will
certainly perform,) to go into France. For your gifts bestowed on me, I
esteem them in the highest degree: and right well content I am to have a
perpetual League with you, that the like Fortune may betide us both, the one
to be a safeguard to the other. This I both offer, and accept of. I his League
God grant may to us both prove happy and fortunate.

(14) With such like interchanges the time much spent, and night drawing on,
they were brought to banquet: And early the next morning, coming forth of
their lodgings, most lovingly embraced each other, when each gave and received
presents best suting with their estates and occasions. Neither does Krantzius
stay his pen there, but proceeds to particular affairs betwixt these two
Princes, without the concurrence of any of our own writers.

(15) As how the English rose in Arms against Alstenus their King, taking
opportunity of the time, for that Rollo (whom they knew to be joined in a most
strait confederacy with their Sovereign) being then employed in the wars of
France, could not come or send to his aid: Alstenus therefore oppressed with a
tumultuous kingdom, remembered Rollo his faithful friend, and sending
Ambassadors declared unto him Alstane faith to his friend.
what distress he was in; who not unmindful of the firm league betwixt them,
left his French wars, and prepared for England with all his Forces; where
entering the Island, he easily quieted the tumultuous rebels, ransacking their
Cities, curbing their wildenes, and so reducing them at last to an orderly
subjection. For which his great love, care, and pains, the King not unthankful,
resolved to requite him with the half of his kingdom, appointing the Cities
and limiting the bounds, which each of them should rule and govern as their
own possessions.

(16) Rollo in the mean time, as careful of the peaces continuance, as
regardlesse of so great remunerations, takes pledges of the Rebels for
securing their loialtie to the King, and peaceable bearing toward himself;
upon accomplishment whereof, repairing to Alstenus he thus bespake him.

(17) Seeing (King Alstenus) you have so highly rewarded me, both with princely
entertainment, and bountiful presents, I can do no less, then willingly
bestow upon you these my pains for your safety: it i^ no more then your
deserts do challenge; neither will I accept, or seem so discourteous as to
expect, for my pains, any part of your dominion. Your self now may well
govern it; for France calls for my presence: keep therefore those your
Pledges, brought to you by your Subjects, and there is no doubt but you shall
hence-forward govern your Kingdom in a settled and contentfull quietness.

(18) The King could not contain those his eyes, which now beheld in a
stranger so strange and vnexempled kindness, from resolving into tears: giving
him both hearty thanks, and rich gifts, seeing he could not fasten on him any
portion of his Kingdom: of whom, all that Rollo desired was this, that he
would give license to such voluntary Soldiers as would go with him into
France: whereto Alsten, ready in all things to gratify his desire, gladly
condescended, and furnished him with attendants.

(19) But leaving Krantius the Dane, as likewise Gemeticensis the Norman, to
favor their Country, and these their reports, to the best liking of the
judicious; most certain it is, that the French King Charles, commonly called
the Simple, gave the Duchy of Normandy with his daughter Gilla (whose mother
was Aeguina, the Rollo the first Duke of Normandy. Angiers Records. M. S.
daughter of Edward the Elder, King of England) unto Rollo the Dane, as is
recorded in an old manuscript belonging to the Monastery of Angiers. And when
Rollo was baptized, Charles receiving him for his God-sonne at the Font, he was
there required to do homage for his Dukedom received, and inioined Rand.
Higden. lib. 6. cap. 1.
therein to kiss the Kings foot, which he did, but with some disgrace to King
Charles, and bound it with an oath that he did not receive it upon courtesy.

(20) This Rollo by his second wife Popee, (for Gilla died childlesse) daughter
to the Earl of Bessin and Baileulx, had a son named William, surnamed
Longespee, and a daughter called Girl^ta, who was afterward married to the
Duke of Guyan.

(21) William Long-espee (so called of the Long Sword William Longespee, second
Duke of Normandy.
he usually wore) the second Danish Duke of Normandy, took unto wife Sp^rta the
daughter of Hubert, Earl of Se^tlis, by whom he had only Richard his son:
this William receiving baptism, received therewith a new name, and was
thenceforth called Robert, who having governed his Dukedom with great
moderation the space of twenty years, was guilefully murdered by the working
of Jews King of France, to the great grief of his people, who so far followed
the revenge, that they intercepted Jews in the City Roth^mage, and detained
him their prisoner, Polycr.
till he agreed to these Articles: That young Richard should succeed his slain
Father in the foresaid Dukedom; and that thenceforth when the King and Duke
should confer together, the Duke should be girt with his Sword, and the King
disabled either of Sword or knife: to which Jews yielded upon his corporal
oath.

(22) Richard thus established, governed his Richard I. the third Duke of
Normandy.
Dukedom the space of fifty two years. He was a man of an admirable
fortitude, and therefore was called Richard the Hardy. His first wife was Emma.
Wal^g. Ypodig. Neust.
Agnes, daughter to Hughle Grand, Earl of Paris, Lord Abbat of Germans, and
Father to Hugh Capet of France; but she dying issuelesse, he secondly married
G^or, a Gentlewoman of the Danish blood, (whom he had kept his Concubine
before) by whom he had three sons and three daughters: the first was Richard
that succeeded in his dominions; the second was Robert Archbishop of Roan; and
the third was called Maliger: his daughters were Hawisa, the wife of Geffrey
Earl of Britain, and mother to Alane and Or, (...), Walls. ibi.
Guye his sons. Mand espoused Or, (...). ibi.
Euldes Earl of Chartiers and Blois: and Emma called the Flower of Normandy,
was Queen of England, both by the English King Ethelred, and Canutus the Dane,
to both which she was married.

(23) Richard the second, surnamed the Good, was Richard (...). the fourth Duke
of Normandy. Ran. Higden callth him Richard the third.
the fourth Duke of Normandy, and ruled the same for twenty four years: In
whose time the Normans began to be great, and gracious in England, the marriage
of his Sister making their way: his first wife was Judith the Sister of Geffrey
Earl of Britaigne, by whom he had issue, Richard, the first Duke of Normandy,
and Robert the sixth, William a Monk, and Nicholas Abbot of S. Andrews: his
daughters by her were, Alice, that died young, and another of the same name
married to Reinold, Earl of Burgoine, and Eleanor espoused to Baldwin the
fourth Earl of Flanders, who bare unto him Baldwin the fifth, father of Maud
that was Queen of England, and wife to the Conqueror.

(24) The second wife to Duke Richard the second; was Estrike, Sister to Canute
King of England, from whom he purchased a Divorce, without any issue begotten
on her body; and then taking for his third wife a fair Gentlewoman named
Pauia, had issue by her William Earl of Arques, and Mauger Archbishop of Roane.

(25) Richard the third of that name, and fifth Richard 3. the fifth Duke of
Normandy.
Duke of Normandy, in the second year of his Dukedom died an untimely death,
not without suspicion of Poison, ministered by Robert his younger brother, who
presently was invested in the Duchy, for that he left no issue of his body to
succeed.

(26) This Robert (Duke Richards Brother) was a man of a magnanimous spirit,
and of such bounteous Robert (...). the sixth Duke of Normandy.
liberality as is incredible. He coming to the City Phalesya in Normandy,
chanced to see a most goodly and beautiful damsel, dancing among others of
her familiar consorts; her name was Arlet, of mean parentage (the daughter of
a Skinner, says Ran. Higden. in Polycr. lib. 6. c. (...).
Higden) whose pleasing feature and comely grace so pleased the Duke, that
taking her to his bed, he begot on her, William his only son, (who proved
the only man of the Normans blood) and after upon a remorse of conscience,
undertook a pilgrimage unto Jerusalem, from whence he never again returned.
Arlet in Roberts life time was married to Herlaine a Norman Gentleman, but of
mean substance; to whom ^he bare Odo Bishop of Baion, by his halfe-brother
William created Earl of Kent; and Robert created Earl of Mortaigne, a man of
a dull and gross wit; and a daughter named Emma, wife to Richard Will. (...) of
Roan.
count of Auranches, (a Province in Normandy,) the mother of Hugh Lupus Earl
Palatine of Chester. And thus far bre^ly I have thought good to prosecute the
Line of the Normans, for the better illustration of our English Stories.

(27) Duke Robert intending his pious pilgrimage unto the holy land, assembled
all his Nobility Will. Malmsb. li. 3. ca. 1.
unto the City Fiscan, where he caused them to swear fealty unto (...) son
William, being then but seven years old, committing him to the Governance of
one Gilbert, an Earl of much integrity and prudence, and the defense of that
Government unto Henry the French King, and so in the eight year of his
Dukedom, set on his voyage for Jerusalem; who entering Iurye, and not able to
travail, was born in a litter upon the Saracens shoulders, and near unto the
City, meeting a returning Pilgrim, desired him to report Rand. Higden (...)
Polyc. lib. (...). cap. (...)
in his Country what he there saw, which is, (said he) that I am carried to
Heaven upon the Devils b^cke: but so far was he borne that he never returned,
being prevented by death: which the Norman Peers hearing, made use thereof for
their own ambitious ends, without any regard of young William their Pupil and
Sovereign, and grown into factions, greatly troubled the Peace of their
Country, wherein Earl G^bert the Protector was slain, by Randulphus the young
Dukes Cosen-Germane.

(28) The beginner of these stirs was another of Will. Malmsb. lib. 3.
his kinsmen, even (...) of (...), the son of Duke Richards daughter, brought
up with Willam in his youth, and ever in his most especial esteem; who, upon a
vain hope to aspire to an Earldome, got the aid of the Vicounts, Nigell, and
Randulph, but took such a fall before he could ascend the highest step, that
in losing his footing he lost therewith his head.

(29) Strife also arose betwixt young William, and his Uncle William the
base-borne Earl of Archis. Whereupon King Henry of France, who till then had
held this Wolf by the ear, fearing some hazard to himself, if he should now
let him go, thought it best to aid the Earl in his cause, and therefore sent
him supply under the leading of some men of note; but William so begirt his
Castle with strait siege, that he caused the Earl by famishment to yield up
his Fort, and drove the French with disgrace out of the field: where, with such
success he still prospered, that Henry now, to secure his own Confines, sent
Odo his brother for Prefect, into those Parts, that lay betwixt the Rivers Reyn
and the Seyn.

(30) William as watchful as the French King was jealous, sent against Odo,
Robert Count Aucensis, Hugh Gornacensis, Hugh Mountfort, and William Crispine,
all of them stout Soldiers, which so bravely bare themselves, that Odo was the
first man that made away, and the restof the French saved themselves by flight.

(31) William that had sworn a league with King Henry, and in his Minority had
ever found him his gracious Guardian, was loath to endanger the breach of his
Oath, or the duty that love and deserts had obliged him unto; and therefore by
this Stratagem he sought to dislodge the French. In the silence of Night when
in the Kings Camp all were at rest, he caused to be cried aloud, the flight of
Odo, and his discomfiture, with no less terror then it was; which rang so
shrill in the ears of the French, that Henry thought best to be gone: leaving
William the absolute Lord of Normandy.

(32) Which he valiantly defended, and uprightly governed all the days of King
Henry: whose death presently caused an alteration of State; for he leaving
Baldwine surnamed the Gentle, and fifth Earl of Flaunders, Tutor to his young
Son Philip, the quarrel betwixt those two Princes had an end; Baldwine on
the one side so working his Pupil, and on the other the Normane, (who was his
son in law) that a most firm League was ratified betwixt them, and kept
unviolated so long as William was a Duke: where we will leave him in
prosperity and peace, and proceed in our intendment, as he did in his Conquest
here in England.

WILLIAM SVRNAMED THE Monarch 39.
CONQVEROVR, THE THIRTY William the Conqueror.
NINTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: AND FIRST OF THE NORMANS: HIS LIFE, REIGN,
ACTS, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER II.


BAttle Field won with the loss of little less then sixty eight thousand
men, An. D. 1066
and Harold in Souldierlike exequies borne unto Waltham in Essex, and there
honorably enterred, as we have said: William the Conqueror, (for so now may
we style him) returned to Hasting, and thence set forward with spoil of the
Country, over Thamesis toward London. Simon D^.


(2) Where Edwine and Morcar, the Brethren of the Queen, were in working the
English, that one of them should be King, or rather, says Simon of Durham, to
crown Edgar Etheling, the rightful heir, in such esteem with the People,
that he was commonly called Englands Darling; unto whose side most of Lib.
(...). (...).
the Nobles a^ered, with the Citizens of London, and the Nauall forces; to
which part also joined Aldred Archbishop of York, though presently he fell off
and stuckt to the stronger; for the Prelates, though The Pope powerful to
(...).
secretly affecting the right claim, yet terrified with the flashing
thunderbolts of the Papal curse, durst not go forward with their purpose (so
powerful was the Pope, even then to defeat the rightful heirs of kingdoms)
but refused to side with the Lords, (...). (...).
whereupon all their designements were suddenly quashed.

(3) For William having wasted through Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, and
Barkshire, came unto Wallingford, and crossing there the Thamesis, passed
through the Counties of Oxford, Buckingham and Hertford, where staying at
Berkhamsted, Aldred Will. (...).
Archbishop of York, Wolstane Bishop of Worcester* Walter Bishop of Hereford,
with the Earls Ed^ and Morcar, yea and Edgar himself, yielded their allegiance
unto the Duke: This curse so prevailing, far engaged William to the Pope.

(4) William intending for London, being on his Trees cut down to hinder
William passage.
way, found the passage stopped up with multitudes of great trees, which by the
policy of Frethericke Abbot of S. Albanes, (a man descended from the Saxons
noble blood, as likewise from Canutus the Dane) to secure his Monastery from
the destruction of the Normans, were so cut down: whereat the Duke both
wondering and fretting, sent for the Abbot, under his assurance of safe return,
and demanding the cause why his woods were so cut; Frethericke answered very
stoutly, I have done (said he) the duty both of my birth and profession; and
if others of my rank had John Stow.
performed the like (as they well might and ought) it had not been in thy
power to have pierced the land thus far.

(5) W^lliam hearing the bold answer of this Prelate, and knowing it was now a
time fitter to pacify, then exulcerate the English spirits, gave way to the
present necessity, and withal hastened (as good policy required) his
coronation, which at Westminster was solemnized upon Monday, being the day of
Christ's Nativity, and year of salvation, 1066. where King Williams Coronation.
he received the crown at the hands of Aldred Archbishop of York; causing the
Bishops and Barons to take the oath of allegiance unto him; and himself
likewise at the altar of S. Peter's, took a solemn oath to defend the rights
of the Church, to establish good laws, and to see justice uprightly
administered, as became a good King; and thereupon chose for his counsel, such
men as he knew to be of great wisdom and experience: next, applying his
thoughts for the security of his new gotten Empire; fortified such: places as
lay open to danger, William fortifieth against invasions.
bestowed strong Garrisons upon the coasts, and ships to ride in those Harbors
which were most exposed to invasion.

(6) And the better to assure the south of the land (best serving his purpose,
if any new troubles should arise) he took his way toward Dover, the Polydor.
lock and key of the Kingdom, as Matthew Paris terms it; that so he might
command the seas from his enemies arriuage, and ouer-awe the Kentish a most
Math. Paris.
strong and populous Province. When Stigand therefore Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Eglesine the Politic Abbot of Saint Augustines (being the chiefest John
Stow.
Lords and Governors of Kent) understood of his approach, they assembled the
Commons at Canterbury, laying forth the perils of the Province, the miseries of
their neighbors, the pride of the Normans, and the wrongs of the Church; all
which now were too apparently seen: the English till then, (they said,) were
borne free, and the name of Archbishop Stigands persuasion of the Kentish.
bondmen not heard of among them; but now servitude only attend us, if we
yield (said they) to the insolency of this griping enemy: These two Prelates
therefore, after the example of the undaunted Machabees, offered themselves to
die in the defense of their Country; whose forwardness drew the people unto
the like resolution, which by their aduertisements were assigned to meet at a
day, the place was Swanscombe, two miles west from Graves end.

(7) Where accordingly conuening, and keeping secret in the woods, they waited
the coming of Thom. Sprot.
the Conqueror, all jointly agreeing, for that no way lay open save only a
front, to carry in their The Kentish policy against King William.
hands great branches of trees, wherewith they might both keep themselves from
discovery, and (if need were) impeach the passage of the Normans: which device
took so strange an effect, that it daunted the Duke even with the sight at his
approach; who being, as he thought, free from the enemy, was now suddenly beset
on all sides with woods, whereof seeing some before him to move, he knew not
but that all the other vast woods were of like nature, neither had he leisure
to avoid the danger. The Kentish enclosing his Army about, displaied their
banners, cast down their boughs, and with bows bent prepared for battle; so
that he which even now had the Realm to his seeming in his fist, stood in
despair of his own life; of which his sudden amazement, the reverend
Prelates Stigand and Eglesine taking notice, and also advantage, presented
themselves before him, and in the behalf of the Kentish thus spoke.

(8) Most noble Duke, behold here the Commons Stigands Oration
of Kent are comeforth to meet and receive you as their Sovereign, requiring
your Peace, their own free condition of estate, and their ancient laws
formerly used: if these be denied, they are here presently to abide the veraite
of battle, fully resolved rather to die, then to depart with their laws, or
to live servile in bondage; which name and nature is, and ever shall be strange
unto us, and not to be endured.

The Conqueror driven into this strait, and loath to hazard all on so nice a
point, their demands being not unreasonable, more wisely then willingly Will.
Thorn.
granted their desires; and pledges on both parts given for performance, Kent
yields her Earldom; and Castle of Dover to their new King William.

(9) All things established for Englands security, and subjection now to the
Normans; he ordained his half brother by the surer side, Odo Bishop of Simon
Dun. Odo Bishop of Bayeux made Earl and governor of Kent.
of Bayeux, (whom he created Earl of Kent) and his cosen William-Fitz-Osburne
(by him made Earl of Hereford) to be Governors in his absence over the
Realm; and in the Lent following sailed into Normandy, leading with him many
pledges for their fidelity, besides other Nobles, especially such as he feared
to be too potent; amongst whom, Stigand Henry Hunt. Poly^r.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the two great Earls Edwin and Morcar, Edgar
surnamed Etheling, Fretherik Abbot of S. Albans, Agelnothus Abbot of
Glastenbury, Walteof the son of the warlike Siward Ypodigma Neu^.
Earl of Northumberland, Roger Earl of Hertford, Rainulph Earl of Cambridge,
and Gospatricke Earl Mari^us.
of Cumberland, were the men of greatest note; yet was he no sooner gone, but
that Edrick surnamed Syluaticus (son to Alfrick, the brother of Edrick
Streona, the treacherous Earl of Mercia,) a man of great spirit, and of no
little power, aided by the Welshmen, took up arms and denied subjection to
the Normans, The Welshmen took Arms against William.
so that by either party (as in civil discords it ever falls out) great
spoils were made in many places; but most of all in Herefordshire, where
Robert Fitz-Scroope left to man the Castle, did much hurt upon the Tenants of
Edricke, and he to requite him with the like, calling to his aid Blethyn and
Rywalhon Kings of Wales, wasted all to the mouth of Matthew. West. lib. 2.
Wye.

(10) These stirs in England called William out of Normandy, and were so
distastful to his great, but An. D. 1067
ill digesting stomach, that he began to hold the reine straiter, and harder
to curb the headstrong English, giving the possessions of their Nobles unto
his Normans, and laying unwonted taxes and heavy subsidies upon the Commons,
then which nothing bred him more hatred, in so much, that many of The lands of
the English given to the Normans.
them, to enjoy a barren liberty, forsook their fruitful inheritance, and
with their Wives and Children, as outlawes, lived in the Woods, preferring that
naked name of freedom, before a sufficient maintenance possessed under the
thraldom and tyranny of their Conquerors: but in short time, to sustain their
wants, (easily conceived, but hardly endured) they so fell to spoil and rob,
that the high ways Wars even in peace.
lay vntrod from town to town, yea and private houses every where so guarded
with bows, bills, polaxes, swords and clubs, as if they had been not harbors
of peace, but fortresses of war; when prays were made at the shutting in,
and opening of their doors, as in times of open hostility. On the other side,
such as preferred vassalage with some hope of tolerable (yea, or intolerable)
usage, they to curry favor with the Normans, seeming to forget Mat. Paris.
who they were, became as strangers themselves, and did shave their beards,
round their hair, and in arment, behavior, and diet, a ltogether unfashioned
themselves to imitate them: it being a shame in those days, even amongst
Englishmen, to be an The English became strangers.
Englishman.

(11) Unto these Malcontents, and voluntary Out-lawes, joined Morcar and
Edwine, the stout Earls of Chester and Yorkshire, setting up again for their
Captain Edgar Etheling (which if in due time at first they had done, might
have proved successful) who with their accomplices right valiantly for a time
resisted the Normans, and in their proceedings put many of them to the sword.
King Many Nobles* fly out of England.
William as careful and sedulous to prevent further mischief, collecting his
forces, and not without danger of his life, dissolved their power, so that
every man sought how to save himself by escape: among whom Edwin and Morcar,
Welthersus and Mat. Paris. Mat. Westminster.
Merther, with some of the Bishops and Clergy went into Scotland. Marleswin,
and Gospatrick, Noblemen of Northumberland went into Denmark: Edgar Atheling,
with his mother Agatha, and his sisters Christian and Margaret, took the seas
for Hungary; but by contrary winds were driven into Scotland, where they were
most courteously entertained by Malcolme (surnamed Cammor) King of that
Country, who so affected the person and qualities of King Malcolme (...) Lady
Margaret.
Lady Margaret, that he entered with her a Nuptial contract, and the rather in
respect of her possibility and neerenesse to the English crown; whose marriage
was solemnized about the feast of Easter, in the second of King Williams
reign, whereby Scotland became a sanctuary to the English, which daily fled
thither from the pressures of the Normans.

(12) The Conqueror now perceiving the occasion of new stirs, sent unto King
Malcolme for the delivery of Edgar his enemy; which if he refused, King
William sends for Edgar out of Scotland.
he threatened to denounce open war against Scotland. But Malcolme minding
more his own honor, then King Williams threats, returned this answer, That
he held it an unjust thing, yea and (in a Prince) a wicked part, to betray him
to his enemy, that came unto his Court for protection, as Prince Edgar was
forced for fear of his life; whose innocence and demeanor toward William, his
greatest adversary, could not touch with the least suspect: alleging further
(besides the respect of An honorable saying.
ordinary humanity, in this case ever religiously to be observed) the straight
bands of their near alliance, which required him to tender the afflicted The
love of alliance.
estate of his most loving wives, most loved brother, coming under his
Canopie, as it were for defense.

(13) William thus frustrate of all hope from king Malcolme, and daily
perplexed at the flight of the English unto his kingdom, feared a revolt and
dangerous rebellion; to prevent which, he caused four strong castles to be
built, one at Hasting, another at Lincoln, the third at Nottingham, and the
fourth at York, wherein he bestowed strong Garrisons: and disarming the English
of armor, commanded every house-holder to put out both fire and candle at
eight of the clock at night; at which hour, in every Fire and candle forbid
at certain hours unto the English.
City, Town and Village, he caused a bell to be rung, of the French then
called Couerfew (that is, Couer-fire) partly yet in practice, and in name very
near, commonly called Curfue: to prevent nightly tumults that might happily be
done.

(14) All this his circumspection notwithstanding, could not prevent the
troubles that presently M^. Westminster
arose; for Goodwin and Edmund, the sons of the late King Harold, coming
with some forces out of Ireland, and landing in Sommersetshire, fought Goowin
and Edmund out of freland invade England.
with Adnothus, (sometime master of their fathers horse, but now a Normanist)
whom they slew with many others, and taking great booties both in Cornwall and
Devonshire, departed again for Ireland.

Excester likewise, seeking to shake off the fetters of the Normans bondage, as
also Northumberland, to recover their former liberties, took Arms against
whom, King William in all have possible; sent Robert Cumin, and went himself
strongly prepared against Excester, which he most straightly beleaguered; at
which time the Citizens thought it not enough to shut their gates against
him, but contemptuously taunted and flouted him, until a great piece of the
wall Ca^d D^.
falling down by the especial hand of God, (as the Historians of that age
report) they immediately set Excester yielded to King W^liam
open their gates, and submitted themselves to his mercy. The chief instigator
to their disloialty was Githa the mother of King Harold, and sister to Swain
King of Denmark, with others siding against the Normans; who now seeing the
yielding up of that City, shifted themselves out of danger, and got over unto
Flanders.

(15) But fortune to Cumin was not so favorable An. D. 1068
in the North, nor himself so circumspect as va^iant; for lying securely, as
he thought in the City Durham, he was on the sudden surprised in the night
by Edgar Atheling and his followers, where The Normans slain in the north.
Robert and seven hundred of his Normans were slain, one only escaping, who
brought the bloody news thereof to King William, which happened in the third
Polydor.
of his reign, the twenty eight of January, and year of Christ, 1068. The
depth of Winter notwithstanding, he posted into the north; whose only terror
danted all further attempts, so that taking some of the Authors of this
rebellion, he cut off their hands and some of their heads, conceiving hereupon
more hatred against the English, and in that spleen of displeasure returned to
London.

(16) Whiles these insurrections were on foot in England, the fugitive English
in Denmark so far prevailed An. D. 1069
with King Swain, that they procured his aid to recover their rights, and the
rather, as they alleged, for that the Crown of England was his, descending
from those that had before made conquest thereof: M^b. Paris. Mat. Westminster. lib. 2.
he therefore sent a puissant Navy of three hundred sail well fraught with
soldiers, under the conduct of Osburne his brother, and Harold and Canute The
Danes with English fugitives invade England.
his sons,: who arrining in Humber, landed their men for York, and wasted
the Country all the way as they went; unto whom shortly joined Edgar and his
associates out of Scotland, so that their Army was exceedingly strong. Whose
approach so terrified the Lib. ^bor. M. 5.
Yorkers, that for very grief thereof their Archbishop Aldred, (who was wholly
become the Normans favorite) died, and the Norman Garrisons that there kept,
lest the enemy should have any York set on fire by her own soldiers.
shelter or succor, set their suburbs on fire; the flame whereof carried with
an ouer-high wind, soon consumed a great part of the City it self, and
therein, the fair Cathedral Church of S. Peter's, with a famous Library
thereto adioining.

(17) The Citizens, and Soldiers thus beset with sudden flames, thinking to
secure their lives from the fire, did enhazard them on the fury of the sword;
for coming unawares upon these hardy and well appointed Danes, were forced to
come to a disordered The Danes victors over the English.
fight, wherein though for a time they behaved themselves most valiantly, yet
being ouerlaid, were discomfited with the slaughter of three thousand of their
men. The Danes, swelling with this prosperous success took into
Northumberland, bringing all to their obeisance where they came; and the two
young gallants were thereby so fleshed, and encouraged, that they intended to
have marched to London, had not the extremity of winter (enemy to all warlike
enterprise s) hindered them; yea and William as willingly would have been
doing, if the same cause Willims policy to weaken the English.
had not kept him back: but when the time of the year was fit for war, he
gathered a great host, whereof the English were chief, this being his policy,
to use their weapons each against others, whereby their strengths might be
lessened, that so whosoever lost, his Normans might win: these ioining Will.
Malmsb.
battle with the enemy, fought it out manfully; and lastly, making a breach
into a wing of the Danish army therewith so daunted the rest, that all of them
gave back and fled; Harold and Canute to their ships, and Edgar Atheling by
swift horse into Scotland. Earl Waltheof, who with his own hands had slain
many a Norman that day, was reconciled to King William, now left conqueror of
the field; whose wrath was so kindled against these Northern disturbers, that
he wasted all the fair Country betwixt York and Durham, leaving al desolate
for threescore miles space, which nine years after lay untilled The North
miserably wasted.
and without any inhabitant; when grew so great a famine, that these Northerns
were forced to eat the flesh of men.

(18) The Conqueror after these troubles bare An. D. 1070 Polydor.
more hatred unto the English, whose inconstancy (so he accounted their
unquenched desire of liberty) he daily dreaded, especially the Nobles, and men
of power; whereupon he began to deal yet more roughly for light causes,
thrusting out some of them into exile, and depriving more of their lands and
goods, seizing most part of every man's reuenews into his own possession, as
gained by a lawful conquest, The English hated and banished
causing them to redeem them again at his hands, and yet retained a propriety
thereof unto himself, by receiving an annual rent, and other provisions and
services, whereof if they failed, their lands were utterly excheated to the
crown; neither spared he the Corporations of Cities, Towns, Monasteries, or
Episcopal Sees; but took from them their ancient liberties and privileges,
whose redemptions set at what rate it pleased himself, soon weakened their
estates, which was the only thing he aimed at, and therefore often blamed
Canutus for his overmuch gentleness extended toward those, whom he had
conquered, whose steps therein he meant not to tread.

(19) He charged the Clergy with armor, horse Math. Paris.
and money, for the maintenance of his wars, wherein the Bishops and Abbots were
taxed at very great sums, which he caused to be registered and laid up in
his treasury: so that he did not only bereave their Abbeys and Monasteries of
all their gold and silver, but, by the report of Roger Windouer, Roger Wind.
laid hands upon their Chalices and rich shrines, and for their further undoing
established by decree, that no English Scholar should come to promotion. In
which respect also, whereas King Alfred had for the Will. Malmsb.
maintenance of many learned Divines, (which might instruct Ex Archi^. Colleg.
Vniuersit. Oxen. Tun. Apol. l. 2.
his people in the Faith, in their own vulgar tongue) founded a goodly College
in Oxford, to be maintained wholly at the Kings charges, which was accordingly
performed, and roially continued in all his successors raigns: King William,
desiring utterly to destroy the English tongue, and preaching therein; decreed,
that the said annual expense, should never after be allowed out of the Kings
Exchequer, to the great impairing both of learning and religion. To further all
which proceedings, his holy Father Pope Alexander the second, Will. Thorn.
set in a foot, sending two Cardinals, and a Bishop from the Sea Apostolic,
who in a Council degraded Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, Egelwine Bishop
Marianus.
of the East Angles, besides diverse other Bishops and Abbots of the English
nation; deprived for Gerua. Doraber.
no evident cause, but only to give place to the Normans in favor of the King.

(20) The ancient laws of the land he abrogated for the most part, ordaining
new, nothing so equal M. Mils in Will. Conq.
nor so easy to be kept; which his laws although they nearly concerned the
English and therefore ought of them to have been familiariy known, were
notwithstanding Mard laws imposed upon the English.
written in the harsh Norman tongue, which they understood not; so that many
persons, partly by the iniquity of the law it self, partly by ignorance in
misconstruction, and often also by the sleightes of Pleaders and Judges, who
might pretend for law what they list, were wrongfully condemned, in forfeiture
of goods, lands, yea and also of life, and generally so entangled with their
unknown interpretation, and tortured with their delays, turmoiles and
trauerses, that they rather chose to give over their suites, then to follow
them with their endless vexations.

He caused likewise his Broad seal, wherewith he confirmed his Deeds and
Charters, to be inscribed on the one side, to acknowledge him for the Normans
Patron, and on the other, for the English King, as in the sculpture thereof, at
the entrance of his history King William his Seal.
is seen, which bears this sense; This Sign does William, Normans Patron
show:
By this the English him their King do know.


(21) These snares of his laws accounted the fetters of the Natives, were by
the Nobility sought to An. D. 1072 Will. Malms.
be cast off: for Edwin and Morcar, (the two stout Earls so often mentioned)
fainedly reconciled to the King not long before, combining with Fretherike, the
bold and rich Abbot of S. Albanes, set up Edgar Atheling their General once
again, and fell into a new conspiracy: William Lion-like storming at the
loose, and regardlesse allegiance of these insufferable subjects, daily with
fresh attempts so disturbing his peace, with a mighty power hastened against
them, and armed as well with the spiritual sword of Lanfranck, (then advanced
to be Archbishop of Canterbury) as with maile of Iron, or coats of steel,
laid all barren wheresoever he came: his opposites for their parts knowing
his purpose, as desperately The English rise against William.
maintained what they had begun, and fully were resolved to make the sword
their Judge.

(22) The King by his Spials hearing the increase of their power, and knowing
to his restless trouble, the unwilling subjection of the English, entered
consultation with his Archbishop; who as Rhehoboams Sag^s, gave him counsel
somewhat to bear with their abuses, rather then to hazard the ruin 1. King.
12. 6.
of all in fight; and so far prevailed in this his advice, that an assembly
was appointed to meet at Berkhamsted in the County of Hertford, where the King
entering parley with the English Nobility; so far did wind himself into their
good opinions, (being a very politic, and faire-spoken Prince) that they all
forth with laid down their weapons.

(23) And he for his part fearing to lose the crown with shame, which he had
gotten by the effusion King William sworn unto King Edwards laws.
of so much blood, gave his oath upon the holy Evangelists, and the relics of
Saint Albane the Martyr, (the same being ministered unto him by Abbot Fretherik)
swearing to observe, and inuiolably to keep the ancient laws of this land; and
most especially those compiled by King Edward the Confessor, though (as the
event soon showed) he little meant to do as he pretended.

(24) Peace thus established, among other conferences beseeming such estates,
it chanced King William to demand the reason how it came to pass, that his
fortune should be in one days battle to subdue the English, which the Danes
before him could not do in many; to which question whilst each Lib. S. Alban.
M. S. in vita Fretheric.
stood looking on others, expecting what to answer, the stout Abbot Fretherick
stepped forth and said:

(25) The reason thereof may easily be given, if the occasion be well
weighed; for wontedly the land was defended by dint of swords, until that
their warlike wearers A good speech ill taken.
upon their godly devotions, laid them from their sides upon the Altars of
Orisons, which through ouerlong rest are grown very rustie, and their edges
too dull now for the field: for, (said he) the maintenance of martial men,
with a great part of this lands revenues, are daily converted to pious
imploiments, to maintain and defend these holy votaries, whose prayers pierce
more deeper then the sword: and therefore thou art obliged o King, to maintain
their peace, that have been the cause of thy so easy purchase.

(26) But William before the words were well out of his mouth replied and said,
Is the Clergy so rich and so strengthened that the land thereby (...) weakened
of her men at Arms, and to keep only the religious in safet^ shall the
Laity lie exposed to the (...) of the Danes, King Williams angry answer.
and other foreign Enemies? surely out of your own mouths I will judge you,
and for redress will first begin Lib. S. Alban.
with thee: whereupon he took from the Abbey of Saint Albanes all the lands
and revenues that lay betwixt Barnet and London-Stone. Abbot Fretherick, whose
ouerbold answers had now offended the King, without delay called a chapter of
his brethren, showing them their approaching dangers, and to avoid the present
storm, went himself to Ely, where he desisted not from his wonted
machinations against the Conqueror.

(26) This conference ended, and the Kings oath received, the English Armies
disband themselves, as dreaming they had now good Fortune by the foot and
hoping the greatest storms of their dangers were past; which presently proved
but a Vain surmise: for King William having compounded with Simon Dun. Math.
Paris.
the Danes that lay all this last Winter in Northumberland, and paid them a
great sum for their departure, began extremely to hate the rebels, and
with full resolution of their destruction, suddenly King William works upon
advantage.
set upon them apart, which he durst not attempt, when they were united, so
that slaying many, imprisoning others, and prosecuting all of them with fire
and sword, well was he that could be first gone.

(27) Edgar Etheling got again into Scotland, and Edwin Earl of Yorkshire
following with the like intent, was slain in the way by his own soldiers;
Ran. Higden. Henry Hunt. Math. Paris.
Egelwin Bishop of Durham, Morcar Earl of Chester, Siward surnamed Bran, and
Hereward (a very valiant Knight) got into the I Will of Ely, relying wholly The
I Will of Ely fortified against William.
on the advantage of the place.

This Hereward had received a hallowed sword, and benediction of his uncle the
Abbot of Peterborow, and had most valiantly defended his own inheritance
against the Normans, and with no less Ingulphus.
couragewithstood the Conqueror, being made captain of those now assembled.

(28) But the King lest delay should give them advantage, and harbor more of
such his unbridled subjects, with a great power hasted thitherward, and
stopping up the East passage from all flight, or relief, King William
assaulteth the I Will of Ely.
drew a causy on the west through the deep Fennes, even two miles of length,
where likewise he then built the Castle of Wisbech: against which, Roger Wind.
they in the I Will raised another of timber and turffes, and called it according
to the name of their Captain, Hereward: at which place, many assaults and
bickerings being made, but yet no entrance gotten, Morcar by boat escaped out
of the I Will, and in Scotland obtained by price, what these distressed could not
by prayer; so that Malcolme the King, in rescue and revenge of them, invaded
Cumberland, and forraged all Theisdale: Hereward also went out of the I Will, and
got a The Scots invade Cumberland
gallant crew of choice and youthful soldiers, which stood most stoutly for
the defense of their liberties.

(29) In the mean while, the Monks, oppressed with miseries, sued for mercy
unto the King, and Thurstan the Abbot repairing to Warwick, where William then
lay, offered him entrance unto the I Will, if he The Abbot would hold his,
howsoever the rest fared.
would restore to their Abbey the ancient possessions: the King then reioicing,
to obtain that by wit, which Canutus could not do by maine strength, accorded
to the request, and in great have, but no little difficulty, got into the I Will,
where slaying a thousand of the Common sort, hec used great cruelty against the
better, imprisoning many, and dismembring others, some of their hands, some of
their eyes and some of their feet. Egelwine Bishop of Durham he imprisoned,
first at Abington, then at Westminster, whose diet was either so sparing, or
stomach so great in forbearance, or both (for both are reported) that ere long
he died of hunger.

(30) Howsoever the Monks of Ely kept their promise with William for betraying
of the I Will; he contrariwise brake his for their preservation and peace; John
Stow.
for by no means their prayers would enter his ears, t^l the sound of seven
hundred marks had opened the way; to collect which, they were forced to f^ll A
small piece of (...) made more (...) pa^.
both the jewels and ornaments of their Church: which being brought to his
receivers, there wanted (whether by error or deceit) a groat in weight (form
those days greater sums passed by weight, not by tale,) whereof when the
King understood, he in great (but captious) rage, denied them all composition
for peace, whereupon with much suite he was entreated to accept of a thousand
Marks more, to raise which, they disfurnished their Monastery even of things
of necessary use.

(31) But the English Fugitives, who had gotten the Scots to stick to them,
were not yet pacified, but entering into Cumberland, they wasted the Country
before them unto the Territories of Saint Cuthbert, and city of Durham; to meet
whom, King Wi^am sent Gospatrick, who lately reconciled to his favor* and
created Earl of Northumberland, showed the like measure of cruelty upon the
Scottish Abetters, (...) they had done against the English. The Conqueror The
English enter into ^land (...) with small success.
therefore not a little moved against King Malcolme, for that his Country was a
receptacle of his Rebellious Subjects, and himself now the chief Leader of
the Malcontents into his Kingdom, hasted into Scotland with a desire and
purpose, to have done much more then he was able to accomplish: for entering
Galloway, he more wearied his Soldiers Polydor.
in passing the Marish grounds and mountains, then with encounter or pursuit
of the Enemy, so that he was forced to give over his enterprise, and then drew
his forces toward Lothiam, where King Malcolme and his English late, being
fully resolved, there to end by battle, either his troubles; or his life.

(32) But Malcolme wisely considering the event of war and that the occasion
thereof was not for his Matthew. Part.
own subjects, but for a sort of foreign fugitives, began to think, that
the wrongs therein done to another he could hardly brook himself, and sent
therefore to William proffers of peace; whereunto Henry Hunt. Gemeticensis.
lastly the English King inclined and hostages delivered upon further
Conferences, what time (as I take it) upon Stane-more, not far from an homely
hostilerie A stone Cross^ erected for a Mere mark to both the Kingdoms.
called the Spittle, a Stone-Crosse (on the one side of whose shaft stood the
picture, and arms of the King of England, and on the other the Image and arms
of the King and Kingdom of Scotland, upon Hector Boethius.
that occasion called the Roi-crosse) was erected, * That is, Kings. Cross.
to show the Limits of either kingdom; some ruins of which Metre-marke are
yet appearing; for King William, granting Cumberland unto Malcolme, to hold the
same from him, conditionally that the Cambden Brit.
Scots should not attempt any thing prejudicial to the Crown of England, (for
which King Malcolme did him homage, says Hector Boethius the Scottish writer)
and the English being reconciled to his favor, after Hector ^oet. lib. 12.
Cap. 10.
he had built the Castle of Durham, returned as cleared from all Northren
troubles.

(33) But his Norman Dukedom, stirred somewhat unto rebellion, called King
William into those An. D. 1074
parts, where, by the prowess of the English, he soon brought all things to
peace, and returned for England, better conceiting of that Nation, especially
of Edgar Etheling, whom he courteously received and Will. Malms. Math. Paris.
honorably maintained in ^is Court, allowing him a pound weight of Silu^ every
day to spend; a rare The bounty of King William toward Edgar Etheling.
example of a victorious Conqueror showed upon a man so unconstant, (who twice
had broken his oath of fidelity) and dangerous to be so near unto his person,
being, as he was, a Competitor of his Crown.

(34) Whiles the King was in Normandy, Ralph de Ware Earl of Suffolk and
Norfolk, took to wife Emma the daughter of William Fitz-Osberne, and sister
to Roger Earl of Hereford cosen to King William, and that without his consent;
by whose affinity he conceived no small pride, and even on the wedding day,
when wine had well intoxicated the brain, with a long circumstance persuaded
his Guests unto a Rebellion; unto whom yielded ^oger Earl of Hereford, his
Brides brother, and Waltheof Earl of North-hampton, I^n Stow.
with many other Barons, Abbats and Bishops: But the next morning, when Earl
Waltheof had consulted A conspiracy intended and revealed.
with his Pillow and awaked his wits to perceive the danger whereunto he was
drawn, repaired straightwaies to Archbishop Lanfranke, who was left Governor
of the Land in King Williams absence, revealing unto him their Conference and
Treasons intended, by whose advice he went over into Normandy, and there with
submissiue repentance, showed the King what these Lords and himself had
intended.

(35) The Earls therefore of Norfolk and Hereford, whose state now lay open
to chance, as desperate men took themselves to Arms, and sought how to unite
their two powers into one. This sudden sound of war soon roused the
Subjects, so that Wolstane Bishop of Worcester, and Egelwine Abbat of Mat.
Westminster. Henry Hunt. Simon D^.
Euesham having called to their aid Walter Lacie, and Vrse the Sheriff of
Worcester, so manfully withstood Earl Roger that he with his Army could not
pass over Seuerne to join with his brother Norfolk: And he again was so
sore laid at, by Odo Bishop of Bayeux, and Geffrey Bishop of Constance, (who
had assembled John Pike.
a mighty Army both of English and Normans) that they constrained him first to
Norwich, where, in the Castle he bestowed his Countess, and thence fled
himself into Little Britain, whither shortly she followed.

(36) William now returned from Normandy and some relics of Rebellion
remaining in the West, he An. D. 1075
hasted thitherward, where, with small ado he got William returning uses
severity against the English.
Earl Roger into his hands, and condemned him to perpetual prison; the Welsh
his Aiders (of whom also were many at the said Marriage) he used with great
severity; for of some he put out the eyes, of others he cut off the hands,
hanged some upon gibbets, and he that escaped best, went into banishment;
neither Earl Waltheof, notwithstanding he revealed the conspiracy, escaped
unpunished; for after that the King had taxed him with ingratitude (he having
formerly restored the Earldom unto him) he caused his head to be chopped off at
Winchester, (although he had before promised his pardon and life) his great
possessions be Will. Malmsb.
ing his greatest Enemies; for he is reported to have been Earl of
Northampton, Northumberland and Huntington, thought by the King to be fitter
dignities for Henry Hunt.
the Normans his followers; and the desire of a new Marriage, moved Judith his
wife not a little to set forward and hasten his death. A kinde-hearted Wife.


(37) These beginnings against the Welsh, King William prosecuted farther,
entering into Wales with An. D. 1076 Mat. Paris. Matthew. West.
a strong Army, as purposing a final end of those Domestical wars, having
so replenished England with his Normans, that he now promised himself
security and happiness of State: To him therefore the Princes of Walls unable
to resist, performed their The Princes of Wales do homage to William
Homages at Saint David's, and with their Hostages he returned as a victorious
Conqueror.

But the Seas of these troubles now grown quiet and calm, and he at some
leisure to think on future success, all on the sudden a cloud arose in the
North, which hastily came on and threatened a storm.

(38) For Swain King of Denmark, whose title Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. Simon
Dun.
(to his seeming) stood firm for the Crown, manned forth two hundred tall
Ships, whereof his son Canute and Earl Hacon were Generals; for his brother
Osborne he had banished Denmark, that basely took money to depart England
some few years before, notwithstanding his claim he made still, though for
money, still stopped by his Danes: For so says their own writer Adam
Bremensis, that continual contention was betwixt Swain and the bastard,
although (says h^) Will. Malmes. Math. Paris. Polydor.
our Bishops by bribes would have persuaded peace betwixt the two Kings: Yea
and Malmesbury, our writer, affirms, that William gave bribes to Earl Hacon
to begone; though Paris and Polydor report, that when these Danes heard that
their favorites here were vanquished they turned their Sails for Flanders,
and durst not fight with King William.

(39) But now a less suspected, but much more An D. 1077
unnatural war arose; for Robert, his eldest son, (set on by Philip King
of France, who did greatly dread Robert warreth for Normandy.
this so hasty grouth of the Conqueror) claimed Normandy by gift of his
father, promised to him immediately after his Conquest of England; a Noble
Gentleman surely, but of an ambitious and hasty nature, prodigally spending and
maintaining his followers above the compass of his private estate; him Philip,
and his own ill-nurtured Ambition, thrust forward, Will. Malmes.
and Q. Maud his mother supplied under hand, out of her own Coffers, and King
Williams Reuennewes, so that with banners displaied he entered Normandy in
hostile manner, and there by force seized upon diverse places to his own use,
and so without respect of dutiful patience gained by force the free-gift of
his father.

(40) King William hearing of his son Roberts proceedings, was not (as great
cause there was) a little offended thereat, and with a powerful Army hasted
Mat. Paris. Simon Dun.
to Normandy* where near unto the Castle of Gerbory, at a place called
Archenbraye, he joined battle with his son; where the fight was sore and
dangerous on both sides, the Generals being such men as they were: but in the
heat of the foot battles that fought it out resolutely, Robert commanded a
power of horse to break in upon the Rereward of his enemies, and himself
valiantly following, chanced to light against his own Father, and with his
lance King William wounded and unhorsed.
thrust him through the Arm, bearing him off his horse to the ground. King
William thus wounded and fallen, called for help to be remounted, storming to
see his blood spilt in his own land, and against his own son, which never
had been in battles of other countries, nor drawn by the weapons of
foreign enemies, and in great rage threatened the revenge: Robert that knew his
Father by his voice, hastily alighted, and in his Arms took him from the
earth, humbly desiring his pardon for this unknown fact, and forgiveness of his
ouer-hastie attempt; then mounting him upon his own horse, brought him in
safety out of the press; who having escaped so great a danger, and seeing
himself He bandeth his son.
for the present too weak to withstand the enemy, left the honor of the
field unto Robert, with the loss of many his soldiers, slain there both in
the battle and chase, besides a great number that were hurt and wounded;
among whom, William Rufus his second Will. Malmes.
son was one, a man of a better temper, and more filial regard to his
parents, and therefore more deservedly and tenderly beloved then Robert; for
which dishonor now done to his Father, and disloialty for his unnatural
arms, he bitterly cursed him, and execrated the time wherein he begat him:
how beit, others do write, that for his most undaunted courage at that time,
issuing and ending in such dutiful and tender care of his fathers safety, he
presently forgave his former offenses, and ever after had him in better respect.

(41) These stirs thus qualified, and King William returned, he went forward
with his former determination; for settling a further assurance to himself and
successors of the English crown; to which An. D. 1708 The Tower of London
built. John Stow. Regist Epist. Ro^.
end, first on the east side of London (the mother City of the land) he laid
the foundation of a stately and strongly fenced Castle, or Magazine of warlike
munitions, entrenched with a large and deep ditch, now called the Tower of
London; the surueyor of which work, was Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester; about
the twelfth year of the Conquerours reign, so much is lessened the antiquity
of that Citadell, and credit of such, as would have it founded by Julius
Caesar; unless (perhaps) we would think that King Stephenide.
William did only add some new fort to the former; being built (says
Fitz-Stephen) with mortar tempered with the blood of beasts.

(42) Then to enrich his own coffers (for he is Will. Malmes.
taxed by Malmesbury to be exceeding covetous) he laid great subsidies upon the
land: and that the same might amount to his great benefit (though with
Florentius Wigor. England. Suruaie and general Judgment.
the greatest grieuance of the people) he caused an exact survey to be taken
of the whole kingdom, yea and of every particular part and commodity thereof;
so that there was not an hide of land, lake, water, or wast, but he knew the
valuation, the owners, and possessors, together with the rents, and profits
thereof, as also of all Cities, Towns, Villages, Hamlets, Monasteries, and
Religious houses; causing also all the people (...) England to be numbered,
their names to be taken, with notice, what every one might dispend by year;
their substance, money and Ingulfus.
bondmen recorded: how many yokes of oxen, and plough-lands were in the Realm,
and what services they owed, who held of him in Fee; all which was certified
upon the oaths of Commissioners. This done, he exacted six shillings to be
paid him for every hide of land; which amounted to an huge mass of money. The
Book thus made of every Higden.
several survey, was commonly called the roll of Winchester, (as being there
at first kept) but for the generality, Stow calls that book, Do^us Dei.
and inevitable censure thereof, is by Authors named Liber Iudiciarius, by the
English, Domesday Ingulfus
book, kept to this day in the Kings Exchequer at Westminster: of which
collection Robert, a Poet at Gloucester Geruasius Tilburiens. Robert
Glocestrens.
in ancient time, and ryme wrote thus: The King William, vor to wite the worth
of his land,
Let enqueri stretlich thoru all Engelond,
How moni Plou-lond, and hou moni Hiden also,
Were in euerich sire, and wat hij were wurth yereto:
And the rents of each town, and of the waters echone,
The wurth, and of woods eke; that there ne lived none,
But that be wist wat hii were wurth of all Engelond,
And wite all clean, that wurth thereof ich understand,
And let it write clean inou, and that scrit dude iwis;
In the Tresorie at Westminster, there it yut is,
So that ure Kings suth, when hii ransom took,
Yrede wat folc might yiue, hii fond there in yor book.


(43) This exaction was gathered with such extremity, Englands exactions.
and paid with such impouerishing of the English, that they grievously groned
under their miserable estate, whereby more hatred grew daily to the King, and
his Normans; whose love again to themward was so little, that he sought by
ail means to John Castor. John Rowse. Englishmens reproach.
bring the English name, and Nation to ruin: for it is noted by Castor, and
Rouse, that no English man was permitted to bear any office of Credit, or
Countenance in Mat. Paris in G^d. Conq.
this Conquerours days, and accounted it was a great shame to be called an
Englishman, or to marry into their blood.

(44) These greeuances seeming insufferable, the English incited Malcolme King
of Scotland once more Simon Dunel. Malcolme inuadeth England.
to enter King Williams confines, wasting all before him unto the River Tyne;
against whom the Conqueror sent Robert his son, surnamed Courtoise, who
marching with a mighty Army, made show of doing much more then he did; this
only being memorable, that near to the mouth of Tyne he laid the foundation
of a Castle, whereof the town of New Castle did afterward take both her
beginning, and Name; though long before that time there was a place called
Monk-Chester, because (as it should seem) it had been Cambden in Otta^.
either the habitation, or possession of some Religious Order.

(45) Neither was Swain, King of Denmark, so quailed by his former
expeditions, but that he had Simon Dun. Danes prepare against William.
a mind once more to graspe at the English Crown, preparing a mighty Armado
that way, as was constantly reported and believed; King William therefore Mat.
(...) the (...) ^ance of in ^ame (...)
retained a great power of French Soldiers with others, which he had lately
brought with him from Normandy, to disburden himself of whose Charges, he
appointed them to be maintained at the costs of the English, both for their
wages, and other provisions, which was an other great burden unto the English,
though it long lasted not; for that the Danish King better aduising himself,
gave over the enterprise, and thereupon these Soldiers were discharged. King
Williams depopulations.


(46) Another grief and offense he ministered against both God and man, for the
fruitful Country lying South from Sarisbury unto the Sea, he dispeopled,
pulling down Towns, and Villages, with 36. Mother-churches, from man's use,
and Gods divine service; Cambd in Hantshire.
and for 30. miles, laid open the country some say out of policy, to have safe
ariuage from Normandy in time of need: others say, for beasts, and for his own
game in hunting, or to use the words of Gualter Mapes, who lived immediately
after, to dedicate the same unto wild Beasts and Dogs-game; which place called
anciently Ytene, was ever since named the New Forest: imposing Gualter M^
great penalties both pecuniary, and corporal on all such as offended in
hunting his Game: in so much that he was then called the Father of wild Beasts,
King William the father or wild Beasts.
more favoring them then the People his Subjects. But Gods just judgment not
long after followed this so unreasonable, and cruel act: for in this Forest,
Richard his second son being goared by a Dear, (others say, blasted with a
pestilent Air) was untimely slain: And Rufus his other son mistaken
Judgments of God ^n King Williams (...) in New Forest Cambden.
for a Dear was by chance shot through with an Arrow, by Walter Tyrell. Henry
likewise his Grandchild by Robert Curtoise, whilst he hotly pursued the
chase, was stricken by a bough into the laws, and as Ab solon left hanging
until he died.

Thus, no doubt, God punished his sins (even on his children, and childrens
children) who had both taken away the places, and use of his service, and also
disherited multitudes of Christian people to their extreme poverty, for his
vnsaciat and superfluous pleasure: so that (as some then thought) the Earth it
self also seemed to cry Revenge, when as upon the sixth of April, and
fifteenth of King Williams Reign, Matthew. Paris.
a most fearful Earthquake, with a warring noise, did shake the ground.

(47) Other great calamities are noted to have Calamities falling on the Land.
happened upon his people, as burning fevers strangely consuming the people:
Murrens devouring infinite numbers of Cattle; abundance of rain, and concourse
of water-flouds beyond credit, whereby the hills were so softened to the very
foundations, that some of them fell, and overwhelmed the villages which were in
their way: most of the principal Cities of England much endamaged by fire, and
London especially, where the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul (as much as was
combustible) was consumed to ashes; and if that may also be noted (which All
things degenerate
caused not the least wonder) tame, and domesticke fowls, as hens, geese,
peacockes, and the like fled into the forests, and woods, and became very
wild, in imitation of men, degenerating then into Roger Wendouer.
savages: for in those times even the Churchmen (and therefore less marvel
of others) became unlike Marianus.
themselves: Walter Bishop of Durham, bought of King William the Earldom of
Northumberland, maintained murderers, and was murdered himself. Odo, another
Bishop, and Earl also, to revenge his death, made Northumberland desolate,
beheading and dismembring the poorer sort, and at great Pope Gregory's Bulls
against married Priests.
ransomes fining the rich, and Pope Gregory for his part played Rex in this
land, sending hither his Bulls with damning curses against the married Clergy:
commanding that none should hear their Masses: which how it was disgested,
either by God, or man, Matthew Paris. in G^. Conq.
let us hear Paris an ancient Monk (and therefore herein no partial man)
speak his mind.

(48) Pope Gregory in a general Synod excluded the married Priests from
execution of their holy Inhibiting of married Priests a new device, and
inconsiderate.
offices, and forbad the Laymen to hear their Masses; a president new, and
proceeding (as it seemed to many) out of inconsiderate judgment, contrary to
the sentence of the holy Fathers: which have written, that the Sacraments of
the church by the invisible operation of the holy Ghost, have their due effect,
whether they are dispensed by men good or bad, etc. By which fact so grievous
Popish Continency hypocritical.
a scandal is arisen, that holy Church was never rent with a greater schism
in the time of any heresy whatsoever; whiles some stand for the right, and
others strive against it. Moreover, whereas few observe this chastity enioined
(for that though some for gain, or vainglory, do hypocritically pretend it;
yet many do heap up incontinency with perjury, and manifold adulteries) by
this occasion the Laymen shake off all due respect to sacred orders and
ecclesiastical government; they profane the holy mysteries, they baptize
Infants, anointing them with the sordid humor of their ears in stead of holy
oil, they burn the tithes due to the Priests; our Lords body consecrated by a
married priest they tread under their feet, and often do wilfully cast forth
the blood of our Lord upon the ground.

(49) This Gregory (before called Hildebrand) sat in Peter's chair with such
pranks of impiety, that his government was odious to the Romans, who wished an
end of his reign and life, so that certain South saiers employed in that
business gave forth, that after Gregory, Odo should be Pope. Odo, our said Odo
King williams brother, affects the Papacy.
Earl, the Conquerours brother, fed with full hope that he was the man,
sends to Rome to buy him a Palace, adorning it with stately and ouer-lauish
trimmings; Salutes the Senators with great gifts and complements, stuffeth
bags with money, and letters to such as might do much in the election, and
prouides honorable personages to attend him to Rome. Among the which for
chief, was Hugh Earl of Chester, with many great men and Knights of the land:
for the Normans variable, and desirous to see foreign Countries, were
contented to forsake their fair lands in the west climate, to accompany this
proud Prelate over the river Poo.

This jolly train was set forward into the Isle of Wight, and there in great
pomp ready to set sail into Normandy, when on the sudden King William
unlooked for, was even among them, and in his great Hall in presence of his
Nobles thus spoke:

(50) Excellent Peers, I beseech you hearken to my words, and give me your
counsel: at my sailing King william condemns his brothers Ambitions.
into Normandy, I commended England to the government of Odo my brother Bishop.
In Normandy many foreign foes have risen up against me, yea and inward friends
I may say, have invaded me: for Robert my son, and other yonglings whom I
have brought up, and given Arms, have rebelled; unto whom my false Clients,
and other bordering enemies have given their assistance: but they have not
prospered, God (whose servant I am) ever defending me? neither have they
gotten any thing of mine, besides iron in their wounds: They of Aniou prepared
against me, whom with the only fear of war I have pacified. These
businesses you know have drawn me into Normandy, where I have stayed long and
employed my painful endeavors on public behoofes. But in the mean time, my
brother has greatly oppressed England, spoiling the Churches of Lands and
Rents, has made them naked of Ornaments given by our Predecessors, and has
seduced my Knights, with purpose to train them over the Alps, who ought to
defend the His sacrileges.
Land against the invasions of the Danes, Irish, and other Enemies over strong
for me; but my greatest dolor is for the Church of God, which he has
afflicted, and unto which the Christian Kings that reigned before me, have
given many gifts, and with their loves honored, for which now (as we believe)
they rest, reioicing with a happy retribution in a pleasant State: Ethelbert,
Edward, Saint Oswald, Althulph, Aefred, Edward the Elder, Edgar, and my cosen
and most dear Lord Edward, have given Riches to the Church, the spouse of God:
But my Brother to whom I committed the whole Kingdom, violently plucketh away
their goods, cruelly grindeth the poor, and with a vain hope steals away my
His Oppressions.
Knights from me, and by oppression has exasperated the whole Land with unjust
taxations; consider thereof, most Noble Lords, and give me (I pray you) your
advice, what is herein to be done.

(51) At which pause when all stood mute, as fearing to give their opinions in
so weighty a point, concerning so great a Person, the King thus continued his
speech.

Hurtful rashness is ever insufferable, and must at length be repressed. This
man has oftentimes His Trecheries.
banded himself against his own father, and upon a stomach, blown up with
pride and folly, has fallen off to the King of France: therefore lest with
overmuch lenity, we buy too late a repentance, he shall remain Prisoner, yet
not as a Bishop, whose name I both honor and reverence, but as an Earl,
subject to the Laws and Censure of his King. His imprisonment.


Which accordingly was done; upon seizure of whose estate, this Prelate was
found so well lined in purse, that the heaps of yellow metal did move
admiration to the beholders, and many of his bags were His Avarice.
taken up out of the bottom of Rivers, where they were hidden full of gold
ground into powder.

(52) Soon after, some displeasure having arisen betwixt King William, and
Philip King of France, he having first generally caused to be taken the Oath
of English Allegiance to himself and successors, with a mighty mass of money
(fitted for some great attempts) Will. Malmsb. Matthew. Paris.
departed to Normandy; where falling sick, and keeping his Bed more then his
wont, the French King hearing that his disease was in his belly, gave him this
frumpe; Our Cosen William (said he) is laid Some write King William took
Physic to take down his great fat belly. Higden.
now in Childbed: Oh what a number of Candels must I offer at his going to
Church? surely I think a hundred thousand will not suffice.

King William hearing thereof, is said to make this answer; Well, our cosen of
France I trust shall be at no such cost; but after this my childbirth, at my
going to Church (swearing by the resurrection and brightness William Malmes.
King Williams Oath.
of God) I will (said he) find him one thousand candles, and light them my
self. And accordingly toward August following, when both the trees, fruits,
corn, and ground, was most flourishing, he entered France with a mighty Army,
spoiling all the west parts thereof before him; and lastly, set the City Meux
or Mauntz on fire, wherein he consumed the fair Church of our Lady, in the
walls whereof was enclosed an Anchoret, who might, but would not escape, holding
it a breach of his religious Stow says two Anchorits.
vow to forsake his Cell in that distress. The King busied in these attempts
cheered his men to feed the fire, and came himself so near the flames, that
with the heat of his harness, he got a sickness, and the same increased by
the leap of his horse, that burst the inward rimme of his belly, and cost him
his life.

(53) At which time feeling death to approach, he deferred not to address his
last Will, wherein he King Williams last Will and Testament.
commanded all his Treasure to be distributed to Churches, Gods Ministers, and
the Poor, limiting to each their several portion and quantity, which he
caused to be engrossed in writing by Notaries before him: Amongst which, he
bequethed to the Church and Monks of Saint Stephens at Cane in Normandy, Ex
Libro Cadomensis Monast.
two Manors in Dorsetshire, one Manor in Devonshire, another in Essex, much
Lands in Barke-shire, some in Norfolk, a Mansion house in Woodstreet of
London, with many Aduowsions of Churches; yea, which is to be wondered at, he
gave his Crown, and Regal Ornaments thereto belonging to the said Church;
being of his own foundation; for the redemption whereof, King Henry his son,
gave the Manor of Brideton in Dorsetshire, to prevent any danger that thereof
might arise; and unto the Churches by fire destroyed in Meuxe, he gave great
sums of money to repair them: and so preparing himself for God, briefly
ran over the carriage of his former life; the sum whereof (as much as best
fitteth this place) we will declare as he spoke it to them that were present.

(54) Being laden with many and grievous sins, (O Christ) I now tremble, who am
ready to be His last Speec^ on point of death.
taken hence, and to be tried by the severe, but just examination of God. I
that have alwais bin brought up in wars, and am polluted with the effusion of
blood, am now utterly ignorant what to do; for I cannot number my offenses,
they are so infinite, Of his Sins.
and have been committed by me now these sixty four years: for which, without
any delay I must render an account to that most upright Judge. From my tender
infancy and age of eight years, I have hitherto sustained the weight and
charge of Arms to defend my Dukedom, governed by me now almost fifty six,
both in preventing Of his Norman troubles.
those snares that have been laid for my life, and in vanquishing those
conspirers which would have usurped my right: a stiff necked people I may say,
my arm has still managed; I mean the Normans, who with an hard hand, if they
be curbed, are most valiant, and in hazardous attempts invincible: for, as
they excel Of his Normans qualities.
all men in strength, so do they contend to overcome all men by valor. But if
the reine be once let loose, and laid in their necks, they will tear and
consume one another; for they are ever seditious, and desirous of new
stirrings; experience whereof sufficiently I have had, not only of my
confederates and allies; but even of mine own kindred, denouncing me to be a
bastard, degenerate Of his friends and Kindreds unkindness.
and unworthy of government: against whom, I have been forced to put on
armor, before I was by age ripe to weild it: all which I have vanquished, and
some of them captiuated, God so preserving me, that they never had their
desires. A royal Diadem, which none of my predecessors Of his English
Conquest.
ever ware, I have gotten, not by right of inheritance, but by heavenly grace.
What labors and conflicts I have sustained against those of Excester, Chester,
Northumberlands, Scots, Gauls, Norwegians, Danes, and others, who have
endeavored to take the crown from me, is hard to declare; in all which the lot
of victory fell ever on my side: which worldly triumphs, howsoever they may
please the sense and outward man, yet they leave an inward horror, and
fearful care which pricketh Outward triumphs leave inward horr^s.
me; when I consider, that cruel rashness, was as much followed, as was the
just prosecution of the cause. Wherefore I most humbly beseech you, O ye
Priests and Ministers of Christ, that you in your prayers will commend me to
God, that he will mitigate my heavy sins, under whose burden I lie pressed,
and by his unspeakable mercy make me safe among his elect. Nine Abbeis of
Monks, and one of Nuns which my His works of devotion.
Ancesters founded in Normandy, I have enriched and augmented; and in the time
of my government, seauenteene Monasteries of Monks, and six of holy Nuns,
have been founded by my self and my Nobility; whose Charters I have freely
confirmed, and do by princely authority confirm against all emulations and
troubles; in them God is served, and for his sake many poor people relieved;
with such Camps both England and Normandy is defended, and in these Forts let
all younglings learn to fight against the Devil and vices of the flesh. These
were the studies that I followed from my first years, and these I leave unto
my heirs to be preserved and kept. In this then (my children) follow me, that
here and for ever you may be honored before God and Men: And chiefly, O you my
very bowels, I warn you to frequent and follow the company and counsel His
Counsel to his Children.
of good and wise men, and govern your selves accordingly, so shall ye long
and happily prosper. Do justice to all without partial affection; for it is a
true wisdom indeed that can discern betwixt good and evil, right and wrong.
Shun wickedness, relieve the poor, succor the weak, but suppress the
proud, and bridle the troublesome. Frequent the Church, honor the religious,
and without weariness be obedient unto the law of God. The Dukedom of
Normandy, The dispose of his States.
before I fought against Harold in the vale Senla^, I granted unto my son
Robert, for that he Of Normandy.
is my first begotten, and has already received homage of all the Barons
almost of his Country: that honor given cannot again be undone; but yet
without doubt, I know it will be a miserable region, which is subject to the
rule of his government; for he is a foolish proud knave, and is to be punished
with cruel fortune. I constitute no Heir to the Realm of England, but do
commend it to the Of England.
everlasting Creator whose I am; for I possess not that honor by any title of
inheritance, but by the instinct of God, the effusion of blood, and the
perjury of Harold; whose life bereaved, and his favorers vanquished, I made
it subject to my dominion. The Natives of the realm I hated, the Nobles I
dishonored, the vulgar I cruelly vexed, and many unjustly I disherited. In the
County of York, and sundry other places, an innumerable sort with hunger and
sword I slew: and thus that beautiful Land and noble Nation I made desolate
with the deaths of many thousands, (woe worth the grief.) These then my sins
being so great, I dare not give the offices of that land to any other then to
God, lest after my death they yet be made worse by my occasion. Yet William my
son, whose love and obedience from his youth I have seen, I wish (if so be
the will of God) may flourish in the throne of that Kingdom, with a long life
and happy reign.

(55) Henry his youngest son, surnamed Beauclerke, hearing himself utterly
neglected in his Fathers distribution, with tears said to the King: And what
King Williams Legacy to his son Henry.
Father do you give me? to whom he answered, five thousand pounds of silver
out of my treasury I gi^ thee. But what shall I do with treasure, said Henry,
if I shall have no dwelling place or habitation? His Father replied, Be patient
my son, and comfort thy self in God, suffer quietly thy elder brother to go
before thee: Robert shall have Normandy, and William England: but thou in time
shall entirely have all the honor that I have gotten, and shall excel thy
Brethren in riches and power.

After which speeches, he presently called his son William, to whom he
delivered a letter signed with He writes into England.
his own seal, written unto Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, and commanded
him therewith to have for England, lest in that spacious Kingdom some sudden
troubles should arise; and so with a kiss blessed him in Christ. His prisoners
he commanded to be ^et at liberty, affirming that he had done Earl Morcar
much wrong, whom as he then confessed, he had imprisoned more for fear then
for fault; only his half brother Odo he would have had to remain a
perpetual prisoner, but that by the importunate intercession of friends he
was released.

(56) The period of this Great Conqueror now come near to his last, when this
Sun so gloriously raised to the height of his course, must now of force set
in the West, the dying King (for Kings must die) King Williams death.
having raised his weak body upon the Pillowes, heard the sound of the great
Bell in the Metropolitan Church of Saint Geruis near Roan, and demanding the
cause, one replied that it did then ring prime to o^ Lady; whereupon with great
devotion lifting his eyes toward heaven, and spreading abroad his hands, I
commend my self (said he) to that blessed Lady, Mary, Mother of God, that
she by her holy prayers With such doctrine was good devotion abused contrary
to the prescript of God Isai. Chap. 33. 16.
may reconcile me to her most dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ; and with the
words yielded up his Ghost, upon Thursday the ninth of Septemper, the fifty
sixth of his Duchy, the twenty one of his Kingdom, the sixty four of his
age, and year of Christ Jesus 1087.

(57) Wherein; as we see the instability, both of Man's life, and Glory, (a
point fitting for great Princes ever to think on;) so by the sequel we shall
perceive, how ill-rooted and ungrounded the friendship Princes friends.
is, which attends the greatness of Soueragnes, whose Favorites chief or
only ends are their own Ambition and Gain, the fuel whereof once beginning
to decay, the fire of their seeming-deuotion will be quickly cold. For no
sooner had this late-glorious Princes Soul bidden farewell to his Body, but
his dead Corpse was presently abandoned by his followers His Corpse forsaken of
all sorts.
of nearest place, and best means, who posted homewards apace to defend their
own; and by the meaner and his inferior servants, he was dispoiled of Armor,
Vessels, Apparel, and all Princely furniture, The qualities of Court-Kites.
even so far from al wonted and due respect, as that they left his dead Body
naked upon the floor; like true Kites, praying whilst any thing was to be had.

The sudden fame of his death stroke such fear into the Commons hearts as was
admirable, every man shifting for one, but all neglecting the funeral rites of
their King, until that one Harluins a poor Country Knight, undertook the
Carriage of his Corpse unto Cane, and at his own cost, both by Sea and Land,
unto Saint Stephens Church, which this dead King had formerly founded.

At his entrance into Cane, the Covent of Monks came forth to meet him, and to
celebrate the burial with all Ceremonies beseeming; but behold even at that
instant, a sudden chance of fire happened, His Hearse also abandoned of al.
which presently invaded a great part of the Town, that, as his Corpse before,
so now his Hearse was of all forsaken, whiles they addressed themselves to
repress that furious Element: which done, and the Funeral Sermon ended, the
Stone-Coffin set in the earth, in the Chancell betwixt the Chorale and the
Altar, and the body ready to be laid therein, one Ascelinus Fitz-Arthur, a man
of some Note, stood up and forbade the burial: This very place (said he) was
His burial place denied him.
the floor of my Fathers house, which this dead Duke violently took from him,
and here upon part of my inheritance founded this Church: This ground therefore
I challenge, and in Gods behalf forbid that the Body of my dispoiler, be
covered in my Earth, neither shall it be interred in the precinctes of my
right. Whereupon they were enforced to compound with him for a present sum of
money then delivered, and with consent of his son Henry, for a hundred pound
weight of silver after to be paid, and so the Exequies went forward; when,
behold again the Corpse laid into the Tomb, was with the largest, which being
pressed, the belly Annoiance at his funeral.
(not bowelled) brake, and with an intolerable stench so annoied the
bystanders, that neither Gummes, Hence Stowe notes their report for fabulous,
who wrote that his Body was found vncorrupt 500. years after his death.
nor spices fuming from the Censures, could be any whit sensible to relieve
them, insomuch that all with great amazement hastening away, they left the Monks
to shuffle up the burial, and they were soon glad to get them to their cells.

(58) This then was the life and death of this great Monarch, the Conqueror of
Men, but not of Death, nor suruiuing Envy; a bright example of the dim glory
of man, who in life had the possessions of Kingdoms and Dukedomes, men at
Arms, riches and honor, and all things thereto adhering; but after his death,
neither Ornaments, nor Attendants, nor place of burial, till it were bought;
all which, private men seldom want: so vain is the pomp of this world, and
so uncertain the state of her darlings.

(59) He was for stature indifferent, of countenance stern, his forehead
high, and hair very thin, fat and corpulent of body, with his belly His
description for lineaments and qualities. Will. Malmes.
bearing out, so strong of ioints and arms, that few could bend his bow; of
wit ready, and very politic, in speech eloquent, resolute in attempts, in
hazards valiant, a great soldier, and as great in success; Rand. Higden
Polyc. lib. 7. cap. 4.
rough and covetous toward the English, in his taxes, laws, and in giving to
his Normans their lands; whose Charters were of a far other tenor, form,
and breuity, then those tedious and perplexed conueyances, since in use, as by
these few inserted may appear. I William King, the third year of my reign,
Stow ex libro Richmond. King Williams Charter to Hunter.

Give to thee Norman Hunter, to me that art both leefe and Decre,
The Hop and the Hopton, and all the bounds up and down,
Under the Earth to Hell, above the Earth to Heaven,
From me and mine, to thee and to thine,
As good and as fair, as ever they mine were,
To witness that this is sooth, I bite the white wax with my tooth,
Before Ingge, Maude, and Margery, and my youngest son Herry:
For a bow and a broad arrowe, when I come to hunt upon yarrow:


(60) At the suite of William Bishop of London, he granted the City (whose
chief Magistrate was then Lambert. Peramb.
called the Portreue) their first Charter written in the Saxon tongue,
confirmed with green wax, whereas the Saxons before used only to sign with
guilt crosses, Ingulfus,
and such like marks: the Copy thereof is this: William Cyng greit William
Biscop. and Godfreges Portgerefan and call the Burhwaren the on Lunden beon,
etc. William King, greeteth William Bishop, Hollins. Lamb. Peramb.
and Godfrey Portreue, and all the Burgesses that in London be, French and
English, friendly. And I do you to wit, that I will, that you enjoy all the
law which you did in the days of Edward King. And I will that each Child be
his Fathers inheritour after his Fathers days. And I will not suffer that any
man you any wrong offer. God you keep.

(61) In the like Charter, granted to his Nephew John Leland.
Alane Earl of Britain for lands in Yorkshire, he writes himself William
surnamed Bastard; and yet it seems, he was offended at Guy of Burgundy for
tearming him Nothus; perhaps, because that word signifies such a one, whose
Father is unknown, whereas King Williams was not only known, but renowned also.

(62) Howsoever he was stern and hard to the English, yet to his Normans he
was facile and too indulgent, much devoted to Religion, and frequenting the
Church, both morning, and evening; The Clergy that lived according to their
rule and profession, he both honored and richly endowed; but to the
licentious was very rough and hard handed: Will. Malms.
his uncle Malgerius Archbishop of * Rotemage, for his dissolute life he
disgraded: his brother Roane.
Odo Bishop of Baieux, he imprisoned, and many of the English deprived, as we
have heard.

(63) Besides his many other stately buildings, both for fortification and
devotion, three Abbeys of chief note he is said to have raised, and endowed
with large privileges and rich possessions. The Bartel-Abbay so called of a
battle there sought against Harold.
first was at Battle in Sussex, where he won the Diadem of England, in the
valley of Sangue-lac, so called in French, for the streams of blood therein
spilt: but William of Newberie deceived in the soil Will. Newbery.
it self, which after rain shows to be red; affirms, that after any
small shower of rain, the earth sweateth forth very fresh blood, as by the
evident sight thereof (says he) does as yet plainly declare, that the voice
of so much Christian blood there shed, does still cry from the earth to the
Lord.

(64) But most certain it is, that in the very same place where King Harolds
Standard was pitched, and under which himself was slain, there William the
Conqueror laid that Foundation, dedicating it to the Holy Trinity, and to
Saint Martine, that there the Monks might pray for the souls of Harold and the
rest Math. Paris in Will. Conq.
that were slain in that place: whose Privileges were so large, that they,
and others of the like condition, were afterward dissolved by Act of
Parliament, when it was found by experience, that the fear of punishment being
once taken away, desperate boldness, and a daring will to commit wickedness,
grew still to a greater head: for it was enfranchised with many freedoms; and
among others, to use the words of the Charter; were these: If any Thief,
Murderer or Felon, for fear of death, fly and come to Charta de Bello.
this Church, let him have no harm, but let him be dismissed, and sent away
free from all punishment. Be it lawful also for the Abbot of the same Church
to deliver from the Gallows any thief or robber wheresoever, if he chance to
come by, where any such execution is in hand.

The Standard it self curiously wrought all of gold and precious stones, made
in form like an armed man, Duke William presently upon his victory, with great
complements of courtesy, sent to Pope Alexander the second; as good reason it
was, the Popes transcendent pleasure and power, being the strongest part of the
Dukes title to the Crown, and his cursing thunderbolts the best weapons
whereby he attained to wear it.

(65) At Selby also in Yorkshire, where his youngest son Henry was borne, he
founded the Abbey Selby Abbay.
of Saint Germans: at Excester, the Priorie of Saint Nicholas; and to the
Church and College of Saint Martins le grand in London, he gave both large
privileges, and much land, extending from the corner Exeter Priory.
of the City wall, by Saint Giles Church without John Stow.
Criplegate, unto the common Sewer, receiving the waters; running then from the
More, and now More-fields.

(66) At Cane in Normandy, lie founded the Monastery Saint Stephens in Cane.
of Sant Stephen the first Christian Martyr, adorning it with most sumptuous
buildings, and endowing it with rich revenues; where his Queen Maud had
erected a Nunnerie for the society of veiled Virgins, unto the honor of the
blessed virgin Mary. Thus much of his Acts, and now of his marriage and issue.

His Wife.
(67) Maud the wife of King William, was the daughter of Baldwine the fifth,
surnamed the Gentle, Earl of Flaunders; her mother was Alice, daughter of
Robert King of France, the son of Hugh Capet: She was married unto him when
he was a Duke, at the Castle of Angi in Normandy, and in the second year of
his reign over England, she was crowned Queen upon Whit-sunday, the year of
Grace, 1068. And although she maintained Robert in his quarrel for Normandy,
and out of her own coffers paid the charges of war against his Father, and
her own Husband; yet, because it did proceed but from a motherly indulgence
for advancing her William Malmes.
son, it was taken as a cause rather of displeasure, then of hatred, by King
William, as himself would often avouch, holding it an insufficient cause to
diminish King William regardfull of matrimonial agreement.
the love, that was linked with the sacred band of a matrimonial knot. She
departed this life the second day of November, the sixteenth year of his
reign, and of Christ's humanity, 1083. for whom he often lamented with tears,
and most honorably enterred her at Cane in Normandy, in the Church of S.
Mary's, within the Monastery of Nuns, which she had there founded.

His Issue.
(68) Robert, the eldest son of King William, and of Queen Maude his wife,
was surnamed Curtuoise, Robert.
signifying in the old Norman-French, Short-Bootes: he succeeded his father
only in the Duchy of Normandy, and that also he lost afterward to his
brother Henry King of England; at the battle of Ednarchbray (in that Dukedom)
the year of our Lord 1106. where he was taken prisoner, and having his eyes
put A cruel revenge of one brother on another.
out (an unbrotherly punishment) was committed to the Castle of Cardiffe in
South Wales; and after twenty eight years imprisonment, there deceased, the
year before the death of his said brother, Anno 1134 and was buried at
Gloucester, in the midst of the Quier of Saint Peter's Church; where remains a
Tomb with his Carved Image at this day. He had two wives, the first, Margaret
daughter of Herbert, Earl of Maygne, both married in their Childhood, and
she died before they came to years of consent: The other was Sibyll, daughter
of Geffrey, and sister to William, Earls of Conuersana in Italy, and Niece of
Robert Guiscard, Duke of Apulia: By her he had two sons William and Heny;
this Henry was he that was slain Henry slain let his Gra^drathers New-forest.
by mischance, as he was hunting in the New-Forest in Hampshire.

William the Elder, surnamed in Latin Miser, was Earl of Flanders, in right
of Queen Maude his Grandmother, succeeding Charles of Denmark in that
Earldom; he also had two wives, the first Sibyll, (whose Mother, called also
Sibyll, was the daughter of Fowlke Earl of Anion) after divorced from him, and
remarried to Terry of Alsac, his Successor; the second was Joan, the daughter
of Humbert Earl of Morien, now called Sauoy, sister of Queen Alice of France,
wife of King Lewis the Gross: he died six years before his father, of a
wound received at the Siege of the Castle of Angi in Normandy, the 27. of July,
in the 28. year of the Reign of King Henry his uncle, and of our Lord, 1128.
he was buried at Saint Omers in the Monastery of Saint Bertin, and left no
issue behind him.

(69) Richard the second son of King William and Queen Maude, was born in
Normandy, and after his Richard.
Father had attained the Crown came into England, where, being then very
young, as he was hunting in the New-Forest of Hampshire, he came to a violent
and Richard slain (...) his fathers New-Fo^est.
sudden death, by the goring of a Stagge; (others say, by a pestilentayre,) and
is noted to be the first man that died in that place, the justice of God
punishing on him his Fathers dispeopling of that Country: his body was thence
conveyed to Winchester, and there buried on the Southside of the Quire of the
Cathedral Church, where there remains a monument of him with an inscription
entitling him a Duke, and some suppose of Bologne.

(70) William, the third Son of King William and Queen Maud, was borne in
Normandy, in the 21. William Rufus, or, the (...),
year of his Fathers Dukedom, ten years before he was King, 1159. he was
surnamed of the Red color of his hair, in French Rows, in Latin Rufus; he
was brought up under Lanefranke the learned Lumbard, who was Archbishop of
Canterbury, of whom he received both instructions of knowledge, and the order
of Knighthood; he served under his Father at the battle of Gerbereth in
Normandy; 1079, wherein he was wounded: and he always framed his actions so
pleasing to his Fathers humor, as that he thought him much worthier then his
elder brother to succeed in his Kingdom.

(71) Henry, the fourth, and youngest son of King William and Queen Maud his
wife, was borne in Henry (...)
England at Selby in Yorkshire, the third year of his Fathers reign, and of
our Lord God, 1070, his childhood was trained up in learning, at Cambridge
says Caius; but the ancient Annals of Saint Austins (...).
in Canterbury, say, he was Philosophia peregre informatus, instructed beyond
Sea in Philosophy; where for his Annals S. Augustus Cant^ar. M. S.
notable knowledge in the Liberal Sciences, he was surnamed by the French,
Beauclerk, that is, the fine Scholar. Upon his return he was made Knight,
being 16. years old, by his Father at Westminster, in Whitsontide, the
nineteenth year of his Reign, Anno 1086. and though at his Fathers death he had
nothing bequeathed him but Treasure, yet afterward he succeeded his Brothers,
both in the Kingdom of England and Duchy of Normandy.

(72) Cecilie, the Eldest daughter of King William and Queen Maude his wife,
was borne in Normandy, Cecily.
brought up in England, and carried again into Normandy, where in the ninth
year of the Kings Reign, and the year of our Lord 1075. she was by her
Father on Ester day, with great Solemnity offered up in the Church of
Feschampe, and veiled to be a Nun in the Monastery there; but was afterward
elected by She is veiled a Nun.
the Nuns of our Lady at Cane, to be Abbess of their Monastery, founded by
her Mother, which she governed, and where she died, and was enterred.

(73) Constance, the second daughter of King Constan^
William, and Queen Maud, was the first wife of Allayne Earl of little
Britaigne, surnamed in the British, Fergent; in English, Red. In regard of
which marriage, and his service done at the conquest of England, his Father in
law gave him all the lands of Earl Edwine, whereon he built the Castle, and
whereof he made the Earldom of Richmond, which long The Earldome of Richmond
erected.
after, belonged to the Earls and Dukes of Britaigne his Successors; although
he had his children by an other wife; for she died very young and without issue;
and was buried in the Abbey of Saint Edmundsbury in Suffolk.

(74) Alice, the third daughter of King William and Queen Maud, was married to
Stephen Earl of Alice.
Bloys in France, and had issue by him William an Innocent, Thibaud surnamed
the Great, Earl of Blois, and Champain, Stephen Earl of Mortain and Boleine,
(who was King of England) Henry a Monk of Cluny, after Abbot of Glastenbury,
and Bishop of Winchester, Mary married to Richard Earl of Chester, and Emme,
wife of one Harbert, an Earl of France, and Saint William Archbishop of York.
mother of Saint William Archbishop of York: She suruiued Earl Stephen her
husband, and in her widowhood took upon her the profession of Religion in the
Priorie of Nuns at Marciguy in France, where she ended her life.

(75) Gundred, the fourth daughter of King William, Gundred.
and of Queen Maud, was married to William of Warrein, a Nobleman of Normandy,
who was the first Earl of Surrey in England; by whom she had issue William
the second Earl, Progenitors of the Earls that followed; and Rainold of
Warren, her second son, who had also Issue. She died in Childbed, three
years before her husband, at Castleaker in Norfolk the 27. of May, in the 20.
year of her fathers reign, being the year of our Lord, 1085. and is buried in
the Chapter House of Saint Pancrase Church within the Priory, at the town of
Lews, in the County of Sussex.

(76) Ela, the fifth daughter of King William, and his Queen Maud, in her
Childhood was contracted Ela.
in marriage to Duke Harald, when he was in Normandy, being then a young
Widower. Notwithstanding, he refusing her took an other wife, and usurped the
Kingdom of England, after the death of King Edward, whereby he occasioned his
own ruin, and Conquest of his Country, which afterward ensued when her Father
sought revenge: so much (as some write) to the coffeehouse of this Lady,
that for grief of these mischances, she ever after refused marriage, and led
a single and solitary life; though others upon better warrant collect, that
she died young, and before William her Father set forth for England; Harald
himself pleading, that he was free from all covenants and promises to Duke
William, by reason of the death of this his daughter.

(77) Margaret, the sixth and youngest daughter of Margaret.
King William and Queen Maud, was in her childhood given in marriage to
Alphonso King of Gallicia in Spain, that afterward was so renowned for the
Conquest of the City Lysbon, for his victories against the Mores, and for the
slaughter of their five Kings, and was the founder of the Kingdom of
Portugal, the first King thereof, and the first bearer of the five Shields of
the said five Kings, which are to this day the Arms of the same. But this
Lady being thus contracted, deceased before those things happened, and before
she came to years of lawful consent to the marriage.

WILLIAM THE SECOND SVRNAMED William Rufus.
Monarch 40
R VFVS, THE FORTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH: HIS ACTS, REIGN, AND UNTIMELY
DEATH. CHAPTER III.


WIlliam posting for England, and Archbishop Lanfrank his An. D. 1087 William
Rufus comes into England.
earnest soliciter by liberal gifts given, and promises made to abrogate the
over hard laws of his Father, had the readier passage into the opinions of
them that could do most: and the more to notify his intended mild government,
with other his noble inclinations to princely virtues, as eyewitnesses of his
favors toward the English, he brought with him Ypodigma. Neustria.
from Normandy, Morcar, the stout Earl of Chester, and Wilnoth the son of
King Harold, both of them released out of prison, and then held in especial
favor Simon Dunel.
with him. But most of the States standing for The Peers wish well to his
Elder brother. Mat. Paris. Ypodigm.
Robert Curtoise his elder Brother (a man deemed of a more liberal
disposition, and better temperature toward the Subjects) their titles had
been tried by Lanfranke and Wulstane sway the Peers for Rufus.
swords, had not Lanfrank and Wulstan, both wise and reverend Prelates, by
their Counsels and Mediations stayed their hands. William Gemit. Matthew. Paris.
His Coronation.


(2) Consent thus gotten, and all voices given for William, he was crowned
their King at Westminster, upon Sunday the twenty sixth day of September, and
year of Salvation, 1087. by the hands of Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury;
under whom he had been educated even from his Childhood, and by His
disposition.
him made fit both for War and Government, had not the variable inclination
of his own mind carried his actions past the limits of any stayed compass.

(3) Robert upon discontents that Normandy was An. D. 1088 Rand. Higden. in
Polychr. lib. 7. cap. 5 Robert possessed of Normandy.
still detained, before his Fathers sickness, was gone into Germany, to
solicit their assistance for his right to that Duchy: but hearing of his
death, hastes into the Province, and was there peaceably received, and made
their Duke: which title notwithstanding, seemed to him dishonorable; his
younger brother being invested to a Kingdom, and himself disinherited; no
other cause moving, but his overmuch His disposition.
gentleness, being by nature composed nothing so rough, as was Rufus.

(4) The like emulation incited Odo, Bishop of Baieux (his uncle) against
Lanfranck the Archbishop, Odoes emulation against Lanfrank.
who now ruled all, and had worn him out of favor with the Conqueror his
half brother, whom he Polyc. lib. 7. cap. 5.
taught the distinction of imprisoning Odo, as an Earl, not as a Bishop: now
therefore seemed the time most fitting for a just revenge: and albeit that
Rufus brought him from Normandy, where he had been captiuated, and restored
him his honors and dignities in England; yet he, ungrateful man, envying
that Lanfranck should go before him, complotted the downefal as well of the
one, as of the other. And drawing into this conspiracy, Robert Earl of
Mortaigne and He conspireth against the King.
Hereford his brother, with many other of the English Nobility, wrote his
letters into Normandy unto Inuireth Robert to try for the Crown.
his Nephew, hastening him to repair into England, and recover his right, which
by his means he promised should soon be effected.

(5) The business thus wrought to Duke Roberts hand, and the English resorting
daily into Normandy, Duke Roberts hopes for England.
assured his hopes of a happy success, only the hinderance was want of money,
and that very much as the world then went with him, having ever borne himself
no less then his birth, nor ever had made his bags his summum bonum. In
these extremes, he His wants.
well saw the less was to be followed, and to set a Dukedom at stake to cast
at a Kingdom, he thought it ods sufficient, though the chance were doubtful:
Therefore to his younger brother Henry, who had store of gold, and wanted land,
he morgaged the County of Constantine, a Province in Normandy, and His supply
by morgage of his Land.
then sent to Odo, that he should expect his landing on the West-coast of
England by a day prefixed.

(6) The Bishop now grown bold upon Duke Roberts great power, showed himself
the first in the Odo the ringlealeader for Duke Robert.
Action; and fortifying Rochester, began to molest the peace of Kent, sending
to his accomplices abroad to do the like, which was not long in performing: Rob.
Mowbray and other his associates. Will. Malms. Simon Dun.
for in the West, Robert de Mowbrey Earl of Northumberland, assisted by
Geffrey Bishop of Constance, sacked Bath, and Berkley, with a great part of
Wilt-shire, and strongly fortified the Castle of Bristow against King William:
In Norfolk, Roger Bygod, Bristow fortified. against King William.
in Leicestershire, Hugh Grentemeisnil did shrewdly wast those Countries: Roger
Mountgomery Earl of Shrewsburie with his Welshmen, assisted by William Bishop
of Durham (the Kings domestical Chaplain) Henry Hunt.
Barnard of Newmerch, Roger Lacie, and Ralph Mortimer (all of them Normans or
Frenchmen) with fire and sword past through the Country of Worcester: Duke
Robert very fair for the Kingdom. Will. Genetic.
and surely, the stirs were so great, and Duke Robert so favored, that by
the judgment of Gemiticensis, had he hasted his arriuage, or followed the
occasion, the Crown of England had easily been set upon his head.

(7) All in an uproar, and Rufus thus turmoiled, he appointed his Navy to
scowre the seas, and to impeach King William promises to mollify his Laws.
his brothers arriuage: then gathering his forces, and knowing well how to
please the vulgar, promises again to abolish their ouer-hard laws, and
presently to put down all unjust Imposts and Taxations, whereby the People were
soon drawn to stand in his defense; and among them Roger Mountgomery He
waxes strong.
was reconciled to the King.

Thus now grown strong, and his enemies decreased, he led his Army into Kent
where the sedition first began, the Castles of Tunbridge and Horn he
recovered, as likewise Pemsey, wherein his uncle Odo had strongly immured
himself, whose lack of victual, by King Williams strait siege, allaied the
Odo his great heart taken down.
pride of that great-hearted man; so that he not only surrendered the same,
but promised the delivery of Rochester also strongly manned, with Eustace
Earl Simon Dun.
of Boloigne, and a sort of other gallant Gentlemen, even the flower of
Normandy and Flanders.

(8) Odo coming to Rochester for the delivery of An. D. 1089
the This Castle some lay was built by Odo, but it appears to have been built
by William Conqueror. Domesday-book. Will. Gemet.
Castle according to his promise, was by them surprised, and laid in strait
prison, whether in displeasure, or under color, and with consent of Odo, I
will not say; but certain it is, that the King took the matter so to heart,
that he sent forth his Proclamation through England, commanding that every man
should repair to that siege, whosoever would not be reputed a Niding, a word
of such disgrace, and Niding a word of Reproach. Camb. in Kent.
so distastiue unto the English, that multitudes seemed rather to fly, then
run to that service; whereupon the Castle was surrendered, and Odo banished
Matthew. Paris. Odo leaves England.
into Normandy, lost all his livings and honors in England.

(9) Whilst these things were in acting betwixt King William and his Barons,
Duke Robert with his Normans was landed at Southampton, having passed Rufus
pretends submissiuenesse to his brother.
some conflict with the Kings ships at the sea: whom Rufus so feared (if mine
Author say true) that he sent Messengers unto him in most submissiue manner,
protesting Polychr. lib. 7. c. 3.
that he took not the crown as his own by any right; but rather to supply
the time in his absence: neither did he account himself King, but as his
substitute to hold the crown under him; yet seeing the matter had been so
far passed, and the Imperial Crown set on his head; he most humbly desired
that it might so rest, proffering to pay him three thousand Marks by year,
and to resign it to him at his death: whereat Duke Robert shaking his head
(belike he saw no other remedy) easily consented, and returned forth with into
Normandy.

(10) And, if we compare this with the Monk Math. Paris. William Rufus, a
cunning Timeseruer.
of Saint Albans report, we may well believe, that William was forward enough
in his offers, though ever as unready in performance; for the Barons then being
up, and he not able to allay them, did that by his word, which he could not by
his sword, protesting to them that he was willing to resign the Kingdom, and
would be content either with Money or Possessions, Fair words appease fools,
and often deceive the wise.
if those that were his Fathers Ouer-seers should think it meet; and for any
Ordinances touching the affairs of the Common weal, he would refer it
wholly to themselves, provided always his own honor should not thereby be
impeached. But when the Clouds of these fears were altogether ouer-blowne, no
budde once appeared from these fair planted grafts.

(11) For Lanfrank deceased, and both King deprived Lanfranke dies.
of a politic director, and Common-welth of a principal Statist, he presently
showed the bent of his inclination, lauishly giving where no deserts had
engaged, and exacting extreme tributes, when no Necessity required; always
covetous, yet never thrifty, and still gathering, yet never enriching his King
William an ill manager of Ecclesiastical promotions. G^rn, Dor.
Coffers: All Ecclesiastical promotions then vacant he assumed into his own
hands, and kept the Sea of Canterbury without an Archbishop above four years,
setting to sale the free-rights of the Church, and he that would give most came
soonest to preferment, whereby both the Lands and good esteem of the Clergy was
daily diminished.

These greeuances were complained of unto Pope Pope Vrb^ not at leisure then to
remedy Church wrongs.
Urban, but he over. busied to forward an expedition of Christian Princes for
the winning of Jerusalem, had no leisure seriously to think upon their
estates, or else less mind to divert Kings out of their own byas, whose
persons he meant to reserve for his own gain.

(12) The Storm thus clecred without any An. D. 1090
thunder; King Rufus set the eye of desire upon Duke Roberts dominions, who
lately had done the like with Ypodigma Neustria. King William enters Normandy.
his; and suddenly burst into Normandy, as Scipio did into Afric, pretending
revenge of injuries done to his Kingdom; first therefore surprising the
Castles of Saint Valery and Albemarle, he stored them with his own Soldiers;
then piercing forward did great spoil in the Country. Robert destitute of
means and knowing his Normans ever unfaithful, sent to Philip the French
King, desiring his assistance against this Brother-Enemy; who preparing toward
Normandy, was stopped with such golden showers from King William that he could
not pass, so that Duke Robert Peace made betwixt the King and Duke.
was constrained to make a peace with his brother, though for himself a very
sorry one, as says Gemeticensis; which, as Paris reports, was effected by
Will Gemet. Matthew. Paris.
twelve Princes upon either part, and the conditions as follows: that King
William should retain and enjoy the County of Ewe with Fescampe, the Abbacie
of Mount Saint-Michael, and all the Castles he had gotten in Normandy: for the
Duke it was agreed, that his brother King William should aid and assist him,
to recover thoselands and territories beyond the seas, which had been
belonging to their Father; That all such Normans as had lost their livings in
Ypodig. Neust. Math. Paris.
England, in taking part with Duke Robert, should be restored: and lastly,
whether of them should die first; the suruiuer should be his heir.

(13) Peace thus established, and both their powers united, they bent
altogether against Henry their Both Brethren oppugn Henry the younger brother.
youngest brother, who fearing after-claps, had strongly fortified the Castle of
Mount Saint-Michael, situated upon the confines of Normandy and Britain: him,
whom they ought to have provided for, (says Gemeticensis) they went about to
expel, and all the Willi. Gemet.
Lent long laid siege aginst him.

It chanced one day as his men sallied out, and made a brauado in the face of
their beleaguers; King William alone, more bold then wise, rode against them,
King William endangered in a Siege.
thinking none so hardy as to encounter him single; but presently a Knight slew
his horse under him, and his foot entangled in the stirrupe he was
ouer-throwne; his enemy therefore with drawn sword, was ready to have slain
him, had he not revealed himself by his voice: the armed men with great
reverence then took him up, and brought him another horse; when the King not
staying for the stirrup, sprang into the saddle, and with an angry countenance
demanded, who it was that overthrew him? King William preferres him that
overthrew him.
the Knight as boldly answered, and showed himself who he was; by Lukes face,
quoth William (for that was his oath) thou shall be my Knight, and be enrolled
Williams Oath. Edmerus says, his oath was, By Gods face.
in my Check, with a Fee answerable to thy worth.

(14) During this seige, Prince Henry being sore distressed for water, and
knowing Duke Robert to be An. D. 1091 Ran. Higden in Polychr. lib. 7. c. 5.
of the milder temperature, sent him word of his want, desiring to have that
permitted, which God had made common, and given even to brute beasts, A
friendly Enemy.
as well as to men; Duke Robert therefore commanded him to be supplied, whereat
William was wroth, telling his Brother he wanted discretion, and policy in
war, which allowed all advantages to surprise the Enemy: And do thou (said
Robert) esteem An vn-brotherlie Brother.
more of water, which is every where to be got, then of a Brother, having no
more but him and me? In which dissension, Earl Henry got thence; and by policy
took a very strong town called Danford, where Will. Gemet. The three brethen
reconciled. Ypodigm, Neustr.
presently was a reconciliation made amongst these three brethren, who
thereupon forthwith took the Seas together for England.

(15) About this time, in the year of Grace, Chron. Wallia.
1091, and fourth of King Rufus his reign, one Eneon the son of Cadinor Lord
of Dyuet, moving War bewixt Rise Prince of Southwales, and (...).
rebellion against Rees ap Tewdor Prince of Southwales, drew to his side Iestyn
Lord of Glamorgan, upon promise to become his son in law by the marriage of
his daughter: Iestyn notwithstanding, judging their faction too weak, sent
Eneon into England, where he was well acquainted, to procure aid against
Rees: who entering conference of his business with Robert Fitz-hamon a worthy
Knight of the Kings Priuie-Chamber, wrought so far with Rob. Fiftz-hammon ^ides
(...).
him, being a man easily drawn to the exercise of war, that for a Salarie
he undertook the service, and with twelve Knights, and a competent number of
Soldiers went into Wales, where ioining with Iestin, in battle slew Prince
Rees ap Tewdor, with Conan his son. Robert Fitzhamon, now minding to return,
demanded his pay according to covenants, Rob. Fitz. hammon and his followers
possesions in Walls.
which Iestine in some part denied, alleging that Eneon had gone beyond his
commission: whereupon such discord arose, that these friends fell out, and
Eneon thus touched in his reputation, sided with the English against his own
Countrymen; whereupon a battle was fought, and Justin with most of his Welsh
slain, so that Robert with his followers obtained a fruitful possession in
those parts, (which by their posterties are enioied even to this day) whose
names, as they are found written in a British record, were as follows.

NAMES. POSSESSION. 1 William de Londres. Ogmor. The Knighs who attended Fitz
hammon;
2 Richard de Grana Villa; Neth. 3 Pagan de Turberuile. Coity. 4 Robert de S.
Quintin. Lhan Blethyan, 5 Richard de Syward. Talauan. 6 Gilbert de Humfreuile.
Penmarke. 7 Roger de Beckrolles. East Orchard. 8 Raynald de Sully. Sully. 9
Peter de Score. Peterton. 10 John Le Fleming. Saint George. 11 Oliver de Saint
John. Fonmon. 12 William de Estirling. Saint Donats.

(16) As these things were commenced betwixt An. D. 1092 Gemet. Malcolme King
of Scotland enters England with a power.
England, Normandy, and Walls, Malcolme King of Scotland entered into the
English Marches as far as to Chester in the Street, doing much harm; whose
farther outrage to prevent, William incontinently hasted, sending by sea a
great Navy of Ships, and by land his brother Robert, though with much loss
of either: for his Fleet was torn by tempest, and his horsemen through hunger
and cold perished in those barren parts: at length the Kings come to an
Interuiew, King William (...) Malcolme meet, and enter League,
where by the means of Edgar Atheling, a peace was concluded to both their
contents: for William restored unto Malcolme twelve Villages, which he Ypodigm
(...) ^stria.
had held in England under his Father, and gave him yearly twelve Marks in
gold: And King Malcolme for his part promised to keep true peace with him, as
he had done with the Conqueror, whereunto Mat. Paris.
he gave him his Oath, as says Matthew Paris.

(17) But as these two Kings of Enemies were King William and Duke Robert at
variance again^.
made friends, so the two Brethren of reconciled friends became again enemies:
for Duke Robert well perceiving, that King William meant nothing less then
performance of covenants, (protracting time upon some secret purposes, as his
jealous head conceived) in great displeasure returned into Normandy, taking
with him Edgar Atheling, whom he held in an especial account.

(18) King William then repairing those Castles which the Scots had destroyed,
new built in Cumberland the City Carleil, which two hundred years before
Carleil reedified.
had been spoiled by the Danes; and having defenced it with walls, built
there the Castle, Churches, Peopled with a Southern Colony. Endowed with large
Privilegio.
and Houses, wherein he placed a Colonie of Southern Soldiers, with their
wines and children, granting large privileges to the place, which the City
enioieth even unto this day.

(19) And having settled his affairs thus in the North, returns with triumph
into the South, An. D. 109;
where immediately he fell dangerously sick, King William falls sick and
voweth (...).
in the sixth year of his Reign, at the City of Gloucester; whose sins
began to sit so near his heart, (not looking to continue to commit many
more) that he sore repented him of the same, making many promises to amend his
life, if God would be pleased to give him longer life: the hard laws against
Matthew Paris. Henry Hunt.
the English, he vowed to reform, as also his own vices, and to settle peace
and good order in the Church, then far out of frame, almost all the Monks in
England, lived rather like Consuls, being Hunters, Hawkers, Dicers, and great
Drinkers Polychron. lib. 7. ^p. 6.
(says Higden) little regarding the rules of their profession. Those
Bishoprics and Monasteries that were vacant, and in his own hand, he
forthwith, and (much against his wont) freely bestowed: the Archbishopricke of
Canterbury upon Anselme a learned Ger. Dorob.
Norman Abbot: the Sea of Lincoln he gave to Robert Bluet his Chancellor, a
man of mean learning, Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops. Hic hum^lis, dives:
(res mira) potens, paus^ vltor, Compatiens^ ^itis, cum pateretur, erat.
Ypodig^. Neustri. King William regaineth his health, and loses his good
purposes. Goodwin in the life of Anselme.
and some other touches, but otherwise of many singular parts.

(20) But the danger past, and health recovered, he began to be more sick
in mind, soon repenting him of his too-soone Repentance: for as in spending his
own wealth, he was very prodigal, so was he very diligent to enter into
other men's estates, and to gain from them what he could, and therefore
tampereth with Anselme, persuading him, that the trouble of the Archbishops
place was very burthenous, especially for a man wholly brought up within the
walls of a Monastery, devoted to contemplation, and unexperienced in the
manage of great affairs of State. But all this Art could not induce him to
let go his hold-fast of the Kings absolutely passed promise, nor yet to
satisfy his Polychron. lib. 7. cap. 7.
great desire with money, and therefore the King paid himself out of his Lands.
Likewise from Roger of Lincoln he exacted five thousand pounds; and the
Commons he fined for transgression of his penal Rand. Higd.
laws; and in truth molested all for money: None were rich but Treasurers and
Collectors, none in favor but unconscionable Lawyers, and none rewarded but
Promoters: so that his ouer-haled subjects fled daily out of the Realm;
against whom he published Proclamations, with an inhibition that King Malcolme
comes to Gloucester.
none should depart without his safe Conduct.

(21) Soon after this, Malcolme King of Scotland came unto Gloucester, to
confer with King Will. Gemet.
William touching the Peace of both the Realms; but conceiving a grudge, for
that he was not entertained according to the Majesty of his estate, departed
Departs discontent. William Malmes. Polydor. Raises a power.
in displeasure without speech with the King; and immediately raising a power
against England, destroyed the Country unto Alnewicke Castle.

Robert Mowbray then Earl of Northumberland, a most valiant Soldier, seeing
his Country thus ouerrunne, made head against him, not staying for directions
from his King; and lying in Ambush for his William Gemet. Is slain with his
son the Prince. Simon Dun.
return, so sore and suddenly distressed his forces, that both King Malcolme
himself and his son Prince Edward were there slain.

(22) Hereupon Earl Mowbray growing proud and greatly suspected by King
William, began to Earl Mowbraies greatness suspected by the King.
fortify the Kings Castles, with Munition for Arms against the like invasion,
and indeed against the Kings will; who sent him word somewhat roughly, to
desist from his doings, and presently to repair to his Presence; which whilst
he lingered and neglected Math. Paris.
to do, King William sent his brother Henry to spoil Northumberland, and
immediately followed after himself, where without much ado, he took the
Earl, and committed him prisoner to Windsor Is taken and imprisoned.
Castle.

(23) These stirs in the North are diversely reported: for Walsingham in his
Ypodigma Neustriae, says, that Robert Moubray and William of Anco with
Ypodigm. Neustr.
others, conspired to deprive the King both of crown and life, and to have set
up Stephen de Albamarle his Aunts son: the issue of which treason was
prevented by surprising Mowbray, who died a Prisoner. William of Anco was
punished with loss both of his eyes and his virility; and William Aluerie (the
Kings Godfather, Kinsman and Sewer) cruelly whipped, Hector B^s lib. 12. cap.
12.
and all naked goared in blood, though guiltles, was hanged. Hector Boethius,
the Scottish, Historian relates somewhat otherwise of the death of King
Malcolme; as that the English having gotten the Castle of Anwike, King Malcolme
with a strong siege environed it about; when, the English distressed, and ready
to surrender, a certain Knight amongst them attempted a very desperate
enterprice, for mounted upon a swift horse, unarmed, excepting only a light
Spear in his hand, upon the point whereof he bare the keys of the Castle, he
rod directly to the Scottish Camp, and was with great applause brought unto
their King, where couching his staff, as though he meant with submission to
deliver him the keys, suddenly ran him into the left eye, and through
Malcolme slain under show of submission.
swiftnes of his horse escaped, leaving the King there dead: for which act King
William (says he, though erroneously) changed the Knights name into Perceeye,
whence that Noble Family is descended. The name of Percyes ancienter the^
Perceing of Malcolmes e^e. Uide Cambd. in North^m. Gemet^icensis. Sa^nt
Margaret (Edgar Ethelings Sister) dies for grief of her husbands death; few
such Saintlike wives. Hector Boethius Math. Paris The English Monarchs of Wales.


Gultelmus Gemeticensis says indeed, that it was reported that King Malcolme
was slain by a guile, declaring not the manner, but by the hands of Morell,
Nephew to Earl Mowbrey, where likewise died Prince Edward his son, and the
greatest part of his Army: with which doleful news (says Hector) his Queen
Margaret (called the Saint) within three days after died of grief. But Paris
has set it down, as is said; and in the same year makes William the
Conqueror of Wales; since which time the English Monarchs have been
accounted their chief Governors.

(24) Grudges now grown betwixt King William and Duke Robert his brother, each
accusing other of breach An. D. 1094 Will. Malmsb. Ran. Hagd. Simon Dun.
of oath and of Covenants; William from Hastings set sail into Normandy, where
some bickering fell betwixt the two Brethren, but by the mediating of certain
grave persons, their quarrels were comprimised, A breach again betwixt the two
Brethren, but made up for a time.
and Princes chosen to be their Arbitrators; which hearing indifferently all
allegations, adjudged King Rufus in the fault, who thereupon (as thinking
nothing right, but what went with him) King William refuses the censure of his
Arbitrators.
was so far from following their award, that being offended with their
censure, he presently assaulted, and took the Castle of Burren; neither did
Robert for his part sleep the whiles, but surprised the Castle of Argenton,
which was by former covenants given to King William, drawing likewise Philip
the Bothparts again in Arms.
French King to his side, who with his Army entered Normandy for his assistance.

(25) King William then waying into what danger he had brought himself, (all
approving Duke Robert, and disallowing his Acts,) he sought to do King William
preuailes by money.
that by money, which he could not by sword. Therefore to those soldiers, which
in heat of his fury, he had commanded to be sent him into Normandy, (even
twenty thousand, now in readiness, and at Hastings staying for a wind) he sent
a countermand, exacting of every common soldier ten shillings in money for the
release, and so without further trouble Math. Paris.
to return to their homes; with which sum he so pacified the French King,
that he now left Robert to The French King leaves his friend for money.
look to himself, who thus forsaken, was constrained to come to an
unreasonable peace.

(26) And the more willingly, for that the holy wars for Jerusalem, deliberated
of five years before, were now hotely pursued by Pope Vrbane the second, The
wars for the Holy Land.
(whom Bibliander blames to be the causer of much Christian bloodshed) only
to set up that, which Theod. Biblian.
Christ by Prophecy had laid in desolation. Among these Christian valiant
Captains Duke Robert would Duke Robert going to Jerusalem morgageth his
Dukedom. Henry Hunt. Will Thorn. Paul. Aemil.
be one, but wanting money, (no news at all to his coffers) he sent to his
brother King William to be supplied, and for the sum of six thousand, six
hundred, sixty six pound of silver, (Paulus Aemilius says, six thousand nine
hundred thirty four more) morgaged his Duchy unto him, giving him the
possession Will. Gemet.
thereof before his departure.

(27) To make up which sum, he did not only oppress and fleece his poor
subjects, but rather (to King Williams extreme exactions Math. Paris.
use the words of Paris) with importunate exactions did as it were flea off
their skins; for the Churches and Monasteries, having sold away their Jewels
and Not sparing Churches and Monasteries.
Chalices to satisfy his appetite, and answering they could make no more; the
King replied, with some scorn; And have you not, I beseech you, Coffins of
Gold and Silver for dead men's bones? Accounting the money laid out upon this
holy Expedition, to be better employed then to garnish the relics of the
dead. Aedmerus. An. D. 1095


(28) The King thus finding his fortune in all things pliable to his wishes,
and his heart therewith greatly puffed up, his purpose was now at his return
from Normandy, to make a full conquest of Wales; therefore redoubling his
forces he drew into the His expedition for Wales.
Marches, where piching his Tents he consulted with his Captains what was
best to be done. The Welshmen finding themselves ouerweake, fled The Welsh fly
to their Mountains.
according to their accustomed manner, into the Woods and Mountains, taking
thereby such advantage against their pursuers, that the King returned without
any notable deed done; and with the like An. D. 1096
success he undertook an other Expedition against them the year following.

(29) But bearing a mind still to subdue al Wales, he had first in his eye the
Island Anglesey, against which Anglesey invaded. Mat. Paris. An. D. 1097
he sent Hugh Mountgomery Earl of Shrewesburie, and Hugh Lupus Earl of
Chester, who there executed their Conquests with very great cruelties, cutting
off the Noses, Hands, and Arms of their resisters, without Cruelty there used.
Girald. Cambr.
regard of age, or sex, nor sparing either places or persons, sacred or
profane. At which very time it chanced Magnus King of Norway, the son of
Olanus, Norwegians assault Anglesey. An. D. 1098
(the son of Harold Harfager) to have made his Conquest of the Isles of
Orkeney, and then wafting along the Seas, sought to come on Land in Anglesey,
whom to impeach, these Earls made all their powers: where Hugh Mountgomery
armed at all parts, but only the sight of his Beuer, was shot into his
Mountgomery killed in the Eye.
right eye, whereof he died eight days after.

(30) The holy voyage now set forward, (unto which Pope Vrbane was a chief
instigator) thirty An. D 1099 Synodus Claromontana. The Holy voyage. Peter, an
Hermit, the Captain.
thousand Christians took the Sign of the Cross, wearing it on their
garments as the cognizance of their devoted warfare: The chiefest Captain of
which Princely Army, was Peter a poor Hermit, who returning from Jerusalem,
certified the Pope of the Christians great misery under those merciless
Infidels: but the good man more exercised in prayers The number of the Army.
Math. Paris. The Generals of the Army. Henry Huns. lib. 7.
(the weapons of Votaries) then expert to guide an Army, was soon entrapped
among the Bulgares, and slain with most of his soldiers. But yet the
business still prosecuted, the number of all degrees and ages flocking to the
service, is reported to have amounted (a thing almost incredible) unto seven
hundred thousand. In chief command of which huge Army, were employed many
brave Princes of Christendom; as Godfrey the famous Duke of Loraine, with his
brethren Eustace and Baldwin: Bohemund Duke of Naples, and his Nephew
Tancredus: Robert Earl of Flanders; Hugh le grand, brother to Philip the
French King; Raymund, Earl of S. Egidius; and besides many other great
Princes, the foresaid Robert Duke of Normandy, not the last in esteem for his
renowned service; as his memorable prowess in that imploiment did afterward
Mat. Paris.
make apparent unto the world. All these meeting at Constantinople (where
Alexius was Emperor) passed over Hellespont, and proceeded with better
success then the Hermit had done, subduing Their fortunate successes.
Cities and Countries before them, with the slaughter of an hundred thousand
Infidels, and purchase of great spoils: and lastly, took Jerusalem the holy
Th. Lanquet. Jerusalem taken by Christians.
City, in the thirty ninth day after the Siege thereof. But let us from Iewrie
return into England.

(31) King William at rest whilst his Brother and the rest were in wars,
thinking now both of fortifying An. D. 1099
and beautifying his Kingdom, caused new walls to be built about the Tower of
London, and at Westminster (* where before was the ancient Palace (...).
of Saint Edward and his Ancestors) said new foundations of a most large and
Princely Palace; the Hall whereof, by the testimony of Paris, should have Math
Paris. Stowes (...).
extended (if he had lived to finish it) from the River Thamesis even unto the
common high way, as might Westminster Hall built.
appear by the first groundworks, at the time wherein Paris wrote: but that
stately Building, which now we call the Great Hall, he finished as it now
stands, containing in length two hundred and seventy foot, in breadth
seventy four: yet (when some praised the The length and breadth thereof.
largeness thereof) he found fault that it was not made bigger, accounting it
scarce worthy the name of a Bedchamber, in respect of that which he intended
Rand. Higden.
to build.

And certes, of a right magnanimous disposition was this Rufus, as appeared at
such time, when sitting at dinner, purposing forthwith to take his pleasure in
hunting, a messenger brought him sudden news of the Siege of Main, a City in
Normandy: whereto Main in Normaney besieged. Henry Hunt.
when the King answered, He would take advice what to do: But thy Subjects
(replied the party) are in distress, and cannot be delaied; whereat the King
swore The Kings readiness to relieve them.
his wonted Oath, that if they could not, they should not, and that he would
not turn his back till he were with them; and thereupon commanded to break
down the wall that he might go forth the next way to the Sea, leaving
straight Commission for his Nobles to Will. Malms.
follow him with all celerity.

(32) But the winds being contrary, and thereby both the Sea and the King in a
great rage; his Pilote misdoubting hazard of Shipwrake, desired him humbly to
expect a while, till those boisterous Elements were calmer, and passage more
safe. Whereunto he answered, as no whit daunted: Have thou ever heard that any
Yes King Pharao was drowned, if the Pilot durst have so replied. Will. Genetic.
King has been drowned? therefore hoise up the Sails, I charge thee and be
gone. The City upon this unexpected speed of the King, was soon released, and
Helias, Consul of Cinomannia, who did beleaguer it, being taken by a train,
was by King William iested at to his face, as a man neither of Martial
prowess nor policy: at which indignity the Noble Helias disdainingly
storming, with great boldness said unto The courage of Helias a Prisoner
Rufus: I am now thy Prisoner, not by thy prowess, but by chance of war, and
my own misfortune: but were I at liberty, thou should well know, I am not
the man thus to be laughed at. The King well-liking the confidence of his
spirit: Well then (said he) King William releateth him.
I give thee full liberty, go thy ways, do what in thee lies; I am the man
that ever will mate thee.

(33) And surely, howsoever he might be blemished His great valor.
with many stains of bad Government, yet for his valor and resolutions in
wars he is greatly commended; and so much by some, that, if it were not against
the faith of Christianity, it might be thought Will Gemet. lib. 4. His praises
much impaired by partial writers.
(says Malmesbury) that the Soul of Caesar had entered into the body of this
Kufus, as that of Euphorbus is said to have don into Pythagoras: yea, and those
stains (we may well think) were no whit lessened by his story writers, who
were dependants of the Romish See: for that he little favored their Holy
Father, or any such as adhered unto the Sea of Rome, against the His opposition
to the Romish Church.
Prerogative of his Crown; as especially appeared in his Offense conceived
against Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, for his too Romish humor. There was
at that time a Schism in the Roman Church, which Monster-like had then two
heads on one Body, the Two Popes of Rome. Mat. Paris.
Emperor (who claimed that as his right) placing one, and the Roman Clergy
abetting another, Vrbanus by name, with whom consorted Anselme, against the
Kings command.

The King alleged, that no Archbishop or Bishop No English B. subject to the
Pope. (...). Holinsh. The King of Enland has as great privileges as the
Emperor.
of the kingdom should (or ought) be subject to the Pope or Court of Rome,
with whom they had naught to do: that he and his Realm had as large
franchesies, ever since the receiving of the Christistian faith, as the
Emperor had in his Empire; and that therefore none ought in his Realm to be
received for Pope, whom himself and his State should not first approve: that
without his license none should go or appeal to Rome in any cause: that
Anselme could not keep his Allegiance to his Sovereign, and also to the Pope.
Upon all which points the Prelates of Matthew Paris alibi except also Ranulphus
Cestrinsis Episc.
England, excepting only Gundulphus B. of Rochester, assented to the King
against Anselmus, that he was guilty of High Treason, for attempting to deprive
the Crown of these prerogatives.

(34) And because the King then urged, that herein he did no more then his
Father had done before Pope Gregory was justly by all men's judgments (says
Paris) deposed for Treason against the Emperor.
him, it shall not be impertinent to observe here, how that, as Vrbanus used
Anselmus for his instrument to draw the King to his beck; so Pope Gregory
before him used Archbishop Lanfrancks help for undermining of William the
Conqueror, and to subject him and his State to the Papacy; which that it may
appear the better, I will here insert the Conquerors own Letter to the Pope.

To Gregory the most Excellent Pastor of Holy Church, William by the grace of
God, King of England and Duke of Normandy, wishes health and friendship.
Amongst Lanfranks Epistles, M. S. vetust. The Pope would have William
Conqueror to swear him allegiance.
Your Legate Hubert (Religious Father) came unto me, exhorting me, in your name,
to make Allegiance to you, and your Successors, and to take better order for
the money which my Predecessors were wont to send to the Church of Rome. The one
I have granted; of the other I have not admitted. Fealty to you, I neither
would nor will make; for I neither promised you so much, neither find I that
ever my Antecessors did perform it to yours. The * money has been
negligently gathered, my self almost these This money was the Peter Pence or
Romescot, which Edward Confessor calls Eleemosynas, as given of Alms to the
Church of Rome.
three years being in France; but being by Gods mercy returned into my
Kingdom, as much as is Collected is now sent by the said Legate: the rest
shall be sent when it may conveniently, by the messengers of Lanfrancke our
faithful servant. Pray for us, and for the good estate of our Kingdom; for I
have loved your Predecessors; and my desire is above all others sincerely to
love you, and to hear you obediently.

His Holiness was then very wroth, that things did not cotton better to his
desires in England. But Lanfranck cleared himself of the blame, showing him
how diligently (but indeed traitorously) he Lanfranke counsels the King to
subject himself to the Pope. Epist. Lanfran. M. S.
had bestirred himself, in counselling the King to yield to swear obedience
to the Pope: Suasi, sed non persuasi (says he) I have so advised him, but I
could not persuade him.

(35) By which incredible pride and Popish encroachments, attempted by the
means of these chiefest Prelates of the Kingdom, King William Rufus (no
doubt) saw it was high time for him to prevent Will. Rufus prudently treads his
fathers steps. Eadmerus. He denies the Popes power, Soluendi and Ligandi.
Hodins.
farther mischiefs to his State, by following his Fathers steps in timely
repressing such Papal intrusions: yea so far was he from yielding his neck
to that yoke, that he auowed, that the Popes, though boasting of Peter's
Chair, had not from him any power of binding or loosing, whose godly steps
they wholly neglected, following only after Lucre and wordly Honors: that
also it was but imposture to teach Intercession, and bootlesse Against praying
to Saints.
to use Invocation to Saints, even to Saint Peter himself. And as for the rest
of the Romish Clergy, who then gave themselves strangely to wordly and fleshly
pleasures, wearing their guilt girdles and Rand. in Polycbr. lib. 7. cap. 9.
spurs, and trimming their bushie Locks; their loose lives the King much
detested, and sought to punish; which most incensed their Choler: and these
were the hairs no doubt in those Monkish writers Pens that ever blotted his
fair name, under their fast-running, and uneven hands. For so much may we
gather from Gemeticensis the Recorder of his Gemet^ic. l. 7. c. 8.
life, who having reported many Acts of this Kings, seems lastly to check
himself for going so far: where (he says) These and many other like things
we could truly report of him, were it not we think it vnconvenient A very
wise reason.
largely to relate his actions, because he persecuted very many of Gods
servants, and the holy Church not a little, for which it is thought by the most
part of wisemen, that he repented too late and unprofitably.

(36) And true it is, that some of them have taxed him for great Pride and
Covetousness, whereof yet Rob. of Glouc. Chron. S. Albans.
some pregnant examples to the contrary are not wanting; as, (though the
instance be somewhat familiar) when his Chamberlane bringing him a pair An
example of Will. Rufus his wonderful Pride. Every base knave will now go
costlier.
of new hoase, and he demanding the price, was answered that they cost three
shillings; Away base fellow (quoth he) are those beseeming a King? bring me of
a Mark price: his servant went, but brought him an other pair of no greater
cost, yet told him (as great Men's reckonings usually are made) that they were
of the rate appointed: wherewith the King was very well pleased, and disbursed
that great Price to fulfill his own pride.

(37) His Covetousness what it was, may hence His avarice. Polydor Virg.
appear, that when two Monks whose Abbat was lately dead, repaired to his
Court, and each in large offers out-uied and ouerbad the other, to succeed in
the Abbacie; a third Monk very sober, and poor in show, accompanying them in
their business, stood by; whom the King asked what he would give to be made
Abbat? Nothing, said the Monk; for I entered Polych. lib. 7. c. 11.
my profession to be poor, and hitherto have been, little esteeming the pomp
or riches of the world. Then thou art the man (replied the King) and shall be
their Abbat, more worthy in thy poverty, A princely choice. I would all
Simoniacks might so be served.
then they for their price; and so conferring on him that high honor, checked
the others to their open infamy and reproach.

As the like he also did to Hugh a Norman Knight, and Soldier by profession,
who of a sincere devotion had entered the Monkish Order in the Monastery A
preferment bestowed unlooked for.
of S. Augustines at Canterbury, and at the death of Vido the Abbat, was but a
Probationer; when coming with others to the King for the election of another,
was chosen himself (though sore against his will) without any request or
proffer; whose penitency and unfeigned humility so moved the King, that in this
his Election he burst forth into tears.

(38) Other faults I grant he is charged with, Of King Williams inconunency.
wherein we have not and cannot utterly acquit him: as this besides others,
that his chiefest Consorts were Effeminated persons, Ruffians and the like, and
himself said to have delighted continually in Adulteries, and the Company of
Concubines, etiam coram Sole, Math. Paris. No Issue ^legimate of his, known.
shameless and in the sight of the Sun; though none of them be named, nor
any his illegitimate issue known; and yet only, or especially for his sins,
many strange signs of Gods wrath are reported to have happened in the time of
his reign.

(39) For in his second year a terrible and most dreadful Earthquake
happened: And in his fourth, An. D. 1089 Strange accidents of his time
Earthquake.
a vehement Lightning pierced the Steeple of the Abbey at Winscombe, rent the
beams of the roof, cast down the Crucifixe, brake off his right leg,
Lightning.
and withal overthrew the Image of our Lady standing hard by, leaving such a
stench in the Church, that neither incense, holy water, nor the singing of the
Monks could allay it. And not long after, so great a tempest of wind
happened, that in London it bare down six hundred Houses, and blew off the
Wind.
roof of Bow-Church, which with the Beams were borne into the Air a great
height; six whereof being twenty seven foot long, with their fall were driven
John Stow.
twenty three foot deep into the ground, the streets of the City lying then
vnpaued.

In the ninth of his Reign a blazing Star appeared with two bushes, and
other Stars seemed to An. D. 1096 Uncouth Stars.
shoot darts each against others, to no little fear and amazement of the
beholders. The last of his Reign, Deluge.
the Sea breaking over his limited banks, drowned an innumerable multitude of
people in many Countries, and in Kent overwhelmed the lands that sometime were
Earl Goodwins, which as yet are called Goodwin Sands. Hector Boethius.
Goodwins Sands, lying very dangerous for all Nauigators. But most fearful
was the Well of blood, which A Well of blood
for fifteen days rose up out of the ground at Finchamsted near Abington in
Barkeshire. His own Will. Malmesbury. Mat. Westminster. Henry Hunt. Rand. Higd.
dream, wherein it seemed the veins of his Arms to be broken, and abundauce
of his blood streaming on the floor; as likewise that Monks, who in his
Presages of his death.
sleep saw the Crucifixe to spurn the King to the ground: these with many
like, were held as presages of his death, which presently followed. Of al
which, or the most part, what better censure can we give, then that which King
William himself (when this last vision was told him) did deliver; saying,
Well, a Monk he is, and can dream (Monachiliter) as Monks Math. Paris ad
An^. 1100.
use to do, only for to gain. Give him an hundred shillings, lest he should
think he had dreamed bootelesse.

(40) Whatsoever force those presages had, it is true, that upon the second day
of August, as he was hunting in the new Forest, and in the place called
Chorengham, all his Company being scattered from him, saving only a French
Knight, whose name was Matthew. Paris. Gemeticensis.
Walter Tirrell, the King with his arrow struck a Stag, which yet not greatly
hurt ran away; to mark therefore the course that it took, he held up his
hand betwixt his eye and the Sun, when unawares also Walter Tirrell so shot,
that his Arrow glancing against a tree, struck the King in his breast, who
hastily breaking off so much as stuck out of his body, with one King William
slain with an Arrow in hunting.
only groan fell down and died. Of which sudden chance, his followers soon
understanding, most of them made away, but those few which remained, laid his
body (basely God wot, but as necessity suffered) into a Colliers Cart, which
drawn with one silly lean Beast, through a very foul and filthy way, the
Cart broke, and there lay the spectacle of worldly glory, both pitifully
goared, and filthily bemired, Math. Paris.
til afterward he was thence conuaied unto Winchester, and buried under a
plain flat Marble stone in the Quire of Saint Swithens, the Cathedral Church
of the City, whose bones were since taken up, and laid into a Coffer, with the
bones of Canutus. He died Years of his age and Reign.
after he had reigned twelve years, eleven months lacking eight days, being
the year of his age forty Will. Malmes.
three, and of Christ Jesus, 1100.

(41) He was of person indifferent, not of any His description of mind and
body.
great stature, yet very well set, his belly (like his Fathers) somewhat bearing
out: of complexion Boethius thence surnames him Red-face.
ruddy, whereof he took his surname, and his hair somewhat yellow, his
forehead flat and square, and his Eyes diuersely colored; a stammering tongue,
especially in his anger; gorgeous in apparel, and of no sparing diet; very
bountiful to Soldiers, often hard to Churchmen, burdensome so his Subjects,
an expert Soldier, that could well both endure labor of the Body, and put off
cares of the mind; in his affairs circumspect, of his word steadfast, and in
his wars no less diligent, then fortunate. He gave His works of devotion.
to the Monks called de Charitate, the great New-Church of Saint Saviors of
Barmondsey in Southwark, which he built, with his Manor of Barmondsey it
self, and all the appurtenances, together with the Town of Charleton:
confirming all that had been Lib. Bermond.
given them before. He also of an old Monastery in York founded a new
Hospital, to the honor of Saint Peter, for the sustentation of poor men and
women: dying as we have said, without Wife or Issue, or without respit of time
for dispose of his Crown, or other wordly affairs.

HENRY, THE FIRST OF THAT Monarch 41
Henry I.
NAME, THE FORTIETH ONE MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS ACTS, REIGN, WIVES,
AND ISSVE. CHAPTER IIII.


HEnry, the youngest son of the Conqueror and third An. D. 1100 Will. Malms.
John Rowse. Annals S. Aug. Math. Paris.
King of his race, was born here in England, and brought up in learning eue^
from his childhood, whereby he gained to himself the high honor very rare
in those days, especially in Princes, to be, and to be styled the Beauclerk:
whose portion of Treasure was not a little, given him by his father, neither
any whit spared by himself to purchase friends at the death of his Brother,
This was the first Earl of Warwick from the Conquest, so to continue only ad
pla^um. M. The Miles. Th Rudborne.
Henry of Newburgh the right Noble, virtuous and learned Earl of Warwick,
ever making his way both with the Clergy and Nobles, who A politic but
traitorous course of capitulating. Math. Paris.
refused to admit any King but with capitulation and covenants to their own
likings.

(2) The steps then by which he mounted the Throne of Majesty, were the
dislikes of Williams ouer-hard Henry's helps to the Crown. Will. Gemet.
curbing of his Natives, as he ever called the English: the rash and giddy head
of his brother Robert; his absence in Syria, for whose return to stay was
dangerous, and whose election for King of Jerusalem, was likely to employ his
person there: his English-birth, Idem.
having both a King and Queen to his Parents; his fair promises for
reformation of bad and rigorous Roger Houed.
Laws, imposed by his Father and Brother, the restoring of the Clergy from
exile, and to their Church-Liuings; remission of Taxes exacted on the Subjects;
and due punishments of such persons as Henry Hunt.
were the chief Causers thereof, in which behalf to satisfy the People he
committed Ralphe Bishop of Ralpe Bishop of Durham imprisoned. Math. Paris.
Durham to the Tower. Then promising by Oath to frame just Laws grounded on
those of Saint Edward (then which nothing was more desired) did wind himself
so far into the loves of all, that with a general concurrence he was saluted
King.

(3) He began his reign the second of August; His Coronation. Ger. Dorob.
the sacred rites of whose Coronation were celebrated at Westminster, by
Maurice Bishop of London (in the absence of Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury)
the fifth day of the same month, the year of Christ 1100. When Henry the
fourth possessed the Imperial William Malmes.
Diadem, Philip the first swaied the Scepter of France, Edgar wore the Crown
of Scotland, and Paschall The fortaine Princes reigning in his time.
the second sat in the Sea of Rome.

(4) His first business was to put in execution what he had promised; and
because he might be thought The reformation of his Court. Rand. Hig. in
Polychr. lib. 7. ca. 12.
unfit to guide a large kingdom, who cannot reform those who are ever at his
elbow, began (as a good Prince ought) with his own Court and Household (as
knowing that to be the pattern and warrant of others enormities) whence he
cashiered al Court-minions and nice or effeminate wantons, and enacting a
decree against his Courtiers Rapines, Adulteries and Robberies, punished their
Thefts with Houeden. Wigorniens.
death, and Lechery with the Malmes. lib. 5. de Regibus. Public Liberties by
him granted. Stowes Annals.
loss of their Eyes, and other parts peccant.

Then he restored to the English the use of Lights, which his father forbad by
the ringing of a Bell, and had now continued for the space of thirty three
years, ordaining likewise many good Laws, and common Liberties, exemplified
at large in Matthew Paris, which summarily may be thus abridged.

1 The Freedom of the Church from oppressions, Math. Paris.
or reservation of their Possessions upon vacancies. 2 That the Heirs of his
Nobility should possess the Lands of their Fathers, without redemption from
him, which favor the Nobles likewise should afford to their Tenants. 3 That
the Gentry might give in Marriage their Daughters and Kinswomen without his
license, so it were not to his Enemy. 4 That the widow should have her Iointer,
and not be compelled to marry against her own liking. 5 That the Mother or
next of kindred, shall be Guardian of the Lands of her Children. 6 That Coiners
of false money should be * punished; and likewise ordained a measure By loss
of right hand, says Malmes. Of Hand and Genitals, Gometicons lib. 7. cap. 23.
Of Eyes and Genitals, Houeden. Malmes. lib. 5. Simon Dun. Will. Malms. King
Edwards Laws revived again.
to the length of his * Arm to be a standard for Commerce among his People. 7
Then did he forgive all debts to the Crown before his own time, and murders
committed before the day of his Coronation: with some other like indulgences:
But, to the greatest content of the People, he gave power and strength unto
King Edwards Laws.
(5) To these his Ordinances he set his Name and Seal, with the subscription
of sundry Peers, commanding His Charters sent to be kept in Monasteries. Math.
Paris.
as many Copies as there were Counties in England to be transcribed and kept in
the Monasteteries of every Province. Then did he recall Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury forced out of the Land by Rufus, and bestowed all vacant.
Church-liuings upon Ger. Dor.
the worthiest persons. But to ground his new planted affection more deep in
the hearts of the English, Ypodigma Neustria.
he became a suter to Edgar King of Scotland, to have his sister to wife, which
was Maude the daughter of Queen Margaret, Sister to Edgar Etheling and
Grandchild of Edmund Ironside, whereby his issue might His Marriage into the
English blood Will. Genetic. cap. 25. Math. Paris.
merely be both of the English blood and of the ancient English Kings.

(6) She by report of some writers had vowed Virginity, and was brought up in
a house of Religion at Winchester (having entered the profession of a (...) a
Votary.
Nun under her Aunte Christian) whose sanctity and knowledge both in matters
humane and divine, with her mother Margarets, are highly commended (says
Gemetic. cap. 10.
Gemeticensis) in a book written of their lives: Notwithstanding others hold
that she veiled her self but for a shift, to put off some unworthy matches,
which her father Malcolme would have imposed her; and indeed Eadmerus.
this scruple was such a Core in Anselm his mouth that Rand. Higden. in (...),
lib. 7. cap. 16.
he would not pronounce the words of Contract until her self had cleared the
doubt by her open confession.

(7) Duke Robert, who now had bin five years in the holy wars, and therein
borne himself with such valor Math. Paris. Duke Roberts noble service in the
Holy wars.
that he of all the Christian Princes was thought the worthiest to be
anointed King of Jerusalem, had their voice and election standing in the
Temple before the Altar, upon Easter-Eue: and that the rather by a miracle of
his Taper, which took light of Duke Robert elected King of Hi^salem.
it self, or from Heaven (if we will be so light to believe it:) but he
hearing of the death of Rufus, refused that, in hope to have England; for which
his neglect Ran. Hegden. in Polychr l. 7. c. 1^. Math. Paris.
of Divine appointment, it is said God never after prospered him: then
returning from Syria into Normandy was there ioifully received, and assumed
aagain his Dukedom (which he had engaged to his brother He returns into
Normandy Will Gemet. cap. 12. His attempts for England. Math. Paris. Roger.
Houed.
William) without repaiment of any money: where hearing that Henry his younger,
was stepped into his throne of England, laid proiects in his mind how to defeat
him. And to further these his designs, Ralphe Bishop of Durham, corrupting his
keepers, brake out of the Tower of London and gat into Normandy, where he
instigated Duke Robert against his brother of England; others also delighting
in alterations, solicited Will. Malmsb. Henry Hunt.
Robert to make into England, with promise of their assistance to recover the
Crown.

(8) King Henry for his part resolving to hold what he had got, neglected no
means to keep the King Henry strength^eth himself against Duke Robert.
Diadem as it was set, and therefore rigged forth his Navy to secure the Seas,
manned his fortresses, and with a great Army repaired toward the Coast, where
near unto Hastings he lodged his Camp, relying more upon his own strength
and valor of his People, then any just title he had to the Kingdom.

(9) Duke Robert by this time had taken the An D. 1101 An. Reg. 2. The English
^all off to Duke Robert.
Seas, and was upon the Kings fleet before they were aware, where preparing
for Conflict, the most of the English fell to the Normans, either by the
persuasion of the Duke or in hatred of Henry, that then began to tyrannize over
them as they did imagine: By which means the Duke, had safe landing at
Portesmouth, and Math. Paris. The Duke landeth in England. Will. Gemet. cap. 12.
did not a little rejoice in this his fortunate beginning; threatening his
brother to be reue^ged for his wrongs, and blaming the Nobility for suffering
him thus to be abused, whilst he for the common good of Christendom, was
employed in the Holy-Lands war. King Henry, as wise, as the other was
valorous, wrought K. Henry labors for a peace.
under hand for an agreement of peace; for he very well saw, that the event of
war has commonly issue from the first success, and at one and the same time
does bolden and weaken the courage of the multitude; therefore certain
Noblemen on both sides so trauised the businesses, that the Brethren in short
time became friends, and a composition made Henry (...). Agreement made betwixt
the Brethren.
to both their contents. The agreement was thus, that, because Henry was borne
after his fathers Conquest of this Land, and stood now the Crowned King with
common consent, he should during his life, enjoy the same, paying Duke Robert
in way The covenant of Peace.
of fealty three thousand Marks by year: and the suruiuour to be heir to his
brother deceased, if he died without a son. In which it was also concluded,
that all, either English or Normans, which had Will (...). Matthew. West. (...),
Dor.
taken part with the King or Duke, should be pardoned of all offenses, and
their Livings again restored: for the Confirmation whereof, and the
performance accordingly, twelve Princes upon either parties took their
Corporal Oaths; and the Armies presently dissolved.

(11) The Norman Duke princely entertained the space of six months in the
Court of King Henry, Duke R^bert entertained in King Henry's court. Will Gemet.
Cap. 13.
showed himself rather open and credulous, then any way suspicious, in all his
carriages, and so with much liking, and love to his brother, departed unto his
own Country. But the Sunshine of these fair days, began forthwith to be
ouercast, by the incitation of such as endeavored to sow discord betwixt the
two Brethren: and not only those in Normandy, which ever buzd iealousies into
Duke Roberts ears, but eue^ in England also, some fell in dislike of King
Henry, and affecting alteration, with the malignant eye of envy beheld the
glory of his beauteous Crown.

(12) Amongst whom, Robert Beliasm Earl of Rob. Beliasme against the King. An.
D. 1102.
Shrewsbery, the eldest son of Roger Mountgomery, strengthened the Towns and
Castles of Shrewsburie, Bridgenorth, Tichile, and Arundell, with victuals,
munition, and men, against the King; alluring likewise the Simon Dunel. An.
Reg. 3.
fickle Welshmen unto his designs. Henry therefore in rage and have, marched
thitherward with a great power; Roger H^uen.
against Arundell Castle, he raised another of wood* and took it; besieged
Bridgenorth, which presently Matthew. Paris.
yielded, and Shrewsbury sent him their keys and pledges of their obeisance:
when Beliasme with his brother Arnulfus, and Roger de Poytiers, were
constrained Henry Hunt.
to abjure the Land for ever, and thereupon went into Normandy, where they
ceased not to raise more sparks from that brand which others before them had
blown.

(13) Neither were those men busier to raise stirs abroad, then was Archbishop
Anselmus to do it at home; who being a man of a stiff resolution, in a Math.
Paris.
Council holden at London, drew on him the offense both of the King and
Clergy: for therein, first, he excommunicated all married Priests, Goodwin in
vita Anselmi. Eadmerus.
half the Clergy of England at that time, being either married or the sons of
married Priests; next he inhibited all lay men to hear their masses. But this
thing (says Paris) howsoever it seemed good to some, yet unto others very
dangerous, lest while they affected after a purity which was above their
strength, they might fall into impurity of a higher quality. Matthew. Paris
In this Council also Anselme, peremptory upon the Popes assistance, deprived
many great Prelates Contention about inuestitures.
of their promotions, because they had accepted their Inuestures from the King
which was done by receiving of a Pastoral staff and a ring, an ancient rite,
testifying that their donation was from their Sovereign, (as S. Wulstan
received his Staff from S. Edward, and therefore professed he would resign
it only to him:) in which number were the Abbots of Math. Paris in Will. Ru^.
Ely, of Ramsey, of Perscors, of S. Edmunds, of Tauestock, Peterborrow, Burch,
Bodiac, Middleton, and Stoke: for which his bold parts, and for refusing to
consecrate certain Bishops, advanced by the King, great contention fell betwixt
him and the Archbishop, who taking himself much wronged by the present
ouer-bearing power, appealed unto his Holy Father, Pope The Archbishop goes to
Rome.
Paschall, and soon after went in person to Rome unto him.

(14) Unto whom likewise the King sent his Ambassadors, namely Herbert Bishop
of Norwiche, with Robert Bishop of Lichfield, both of them of his privy An. D.
1103 An. Reg. 4. Will. Thorn. Polydor. The King sends Ambassadors to Rome.
Counsel, and William Warenast his procurator a Clergy man, of a very bold
spirit and speech, who in debating his Soueraigns cause before the Pope and
cardinals, with threatening language and countenance avouched, that the King his
Master would not lose his right in the Inuestitures of the Church, for the
loss of his The King will not loose his inuestures for his Kingdom. Math.
Paris.
Kingdom: whereto the Pope, (no Crauant to be dared on his own dunghill) as
stoutly answered; If, as thou say, the King will not lose the donation of
Churches, for the loss of his Kingdom; know thou for certain The Pope will
lose his head rather then suffer kings to have inuestures.
(before God I speak it) that I would not suffer him to enjoy them without
punishment, no not for the saving of my head: notwithstanding which brave words
against the King, yet the degraded Abbots were restored through the Clemency of
the Papal see, which is never wanting Silver and gold best mediators to the
Pope. Pari^nsis.
to any, as long as the white and red, (to use the very words of a Monk) make
intercession for them. But from the Church to the State.

(15) Robert Curtuoise, either to sound his brothers Duke Robert entertained in
England. An. D. 1104. Will. Gemet. Henry Hunt.
designs, or to congratulate him in a brotherly love, came into England; where
he was so roially entertained, that all suspicion was quenched, and himself
so well contented, that at the only motion and request of Queen Maud, he
remitted the three thousand Marks, couenanted to be paid yearly unto him,
though he were less able to forbear, then King Henry to give. But when his
wants told him of this his over He remits 3000. marks a year to K. Henry. An.
Reg. 5.
lavish releasement, he openly exclaimed against King Henry, that he had
craftily circumuented, and deceitfully cheated him; and now giving open ear
and credit to such as sought their disunion, gave his Brother all occasions of
enmity, who was ready enough of himself, to make the least very great. For
besides this present displeasure conceived against Duke Robert, he added
others, and this especially, that D. Roberts patrimony wasted. William Gemet.
he had wilfully wasted the Inheritance which his father had left him, to wit
the Dukedom of Normandy, having nothing now almost in that Dominion besides the
City of Roane, which he would have parted with also, had not the Citizens
thereto denied their consents.

(16) Neither was it the least motive to King Henry's displeasure, that his
traitorous subjects were so willingly received by his brother; for besides
Robert Beliasme and others, William, Earl of Mortaigne in Normandy, and of
Cornwall in England, the son of William Earl of Mortaign against the King.
Ypodig. Neustri.
Robert, half brother to the Conqueror, because the Earldom of Kent (which
he made claim unto, as heir to his uncle Odo) was denied him, in a discontent
got him into Normandy, where besides his valiant assaults of the Kings Castles,
and Soldiers, he much endangered the possessions of Richard Earl of Chester,
Math. Paris. Rand. Higd. lib. 7. cap. 13. Will. Malmsb.
then a child and the Kings Ward: so that the flames of war raised by these
seditions, seemed to be blown from England unto the parts beyond the Seas, and
to fire the territories of the English there; neither is it easy to declare
(says Houeden) what misery (the mean while) by exactions the land felt here
at home. Math. Paris. K. Henry allures the Normans to side with him. An. D.
1105 Rog. Houeden. An. Reg. 6.


(17) For the King incited into Normandy upon these occasions, by large
distributions of money carried out of England, won the Normane Nobility to
revolt from their Lord, and took the Town and Castle of Cane by composition,
and burnt Bayon with the beautiful Church of Saint Mary's, whereupon Henry.
Hunt. Forts of Normandy yielded to the King.
the Priories of Normandy yielded themselves unto his Protection; by whose
example the Britains and those of Aniou did the like; so that their Castles
and forts were filled with the Garrisons of King Henry, Duke Robert in no wise
able to resist; which done Henry with triumph returned into England.

(18) The Curtuoise by his Normans thus discourteously An. D. 1106 Duke Robert
leaves force and trusts to persivasion. An. Reg. 7. Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. D.
Roberts submission.
dealt with, saw it was bootelesse against so great a stream to strive, and
therefore thought best to lay away weapons, and to become himself a Mediator
for Peace. With which resolution taking the seas, he followed his brother unto
Northampton; where humbling himself in a more deiectiue manner, then either
his birth, or own nature could well brook, desired the Kings peace, both in
respect of their brotherly union, and the regard of his own accustomed
clemency; willing him to consider, that war was not only unnatural betwixt
brethren, but that a reproach ever follows the chariot of the Victor, desiring
him not to triu^mph in his overthrow, who was now ready to render all that he
had into his hands: but King Henry muttering to K. Henry respects it not.
himself, turned away from his brother without any answer.

(19) For God (says Paris) not pleased to give the effect, though the
Beau-clearke felt a remorse in conscience, Math. Paris.
for usurping his Kingdom (being indeed very learned, K. Henry resists the
counsel of his own conscience.
and well understanding the duties both of equity and law) and thereupon
began both to fear some violent insurrection of the subjects, and also the
revenging wrath of God upon him, for his treacherous and unjust dealings toward
his elder brother, to whom undoubtedly the Kingdom by all right did
appertain: yet stood he rather in fear of men then God (whose favors he
cunningly labored to keep) whom he meant to please another time by A
presumptuous ground to defer repentance.
building of an Abbey for his satisfaction. Duke Robert then seeing and
detesting the Kings swollen pride, posted back unto Normandy to gather his
powers. Henry also held it good policy, not to give passage unto Roberts wrath,
knowing him a Soldier, and well waying his desperate estate: and therefore
King Henry wins his Nobles with fair words.
calling his Lords unto London, in an assembly tickled their ears with these
delectable and smooth words.

(20) My friends, and faithful Counselors, and native Countrymen, you know by
true report Mat. Paris.
how my Brother Robert was elected, and by God himself called to be the
fortunate King of Jerusalem, and how unfortunately, or rather insolently, he
refused that sacred estate, whereby he is now most justly reprobated of God:
you also know by many other experiments, his pride and arrogance; for being a
man of a warring humor, he is not only impatient of any peace, but also
wilfully desires to trample upon you as men of abject and contemptible
disposition, vpbraiding you for idle droanes, for belly-gods, and what not? But
I your King, naturally inclined to be both humble and peaceable, take delight
in nothing more then to do you good, to maintain your tranquillity and ancient
liberties, (as I have often sworn unto you,) and meekely and willingly to yield
my self to your aduises, whereby I may circumspectly govern you as a clement
Prince: and to that end even now will I confirm (if your wisdoms so think
fit) your ouer-worne and undermined Charters, and will roborate them most
firmly with a new oath and ratification. Mean while, all the laws which the
holy King Edward by Gods inspiring did establish, I do here command to be
inuiolably observed, hereby to move you to adhere steadfastly unto me, in
repulsing cheerfully, willingly, and powerfully, the wrongs offered me, by my
brother shall I say? nay, by my most deadly enemy and yours, and of the whole
English Nation: For if I be guarded with the valors and affections of
Englishmen, I shall scorn the threats of him and his Normans, as forcelesse,
and no whit to be feared. And King Henry's confidence of the English.
with these fair promises (which yet afterward he utterly neglected) he so
won the hearts of them all, that they would die with him, or for him, against
any hostility whatsoever.

(21) Duke Robert gone, and preparing for war, Henry thus settled in his
peoples affection, followed Math. Paris. King Henry inuades Normandy.
him with all expedition, having in his company the choice Nobility of England,
Normandy, Gaunt, and Britain, so that he was exceedingly strong. With Robert,
for men of chief account, were Robert Beliasme, Earl of Shrewsburie, and
William Earl of Mortaigne, in like displeasure with the King, and therefore
armed with the like desperate boldness.

(22) Henry with his Army had pierced into Normandy, even as far as Yet he
also long after was taken and cast into perpetual prison. Will. Malmsbury. Mat.
Paris says, it was the (...). Caend. Maij.
Tenerthebray, a Castle of the Earl of Mortaigne, using all means possible to
Will. Ge^
surprise the same; for whose rescue, the Duke with these his Consorts, made
all diligence to dissolve Mat Paris calls in Her^ebray.
the siege, and after some few skirmishes joined a bloody battle, bravely
fought on each part, where at the first onset, the Kings power (though, much
greater in number) went down; but by their multitude A fierce battle betwixt
the Brethren and their forces. Mat. Paris. Duke Robers taken prisoner.
Eadmerus. Mat. Paris.
and manhood (especially through the * Kings example and encouragement) they
soon prevailed; where Duke Robert, with Earl William, and sundry others of
good note, manfully fighting in the very press of their enemies, were taken
prisoners; but * Robert Beliasme escaped by flight. And thus (as Matthew Paris
observed) Gods Justice and Mercy took effect; his Justice upon Robert, for his
refusal of Ierusalems title, and unto Henry his favor, according to the
prophecy of King William his Father. This battle was fought, and Normandy
won, upon Saturday, being the Vigill of S. Michael, even the same day forty
years that William the Bastard set foot on Normandy conquered. Will. Malmes.
Englands Shore for his Conquest; God so disposing (says Malmsbury) that
Normandy should be subjected to England that very day; wherein England was
subdued to Normandy.

(23) Robert Curtuoise, that now unfortunate Will. Ge^.
Prince, and William Mortaigne, that valiant, but headstrong Earl, were
forthwith sent into England and imprisoned; the Earl in the Tower of London,
and the Duke in Cardiffe Castle in Wales, after he had governed the Duchy of
Normandy nineteen years; and was for esteem in Chivalry accounted among the
best Captains that the world then afforded, had he not been (as commonly
martial spirits use to be) too rash and unstaid in his other enterprises;
which headiness did now draw upon him a penance of twenty six years
continuance, in the afflicted state of a forlorn Captive. And Henry now no
Roberts rashness overthrew (...).
longer as a brother, receiving the keys of Normandy, as a Conqueror returned
into England.

(24) But long it was not ere Duke Robert, weary of this unwonted duresse,
sought to escape; and having An. D. 1107
liberty to walk in the Kings Meadows, Forests, Mat. West^.
and Parkes, brake from his Keepers without any Assisters, or means for
security; who being mist, An. Reg. 8.
was presently pursued, and taken in a quag-mire, Math. Paris.
wherein his Horse lay fast: whereupon the King hearing of this his attempt,
considering that woods were no walls to restrain the fierce Lion, and that to
play with his claw was to endanger a state, commanded him not only a greater
restraint and harder durance; but also (a thing unfit for a brother to suffer,
but most unworthy for Beauclearke to act) both his eyes to be put out, causing
Duke Roberts (...) pu^out. Mat. Paris.
his head to be held in a burning basin (to avoid the deformity of breaking the
eye-bais) until the glassie tunicles had lost the office of retaining their
light.

(25) Having thus quieted all foreign oppositions, King Henry set his mind to
prevent Domesticke; An. D. 1108
and therefore (about this time) those Flemmings Flemmings placed in Wales.
whose Lands the Seas had devoured some few years before, and place was
granted them in Cumberland, first by King Rufus, and afterward by Henry; An.
Reg. 9.
were now by the King, upon better aduisement, removed into Wales, both to
disburden his Inland of such guests, and that so they might be a defense
betwixt him and those euer-stirring people. Which project nothing deceived his
expectation; for by the testimony of Giraldus, They were a Colony stout and
Giral. Ga^b.
strong, and continually endured the wars of the Welsh; a Nation most
accustomed to seek gain by clothing, by The commendation of the Flemmings.
triffique also and Merchandise by Sea and Land, undertaking any pains, or
perils whatsoever. A people of very great power, and as time and place
requires, ready by turns to take plough in hand and till the ground, as ready
also to go into the field and fight it out; and that I may add thus much more
(says he) a Nation most loially devoted to the Kings of England, and as
faithful to the Englishmen.

(26) By the which his policy, he attained that The Flemmings great helps for
restraining the Welsh.
which his brother Rufus could not, who many a time had but small success in
those parts though otherwise, ever sped most fortunatly in all his adventures
of wars: But it is thought by some, that as the King Rufus had little
success in Wales.
Mountanous cragginesse of the Country; and sharpness of the Air, encouraged
them in their rebellion; so the same impeached Rufus his success.

But King Henry (says Malmesburie) who with many a warlike expedition went
about to force the Welshmen, Will. Malmes. lib. 5.
ever stirring unto Rebellion, for to yield and to submit themselves; in the
end resolved upon this whole some policy; for to take down their pride, he
brought thither all the Flemmings that dwelt in England: a great number of
which Nation in those days, in regard of his mothers kindred by her Fathers
side, flocking hither, were closely shrouded in England, in so much as they for
their multitude King Henry disburden^ England of the Flemmings
seemed burden some unto the Realm: Wherefore he sent them all together with
their substance, their Wines, and Children, unto Rosse a Country in Wales, as
it were into a common auoidance, thereby both to purge his own kingdom, and
also to quatle and repress the desperate boldness of his Enemies.

(27) And now being free from all fear of subuerters, King Henry, growing
disdainefull (says Paris) refused to fulfill what he had so often promised to
his Nobles, The King violats his promise to the Peers. Math. Paris.
heaping threats upon threats; for God had bestowed on him three bounties,
wisdom, victory, and riches, above any of his Predecessors: but for all these
he showed himself to God most unthankful: And of his Clergy (we may say)
too regardlesse, in suffering Anselm, newly reconciled, to lay heavy
punishments upon the Ansel. still molests married Priests.
married Priests, putting many from their places, because they denied to put
away their Lawful wives, whereof great contention followed, and grievous
sins in short time committed, both against God and Nature. Eadmerus.


(28) Among these proceedings in England, Philip King of France deceased, and
his son Lewis King Philip of France dies, and Lewis succee. death. Polyder.
King Henry strengthens Normandy.
surnamed Crassus succeeded in his government, which how he stood affected to
Henry was doubted, and therefore to make sure work, the King sailed into
Normandy, furnishing his Towns, Castles, and Fortresses, with all habiliments
of war, with provisions befitting such suspected times; and so returning, he
found attending his coming, the Ambassadors of Henry the fourth Emperor, as
suitors from their Master to obtain Lady Maud the Kings daughter An. D. 1109
His daughter married to the Emperor. An. Reg. 10.
in Marriage, then not past five years of age, which was willingly granted,
and the espousals by way of Proxy solemnized, with great feasts and magnificent
triumphs.

(29) About which time the death of Archbishop Anselme happening, gave no small
hope to the Clergy, as themselves conceited, again to enjoy Archbishop Anselme
dies. An. D. 1110
the liberty of matrimonial society; wherein they were not a little deceived:
for the King seemed willing that the Ecclesiastical Ordinance before made
should be more nearly looked into; whereupon men for fear, and in the sight
of men, carried themselves An. Reg. 11.
accordingly, but if in secret they did worse (says Eadmerus) let the charge
light on their own heads, since every Appearing Chastity did breed secret
impurity.
man shall bear his own sins: for I know, (says he) that if Fornicators
and Adulterers God will judge, the abusers of their own Cosens, (I will not
say, their Eadmerus.
own Sisters and Daughters) shall not surely escape his judgment.

(30) The Kings peace, which seemed to be secured An. D. 1111
by his new affinity with the Emperor, and his glory raised to the high, began
now to be envied, and his brother Duke Roberts extremities greatly to be
pitied, both by some English and also Normans. An. Reg. 12.
For Foulke Earl of Aniou both threatened the revenge, and by corrupting the
inhabitants wanne the City of Constance, from his obeisance. To stay whose
irruptions King Henry passed into Normandy, where he used great extremity, and
put to death Helia Earl of Cenomania, who held that King Henry goes into
Normandy against Rebels. Math. Paris.
County against him; for which cause Godfrey Earl of Gaunt took such
displeasure that he entered into that Earldom, and marrying the said Helia
his daughter, kept the County perforce against King Henry's great power. But
Robert de Beliasme Robert Reli^sme an old Traitor taken.
that had escaped at Duke Roberts overthrow, was then taken and committed
prisoner to Warham Castle, too gentle a punishment for so blood-thirstie a man,
whose nature was such, that he delighted himself only in cruelty, an example
whereof he showed upon his own son, who being but a child and A bloody
father and a cruel pastime.
playing withhim, the father for a pastime, put his thumbes in the boys eyes,
and thrust out the balls thereof.

(31) These wars somewhat assuaged, King Chro. Wallia. An. D. 1112 An. Reg.
13.
Henry returned into England, where the people conceived much grudge at his
importable taxes, and the Clergy no less at his reservation of Church livings
in their vacancies, under pretense of keeping them for the worthiest; but how
unworthily he oftentimes bestowed the^, may be gathered by that pretty reproof
of Guymundus his Chaplain, who grieuing to see vnworthymen (for the most part)
advanced to Bishoprics and other dignities; when on the Rogation day he
celebrated divine service in the Kings Chapel, Regist. S. Frides. Wid^. Oxon.
being to read that lesson, out of Saint James 5. 17.
James, it rained not on the earth III. years, and VI. months, he purposely
read it, it rained not, one, one, one, years, and five, one, months. All men
either laughing or wondering at his reading; the King checked him for it, and
asked him the reason; marry (quoth he) I see you bestow your preferments only
on such, as can read so: which secret touch the King well weighing, did both
presently prefer him to the government of Saint Frideswides in the University
of Oxford, and afterward was more careful in all other his choices.

(32) The King had not been long in England after his return from Normandy,
before the Welshmen An. D. 1114 Floren. Wigorn. Math. Paris. Mat. Westminst.
John Castor. Chron. Wallia.
(then a restless people) were in Arms against such English, as had set
footing in that Country, which were Gilbert Strangbowe Earl of Strygil, and
others, whose lands in the south part Owen ap Cadogan sore molested and
spoiled; the like did Gruffith ap Conan Prince of North Wales upon Hugh Earl
of Chesters County, and both of them denied King Henry either service or
tribute. These Earls so incensed the King, touching these and other outrages
of the Welshmen, that in a rage he vowed not to leave The King goes with a
power against the Welsh.
one alive in all North- Wales, nor in Powys-land; and straight repairing
thitherward, divided his Army into 3. parts. The first was led by Earl
Gilbert against South Wales; the second band by Alexander King of Scotland, and
Hugh Earl of Chester against North Wales; Henry Hunt.
and the King himself lead the third, under whose Standard was the chief
strength of middle England. But the Welsh seeing themselves far unable to
withstand this present preparation, took into Flor. Wigorn.
the Mountains and Woods, (their surest holds) where being followed, with
great difficulty, many of them were slain, and the rest yielded to King The
Welsh subdued.
Henry; who now as a Conqueror in triumph returned to London.

(33) Whither immediately resorted unto him, the Ambassador of his son in
law the Emperor, to have his wife Lady Maud now marriage-able, Math. Paris.
Henry Hunt.
to be sent unto him; to which request the King most willingly condescended,
and to furnish her forth accordingly, laid a Lawyers call this Aid a file
marrier, and Polydor. Hist. lib. 11. says this was the first president: but
falsely; for both this, and that other at knighting of the Kings children, are
mentioned in the grau^d Cust^mier of Normandy; and was in use amongst the
Roman Emperors: Suetonius in Caligula. The English Kings Eldest Sons Dukes
of Normandy.
tax upon his Subjects, taking three shillings for every Hide of land:
whereupon she was presently conducted by his greatest Pears into Germany, and
at Mentz married to the Emperor Henry the fourth, being there consecrated and
crowned his Empress.

)34) Shortly after King Henry took the Seas for Normandy, and there created
his son William (about the age of twelve years (Houeden says but eight)
Duke of that Country, causing the people to swear him fealty, whereof grew a
custom that thenceforth the Kings of England made evermore their eldest sons
Dukes of Normandy; which done, he returned, and nothing recorded of his next
years adventures, but only that the Sea gave place to the Sands, and by low
Ebbes restored some part of her treasures that long had laien hid and buried in
her depth; the rivers likewise forgot their wonted Will. Thorn.
swiftnes; and as it were seemed unwilling to pay their ancient tribute into
that dejected Element, and among An. D. 1115 Math. Paris
them Thamesis not the least, whose waters so failed for two days, that
betwixt London Bridge and the Tower she became passable and scarce two foot
deep.

(35) King Henry free now from all foreign and An. D. 1116 Polydor. lib. 11.
domestical trouble (only Gruffith ap Rees somewhat unquiet in Wales) gave
his thoughts to assure the Crown into his line, and to ordain laws for the
well governing of his people; for calling an assembly at Salisbury, caused the
Estates both Spiritual Ger. Dor.
and Temporal, to swear fealty to himself, and to his son Willam, the Hope
of succession: then reforming many abuses, and ending certain contentions both
of his Nobles and Prelates, laid here the first foundation of our High Court of
Parliament: The beginnings of our Parliaments.
for the English Kings in elder times, ordered the affairs of the
Commonwealth, by their Edicts, by their officers, and by the Governors of
every The difference betwixt this and the Ancient v^e of the State.
Country, and seldom had the joint advice of their people; saving only at
beginning of their government, and in time of war; whereas now the Subject,
best understanding his own grieuances, has both liberty in choice of their
Knights and Burgesses, as also free voice to complain thereof in that
honorable assembly.

(36) At this time Theobald Earl of Blessis, Nephew unto King Henry, upon
occasion of displeasure Campaigne.
rose up in Arms against the French King, to whose aid King Henry sent;
whereat Jews found Henry Hunt. Offense and cause of debate betwixt King Henry
and King Lewis of France.
himself sore agrieued, and drew to his side Baldwine Earl of Flanders, and
Foulke Earl of Aniou, who together took oath to dispossess Henry of
Normandy, and to make William the son of the Curtoise Duke thereof, to whom
it belonged by right Attempts to dispossess K. Henry of Normandy.
and descent; to which also many of the Nobles of Normandy consented; pitying
the wrong of the noble spirited Child, and the wretched captivity of the blind,
and ouer-borne Father.

(37) Henry as wisely wrought against their designs, Henry goes to secure
Normandy.
and leauying a great tax upon his Subjects, passes therewith into Normandy,
where uniting the aides of the foresaid Theobald, as also of the Earl of
Britain, with his English, he made a great show in the field: at which time
King Jews with the Earls of Flanders and Aniou being entered Normandy, and
Math. Paris.
hearing of King Henry's approach and power, staid scarsly one night, but as me^
without heart or courage returned, and left the Country for him: so that all
things seemed well quieted for a year or two; nothing disturbing King Henry's
peace, excepting only the expectance of the Popes Legate, whom he An D. 1117
prohibited to enter England, and the death of his Queen Maud, the very
mirror of piety, humility, Flor. Wigor. An. D. 1118
and princely bounty.

(38) But coals of displeasure kindled betwixt King Henry and Jews of France,
were not quite extinct, An. D. 1119 A pitched field betwixt the Kings of England
and France. An. Reg. 20. Malmes. lib. 5.
though they had lain for a while, as raked up under cold ashes. For the next
year following, and twentieth of his reign, Jews came into Normandy as hot
in rage to do somewhat, as before he departed thence calm and cold; where
forthwith he began to molest the Country; which K. Henry for a while suffered,
till his friends noted him of cowardice; to whom he replied; that he had
learned of his Father, to break the fool hardines of the French, by patience,
rather then by force: that they should not wonder, if he were loath to be
prodigal of their blood, whom he found so fast friends unto him: that he would
not gladly win a Kingdom with their deaths, whose lives he still found
devoted to all hazards for his cause: that he used this backwardness, only
to stay them, whom he saw so forward to testify their zeal voluntarily, even
with their blood: which to proceed from providence, and not from
dastardlinesse, they should soon perceive. This accordingly he made good; and
a pitched field was fought betwixt the Kings of England and France; whereof let
us hear the Monk Paris report. The Math. Paris. The Army of the French King.
French King (says he) having ordered his Army into two Battalions, in the
former of them placed William the son of Duke Robert, the brother of King
Henry; the other, Jews himself led, consisting of his special and chiefest
Soldiers. King Henry also disposed The Army of the English King.
his forces into three Battles, the first, consisting of his Peers and men
of Normandy:- In the second, him self kept among his own guard, and daily
attendants: and in the third, he marshalled his sons with the maine strength
of the Footmen. The Armies thus ordered, the troops on both sides gave
assault, whereof the first Battalion of the French brake through the ranks of
the Norman Nobles, overthrowing their Ho^e-men, and forcing them to seatter; in
which violence they likewise brake into King Henry's battle, and put it much
out of order: but he taking courage, and comforting his men began a most
bloody and bold const^t: wherein himself was twice struck upon the head by
William Crispin Heny Hurt. The King dangerously assailed.
County of Eureux (whom for his offenses Henry had before banished) whose sword
and strokes were so sure and so heavy, that albeit the Kings helmet was
impe^etrable, yet withfine force was it beaten stat to his head, insomuch that
the blood came forth in abundance* but Henry feeling himself to be wounded,
gathered with his rage more strength, and stroke the said Countyia such sort,
that at one blow he overthrew both him Ypodig. Neustrl.
and his horse, and took him prisoner; by which example his Soldiers were led
to fight like Iyons, and the And as bravely acquits himself.
French to betake themselves unto flight. In this battle died many thousands,
and among them Baldwine (...) Earl of Flanders slain.
Earl of Flanders: King Henry returning victorious, was received triumphantly
into Roan.

(39) Foulke Earl of Aniou having lost Baldwine An. D. 1120
his martial Companion, and seeing it was bootles to bandy against the
Beanclarke, fell to an agreement Ge^. Dor. Prince William marries the Duke of
Anious daughter. Roger. Houed.
with him, which was confirmed by giving his daughter unto his son Prince
William (now seauenteene yeerts old) whom Henry made inheritor of all his
Kingdoms, whereupon both France and Flanders became his reconciled friends,
and William Prince William does homage for Normandy.
did homage to King Jews for his Duchy of Normandy. These things thus
ordered King Henry upon the twenty fifth of November, loosed from land at
Haresteer.
Barfluit, and prosperously arrived in England.

(40) Prince William, who now wanted but only Prince William puts to Sea.
the name of a King, commanded another ship to be prepared for himself, his
Brethren and Sisters, with many other Nobles and Gallants Courtiers, both of
England and Normandy, who plying the Mariners with pots and wine (therein being
instruments of their own calamity approaching) made them brag to out-saile
the Kings ship gone before; and in the night putting forth from land, with a
merry gale made way over the dancing waves, as swift as an arrow: but (as if the
Heavens would have King Henry's too great felicities allaid, and tempered with
sense of Courtly variety, in the midst of their iollity and singing, (alas
they sang their last, and little A most lamentable shipwrake. William Malmes.
thought on death) for suddenly the ship dashed against a Rock, not very
far from the Shore, at which fearful disaster, a hideous cry arose, all of
them shifting (and yet through amazedness not knowing how to shift) to save
themselves from the danger: For God repaying the reward for sin, suffered not
those Sodomitic^ labe insects (...) omnes, says Paris.
unnatural wantons (for such were many of them, says Paris) to have Christian
Burial, but were so swallowed up of the Sea, when her waves were most calm.
Prince William got speedily into the Cocke-boate, and might Prince Williams
pity to his sister cost him his life.
well have escaped, had he not pitied his sister the Countess of Perch,
crying unto him for help; when turning the boat to her aid, so many striued to
get in (every man in such a case esteeming his life as much as a Prince) that
with their weight it presently suncke, and of so princely a Train no one
escaped to relate that doleful tragedy, save only Malmsb lib. 5. de Reg.
Only one of all his train escapes.
a base fellow (a Butcher some say) who swamme all the night upon the
Maine-maste, and got shore in the morning with much danger of life.

(41) This was the most unfortunate Shipwreck that ever happened in our Seas,
bringing an inconceiuable heaviness to the King, and whole State: The chief
of those who then perished. Math. Paris. John Stow. Rand. Higden.
for therein perished Prince William Duke of Normandy, the joy of his Father,
and hope of his Nation; Richard his base Brother, his Sister Maud Countess of
Perch, Richard Earl of Chester, with his wife Lady Lucy, the Kings Niece by
his Sister Adela, Otwell the Earls Brother, the young Dukes Governor, diverse
of the Kings chief Officers, and most of the Princes, Geffrey Riddle, Robert
Manduit, William Bigod, Geffrey Archdeacon of Hereford, Walter de Crucie, and
many other of prime note and esteem, to the number of one hundred and sixty
persons, none of their bodies being found, though great search was made for
them.

(42) King Henry thus at once deprived of all his lawful Posterity (only
Maude the Empress An. D. 1121 Eadmerus.
excepted) upon the tenth of April and two and twentieth year of his Reign,
married his second wife Adel^a, a Lady of surpassing beauty, the King Henry
marieth again. Gemiticensis. Geru. D^ob. Henry. Hunt. Mat. Paris.
daughter of Geffrey first Duke of Louain, in hope (though it proved otherwise)
to have repaired his late losses by issue of her; whose Coronation was
appointed to be celebrated by Roger Bishop of Sarisbury, the infirmity of
Palsy so troubling Ralphe Archbishop of Canterbury, that himself could not
perform Rand. Higd. in Polyc. lib. 7. ca. 15.
it; yet because Roger was not appointed by him, he forbad his imploiment; and
the King wearing his Crown, says the Monk of Chester, this testy old man
could hardly be entreated by the Lords, to withold his hands from striking
the same from A Choleric Prelate.
the Kings head: of such Spirits then were those spiritual Prelates, and
jealousy to loose their pompous pre-eminence of honor: but his high top was
somewhat born down by the boisterous blasts of Pope Calixt, from whose holy
hand Thurstan Archbishop of York (contrary to the Kings command, and his
own Math. Paris ad An. 1119.
Oath) having received consecration, and thereupon forbidden by the King to
Eadmerus.
put foot again within his Dominions, his holiness commanded his New Creature
should be installed ( Polyc. lib. 7. c. 15.
against all right and custom) without professing any subjection to the Sea of
Canterbury; and threatened with his curse to interdite both Provinces till that
was performed. The cause of the Popes indignation against Ralph is supposed to
be, for that he had received his Paris An. 1113. Roma sub Vrbano, Anno 1094.
Inuestiture of the King, who contrary to the Canons of the late Roman Paris
there calls it Their ancient Custom and An. 1112. it had con tinued 300. years
and under 60. Popes.
Synod, did still challenge and practice that, * Regal prerogative.

(43 Whether it were about this contention of Inuesting, Will. Malmes.
or about a Friar of the Holy Sepulcher, whom (as Malmsb. says) the King had
imprisoned, or about Thurstans hard usage; certain it is, that the Pope much
desiring to have private talk with the Goodwins Catalogue.
King, came to him into Normandy, and so at Gisors conferred (says Paris) the
Great King and the high Math. Paris.
Priest: but notwithstanding the Popes threats or intreates, Thurstan was kept
in banishment full five years, and then for the Popes pleasure was restored.
But at this meeting the King was so liberal of rich gifts to the Pope and his
Cardinals, that therefore the Pope (says a Monk) held him a most wise and
eloquent Will. Malmes.
perswader, and his actions very justifiable; But it seems the Cardinals were
neither so eloquent nor learned as they should be, for that (says he) two
youths in the Kings Company, sons of the Earl of Mellent (learned both, and
therefore fit to be with Will. Malmsb. Rand. Higden.
that learned King) reasoning of some points with them, and disputing
Scholler-like with Logical Syllogismes, the G^d Rabbis (used to other
exercises at Rome, then studying) were quite grauelled, and had naught to say,
but that more learning was in these Western parts, then they had thought. But
as these Church-stirres did not a little disquiet the King, so also did new
Welsh Cor^. Walls
tumults, raised by Meredith ap Blethyn, who with the three sons of Cadogin,
Encon, Madoc, and Morgan, sore troubled the Kings people and peace, by New
attempts in Wales
breaking into the Marches, and especially into Cheshire, where they burned two
Castles. The King An Army conducted against them.
therefore making toward them, had sent his maine Army to conduct the
Carriages, whilst himself with a small Company took a nearer way through the
Mountains and Straites; which being forelaid by the Enemy, was with great
courage set upon, and through the advantage of the Place, many of his men
slain, and more hurt, by the Welsh Archers, whose showers of Arrows rained
thick upon them from the higher ground: amongst which, one was so leuelled at
the King, that it struck him on the breast, The King struck with an Arrow.
yet being surely armed, did him no hurt; but he therewith all wonderfully
dismayed, and by likelihoode fearing some treason amongst his own, (for, then
he swore by our Lords death, his usual oath, King Henry's usual Oath.
Malmes. lib. 5.
that no Welsh-man shot that Arrow, but one of his own Prouincials) and
considering that by these his ouer-rash proceedings his glory purchased in more
famous parts, might again be lost in this wild and rude Country; came to a
Parley and Peace; A Peace concluded.
receiving of the King a thousand head of Cattle, and leaving Kord Fitzwarren
Lieutenant of the Marches, returned to England, where he held three
Parliaments John Castor. Chron. Wallia.
in the same year, one at Norwich, another at Northampton, and the third at
London.

(44) The Normans still repining at the Captivity An. D. 1122 The Normans set
up Duke Roberts son.
of Robert their late Duke; and standing well affected unto his Son, thought
now the time fitting, (Prince William being dead) to raise the other William
his Cosen Germane into his place: who, as the Monk of Chester affirms,
married Sybil the other daughter of Foulke, Earl of Aniou, He marries Sibyl
daughter to the Earl of Aniou. Rand. Higd. in Polyb^. lib. 7. c. 16.
with whom he received the Earldom of Cenomannia, upon displeasure that King
Henry withheld the formers dowry in England. The chief in this action was
Robert Earl of Mellent, who was lately fallen off from the King: Henry
therefore hasting into Normandy, besieged his Castle Pont-Audomar, An. D. 1123
Roger Wind. Math. Paris. King Henry repaires the Castles of Normandy.
and took it, and at that time built a large and high wall with many Bulwarks
about the Tower of Roan, repaired the Castles of Caen, Arches, Gisors, Faleise,
Argenton, Damfort, Vernon, Ambres, and sundry others.

(45) In the mean time, Earl Mellent desirous An. D. 1124
to be revenged upon the King, associated Hugh Earl of Montfort and others
unto his aid, who entering Normandy with fire and sword, did much harm as they
went, thinking to bring all to their obeisance: against whose outrages, William
Tankeruile Henry Hunt. Math. Paris. Tankeruile takes the Traterous Earls in
Normandy.
the Kings Chamberlain, and Lieutenant in those parts, addressed himself, and
training them into danger of an Ambush, laid for that purpose, after long fight
took them both prisoners, and presented them to his Master, whereby the wars
ceased Mat. West^.
for a time in those parts.

(46) In this the Kings absence, but yet with his license, Johannes Cremensis
the Popes holy Cardinal, An. D. 1125 Cardinal Cremensis, the Popes Legate to
restrain Priests marriages
came into England, sent by Honorius the Second, there to redress the still
continued sinne-seeming abuse of the Clergy, in retaining and using, according
to Gods own Ordinance, the Society of their Polychr. lib. 7. cap. 16.
wives. This Pontifical Prelate was entertained by all the Bishops and Abbots
with great and costly Presents, and afterward being solemnly set in a Council
at London, upon the birthday of the Blessed Virgin, made a soleme Oration in
praise of Virginity Hen. Hunting. lib. 7. Houed. in He^r. 5.
and Chastity, with a terrible inuectiue against the married Priests: and to
amplify their sins the more, he showed what extreme impiety it was, to rise
from the bed of unlawful lust, (for so was their chaste Marriage termed) and
with polluted hands to touch the Sacrament of the body of Christ: but the same
night following he * having that very day consecrated Taken with a whore the
same day he celebrated the Sacrament. Mat. Paris. Huntingdon. Rog. Higden.
that holy Sacrament, was himself taken with a Whore, the matter being so
apparent, that it could not be hid, (neither ought it to be silenced, says
Huntingdon) to the great reproach of those most unchaste boasters of Chastity,
as both Paris and Higden themselves do confess: and so he returned to Rome
with shame enough, but with little success in that intended business; till
some few years after Viz. An. D. 1129. Polydor. Math. Paris. Huntingdon. Roger
Houed.
King Henry, seeming very desirous to settle his pretensed continency in the
Clergy; in a Council held at London, obtained (through simplicity of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, says Paris) that himself should have the execution
of justice and punishments of the Priests, that offended either in keeping of
their wives, or using of Concubines, (for likely those that liked not the one,
loved the other, as well as Cremensis;) but even then also, the Kings end being
only to get in sums of money, which he had still occasions to use, every
man redeemed his liberty by his purse, and matters rather proved worse, then
any whit reformed.

(47) Whilst King Henry about his said affairs lay in Normandy, news was
brought him that Henry An. D. 1126 Emperor Henry (the Kings Son in law)
dies The Empress comes into England. The Peers swear fealty to Empress
Dowager the Kings daughter. Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. Huntingd. lib. 8.
the Emperor his son in law was dead; whereupon he presently sent for his
Daughter the Empress; and with her he returned into England, where calling a
Parliament, in the presence of himself, and of David King of Scotland, he
caused the Nobles, (and first before all other, Stephen his Sisters Son who
first did violate it,) to swear fealty to her, as to his lawful, and now
only heir, by whom they should again come to be governed by the ancient
English Royal blood, from which he showed her to be descended: which Oath was
this, that they should, as much as in them lay, after King Henry's decease, (if
he died without Heire-Male) establish her Queen of the Monarchy of Great
Britain, now called England. But whether they did or no (says Gemeticensis)
belongs not to me to tell: but this our Story shall hereafter relate, and make
known.

(48) Giraldus and Higden, and some ancient Manuscripts affirm (but with very
little probability or Antiq. Manuscr. Giral. I^iner. Polych. lib. 7. c. 16.
Houed. in Hen. 1. Henry the Emperor supposed not to be dead.
credit) that Henry the Emperor died not at this time (as was given forth;)
but that rather upon a Gemetic. p. 680.
remorse of conscience, for imprisoning his own natural Father, Henry the
third unto death; and also his Spiritual Father the Pope with his Cardinals;
repenting these outrages, he laid aside his Imperial Roabe, and secretly fled
into England, where at Westchester he became an Hermit, changing his name
unto As being now called of God, says Tre^isa.
Godscall, where he so lived the space of ten years, and was buried in the
Cathedral Church of Saint Werburga the Virgin. Upon which his sudden flight
and missing, the Empress Maud John Stow. The Empress falsely suspected.
some say, was suspected to be guilty of his death, and for that cause was
kept continually in the Queens Chamber Indeed, that she abode still in Chamber
with the Queen, Paris records; but he gives a wiser Math. Paris.
reason thereof, for that her Father did love her exceedingly, as being now his
sole Heir; and where should an Empress rather live then with a Queen? a
Daughter, then with her Mother? a fair Lady, a Widow, and an Heir of so great
a Kingdom, then where her Person might be safest from danger, her mind from
inueigling, and her carriage from suspicion? But as for that other idle
conjecture, it is razed out, both by those Writers, who record his Burial, and
Monumentat Spire, (as Polyer. lib. 7. c. 16
Higden himself signifies) and also by the pen of William Gemeticensis, who
reports her to be a woman generally well thought of, and approved among the
greatest Princes of the Empire, for her prudent and gracious behavior toward
the Emperor Will. Gemet. The good esteem of the Empress.
her husband; insomuch that they became suitors unto her, seeking by all means
to attain her to govern them, and to that end attended her to King Henry in
Normandy to solicit the same; to whom in no wise he would give his consent,
meaning to make her his Successor in the Kingdom: Whereunto Malmsbury (who
then lived) accords; saying, she was very unwilling Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1.
to have come out of those parts of the Empire, where both her dowry and
acquaintance lay, and that the Princes of those Countries came more then once
into England, to have her for their Empress, but that the King would not part
with the Heir of his Crown.

(49) But King Henry afterward desirous to be free from the variances of
these foreign Princes, An. D. 1127
and hearing that Foulke Earl of Anion had given his Earldom, with the
territories of Gaunt and Turyn, unto his Son Ieffrey Martell, surnamed
Plantagenet, (himself minding to abide at Jerusalem, Matthew. Paris. Will. Gemet.
whereof he was King in right of his wife Milissent, the daughter of Baldwine
de Burge lately deceased) thought him the fittest to be linked into his
alliance, The Empress married to the Earl of Anion.
and therefore concluded a marriage betwixt the said Ieffrey, and his only
lawful daughter Lady Maude the Empress, though partly against her liking, as
both Gemeticensis and Geruasius of Canterbury does declare; Gemeticensis. Ger.
Dor.
which was solemnized in Normandy the third of April accordingly.

(50) That William, son to the Curtoise, was formerly favored by Earl
Foulke, we have showed, but now he was further followed with increase of
William (son to Duke Robert) made Earl of Flanders.
Fortune, and the French Kings aid, only for a rub in King Henry's way; for
Charles Earl of Flanders, being traitorously murdered by his own People Mat.
Paris.
without any his issue to succeed him, Lewis of France (to make William faster
to him) set him in possession as the next heir in blood unto that Larledome:
William being the son of Duke Robert, and Robert the Eldest of Queen Maude
(the wife of the Conqueror) Williams title to Flanders.
and she daughter to Earl Baldwin the fifth; whose issue Male now failing, the
right was from her derived unto this her Grandchild William.

(51) This Groundwork unto greatness King An. D. 1128
Henry disliked, least by his Nephews height, himself might be over topped,
and his blind fathers wrongs the sooner redressed: therefore having by his
daughters marriage made Aniou his, from Normandy King Henry invaded France.
he invaded France, even unto Hespard, where for eight days he remained as
secure as in his own Mat. Paris.
Kingdom, and partly by fear, partly by fair paiments, wrought Lewis to
withdraw his aid from young William: neither so ceased, but that he instigated
William de Ypres to disturb Williams state, He uses means to disturb
Flanders.
and did also draw a cerraine Duke named Theodorick out of Germany with a band
of Flemmings, who entered Flanders in Hostile manner.

(52) With these last, Earl William (a Prince for his age of imcomparable
prowess) soon met, and giving Earl Williams great valor.
them battle, with an invincible courage brake through the enemies troops, in
such sort that they were discomfited, and the Earl had the day; whence in this
heat of blood, he marched unto Angi, a Math. Paris.
Castle of King Henry's, which after a strong siege, being upon the surrender,
by a small wound which Earl William received in his hand, he shortly died,
but not without immortal fame, for magnanimity He dies of a small wound in his
hand.
and valor.

(53) Were it not reported by some Writers of note, I might here well pass
over certain presaging Huntingdon. lib. 7. Will. Malmes. in Nouella Historia.
Higden.
dreams (as the Monks interpreted them) which King Henry had, being ready now
to go into Normandy: for to his seeming he saw a sort of rusticke plough-men
with their Instruments of husbandry; after them Soldiers with their weapons of
War: and lastly, the Bishops with their Crosiers staves, all of them angerly
threatening, and attempting his death: wherewith he was so perplexed, that
leaping out of his bed, he called for help: but seeing it but a dream, as a
dream he esteemed it, and passed over into Normandy: where long he stayed
not, but that his Daughter Maud The Empresie departs from his husband
upon some displeasure departed from her husband, and came with her Father into
England. Some write A. Do. 1131 Roger Houed.
that she was the pro^ker of certain displeasures betwixt her husband and
Father, which so affected his mind with Houeden. in Henric. 1. Huntingdon.
Hist. lib. 7. Malmes. novel. lib. 1.
passions of wrath and grief, that many thought it was a great hastening of his
end; and indeed Malmsburie witnesses, that the King upon his deathbed
passionately mentioned the wrongs and indignities wherewith her husband had
disquieted his mind. The Empress to her husband. Hen. Huntingdon. lib. 7.
Howbeit soon after this her departure from him, by consent of the States, who
met at Northampton; she was reconciled to her husband: sent An. D. 1131.
unto him upon his entreaty: and bare him a son, whose name was Henry; for
joy whereof, King Henry Ger. Dor.
assembled his Lords, and again made his said Daughter, and the lawful Heirs
of her body his Math. Paris.
Successors in his Dominions.

(54) And then preparing again for his last and fatal passage into Normandy,
took shipping upon An. D. 1133
the Nones of August, (the very day wherein he first received the Crown,) when
happened so wonderful Will. Malmes in nouel. lib. 1.
an Eclipse of the Sun, that Malmsbury the reporter faith, himself then saw
the stars plainly in the Firmament about the Sun, and that two days after,
so great and fearful an Earthquake The Kings last voyage into Normandy,
presaged to be fatal.
happened, that the house where in himself sat, was lifted up with a double
remove; and others say, that out of riffes in the earth, burning flames arose,
that could not be quenched, which diverse judged to be fatal prodigies of the
deaths of those Princes that Polychron. lib. 7. cap. 17.
soon after ensued.

(56) For Robert the Curtoise, after twenty six years An. D. 1134 Robert
Curtoise dies in prison.
imprisonment and blindness, through grief conceived at the putting on of a
fair new roabe, (too little for the King, and therefore in kindness sent to
Duke Robert to wear) grew weary of his life (as disdaining to be mocked with
his brothers cast clothes,) and cursing the time of his unfortunate Nativity,
resused thenceforth to take any sustenance, Math. Paris. Matthew. West.
and so pined himself to death. His body was buried at Gloucester in the
Church of Saint Peter, and middle of the Quire, where to this day remains his
Tomb, with a carved Image of his feature, as the monument of a most
unfortunate man.

57 And not long after K. Henry in Normandy coming King Henry dies in
Normandy.
scarce very well from Hunting in the Forest of Lions, and Town of Saint
Denis, made his repast of a dish of Lampreyes (which meat he too well loved,
but could never well digest;) whereupon he fell more grievously sick, and the
same still increasing; Houeden. Will. Malms. Math. Paris.
after seven days sickness, upon the first of December, the sixty five of his
age, and year of Christ Jesus, 1135. when he had reigned King of England,
thirty five years, four months, lacking An. D. 1135
four days, and Duke of Normandy, twenty nine years and four months: he
died in the said town of S. Denis, and from thence was conveyed to Roan, Will.
Gemet. Math. Paris.
where his Bowels, Eyes and Brains were taken out, and buried; the body also
sliced, and powdered with much salt, was wrapped in a Bulls hide Polychr. l. 7.
c. 17.
to avoid the stinch, being so intolerable, (a point fitting for such great
Princes to think on, and Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. l. 8.
in their great glory and pleasures to remember their frail and humane
condition,) that the Physician who took out his brains was poisoned
therewith, and presently died: whereupon some observed, that other Kings killed
men in their life; but he also * after he was dead; thence was his Corpse
carried into England, and honorably buried upon Mat. Westminst. Math. Paris.
Simon Dun.
the day of Christ's Nativity, at Reading in Barkeshire, in the Abbey that
himself had there founded, and endowed with large possessions.

(58) After his death (says Huntington and Houeden) men spoke their mind as
freely of him, Huntingdon. l. 8. Houed^. Rand. Hig. in Polychr. lib. 7 ca. 17.
as of any other dead man: some commending him for these three glorious
felicities, His especial pre-eminence.
Wisdom, Victory, and Wealth: others condemning him for three especial
vices, Covetousness, Cruelty, and Lechery; some * His especial vices.
instances of which we have touched in the relation of his life; the first
three, in obtaining and keeping the Crown: the last, in his most grievous
taxations, cruel handling and imprisoning his Brother; and his incontinency of
life shall presently appear, by his many illegitimate issues, the fruits of
his wantonness, and witnesses of his shame: in that Princes who are to punish
such sins in others, ought themselves especially to be free from them: for
though their living fortunes stop men's tongues from vpbraiding: yet after
their death the tongues of the vulgar, and pens of the learned, will make the
infamy Princes vices come to light after their deaths.
of their vices to be immortal.

(59) He was for personage of a reasonable stature, broad breasted, well
iointed, and full of flesh: Description of his person and qualities. William
Gemet. cap. 10. Math. West.
amiable of countenance, sharp and fair eyes, black of hair, and that
somewhat carelessly hanging on his forehead; his mind was enriched with many
virtues, a follower of Justice, a lover of Religion, severe against thieves,
and all effeminate nicities; So that he commanded men's long hair (which
against God and Natures law was matchable at that 1. Cor. 11. 14.
time with women's) to be cut off: temperate of diet, and never drinking but for
thirst; valiant in battle, Higden. l. 7. c. 12. Malmes. lib. 5.
yet very circumspect, seeking rather to win by wise care, then by effusion of
blood: and by the Will. Gem. cap. 22.
report of most Writers excelled all the Princes of the World in his time, in
Mercy, Wealth, and Bounty, unto Monasteries: the land he defended by Garrisons
of Soldiers planted on the Confines of his neighbor Princes, building many
Forts, Bulwarks and Castles; besides twenty five Towns and Cities: whatsoever
was wisely or virtuously performed in his Government, is chiefly ascribed to
his younger years institution in true Learning and Philosophy, which was
Malmesb. lib. 5. in Hen. 1.
the great furnishment of him unto the Science of Regality; being often heard
to say, that he esteemed an unlearned King but a crowned Ass. In which regard
(says Rossus, that Palace he called Beau-mount, where afterward King Richard
the the first was born
Rossus, he took chief pleasure to reside in his new Palace, which himself
built at Oxford, both for the delight he had in learned men, himself being
very learned, and for the vicinity of his new Park at Woodstocke, which he had
fraught with all kind of strange beasts, wherein he much delighted, as Lions,
Leopards, Lynces, Camells, Porcupins, and the like. His delight also in He
built also the Castle at Woodstocke.
works of devotion, shows it self both in the erection and indowment of the
Collegiate and Paris. An. 1132
Episcopal Sees of Carlisle, and Higden. l. 7. c. 14 Goodwine Catologue of
Bishops.
Ely, as also of the Abbayes Malmes. lib. 5.
of Hide, Circester, Reading, and the Priorie of Dunstable: His Wife Queen
Maud founded the Priorie of Holy Trinity within Algate, and the Hospital of
Saint Giles in the Fields: so that by himself, his Queen, and other devoted
persons, twenty four foundations to religious uses (if not more) were erected
in the reign of this King.

His Wives.
(60) Maude the first Wife of King Henry, was the daughter of Malcolme the
third, surnamed Great head.
Canmoir, His first Wife.
King of Scotland: her mother was S. Margaret, daughter to Edward, son of
Edmund the Ironside King of England. She was married unto him at London in the
first year of his reign, Anno 1100. by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury:
having formerly Malmes. lib. 5.
vowed her self a Nun, which some swore she did not for love of single life,
but to avoid some unworthy matches, which her Father would have imposed on
her. Her Coronation was at Westminster by the same Anselme, on Sunday the
eleventh Will. Malms. Ibidem.
of November in the same year. She was his wife seventeen years and more,
famous for her learning, love to learning, charity to the poor, and all
virtuous dispositions; and deceased at Westminster the first of May, in the
eighteenth year of his reign, and year of our Salvation, 1118. where she was
buried in S. Peter's Church, on the right side of King Edward the Confessor.

(61) Ad^licia, or Alice, the second wife of King Henry, was the daughter of
Godfrey the first Duke of His second Wife
Louaine, by the daughter of the Emperor Henry the fourth, and sister to Duke
Godfrey, and Iocelin of Louain. She was married unto him the nine and
twentieth of January, in the twenty one of his reign, and year of Christ,
1121. and was crowned the morrow after being Sunday. She was his wife fifteen
years, but ever childlesse, and suruiuing She was ever barren.
him, was remarried to William Daubeny Earl of Arundel, and was mother of
Earl William the second, Rayner, Godfrey, and Joan, married to John Earl of
Augi, etc. His Issue.


(62) William, the son of King Henry, and Queen Maud his first wife, was born
the second of his Fathers Reign, and of Christ, 1102. When he came to age of
fourteen years, the Nobility of England did him homage, and swear their
fealties unto him at Shrewsburie. The third year after, he married the
daughter of Foulk, Earl of Aniou; and the same year he was made Duke of
Normandy, doing his homage for the same to Jews the Gross, King of France;
and received the homage and oaths of the Nobility of that Country: but in his
return for England, he was unfortunately drowned near unto Barbfleet upon
the twenty sixth of November, the year of Grace 1120. and eighteenth of his
own age, without any issue, to the great grief of his Father.

(63) Maud the daughter of King Henry, and of Maud.
Queen Maud his first wife, was borne the fourth year of her Fathers reign.
She was the second wife of the Emperor Henry the fourth, espoused at six
years of age, and at eleven with great solemnity was married and crowned his
Empress at Mentz in Germany, 6. January, Anno 1114. the ninth of her husbands,
and foureteenth of her Fathers Reigns. She was his wife twelve years, and
suruiued him without any issue of him; and coming into England a widdowe, she
had fealty sworn unto her by the Nobility, and was remaried to Geffrey
Plantaginet Earl of Aniou, son of Foulke King of Jerusalem, upon the third
of April, and year of Grace 1127. by whom she had issue, Henry, the Second,
King of England, Geffery Earl of Nantes in Britanie, and William who was
called Earl of Poyto: she was his wife twenty three years, and suruiuing him
also continued a widdowe the last seventeen years of her life, which she
ended in the City of Roan the tenth of September, 1167. the foureteenth of the
reign of King Henry her son, and was buried in the Abbey of Be in Normandy.

(64) Richard a second son to King Henry, and Queen Maud, by the testimony
of Geruasius the Richard.
Monk of Canterbury, who makes Maud their eldest Child, William the second;
and lastly, Richard; and then (says he) she left bearing: but Malmsbury says,
she had but two Children, one of each sex.

(65) Eufem also another daughter, and fourth Child (by Hector Boethius the
Scottish Historian) is said Eufem.
to be borne unto the Beauclearke by Queen Maud; the credit of the two last,
I leave to the reporters, who only thus name them without any further
relation. His Natural Issue.


(66) Robert, the natural son of King Henry, was Earl of Gloucester, and
married Ma^l daughter Robert.
and heir of Robert Fitzhamon Lord of Glamorgan, by whom he had issue William
Earl of Gloucester, Richard Bishop of Bayon, Roger Bishop of Worcester, and
Maud the wife of Randolph Gernon, the mother of Hugh Keueliot Earl of Chester,
and Richard his brother: Earl William married Auis daughter of Robert Bossu
Earl of Leicester, and had issue three daughters and heirs of that Earldom,
which by Au^s the second of them, in the end descended to Clare Earl of
Hertford. This Earl Robert died the last of October, in the twelfth year of
King Stephen, and was buried at Bristow in the Church of S. James, which he
had founded, and his body laid in the midst of the Quire; unto him William
Malmsbury dedicated his Book called Historia Nouella.

(67) Richard another natural son of King Henry, Richard.
was as it seems by an ancient Register of the Monastery at Abington, borne
in the reign of King William Rufus, of the widow of Anskill, a Nobleman of the
Country adioining to the said Monastery; and it seems he is that Richard
that was drowned in the Norman Seas near Barbfleet, among the rest of King
Henry's children.

(68) Raynold the natural son of King Henry, was borne of a daughter unto
Sir Robert Corbet, Lord of Alcester in Warwickeshire, by the gift of the King
Raynold.
in favor of her, who was after married to Henry Fitz-herbert his
Chamberlain. This Raynold was created Earl of Cornwall, and Baron of Castle
comb, with consent of King Stephen, and had issue four Daughters, of whom have
sprung many fair branches.

(69) Robert another of that name, was borne Robert,
of Edith, the sister of Iue, son and daughter of Forne, the son of
Sigewolfe, both of them great Barons in the North: which Edith afterward King
Henry gave in marriage to Robert D^lie, Baron of Hook-Norton in Oxfordshire;
and with her gave him the Manor of Eleydon, in the County of Buckingham, by
whom he had issue Henry Doylie Baron of Hook-Norton, who oftentimes mentions
this Robert in his Charters, ever calling him Robert his brother the Kings
son.

(70) Gilbert another natural son of King Henry is named in the additions to
the story of William Gilbert,
Gemeticensis the Norman Monk, in the Chronicle of that country, written by
John Tailor being a Translator of that work out of Latin into French; and
lastly, in the Treaties betwixt England and France, written in the French
tongue by John Tillet, Secretary to their late King Henry the second, and yet
in them, not any other mention is made, but only of his name.

(71) William also a narurall son of Henry the King, had given unto him the
Town of Tracie in William.
Normandy; of which he took his surname, and was called William of Tracie:
But whether he were the Progenitot of the Tracies, sometime Barons in
Devonshire, or of them that now be of the same surname; or whether Sir William
Tracie, one of the four Knights, that slew Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury, were any of his posterity, is not certainly reported: nor any
thing else of him, more then that he died a little after his Father, which was
in the year of Christ, 1135.

(72) Henry another natural son of King Henry, was borne of the Lady Nesta,
daughter of Rees Henry.
ap Tewdor Prince of South Wales, who was the Wife of Sir Gerald Windsor, and
of Stephen, Constables of the Castles of Pembrooke, and Abertinie in Wales, and
Progenitors of the Families of the Fitz-geralds, and the Fitz-Stephens in
Ireland; he was borne and breed, and lived, and married in Wales, having issue
two sons, namely, Meiler and Robert, of which Meiler the elder married the
daughter of Hugh Lacie, Lord of Methe in Ireland; he was at the conflict in
the I Will of Anglesey, between Magnus the son of Harold, Harfager King of
Norway, and Hugh of Mountgomery, Earl of Arundell and Shrewsbury, wherein he
was slain, as some say, with the said Earl, Anno, 1197.

(73) Maude the Natural daughter of King Henry was Countess of Perch, and
the first Maud.
wife of Earl Rotroke the first of that name, son of Arnolfe de Hesding the
first Earl of that County: She had issue by him one only daughter named
Magdalen wife to Garcy the fourth King of Navarre mother of King Sanches,
surnamed the wise, from whom all the Kings of Navarre are descended: She died
upon Friday the twenty sixth of November, in the twentieth of her Fathers reign
and year of Grace 1120. being drowned in the Sea with her brother Duke William.

(74) Maude another of that name and natural daughter of King Henry, was
married to Conan the Maud.
first of that name surnamed the Gross, Earl of little Britain in France,
son of Earl Alan by Ermengard his second wife; by Alan she had issue
Howell, pronounced illegitimate, and disherited by his supposed father
Constance, that died without issue, and Bertha the wife of Eudes Earl of
P^rohet, mother of Earl Conan the younger, who by Margaret sister of William
King of Scots had issue Constance married to Geffrey son of King Henry the
second.

(75) Julian likewise an other natural daughter of King Henry was married to
Eustace the illegitimate Julian.
son of William Lord of Brete^il in Normandy, who was the son and heir of
William Fitz-Osborne and elder brother of Roger, both Earls of Hereford in
England, and this Eustace had he been lawfully borne in wedlock, had been
heir to the Earledomes of Hereford and Iuerie: notwithstanding he had as small
a part in that inheritance of the Town of Pacie from which he took his
surname, being commonly called Eustace of Pacy, and had issue by this Julian
his wife, William and Roger of Pacy his sons.

(76) A natural daughter of King Henry recounted by the continuer of the
History of William Gemeticensis, and by John Tillet his follower, is reported
by them to have been married to one William Goet a Norman; but in neither of
these writers is any mention made of her name, or of his estate, issue or other
relation.

(77) Another natural daughter of King Henry is without name, recited by the
said Authors, and by them reported to be married to the Vicount of Beaumont,
which is a Town within the County of Maygne. She had issue by him, as Roger
of Houeden writes, Richard Vicount Beaumont, Father of Queen Ermengard the
wife of King William of Scotland: and Robert the Abbot of Mount-Saint Michael
mentions another of her sons, named Ralphe, who (as he says) was Bishop of
Angiers.

(78) Another natural daughter also of King Henry is recited by the Normane
and French writers before avouched, and reported by them to be married to
Matthew of Mountmorancy, the son of Bouchard of Mountmarancy, from whom
perhaps descended the House of Mountmorancy, who after came to be Earls and
Dukes, being grown to be one of the greatest houses in France, next to the
Princes of the blood, for possessions, alliances, and honor.

(79) Elizabeth the last natural daughter of King Elizabeth.
Henry recounted by the former Authors, was unmarried in the time of the one,
and her husband unknown to the other; but both of them agree, that she was
borne of Elizabeth the sister of Walleran Earl of Meulan, who was sister also
of Robert Bossue Earl of Leicester, wife of Gilbert Earl of Pembrooke, and
mother of Earl Richard Strangbow, the Conqueror of Ireland.

STEPHEN THE TWO AND Monarch 42.
Stephen.
FORTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER V.


THough the Empress Maud had fealty sworn unto An. D. 1135
her, in the life time of her Father: and again both King Henry's Issue
defeated of the Crown by Stephen.
her self, and issue ordained to be his successors in Englands Throne, as has
been said; yet so powerful is Ambition, where the object is a Diadem, and so
weak are all assurances which are built on the wavering Multitude, that King
Henry's providence, was soon defeated, and with his death al fealties reuersed,
and that by him only who had * contended to be the foremost of the Laity in
taking that oath, even Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. Will. Walsingham. Floriacensis.
King Stephen his descent.
Stephen Earl of Mortaine and Bolloine; a man whose descent was very Noble,
being the third son of Stephen Earl of Bloys and Champaigne, who was the
son of Earl Eudes, and he of Earl Theobald, the son of Gerlon the Dane,
the companion of Rollo Duke of Normandy; his mother was Some call her Adela,
others Alice.
Adelicia the third daughter of William the Conqueror by Queen Maude his wife:
And himself was advanced to be Earl of Mortaigne by King Henry his uncle,
whose Crown he now endeavored to usurp, being otherwise for his many princely
parts, worthy to weild a Scepter, if his claim thereto had been just and
warrantable.

(2) For as soon as Natures course had brought Will. Gem.
King Henry, where Princes and poorest Subjects are all equal; forthwith he
was working to dispossess his Issue, which only now rested in Maud and her
Children; in which attempt it happened fortunately Stephens brother his chief
Agent
for him (if any thing may be counted fortunate, which is joined with
impiety) that his younger Brother Henry was then Bishop of Winchester, and a
very potent man in the State, who had industriously Malmsb. Nouel. lib. 1.
Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. Archbishop of Canterbury Stephens abettor
stirred himself in making way to his entrance; and (upon assurance of all
liberties to the Church and Commonwealth) had drawn on also William
Archbishop of Canterbury, the very first man that had sworn unto Maude the
Empress: by whose example many others were winded into the like perjury, *
traitorously auowing, that it was baseness for so many, and so great P^eers,
to be subject unto a Woman. A traitorous position. Rog. de Wendouer. Math
Paris. Malmsb. Nouel. lib. 1. Idem.
And to help forward those audacious beginnings, Roger Bishop of Salisbury,
the late Kings Treasurer protested (Malmsburie, who reports it, himself heard
it from him) that they were free from the oath made to the Empress; for that
without con sent of the Barons she had married out of the Realm; but that which
wrought most, was the testimony of Hugh Bigot, O^ high Steward Mat. Paris. Tho.
Wall. Ypodigma. Neustria.
Senescall unto King Henry departed, who coming over with Stephen, took his
corporal oath, that the King on his deathbed, upon some offense taken against
his daughter Maude, disinherited her, and appointed this Stephen his nephew to
be his successor. These colorable instigations so moved the Idem. Fealty
sworn to Stephen.
too credulous Archbishop and the Peers, that they all swore fealty unto him
and became his Leigemen.

(3) His first landing in England, (being at Whitsand-bay) by a tempest of
thunder so wonderful and Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. Mat. Westminster.
terrible that the people thought verily the end of all was at hand, did
prognosticke the storms of troubles which his perjury brought with him; for
even then both Dover and Canterbury fortified themselves against him, though
London gave better leave to his entrance, Stephens lovely. qualities.
whose Person and presence drew ever the affections of the beholder, being in
all parts complete with Will. Malmes. Ibidem.
natures endowments, of personage passing comely, of disposition loving,
cheerful, and affable to the meanest, always very liberal; but now
especially, knowing his Purse the best Lawyer to plead for his Title; and in
Martial prowess gave place to none of that time wherein, though his whole
reign was continually spent, yet (by reason of King Henry's great Treasure
left) never burdened he the Commons with any exactions, a thing that ever
gains the love of the common sort: neither is he taxed with any other
obseruable crime, save only his perjury against the Empress Dowager and her
son.

(4) He entered his government the year of Christ Jesus, 1135. the second day
of December, and Rand. Higden. Roger Houed.
was crowned at Westminster the twenty sixth of the same Month, being Saint
Stephens day, by William Corbell Archbishop of Canterbury, who with the rest of
the Prelates doing him homage, and knowing now he would yield to any
conditions (for performance whereof his * Brother of Winchester did there
engage himself for a pledge) they all took their Will. Malmes. lib. 1. nouel.
oath of allegia^ce conditionally, (traitorously, I might say) to obey him as
their King, so long as he should preserve their Church Liberties, and the
vigor of Allegiance sworn conditionally to the King. Idem.
Discipline: And that the Lay-Barons made use also of this policy, appears
by Robert Earl of Gloucester, who swear to be true Liegeman to the King, as
long as the King would preserve to him his dignities, and keep all Covenants,
whereupon the King promised for the present, that he would speedily reform the
ouer-hard laws of his Predecessors, and King Stephens fair promises.
mollify the extremes thereof to their own likings, under his Seal and
Charter: and so thence hastening to meet the Corpse of his deceased uncle,
(which was now brought into England) he honored Huntingdon. lib. 8. Houeden.
that pompous funeral, with his own, and all his great Prelates and Peers,
attendance at Reading; whence presently he went to Oxford, where he sealed Hen.
Huntingdon
his fore-promised Charter, of many indulgent favors: Malmes. novel. lib. 1.
Kings Stephens Charter.
prefacing therein, that he attained the Crown by Election only; and that
Pope Innocentius confirmed the same; whereby may be conceived, that his
Holiness, either out of hatred to the Empress, (whose husband This Henry
imprisoned the Pope.
Henry was no friend to the Papacy) or for some other holy ends, had no small
hand in advancing Stephens perjured and disloiall intrusion. The Tenor of the
Dated apud Oxenford. 1136 reg. 1
Charter it self is; That all Liberties, Customs, and Possessions granted to
the Church, should be firm and enforce; that all Persons and Causes
Ecclesiastical should appertain only to Ecclesiastical Judicature: that
none but Wl. Malmsbury. Huntingdon. Roger Houed.
Clergy men should ever intermeddle with the vacancies of Churches, or any
Church-mens goods; that all bad vsages in the Land touching for rests,
exactions, etc. should be utterly extirpate; the ancient Laws restored, etc.
As Stephen well knew, that they had chosen him their King, only to make their
uses of him, so these immunities he granted, rather to bleare their Eyes, then
Will. Malmsb Houeden.
* with any purpose to manacle his own hands with such Parchment-Chaines.

(5) This his entrance was very peaceable (says Geruasius of Canterbury) but
by little, and little civil discordincreased, Geruas. Dorob.
to the lamentable destruction of men, and the land: whereto Robert Earl of
Gloucester, Math. Paris.
halfe-brother o the Empress, whose wisdom and power King Stephen much
feared, gave a secret beginning, Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1.
when amongst them that swore him fealty, he concluded his (as we said) with
this reservation, that his own authority should be nothing empaired, meaning
no longer to respect him as his King, then the King should him as a Peer: and
a general sufferance, to erect Castles for strength Castles generally raised
in England.
throughout the land, was no security to his peaceable estate. Intended indeed
to strengthen the Kingdom against Maud the Empress; but proved the bane of
all subiectiue obedience: which was politickly considered by Henry
Fitz-Empresse, in the conclusion Walsingham. Ypodig. ad Ann. 1151.
of Peace betwixt King Stephen and him, when a thousand one hundred and
fifteen Castles so raised, were again razed and cast down.

(6) The first man that professedly set himself opposite to Stephens
usurpation, was Baldwin de Reduers, Excester first resists King Stephen.
who fortified the City and Castle of Excester against him; the Welshmen also,
bearing in mind the harms that K. Henry had done them, desired revenge, and
made many slaughters upon the Kings people: Against these, Stephen proceeded
with his band of English and Flemmings, and after a strong and chargeable
siege, by famine drew forth Baldwin, his wife, and children, all which he
disherited and expulsed the Land, using so great lenity toward all other
offenders there, that it gave great encouragement to Hen. Hunting. lib. 8.
Flor. Wigorn.
others rebellions. But in Wales the business prospered not so well, where at
Cardigan a great battle was fought, with such slaughter and ouerbearing of the
English, that the men by women were taken and led away Captive, and so many
drowned by the fall of a Brige over Temd, that a passage was made over the
water with the dead Carcases therein heaped.

(7) Neither thus only, but some of the English also distasting King Stephen,
secretly instigated David Polydor. A. Do. 1138 Ypodigm. Neustr.
King of Scotland, to revenge the wrongs done to the Empress Maud, a service
as they urged it very grateful unto her, and even pleasing to God and Man. He
therefore consenting, invaded the borders, and took from the English both
Carleile and Math. Paris.
Newcastle, which he stuffed with Garrisons. Against these, King Stephen
prepared, and with a great power came into those parts, where diverse accidents
by diverse reporters are related, yet all agree that ere long peace was
concluded, Carleil still enioied by King David, and the Earldom of Huntington
by Prince Henry his son; for which he did homage at his fathers command,
David himself refusing so Will Gemet.
to do (as Hector Boethius the Scottish writer affirms) for that he had given
his faith before unto Maud Hect. Boethius. lib. 12 cap. 17.
the Empress.

(8) King Stephen returned, and all in good quiet, he suddenly fell sick of a
Lethargy, yea and in such danger of life that the common report gave forth he
Simon Dun.
was dead, which stirred great troubles both in England and else where, for
thereby his friends were stricken into great fear, and the factious more bold
to prepare for Queen Maude; for Hugh Bigot one of Math. Paris
his chiefest and first raisers fortified himself in the Henry. Hunt. lib. 8.
Castle of Norwich, and would not deliver it unto any save only to the King,
yea and very unwillingly also unto him: and in Wales, Owen and Cadwalader the
sons of Gruffith ap Conan Prince of that Country, carried great spoils from
the English, as of other Chron. Wall^a.
goods; so also of Horse and Armor, and habiliments Tumultuous attempts in
Normandy. Pari^ensis. W^lsingh. Tpodig. Malmb. Novel. lib. 1.
for war; likewise in Normandy, Conspiracies began to bud forth; for Geffrey
Earl of Aniou, who in right of his wife made claim unto all, easily got the
hearts and endeauours of many to adhere unto the true heir; possessing
himself of certain Castles; but entering further on the Demaines of one
Taleva^, a man of note (proscribed for some offense or displeasure by King
Stephen) the Normans disliking that, and some other his doings, sent for
Theobald Earl of Bloys (Stephens elder Brother) offering him both their
Dukedom, and their swords, Stephens elder Brother laie^ claim.
and lives to defend him in it; who coming to Luxonia, Robert Earl of
Gloucester (not unwilling any way to weaken King Stephen) delivered unto him
upon composition, the County of Falesia, himself carrying no small sum of
money thence out of King Henry's Treasury, and very thoroughly, (though
secretly) watching all opportunities to advance the title and designs of the
Empress. Idem.


(9) Stephen recovered, and hearing these stirs, Stephen goes into Normandy.
Will. Newb.
prepared himself first into Normandy, at whose approach, after some small
attempts, the people (distracted betwixt fear, and sense of their ducty)
yielded themselves unto his power; surrendering their fenced Cities, and other
strong holds. This Ger. Dorobor.
good success thus fortunately begun, he hoped further to prosecute, by
means of a league, which He makes league with France. Huntingdon. lib. 8.
Houeden. Math. Paris. His son E^stace Duke of Normandy.
he lately had made with Lewis the seventh King, of France: and hereupon
created Eustace his eldest son living, Duke of Normandy, commanding him to do
his homage for the same to Lewis.

(10) Earl Theobald seeing himself thus defeated of his hopes and purposes,
stormed at the wrongs done by King Stephen; for he, (his elder by birth, and
Bloyses Earledomes lawful heir) laid his title Stephen buieth his elder
brothers Title. Ypodigm. Neustr. Roger Wend. Houeden. Huntingdon. lib. 8. Mat.
Paris.
both for Normandy and England also, now usurped by Stephen his younger:
notwithstanding (rage naught auailing without power) he came to a composition,
and remitted his Claim for two thousand marks annually to be paid. Geffrey of
Aniou likewise, whose title by his Wife was better then them both, not able at
the preset (being so far ouer-matched by the Kings power, wealth, and
confederats) to do what he would, yielded to necessity, and for five thousand
marks He stops the Empresses husbands mouth with money.
yearly to be paid, suffered Stephen quietly to enjoy the Crown.

(11) Having thus at once swept the two greatest rubbes out of his fortunes
way, he well hoped that An. D. 1138.
all clouds of displeasure, and opposition, were now Ann. Reg. 3.
ouer-blowne, when unexpectedly news came, that England was intumults, the
sparks of conspiracy, Geru. Dorob.
kindled secretly before in the hearts of factious Peers, now openly breaking
forth, upon advantage England again in tumults.
of his absence in Normandy: therefore, having not altogether composed his
business in those parts, he took King Stephen returns into England.
ship for England in the depth of the winter; and even in the Vigill of Christ's
Nativity, besieged, and after took the Castle of Bedford, that was manned
against Roger Houeden.
him in the behalf of the Scots; about which time David their King having
entered Northumberland in the quarrel of Queen Maude, the ruder sort of his
Math. Paris. The King of Scots against King Stephen.
Army (as commonly the best governed is not empty of such) revenged too
tragically the wrongs of the Empress, in ripping up the wombes of women with
Ypodig. Neustri. ^ed. in Steph. Huntingdon. lib. 8.
child, and tossing their infants upon the points of their spears, slaying the
Priests at the Altar, and dismembring the slain bodies in most unhuman manner.

(12) Against these, King Stephen made hastily forward, affirming it no
policy, to give one hours rest The English Nobles against King Stephen. Simon
Dun.
unto the Enemy: and threatening more then he accomplished, entered Scotland;
whence after some small revenge wrought, he was hastily recalled; so many of
his Nobles in England now in Arms against him, that he was in a sort besette
on every side. And what other could be, a Usurper, expect from them, but
Treason, whom himself had formerly taught to be Traitors to their rightful
Sovereign? But yet (as no Rebellion was ever without pretense of Reason and
Justice) they alleged, that he had Huntingdon. 8.
violated his Oath touching their Forests, and other Immunities of Church and
Commonwealth: but Church and Commonwealth, were but public colors for
private Malmes. Nouel. l^b. 2. page 105.
grudges, (as Malmesburie, who then lived, well vnfouldeth) which the
Great-Ones concerued against their King, because he would not grant them such
Castles, Commands, and Lordships, as themselves liked and expected of him, whom
they Idem. li. 1. pa. 102.
thought to be so obliged unto them, that he ought deny them nothing. The
endless and shameless importunities of these men, sometimes he put off,
alleging thereby, the impair of his Crowns reucnewes; Idem.
sometimes he was feign to satisfy, distrusting their fal^ing from him: whose
loialtie notwithstanding being built on so vn-noble grounds, was but colored,
and therefore could not long be permanent. Earl Robert sends threats to King
Stephen.
Neither was it. For Robert of Gloucester (the Empresses halfe-brother, and now
her chief Counselor and Captain) finding those particular dislikes apt to be
wrought on, and made serviceable for a common behoof; whetted on with the
touch of conscience, and counsels of religious learned men, (who urged him,
with the hazard both of his credit, and soul, for Idem.
neglect of his first, and only-lawfull, Oath to the Empress) sent threatening
messages unto King Stephen, charging Malmesb. No^el. lib. 1.
him with his Oath of Allegiance unto Lady Maud his Sovereign, against whom
he h^ showed himself a most perfidious man, and had impiouslie drawn him
with others to do the like; and so denouncing Stephen an open Enemy to the
State, and himself unto Stephen, made strong his faction with the assistance
of many Nobles; among whom, Milo, a chief man of war, and High Constable to
King Geruas. Dorob. Will. Malm^b.
Stephen, revolted from him, and became a great help to their proceedings.

(13) Earl Robert (whom estsoones the enraged King discharged of his honors
and possessions in English Peers fortific against the King.
England) took into the Castle of Bristow, and made good also his Castle of
Slede; his accomplices likewise did the like in other places: for William Talbot
manned Henry H^t. lib. 8. Houeden.
the Castle of Hereford, William Louell the Castle of Carry, Paganell the
Castle of Ludlow, William de Mount the Castle of Dunestor, Robert de Nichol the
Castle of Warram, Eustace Fitz-Iohn the Castle of De Malt^na.
Meltune, William Fitz-Alain the Castle of Shrewsburie, and Walkelinus the
Castle of Doure. And thus those forts which were erected to defend the Crown,
first offended the King, some few whereof as he recovered, he flatted to the
ground, and wished the other no higher walls; still swearing by Gods Birth King
Stephens usual Oath. Ma^es. N^el. lib. 1.
(his usual Oath) he would not so slightlie be vnseated of his Crown, and
wondering what should move them, who had so readily advanced him, so speedily
to vnstate him. One fresh motive to these Noble-mens discontents was the Kings
* seizing on some great men and their lands, on bare suspicion of Melmesb. N^l.
libro secund^.
their loialtie; and on the other side, the extraordinary favor, which
Stephen showed to William de Ypre, and his Flemings (which they interpreted as
a contempt Ger. Dor.
of themselves and their Nation) whose counsels he generally followed, and
chiefly relied upon: In disdain whereof, they sent word to the Empress, that
within five Months, she should have the An. D. 1139.
Realm at command, according to their Oaths made to her Father.

(14) These turmoiles thus working in the bowels of the Kingdom, David King of
Scotland had The King of Scotland his attempts against Stephen.
better opportunity to assail the sides and skirts thereof; and following
what he had begun, with a very great Army entering Northumberland, made
great slaughter of the English, and destruction of their Country: Against whom
the Northren Lords prepared, at (...) command of Thurstan Archbishop of York
((...) King Stephen Lieutenant in those parts) Simon Dun.
who being by sickness kept from the Field, appointed Ralph Bishop of Durham
his General; whose Inuectiue Oration before their joining of battle,
occasioned upon the foresaid misdeameanors of Houeden. Wendouer. Hen. Hunting.
some undisciplined Scottish, is at large set down by Houedon, Huntingdon,
Wendouer and others; in the close whereof, he absolueth from punishment of sin,
all such of his side, as should die in this battle: which made the English
more desperate in fight, who so sorely pressed upon their enemies, that they
forsook This field was fought in August An. 1138. near the mouth of Humber.
Mat. Paris.
their King, he notwithstanding valiantly persisting, til his dearest friends
ernestly urged him to avoid. But his son Henry, esteeming more of glory the^
life, rushed in amongst his retiring soldiers, and with undaunted courage,
persuading them to regard themselus and his presence, with threat of shameful
deaths to all such as fled, he held them in for a time; till at length The
great valor of Prince Henry of Scotland.
ouer-laid with the maine-battaile of the English, the magnanimous Prince
Henry, likewise quitted the field, bitterly cursing the frowardness of
Fortune, Mah. Paris. Houeden. and alij. Polyd. Uirgil.
and the mischance that happened that day.

(15) With like fortunate success, proceeded Stephen against his disobedient
Barons, and wanne from them the Castles of Hereford, Gloucester, Webley,
Bristow, Dudley and Shrewsbury, whereby he weakened Rand. Higden. Earl Robert
leaves England.
Earl Robert so much, that he was constrained to fly into France, and there
instigated his sister the Empress to come into England.

(16) These domesticke opposites thus removed out of his way, King Stephen
re-addressed himself for the North, to prosecute that which Thurstan had
begun: first therefore winning the Castle of Leids, he went into Scotland,
where by the persuasion and prowess of Mars and Vulcan (says Paris) a Peace A
Peace betwixt the King of England and Scotland. Math. Paris. Henry Hunt.
was concluded betwixt the two Kings; and Stephen thence returning, brought
Prince Henry (whom he created Earl of Huntingdon) with him into England, and
at the siege of Ludlow Castle, the aduenturous Prince was almost surprised,
where the besieged with Houeden. Henry. Hunt.
an Iron Grapple plucked him from his horse, and so had taken him, but that King
Stephen himself, with great valor and honor recovered him: who having won
the Castle, went presently to Oxford, whither news was brought him that the
Empress was preparing for England.

(17) To make all sure as he went, Stephen thought it good to demolish, and
race those Castles lately built, (having had experience to what troubles they
A. Do. 1140 King Stephen pluckes down the Castles.
had brought him) and to prevent the building of new; and namely, that of the
Divise, now (as he surmised) in fortifying against him: he therefore sent for
Roger Bishop of Salisbury (the Founder both of that Castle, as also those other
of Sherborn and Malmsbury) a man who in a bad cause had stood King Stephen in
good stead, howsoever some envying his greatness, had incensed the King against
him, and other Malmes. Nouel. lib. 2.
Prelates, as if they were fallen from his side. The Bishop standing
peremptorily on his innocence, yet mistrusting the event, craved the company
of Henry Hun. Houeden.
Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and of Nigell Bishop of Ely; so with a great and
well appointed train, repaired to Oxford unto the Court, where Stephen had
summoned a Grand-Councell of the States. A great Council at Oxford.


(18) The King who expected of Churchmen humility, seeing them now armed as
men for the field, commanded his attendants to take armor Geruas. Dorob.
likewise, and so entering communication of diverse matters with his Peers and
Prelates, their Soldiers casually meeting, fell at variance, where the Bishops
Malmesb. loco citato.
friends had the worse, so that many of them were wounded, and the rest
forsaking their masters ran away. This great assembly thus disturbed, the
King required the Bishops to satisfy his Court The Kings usage of his Prelates.
for these outrages of their servants, which satisfaction should be, to deliver
the keys of all their Castles to the King, as pledges of their fidelity, which
they refusing, Idem.
the Bishops of Salisbury and Lincoln were laid hold of; but Ely escaped to
the Castle of Divise: Alexander was imprisoned, till he had y^ded him his
Castles of New-werke, and I^ford. Paris.
Slaford; Roger the Castles of Sherborne, and the Devises (accounted then one
of the goodliest Castles of Europe) besides forty Wendouer. Paris.
thousand Marks in silver; (which losses the Bishop did not long survive). The
King employed the money to purchase Lady Constance, sister to Lewis King
Polychr. lib. 7. cap. 18.
of France, to be wife unto his son Eustace: all which was to strengthen
himself against the Empress Roger Houed.
Maud, whose coming he continually feared, and now before his expectation she
was landed in England, The Empress arriues in England. Malmesb. Nouel. lib. 2.
Huntingdon. Rog. de Wendouer.
at a fit time for her designs, when all the great Prelates (who formerly
were his chiefest friends) were highly incensed against the King for such
oppression of their Brethren.

(19) The place of her arriuage was at the At Portsmouth says Geruas.
port of Arundell, into which Castle she was joyfully received by William de
Albeny, who had married Queen Adeliza, the late wife to King Henry, whose
Dowry it was; from hence Earl Robert diuerting his course only with ten
horsemen, and as many Archers, Math Paris Earl Robert brings but 140. men, to
the winning of the Crown of England.
(for in all he brought over but one hundred and forty with him for so great
an exploit) passed through the Land unto Wallingford and Gloucester, soliciting
his Accomplices for the aid of his sister the Empress. Malmesb. lib. 2.
A man who then lived, holds him, in this bold attempt with so small forces, no
way inferior to Julius Caesar, whom Liuie reports to have begun his civil
war, and to have set himself against the whole world, only with five Cohorts
of Soldiers.

(20) King Stephen as then lay in siege of Marleburgh Castle, but having
intelligence of this more dangerous an enemy, dislodged thence, and with all
expedition made toward Arundell; whereat the Stephen ha^es to the Empress.
Empress, wanting her Counselor, was wonderfully perplexed, yet wanted not a
woman's wit to help at need; insomuch that by the report of Geruasius, lest her
dignity and right might any way be endammaged, Her politic excuse. Ger. Dor.
she took an oath, that none of these the Kings enemies by her advice or
consent had entered the land, but with condition to carry themselves orderly
without impeachment of the honor and allegiance due to the King; by which
policy (to give it no worse name) she so satisfied Roger. Houed. Henry Hunt.
King Stephen (whom al do censure for too much credulity and facility toward
his foes) that he caused her to be conuaied honorably unto Bristow, where
she remained the space of two months, and then got thence unto Wallingford.

(21) Earl Robert in the mean while dispersed the news of the Empresses
approach, unto whose aid The Empresses power increases Geruasius.
so many gathered, that the same Monk reports, no man was able to set down
their multitudes in context of history, much less by way of Computation: then
began (says he) both labor and dolor, which brought the whole Realm to a
most grievous division, and in a manner to an utter ruin: for those that
favored the King, what evil soever could be wrought or imagined, they did
against them, that took part with the Empress: and contrariwise, Earl
Robert, whose power daily increased, tortured with cruelties all those that
stood for the King; and to augment a more mischief, the Flemings Flemings came
to King Stephens aid.
left their own Country, and came over by multitudes, like unto a Company of
hunger-starued Wolves, seeking to bring the Lands felicity unto nothing.

(22) Stephen, whose head was now full of troubles, delaid no time to forward
his Fortunes, but straightwaies King Stephen besieges Wallinford Castle. Geru.
Dor.
besieged Maud and her brother in Wallingford Castle; notwithstanding, wearied
with long labor and profiting little, he caused a Tower of wood to be there
erected, which he strongly fortified with me^ and munition, and then removed
to the siege of Malmesbury. His brother also of Winchester, a stout and
politic Prelate indeed, bestirred all his wily wits in Stephens behalf;
for inuiting certain Noblemen to his Palace at Winchester, retained them The
Bishop of Winchester entraps the Nobles Math. Paris.
prisoners, till he had compelled them there, to resign their Castles to the
King. In the mean while Earl Robert subdued and spoiled Worcester: Ralph
Painell, in the Empresses favor, burned Nottingham; and Ranulph Earl of
Chester, ioining in wishes with Robert (whose daughter he married) showed
himself not unwilling to annoy King Stephen, though he had received great
honors at his hands. The Empress her self, the better to secure her own
person, and to give access unto her favorites, took into Lincoln, where she
meant to make her abode, storing the City with all provisions necessary.

(23) King Stephen, as vigilant as the other was politic, made straight-waies
thitherward, and begirt Simon D^n. Roger Houed.
the City with a strait siege, where he had surprised his greatest Enemy,
had she not found means thence to escape: and so possessing himself of the
City, settled it, and the whole Country in very good quiet. Soon after whose
departure, Ranulph Earl of Chester, with his Countess, and Brother, coming
to Lincoln, to keep their Christmas; the Citizenes knowing the Kings
iealousies, and desirous to currie favor with him, sent secret intelligence,
that if he would surprise both those Brethren, he had now the fittest Malmsb.
Nouel. lib. 2.
advantage: whereto the King giving ear, came thither with great expedition;
and whiles they, thus circumuented, stood on their guard in the Castle, the
Earl escaped forth, and went to crave aid of the Empress, for rescue of his
wife and brother whom he left besieged. Earl Robert, hearing the news, and
glad of so fair an opportunity, joined with Ranulph, and they both gathered
all their powers both of Welsh and English, for the relief of their friends in
Lincoln: where, resolutelie first wading through the River, (which parted them
from the Kings Army, and was then deep) upon Candlemas day and year of
Christ Jesus one thousand one hundred forty one, they pitched their Tents, and
in the Niger. Polydor. Nie. Tri^. King Stephen and his adversaries pitch their
Battle
Kings sight ordered their Battle: One Squadrone whereof, was lead by Earl
Ranulph: the Disherited were the Guiders of another; in the third was Earl
Robert himself; and the Welsh-men served for the Wing. Their troops thus
marshalled, Ranulph appointed in rich Armor, and full of brave resolution,
spoke thus to his followers, in the presence of Robert R^n. Higden.
of Gloucester.

(24) I yield you unfeigned thanks, (Invincible Captain, and you, our
companions in Arms) which here so resolutelie witness your loves unto
Ranulphs Oration before the Battle Roger Houeden.
me, upon my sole request, even to the hazard of your own lives. Since then, I
am the chief cause of this your peril, it well befits me, that I my self be
foremost in the hazard, and give the first onsette of battle against this
faithless King; who made us a show of truce, only to take advantage for our
ruins; and therefore both mine own courage, and the Kings unjust dealing,
give me cause to hope, that I shall forthwith break asunder the strongest
array of his Army, and make my way through their midst, by dint of this my
sword. It shall be argument of your prowess, to follow me, leading you the
way, and to imitate me, giving you example. My thoughts already tell me,
that even now I am breaking through his Battles, trampling on the necks of his
Chieftaines, and piercing with this my sword the very sides of the King
himself. His speech though short and headdie, as more fitting a Soldier then
an Orator, yet well suited with the time, and was seconded with great applause
of the Soldiers: Whereupon Robert Earl of Gloucester, stepped forth and said.

(25) It is not against right, most Noble Earl, that the honor of this days
service, and first assault, Henry Hunt. Earl Roberts Oration before the
Battle. Roger Houeden. Henry Hunt. Polychron.
should be permitted unto you, in regard of the greatness both of your descent,
and your martial achieuement; but yet, if Descent be stood on, I my self am
both the son, and nephew, of a Mighty King; if Valor, here now are many of
choicest worth, of whom none living can challenge precedence for prowess. But
other reason ought now to sway. For since the King, contrary to his Oath made
to my Sister, impiously usurped the Kingdom, he has made a confusion of all
things, both in causing the blood of many thousands to be spilt, and in making
many Owners (as himself was) of that which was not their own, by depriving
other of their rightful inheritance: These therefore thus disherized, ought of
right (in assurance of help from their righteous Judge and revenger) give
first assault on their unrighteous oppressor; and God who justly judges his
people, will (doubtless) look down from his heavenly habitation, and will
not leave us succourlesse, whiles in a just cause, we impugn a most unjust
Intruder. But one thing, (most resolved Captains and soldiers) I would have
you through lie to consider, that through these Fennes (which with so much a
do you have passed) there is no way fit for escape: here must we either
vanquish, or leave our lives, for hope of flight is none at all, nor is there
any other way, left us now to go, but by our swords into the City: and (if I
guess aright) even this, that we have no means to fly, will be to us the
means (by divine assistance) to get the Victory; because they must needs
trust to their Manhood, who see no hope to thrive by their Cowardice. Indeed,
the Citizenes of Lincoln keep nigh to their houses, and in the brunt of the
Battle, there will their minds be, and thither will their heels follow,
whiles you victoriously shall keep the field. And consider farther with me,
what kind of Captains they have: First Alaine Duke of Britain, he comes
armed, not against you, but God himself, a furious person, spotted Alain Duke
of Britane.
with all filth of sin, in malice unmatchable, who thinks it his greatest
dishonor, to see any man excel him in cruelty: with him comes the
treacherous Earl Robert Mellent, the very craftes-master of fraud, in whose
heart dwells impiety, guile Robert Mellent.
in his mouth, cowardice in his actions; high of mind, vaineglorious in words,
degenerous in performance; last in the fight, first in the flight. Next, comes
Hugh By-god, his name neerelie sounding his perjury; who thought it not
sufficient to break Hugh Bi-god.
his oath with the Empress, but that he must be once again forsworn (as all
the world does know) that Henry at his death bequeathed the Crown unto
Stephen, to the prejudice of his own daughter; a man (in a word) who accounts
Treachery a Virtue, and Perjury a courtly quality. Among Earl Albemarle.
these Gallants marches the Earl Albemarle, a man of a singular constancy in
evil; very ready to attempt, and very loath to leave any mischief; whose
wife, through irkesomnes of his insufferable filthy qualities, is gone from
him; and the Earl that keeps her, he comes against us too, a notorious
adulterer, and the Non-pareill of impurity, a true Soldier of Bacchus, a
stranger to Mars; to whom the sight of all blood, except of the Grape, is very
fearful. Then sets forth Simon Earl of Hampton, whose deeds consist
altogether in words, Earl Simon.
and whose liberality only in promises; for when he has said, he has done,
and ye get no more. Lastly, you see here gathered a knot of Peers, all like
to their Prince, accustomed to robberies, enriched with rapines, fatned with
man-slaughters, and all tainted with perjury You therefore (Noble spirits)
whom great Henry advanced, and this Stephen has cast down, whom Henry made
wealthy, and Stephen has empouerished, be now courageous, and upon assured
confidence of your great valors, yea, of Gods justice, seek both your just
Revenge, which God even puts into your hands, on these ungodly wretches; and
immortal Glory, which shall hence-forward attend both your selves, and your
posterity for ever. If you are all of this mind, for executing this Judgment
of God now upon them, then vow your selves unto God, and this his service; and
forbear, nay rather forswear, to show your backs to your foes.

At which words, all jointly lifting up their hands, and acclamations unto
heaven, with a terrible shout abiured all thought of flight, and quickening up
their brave spirits, advanced gallantly toward the enemy.

(26) King Stephen, the mean while, was far from being idle, who also
ordered his Army into three several Battalions: the greatest part and best
King Stephens address to the Battle.
harnassed, whose horses he had sent away (perhaps also to deprive his men of
all hope of flight) he appointed to remain on foot with himself, and certain
of his Nobles, all under one Banner. The horsemen he disposed into two
several wings, the one Math. Paris. Simon Dunel.
commanded by Alaine Duke of Britain, Hugh By god Earl of Norfolk, Simon
Earl of Hampton, witthe two Earls of Mellent and Warren; and the other Wing
was governed by William de Ypres the Fleming. Then the King, because his voice
was not very pleasing or audible, commanded Baldwine Fitz-Gilbert, a man of
great honor and prowess, to utter his mind unto the Army, who standing
conveniently to be heard, spoke unto them as follows.

(27) All such as address themselves, and expose their lives, to the hazard of
battle, have Henry Hunt. Roger Houeden.
three things advisedly to be thought on: The equity of their cause; the
Number of the Forces; the sufficiency of their men. The first, lest they
endanger the state of their Souls; the next, lest they be ouerlaied with
multitude of their enemies; and the last, lest while they presume upon numbers,
they find them but faint-hearted, to their utter ruin. But in all these, we
know ourselves to be sufficiently furnished. The Justice of our cause is, for
observing the vow made before God unto our King, to withstand them that have
falsified their faith, even to the hazard of our lives. For our Number, in
Horsemen; it is not inferior to theirs; in Footmen we far exceed them: and for
sufficiency, what words can equal the noble valor of so many Earls, Lords,
Captains and Followers, trained up ever in the wars? But above all, the
incomparable prowess and presence of our King, will be in stead of thousands
to us. Since then this our Lord, and the Lords Anointed (to whom you vowed your
faith) is in field here amongst you; now perform this your vow unto God;
assured, that the more constant you prove in this your Princes service, and
faithful against those faithles perjured persons, the more shall your reward
be at the hands of God, and of him. Therefore be both courageous, and
confident; the rather, considering against whom you fight: even against Earl
Robert.
Robert the Base-borne General, whose utmost worth is well known; for he can
threaten much, and perform as little: a Lions tongue, and a Hares heart: his
fair speech is his credit, his foul actions Earl Ranulph.
are his shame. Chesters Earl what is he? a man audacious, but without all
judgment; heady to plot a treason, but still wavering in the pursuit of it:
ready to run into battle, but uncircumspect in any danger; aiming beyond
his reach, and conceiting things merely impossible; and therefore has he few
with him that know him, but leads only a rout of vagrant rascals: so there is
nothing in him to be feared; for whatsoever he begins like a Man, he ends it
like a Woman; unfortunate in all his undertakings; in his encounters still
either vanquished, or if he chance (rarely God wot) on a victory, it is with
far greater losses then the conquered. The Welshmen he brings, The Welsh.
are fitter for our contempt then fear: their rashness you may easily see, for
it is naked and unarmed, who wanting both military Art and Practice, run
headlong, like brutes upon the Hunters Iauelins. The rest as well Nobles (if
such they may be termed) as common Soldiers, are but straglers and
runnagates: of whom I would wish their number greater; for the more they be,
the more successesse will be their service. You therefore (great Peers and
Worthies) it now behooves (and indeed it much behooves you) to be very
mindful, both of your Valors, and Nobleness: this day advance your Prowes to
the height, and following the foresteps of your famous Ancestors, leave to your
posterities both a noble pattern, and an everlasting renown. Your daily
success of victories, should quicken your hearts this day to atchieue bravely,
and the continual miscarrying of our enemies, will quicken their heels to
fly as speedily: and (I dare say) they already repent of their coming hither,
and are by this time casting how to be gone, if the nature of the place would
give them leave. Then since it is impossible for them either to fight, or fly;
why come they hither, but even by Gods own appointment, to offer themselves,
and all their provisions into your hands? and here you see their horses, their
Armor, yea and their bodies, to rest at your pleasure: reach forth therefore
your warlicke hands to seize on that joyfully, which God has freely brought
you.

Which exhortation he had scarsly closed, when the noiseof Trumpets, and shout
of the enemies coming on, was Rhetoric enough to incite them The Battles
ioin^
to their tasks.

(28) A sore battle was fought, and with equal success a long time
maintained: for the band of Henry Hunt. Will. Part. Mat. Paris.
the disherited, whose particular wrongs whetted their courage, (and were
therefore politickly placed in the front) brake terribly into the Kings
Vauntgard; and contrariwise William of Ypres into the Welsh, until the
Fore-ward of the Kings horsemen Polydor.
began to shrink back, and (not without suspicion of treason) galloped
away; when presently the Earl of Chester encountered the Kings battle of
foot, in whose strength he reposed most trust; but it being ouerlaid with
Assailants, began also to faint and to fly, leaving the King enraged, both
Ger. Dor.
with his friends faint-heartednes, and with his foes success. A very strange
sight it was (says Paris) there to behold King Stephen, left almost alone in
the field yet no man daring to approach him, whiles grinding Mat. Paris. King
Stephens great valor.
his teeth, and foaming like a furious wild Boar, he drove back with his
battle-axe whole troops assailing him, and massacring the chiefest of them to
the eternal renown of his courage: If but a hundred such had there been with
him, a whole Army had never been able to surprise his person: yet as he was
single, he held out, til first his Battle-axe brake, and after that, his sword
Huntingdon. King Stephen taken prisoner.
also, with the force of his irresistable strokes, flew in pieces; and he now
weaponlesse, and (by an unknown, doubtless, an vn-noblehand) stricken down
Ypodig. Neustr. Malmesb. Nouel. lib. 2.
with a great stone thrown at him, was seized on by William of Alias de Kain^.
Huntingdon.
Kahames, a most stout Knight, and by An. Reg. 6.
Earl Roberts command, preserved from any violence to his person, was carried
prisoner unto Maud the Empress at Gloucester, and thence was sent bound unto
Bristow, where in the Castle he remained in safe Math. Paris.
custody.

(29) The Empress having thus got the Lion in her hold, triumphed not a little
in her own fortune, The Empress absolute governor of the Kingdom.
and now as sole Soueraign of Englands Monarchy, commanded all business,
elected her Counselors, and bestowed many dignities where she most favored.
Notwithstanding, that she altered not her style of Empress, or Queen of
Romans, may appear by this her Broad-Seale ensuing; under Charta Matild.
Imper^ricis.
which she granted the custody of the Tower of London unto Geffrey de
Mandeuil, and his Heirs, couenanting with him therein, that she would not make
peace with the Citizens of London, without the said Geffreis consent, because
they were his mortal enemies: but this Earl being afterward unawares
apprehended in the Kings Court at Saint Albans, could not be Geruas. Dorob.
released, till he had surrendered both the Tower of London, and other his
Castles to the King.

Upon these happy successes of the Empress, the Statesmen stood not any
longer for King Stephen, but their Faithes turning with his Fortunes, all of
them surrendered their allegiance unto her; the Kentish only excepted, where
Stephens Queen, and William de Huntingd. l. 8.
Ypres, maintained his quarrel to the uttermost of their powers.

THE TRVE SCVLPTVRE OF MAVD THE EMPRESSES BROAD SEAL, APPENDANT TO HER
CHARTERS.


(30) But the Empress conducted in State to Winchester, had the Regal Crown
of the Kingdom Geru. Dor. The Clergy approoues the Empresses title. Will.
Malms.
there delivered her; no man more forward then Henry the Bishop, and Brother of
Stephen, who upon the vowing to be ruled by his advise in affairs of Estate,
being then the Popes Legate, solemnly in a Synod of the Clergy, accursed all
such Malmesb. Nouel. lib. 2.
as withstood the Empressae, and blessed all them that assisted her interest:
but both he, and his friends forgot not to add that wonted traiterous clause
of their oath, so long to keep faith to her, as she kept her Covenants with
them: and so with applause of the people, she came to London, and after much
persuasion and mediation (for that the Citizens The Empress received into
London.
were very stiff against her) was received into the City with a royal
Procession.

(31) Neither was King Stephen thus defeated of England only, but Normandy
also cast off the yoke Normandy falls from King Stephen. Will. Paruus.
of subjection: for Geffrey of Aniou, husband of the Empress, having some
intelligence of this achieved victory, induced the Normans to incline unto
him, by publishing the captiuation of Stephen, unable now to relieve them, or
himself; and David King of Scotland for his part was not behind, to set
forward the claim of Lady Maud, assuming in her behalf the County of
Northumberland.

(32) Maud thus established, all now esteemed her as Fortunes dear darling,
and beheld her as their only rising sun; the Prison walls ouershadowing the
Presence, feature, and favors of the now dejected unfortunate Stephen, whose
sorrowful wife Queen Maud, incessantly solicited the Ger. Dor.
Empress in her husbands behalf, desiring his liberty, but not his Crown,
which he was now contented Stephen desires liberty, and not the Crown.
to let her enjoy; and thereunto offered for pledges many great persons, who
protested for him to the Empress, that he thenceforth would deuote himself
unto God, and either become a Monk or a Pilgrim: Henry of Winchester also
became a Ypodig. Neustr. King Stephen would be a Monk or Pilgrim.
suitor unto her in the behalf of his Nephew Eustace, King Stephens son,
that the Bo^gne and Mortaine.
Counties belonging before to the Father, might be conferred upon the son.

(33) The Londoners likewise having received her into the City as their Lady,
thought now (as most do with new Princes) they might have what they would
ask, and became her importunate Suppliants, that the over hard laws imposed
by her Father, might now be remitted, and those of King The Empress not facile
to grant suites.
Edward might wholly be in force. But she rejected all these Petitioners, out
of pride, say some; but it may seem rather of policy, holding it safest, to
passeaffaires of importance, not upon entreaty, but by due advice, and to
govern the subject with a severe austerenes, rather then an indulgent lenity.
But this too regular strictnes, which might have done well in a settled
government, in this her yet Her stiffness incommodious.
green, and vnsecured estate, proved not so behouefull. For first, Queen King
Stephens wife.
Maud sent to her son Eustace, that their suites must be obtained only by
war; willing him to make strong his party by the assistance of the Kentish:
the Nobles The Nobles offended, fall off from her. Malmes. Nouel. lib. 2.
likewise, Stephens undertakers, repined, that they were so slightly regarded,
or rather rejected: and the Londoners also storming at the repulse of their
desires, devised how they might take the Empress The Londoners conspire
against her. Nic. Trivet.
their Prisoner, and so redeem King Stephen, to whom their affections were ever
firm: but she hearing of their conspiracy, fled secretly in the night, and
took into Oxford, which in all her difficulties she ever found true unto her,
out of their love, both to her cause, and to her Father; and threatening due
revenge for her late wrongs, wrought it upon the Nobles in prison, and (more
then was due or decent) upon Stephen himself, whom she commanded to be laden
with Irons, and to be abridged of all princely services. Roger Houeden.


(34) Winchesters high mind not brooking the Empresses denial of his suite, in
behalf of his Nephew Ger. Dor.
Eustace, upon secret conferences with Queen Mand, by her lamentable
entreaties, began to melt in his affection toward the distressed King his
brother; and Malmesb. Nouel. libro secund^.
in fine, resolving to try the uttermost for him, absolved all those whom
before he had excommunicated, Henry of Winchester recalls his Excommunication.
pretending, that the Barons had all kept faith with her, but she had not kept
touch with them; and thinking this a fit time to work for his brother,
solicited the discontented Londoners in his behalf, and stored the Castles of
Waltham, Farnham, and Winchester with Munition and men; mean while the
Empress came speedily to Gloucester, to confer with Milo her chiefest
friend, and presently again returning to Oxford ( Idem loco citato.
which she chose for her Court and chief place of abode) was there maintained
only The Empress maintained at Milo his charges.
at his charge, not having one days diet, or provision of her own; to requite
which fidelity, and other noble services, she there created him Earl of
Hereford.

(35) Her forces recollected, and thither assembled, she went forthwith to the
City of Winchester, accompanied with David King of Scotland her uncle, Earl
Robert her brother, and many other Nobles; where sending for the Bishop being
then in the City (whose aid she could hardly spare, and therefore was desirous
of his reconcilement) though he mistrusted some peril, yet not daring to send
a denial, returned the Messenger with this equivocal answer, that he would
with all speed address himself, as if he had The Bishop of Winchester
equiuocateth.
meant to follow them: so forthwith issuing secretly out of the City, did
indeed address himself to * Ego parab^ me. Will Malmsb.
work her ruin: for, sending for Queen Maude her son Eustace, the
Londoners, and William Ypres, (afterward created Earl of Kent) made strong
his part, himself and friends abiding in the City, whiles the Empress and her
Nobles defensed themselves in the Castle, not aduenturing to go forth amongst
Will. Malmes. Geruas. Dorob.
so many their mortal enemies: and soon after, to work his wrathful will,
knowing the Citizens to be more affected to the Empress then to him,
commanded the said City to be set on fire, where in, the He fires Winchester.
Monastery of Nuns, above twenty Churches, Alias The Covent at Hyde. Malmesb.
the Covent of S. Grimbald, and the better part of the City, were consumed to
ashes.

(36) Seven weeks thus spent, in this counter-siege Ger. Dorob. The Bishop of
Winchester entrappeth the Empress.
of the City and Castle, the Bishop, to deceive the Empress, commanded
peace to be proclaimed, and the Gates to be set open toward evening. The
Empress then, who had endured such troubles and so long a restraint, greatly
desired to change her lodging, and to recreat her perplexed spirits in some
other place; so taking horse, accompanied with her brother, Reinold Earl of
Cornwall, her servants, and many others her friends, besides Earl Robert, who
followed behind with a troop of Nobles and Knights; presently at the
Bishops commandment, Malmsb. lib. 2.
she was pursued by his Soldiers, and many of her train wounded and taken
prisoners; the Empress by good providence escaped into the Castle of
Lutegareshall, and thence to the Castle Diuize: where understanding that she
was still in hazard to be surprised, she was contented, (as what will not
necessity endure, and a woman's wit devise?) to be laid in a coffine bound
fast with cords; and so, as if it had been her Corse, carried in a horselitter
The Empress carried as a dead Corse. Will. Walsingham. Ypodigm. Neustr.
to the City of Gloucester: in which bonds of her own distress, she had good
occasion to remember the chains of King Stephens captivity. To such
extremities were these two Princes at the self same time subject, that whiles
they turmoiled for spacious Kingdoms, brought themselves to the very extreme
wants, of air, and of elbow-roome; but with such dalliance does Fortune (we
see) oftentimes follow her game, that she makes even Monarchs the Balls of
her play, and tosseth them lastly into the Hazard, whence hardly they escape
with safety of life. Yet this was not the worst; for Earl Robert her brother,
whilst he was busier in providing for her safety, then for his own, was
taken by his pursuers at Stoubreg Malmes. Ger. Dor.
with others; brought back to Winchester, and there presented by the Bishop
unto Queen Maud, King Stephens wife, who committed him to the custody of
William Ypres, and he for more safety to Gloucester; but others taking
sanctuary in the Nuns Monastery Earl Robert taken.
of Warwell were burned together with the place: Thus then the King on the one
side, and the Malmes. lib. 2.
Earl on the other, were kept in safe custody; but the Queen laboring for
the Kings release, and the Countess for the Earls, many Articles were
propounded, and many messengers employed: at length, this was thought fittest,
that Stephen should be restored to his kingdom, and Robert under him to have
the whole government of the Land; so that both of them should now jointly
uphold that, which they (the two Ringleaders) by opposition had cast down.
But Earl Robert as he was no whit dejected in mind, with any frown of Fortune
whatsoever, so reserved he his fidelity to the Empress unstained, and unmoved
either with fear or fair inticements, still refusing to capitulate for his
freedom, but to Will. Malmes.
his Sisters liking; who likewise bare so brave a mind, that were her state
never so weak, she would not consent nor give the least ear to any
composition for the Crown.

(37) Then was enmity increased, the Kingdom Will. Malmsb. An. D. 1142. The
King and Earl Robert redeem each other out of prison. Roger Houeden.
divided, and the peoples hatred kindled in mainetaining the factions, all
fore-running the ruin of the Land: Forthese two Chieftaines wearied with
irksomnes of irons, and hard imprisonment, made exchange the one for the other,
without any farther mention of peace, and so studied not only to renew their
former designs, but to increase the lands misery by more eagre wars.
Stephen in England wrought the people for him, and Robert Malmesb.
taking pledges Math. Paris.
of the Nobles to attend and guard the Empress at Oxford till his return,
went into Normandy to solicit The wars renewed.
Geffrey her husband for her defense. But the Earl having troubles with his
own Nobility, and the Normans scarsly brought to any subjection, thought it
not convenient by his own absence for a state in hope, to hazard that in hand;
and therefore sent with Robert some strength of Arms, and with them his young
son Prince Henry into England.

(38) The Empress in his absence, had well fortified The Empress besieged in
Oxford. Geruas. Dorob.
her self in Oxford, whom Stephen (using the benefit of Roberts absence)
followed with an eagre pursuit, and wanne the Suburbs even unto the City
gates; then girt he the Empress with so strait a siege, (meaning never to
give over, till he had now made her sure in his possession) that for two
months whatsoever Strength or Stratageme could perform in assault or
defense, was there put in practice, till at length great penury enforced to
think of a Nic. Trivet.
surrender: but she, a woman (whose sex has often Will. Neub.
deceived wise men) resolved once again to ouerreach Higden.
her foe by wit, whom she could not by force: whereto the time did fit her
wishes; for being a winter, sharp above measure, the River Thamisis that
runs by the City walls, was then congealed with a Walsingh. Ypodig.
strong crusted Ice, and besides a great snow did then Ger. Dor.
continue, and had covered the ground. Maud upon these advantages, put in
practice a most dangerous attempt: for clothing herself, and some Math. Paris
She escapes by a wile.
choice of her company, in white linen garments, to deceive the eyes of the
Sentinells, issued secretly by night out of a posterne-gate, and passing the
frozen Will. Malmsb. Simon Dun.
River, ran on foot, through ice, and snow, ditches, and valleys, for five
miles, even to Abingdon, the falling snow still beating in their faces; and
there taking horse, the same night got to the Castle of Wallingford, Ypodig.
Neustr. Geru. Dorob.
to the great joy, and also admiration, of all that were therein.

(39) In the mean while, Earl Robert, with Prince Henry, were arrived in
England at Warrhame Prince Henry arriueth. Geruasius.
haven, and presently besieged the Castle there, (so to withdraw the King from
siege of his sister;) but hearing of the happy escape of the Empress, came
with young Henry unto his mother, whose sight made her forget the grief and
sorrows that she had An. D. 1143.
long endured. Then was Oxford upon conditions yielded to the King; and Wilton
fired by the bastard An. D. 1144
Earl Robert: The Tower of London, with the Castles of Walden, Pleises, and
Lincoln, yielded to Stephen; An. D. 1145. Math. Paris.
the Castles of Warham, and Portland, yielded to Robert: The Earls of Chester,
and Essex, surprised by the King; William Martell the great favorite, taken
and imprisoned by the Earl. Thus sundry An. D. 1146.
years passing with variable successes to and fro, and every year heaping on
each side, fresh calamities, to the great ruin of the whole land; the
Empress, even The Empress and the Prince return to Normandy. An. D. 1147.
wearied with those wars and vncertaineties of success, went into Normandy,
choosing rather to be under the protection of her husband in peace, then to
reign in England perplexed with troubles: and to the same end she had not long
before, sent her young Ger. Dorobor.
son Henry to his father, who desired to have him rather heir of a Dukedom
with safety, then of a Crown with daily hazard.

(40) Stephen, that by a fresh surprizall of Randall Kings durst not enter
Lincoln before King Stephen.
Earl of Chester had got Lincoln, and entering thereinto (which no King before
him durst do, for that certain wizards had prophesied euilluck unto such) at
christmas did there wear the Regal Crown on Geruasius.
his head, and after the Empresses departure, caused the Barons of England, to
swear allegiance unto Prince Eustace his son; by which two complements, he
supposed all had been sure on his side; and the rather, for that the most
faithful, puissant, and euer-renowned Earls, Robert of Gloucester, and Earl
Robert and Earl Milo die.
Milo of Hereford the two great and glorious pillars, which had by many
Conquests supported their Anioueians cause, were now conquered by death; and
the rest of the Nobles, applying themselves to the Times, kept themselves quiet
in the absence of these An. D. 1148. Prince Henry returns into England.
Competitors; all which gave no little assurance unto Stephens estate.

(41) But Henry Fitz-Empresse, grown now from a Child, thought it best a while
to leave Mercury, An. D. 1149 Ger. Dor.
(for it is said he was Bookish) and to follow Mars; so knowing his presence
would prefer much his purposes (for men would be loath to hazard all for one,
who himself would neglect all) hasted again into England, with an Army of
valiant and choice Soldiers; to whom joined the discontented Earl of Chester,
Roger the son of Miles deceased, with many more Knights and Gallants of the
English: he therefore took into the North, and met with David his cosen, King
of Scotland, of whom Roger Houeden. Ger. Dor.
he was most honorably received, and solemnly sacred with the Military
honor of Knighthood: and thence forward sought all occasions to provoke both
King Stephen, and his son Eustace against him: and having settled some courses
with certain Peers for the pursuit of his designs in England, he returned
into Normandy to compose and set forward some other businesses, which might be
available for these Prince Henry returns into Normandy.
his ends.

(42) Where long he stayed not, but that Geffrey his Father departed this life,
and left him his Heir An. D. 1150
both of Aniou and Normandy; and the year following, he matched in marriage
with Eleanor Duchess Math. Paris.
of Guien and Aquitane, lately divorced from Henry Hunt.
Lodowicke King of France for consanguinity, and adultery (says Paris) after
she had borne him two daughters; Lodowicke fearing issue-male by this marriage
to the disheriting of his said daughters, Prince Henry marieth Eleanor,
divorced by K. Jews*
greatly impugned Duke Henry; and Stephen suspecting his greatness, now being
Duke of Normandy, Aniou, Aquitane, and Guien, both of them sought each way to
impeach his peace: Lodowicke, with Prince An. D. 1151
Eustace, in the parts beyond seas, and Stephen in England, to make sure his
succession, sought to inuest the said Prince Eustace with the English Diadem;
both The Archbishop of Canterbury refuses to consecrate Eustace King. Ger.
(...) Dorob. An. D. 1152. Henry. Hunt.
to prevent, and utterly deprive Henry Fitz-Empresse for ever: for calling a
Counsel at London, King Stephen commanded Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury
to consecrate Prince Eustace for their King; which he refused to do, and that
by commandment from the Pope (whose holy See can deal on both sides, as makes
most for their advantage) alleging Geruasius.
now, that his Father was an usurper, and perjured Intruder: whereupon the
honest Archbishop fled into Normandy, and the King seized upon al his
possessions. It may seem, that one cause of the Popes inclining to young
Henry's title, was to stre^gthen him against his enemy King Lewis of France,
who Idem.
had highly offended his Holiness, for casting the Popes Bulls (whereby he
required the fruits of Vacancies of all Cathedral Churches in France) into the
fire, K. Jews casts the Popes Bulls into fire.
saying, he had rather the Popes Bulls should rest in the fire, then his own
soul should frse in hell.

(43) King Stephen thus defeated of his purpose, and seeing his Title
questioned by the Church, who had before approved it, resolved to make it good
by the sword: for winning the Castle of Forte Newbery.
Muby, fortified Malmesbury, and laid a strait siege unto Wallingford; against
which, he erected the Castle Cranmerse, to stop the passages of their
relief, or coming An. D. 1153.
forth. But Henry after he had calmed the boisterous storms of war, in the
parts beyond Henry Fitz-Empresse comes again into England.
the seas, came over into England well appointed, unto whom also resorted many
of the Nobility, who yielded up themselves, and above thirty strong Castles to
the young Duke; now well furnished, hasted to raise the siege of Wallingford,
and there undertook a great enterprice; for he incircled the Bestegers with a
great and deep Trench, whereby he kept them from relief, as they did keep
the Besieged.

(44) Stephen following hastily to succor his men, (though with the less
edge, for that he never sped Ger. Dorob. cap. 14 King Stephen and Fitz-Empresse
well in any assault of that Castle) pitched down his Tents, even near his
enemy; and ready on both ready to join battle. Henry Hunt.
sides to give battle: the Winter storms were suddenly so troublesome, that
nothing could be done; but those somewhat ouerblowne, and the Armies scarce
three furlongs asunder; as King Stephen was busied in disposing of his host,
and giving direction for order of the battle, his horse under him rising with
his fore-feet, fell flat upon the earth, not without danger to his Rider; and
thus did he Unlucky presages to K. Stephen.
thrice ere he left; which thing his Nobles secretly muttering, interpreted for
an unlucky presage: when William Earl of Arundell, a bold and eloquent man,
went to him and advised him to a peace; affirming the title of Duke Henry to be
just; that the Nobility on both parts there present, were nearly linked in
Alliances and Blood, and how these stood affected, was very doubtful; yea,
that Brethren were there assembled, the one against the other, whereof must
needs follow an unnatural war betwixt them, and of dangerous consequence,
even to him that conquested. With these and the like allegations at last
Stephen began to bend, and a parley f^ peace was signified unto the Duke.
Henry already warm for the battle, and his thoughts fixed on nothing less A
Parley betwixt K. Stephen and Fitz-Empresse.
then peace, could hardly moderate his youthful affections; yet at his friends
importunity, he yielded to confer with King Stephen.

(45) The place for conference was so appointed; Ger^. Dorobor.
that the river Thamesis parted the presence of these two Princes; so that from
either bank they saluted each others, and after a long conference, agreeing on
a truce, and upon fair terms of amity departed, A truce concluded. Math.
Paris.
commanding all weapons and attempts of war to be laid aside.

(46) But Eustace, who hitherro had attended Fortune for the Crown, and now
hopeless to have Eustace K. Stephens son like^ not the truce.
as his Fathers Successor, was greatly displeased with this new molded
friendship, and in a fury departed the field, purposing to raise himself by
his own means; and coming to Bury, urged the Monks John Textor.
of Saint Edmunds for money, to set forward his heady designs: But the wiser
amongst them unwilling to be wagers of new wars (which though ill for all
sorts, yet proved ever worst to the Clergy men's possessions) denied his
request; wherewith enraged, he commanded his men to carry their Polycbr.
corn and other provision into his own Castle, situated hard by. But being
set at dinner, we read of him (says mine Author) that even the very first
bit Ger. Dorob. Prince Eustace dies.
that he put in his mouth, drove him into a frenzy, whereof shortly after he
died; whose body was interred at Feuersham in Kent.

(47) The death of Prince Eustace so much aduantaged Duke Henry, that thereupon
(the truce in likelihood expiring) many fell off unto him, and many Castles
were delivered, as Bertwell, Reading, Warwick, Stamford, and others; whereat
Stephen was not a little displeased, and thinking to entrappe the young
venturous Duke, with a strong Army followed him unto Wallingford: But God
himself looking Polydor.
down from heaven (says Matthew of S. Albans) made there an end of those long
calamities, by stirring the minds Math. Paris.
of chief men in the land to labor for peace: such was Theobald Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Henry Bishop of Winchester, who having troubled the realm
The King and Fitz-Empresse accorded.
with fire and sword, moved now to repentance, wrought so effectually with his
brother, that he inclined unto a wished peace, contented to adopt the Duke for
his Son and Successor; and so coming both together to Oxford (a blessed sight
to so distressed and distracted a Kingdom;) there did all the Geruas^.
Nobles do fealty to him, as to the undoubted Heir of the land; and the Duke
to acknowledge this as a favor, yielded him the honor of a Father, and the
roialtie of all Kingly power during his life.

(48) Notwithstanding, the clear Sunneshine of these fair days, was somewhat
darkened with a An. D. 1154 Prince Henry in danger by treachery.
cloud of treachery, and lewd attempts of the Flemings; who envying Englands
peace, upon Barham Downs, intended to surprise Prince Henry in his return
from Dover, and presence of King Stephen In this conspiracy was William the
Kings son, though but young, who himself meaning to have one cast at the
Crown, instantly before it should have been effected, was through the
wantonness of his horse cast to the ground, and with the fall brake his leg;
to whose assistance, whiles every one gathered and lamented, Henry upon secret
notice of the treason hasted unto Canterbury, and thence to London, and Prince
Henry goes into Normandy. King Stephen dies.
soon after over the seas into Normandy.

(49) And Stephen now after he had reigned eighteen years, ten months, and
odd days, departed this life at Dover, in the Monastery of the Monks, of an
Iliacke passion, mixed with his old disease the Emrods, the twenty five of
October, and year of Paris. Book of S. Albanes.
Christ's Nativity, 1154. A most worthy Soldier, says Paris and (in a word)
one who wanted nothing but a just title to have made him an excellent King; in
his ordinary deportment very devout; the fruits whereof we^ showed in erecting
with sufficient endowments, ^he Abbeyes of Cogshall in Essex, of Furnesse in
Lancashire, the houses of Nuns at Carew, and Higham, an Hospital at York,
and the Monastery of Feuersham in Kent, where his Queen, his son, and
lastly, himself were enterred: but since, his body for the gain of the lead,
wherein it John Stow.
was coffined, was cast into the river. So uncertain is man (yea greatest
Princes) of any rest in this world, even after burial; and restless may their
bodies be also (who for filthy lucre) thus envy to the dead, the quiet of
their graves.

His Wife.
(50) Maud, the Wife of King Stephen, was the daughter of Eustace Earl of
Bulloigne, the brother of Godfrey, and Baldwin Kings of Jerusalem: her Mother
was Mary, sister to Maud Queen of England, Ger. Do^.
wife of King Henry, her husbands Predecessor. She was crowned at Westminster
upon Sunday, being Easter Day, and the two and twenty of March, in the first
year of her husbands reign, and of Grace, 1136. and being Queen fifteen
years, she died at Heningham Castle in Essex, the third of May, and year of
Christ, 1151. and was buried in his Monastery at Feuersham in Kent.

His Issue.
(51) Baldwin, the eldest son of King Stephen and Queen Maud (bearing the
name of King Baldwin his uncle) was born in the time of the reign of K. Henry
his fathers uncle; and died in his infancy, during the reign of the same King.
He was buried at London in the Church of the Priorie of the Trinity within
Algate, which was a house of black The first Canon Regular in England was of
this place Ann. (...). and the Prior thereof was Alderman of London. Stowes,
Survey.
Canons of the Augustinian order, founded by Q. Maud, the first wife of the
foresaid King Henry the first.

(52) Eustace the second son of King Stephen, and of Queen Maud his wife,
being the heir apparent to them both; when his Father was King, was created
Earl of Bolloigne, which dignity was the inheritance of his mother. He
married Constance sister of Lewis the seventh King of France, daughter of King
Lewis the Gross: who afterward was remarried to Raimond the third, Earl of
Tholouze: for Eustace died before her without Issue by her, the tenth day of
August, in the eighteenth year of his Fathers reign, and of Grace, 1152. He
was buried by his mother in his Fathers Monastery at Feuersham in Kent.

(53) William, the third and youngest son of King Stephen and Queen Maud,
married Isabell daughter and heir of William Warren, the third Earl of Surrey,
with whom he had that Earldom; he was in his Fathers life time Earl of
Surrey, Lord of Norwich and Peuensey in England, Earl of Mortayne, and Lord
Eagle of Normandy. After his fathers death, King Henry the second made him
Knight, resumed those things that he held of the Crown, restored him to all
that his Father held before he was King. And so he was Earl of Bolloigne,
Surrey, and Mortaine, and being with him in his journey to Tholouze, died
without issue, in his return home-Ward, in the Month of October, the seventh
of King Henry's reign, and of Christ Jesus, 1160.

(54) Maud, the eldest daughter of King Stephen and Queen Maud, was borne
before her father was King, in the reign of King Henry the first, her uncle;
Stowes Survey. p. 105.
in whose time also she deceased, being but yongue, (though some report she
was wife to the Earl of Millen) and was enterred at London, with her brother
Baldwin, in the Priorie of the Trinity aforesaid, then commonly called
Christs-Church, and now lately named the Dukes Place within Algate.

(55) Marie, the younger daughter of King Stephen and Queen Maude, was a Nun,
and Abbess of the Nunnerie at Rumsey in Hampshire; notwithstanding, when her
brother William, Earl of Bolloigne, was deceased without issue, she was
secretly taken from thence, and married to Matthew the younger, son of Terry
of Alsat, and brother of Philip Earl of Flanders, who in her right was Earl
of Bolloigne. She was his wife ten years, and was then divorced from him, by
the sentence of the Pope, and enforced to return to her Monastery, having had
issue by him two daughters, which were I Would and Maude, allowed by the censure of
the Church to be legitimate. Lady I Would, the elder, was married to Raymond of
Damp-Martine, in her right Earl of Bolloigne; and Maude, the younger, to Henry
Duke of Lorraine. His Natural Issue.


(56) William, the Natural son of King Stephen, is mistaken of some to be
the same William, that was Earl of Bolloigne. Others, who know that William
Earl of Bolloigne was lawfully borne, do think that his father had no other
son named William but him; wherein let William Earl of Bolloigne, the lawful
son of King Stephen, be himself a lawful witness of the truth, who having
best cause to know it, does best prove it,; and in an ancient Charter of his,
being written in those days, and extant in these, does name him for a
witness, and calls him his Brother.

(57) Geruais, another Natural son of King Stephen, begotten on a
gentlewoman named Dameta, and borne in Normandy, was brought into England by
his father, the fifth year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 1140. He was the same
year, by his fathers means, made Abbat of Westminster, and so continued for
the space of twenty years: he deceased there the twenty sixth of August, in
the sixth year of the reign of King Henry the second, the year of Grace
1160. and lies buried in the South part of the cloister, within the said
Monastery, under a flat stone of black marble, which is remaining there until
this day.

HENRY THE SECOND, DVKE OF Monarch 43.
Henry second
NORMANDY, GVYEN AND AQVITAINE, THE FORTY THIRD MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN;
HIS REIGN, ACTS AND ISSVE. CHAPTER VI.


HEnry of that name the second, by the double interest of descent and adoption
(as you have heard) succeeded in the Kingdom of England, whose Pedigree,
(which Matthew Paris extends Ad A. D. 1135.
by the mothers side, in a right line up to Noah) and former fortunes, having
already been touched; his counsels, acts, and other affairs of greatest
importance, after the death of King Stephen come now to be handled.

(2) He came not to the Crown unexpected, nor undesired; The great expectation
of King Henry.
for the opinion of the man, and hope conceived of his future government, had
the force to hold England in good obedience without the presence Math. Paris.
Henry Hunt.
of a King, about six weeks, whose entrance like that of the Soul into the
Body, did quicken, and enspirite the Realm, as then (in the person of England)
this clozing verse, or Epiphoneme spoke: Henry Hunt.
Spirituses, caro sum: te nunc intrante reuixi.
Thou, Soul; I Body am: by thee to life I came.
Neither did his presence diminish the expectations raised, but was saluted
King with general acclamations, His access and Coronation. Ypodig. Neustr.
Mah. Paris.
and with no less joy at Westminster by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury,
anointed and crowned: the sum of whose first courses for settling his State
was this.

(3) Sundry Castles (nests of Rebels) he flatteth to the earth, some others
he fortifies or resumes at His first actions. Mat. Paras.
his pleasure; chiefly such estates, as had been alienated from the Crown, as
the hire and unjust reward of those who withstood his claim. Others write,
that he promiscuously took all such lands Lib. Monast. S. Albeni.
into his own possession, as were by Jurors found upon oath to have belonged
at any time unto the Polyd. Vir. lib. 13.
Crown. Some Earls unduly created, he reduces to private condition, and
purges the Realm from Ps^do-Comites, says Mat. Paris.
sorrine Soldiers; chiefly from the Flemings, whose mercenary swarms most
pestred the same, and had most insested him. And because Government is the
Soul of State, and Wisdom the Soul of Government, he chooses to himself a
Body of Counsel out of the most eminent persons of both sorts: such was
Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury; and for that self consideration, he laid
the Chancellorship of England upon Thomas Becket, and held in special favor
John of Oxenford, with sundry other Roger Houeden.
Prelates of chiefest note: of the Laity, he had Robert Earl of Leicester,
chief Iusticiar of England, Richard de Luci, Iocelin de Bailull, Alan de
Neuile Roger. Houed.
and others: but for a Cabanet-Counsellour at all times, he had his own
mother, Matildis the Empress, one of the most sage and experienced Ladies of
the World. Thus then furnished, and Math. Paris. ad A. D. 1155.
assembling a Counsel at Wallingford, he as well for his own securing, as for
the assurance of his Ger. Dorob.
Children, swears the Realm to the succession of his sons William and
Henry, the one being in remainder to the other.

(4) But quiet consultation did not take up the most of his time, even in the
days of these Sun-shining beginnings: for the reign of Stephen, a most gentle
Prince (who thought, out of the necessity of his Lib. Monast. S. Al.
own estate, that it was not safe for him to be severe) having given way for
many of the mighty, to maintain sundry insolences; these now feeling a
restraint, began not a little to repine: but Hugh de Mortimer, wanton with
greatness, and the most arrogant man alive, stuffed his Castles of Gloucester,
Math. Paris.
Wigmore, and Powel in hist. Camb. p. 222. mistakes a Bridge for a Castle. In
old Records indeed Bridge-North, is called Bruge, which caused that error.
Bridgenorth with rebellious Garrisons; which Henry notwithstanding reduced to
subjection, though in the siege of the last-named, not without imminent peril
of his person, had not Hubert de S. Clare, cast himself between death and the
King, taking the arrow into his own bosom to preserve his Sovereigns life.
It bound Tiberius to Seianus most of all, when a part of the banqueting Cave in
which they were, suddenly falling, Powel writes that it was a Welsh man, who
shot the arrow at the King, ibid.
Seianus was found to have borne the ruin from the Emperor, with the peril
of his life: but Seianus suruiued that adventure, which our Senclere did not,
save only in the better renown thereof, which deserves to be immortal,
being an Act of piety, worthy of a Statue, with Codrus, Curtius, Manlius, or
whosoever else have willingly sacrificed themselves for their Country, or for
the Father of their Country, the King.

(5) Henry thus having in some sort settled England, hastes into France to
King Lewis in the first year of his reign, and there did homage unto Roger
Houed. Annal. p. 2.
him for Normandy, Aquitane, Angiou, Main and Tourain, which partly were his
patrimony, and partly the inheritance of Elianor his wife.

(6) His domesticke enemies being subdued or appeased, he put his brother
Geffrey by force to Math. Paris ad an. Dom. 1561.
a pension, the sum whereof (if it be any thing to the purpose to know) was
1000. l. English, and 2000. l. Aniou by year, wringing out of his possession
all such territories, as by their Fathers last Will Polyd. Uirg. in H. 2.
and Testament, were bequeathed to him in France. But Geffrey did not long
enjoy the said annuity, or his brothers friendship: for in the third year,
death brought a discharge, and Henry was disburdened of those paiments. For his
violence in taking away those lands, King Henry might allege he was eldest
brother: but that allegation might be avoided with his own consent, which
once he gave: but the great Elixar, called Reason of State, (though falsely so
called, unless it be seasoned with Justice, and Religion) has so
transmutatiue a faculty, as to make Copper seem Gold, right wrong, and wrong
right; yea, when all Pleas fail, it will stand for good, while there are
forces to support it.

(7) This accord between the two brethren, being thus (howsoever) established,
the King repaires into England, and at Chester enters amity with Malcolme King
of Scots, on such terms, as his Grandfather Rog. Houed. fol. 281, page 2.
Annal. par. (...).
had done, yet Saluis omnibus dignitatibus suis, saving to himself all his
dignities: and the said Malcolme restored to Henry the City of Karleol,
Newcastle Math. Paris. Ypodig. Neustri. Hector Boethius. lib. 13. C. 1. says it
was at London.
upon Tyne, etc. and Henry restored to him the Earldom of Huntington in
England. And, so justly dreadful did the growing puissance of this young
Monarch appear to his greatest enemies, that Hugh Bigod Earl of Norfolk, who
had potent means to do mischief, rendered his Castle to be at his disposal.

(8) The Welsh notwithstanding forsook not themselves, but did some memorable
matters under conduct of the valiant Prince Owen against the English, in
defense of North Wales, and their Countries liberty, to the loss of the
English, and Hist. of Camb.
extreme danger of the Kings own person, whose Standard royal was cowardly
abandoned, and John Stow.
the King reported to be slain: for which Henry de Essex, the Kings
Standard Bearer at that conflict, was afterward accused by Robert de Montford
his near Kinsman, and in single battle within lists was vanquished at
Reading, where the said Henry de Essex was shorn a Monk, and died. Matthew
Paris Math. Paris.
relates the whole voyage of King Henry summarily thus: That Henry prepared a
very great Army against the Welsh, with full purpose to ouercom them both by
land and sea; that he cut up the woods and forests, and laid open a way; that
he recovered the Castle of Ruthlan and other fortresses taken from his
Ancestors; that he repaired the Castle of Basingwerke, and that having brought
the Welsh to his will, he returned with triumph into England.

(9) After this, himself and his wife Queen Elienor being openly crowned
upon Christmas day, ( Roger Houeden.
some say Easter day) at the City of Worcester; Math. Paris. Ypodigm. Neustr.
they both at the Offertorie laid their Diademes upon the high Altar, vowing
never to wear them after; Rog. Houed.
this being now the third time in which at three several places, Westminster,
Lincoln, and Worcester, he Guliel. Tyr. Houeden.
had been crowned. This devout act of his, did flow perhaps out of some such
speculation as that of Canutus, who thought none truly worthy the name of King,
but God alone; or that, upon which Godfrey of Buillion, refused to wear a
crown of gold in Jerusalem, where our Lord and Savior had been crowned with
thorns. For this King had at times the pangs and symptoms of mortification and
piety, and did herein acknowledge the only giver and taker-away of kingdoms
God-almighty; putting himself and Realm, under the protection of that
Majesty of whom he held paramount; and professing (as it were) that from
thencefoorth he would direct his actions to the glory of his omnipotent
Master, which is indeed the only final cause of all true monarchy.

(10) Not long after, having established his affairs in England, he crossed the
Seas into Normandy: An. D. 1158. Mah. Paris ab A. D. 1158. vsque ad A. D. 1163.
where successively sundry matters of importance fell out: as the seizure of
the City of Nants in Britain after his brother Geffreis death; his journey to
Paris, being invited thither by Lewis and his wife the Queen; the
unprofitable siege of Tholouze laid by King Henry, where Malcolme King of
Scots was Rog Houed.
in company with him; the unripe marriage of his son Henry to Margaret the
French Kings daughter, whom Thomas Becket then Lord Chancellor had formerlie
conducted with very great State from Paris, by consent of parents for that
purpose; the offense taken at those spousals by Lewis, for that the children
were but infants, and that himself was a looser thereby; the war hereupon
attempted by Lewis, fortifying Cha^mount, which (the French having quit the
Field by flight) King Henry recovered with advantage; the Armies of both these
great Kings, being afterward at point (as it were) to join, dispersed upon
reconciliation of the two Kings, by reason of a marriage concluded upon,
between Richard, King Henry's second son, and Alice the French Kings daughter*
All which and some other, not drawing with them any extraordinary sequel, nor
offording much matter for civil document, must not preponderate the handling
of things more rare and considerable.

(11) For after these accidents, began the famous An. D. 1163.
controversies between the King and his Archbishop Becket, a man of an
invincible stomach The great contention between the King and Becket Archbish.
of Canterbury.
and resolution in his life, and after death reputed by some for a great Saint
or Martyr; as is likewise noted of Henry, Mat. Paris, and alis. Leg end. aur.
in vita Tho.
that he was the most politic, martial, rich, and honored Prince of all his
time. This Prelate by birth a Londoner, (though his mother, a Sarazen, Polydor.
l. 13. but M. Fox denies it.
say some) by profession a Gal. Wigornie^sis says he was Doctor Oxoniensis.
Ciuilian, was by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, both made his
Archdeacon, and also placed about the person of Duke Henry, who being now
King; advanced him in the very first year of his reign to be Lord
Chancellor of England, in which high honor he carried himself like another
King, and afterward upon Nubrigensis, l 2. c. 16. vt conregnare videretur.
Geruasius ad An. 1154. Regis Rector and quasi Magister.
the death of Theobald, though the Fox in Acts. p 264.
Monks objected against Becket, that neither a Courtier nor a Soldier (as
Nubrig. l 2. c. 16. Houcden.
he had been both) were fit to succeed in so high and sacred a function, yet
the King gave him that Arch-bishopricke, partly in reward, and partly in
further hope of his ready and faithful service. Which to be true, a Legender
of his Miracles can best relate. Nonnullis tamen etc. Many (says he) judged
his promotion not Chron. de Passione and mirac. beati Th. MS. Fox. p. 287.
Canonical, because it was procured more by the importunity of the King, then
by the voices of Clergy, or People; and it was noted as presumption and
indiscretion in him, to take upon him to guide the Stern, who was scarce fit
to handle an Oar, and that being skild only in worldly affairs, he did not
tremble to ascend unto that sacred top of so great dignity. Whereto agrees
the reports of two learned Monks who then lived, (for such Authors only we
will herein follow, as shall be impartial) Gal. Nubrig. l. 2. c. 16. Math.
Par ^ad An. 1163. permissione, Regia, etc.
one of which testifies, that the Pope about that time calling a Council at
Tours (and the King giving License to his Archbishops and Bishops to go
thither) Becket secretly surrendered his Arch-bishopricke, which he had
received from the Kings hand, into the Popes hands. The Nubrig. per operam,
manu^que Regiam. Geru. Dorob.
other says, Becket himself confessed, that, not Canonical Election did call
him, but public power drove him in, nor the will of God, but man's pleasure,
placed him in the room. Howsoever, these being memorable arguments of the
Kings exceeding love; let us now see how this great Prelate endeavored to
deserve it, or how he chanced to lose it.

(12) Great and flourishing was the state of the English Church and
Comon-wealth at this season; the quiet of both which, the King studied and
hoped to establish The causes of the debate betwixt the King and Becket.
by the undoubted assistance of his great favorite Becket, whose counsel and
authority he knew might much further his princely designs, especially touching
affairs of the Church, and abuses of Church Nubrig. loco cita.
men, which then were grown to a dangerous height: whereof let us hear the
Monk of Nuborough speak: It was declared in the Kings presence, how that
Clergy me^ had committed above a hundred murders under his reign; Gul. Nubrig.
l. 2. c. 16.
wherewith the King highly offended, he was in punishing of them somewhat too
vehement; but the blame of the Kings too much earnestnes, must lie on the
Prelates, in as much as they gave the cause thereof: for, whereas sacred Canons
ordain, that Clerks found guilty, not only of heinous and grievous sins,
but also of lesser, should be degraded, and thousands of such were in the
Church of England, like innumerable chafe amongst a little good corn; yet
very few such, for these many years have been deprived. The Prelates for
sooth, while they bestirre themselves, rather to uphold the liberties and
dignities of Clerks, then to chastise, and cut off their vices, think they do
God and his Church good service, in protecting from public Discipline such
heinous offenders, whom (by duty of their places) they ought to correct
according to the Canons censure, whereby they through their impunity, having
liberty to do what they list, have neither fear of God, (whose judgment they
think is far off) neither of men in authority, since on the one side their
Prelates neglect to reform them, and on the other side, they are thus exempt
by their order from the temporal Jurisdiction.

(13) This being the state of the Church and Realm, wherein some were so
injured without remedy, and others so injurious without coertion, as if neither
sort were in condition of Subjects; the King (who was a man of excellent
Wisdom, Constancy, and Zeal) took especial care of quickening the Idem
Nubrig. l. 2. cap 1.
public Discipline, and the rigor of ancient laws, which thus lay neglected;
for which end he had settled choice Ministers of Justice through all parts of
his land* and upon complaints brought him by his Subjects of the remissenes,
and other defects of his Judges, he accordingly by his princely providence
applied remedies, and chastised the delinquents. The like remissenes (to
censure it no harder) was complained of in his Spiritual Houeden. M. Fox.
Judges, occasioned by a murder, committed by a Priest of Sarum Diocese, whom
the Archbishop commanded to be deprived, and put into an Abbey, whereby he
was freed from sharper punishment, intended by the Kings Iusticiaries: with
which (and some other like affronts of his Archbishop) the King M. Fox. p. 264.
conceived no little displeasure, as requiring, that Justice should be
ministered to all alike without partiality, and Nubrig. l. 2. c. 16. sine
delectu.
seeing this apparently to tend unto the ruin of all royal government: the
Archbishop on the other side, stood no less peremptory on the immunities of
his Clergy and See: yea so far, as that he challenged Geruasius. ad An.
1163. c^ gestiret iura Cant. Ecclesiae reuocare.
from the Crown (to the Kings great offense) the custody of Rochester Castle
and other Forts, which the King for securing his state had resumed into his
Ibidem.
own hands.

(14) This maine controversy betwixt Regnum, and Sacerdotium, the Crown and
the Mitre, Houeden Roger Houeden. ad An. 1163.
(who then also lived) thus summarily delivers: The King would that all such of
the Clergy as were deprehended in any Robbery, Murder, Felony, burning of
houses, and the like, should be tried and adjudged in his temporal Courts, as
Laymen were: against which, the Archbishops resolution was, that all Clergy
men so offending should be tried only in the Spiritual Courts, and by men of
their own coat, who if they were convict, should at first be only deprived
of their office and benefice: but if they should again be guilty of the like,
they should then be adjudged at the Kings pleasure. The King finding himself
to be hereby but a Demi-King, deprived of all Soueraignety over one half-deale
of his Kingdom, and perceiving Beckets stiffenesse, in thus contesting with
his Sovereign, to be no way mollifiable by whatsoever his old favors, or
fresh persuasions; notwithstanding resolved to put nothing in execution, which
should not first be ratified and strengthened with consent of his Bishops; of
whose ready assent to so just demands he had no cause to Nubrigensis.
doubt: who thereupon assembling at Westminster, the King, took both offense
there, at the Archbishops thwarting his desires, and occasion also to establish
sundry other Articles, which he called his Grandfathers Customs, peremptorily
urging Becket to yield thereunto, without any such reservation Ger. Dorobor.
of saving in all things his order, and right of the Church, wherewith he would
have limited his assent.

(15) The points in those Ordinances which the Points which the Archbishop
would not consent unto.
Archbishop principally stuck at, as Ep. Tho. ad Alex: 3. PP. Ep. Th. ad
Suffr. suos. apud Roge. Houed.
himself did set them down in his letters to the Pope, and his own Suffragan
Bishops within the Diocese of Canterbury, were principally these; 1. That none
should appeal to the Sea of Rome for any cause whatsoever, without the Kings
license. 2. That it should not be lawful for any Archbishop or Bishop to depart
the Realm, and repair to the Pope upon his summons, without the Kings
license. 3. That no Bishop should excommunicate any one whomsoever, holding of
the King in chief, or put any other of his officers under Interdict, without
the Kings license. 4. That Clerks criminous should be tritried before
seculardudges. 5. That it should not be lawful for a Bishop to punish any one
for perjury or faith-breach. 6. That the Laity, whether the King or other,
should hold pleas of Churches and Tithes, etc.

(16) These points so nearly touched the Papal Sovereignty, and
Church-Liberties, that the resolute Metropolitan mainely opposed his whole
powers against them. Henry also persisted, as his Grandfather Henry the first
had done, who having a See before in Henry the first.
like war with Anselm his Archbishop, was so vehement therein, as he would
not suffer him to return into England (though after some years banishment)
unless he would absolutely bind himself to observe, not his Fathers Customs
only, but his brothers also, who were the two fatal Williams, the Conqueror
and Rufus.

(17) Many reasons moved Henry to attempt this Reasons moving King Henry to
urge the Archbishop to assent.
business; as first, the enlargement of his Regal authority: Secondly, to
exempt his State by degrees, from the dependancy on any external Government, as
lineally claiming both from a Conquest, and from absolute-Soueraigne
Antecessors, and so to introduce that free Empery, to which he saw no way lie
open, but by subordinating the Persons and Causes of Churchmen to the secular
soueraignety, in a few points first, and then in other. And that this was the
secret, will not obscurely appear in Act. and Mon. page 265.
that Article, which was summarily this: That Appeals should be made from the
Consistory to the Archdeacon, from him to the Bishop, thence to the
Archbishop, and so to the King. Thus far M. Fox; but Matthew Paris has more:
That the King should command the Archbishop Math. Paris.
to end the suit, and that it should proceed no further without license of the
King.

(18) A third reason was, for that he had by his own persuasions, and by the
Counsel of one Ernulph a Hou^den.
Bishop, drawn unto his purposes the Archbishop of York, and all the other
Bishops in a manner, who were now sure unto him, and ready to yield to his
demands, which, they saw, did tend to the good of the State wherein they lived.
Moreover, he was persuaded of great facility in obtaining his desire, both in
regard of the Epist. Th. apud Rog. Houed.
advantage which the Schism then vpholden by Frederick the Emperor against
Alexander the third did give, which might make that Pope afraid to leese or
hazard his friends: as also for that the King, till he found the contrary,
thought himself assured of his Thomas, whom (if Ep. ad Th. apud Rog. Houed.
Gilbert Bishop of London said true) he advanced to that dignity against the
will and liking, as well of Matildis the Empress his mother, as of the Clergy
and people.

(19) Besides these and other reasons encouraging the King, Pope Alexander very
desirous to An. D. 1164 A. Reg. H. 2. 10.
keep the Kings love (though secretly wishing well to Beckets attempts) sent
one Philip his Almoner purposely to compose the controversy, by whom the Pope
and Cardinals required the Archbishop to make H^eden.
promise unto the King to the keeping his said Ordinances absolutely, and
without any sauings or exceptions: whereupon Thomas seeing his scrupulosity
thus disapproued by his Sovereign, by all his Brethren the Nubrig. l. 2. c.
16. calls him Hominem Scrupulosum.
Bishops, and by the Court of Rome it self, he rode to Woodstocke to the
King, and there promised, that he would keep his said laws, bonafide, and
sine malo ingenio, in good faith, and without mal-engin. Rog. Houed.


(20) The King afterward (supposing now all contradiction had end, and that
Thomas would not waver in his faith) called an Assembly of the States at The
Council at Clarendon.
Clarendon (of which place in Wilt-shire and not in Normandy, as Mr. Fox.
some have mistaken, the said Customs called by the King, Auitae, were
denominated) to collect and enact those Laws: where John of Oxenford sitting
President, Becket, relapsing again Math. Paris. The Archbishop violates his
promise.
from his promise given to the King, said, that he had grievously sinned in
making that absolute promise, and that he would not sin therein any more.

(21) At which, the King was so vehemently stirred and inflamed, that he
threatened banishment and destruction to him and his. But the Archbishop,
having definitely resolved to undergo any peril, The Archbishop would not
relent so far as to subscribe.
was yet so softened with the tears, prayers, and kneelings of so great and
honorable personages, as the Bishops of Salisbury, and Norwich, the Earls of
Leicester, and Cornwail, and two knights Templars, Richard Roger Houeden.
de Hastings, and another, privately repairing Ger. Dor.
unto him, that before the King, the Clergy, and people, Idem.
he swear in verbo Sacerdotali, in the word of a Priest, and de plano,
sincerely, that he would observe the Math. Paris.
Laws, which the King entitled Auitae, and all the Bishops, Guil. Nubrig.
Houeden. Geruasius.
Abbats, Priors, and whole Clergy, with all the Earls, Barons, and Nobility,
did promise and swear, the same faithfully and truly to observe and perform,
to the King and to his heirs for ever. But when the King, not so contented,
would have him (as every one of the Bishops had done before him) to subscribe,
and affix his seal to an instrument, in which those Customs or Laws (being
in number sixteen) were comprehended; Vide Geruasium, where they are all
verbatim recited. Beckes again starts from his word. Ger. Dor. Ibidem.
he once again starting from his faith, did absolutely refuse, alleging that
he did promise it, only to do the King some honor, verbo tenus, in word
only, but not with intent to confirm those Articles; neither could the example
of the whole State move him, nor the credit of Rotrod, Archbishop of Roan,
(though sent from the Pope) compose the difference, because Henry would not
otherwise agree then as the Pope did by his Bull confirm those Laws, which
would not be granted.

(22) Henry hereupon sent in Embassage John of The King dispatcheth Ambassadors
to the Pope.
Oxenford, and one Ridell, his clerks, to the Roman Bishop, praying that the
Legatine power for England, might be committed to Roger Archbishop of York,
that so yet he might at last bring Thomas under: but neither did this plot
thrive: for that the Pope (knowing that the cause was his own more then
Beckets) would not be an Author of any grieuance unto him, (who in sorrow for
that he had so yielded in promising, suspended himself from use of his
priestlie function, till upon suit he was Mat. Paris.
repermitted) yet somewhat to gratify the king, he by his Bull granted Geruas.
Dorob. Houeden.
a slight authority; which when the King saw to be but superficial, and not
well horned for his purpose, with great disdain, he sent the Bull back again
to the Popes stall.

(23) There followed now upon Thomas sundry The Archbishop called to account
molestations: for first, he was Rog. Houed.
condemned in damages for a Manor, which John de Marshall claimed;
notwithstanding the Archbishop had enioied the same for a long time, without
interpellation or disturbance. Then was there at Northampton, (where the king
had summoned a Parliament) an account demanded of him for the king, to the
value of thirty thousand pound, which came to his hand during his
Chancellorship. Whereunto his answer was, Mat. Paris. Rog. Houed.
That seeing he had formerly accounted, and that the kings eldest son Henry,
on his Fathers behalf, and all the Barons of the Exchequer, and Richard de
Luci Iustitiar of England, had acquitted him toward the king of all accounts,
and that he came free from all actions and dangers to the Arch-bishopricke,
that now therefore he would not answer, as a Layman, having heretofore had
so sufficient discharge: which refusal of his was aggrauated with diverse
accusations laid upon him, as of contempt toward the king, in denying to come
to his presence, being thereto commanded by him, and the like: whereto though
he made excuses (reasonable enough, if true) yet the Peers and the Bishops
condemned Mat. Paris. Geruasius.
all his moueables to the Kings mercy: and the Prelates perceiving the kings
displeasure, to tend yet to some farther severity, premonished him to submit
himself, for that otherwise the kings Court intended to adiudge him a perjured
person, and also a Traitor, for Idem.
not yielding temporal allegiance to his Temporal Sovereign, as himself had
sworn to do: and accordingly the Prelates themselves by joint consent
adjudged him of Perjury, and by the mouth of the Bishop of Idem.
Chichester, disclaimed thence forward all obedience unto him, as their
Archbishop. The next day, whiles the Bishops and Peers were consulting of some
further course with him; Becket, not as yet daunted, Nubrig. Houeden.
Dorobornensis.
caused to be sung before him at the Altar: The Princes sit and speak against
me, and the ungodly persecute me, etc. And forthwith taking his silver Crosier
in his own hands, (a thing strange and unheard of before) enters armed
therewith into the Kings presence, Dorobornensis.
though earnestly dissuaded by all that wished him well: wherewith the King
enraged, commanded his Peers to sit in judgment on him, as on a Traitor and
Perjured person; and accordingly they adjudged him to be apprehended, and cast
into prison. The Earls of Cornwall and Leicester (who sat as Houeden.
Geruasius.
Judges) citing him forthwith to hear his sentence pronounced; he immediately
appealed to the Sea of Rome, as holding them no Judges competent: whereupon all
reuiling him with the name of Traitor, and the like; he replying, That were it
not for his function he would enter the Duel or Combat with them in the
field, to acquit himself both of Treason and Perjury, sped Geruas. Dorob.
from the Court, and from thence without delay into Mat. Paris. An. D. 1164.
Flaunders, disguising himself under the name of Dereman.

(24) The King on the other side, to leave nothing undone, whereby to atchieue
his desire, forthwith dispatched away Gilbert, Bishop of London, and Another
Embas. sage from the King to the Pope
William, Earl of Arundel, to the French King, that he would not harbor, nor
cherish one, that was fled as a Traitor; but prevailed not: for he, upon the
contrary dealt with the Pope, That as he loved the Roman Church and the aid of
France, so he would support Rog. Houed. Geruasius.
the cause of Thomas against the King: which whether he did it out of Faction,
rather then Devotion, let others judge: for as we may easily think that the
French would gladly incommodate the king of England: so this is not to be
denied, that Lewis was Mat. Paris. (...) Rog. Houed. and alij.
often afterward a Mediator for peace, and undoubtedly held the man himself
in great estimation both alive and dead.

(25) The Archbishop growing thus in favor with the Pope, King Henry sends
an Embassage unto him of many great Personages, as Roger Archbishop The King
sends Ambassadors to Rome against Becket.
of York, the BB. of London, Winchester, Chichester, John of Oxenford, William
Earl of Arundell, etc. whose whole emploiment being prece vel pretio, by
Geruasius
requests and gratifications to procure disgrace unto Becket, their final suit
was, That the Pope would send Houeden.
two Cardinals into England, fully to end the matter; but the Pope denied it,
as holding it derogatory to his own absolutenes, saying (like Gods Vicegerent
at least) Isay chap. 42. ver. 8. I am the Lord, this is my Name, and my glory
will I not give to anyother, etc. Houeden.
That is my own glory, which I will not give to any other; but when he is to
be judged, I will judge him my self: For he knew the King of England was
mighty both in speech and means, and that Legates might easily be corrupted,
as being men, more thirsty after gold and silver, then after justice and
equity: and the Pope and Cardinals wisely resolved (says the Monk of
Canterbury) that as, if this Archbishop were now vpheld in his Ger. Dorobor.
cause, it would be a pattern for others in like case to resist Kings; so, if
he should sink, no Bishops ever after would darc oppose themselves to their
Sovereigns pleasure, and so the State of the Catholic Church would be shaken,
and the Popes authority be crushed.

(26) The King having received this foil, and impatient of repulse, where his
own subject was a The incensed K^gs proceedings.
party, thought the indignity offered by the Pope insufferable, and to let him
understand how he took it, directs his Writs unto the Sheriffs in England,
commanding them to attach such as did appeal to the Roman Court: the fathers,
mothers, brothers, Math. Paris. ad Ann. 1164.
sisters, nephews, and neices, of all such of the Clergy, as were with the
Archbishop; and to put them under sureties, as also to seize the revenues,
goods, and chattels, of the said Clergymen. Again, by other his letters to
Gilbert Bishop of London, he sequestered the profits and livings, which within
his Diocese did belong to any of the Clergy, who were fled to Thomas, that
(without the Kings leave) they might have no part thereof. Lastly; to his
Justices he signified, that they should safe-keepe whosoever did bring any
interdict into England till the Kings pleasure were further known: he also
caused the Church of Canterbury, and all the Archbishops goods to be
confiscated, grounding himself (as may probably be supposed) upon the
judgment given against Becket at North-hampton, notwithstanding that the said
sentence was expressly nullified by the Popes The Original (...) self, I have
seen in the custody of Mr. (...) of (...).
Bull; and not only by word of mouth, as * Matthew Paris seems to mistake it.
Neither was this all, for he banished out of the Realm Ma^h. Paris. Ann 1164.
Rog (...). (...). Ger Dorob.
all the kindred of the Archbishop, man, woman, child, and sucking babes; and
for bad that he should be any longer publicly mentioned and prayed for in the
Church as Archbishop of Canterbury.

(27) The Archbishop on the contrary part (the contention being now wither the
power Ecclesiastical An. D. 1166 Rog. Houed. Ep. Thom.
or Secular, should work most) did solemnly in France where he abode,
excommunicate all such as obeyed, defended, or had occasioned the said laws,
and Auitall Customs, and some of the parties by name, as Richard de Luci,
Richard of Poictou, Iocelin de Bailull, Alan de Ne^ile, and other, who
presently appealed; but the King having further notice, that Becket Ger. Dorob.
says (...) e^isit.
after his public sermon, on a great Festival day, had solemnly threatened the
like thunderclap against his Royal Person; either to terrify his adversaries,
or to revenge himself, if any such sentence should be against him, gathered a
mighty Army under * Geruasi^ says vt (...) etc.
pretense of subduing Wales, where yet he did little. The mean while John of
Oxenford (who not only followed the Kings cause stoutly, but also Bale Ce^t. 3.
writ a learned Book in justifying of it against Becket) prevailed so far at
Rome, that two Legates a latere, should be sent into England, to reconcile the
King and Thomas; but when they were gone, the Pope hearing that they were
resolved Geruasius.
utterly to confound the Arc^shop, sent letters after them to rebate their
absolute power, they being men (says Geruasius) * Auram and aur^ (...). Geruas.
who too much thirsted after gold and glory.

(28) When these two Cardinals came to Thomas, he refused to put his cause to
them, unless Mat. Paris.
there were first a plenary restitution made to him and his of all that had
been taken away: but being then counseled by them to submit himself to the
king, his answer was, he would, saving Gods honor, and the Churches liberty;
saving his own honor; and his Churches possessions; and saving his own and
Acts and Monuments page 284. Col 2. Ibid.
his friends right: being further demanded, whither (to resettle peace in Gods
Church, which he seemed only to desire) he would renounce his Bishop-ricke,
if the king would renounce his customs: he answered, The proportion was not
alike: for that with the honor of his Church and his Person, he could not
renounce his Bishopric; whereas on the other side, the King was bound, as well
for his Souls health, as for his honor, to renounce those ordinances. (will
you know the reason?) because the Pope and he had condemned them. And so that
design for peace was frustrate.

(29) The King of England tempestuously storming at these affronts, and daily
increase of new Saluo honor Person^ suia sal^ (...), sal^d (...), etc.
salues, wherewith like a guilefull Surgeon, he Math. Paris. Roger. Houed.
still made the wound more to fester; menaced the Monks (which in their Abbey
at Pontenei, had now for two whole years entertained him) to thrust all of
their order out of England, if they durst relieve his enemy any longer:
Whereupon they dismissing him, Lewis the French King took him to Sens with
himself, where for four years he remained and was (if we may credit King
Henry) a Ger. Dor. Ann. 1167.
great instigator of the French King, and also of the Earl of Flaunders,
against the King of England; Cardinal liter. Fox. p. 284.
as was also by diverse Evidences most certain; if the two said Cardinals told
not a lie to the Pope: But, that the Peace was broken, and wars renewed
betwixt the Geruasius. Maxime^ propter Thoma^, vt cr^di potest.
the two Kings, chiefly for Thomas his sake, Geruase the Monk himself does
record it as most credible.

(30) Howbeit, by mediation at length, the two Kings were again reconciled,
and at their friendly Geruasi^s, (...). 1169
A^ud montem (...).
enteruiew, Beckets wel-willers advised him to submit himself in the presence
of both kings, Tacita omni condition. Geruas. ibid.
without any more reseruations; which he seeming to yield to, presented
himself very humbly, and referred the cause to the king, not now, Saluo
ordine suo, but yet on a new point, Saluo honor Dei; wherewith the king
exasperated, told the French king, such was the humor of the man, that
whatsoever Idem.
disliked him, he would say it was against Gods honor, and so would be never
the nearer to conformity; with which, and other speeches, King Lewis offended
with Becket, asked him whether he thought to be greater or holier then Saint
Peter? and the Peers Idem.
of both Nations accused him of much arrogance, as being himself the wilful
hinderer of his own, and the Churches tranquillity.

(31) Notwithstanding, the Pope forgot not his faithful Thomas, and therefore
after he had graced An. D. 1168.
him with a confirmation of all the Privileges, Math. Paris.
and powers, which any of his Predecessors in that See did enjoy (to the daring
and defiance as it were, of the kings utmost indignation) the king sent a
letter into Germany, declaring that he would forsake The King goes about to
forsake the Pope, and join with the Antipape.
Pope Alexander, and join with the Emperor, and Antipape. Whereupon, when the
Bishop of Rome had commanded Gilbert Bishop of London to admonish the king to
give over his courses, and customs The Bishop of London commanded to admonish
the King.
preiudicious to the Church, the said Bishop obeyed, and in his answer sought
to persuade the Pope to a conniuencie, and forgets not to justify his
Sovereign, as That the King was ready to obey the sacred Rog. Houed.
hests of the Church, saving to himself his own and his The Bishop of Londons
defense of the King to Pope Alexand. 3.
Kingdoms dignity: That, as for Appeals, he claimed that honor, by the
ancient institution of his Kingdom, that is to say, That no Clerk should for
a civil action depart the same until right could not be had in his Courts at
home, and then he would hinder no^an. That he did not banish the Archbishop
of Canterbury, who might return at his pleasure, so as he would observe all
those his Grandfathers customs, which once he had given his faith to do:
That the King thinks himself greatly justified, in that he is willing to
stand to the judgment of the whole Church of his own Kingdom, etc.

(32) But when mediations, letters, messages, or other ways, would not
prevail; the Pope admonishes The Bishop of London excommunicated.
the King, that he meant no longer to restrain the Archbishop from revenging
his own, and his An. D. 1169
Churches injuries with the sword of censure, and thereupon (for a beginning)
the Archbishop excommunicates Gilbert Bishop of London, and proceeded so far
with others, that there was scarce found in the Kings own Chapel and
presence such as might Geru. Dorob.
perform the wonted ceremonies.

(33) The King both touched with his own wrongs, and tender of their case, who
for his sake underwent that severity, animates Bishop Gilbert Comforted by
the King.
with most loving offers to bear the charges of prosecuting his appeal
against Becket, and desires the Pope to send him Legates which might absolve
his excommunicated Subjects, and settle a peace, or else Ger. Dor.
he should be compelled to provide otherwise for his own security and honor.

(34) Two Cardinals therefore, Gratian and Viuianus, coming into France to end
the contention, Cardinals attempt to make reconcilement.
return notwithstanding without possibility of doing good; for that Becket
would not yield in any point to those Customs, at which he had once excepted,
but with his ordinary limitations. At last yet by the popes mediation, the two
kings of England and of France met at Paris, whether the Archbishop repaired,
and yet no peace ensued: for that Dorob^rnensis.
the king refused the kiss of peace with him, and Becket would either have a
sound and full peace, or none at all; where, though the king of England refused
to satisfy any thing under the name of restitution, as being against his
honor (because all restitution implied a wrong) yet in the other maine Math.
Paris.
matter of his Auitall Customs, offering to stand to the judgment, not of his
own only, but even of the Parisian Divines, and Church of France; he came
off from that conference with some advantage and The King offers his caus^ to
be judged by the Divines and Church of France.
favor, in the opinion of the hearers.

(35) King Henry (for all this) seeing no issue of his long disquietnes, and
vnregall vsages, understanding also that the Archbishop of Seins in person had
solicited the Pope, to put the Kingdom of England under Interaict, (which is
the prohibiting of the public Dorobornensis. A strange devise of Christ's Vicar
to forbid a whole Kingdom to live like Christians.
use of Christ's Religion, and Christian Burial throughout the whole land) he
being then in Normandy, sends forth his Edict: That if any man bring from the
Pope or Becket, any letters of Interdict, he should presently suffer as a
Traitor to the King and the State: Houeden.
That no Clerk whatsoever go forth of the land without The Kings Edict to
match the Popes Interdict.
a Pass from his Iusticiaries, and none return again without letters of
license from the King himself. That none receive any message from the Pope or
Becket, nor make any appeal unto them, nor hold any Plea by their mandates;
That if any Prelate or Clerk, or Layman shall obey any sentence of Interdict,
he and all his Kindred shall be forthwith expulsed the land, and all his goods
escheated to the Crown. That all Clerks who have rents in England, return
home within three Months, or else all their rents to fall to the King. That
certain Prelates specified, be cited to answer in the Kings Courts for
interdicting Earl Hughes lands. That Peter Pence be not paid to Rome, but
reserved. Thus, (as Geruase the Monk lamentably complains) all from the
eldest to the youngest throughout England were Geru. D^r.
made to abjure obedience to Pope Alexander and Becket.

(36) After all this, it came into King Henry's mind, to sweeten these his many
cares with some solace, The King causes his son to be crowned King.
and to crown his eldest son, yongue Henry, King of England, now in his own
life time: A counsel not more temerarious, then unfortunate: but of which yet
he did hope to reap this consolation, that it was done in contempt of Becket
(whose office it was to have crowned the King,) with some advantage also toward
the perpetuation of the Auitall Customs, and that also without scruple of
conscience, his son receiving the Crown without caution, to preserve ^p.
Alex* Pap. apud Roge. Houed.
the Churches liberty, either by him put in, or by others exacted. Yea rather,
an Oath ministered, and by the yongue King taken, to maintain those Auitall
Customs to the uttermost.

(37) This solemnity was performed, at Henry the fathers commandment, by
Roger Archbishop of York, (the anciently rival See of Canterbury) contrary
to the Popes express Inhibition, the father himself King Henry, being
present thereat, though without any fortunate presage in coming, or cause of
consolation in the action. For Roger Houeden.
he, in his inauspicious passage out of Normandy, arriving not without very
great peril, at Portsmouth, the best and newest ship he had was suncke in the
storms, and therein, besides Henry de Agnellis and his two sons, Gilbert de
Sullemni, Mr. Ralf de Bealmunt, the Kings physician and fauourit, with about
four hundred men and women more, were devoured of the working waves. And at
the feast, the ioifull father himself, carrying the first dish, and the
Archbishop of York saying in pleasance to the yongue King: Rejoice my fair
son, for their is no Prince in the world, has such a seruitor attending at
his table as you. The unnatural Polyd. Uirg. in H. 2.
yongue man answered; why? wonder you at that? my father knows he does
nothing that misbecomes him, for so much as he is royal borne but of one
side, but our self are royal borne both by father and mother.

(38) Add heereunto, that this unlucky Coronations triumphs, were celebrated
with bon-fires kindled by the furies in Normandy; which Lewis the French King
invaded with fire and sword, because his daughter Margaret was not crowned
as well as the yongue King her husband: but the father speeding into those
parts, quenched this flame with a promise to recrowne his son, and then his
daughter Margaret should be honored with like ceremonies. Thus the fathers
patience was exercised on every hand, and worse things were feared.

(39) So now yet at last, in the seventh year of Math. Paris.
Beckets banishment, another meeting was had at Sens, whither, the two great
Kings, and the Archbishop The last meeting for a peace between the King and
Archbishop.
of Sens, and Bishop of Neuers, being together, the Archbishop of Canterbury
repaired, and the treaty of Peace was entered into, which at Ambois, in an
other meeting (at procurement of Rotrod Archbishop of Roan) was finished; and
the Archbishop (knowing the King was terrified with the expectation of the
foresaid imminent Interdiction) was restored to the Kings favor, and permitted
to have full use of his Metropolitan See, and all the profits thereof with the
arrerages. Which conclusion, the King signifies to his son into England,
whither the Archbishop returns, and lands at Sandwich: And thus the
controversy between the King and his Archbishop seemed to be ended.

(40) But the Archbishop had not been long in England, before he published
the Popes letters, by which, Roger Archbishop of York, and Hugh Bishop The
Archbishop publishes new censures.
of Duresme, were suspended from the use of their Episcopal function, for
crowning the yongue King Math. Paris. Roger Houed.
in prejudice of the Sea of Canterbury; and the Bishops of London, Exceter,
and Salisburie, cut off from the Church by censure, for assisting the said
Archbishop at that Coronation; whom Becket would not, but under conditions, at
the yongue Kings request, absolve. Whereupon a great complaint was carried into
Normandy, to the father King, Polydor. Virg. l. 13.
by some of the Bishops: and in the mean time, the Arch-bishoppe Thomas,
putting himself upon the way to visit the yongue King, at Woodstocke in
Oxfordshire, was commanded not to approach. Lib. Mon. S. Alb. MS.


(41) At the news of these late censures, the father King was so sore
displeased, that some words The kings wrath fatal to the Archbishop.
slipping from him, and arguing his great discontent, moved Hugh Moruill,
William Traci, Hugh Brito, and Richard Fitz-vrse, knights and courtiers, topost
Ger. Camb. l. 1. c. 20. calls them Aulici Canes.
into England, and there in a fury, (without either warrant, or priuitie of
their Sovereign) to murder the Archbishop (being then about The printed
Legend says, he was 53 years of age.
forty and eight years old) in his own Church of Canterbury; which sacred
Place, and Time, besides his high Calling, might have pleaded for pity, had
not the men been wholly transported with barbarous rage. For howsoever we are
far from their fancies, who, for his zeal to the Popes Soueraignety, have so
mounted him to the top of Martyrs glory, that not only the basest part of his
Shrine was pure gold, and his In the festiuals of Christ's Nativity Scil. (...).
Natal^ Dominici, Nubrigensis. Erasmus. Guil. Cambd. Stow in H. 8.
old Shoe was devoutly kissed by all Erasm. in Dial. de Peregrinat: Religionis
ergo.
passengers, but also shameless and numberless Miracles are blindly ascribed
unto him, and his Lambert Peramb. of Kent, in Harbaldowne.
Blood almost matched in virtue with our euer-blessed Saviors: yet we no
less condemn their butcherly execution, who T^per Thoma Sanguinem, quem pro^e
impendit, Fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit.
(how great so ever his offense was against the King and State) had no lawful
authority to bear them out, or acquit them, from the guilt of Blood.

(42) To shut up this long contention (which, as you see, would not be extinct
but by blood, nor take end but by his death,) because any censure of our own
will be said to savor of Time-seruing, or State-pleasing, Guil. Nubrig. l. 2.
c. 16,
we will only annexe the bare judgment of the forecited learned Monk of that
time, who thus speaks. Indeed though most men's custo^e is, in those, whom they
love and praise, to extol whatsoever they have done, (an argument of their
great affection, but slender wisdom) yet in plain truth, those things, which
the venerable Archbishop so acted, that no profit at all thence proceeded, but
the Kings wrath only was kindled (whereby so many mischiefs afterward arose)
I do not think to be praiseworthy, though they sprang from a laudable zeal;
as it was in the blessed Prince of the Apostles, who attaining the top of
Apostolical perfection, taught the Gentiles by his example to Iudaize; for
which the Doctor of the Gentiles Galat. 2.
declares that he deserved to be reprehended, though he did it with a
praiseworthy and pious intent. And in another place. The Archbishop was hot
in zeal of Justice, but whither fully according to knowledge, God Nubrig. l 2.
ca. 25.
knows, (for it is not for a man of my mean quality, rashly to judge of so
great a man's actions,) but I think, the blessed Pope Gregory would have dealt
more mildly, and winkt at those things which might have been borne, without
any hazard of the Christian faith, etc. and then concludes: Therefore, that
which the venerable Archbishop then did, I neither judge that it is to be
commended, neither presume I to condemneit, etc. For good men are so to be
loved, or lauded by us, that we neither love nor laud those acts wherein they
show themselves to be frail men, but only those things wherein without
scruple we ought to imitate them: and therefore they are wisely and warily to
be praised, that Gods prerogative may be reserved entire to himself.

(43) Some other learned men there were, who lived near to that time, whose
censure was far sharper then that Monks: Such were some of those An. 1^20.
Divines of Paris, mentioned by Caesarius Dialog. l. 8. cap ^9. ^ale Script.
Brit. Cent. 2.
Caesarius the Monk, who says, The Question was debated to and fro amongst the
Doctors, in the university of Paris, whether Thomas were damned or saved:
amongst whom, Rogerius Fox. p. 289.
the Norman auowed, that he deserved death and damnation, for his contumacie
against his King, the Minister of God: but Petrus Cantor alleged, that his
Miracles were signs of his salvation, etc. An indeed if all be true, which
Monach. Cant. de miracul^ B. Thoma.
one man has written in five books, containing his 270. Miracles, we cannot
but acknowledge him, both the greatest Saint, and the meriest too, that ever
got into heaven; so ridiculous are many things recorded of him. As that of
Ailwardus, who for stealing of a great whetstone (which the Author that writes
it, best deserved) being deprived of his Eyes and MS. Pendend^ perhaps for
Pudenda. Malmesb. de* Rog. l. 5.
Virilities, by sentence of Law; upon prayer to S. Thomas he had all restored
again: Yea even a The printed golden Legend. in v^. Thom.
Bird, having been taught to speak, flying out of her cage, and ready to be
seized on by a Spar-Hauke, said only, S. Thomas help me, and her Enemy fell
presently dead, and she escaped, and (belike) reported it. Of which great
power in this Saint, how can we doubt? since we read, that even in his life
time the * Virgin Marie her self was contented to be his Semster, and sowed
his shirt with red silk? Many of Ibidem.
which kind of follies, (if that word be sharp enough) might be here
inserted, were not our present argument more serious, and these forgeries fit
only for Monks to endite, children to read, and fools to believe.

(44) The report of the tragical outrage on the The kings sorrow for the
murder, and his difficulties thereupon. Math. Paris. Ypodig. Neustr.
Archbishop, coming to the old King, at Argenton in Normandy; there was no
kind of sorrow, into which, (without respect to Majesty, or State) he fell
not; and not without cause, as knowing how plentiful an Hydra of mischiefs
(upon the opinion of his priuitie with the fact) would rise, if not prevented.
But the murderers, fearing least this their fact would displease the king, in
whose revenge they Guil. Nubrigens. l. 2 c. 25. Mat. Paris.
did it, fled into the North, and abode one whole year in the kings Castle of
Knaresborough in Yorkshire; perhaps by favor of the yongue king: none of them
dying for the fact, by way of justice, because, the Clergy exe^pting
themselves from the bonds of civil Laws, the punishment of a Priest-killer (as
by Nich. Trivet. vowel, and Holinsh. p. 99. Math. Paris. says it was granted
to Cardinal Petro (...), by King Hen. Math. Paris, ad. A. D. 1176.
some it appears) was not then the death of the Body by execution of capital
sentence, but of Soul by Excommunication, till about the twenty third year of
this king, it was (at the instant suite of Richard Archbishop of Canterbury,
and of the Bishops of Winchester, Elie, and Norwich) yielded, that such persons
should also suffer loss of life.

45 The king therefore, upon protestation to submit himself, to the judgment
of such Cardinals, Legates, as the Pope should send to inquire of the fact, kept
his Realm from Interdiction, though the king of France, the Archbishop of
Se^s, and Theobald Earl of Blois, had outgone his Ambassadors with their
inflaming letters, containing the descripion of that Parricide.

(46) Henry therefore, among so many perplexities rising out of the Archbishops
murder, saw no King Henry proiects the conquest of Ireland.
way so ready for the calming his own perturbations; or for the auerting men's
thoughts from the consideration of that scandalous tragedy, as to undertake
some great and noble enterprise, which now offered it self very seasonably.
For Ireland, a very spacious and plentiful Island, and lying* commodiously for
the uses of the English, burned in it self with civil divisions, kindled among
the petty Kings and Girald. Cambr. de expug. H b.
Princes thereof: while Rotherick the Great, called O Conor Dun, Prince of
Connaught, abusing his power and the advantage of the times, to the oppression
of his Neighbors, sought to make himself the universal King thereof, having
already invaded the Title and Style of KING AND MONARCH Annalib. Hiber. apud
Came. pa. 794. An. Dom. 1166.
OF IRELAND. And this his purpose was much advanced by the fatal and familiar
error of proceedings in like cases: for the Irish Princes, either through
distrust or pride, forbearing to unite their forces against the common enemy,
while each prouides for one, they are all as it were, overcome.

(47) Moreover Annalib. Hiber. Ibid.
Dermot Mac Murrgh (in that time of the Irish Pentarchie, or fiue-fold
Kingdom) having secretly stolen away the wife of Rotherick (a Girald. Cambr.
lib. 1. cap. 1. in Hiber. expug.
light woman, and consenting or plotting rather, and urging the rape it self)
added to Rotherickes ambition, a just desire of revenge, for so notable,
impudent, and public injury, so much the more odious in Dermots person, for
that he was old: neither was this all; for the causes of this change were
higher.

(48) The only disposer and translator of Kingdoms is God; and in Ireland to
move him to offense (without which no Kingdom is transferred) against the
people thereof, all such sins abounded, as commonly forgo the greatest
changes: for not only the manners of the Nation were extremely corrupted, but
the Christian faith it self decayed; barbarism ouerrunning the one, and
Polig^mie, etc. Polydor. Vir. l. 13.
more then superstitions the other. But it may seem by some Girald. Camb. Hib.
expug. l. 2. c. 7. Edmund Campians Hist. of Ireland l (...) c. 2. M. S. Rossus
Warwic. MS.
Authors, that King Henry's particular inducements to that Action, were both an
ancient title unto that Kingdom, derived from his ancestors (the kings of
England) for many ages before him; and Campian. l. 2. c. 1. MS.
many insufferable wrongs (by their Piracies) unto the English Nation, buying
and selling their Captives, and using Turkish tyranny on their ^dies: which
made the Irish Clergy themselves confess, that they had deserved no other,
then that their land should be transferred to Idem. ibid.
that Nation whom they had so cruelly handled. Notwithstanding, king Henry, who
knew how great and dangerous tumults the Popes had raised on small occasions,
thought his way would be much easier, if he went onward with the Popes good
favor, which he easily obtained (so liberal is his holiness of that which
is none of his) for a fee; viz. a penny yearly to be paid to Saint Peter of
every house in Ireland. Touching which point, Rossus of Warwick ^lla Hadrian.
apud Mat. Paris.
(no Protestant, I assure you*) says, That Englands King is not bound to rely
on the Popes grant for Ireland, Rossus Warwic. MS.
nor yet to pay that tax, because he had claim to that Kingdom by an
hereditary right: and that the Pope had no temporal interest therein (as his
favorites pretend) the often-mentioned Monk of Newborough can tell us, who
says, that Nunquam Gul. Nubrig. l. 2. c. 26.
externa subiacuit ditioni, Ireland was never subject to any foreign command.

(49) God Almighty therefore did now put it into the heart of Henry, for the
reforming of that kingdom, to make a Conquest thereof, having in his infinite
wisdom before hand fitted all circumstances needful to concur, for
inducing so wary and frugal a Prince to such an enterprise, which thus took
beginning.

(50) Dermot Mac Murgh, being in possession of his fatal Helen (the
adulterous wife of Rothericke) was pursued so eagrely with the revenging sword
of his enemy (who, howsoever wounded in heart with the abuse of his Bed,
reioiced in the color and occasion ministered thereby, for him to seize upon the
flourishing Provinces of Leinster) as he was driven to fly from place to
place, and at the length to quitte his kingdom also, the subjects whereof his
tyranny and vices had unsettled, in their affections toward him. Thus desperate
of help at home, his last deliberations were to draw in foreign aides; the
necessity of his case requiring it; and for that purpose, finally Camb. page
730.
resolves to repair to the court of the wise and Giral. Camb.
potent Henry, King of England, being then in Aquitain: neither could Dermot
but know, that it had heretofore been in Henry's designs, at such time
Giral. Cambr. in Hiber. Exp. cap. 1.
as he meant to subdue it for William of Angion, his youngest brother, and also,
because his present Dominions did half (as it were) enuiron it. In which hopes
he was not deceived; for Henry listened thereunto very willingly, as to a
thing which he had indeed Mat. Paris. Ann. Dom. 1155.
some years before proiected.

(51) King Dermot therefore was heard in his suite. But, because the thing, as
at that time, neither seemed great enough, for such a Prince as Henry Dermots
suite for aid liked by Henry.
to undertake directly, nor as yet was held sufficiently discovered to his
hand; that therefore the Ice might be broken by inferior means, and as well
the conueniences, as inconveniences, sounded to the depth, (without engaging
the royal person, name, or power,) it was by the Kings letters permitted to
Dermot (the exiled Prince) to draw what Giral. Camb. l. 2. c. 1. Hib. expug.
adventurers, or voluntaries, either the commiseration of his estate, or other
respects, of piety, profit, or delight in arms, could allure to the action.
Now whether it were, for that he, whose Countries lay toward the Dermots first
succoures.
coasts of Wales, (and within ken upon a clear day) by commodity thereof might
entertain intelligence, as well as traffic, with the inhabitants of those
parts; or, for that the fame of their Cheualrie did inuit; or, for that his
acquaintance at his arrival grew there first; or, for that these and many
other circumstances met in this accident: sure it is, that Dermot raised his
first, and principal succors from among the English Colonies there.

(52) The Welsh had then in their hands a valiant Gentleman of Norman race, one
Robert Authors call him Stephenides.
Fitz-Stephen, Robert Fitz-Stephen.
who by Gilbert de Clare was entrusted with the defense of the town of
Cardigan, but through Camb. p. 518.
treachery the Town being surprised, Robert was also delivered up to Rhese ap
Gruffin, Prince of South Wales, who would hearken to no other endentments of
his liberty, but only, that he should for ever abandon his possessions in
Wales. Whereupon (the opportunity of Dermots quarrel giving hopes of new
fortunes) immediately he entered into contract with the Irish king, promising
by a certain day to come to his succor, with as many Voluntaries, as his
remaining fortunes, or the hope of the voyage could stir: which he Annals
Hiber. apud Camb. and Giral. Cambr.
did accordingly perform, leaving it very disputable, whether with more
success or courage. But Dermot well knowing that the fortunes of this
Gentleman (to whose valor nothing see med impossible) were unable to undergo
the whole Richard Earl of Pembroke.
weight of the unknown work, had formerly dealt with that renowned Lord,
Richard of the house of Clare, He is commonly called (of his chief seat in
Monmouth-shire) Earl of Chepstow or Strigil.
Earl of Pembrooke, surnamed Strong-bow: the man whom the Fate of Ireland did
expect.

(53) Dermotes persuasions to the Earl were of this kind: That the enterprise,
besides the faculty thereof, was full of piety, honor, Justice, and
commodity: That it appeared so to King Henry himself, by whose leave he was
free to The (...) of Der^ persuasions
gather what forces he could: That he was driven out by the cruel ambition of
Neighbors, and treachery of wicked Subjects. That Leinster was a Kingdom,
and though but a part, yet clearly the best and richest part of Ireland. That
multitudes offered themselves to his aid; but his cares were not only for a
General to lead them, but for one to whom he might leave his kingdom also:
That the Earl was he, as the only man, in whose person all the respects of
birth, honor, bounty, valor, youth and fortunes did happily meet. That the
Earl (in his conceit) did dwell but narrowly (considering what he was worthy
of) pent-vp in the straights of an Earledomes title, for whom a great Kingdom
was not great. That they who would not allow Leinster for a kingdom, did
forget, that England once was broken into lesser states; and if Dermot were not
a King, neither then were Ella, Cissa, Vffa, Sigbert, Crida, and the rest in
the Saxon seuen-headed government: that the quantity of Dominion made more or
less strong, but not more or less a King. That he was rightful King of
Leinster, as Son and Heir to Murgh King of Leinster: that if he must forgo
his inheritance, it should be to such as had done him no wrong, and were worthy
of it; to Richard Strong-bow and his followers, and not to Rothericke and
Rebels. That he was not vnking'd, though vnkingdom'd: that Eua his daughter
(Eua the pearl and star of Ireland) should indeed be Eua to his enemies to
bring upon them death, and just confusion: that yet in defeating the Tyrant
Rotherick of his hopes by pla^ ting Earl Richard and his Forces, he should
provide for his Country, not destroy it. That if it did fall out otherwise, yet
his disloiall people had their just deserts, who obiecting vices to their
Sovereign, did themselves commit vile treasons. Indeed (quoth he) I was never
such a King, as that I was not also a Man. But for those matters between God
and me, here is now no place to account, for though his justice has found me
out, yet his mercy has left me more friends at home, then the number and
measure of my sins deserve: My quarrel is most just, as against most wicked
rebels and usurpers: Restore me then (my Lord) by your puissance to my native
soil, and my lawful rights therein: restore with me Religion and Discipline
to the ancient splendour thereof, which was not greater in any Realm about us
then in Ireland; reduce the stray, enlighten our ignorance, polish our
rudeness, and let not such abundant matter of merit and immortal glory
escape you. God himself will prosper the enterprise; holy Church has long
since approved it: and upon such Authors what can miscarry? And though in thy
noble and Christian courage nothing can weigh so much, (and these I see work
mightily) yet to satisfy all *The Irish phrase to use thou and thee.
respects, Thou shall have far larger territories then here Thou can
possess, and goodly lands to distribute for reward among thy friends and
followers. My last offers now shall not show a more desire to use thy forces,
then a love to thy person and virtues. They are not trifles I propose, but that
of which God himself does seem to me to have laid the ground; seeing it is
his holy will that thou at this time should be without a wife. Know thou
then, that I have that one daughter Eua, the heir of my Crown, and comfort of
my age: let thine own eye tell thee how fair and worthy: this I dare avouch,
that thou will think far broader seas well crossed, for view of so honest beauty:
she in the first blossom of her youth, a virtuous virgin, and by both Parents
borne of Princes, shall at thine arriual, with this right hand, be made thine,
and with her after my death, my whole realm, and other my rights whatsoever:
which were they infinitely more; (despise not such love, nor thealliance of one
distre^ed, but nevertheless a King,) I would repute them far too little for
such a son in law: who though thy self as yet no King This seems to be
spoken, because his mother Isabel was Aunt (by the mother) to Malcolm King of
Scots: Cambd. Annals Hibern. Ann. 1169. Earl Richard agrees.
, art come of Kings, and it is my whole and last ambition, that I may live to
make thee one. The Earl accepted the conditions, resolute to set up Dermot
again, and for that purpose bound himself by solemn contract, to the full
performance of his part within a certain time.

(53) Dermot having thus negotiated his affairs and set it in so good
forwardnes, while his friends in England prepared themselves and their Forces,
lest he should seem to rely upon foreign aides, and so to diminish with
them the reputation of his own valor and alliances at home; he sails back
into his Country; carrying with him the promises of confederates, and there
both by his presence and persuasions did the best he could to facilitate the
entrance of the English; whose honorable entertainements, devotions, ciuility,
riches, valors, wisdom, and victorious greatnesses he spared not to
celebrate, as instruments advancing his own designs: which raised no little
expectation, mixed with contrary affections of desire and fear.

(54) The next year, when the season grew fit for an Army to take the field,
Robert Fitz-Stephen Robert Fitz Stephen saild into Ireland.
accompanied with Maurice Fitzgerald his half brother by the surer side, and
Trig^ Militi^s.
a competent number of Soldiers, reposing (under God) their chief hope in
their swords and courages, set sail for Ireland; and M^sc. Clonmel. in Custod.
Patric. white.
in the beginning of May came on shore, at a place called by the Irish, B^nn
(by the English at this day commonly, Bagg and Bunn) which in our language An.
D. 1170 They were Soldiers of all sorts 390. Stowes Annals. ad An. Dom. 1170.
signifies Sacred: a word which (so much as names may be presages of things)
did as it were hallow the attempt of the English with a lucky and gracious
omination, whereof the Inhabitants at this present retain this rhyme. At the
head of Bagg and Bunn,
Ireland was lost and wun.


(55) The next day after, Maurice de Prendergast also, with Manuscr. Clo^mel,
ibid.
other men of Arms, and many Archers in two ships arrived there, being
parcel of Fitz-Stephans Forces and Companions of his Fortunes, who ioining
themselves together, immediately marched to the City of Weisford under their
Banners, and that in the greatest bravery they could, (the Knights and Men at
Arms, in their The name of Pendergast yet remains in Ireland: taken first (as
seems) from a Town of that name in Penbrokeshire.
Coats of Arms and Colors) to draw thereby now at the first the greater
reputation to themselves, and with opinion so gotten, to fill up the smalnes of
their numbere: in which manner assailing the City, the Irish therein rendered
themselves, and in reward of the service, being also Pendergasts, coa^ Armor,
was Gules, a S^ltoyr Vari^, as my learned fri^nd, M. Bolton (whose notes have
given me much light in this Kings life, and diverse others) himself observed
in the Friars Church at Clonmell.
according to capitulation, and encouragement of others, who were to proceed in
this war, Dermot, to whose use the English General had taken it, Girald.
Cambr. in expug. Hiber.
bestowed the City it self, and the Country about upon Robert Fitz-Stephen, at
his pleasure to be disposed off: and there the first Colony of our Nation was
planted, which has ever since immoueably maintained their abode among
innumerable changes in the world, retaining at this day the ancient attire of
the English, and the language also it self, though brackish with the mixture
of * Camb. p. 748. The first English Colonie.
vulgar Irish, which therefore by a distinct name is called Weisford speech,
current only in that City, and the County about.

(56) But Robert Fitz-Stephan thus advanced, for weisford (...).
his more assurance, began to raise a Camb. ibid.
Town at Carricke, making the place which nature had already fortified, much
more by Art defensible. This entry into Ireland being by him now made (under
the name of Henry King of England) and the success exceeding hope, Richard
Strong-bow receiving advertisement from Dermot, and the new Lord of Earl
Richard prepared for Ireland.
Weisford, of all occurrences; thought fit, first to dispatch Annal. Hibern.
apud Camb. p. 795. Raimund sent before with supplies.
some supplies to Fitz-Stephen, which about the beginning of May, under the
conduct of Raimundle gross (a Gentleman of the Earls family) were accordingly
sent: and after Raimund the Earl himself in the same year set forth: His
Forces were about Annal. Hibern. apud Camb. p. (...). An. 1171. C^. Reg^ (...)
apud Cambd. M^scr (...). Annalib. Hiber. apud Came. vbi perp^am (...). 11^0. pro
1171. (...) ibid. ad An. 1185.
two hundredth men of Arms, and a thousand other Soldiers, with whom he came
safe to Anchor in the Bay of Waterford, upon the Vigil of Saint Bartholmew,
August, 23. Ann. 1171. Earl Richard the General, knowing that expedition did
carry with it terror and advantage, presently marches to Porthlarge, (the
Irish name of Waterford) and upon the very next day took the City by force,
and sacrificed the armed Earl Richards first a ^mpts. Waterford taken
Inhabitants to the revenge of Dermot, so the rather to make room, and
security for themselves, to the exceeding terror, and just dismay of all
about, as they who found, that, howsoever the pretense was to resettle Dermot,
the purpose was to seat the English for ever.

(57) But Dermot, Author of this calamity to his Nation, resolute in his
purpose, in full complement He marries the Lady Eua.
of his Contract, does openly in solemn manner bestow his promised daughter
Eua, upon the Conqueror in marriage, with his own right hand giving her in the
Church: at which time, the famous Strong-bow did not celebrate his particular
Wedding Day, but the indissoluble knot of the Irish allegiance to the English
Soueraignetie, with the same Ring which circuled his Wives finger, affiancing
that Island to this our Country.

(58) The Marriage performed, it was far from the mind of the Earl to spend
much time in revels and feasts, but consults with his men of war what Earl
Richard marches to Dublin.
was next to be done for the settling his Father in law King Dermot, and for
finishing the Conquest which was now so happily begun, in two several parts
of Ireland at once. Leaving therefore a sufficient Garrison to make good the
places already gaind, and to secure the la^ding of fresh supplies, he sets
forward with his selected Companies, to whose victorious weapons the whole
Realm lay open, so far forth, that Rotherick himself was very well contented
(notwithstanding his lately usurped, and swelling title of Monarch of Ireland)
to hold himself within the bogs and fastenesses of his peculiar Realm, the
wild, and mountainous Connaught; mean while, Strongbow keeps on his way over
the bosom of Ireland to the principal City thereof, Dublin, taking in (as he
marches) all the places about, and securing himself by pledges, of their
loialty, or otherwise, as he saw most fit. In which journey, pleased with the
delight and fertile situation of C^d. p. 75^.
Kildare, he resolved there to settle his abode, and to erect a seat to his
posterity.

The conquest of Dublin being speedily, and most happily achieved; not long
after, Dermot Mac Dublin taken.
Murgh, Father in law to the Earl (whom the Irish for his affection to the
English, call Dermot Ningall, Dermot King of Leinster dies.
that is, Dermot the Strangers friend) breathed his last at Fernys, dying, (
Annal. Hiber. pr^at.
plenus dierum.)

(59) The fame of these successes wafting over the Irish seas, and coming to
the King, made him resolve to pass in person thither, that he might have the
honor of the Conquest: and not approving such forwardnes in the Earl, who (as
Will. Par^us. Nic. Tr^et. Holinsh. p. 83.
some say) went against his express commandment, (and indeed Giral. Cambr.
cap. 13. lib. 1.
Giraldus, who lived at that time, calls his leave no better then an Ironicall
leave) and for that he knew not to what insolency such fair fortune might in
time allure, as also for that they seemed to handle the Natives too rigorously;
Idem. lib. 1. c. 19.
thereupon he forbids by his Proclamations, any vessel to carry any thing out
of his Dominions into Ireland, and commands all English to return before
Easter, and leave off their attempts, or their estates in England should be
seized for the King. By which Edict these affairs were brought into fearful
extremity, which was changed into better condition by the travel of Herucius
de Monte Marisco, on the behalf of the Earl, and the adventurers, who finding
the King in Glocestershire with an Army for Ireland, appeased his displeasure
upon these terms: That the King should have the head City of the Kingdom,
Dublin, with the adjacent Cantreds, with all the Coast towns and Castles, the
rest to remain to the Conquerours to hold of the King, and of his Heirs, and
so to be under his protection, as Subjects ought, and as they were before;
which subjection it seemed to the King they meant to have renounced.

(60) The Kings goodly Navy lay in Milford haven, to which as he iournied, he
thundered against Giral. Camb.
the Welsh Nobility, coming to entertain him, for suffering Strongbow to
depart: At last being imbarkt, he had a fair Gale which set him safe in
Ireland with all his Forces at Waterford, where first he commits An. D. 1172.
to prison Robert Fitz-Stephen, whom the Citizens presented bound, having held
him in custody, under King Henri^s doings in Ireland
color of doing good service, because he had entered Ireland without the Kings
particular leave; yet soon after the King released him, but deprived him of
Weisford and the territories. Then takes he the homages of such petty Kings,
and principal persons of Girald. Camb. lib. 1. H^b. exp. Ca. 31. 32. etc.
the Irish as repaired, dismissing them in honorable sort, meaning to win
them by gentle, and not exasperating courses; and marching through Ossyrie to
Dublin, he takes o Rotherick the King of Connaughts homage by Hugh Lacie, and
William Fitz-Aldelm: last ly, at Dublin he kept his Christmas in Royal state,
which to behold, very many of the Irish Princes came thither.

(61) Mindful now of his duty to God, the Island being calm, and silent
through the presence of such a mighty Monarch, the most noble King of England,
Religion established by a Synod at Cashell.
and triumphator of Ireland (as Idem. cap. 33 and 34.
mine Author styles him) causes a Synod to be holden at Cassils for
reformation of the Irish Church, where amongst sundry other constitutions, to
which the Irish Clergy did willingly submit, it was decreed, That all the
Church Lands, and their possessions should be altogether free from the exaction
of secular men, and that from thenceforth, all Divine things should be handled
in every part of Ireland in such sort, as the Church of England handles them.
For (says the Constitution) it is most just, and meet, that as Ireland has
by Gods mercy obtained a Lord, and King out of England, so also that from
thence they should receive a better form of life, and manners, then heretofore
they used.

(62) The King continuing his politic iealousies, and thinking Strongbow to
be as yet too great, draws from his dependency Raimund, Milo Cogan, William
Makarel, and other of the best Captains, and makes them his own by bounty.
But before he could fully establish that Kingdom (the inseparable evil fate
thereof, which would never suffer it to enjoy the blessed benefit of exact
ciuility) other affairs which he esteemed more necessary, call him away, and
therefore having left Hugh Lacie at Dublin, he sets sail for England upon
Easter Easter day after noone says Math. Paris and Ypodigm. Neustr.
Monday, and landed happily at Saint David's in Pembrookeshire, from whence with
all speed he posteth into Normandy.

(63) In Normandy there attended for his arrival two Cardinals, sent as
Legates at his own request, for taking his purgation concerning the death of
Giral. Camb. Hib. exp. lib. 1. c. 38.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, whereof, upon oath that he was no way
consenting to that cruel, and sacrilegious revenge, and declaring withal his
infinite sorrow for having in his anger given occasion by rash words for others
to do that deed, and giving further oath to perform enioined penances, he
was by them absolved. The condition of his absolutions were, That he Math.
Paris. Sabellicus Ennead 9. lib. 5.
should at his own charge maintain two hundredth Soldiers for an whole year
for defense of the holy land. That he should suffer Appeals to be made freely.
That he should revoke all customs introduced to the prejudice of the Churches
liberty. That he should restore and make up the possessions of the Church of
Canterbury. That he should freely receive all such as were in banishment for
Beckets cause, etc. Not long after Thomas was canonized by Pope Alexander, and
so not only the victory Mat. Westminster. Nic. Tri^es. Holinsh. page 83.
clearly given him against King Henry, but a triumph also.

(64) Now began the womb of rebellion, and unnatural conspiracies to
disclose the mischiefs which were ordained to exercise this right redoubted
King and Warrior, ^hatched here at home by the malice (some say) of Eleanor
his Queen, at such time as he was absent in Ireland, so that as Math. Paris
one writes, God stirred up the Kings own bowels against himself. Causes of
this unhappy dissension, there were many: First a Queen and Wife, violently
vindicatiue for wrong done unto her Bed by the King, who was immoderatlie
addicted to variety of loves: then Ambition in an euill-naturd Child, and
lastly, pernicious Actors and instruments, who, for their own ends, nourished
this cursed mischief; so as if we should out of our stories recapitulate the
several occasions taken by the son against the father, we should rather
show you the colors, then the causes: For none of those causes which his Son
pretended, seemed great enough with men that fear God, to bear out such
continual divisions as followed.

(65) The head of this conspiracy was very great, and justly very terrible:
for on the side of King Henry the son, there were the Kings of France and
Scotland, Ypodig. Neustr.
Richard and Geffrey, two younger sons of the King of England, whom by their
mothers persuasions they forsook, to follow the yongue King; David the Scottish
Kings brother, Philip Earl of Flanders, (a Peer of France, and a potent
Prince,) Matthew Earl of Boloigne, Theobald Earl of Blois, Hugh Earl of
Chester, Robert Earl of Leicester, Hugh Bigot Earl of Norfolk, Roger
Mowbray, and other great ones, in great numbers, so as nothing seemed wanting,
but only a good cause, which (such as it was) Queen Elianor, like an Alecto,
kept alive, so much as lay in her, with perpetual fomentations. And indeed the
scope of these confederats did require no less a combination, it being to
depose the Father, whom it pleased them (for countenance of their ungodly
arms) to repute no King, because he had crowned his son.

(66) Though nothing then could come more grievous, to the bleeding heart of a
most loving father, then such a war; yet not to be unprovided, he (like a
soldier) prepares himself, when fair means faild, and found multitudes
ready to live, and die with him; the indignity of the unnatural revolt, did
so much inflame all honest courages, which acknowledged him their Sovereign.

(67) The particular accidents of the wars would fill a volume. At one time
Normandy, Guien, and Britane were invaded by the confederats in France, and at
the same time Cumberland by the Scots. But the King of England had friends in
all those parts, and himself hearing that Vernuil was Roger Houeden.
besieged by the French King in person, he began at last to kindle, having,
like a sleeping Lion, sitten still all that while, and (for that the place had,
upon parlea, agreed to render if aid came not by a day) he arrived to their
succor within the time, Math. Paris. Ypodig. Neustr.
sending King Lewis word that he should get him forth of Normandy with
speed, or he would without fail, come, and see how he did upon that very
day. Lewis, meaning nothing less then to put his own Crown in danger, while
he sought one for his son in law, (and therefore in all the warre-time, would
never set up his rest upon a battle,) but willing otherwise to do to King
Henry the father, all the harm he could, by countenancing the faction, and
supporting the revolted malcontents with his best means, and knowing King
Henry was a sower and terrible Prince when he came indeed to fight,
immediately raised his siege, and with as much have as he might, abandoned
the place Th. Walls. in Ypodig. Neustri.
leaving his Camp, tents, and warlike provisions behind, and retired into
France.

(68) And though King Henry, beginning now indeed to shake his dreadful
sword, had many fair days of his enemies, mixed with some losses both of An.
D. 1173.
men and other strengths, though not great, nor many, in regard of the
overthrows which on his behalf were given: For that in Britane his forces had
in battle vanquished Hugh Earl of Chester, and Ralph * Roger Houed.
de Foulgiers, and slain about one thousand and five hundred of their army;
and in England, Reignald Earl of Cornwall, and Richard de Lucie, had in
bloody battle Math. Paris
overthrown the insolent Earl of Leicester, and Poly^. (...).
entered the town of Leicest^ by force; and that he had the persons of the said
Ypodig. Neust^.
Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, Ralph de Fulgiers, and very many other prisoners
of especial note and Nobility; yet Lewis the French King moving a parlea, the
father desirous to use the good fortune of war, to reclaim his rebels, was so
willing to make peace, that he might seem to have outgone expectation in the
quality of his * Houeden.
offers, but through such wicked persuasions, as were used, prevailed not.

(69) A violent firebrand in this division, was Robert Earl of Leicester,
being matched with a Lady no less proud, and stomachous then himself; *
Math. Pari^. The outrageous and disloiall behavior of the Earl of Leicester
who at this meeting, was not contented to have affronted King Henry the
father, on the behalf of his yongue Lord, and Master the son, but (after
many words of reproach) is said to have laid his daring * Roger Houed. Ho^rsh.
hand upon his sword, with purpose to have stricken the King, had he not been
withheld: (and where such spirits had to do, it is easy to guess what
kinds of counsel were like to be embraced and pursued;) having forsaken the
father, not for that the others * Ypod. Neustr.
cause was more honest, but for that (says Thomas Walsingham) the father King,
laboring to enlarge the regal power, sought to set his foot upon the necks
of the proud and haughty.

(70) But God, who meant to chastise the King, and not to deliver him up into
his enemies hands, The Kings victory in England he being ab^ent.
destroyed those hopes, that moved the sons to their unnatural attempts;
for it was not long after, when news came into Normandy, that his faithful
friends and servants, Polyd. Uirg. Henry Hunt. Holinsh. ^n H. 2.
Richard de Lucie and Humphrey de Bohun high Constable of England, together
with the powers of Reignald Earl of Cornwall the Kings uncle, Robert Earl of
Gloucester, and William Earl of Arundell, not far from Bury, courageously
encountered with the Earl of Leicester, and his Gallos quidam vocat.
Flemings, of whom above Houeden. and Polyd. Virg. sa^h 10000. were ther^
slain.
five thousand were slain, or taken, and among the prisoners was the Earl
himself, and Math. Paris
his Amazonian Countess, whose persons at his commandment were not long
after, brought over into Normandy.

(71) This Polyd. Virg.
great victory and other good success, did so much advantage the King, that
Lewis Lewis King of France concludes a truce.
beginning to distrust the enterprise, sought for six months truce for
himself, and had it granted: but because there were yet in England, two
principal men, Mat. Paris.
the Earl of Norfolk, and Roger Mowbray, which held out; having Leicester for
their Randenou, and seat of war, with no small numbers of partakers,
notwithstanding that Geffrey (the Elect of Lincoln, the Kings base son) had
taken two of Mowbraies Castles, and done other good service for his Lord and
Father, the truce served the enemy for no other purpose but to breath, and to
repair himself.

(72) The father (of whom Lewis said, that, he seemed not to go, but to fly,
he went with such celerity * Ypod. Neust.
from one place and Kingdom to another) in the mean while, recouers Xaincts
from Richard his violent son, weakening that party by so much, and would have
weakened it far more, but that aduertisments came post, declaring such matter,
as made him speed into Normandy.

(73) Thither Math. Paris. Great new dangers against the King.
came unto him out of England, Richard (the Elect of Winchester) sent with all
have by the Kings Iustitiaries, to lay open unto him, the dangerous estate
wherein the Realm at that time stood. For after that Philip Earl of Flanders
had solemnly sworn to invade England, in supportation of yongue Henry's
quarrel, sundry forces arriving and ioining with Hugh Bigot Earl of
Norfolk, had taken and spoiled the City of Norwich, and done otherwise much
harm, whereby the yongue King and his faction had taken great encouragement,
as if the die of war were turned, and as well the yongue King as the Earl of
Flanders, were come with forces to the Coasts, there to transport for England:
Rog. Ho^d.
Moreover, Robert Earl Ferrers of Derby (who was fallen from the father) had
suddenly entered upon Nottingham, burnt the town, beaten out the Kings
Garrison, slain the people, and (enricht with spoil) retired to Leicester,
whether about the same time, Anketill Malorie (Constable thereof) had also
brought about two hundred prisoners taken at Northampton, which he (with
slaughter of the like number of the Townsmen) had also suddenly surprised and
taken: so that the Realm stood doubtful, and in extreme peril; to the
increase whereof, William King of Scots (being deep in the confederacy)
invaded England, dividing his Forces, himself with part wasting
Northumberland, and Duncan (a very cruel Captain) with the other destroying
the western Borderers.

(74) The Father wonderfully stirred herewith, leaves Normandy in as good
assurance as the time would permit, and sends before him to the Ships, Eleanor
his own Queen, and Queen Margaret King Henry sails into Normandy.
his sons wife, his son John, etc. the Earl of Leicester and his
Countess, with many other prisoners, and a mighty Army; but the wind
changing, and he compelled to stay in harbor at Barbefleet in Normandy, where
he had taken shipping, he is said (God touching his heart) to have uttered
these words with much remorse, in the presence of al; If my purpose in this
voyage be for the peace of the Clergy and people, and if the King of heaven
shall vouchsafe to quiet and calm these troubles at my arrival, then for his
mercies sake we beseech him to send us a prosperous wind: But if he be
against it, and has resolved to visit the Kingdom of England with the rod of
his fury, let him grant me never to touch the shore of that Country more. His
Prayer thus vttred from the depth of soul, was secunded with a fresh perie of
wind: whereupon setting sail, he arrived safe the same day with all his Navy
at the Port of Hampton in England.

(75) The next day he took his journey toward Canterbury, where (as it
appears) the residue of his penance enioined him at his Absolution, was to
be performed. For, besides the forementioned conditions, the Legates enioined
him (says the Vita B. Th. l. 4. c. 5.
Author of Beckets life) some other thing secretly, which came not to our
knowledge; yea the Epist. ad^ Archi. Raven. apud Houeden.
Legates themselves wrote in their own letters, that he then promised to do
(voluntarily, if ye list to believe it) some things which was not fit for them
to lay open in writing. And well might they be ashamed thereof; but if it were
so unfit to be written, how unfit was it to be imposed on such a Sovereign
Prince? what it was, let Rog. Houed. i^ H. 2 p. 308.
Houeden report. The King coming toward the Church, where the late Archbishop
was buried, clad all in woollen, went three miles barefooted, insomuch, that the
very ground where he went, was bloody, as was evidently seen, much blood
running from his tender feet which were cut with the hard stones. Neither yet
was this the worst; for afterall this, He received Discipline at the hands of
the Bishops, of a great many Priests, and of the Monks. Geruasius names Abbots
also, whereby appears, that every several sort were to have a hand in that
service. Matthew Paris can tell you more plainly what that Discipling was: viz.
he Mat. Paris. Ann. 1174. Walsingh. Nubrigensis. Capgra^. Geruas. Dorob. etc.
received the Discipline of rods on his ba^esh, receiving of every religious
man, (a great multitude of them being there gathered) 3. or 5. ierkes a piece:
whence we may easily believe, Baronius and his Apud Baron. An. Dom. 1174.
Author spoke within compass, who acknowledge he received 80. lashes. To such
height was the Papal tyranny and pride grown toward those, of whom God had
said expressly, Touch not mine Anointed.

(76) Yet some Monks of that age, attribute the happy and great success which
ensued, to the reconcilement which King Henry thus made with God for the blood
of Thomas, because it pleased God to deliver his enemy William King of Scots
into Math. Paris. Rog Houed. Ypodig. Neust. Hector Boethius. 13. li. c. 3. says
the hands of his soldiers about that very time, and did also with storms
beat back into France his disobedient son the young King, being now under
sail for England, scattering the whole Fleet, and almost the King was taken,
13. lul. Ann. Dom. 1174.
sinking it with tempest.

(77) The Kings other actions till his next return into Normandy, which was
not long after, (because Lewis King of France, and his son in law the young
King Henry, the head to which all this putrified humor drew, with the Earl of
Flanders had laid a strong siege to the City of Roan) Ypod. Neust.
Thomas Walsingham comprehends in these few words; He tamed his Rebels, put
his enemies to flight, seized on their fortresses. And so having in a manner
miraculously quieted the Realm, he takes with him the King of Scotland, the
Earls of Leicester and Chester, with other his chief Prisoners Rog. Houed.
(whom he afterward first imprisoned at Caen in Normandy, and then at Faleis)
but leaving his seditious wife behind him under straight custody, he arriues
with his puissance in Normandy, which being understood in the Confederates
Camp, the same Mat. Paris Ypod. Neust.
brake up, and first setting fire on all the engines of war, retreated into
France in such sort, that the English soldiers laid hold upon much munition
and warlike furniture. Roger Houeden (a very sure Author) says Rog. Houed.
that the confederates had only besieged Roan upon one side, and that Lewis
hearing that the victorious King Henry was within Roan, did first send away the
weak, and worst of his Army, and then deceiving the English with a solemn
promise of returning the next day, to enter into a conference with the King
about making a final agreement, did depart; so that Houeden aggrauates the
dishonor of the retreat, with the note of faith-breach.

(78) Let the greatness and felicity of this King The great felicity of King
Henry.
be now but slightly looked upon, and it will appear, that no Prince of
those times was hitherto so much bound to God for manifold favors as he. The
King and power of France, after so many attempts with the young King of
England, and all their forces, flying at his presence without any stroke
stricken, the valiant king of Scotland prisoner, and the chiefest of his Rebels
under his foot, England assured, Scotland dismayed, Ireland retained, Wales
ministering soldiers, Normandy in possession, and all the coasting Regions,
Britain, Angiou, Poictou, Main, Tourain, Limosin, Gascoign, Guien, etc. from
thence as far as the Mountains which separate Spain from France, under his
dominion; and the blessing of Peace shortly after ensuing, upon such terms as
himself could reasonably wish, made him like another Solomon to be sought
unto: his An. D. 1175.
Wisdom and Magnificence being in such high credit through the Christian
World, that the Kings of Castile and Navarre chose him sole Arbiter in their
debate, which to both their contentment he most wisely determined; and then
Mat. Paris. Ypodig. Neust.
at one time in his Palace at Westminster were seen together, the Ambassadors
of Manuel Emperor of Constantinople, of Frederick Emperor of Romans, of Rog.
Houe.
William Archbishop of Triers in Germany, (a mighty Prince) of the Duke of
Saxony, and of Philip Earl of Flanders. Moreover he had the government of
France for a time, the Kingdom of Jerusalem offered him, but refused, and two
of his daughters married to the two Kings Math. Paris.
of Castile and Sicilie.

(79) There was first therefore a truce taken betwixt the three Kings, Lewis
and the two Henry's; wherein Richard (who stood out) was left to his Fathers
prosecution, who ^ing himself thus destitute after many flashes ^paration to
resist, and great conflicts with hi^e, put himself most humbly into his Fath^
^cy, and throwing himself Roger Houede.
with tears (...) obtained the pardon he begd, and (...) ^ion to his most
inward grace and fauo^ (...) ^istan, fatherly, wise and happy Act; (...)
^ercome with this unexpected and (...) ^nes, never desisted till he had
brought t^ young King to a final atonement, arms being laid apart upon all
hands. The chief points of that wished peace were: 1. That Henry An. D. 1175.
The Articles of Peace.
the young King with Richard and Geffrey his brethren should return, freed from
all oaths of confederation, to the King their Fathers obedience, as to their
Lord and Father. 2. That Prisoners should be set at large without ransom on
all hands. 3. That William King of Scots, the Earl of Leicester and Chester,
Ralph de Fulgiers, and other, who had compounded for their ransom, before this
conclusion, should have no benefit of this exemption. 4. That King Henry the
Father should take assurance of loialty toward him by hostage, or oath of such
as were enlarged. 5. That King Henry the son should ratify that Grant which
his Father the King had made to his son John, of some Castles, and yearly rents
in England, etc. The Seal it self, wherewith the young king made this mentioned
Ratification, we have here annexed.



(80) Touching King William of Scotland, his forementioned compounding: our
Historians all agree not, H^eden. Math. Paris Nic. Tri^et. Walsingh. etc.
some saying more, Polyd. Uirg. Hist. Angl. lib. 13.
some less: but Hect. Boe. transla. lib. 13. cap. 5.
Hector Boethius (a Scottish Historian of some credit with that Nation) writes;
1. That King William was to pay 100000. l. Striueling for his ransom, the one
half in present coin, the other 50000. l. upon time. 2. That for assurance of
that sum the Earledomes of Northumberland, Cumberland and Huntington The
points according to the Scottish Authors.
should rest in morgage 3. That K. William should move no war against England
for the retention of those lands. 4. That, for the moresecurity of the
premises, the Castles of Berwick, Edenbrough, Roxbrough and Striueling should
be delivered to the English.

(81) In the mean while, King Henry according to Covenants, discharges out of
captivity nine hundred sixty and nine men of Arms, taken in those late wars;
and King Henry the son discharged above one hundredth; and having accomplished
whatsoever might content or secure his Father, they prepared for England, where
the ioious letters of their coming written by the Father, had begotten great
and longing expectations in the subjects; which he did, (says Paris) That
whom the general danger of war had afflicted, the common gladness Math.
Paris.
might recomfort. In their travail thitherward the confidence was such upon
this fresh reconcilement, that one Chamber and table served both, for whom
before one Kingdom was not wide enough. They landed at Rog. H^ed. An. D. 1175.
Portsmouth upon Friday, 20. Maij, 1175.

(82) The face of England at this present, was like that of a quiet sky and
sea, no blast, no billow, no appearing sign of coffeehouse; which the
better to continue, King Henry the Father accompanied with the King his son,
omitted no office of a just and prudent Governor, visiting a great part of his
Realm in person, consulting, ordering and enacting such laws and courses, as
might most establish the good of Peace. Hence it came, that at London
Constitutions at London the Kings being present.
both the Kings were present in a Synod, in which Richard lately chosen
Archbishop of Canterbury, did publish ( Geruasius. Rog. Houed.
with the Kings assent) certain Canons for the better government of the Church
of England, beginning thus; At the true fountain of all happy rule, that is to
say, at the honor of God, and establishment of Religion and Discipline, etc.
and amongst the Houeden. in H. 2. fol. 310. Symonie was loss of Patronage for
ever.
rest, this one Canon in especial words is enacted, both by authority of the
King and Synod, (and indeed worthy for ever to be in force) That every
Patron taking reward for any presentation, should for ever loose the Patronage
thereof. And the same Kings not long after being at Woodstocke, in
accomplishment of such holy purposes, by advise of the Clergy provided men to
such Bishoprics, Abbacies, and principal cures as were vacant, where King
Henry the Father forgot not his true friend John of Oxenford, whom he preferred
to the Sea of Norwich.

(83) From hence coming to York, he set those parts in peace; whither William
King of Scots* repairing, sundry matters of importance were handled The Kings
at York.
between the two Kings: as likewise afterward at Windsor (where the King had
called a great* assembly of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal) Rotherick King
of Connaught in Ireland (at the suite of his Ambassadors, the Archbishop of
Thuamon and Toomund, and others of that nation, subjects to Rotherick) was
received into protection and favor, and became Tributarie: K. Henry being
unwilling Polyd. Virg. Parliament at Northampton.
to fish with an hook of gold, which in warring upon Ireland he should seem
to do. In an other Parliament, not long after at Northampton, he caused England
to be divided An. D. 1176. The first Iusti^iars Itinerants. Holinsh. (...) Hen.
2. Houeden.
into six circuits, and to each Circuit three Iusticiars Itinerants deputed;
and as well to give his laws more free passage, as also the better to secure
himself he threw to the earth sundry Math. Paris. Roger Wend. Ma^se.
Castles which had bin formerly kept against him, as Leicester, Huntington,
Walton, Groby, Stutesbury, etc. and had the rest both in his English and in his
French Dominions committed to his disposition.

(84) The young King Rog. Houed. Polyd. Virg.
about these times discovered fresh alienations in his mind against his Father;
who yet dissembling all, did arm notwithanding upon the defensive, and
replenished both England and Normandy with Garrisons, which drew the son the
sooner to come in.

(85) But the old King not unwilling perhaps (lest the Brethrens concord might
prove no better then a conspiracy against the Father) that his warlike Children
should contend, Tho. (...). in Ypod. Neust.
did nourish deb^te among them: Certain it is, that to divert the war from
himself, he appeased his son the King with an increase of maintenance for
himself, amounting in the whole to an hundredth pounds Aniouin by the day, and
ten pounds of the same money for his wife the Queen: and whereas Alice
(daughter of Lewis then King of France, who was married at three years of age
to Richard (second son of King Henry) Polyd. Virg. in Hen. 2 call^ her A^ela.
when he was but seven, and now demanded of King Henry the Father, to the
intent that Richard her husband might enjoy her, the old King who was Rog.
Houed.
suspected to have deflowred her, for that time shifted of the delivery of her
person, in such sort that peace was not hindered thereby.

(86) But while the young King by his Fathers Rog. Wend. Math. Paris. Th Walls.
in Tpodig. Neustr.
instigation sought by force to constrain young Richard An. D. 1183.
to do homage to him for Aquitaine, and King Henry the Father for the same
cause commanded Geffrey his third son, Duke of Britain (whom * some for his
extraordinary perfidiousnes in this service toward his Father, and manifold
sacrilege, calls the Rog. Houe.
Child of Perdition) to aid and assist his said elder brother; while also the
jealous Father (out of the strife of his sons) sought his own safety, and in
nourishing it, had by the treachery of the said sons bin twice endangered,
and had at both times been wonderfully preserved; and while the young King by
profound dissimulations, plotted to bring both his Father and Brother Richard
into subjection; behold the hand of God by taking away the young King at
Martell not far from Linoges, where his Father lay at siege, gave an end to
this odious, foul and intricate contention.

(87) Thus was his life cut off like a Weauers King Henry the son dies in
the flower of his y^uth.
thread (say Rog. Wend. MS. Math Paris. Them. Walls. Tpodig. Neust.
Authors) who had by dying cut of the hope of many: But whatsoever his life
was, which God thus shortened at his age of twenty and eight years; certainly
his death was not inglorious, but worthy to be set out in Tables at large as a
pattern to disobedient Children: for his Father refusing to visit him (fearing
his own life,) but sending his King in sign of forgiveness; the dying Prince
most humbly with floods of tears kissing the same, made a most sorrowful
confession of his sins, and fecling death approach, would needs be drawn (as
an unworthy sinner) out of his own bed, and laid upon another, strewed with
ashes, where his soul departed in a most penitent manner from his body; which
being related to the Father, he fell upon the earth, weeping bitterly, and
(like another David for his Absolon) Rog Houed.
mourned very much, O quam nefandum est, says one most gravely: O how heinous
a thing it is for sons to persecute the father! for neither the sword of the
fighter, nor, the hand of an enemy, did avenge the fathers wrong: but a fever
and a flux with excoriation of the bowels. His body was buried (by his own
desire) at Roan; (which yet was not done without trouble, as if the factions,
of which he was the cause in his life, did by a kind of Fate, not forsake him
being dead; An. D. 1183
for the Citizens of Mauns having enterred it, they of Roan without menaces,
and the fathers express commandment, could not obtain it, who thereupon was
taken up again,) but his wife Queen Margaret was sent back into France, and
his suruiuing sons were once again reduced to due obedience, not any enemy
daring to appear.

(88) Who would not have thought, that this stirring Prince, should have had
opportunity to end his days in peace and glory? but it was otherwise
ordained by God, and ancient writers hold, he was principally scourged, for
being drawn, by seeming reasons of State, to put off an holy enterprise, the
occasion whereof, was laid as it were at his foot. An. D. 1184.
For Heraclius Patriarcke of Jerusalem, drawn with the supereminent fame of
King Henry's wisdom, valor, riches, and puissance, travailed from thence into
England, where, Math. Paris Roger Wend.
at Clerkenwell by London, in an assembly of the States purposelie called, the
king made known to them: That Pope Lucius had by ernest letters, commended the
lamentable state of the Holie-land, and the Patriarcke Heraclius unto him: That
Heraclius (there present) had stirred compassion, and tears, at the rehersall
of the tragical afflictions of the Eastern world, and had brought with him
(for memorable Rog. Houed.
signs, that the suite was by common consent of the Country) the Keys of the
Mat. Paris.
places of Christ's Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection; of David's Tower, and
of the holy Sepulcher; and the humble offer of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, with
the Ensign or Standard of the Kingdom, as Roger Houed. fol. 358.
duly belonging to him, who was right heir thereunto, to wit, the son of
Geffrey Earl of Aniou, whose brother Fulke was king of Jerusalem.

(89) Nevertheless, (the King having, at leftwise King Henry refis seth the
kingdom of Jerusalem.
formally, adjured the Lords to advise him, that which should be most for his
souls health) it was thought fit, to aid the cause with money, but not to
emploie his person, north person of any child he had, which was the
Patriarcks last request; and thereupon (to the unspeakable grief of the said
Patriarcke, and of the whole Christianity of the East) he refused the said
Kingdom, and abandoned as noble an occasion of immortal renown, as ever any
King of England had been offered; but gave leave Rog. Houed. fol. 35^
to all such as would, to take upon them the Cross and serve. This Heraclius
is he who dedicated the Temple Church in London, as by this Inscription over
the Church door in the Stone-worke does appear.

ANNO AB INCARNATIONE DOMINI An Inscription upon the Temple Church.
M. C. LXXXV DEDICATA HEC ECCLESIA IN HONOREM BEAT MARIE A DNO ERACLIO DEI
GRATIA SANCTE RESVRRECTIONIS ECCLESIE PATRIARCHA II IDVS FEBRVARII. Qi EAM
ANNATIM PETENTIBVS DE INIVNCTA Si PENITENTIA LX DIES INDVLSIT.

(90) Thus the sorrowful Patriarcke being dismissed (not forgetting as Ran.
Higden. Polyd. Virg. in Hen. 2.
some do write, to thunder Heraclius departs
against the King for abandoning the cause) brought back nothing but discomfort
and despair, the Western Princes (by the Devils malicious Arts) being wrapped
and knotted in mutual suspicions and quarrels indetermined, whereupon shortly
after, ensued, with the loss of Jerusalem, the captivity of Guido King
thereof, and of innumerable Christians besides; whom Sultan Saladin, Prince of
the Musulmans or Saracens, to the grief and disgrace of all the Christian
world, did vanquish.

(91) But, King Henry's mind was more fixed on An. D. 1185.
settling the state of his already-possessed Kingdoms, and therefore in a great
Parliament, held at Oxford, Roger Houed. King Henry gives John his son Ireland.
(unto which came Rhesus and David, Kings of South Wales and North Wales, with
other their chief Nobles, which al did there swear fealty to the King) he
being desirous to advance his son John (whom he exceedingly loved, and
commonly in sport, he called Sans-terrae) having assured upon him certain
Lands and Rents in England and Normandy, did there very solemnly give him
also the title and Kingdom of Ireland; for, (besides the foresaid Bull of Pope
Adrian the fourth, who for sign of inuestiture had also sent a Giral. Camb.
lib 2. exp. Hib. c. 5. Houeden.
ring of gold, which were laid up in the Records at Winchester) Giraldus (who
lived in that age) tells us (to omit what he writes of one Gurguntius) that
Guillomar King of Ireland, was tributarie to the famous Arthur: that Baion
(whence (says he) the Irish came) was at that present under King Henry the
second; and that the Irish Princes had voluntarily submitted themselves, as
unto him who by the * Law of a Sociall war, was become their Sovereign. But
that Author had not seen belike, Ius Belli social, is that right, which
accrews to Princes or States, who aid one another.
or did not remember (when thus he went about to prove a legal right in the
King) what others write of Beda.
Egfrides ungodly spoils in Ireland, or of Came. page 730.
Edgars Charter, in which is said to be contained, that he had under his rule
the chief City of Ireland Dublin, and the greatest part of the kingdom also.
But King Henry strengthening his other rights with Grants of the Popes,
Adrian, and Alexander, obtained also of Urban the third (for Luciue the third,
who was Alexanders successor, would not gratify the the King therein) that it
should be lawful for him, to crown which of his sons he would, King of
Ireland, to whom he sent a crown of Feathers wouen with gold, in all their
Grants reserving to the Roman See, the Peter's pence, and rights; whereupon the
King gave the same to his son John, whose Coronation (stung with the like
before) his father only did delay, at such time as two Cardinales offered to
celebrate that solemnity.

(92 At Windsor, therefore his father giving him the Chr. H^b. apud Camb. page
795.
Order of knighthood (at which time he was about Houed. fol. 359. page 1. and
2.
twelve years old) sent him forth with into Ireland, where the Archbishop of
Dublin and the State, entertained him, but (by reason of such parsimonie toward
his soldiers as was used) he returned the same year without doing much, but
not without having wasted the most part of his Army, in skirmishes with the
Irish. His Style in his seal of Ireland (though Houeden says, his father made
him Regem, a^king) was only, Sigillum Iohannis filij regis Angliae Domini
Hiberniae, Lord of Ireland.

(93) King Henry, hearing now that his martial son, Earl Richard, had
fortified in Poictou against him, and vanquished Geffrey Earl of Britane,
Houeden. fol. 359. page 1.
prepares a puissant army, upon terror whereof, Richard came in, rendering up
Poictou to his mother Elienor, (whose inheritance it was) at his fathers
commandment. The same year wherein the West was thus defiled with unnatural
divisions, the East was likewise polluted with the cursed Apostasy of one
Richard de S. Albane (whom we shame to think, was English) who renouncing the
Christian belief (upon the Patriarcks discomfortable return) became a
principal Commander under the Sultan of Babylon, Saladine, whom the Christians
drove, with loss and slaughter of his army, from Jerusalem. But on the other
side, revenge of disobedience still pursued Gef An. D. 1186.
frey, son of King Henry, who was in a Idem. page 360. Militari conflict^
says Houeden.
Torneament at Paris trodden to death under the horse feet. A miserable end,
and a fearful.

(94) About which times, between the French and English all things stood
unsure, now war, then peace, and war again, by reason that Philip (who had
been crowned King some years before, during the life of Lewis) challenging the
custody of Arthur, the Posthumus son, and heir of Geffrey Earl of Britane,
and sometimes one thing, and sometime another, could not have his will: Whiles
Earl Richard turning to Philip against his Father, but obtaining a truce for
two years, such amity (if there be any amity among mighty Princes) grew
between king Philip and Earl Richard, Heir apparent of England and Normandy,
etc. that one bed and board served both. The Father perplexed, calls his son
home, who pretending many griefs, as the detention of Alice his Spouse, the
doubt of disinherison, and other things, stood out again; and again after a
while submits to his Father. Then bursts forth Philip into Arms; and things so
standing, the heavy news of Jerusalem lost, flew into Christendom. When this
City was formerly recovered by Godfrey of Bolein, an Urban was Pope, a
Frederick was Emperor, an Heraclius Patriarch; so now when it was lost, an
Urban was Pope, a Frederick was Emperor, and an Heraclius Patriarch.

(95) Upon these news Henry and Philip meet, and An. D. 1188
for the honor of God, laying down displeasure, in presence of William
Archbishop of Tire, at which time some say a Cross appeared in the air, take
upon them, as Soldiers of Christ, the badge of the Cross, and there the
better to distinguish themselves, it was agreed that the Roger Houed. fol. 365.
Math. Paris.
French should wear read Crosses, the English White, and the Flemish Green.
And this determination was seconded with warlike preparations, leuies of money,
and institution of martial Discipline: all which notwithstanding nothing went
forward.

(96) At Richard began the breach of this honorable confederation, who taking
revenge upon certain Rebels of his in Poictou, who brooked not his hard hand;
one mischief drew another, and at the last both the Kings of England and
France became parties to the quarrel, greatly against the mind of K. Henry,
whose heart was firmly (...) as it seems) to revenge the cause of Christ upon
Sultan Saladine: for that in his Epist (...) 2. ad Patriar (...). (...) Rog.
Houed. page ^7.
answer to the Patriarch of Antioch, imploring aid, he concludes, That among
other Princes himself, and son, rejecting this worlds glory, and despising
all pleasures whatsoever, and setting behind, all things which were of this
World, would in their own person with their whole Forces by the favor of the
Lord speedily visit him. And sure the state of those parts required it,
Saladine having slain many of the Knights Templars, and Nobles, and above
thirty thousand footmen, with innumerable other in Cities and Towns by him
subdued. Among all which grievous accidents, we cannot (to season sower thereby
with sweet) omit one noble protestation made by the chief crossed Lords,
Philip Earl of Flanders, the Earl of Bloys and other, who being required to
take parts, made answer; That they would not contrary to their promise to God,
put armor on, against any Christian, till they had done their deuoire against
Saladine.

(97) In the treaties therefore between Henry and Philip; the demands of
Philip on the behalf of Richard were such, and so unsafe for the King (as that
all his subjects should swear fealty to Richard during the Fathers life; but
yet reserving their allegiance to the Father) that Richard apparently fell off,
and became Liegeman for Normandy, etc. to Philip King of France; and at a new
Treaty (by mediation of a Cardinal Legate) the demands of Philip being more
hard then before, as that King Henry should not only settle the Kingdom upon
Richard, but take John also with him into Palestine, or that otherwise Richard
would not go (being jealous of his brothers grace with his Father): Henry
would consent to none of those insolent propositions, but disdaining to seem
to be enforced, they betook them selves on all sides to their swords.

(98) The effect whereof was, that former good fortunes forsaking King Henry,
he sustained many An. D. 1189. An. Reg. 35.
losses by the Armies of King Philip and Richard, and was driven out of Mentz
in Main; (the city where he was born, and which he loved above all other
places) by firing of the Suburbs before the enemy came, being casually
consumed, he was glad to yield to such conditions as it pleased Philip to
prescribe. It is written Rog. Houed.
that at the meeting of these two Kings, the sky being clear, a thunderbolt
stroke between them, and after a little pause coming together again, it
thundered more terribly, so that Henry had fallen off his horse, but that his
people sustained him; whereupon he came presently to an end, though it were to
his unspeakable grief; his Kingly heart being used to give, and not to take
conditions.

(99) Fearful was the speech which King Henry, when he abandoned Mentz by
reason of the fire, King Henry's death.
uttered against Richard; which was, That since he had taken from him that day
the thing that he most loved in this world, he would requite him, for after
that day he would deprive him of that Holin^. page 119. in (...). 2.
thing which in him should best please a Child, to wit, his Heart. But after
the peace concluded, (upon mediation) between the sides, another thing struck
nearer; for finding the name of his son John first in the Catalogue of the
Conspirators against him in that action, he bitterly cursed the hour of his
birth, laying Gods curse and his upon his sons, which he would never recall,
for any persuasion of the Bishops and others: but coming to Chinon fell
there grievously sick, and feeling death approach, he caused himself to be
borne into the Church before the Altar, where after humble confession, and
sorrow for his sins, he departed An. D. 1189.
this life. Accidents after his death, which was, when he had reigned 34. years
7. months and 4. days, being 63. years of age.


(100) It shall not (in contempt of humane glory) be forgotten, that this
puissant Monarch being dead his people presently left him, and fell to spoil
all he had, leaving him naked; of whom Roger Houede.
one says truly and gravely, Vere melmuscae, etc. Surely, these flies sought
honey, these wolves a Carcass, these Ants grain; for they did not follow the
Man but the spoil and booty. Neither must it be unremembered, that the fierce
and violent Richard (now heir of all) coming to meet his Fathers body,
roially adorned for the burial according to the Majesty of his estate; the
very Corse (as it were abhorring and accusing him for his unnatural
behauiours) gushed forth blood; whereat Richard pierced with remorse, melted
into floods of tears in most humble and repentant manner, attending upon the
remains of his unfortunate He was buried at (...).
Father to the Grave.

His Wife.
(101) Eleanor, the Wife of King Henry, was the eldest of the two Daughters,
and the sole Heir of William Duke of Aquitaine, the fifth of that name, and the
ninth in succession, son of Duke William the fourth, her Mother was Daughter
to Raimund Earl of Tholo^se, and her great Dowry was motive first to King
Lewis, (who had two daughters by her, Mary and Alice) and after to King Henry,
to marry her. There are of the Serr^ in Le^ the y^ger.
French Historians who report that king Henry had a former wife, and that she
bare unto him Prince Henry: but Writers of our own affairs (and Paulus (...)
in Lu^ic. 7. who call^ her Leo^ra.
some also of the French,) acknowledge but only Eleanor for his Wife. Certain
it is, that king Henry's times were much famoused by two Women of much
differing qualities; the one was his renowned Mother Matildis, whose Epitaph
thus comprised part of her glory: Ortu magna, viro mayor, sed maxima prole:
Hic i^cet Henrici Fili^, Sponsa, Parens.
Here Henry's Mother, Daughter, Wife dothrest:
By Birth, much; more, by Spouse; by Child, most blessed.
The other was this Eleanor his Wife; the first cause of these bloody Wars,
which long after continued as hereditary betwixt England and France, yea and
the bellows of that unnatural discord, betwixt her husband and his sons.
She much out-liued her husband (as a bad thing sticks longest) being so
happy as to see three of her sons, advanced to the Crown, and so unhappy
as to see two of them in their graves: for she lived till King John's time.

His Issue.
(102) William, the eldest son and first child of King Henry, and Queen
Eleanor his wife, was borne before his father was King, and while he was but
Duke of Normandy, in the eighteenth year of the reign of King Stephen, 1152.
and the fourth year after, (his father being then King, and in the second
year of his reign) the Nobility of England swear unto him their fealty, as
to the heir apparent of the Kingdom, at the Castle of Wallingford in
Barkeshire; but he deceased the year following, being the third of his fathers
reign, and the fifth of his own age 1156. He was buried in the Monastery of
Reading at the feet of his great Grandfather, King Henry the first.

(103) Henry, the second son of King Henry, and Queen Eleanor, being borne
the last of February 1156. was their heir apparent, after the death of his
brother William; was Duke of Normandy, Earl of Aniou and Maigne; and was
crowned King of England, at Westminster, by Roger Archbishop of York, the
fifteenth of Iulie 1170. His wife was Margaret, daughter of Lewis the Younger,
King of France, married to him at Nuburgh in Normandy, the second of November
1160. crowned Queen at Winchester, by Rotrocke of Warwick Archbishop of Roan,
the 21. of November 1163. and suruiuing him was remarried to Bela, King of
Hungary: He died without issue, before his father, at Marcell in Tour^ine, the
eleventh of Iulie, the twenty six year of his fathers reign 1182. and was
buried in the Church of our Lady at Roan.

(104) Richard, the third son of King Henry, and Queen Eleanor, was born at
Oxford, (in the Kings Ross^ War^ic. and alij.
Palace there, called Beau-Mount,) in September the fourth year of his
fathers reign 1157. He proved a Prince of great valor, and was therefore
surnamed in French Cuer-de-Lion; in English Lions-Heart: he was created Earl
of Poyton, and had the whole Duchy of Aquitaine, for which he did his homage
to King Lewis the Younger of France, in the eighteenth year of his fathers
reign 1170. yet afterward he conceived some coffeehouse against his father,
and maintained wars upon him, but was reconciled again into his love, and
succeeded him in his Kingdom.

(105) Geffrey, the fourth son of King Henry, and of Queen Eleanor, was
borne the twenty third of September, in the fifth year of his fathers reign
1159. He married Constance daughter and heir of Conan Duke of Britane, and in
her right was Duke of Britane, and did his homage to his brother Henry for the
same Duchy, and received the homages of the Barrons of the same: he died at
Paris, in the thirty two year of his fathers reign 1186. the nineteenth of
August, and is buried in the quire of our Ladies Church there: he had issue
Arthur Duke of Britane, borne after his fathers decease, the heir apparent of
King Richard, and by some supposed to be made away by King John; and also
Eleanor called the Da^sell of Britane, who died in prison in the reign of King
Henry the third.

(106) Philip, the fifth son of King Henry, and Queen Eleanor, may be
mistrusted, to be mistaken by Antiquaries of our time, as misunder-standing the
ancient writers, who mentioning the birth of Philip the Kings son, might by
good likelihood, be thought to mean, Philip son of Lew^ the Younger King of
France, who was borne about this time, and was after King of the same Country.
But Mr Tho^as Talbot, an exact trauailer in genealogies, has not only set him
down in this place, amongst the children of this King, but also warranteth the
same, to be done with good authority: howsoever, it is apparent, his life was
very short.

(107) John, the sixth and youngest son of King Henry, and Queen Eleanor,
was borne in the thirteenth year of his fathers reign, in Anno 1166. he was
iestinglie surnamed by his father Sans-terre, in English without Land, because
he was borne last, as if there had been nothing left for him: Notwithstanding
soon after, he was created Earl of Mortaigne, and had more-ouer by degrees,
the Earledomes of Cornwall, and Gloucester, the Counties of Derby and Lancaster,
the Honors of Wallinford and Nottingham, the Castles of Tikhill, Marlborow, and
Ludgarfall, with many other great Seigniories, and (above them all) was also
Lord of Ireland, and at the last succeeded his brother Richard in all
his-Dominions and was King of England.

(108) Maud, the eldest daughter of King Henry, and Queen Eleanor, borne in
the third year of her fathers reign, married to Henry, surnamed the Lion
Duke of Saxony; Lothar that died young, Otho the fourth German Emperor, and
William borne at Winchester, progenitor of the Dukes of Brunswicke, who bare
for their Arms, the Coat of England, with the two Lions, as King Henry his
Grandfather bare, before the match with Queen Eleanor, and Maud married to
Geffrey Earl of Perch: She suruiued him, and died in the first year of the
reign of her brother King Richard, and was buried by her husband, in the
Church of S. Blase at Brunswicke.

(109) Eleanor, the second daughter of King Henry, and Queen Eleanor, was
borne at Roan in Normandy, in the eight year of her fathers reign, 1162. She
was married to Alf^se, the ninth of that name, surnamed the Good, King of
Castile in Spain, and had issue by him Sa^ches, that died in his infancy:
Ferdinando that died in his youth, Henry King of Castile after his Father,
Blaunch Queen of France, wife to King Lewis the 8. and mother of Saint Lewis.
Berengar married to Alfonso king of Lion: Vrraca Queen of Portugal, and
Eleanor wife of James king of Arragon.

(110) Ioane, the third and youngest daughter of king Henry, and Queen Eleanor
his wife, was born at the City of Angiers in France, in the month of October,
the 13. year of her Fathers reign, which was the year of our Lord, 1166.
when she was eleven years of age; she was with great honor conveyed to the
City of Palermo, and there married to William the second of that name, king of
Sicil, Duke of Apulia, and Prince of Capua, upon Sunday the 13. day of
February, 1177. and was crowned Queen the same day at the same place. She
had a son by him named Boamund, whom his Father when he was returned from
his Christning, created Duke of Apulia: but the child died first, and the
Father after, leaving no issue. And she suruiuing, married again, and was the
third wife of Raimund the fourth of that name, Earl of Tholouz, by him she
had Issue Raimund the last Earl of that house, Bertrand Lord of Branquell,
Montelore, and Saluiac, and a daughter married to Berald of Elbeine, Prince of
Orange. His Natural Issue.


(111) William the Natural son of king Henry, born of Rosamund, the daughter
of Walter Lord Clifford; which Lady for her incomparable beauty was reputed
(with allusion to her name) Rosa-mundi, the Rose of the world: the dear
affection the king bare her, caused both burning jealousy in the Queen, and
fatal ruin to her self, albeit the amorous king, for her secrecy and
security, (but what walls will not a jealous eye pierce through?) had built
for her a most artificial Labyrinth at Woodstocke in Oxfordshire, with such
cunning windings and intricate passages, as had not Fate, and Heavens revenge
on Adultery, showed the way, the enraged Queen had not so soon been rid of
her Rival, nor that wanton Dame of her life. She was buried in the Nunnery of
Godstow by Oxford with this Epitaph. Hac iacet in Tumba Rosa (...), non Rosa
munda;
Non redolet, sed olet, quaredolere solet.
(Rose,
This Tomb does here enclose the Worlds most be^teous
Rose, passing sweet ere while, Now ^ght but edour vile.


But Hugh (called the Saint) Bishop of Lincoln, thought the Hearse of a Harlot
no fit spectacle for a Quire of Virgins to contemplate, and therefore himself
in person caused her bones to be cast forth of the Church; which yet those
chaste sisters afterward recollected, and placed there again with much honor,
^cting a goodly Cross, thus inscribed to the honor of her memory: Qui meat
hac, oret, Signumque salutis adoret,
Vtque tibi detur requies Rosamunda, precetur.
All you which pass this way, This Cross adore, and pray,
That Rosamunas Soul, may True rest possess for ^ye.
The first Son which by her King Henry had, was the said William, surnamed in
French, Longespee, in English, Long-Sword. He was Earl of Salisburie, in right
of Ela his Wife, Daughter and h^ire of William Earl of that County, son of
Earl Patrick, by whom he had Issue William Earl of Salisbury, Stephen Earl
of Vlster, Ela Countess of Warwick, Ida Lady Beucham of Bedford, and Isabell
Lady Vescie: his son Earl William the second, had Earl William the third,
Father of Margaret, Wife of Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln: he died in the
Castle of old Salisbury, and was buried in the Cathedral Church of the New
City, in the ninth year of the reign of king Henry the third.

(112) Geffrey an other Natural son of king Henry, was borne of the Lady
Rosamund aforesaid: This man in his tender youth, was (by his Fathers
procurement) made Archdeacon of Lincoln, and after Bishop of that See, which
he held above seven years without consecration. and then resigning it, in
the year, 1181. into the hands of Richard Ger^. Dorob.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Father; he was made Chancellor of England,
and afterward An. D. 1181.
by his brother king Richard, he was advanced to the Archbishopricke of York,
(being consecrated at Tours in France, An. 1191.) which See he governed with
good approbation. But in the time of his Brother King John, he underwent many
difficulties, by opposing the Kings purposes, who therefore made seizure of his
whole state, and An. 1207. he left the Land and after five years banishment,
died, viz. Ann. 1213.

(113) Morgan, an other Natural son of King Henry, is thought by M. Ferrers.
some (because so small mention is made of him) to have been of no long life
after his birth, and to have been borne of some woman in Wales, where this
Christian name is most commonly used, and whither this King upon many
occasions, sometimes resorted. But Goodwin of the (...). of Durham. John Stow
in the life of King John.
some others (whose studious pains, deserve much thanks of posterity)
report, that he was gotten on the wife of one Rodulph Bloeth (or Blewet) a
knight, and lived both to be Provost of Beuerley, and to be elected to the
Bishopric of Durham, when coming to Rome for a dispensation (because his
Bastardie made him otherwise incapable) the Pope willed him to profess
himself Blewets lawful son, and not the Kings Natural, promising to
consecrate him on that condition: but he, using the advice of one William Lane
his Clerk, told the Pope, that for no worldly promotion, he would renounce his
father or deny himself to be of royal blood: so blind were some Prelates of
those times, who esteemed spiritual functions, to be but worldly promotions.

RICHARD THE FIRST, DVKE OF Monarch 44
Richard I.
NORMANDY, GVYEN AND AQVITAINE, etc. THE FORTY FOVRTH MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISHMEN, HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER VI.


RICHARD succeeding to his deceased Father Henry, brought forth that wonder,
which a An. D. 1199 King Richard orders his estate.
Writer ofthat age thus celebrated, Mira cano; Sol occubuit,
Nox nulla secuta est.
A Wonder strange I write, the Sun did set, yet was no Night.
Meaning, that though Henry were dead, yet the glory and happiness of the land
was not thereby clouded, for that Richard was another Sun, and in some
respects far the more bright, and farther shining of the two; as having for
honor of Christian Cheualrie, wholly consecrated his warlike mind and actions
to the service of God, and readuancement of the Cross of Christ, dishonored
by the Infidels in Asia: in which enterprise he was so fervently zealous, that
from the time of his Fathers death (in whose vows it had been) he (...)
scarce any thing else, disposing the affairs of his Estate (but not R^g. H^ed.
Mat. Paris etc.
carelessly, as some would impose) as of things which did but only vnder-serue,
and conduce Rand. Higde^. in (...). 1.
to the maine and principal end of advancing his Saviors glory, whereunto he
judged that action did tend.

(2) Having therefore ordered his weightier businesses in (...), and other his
transmarine Dominions, and in ^gland by his letters, set Ger. (...).
the Queen his Mother at liberty from that captivity, wherein her late husband
the king had long detained her, (who sensible of others woe by her own, did
afterward exercise many works of mercy in that kind) he cuts over hither,
as well to receive all the rights of Soueraignety, and to settle the same; as
also to levy me^nes for proceeding in his intended holy voia^e, together with
Philip king of France, and other Christian Potentates.

(3) And though before his Coronation, most Kingly power before Coronation.
Writers do not call him a King; yet sure it is, that he and others did
immediately, and unquestionably, upon the first accruement of the interest,
(which was at his Fathers last gasp) exercise all the offices of the royal
power; for so he restored Robert Rog. Houed. fol. 374.
Earl of Leicester to his whole estate: So plain it is, that our Government
allows not the dangerous conuulsions, and empty spaces of an Interregnum,
such as in mere elective States are common, if not continual.

(4) But in nothing more could this noble Prince show his judgment (though he
were otherwise Ger. Dorobor.
Sagacis ingenij, of a sharp and searching wit) then King Richards choice of
friends and servants.
in this: That he banished from his familiarity, and (as my Author says)
hated all those of what profession so ever they were, who had forsaken his
Father, and both retained, and enricht those other, who had loially stood for
him against himself in all assaies.

(5) At his Coronation, which was most magnificently performed at Westminster,
by Radulp. de Diceto apud Too. Walls. in Ypod. Neustr.
Baldwyne Archbishop of Canterbury, the points of the Oath which he made to
God, and the Kingdom of England, Chief matters at the Coronation* of Richard.
at the Altar upon the holy Evangelists, before the Prelates, Nobles, and whole
people, Rog. Houed. fol. 374.
were these: 1. That all the days of life he would bear peace, honor, and
reverence to God, and holy Church and the Ordinances thereof: 2 That in the
people to him committed, he would exercise right, justice, and equity. 3.
That he would blot forth naughty laws, and perverse customs, if any were
brought upon his Kingdom; and would enact good laws, and the same in good
faith keep, and without mal-E^gyn. Which oath being most solemnly taken, and
the sacred unction performed; the Archbishop standing at the Altar forbad him,
on the behalf of Almighty God, to assume that honor, unless he had a full
purpose to keep what he had sworn: whereto Richard assenting, and with his
own hands, humbly taking the ponderous Crown Imperial from off the Altar, in
signification, as is probable, that he held it only from God; he delivers it
to the Archbishop, who thereupon accomplished all the Ceremonies of Coronation.

(6) Which Act was accidently han^eld, and auspicated with the blood of many
Jews (though utterly (...) slain at the Coronation.
against the Kings will) who in a tu mult (raised by the So Martial calls the
multitude.
Ocean) were furiously murdered, which (though it were afterward punished by
the Laws) might seem a presage, that this Lion-hearted King (as his by-name
Ceur-de-Lion did import) should be a special destroier of the Enemies of our
Savior.

(7) After counsel therefore (first moouer in all worthy enterprises) Money
was in his first, and chiefest cares; for raising whereof, to furnish the
intended pilgrimage, he fold, morgaged, estated, and by Richard p^rueis for the
Holy Land
a thousand princely skills) as if he should never (...) come again, added
incredible heaps to those huge sums, which he had scruzed out of Stephen de
Turnham, his fathers Treasurer (amounting to eleven hundred thousand pounds
sterling, if some say true) all hoorded by King Henry. What could indeed be
said enough for such a voyage? and it was a cogitation worthy so glorious a
purpose, so to order his estate, as if he were not to return at all; because,
looking-backe does unbend and soften resolutions.

(8) As for men and soldiers, the Prelates, Friars, and other Preachers, had
stirred up innumerable, by their manifold exhortations (the Arch-bishoppe of
Canterbury having Gir. Ca^b.
travailed through Wales in person for that purpose, going afterward with the
King to Palestine, where also Rog Houed. Math. Paris.
he died) in pulpits and private conferences, sounding nothing but the Cross
and Passion of Christ, calling the world to revenge his cause upon the Pagans,
and setting souls o^re with vehement gestures, actions, and persuasions. But
the ^ngdome of England he ordered thus.

(9) The only maine danger of the (...) ab^ (...) in his brother John Earl of
(...), of whose ambition he was some what (...), (...) His pro^on for (...).
Geruasius.
knowing that King Henry, not long before his death, had intended the Crown
to him: to conquer therefore his appetites, with bounty, and munificence; and
to take away all murmuration in him, for want of Princely competencies, King
Richard did as it were share the Realm with him, giving him six Earledomes,
Cornwall, Dorset, Sommersette, Nottingham, Derby, and Lancaster, besides
Castles, Honors, Manors, Forests, and much other riches, and finally, the
Earldom of Gloucester, with the Heir of that County to be his Wife, though
the Archbishop of Canterbury forbad the Nuptials, alleging she was within
degrees of consanguinitie.

(10) But lest, through evil nature or advise, Earl John should convert those
so great gifts to the subversion of the bestower, He entrusted him with no
part of the Regal power, as the Key, and secret of his proper safety: but
laid the maine burden of Government upon William Longchamp Bishop of Ely,
Mat. Paris. and al^.
chief Iustitiar, and Lord Chancellor of England, and Papal Legate, (a person
out of all suspicion Roger Houed.
for aspiring to the Crown) whereby was conferred upon him, whatsoever either
King or Pope could grant, for accomplishment of his authority; so that he
might well be styled Rex and Sacerdos. Mat. Part.
Prince and Priest of England; as he was one, the most powerful subject for
the time, that perhaps this Realm has had: for, though the King had (as it
were) joined with him in Commission, one Hugh Bishop of Durham, for the parts
of England beyond Humber; yet, as it (...). li. (...). c. (...).
happened in the Consulship of Caesar and Bibulus, that nothing was reported of
Bibulus, but all of Caesar, so did Long champ in a short time easily make
himself sole and absolute, his sway burying in silence, the name, and
endeauours, of his Colleague.

(11) Thus the sum of command, or the Sovereign power it self, was in the
Chancellor as Viceroy, but for defense and preservation of his justice, he *
did subordinate or associate to those Bishops, Rog. Houed.
William Earl of Arundell, Hugh Bardolfe, William Marshall, Geffrey
Fitz-Peter, William Brunor, Robert de Wh^tfield, Roger Fitz-Re^rey, wherein he
did show his love and care of the English Nation, as also of Justice it self:
for that many of these, were of the most honorable Peers of the Land (and not
Justice is best where it brings Honor rather then riches.
men bred-vp or formerly enured to make Justice, or their own Tongues venall,
for a fee:) honor being the rule of their proceedings, and strength of
private fortunes, with their Princes favor, the pillar to sustain that honor.

(12) There remained to provide for (before he left England) the
neighborhood of Scotland and Wales, which might otherwise make use of his
absence to his prejudice: But Rhese ap Gruffith (of whom there is extant a
short but elegant Panegyris) Prince of South Wales (being already in amity)
came as far as Oxford toward him; but because the King (who was there) came
not in person to meet him (as his father King Henry had done) the Prince
(notwithstanding Earl John the Kings only brother, had conducted him from the
Marches with special honor) took it in so high scorn and indignation, (for
even the meanest, from whom service or love is expected, will again expect
regard) that he forthwith returned into his Country, without once saluting
the King; who by this neglect* lost Rheses love, as, upon the like omission,
and vnrespectiuenesse, Augustine (the too supercilious Monk) did leese the
affections of the Monks of Bangor, Rheses own countrie-men, in another part
of Wales.

(13) As for william King of Scots (a very worthy Rog. Houed. The agreement
between the two Kings of England. and Scotland.
Prince) he iourneied hither to King Richard into England, and here concluded
a firm friendship, which he kept very religiously, even in the greatest
troubles of King Richard, to the glory of himself and his Nation, and as some
write, sent his Brother D^d with 5000. Scots, to serve him in the sacred Hector
(...). 13. cap. 7.
w^res. The chief points of their ^tion were (...). That for ten thousand
Marks Sterling, (then Hector (...) ^000. (...).
paid) the Castles of Rockesbrough, and Berwicke (cautionarie Castles, or g^ge
places, for part of his ransom) should be restored. 2. That he should have all
such deeds, instruments, and charters, made by him to the late King Henry,
which had by constraint or duresse been obtained: and himself to be freed
from all encombrances, claims, or pretensions Houeden.
whatsoever. 3. That he should have all such dignities, as his brother Malcolm
held in England, (for which King William did there make fealty) and all such
Lands as his Ancestors did hold of the English Crown.

(14) The State of England being thus in the The agreement between the Kings
of France and England.
maine, and other mean points established, King Richard crossed the Seas into
France to Philip king thereof, according to appointment, that from thence, with
minds and forces united, they might set forward under the Ensign of the
Cross; which after some stay (occasioned by the Ger. Dor.
death of the French Queen) they did, upon these Christian and friendly terms;
1. That each of them preserve the others honor, and bear faith to him for
life, and member, and earthly dignity. 2. That neither of them shall fail the
other in their affairs; but that the King of France shall help the King of
England to defend his land, even as he would defend the City of Paris, if it
were besieged; and Richard King of England, shall help the King of France to
defend his land, even as he would defend his City Roan if it were besieged.
This H^.
being fairly engroft, and afterward ratified with oath, and sent by the kings
themselves in person, the Earls and Barons swear in solemn manner, The
agreement solemnly ratified on all parts.
that they would not trespass against their fealty, nor stir any war in
either of the kings Dominions, so long as they were in that pilgrimage: on the
other side, the Math. Paris.
Archbishops and Bishops did firmly promise (in verbo veritatis, in the word of
truth) that they would accurse and excommunicate al such as did transgress
this agreement.

(15) Thus (after some necessary stays) these two The Kings of France and Eng
land set forward to the Holy Land.
the greatest Monarks of the West, set forward over land (toward the public
service of Christianity) with such numbers as themselves thought best; which
were so great, that having advanced (not without some little loss of people by
the Roger H^d. Mat^. Paris.
fall of the Bridge over the river Rhene at Lions, which brake by reason of the
throng) beyond the said violent stream, they parted company; Philip passing
over the Alps into Italy, and Richard to the Seaside at Marsilia, there to
meet with his Navy, which being compact of all the chief Ships in England,
Normandy, and other his French Dominions, was there appointed to attend.

(16) But the voyage being very long, and King The City of Mes sana in Sicilia
the Rende^u of the Kings.
Richard coming to the Port before his Fleet, after eight days expectation
there, waxing impatient of delay, embarkt himself Act and M^n. page 314.
in twenty hired Gallyes, and ten great hulkes or Busses (a kind of shipping as
it seems peculiar then to the Mediterranean seas) and set sail toward Messana
in Sicilia, the Rendeu^w of both the kings and of their Armies: in which
passage, lying at Anchor (on occasion,) in the mouth Roger Wend. Math. Paris.
of the river Tyber not far from Rome, * Oct^ianus, the Bishop of Hostia
repaired unto him, desiring him in the Popes name, that he would visit his
Holiness; which the King denied to do, laying to the Popes charge many
shameful matters touching the R^ish Simony, and Covetousness, with many other
reproaches, allcadging that they took 700. Marks for consecration of the
Bishop of Mains, 1500. Marks for the Legatiue power of William Bishop of
Ely; but of the Archbishop of Bordeaux an inf^ite sum of money: whereupon he
refused to see R^e. Thus (after sundry accidents and commings on land) hearing
that his Navy was safe, he *stayed for them by the way, and then came Rog. H^ed.
to anchor not long after (to wit, 23. of September) before the City of
Messana, with so great a show of power, and sound of Warlike Instruments, and
other signs of Majesty, in the sight of Philip and his French, and of many
other Nations there assembled, that it stroke horror into the Inhabitants,
(says Houeden) and moved no small envy in the hearts of his confederates.

(17) From this time forward, as it may seem (the Enemy of Concord feeding the
maleuolent passions of men with perpetual matter of debate) the king of France
was never truly king Richards friend in heart, but upon the same day (whither
straightened in provisions or otherwise) he left the king of England; but by
contrary wind was driven back before night, where (after many troubles and
quarrels between the English and Sicilians) the two kings peaced again, and
settled a new and as firm a league, as they could, during that martial
pilgrimage.

(18) Tancred was at that time king of Sicilia by King Richards Sicilian
affairs.
usurpation, after the death of William, who had married Joan sister of king
Richard, whom (at that time upon displeasure and quarrel being prisoner)
Tancred set at liberty, sending her in honorable manner to her brother, and
did yield to sundry Articles, and also present paiments of ample sums. Fear
Rog. Ho^ed. fol. 383.
wrought on both parts; for Richard being among strangers, and not very sure of
the French, seized upon a strength of the Griffons (people much redoubted in
those parts, till the arrival Ide^ ibid.
of the English) and in a tumult took the City of Messana it self, where he
displaied his En^ignes, till for the French Kings love he was content to
disaduance them, and to entrust the City to the Knights Templars and
Hospitalers, Act. and M^. in R. (...).
until Tan^red had fulfilled all such things as Richard did challenge to be
due, being many.

(19) Upon great deliberation therefore, the Sicilan The accord between King
Richard and King Tancred.
King made answer, that he had already paid to his sister, late Queen of
that Island, a very great quantity of coin in recompense of her Dowry or
Ioincture, and would satisfy all his other demands (concerning the Legacies
intended by his Predecessor king William, to the Father of king Richard) as far
as he ought according to the custom of that kingdom, and thereupon gave unto
him for the quitclaime of his sisters Ioincture, twenty thousand ounces of
gold: and farther to be acquitted of all other claims and pretenses, as also
in consideration that Arth^r Duke of Britain, nephew and next heir of king
Richard Arthur King Richards next heir
(if Richard died without issue) should take to wife the daughter of K. Tancred,
he paid him other twenty thousand ounces of gold, and of his own accord, and
for King Richards love, and for the love of the English Nation (which, says
our R^g. H^ed. fol. 386.
Author, was then in greatest reputation through the kingdom of Sicilie) as
also to be the more assured of performance, he gave him other twenty thousand
ounces of gold, Threescore thou sand ounce^ of gold given to King R^chard.
besides afterward four great Ships, called Vrsers, (...) fifteen Galleys.

(20) King Richard on the other side, not to be wanting to any matter, which
in honor and equity King Richards sureties or Sponsors.
might be expected of him, besides letters Patents, he put in upon their
Oaths for his sureties, two Archbishops, and two Bishops of his own there
present, and twenty great Lords, and principal men his subjects, whose names
because many of their posterities do yet stand) are here inserted out of the
said letters Patents, as they are upon record in Houeden.

Iordanus de H^z his Constable, Wiliel^us de Curci, Richardus de Camuilla,
Girardus de Talebot, Robertus Sabluil, Guido de Cro^n, Guarinus filius Geroldi,
Bertramus deVerdun, W. Chamberlangus de Tankeruile, Robertus de N^uo-burgo,
Hugo Bardolf, Wigain de Cheresburg, Gilbertus de Wascuil, Hugo le Bruin,
Johannes de Pillar, Ama^ri de Muntford, Andreas de Ch^uenni, (...) de Forz,
Gaufridus de Rancu^e, Ama^ri Torell, and other not named.

(21) Moreover for final assurance, he offers that Pope Clement should
undertake for performance The Pope King Richards surety.
of his part in the said agreement; and that the said Clement would accordingly
undertake, he requests him by most officious letters, giving him leave without
any reluctation) to put his dominions (upon any his breach) under seuerest
censures.

(22) This peace and accord being happily thus concluded, King Tancred (having
most roially and lovingly feasted the King of England for three days and three
nights in a Castle of his) discovered, upon the way at Tauernium in his
return, a foul and unprincely conspiracy of Philip (whom one of our Writers
calls the vainglorious King) against the head and safety of King Richard; which
coming to be * Ger. Dor.
scanned between the two Kings, the French charged the English with picking of
quarrels; and added, that unless Richard married his sister Alice, according as
he ought, having been contracted long before together, he would be his enemy
while he breathed; whereunto King Richard (being pressed) did reply: That his
Rog. Hou. fol. 392 Act. and Mon. p. 316.
sister during the time of her abode in England, had a child by his Father
Henry King of England, which he was ready to prove by many witnesses there
present: so that King Richard had far more cause then a suspicion of
dishonesty (which John Stow. in Rich. 1.
some write) to refuse the marriage. This falling out so shamefully, Philip
(upon certain conditions between Richard and him) left him at liberty to take
a wife where he thought good, but never (as it may seem) forgave him his evil
will while they two lived together.

(23) And because acts of Christian remorse and humility are too rare among the
Great ones of this vain world, it were a crime to pretermit the exemplar A
Christian example of King Richard.
humiliation of this famous General K. Richard, at this time, who (to use my
To. Houed. f. 388
Authors words) inspired with divine grace, and studying to fit himself for
the great attempt he had in hand, was stung at the soul with so just
compunction for his sins, that calling before him his Archbishoppes and
Bishops into a Chapel, at the house where he was lodged without the walls
of Messana; he blushed not to make a penitent confession of his manifold
Holin. p. 12^. col. 2.
excesses, humbly praying God of mercy, and them (as his subordinate Ministers)
of Absolution; and God (says Houeden) respected him with eyes of Mercy, and
gave him a penitent heart, so that from thenceforth he proved a man fearing
God, eschuing evil, and doing good, To. Hou. ibid.
O foelicem illum, etc. O happy he, who so falls, that he may rise more strong:
O happy he, who after penitence, relapseth not into fault and ruin.

(24) Whereupon addicting his mind to divine contemplations, and meditation of
the christian Church, whose Champion now he was; he desired conference of one
Ioachim (a Cistercia^ Abbot) whose great learning and deep understanding in
the Scriptures, To. Houed. in Ric. 1 Paulus Aemilius in Philippo. 2.
with an opinion of a Prophetical inspiration, made him so famous over the
world, that King Richard sent for him, being the^ in Calabria near Sicilie,
whom at his coming he heard preaching and expounding the Apocalypse of S.
John, touching the afflictions of Houed p. 388.
the Church, and of Antichrist, which (says he) was then borne, and in the
City of Rome, and shall be advanced No new opinion that the Pope is Antichrist.
in the Sea Apostolic, of whom the Apostle said, he should extol himself
above all that is called God; and that the seven Crowns were the Kings and
Princes of the earth which obeyed him. Surely, near about this very time
happened that in Rome, which might seem to give great probability to that Abbots
opinion, especially, if Emperors and Kings be truly called Houed. p. 392.
Gods, over whom Antichrist also should extol himself: for in the same month
that Richard left Messana, Psalm. 82. v. 1. and 6.
was the Coronation of Henry the Emperor, and his Empress Constantia, in S.
Peter's Church; where Pope Celestine, the very next day after his own
consecration to the Papacy, sat in his Pontifical chair, Idem.
holding the Imperial golden Crown betwixt his feet: and the Emperor (as
likewise the Empress) stooping low, received on his head the Diadem from the
Popes feet; and presently again the Pope struck the Emperors crown with his
foot, and dashed* it to the ground; signifying that Houedens printed Copy has
(...), as if the Pope had thrown do^e the Emperor, (...) is more probable with
relation to cor. n^. A D. 1191. The King of France lets ^aile for the Holy Land.
he had power to throw him (upon his demerites) out of his Empire: but the
Cardinals catching up the crown, put it again on the Emperors head.

(25) The same day in which Philip and his French Forces set sail out of the
Haven of Messana, arrived Alienor King Richards mother, accompanied with
Berengaria his new intended Spouse, daughter to* Sanctius King of Nauaire,
whom afterward he took to wife in Cyprus; but his Mother after a short stay
returned by Rome into England, leaving the young Lady with Joan Queen Dowager
of Sicilie, both which accompanied the King toward the holy Land, his whole
Navy being To. Hou^f. 392.
one hundred and fifty great ships, and fifty three Galleys well appointed for
the war, and Ypod. Neust.
many other Sails and Vessels: and (not to omit the same because it is
recorded as a singularity) he had among all these,* thirteen Buces or Buscies,
which had each of them three course of Mat. Par. ad A. D. 1191. Yood. Neust.
Sails to sail with: but no Writer (so far as we yet find) declares what
numbers of Soldiers were in the English Army.

(26) This Navy royal between the Isles of Rhodes and Cyprus, (for the honor
and good of King Richard) was scatterd by God with a terrible tempest, some one
or two of which suffered wreack upon the Isle of Cyprus, whom ^Houed. King
Richards Navy scattered.
Cursac (or as other call him Isakius, Emperor of the Griffons) being a Ypod.
Neust. Math. Paris.
tyrant did spoil, and contrary to Christian Religion, (which was his
profession, though Houed. Ger. Dor. Hect. Boet. l. 13. cap. 7.
some mistake) and all honor and humanity, he would not (among other his
unprincely, or rather barbarous behauiours) suffer the Kings sister, and Lady
Berengaria, with other of that tender society, to come into harbor, to their
great coffeehouse and peril, a Houed. fol. 39^.
Ship or two sinking there: but neither would God, nor King Richard forgive
it him.

(27) For the said unworthy Prince having thrice King Richard subdues the Isle
of Cyprus. To Houed. Mat. Paris. Ypodig. Neust. Ger. Dor. Act. and Mon. p. 320.
Holin. p.
refused to make restitution of his unlawful seisures and prisoners, was
entered upon by the English, driven from the shoares with great dishonor and
slaughter; the City Limeszun left for a prey to the victors, and himself
beaten again out of his Camp, and taken, and after an escape made by him, his
only daughter and heir yielding her self, and her Father lastly coming
again of his own accord (as despairing to lie hid) under custody, and thrust
into fetters of gold and silver, the whole Island (with all the people,
strength, and riches thereof) became subject to the King of England, and both
Father and Daughter led away into captivity.

(28) There arrived at Limeszun, to salute and honor King Richard within three
days after his first victory, Guido King of Jerusalem, Geofrey de Lusignian.
Lenizant his brother, Raimund Prince of Antioch, Earl Boemond his son, etc.
offering their services, and swearing to be his against all men; with whose
priuity King Richard seized the flourishing and spacious Island of Cyprus, by
antiquity celebrated as the very seat of Venus, which that it might so prove
to himself, in the joyous month, he solemnly took to wife his beloved Lady
Berengaria.

(29) The person of the Emperor (for by that lofty title Writers call him,)
was sent to Tripolis in Syria, under the custody of Ralph Fitz Godfrey, Lord
Rog Houed. pa. 392. Act. and Mon. p. 319.
Chamberlain to King Richard: his daughter was committed to the two Queens
Berengaria and Joan: the Island it self was entrusted to Richard de Camuile,
and Robert de Turnham his Viceroyes, with competent force and provisions, and
the Ilanders suffered to enjoy all such laws and liberties, as they held in
the time of Manuel the Emperor of Constantinople, or (as now they call it) of
S^mboli.

(30) This fame of Richard was much enlarged by his conquering a mighty Rog
Houed. Mat. Paris Ypod. Neust.
Argosey, called a Dromond, wherein were aboard one thousand and five hundredth
Sarazens (though disguised under French Flagges) furnished, besides all other
provisions, with fire-workes, barrelles or cages of venomous serpents, and the
like, for the use of the Sarazens at Acon, (anciently called Ptolomais, to the
siege whereof he was then sailing,) thirteen hundredth of which Miscreants, he
sacrificed to Mars and Neptune, keeping the rest for ransom.

(31) Philip King of France, (in hope perhaps to conquer Acon before the
English could arrive, and to win thereby that glory entire) came safe before
that City in Easter week; but as yet had not forced the same: at which time
(that the Reader may observe the general disposition of the western Christians
in those days) there engirded Accon (omitting the many great Prelates,
Princes, Earls, and Honorable Cheifes) these Nations following; the Genowayes
and Florentines, the English under Hubert Bishop of Salisbury, afterward Ger.
Dorob.
Archbishop of Canterbury, Flemings, Almaines, Danes, Dutch, Friselanders,
Pisans, Lombardes, besides the Knights Templars (collected out of all Nations)
and beside the aides of the Asians: all which lay quartered at the Seige in
order, as here they are placed, at that time in which the King of France
arrived. But Richard King of England with his victorious and triumphant Navy
(which when it went out of Cyprus, being much belike augmented* did contain
254. tall ships, and above 60. Galliots) brought terror and Act and Mon. p.
318.
dismay to the besieged, and comfort to the Christians, *upon the Sunday after
Pentecost, being about the midst of June. Rog. Houed.


(32) The siege was so vehemently plied, that (notwithstanding sundry
dissentions between Philip The City of Acon rendered.
and Richard, the two competitors of glory in this voyage) after several
breaches and assaults, the last whereof was made by the Pisans and English,
upon the twelfth of July following, many offers of composition made by the
Saladine, being utterly refused, the City of Accon was rendered to the
Christians upon these conditions. 1 That Saladine (Prince of Mat. Paris Ypod.
Neust.
Miscreants) should by a certain day restore the holy Cross. 2 That he should
set at liberty fifteen hundredth Christian Captives. 3. That the City with all
the things contained therein should remain and be to the Christians. 4. That
the Turks or Sarazens should have their lives only saved, if these conditions
were performed. 5. That they should pay twenty thousand Bizants, (pieces of
gold) toward the charges of the Kings.* To take possession * Rog. Houed. fol.
395.
for the French, there was sent in Drogou de Merlou, and one hundredth men of
Arms, and for the English, Hugo de Gurnay with the like number, who equally
parted the City, goods, and people, between them.

(33) And even now Philip King of France, as well because the Earl of Flanders
died at the siege King Richard upon certain conditions permits the King of
France to depart Roger Houed. fol. 394. p 16.
without issue, whose countries he long had coueted, as for evil will to
Richard, whose noble Acts so far outwent his, and because, as some * write,
he had taken bribes of Saladine, meditates nothing but return, asking license
of King Richard to depart, being then but the tenth day after the Cities
surrender; so badly his envious eyes could, as it seemed, endure the splendour
of his companions glory. The chief commanders of his Army hearing this,
showing themselves true Frenchmen, and sensible of their obligation to God,
and honor, with many tears besought him not to forsake that holy affair, ita
impudenter, so shamelesly. In what Prince would not this have kindled a desire
of a better resolution? But impotent passions carrying him, and miscarrying
him, he persisted to get leave of Richard, who but two days before, would have
had him swear to a stay of three years longer in that service; but he who
had other cogitations far more unworthy of a King, would needs depart,
giving his oath upon the holy Gospels, without which oath King Richard would
not grant his good will. That he would well and faithfully keep the lands and
subjects of the King of England, and neither do damage nor grieuance to them
by himself, nor suffer it to be done by others * till his return. R^. Higd. in
Polyer. lib (...). cap. 27. Iu^ (...).


(34) The King of France thus leaving Accon, in the Castle whereof King
Richard, his Queen and Sister were lodged, and the Duke of Burgunaie remaining
behind with the French host, (to whom King Philip, not without sundry secret
instructions, had with it committed a great part of his treasure) king Richard
in the same day set forward upon a new enterprise; but it is true which one
writes, *that by reason of the dissension between the Kings, which Ger. Dorob.
of them should seem the greater, little or nothing prospered; and just cause
had King Richard to complain in Rog Houed.
his letters, that Philip to the eternal reproach of himself and Kingdom, had
foully forsaken his purpose and vow unto God.

(35) But when the Saladine could not by any means obtain a longer day for
performance of the said Articles of composition, he cut off the heads of all
his Christian Captives; in revenge whereof King Richard brought out his Turkish
Captives, (being about two thousand and five hundredth) and in the sight of the
Saladines host caused their heads to be chopped off; the Duke of Burgundy doing
the same to the like number, near unto the walls of Acon, seven only being
kept alive by the Christian Generals, whereof Karakeys Salaadines * foster
Father Math. Paris.
was chief. But Richard proceeding in his undertaken action, and in his march
to Ioppa, being set upon by Sultan Salaadine (who had put the Duke of Burgundy
to flight, and slain the valiant Jacques de Auennis, who only with a few in
the Reregard made resistance) so courageously encountered him, that the
Salaadine with the loss of three thousand his choicest Soldiers was glad to
turn his back and fly: whiles therefore this Champion is thus employed in the
Holy Land, let us look back a little how the affairs of his Kingdom are
managed at home.

(36) John the Kings brother, making use in England of such discontentments, as
the incredible insolences, Disorders in England. Guil. de Newburgo. l. 4. c.
14. Rog. Houed. Mat. Paris. Nubrigens. l. 4. c. 18
and intolerable tyrannies of the Chancellor (who carried himself both like
a Pope and a King) had bred among the Nobility and people, to advance thereby
his own designs, stirred against him (though strengthening himself like a
General in the field,) so powerful opposition, that in the end, (upon warrant
of a new Houed. in Rich. 1 p. 391. Nubrig. l. 4. c. 18.
Commission sent from the King his Brother) he with the rest of the Peers
suddenly thrust him out of all command, and shortly after most reprochfully
(as it happened, for he fled, and was taken in a Curtesans attire, il beseeming
a Popes Legate) out of the Kingdom also, upon occasion, *Uelut delicata
muliercula. Nubrigens. l. 4. c. 17 Houeden. p. 401
as of other foul demetites, so particularly of a sacrilegious and barbarous
outrage, committed by the Chancellours command, upon the person of Geffrey
Elect Archbishop of York (natural brother to King Richard and the Earl) on
pretense that he entered England contrary to his oath given to his brother King
Richard, where as he then came to take possession of his See, to which he was
advanced by the Nubrigens. l. 4. c. 17. Houeden, p. 399.
Kings own procurement, and by Queen Eleanors own travail to Rome in his
behalf. And Houeden in Ric. 1. p. 392.
albeit this punishment and shame deservedly followed the Chancellors pride and
oppression, yet in one maine point of opposing the Earls Ambition; (who sought
to assure to himself the remainder of the Crown, which in right of blood
belonged to his Nephew Arthur) his service to the State had been very
commendable, if it had proceeded from loialty of affection, and not from a
swelling desire of greatness, which he hoped still to enjoy, if Arthur (a
child) should succeed in the kingdom, whereas Guil. de Newburgo. l. 14.
he knew Earl John's advancement could not be without his apparent ruin.

(37) But Philip King of France in all places laboring by Guil. Nubrig. l. 4.
6. 25.
wrongful and unprincely aspersions to deface the renown of King Richard,
though finding small credit to his words (because the man had done nothing
himself) devised after his return how to trouble and endammage his friends
dominions; and had effected it, if the Lords of France whom he solicited to
that wicked work, upon pretense of the composition made with King Richard at
Messana, had not (to their immortal glory) To. Houed f. 408 Nubrigens l. 4. 6
25.
refused to assist him therein, till Richards return, as well in regard of their
own oaths, as because the sentence of excommunication was denounced against
all such as did attempt to endammage him in his absence.

(38) King Richard notwithstanding that the relation of these things greatly
troubled him, gave not over as yet, but after sundry other matters of
importance performed, did march up within the sight of Jerusalem, where he
skirmished with the enemy, and overthrew the Conuoy or Carauan of the
Salaadine, which came laden from Babylon, guarded with ten thousand men; whom
King Richard valiantly encountering with five thousand selected soldiers, Mat.
Paris says they were 7000. Camels, and makes no mention of Mules or horses.
put most of them to the sword, and took three thousand Camels, and four
thousand Horses and Mules, besides those that were slain, and so gained the
rich spoil of all the Carriages.

(39) After this, and many other worthy things done, as the rescue of Ioppa,
and repulse of Saladine from thence, etc. the King indefatigable in his brave
attempts, desirous to regaine Jerusalem, and the City Baruck, was abandoned in
that enterprise by the Duke of Burgundy (who is * said to have been
apparently corrupted with gifts from Saladine, and the Math. Paris in Rich. 1.
regiments of French under his conduct;) whereupon he was the rather persuaded
by the Knights Templars, and chiefes of the Christian host, not to refuse
Saladines offers for a surceasance from hostility, considering that he had a
purpose to return with reenforced numbers and means; that his present powers
by divisions, by sickness, by battales were wasted, and that the dangerous
estate of his own Dominions did require his presence, (the greatest motive,
for he had supplies of money for his Soldiers wages from Pope Celestine) by
reason of some undue practices at home, and the rancour of King Philip his
unreconcilable adversary abroad. Whereupon a truce was taken for three years,
and Saladine repaid Sabellic. Enn. 9. l. 5 Polyd Virg. l. 14.
such charges as Richard had been at in fortifying Askalon, which was brought
to the same estate, as in which King Richard found it.

(40) But the King of England, though he had very far excelled all the
Christian Princes in great exploites at that journey, because* he had neither
conquered Salaadine, nor Jerusalem, did mourn, Ger. Dor.
and parted pensive. In the holy land he left Henry Earl of Champaine, (who
upon taking the said Baruck was to have been crowned King of Jerusalem, which
Guido had resigned) and he left Guydo de Lusignian (the late King of Jerusalem
in Cyprus, to whom he had passed it, in exchange for the other, to advance his
Kinseman the said Earl of Champain; which upon that Title, the family of
Lusinian for Rog. Hou. f. 417.
many descents after did possess and enjoy. Thus Richard having ordered his
affairs in the East parts, Poly Verg. lib. 14.
sets sail homeward. The Queens Berengaria his wife, and Joan his sister,
with the Captive Lady, Daughter of the Cypriot Emperor, under the conduct of
Stephen de Turnham (hearing of the Kings most heavy fortune) soiourned at Rome
about six months, for fear of Richards enemies, and afterward came safe by
Marsilia in Poictou.

(41) God, whose cause was only pretended in this voyage of the Christians,
did not seem to approve the said truce; for he Mat. Paris.
scattered the English with a terrible tempest, and the Polyd. Verg. lib. 14.
opportunity of Conquest was so lost, that hitherto it could never be
regained, and the King of England letting it slip when God had almost put the
same into his hands, did miserably fall into his enemies hands. Certainly,
the name of Richard was at that time grown terrible to Saladine, who had
received diuerslosses, foiles and overthrows at his haudes: Moreover, the
Saladines whole estate being endangered by such of his own sect as reputed him
a mere usurper, he could not long withstand the double impression of the
Christian Cheualrie, and of his own Allies and Countrymen; as indeed not long
after* he died, leaving his Empire fowly, but justly, distracted by civil
confusions: whereas by this Rog. Houed. f. 414.
Truce the crafty Turk made the world see, that the powers of two so potent
Monarkes had in a manner effected nothing; and Richard could never have time to
return for acco^plishment of his designs; for which all Christendom has at
this hour reason to be sorrowful, and hereofhimselfe* was very sensible, so
that he would oftentimes cry out, that he Polyd Verg lib. 14
was not always wise, alluding to this occasion lost.

(42) But the noble King, hoping to pierce with speed through Germany in
disguise, took to him An. D. 1193
the name of Mat. Paris.
Hugo a Merchant, the hair of his Polyd Verg l. 14
head and beard grown very long, being the fitter to conceal him; but in his
journey over land, was Rog. Houed. f. 408.
near to Vienna unhappily discovered by the profuseness of his expenses; when
he saw he could not escape them, Math. Paris.
in contempt of his fortunes, he put on royal garments, and refused to yield
but Ger. Dor.
only to the Duke himself, who came with joy as to a prey which he sore
longed for: but the rascal multitude Hardings Chr. cap. 138.
cried things worthy of themselves, calling him (O barbarism) Traitor, and
some saying, stone-him, some cut off his head, and others hang him: and because
the inhumanity of this usage may be suited with rimes as rude and ragged, you
shall in such hear the cause of this Archdukes malice, growing first at
Accon, where the Author speaking of King Richard says; He gate it soon with
his great Ordinance,
And on the walls his Banners full high set,
The Kings Arms he set up also of France,
And King Guyes Arms of Jerusalem well bet,
The Duke of Oistrich Limpold without let,
Set up his Arms after above them all,
Which King Richard did cast down from the wall.


(43) And though it is certain that this Author faines not this fact, for that
some such matter (and Pretenses for the detinue of King Richard.
told by *some with more disadvantage to Richards cause) is by others Mat.
Paris ad An. D. 1192. Ger. Dor. who writes that the Archduke set up his
Standard in the chief place of the City of Acon to the injury of King
Richard. Guil. de Nouobur. go. lib. 4. cap. 24 and lib. 5. cap. 16 This
description fitteth a like sect now in the west.
related, yet the grauest Authors agree (that next to the common envy at his
virtues) the greatest pretense was the murder of the Marquess Conrad
committed at Tire, by two cursed Assasines, a* certain sect in the East,
living under a Senior or Ruler, whom they honor as a Prophet, by whom they are
sent forth to murder such Princes as favor them not, promising themselves the
reward of immortality by obeying him in all things, though with the loss of
their own lives. Of which barbarous fact Henry the Emperor, and Leopold the
Archduke (whose near kinsman Conrad was) would seem to believe that Richard
was the Author, though therein they touched his princely reputation and
integrity, * most injuriously, for that the chief of that sect by their own
Ypod. Neust. p. 455. Edit. An, D. 1603 The copy of the said letter see Nubrig
l. 5. cap. 16
public * letters (written with the blood of the shel-fish called Murex,
wherewith Scarlet used to be dyed) acknowledging the fact, declared the true
cause thereof, which was a particular Act of injustice in Conrad himself:
There wanted not sundry other pretenses, as in such cases is usual, as * that
Richard had entered league with Tancred King of Sicilia the Emperors enemy, and
that he had thrust the Cypriot Mat. Par. ad An. Dom. 1193.
(their kinsman) out of the Empire, and kept his only daughter Captive. But
this booty, being too great for a Duke, the Emperor got into his custody,
meaning to coin much gold and silver out of his most unjust affliction, by
sharp imprisonment: which could not make him in any act or speech, or gesture
of his, show beneath the Majesty of a victorious Prince and King of England.

(44) The dismal news thereof flying through the world, presently disclosed
who were sound or The face of England in her Kings captivity.
unsure; sorrow and dismay was every where among his own: Ger. Dor. Rog.
Houed. f. 40^
His careful mother and other his fast friends swear the realm to be true to
King Richard, watch the coasts, and provide for the security of the State with
singular vigilancie, assuring the Cities and good Towns with Bulwarks,
Walls, and Munition. On the contrary, Earl John being (by the The attempts of
John King Richards brother
cunning inueigling and suggestions of his brothers professed foes) not only
put out of all hope of his releasement, but also incensed against him for
intending the Crown to his Nephew Arthur, entered into an unbrotherly attempt
against his Sovereign Lord; the sum whereof, take in the words of Thomas
Walsingham, who says, that John with promises allured many to him through the
whole Kingdom, Ger. Dorob. Rog. Houed. Math. Paris.
did carefully and speedily fortify his holds in England, and passing the
seas, entered into league with Tpod. Neust.
the King of the French, that he might utterly put his Nephew Arthur, Duke of
Britain from that hope, which the Britains had conceived of his promotion.
The Rog. Houed.
Normans giving any way to his disloiall practices, he swears fealty to Philip
King of France (his brothers most mortal enemy) and also that he would take
to wife the Lady Alice King Philips sister, though polluted by his own Father,
and for that cause rejected by King Richard. Out of Normandy he posts into
England, sollicites Peers and people, and was loyally resisted: but he not
quieted so, labors to stir the Scot and Welsh to join in an invasion with
him: the French and Flemings assuring them that his Brother King Richard would
never be set at liberty: but William King of Scots would neither give assent,
nor countenance to such undutiful practices, or rather madnesses. Ger. Dor.


(45) In this most perilous time the valor and loyalty of the City of Roan
(the choicest of Normandy) did most clearly show themselves to the everlasting
commendation thereof: for Philip coming before it with a puissant Army
solicited the^ to revolt, promising mountains. In stead of answer Rog. Hou.
f. 412.
they set open the gates, telling him that he might enter if he would, for no
man hindered him: but the Ger. Dorob.
vainglorious King being better advised, (for the inhabitants, yea and the
damsels of the City, whose heads were polde like as men's, powered molten pitch,
and such like matter upon the besiegers) Martial women in ^oan.
retreated from the walls, and marched away confounded: and being certainly
aduertized that the Emperor and King Richard were agreed, he sends over to
Earl Rog. Houed. f. 414
John, bidding him look to himself, for the Devil was now let loose. He
thereuppon crossed over the seas to Philip, who *excited him to usurp the
Kingdom of England. Lanquet ad A. D. 1191.


(46) Nevertheless by Queen Elianors negotiation (who in person traveled to
the Emperor) the The Articles of King Richards liberty.
King her son was come to be assured of his liberty upon these conditions. 1.
That he should pay to the Emperor one hundredth thousand Marks sterling. 2.
That he should pay fifty thousand Marks of like money to the Emperor and
Duke. 3. That he should marry his Niece, (sister to Arthur Duke of Britain) to
Duke Leopolds son. 4. That the Emperor should secure him, till he were under
sail with a fore-wind. 5. That he should set the Cypriots person at liberty,
and deliver his daughter to the Duke of Austria, who was her uncle, and should
deliver 67. hostages for assurance of all.

(47) But to color this unreasonable and vnprincelie extortion, the Emperor
by his Imperial Charter gives unto King Richard, Province, and sundry other
ample territories, containing 5. Archbishoprickes, and thirty three
Bishoprics (sometime parcel of the Empire, but both then and a King Richard
crowned King of Province, etc.
long time before out of possession) and thereof crowns him King, writing
magnificent letters into England, with such like offices.

(48) Now when King Richard (who had won to himself wonderful honor and
respect, even of A new and foul treason of Earl (...) discovered.
the covetous Emperor, by the proof of his innocence, and by his most noble
and constant carriage) did expect his liberty at an assembly or diet, where the
greatest Princes and States of the Empire were in person, to wit, The three
Archbishops of Mentz, Colon and Saltzburg; The three Bishops of Worms, Spire,
and Leiges; The three Dukes of Swaue (the Emperors brother) Austrich, and
Luuain; The Count Palatine of Rhene, etc. which had undertaken for the
Emperor, whose officers had already received the greater part of the ransom:
behold eue^ then the Emperor shows a willingness to break off, producing
the letters of Philip King of France, and of John Earl of Morton, in which
they offer an huge sum etc. too impious and devilish to speak of: but the
Princes who had undertaken to King Richard for good dealing, went to the
Emperor reproving him for his avarice, who would so dishonourably trauerse and
start back from the agreement: To. Houed f. 418. In January says Nubrig. di^
Parisi. B. Mariae, says another.
upon the fourth of February therefore being Friday, the Archbishoppes of
Mentz and Coleine restore him Rand. Higden in Polycr. lib. 7. cap. 28. Fabian.
after fifteen months imprisonment, to Queen Alienor his mother, free from
the Emperor, all that were present weeping thereat for joy.

(49) This Archbishop of Coleine was he, who entertaining the King in the
Dominions of his Archbishopricke; with great joy for his deliverance did
celebrate divine service in this manner: Now know I truly that the Lord has
sent his Angel and taken Roger Houed.
me out of the hand of Herod, and the expectation of the common people of the
Jews, etc.

(50) And indeed it was Gods Angel did it: for after all this, whiles the King
stayed for a wind, and other preparations at the Seashore, the Emperor
repenting him of his release, sent speedy guarders to Nubrigens. l. 4. c. 41
apprehend him again, vowing he should never be freede from bonds whiles he
lived; but some secret message (as Princes Courts never want Spials) speedily
premonished him, and so by a very little time Mat. Paris. Ypod Neust.
he prevented his surprisers, landing happily at Sandwich, in April the Sunday
after Saint Georges day: where in stead of all other triumphs, or particulars
of joy for his return, we will content our selves with only one, as sign of
the rest. When the King drew near to Rochester, the venerable new Archbishop
of Canterbury Hubert (who had been with him The joyful meeting between the
King and Archbishop.
at Accon in the Holy Land) went ioyously forth to meet him; whom when the
King saw, he dismounted from his horse, and having bowed his knee, fell Ger.
Dor.
upon the earth, in like sort the Archbishop lay right against him; at the
last both of them rising from the ground, they ran into each others arms,
comforting themselves with mutual embraces and weeping with joy.

(51) The justice of a true history will not suffer us here to forget, in what
sort the injustice of this unnoble captiuation of Richard King of England, was
King Richards wrongs revenged upon the Duke of Austria.
punished by God, and on Gods behalf. The Duke of Austrias Country, and
people, being visited with these five plagues, Fire, Water, Barrennes, Worms,
Mat. Paris. To. Houed f. 4^5.
and Pestilence: the Fire, casually burning his Towns; the River of Danubius
drowning ten thousand of his Subjects, in an ouerflow; the earth waxing dry
and Panui. Cestr. Polichr. l. 7. c 27.
sear; the Worms destroying such fruit and grain as grew; and the stroke of
Pestilence killing the principal Nobles and Gentlemen of his Dominions: The
Duke for all this continued obstinate like another Pharao, swearing to cut off
the heads of K. Richards Hostages, unless all Covenants (though extorted by
cruel Duresse) were exactly and speedily performed. Baldwin de Betun (one of
the Hostages) is sent to the King with this bloody message; but before his
return, upon S. Stephens day in Christmas, the Duke Ger. Dor.
spurring his horse in sport upon a Castle of snow among youths, which were
counterfeiting a siege, and an assault, with the slip of his horse, brake his
foot in such sort, as it came to be* cut off, and within a while feeling
himself perishing upward, Tpod. Noust. John Stow in Rich. 1. Holin. page 147
ad A. D. 1195.
so that his death was certain, could not be absolved of his Bishops from the
sentence of Excommunication which had by the Pope bin denounced, till he and
his Lords had sworn to release all the said matters between the King of
England and him; but his son after his death refusing the performance, his
Fathers body lay stinking above ground eight days, for that no clergy man
durst bury it, being but conditionally absolved, till the son did yield to the
performance; yet (if* some may be Polyd Virg l 14.
credited upon his bare word) the son did voluntarily condescend, and not
upon this compulsion.

(53) But albeit the Emperor Mat. Paris ad Ann. Dom. 1196.
to declare himself King Richards injuries revenged upon Henry the Emperor.
wounded with some remorse for his ungodly violence, or to engage others in
the impiety, gave three thousand Marks of King Richards ransom to make
silver Censers through all the Cistercian order, who generally refused the
gift, as parcel of an accursed spoil (for as for those* seventy thousand
marks, Roger Houed. fol. 431.
which he forgave to King Richard, with as bad a purpose (being to hinder
peace between him, and the French) as he had taken the other unjustly, they
are not to be accounted as restitution, but as the wages of sin); revenge
forsook him not, being pursued by his own wife (the Heir of the Crown of
Sicilia) in revenge of some cruelties done to her Countrymen; and after
reconcisement with her, falling dangerously sick, he died at Messana,
excommunicated for King Richards cause. And albeit he had in his life time
sent his Chancellor out of Burgundy, of purpose to offer King Richard
recompense for the injuries he had sustained, and although Constantia the
Empress had sent the Archbishop of Messana (while the Emperors body lay
above ground without burial) to Pope Celestine in humble manner, praying
Christian burial, yet Rog. Hou. f. 440.
unless the money which he had extorted from the King of England were
restored, he could by no entreaties obtain it: which accordingly was promised.

(54) Neither were the King of Englands afflictions unprofitable unto him, for
they gave him occasion to reform his life, taking home to him his Queen
Berengaria, whose society for a long time he * John Stow in R. 1
had neglected, though she were a royal, eloquent, and beauteous Lady, and for
his love had ventured with * Rand. Higden in Polycr. lib. 7. cap. 26.
him through the world.

(55) King Richard after his joyous return into England, having at the Abbey
of Saint Edmunds, in King Richards doings after his return. Mat. Par. To.
Houed. f. 392.
performance of his vow (as may seem) offered up the rich Imperial Standard
of Cursac, Emperor of Cyprus, which he took among the spoils of the
Griffons Camp: thence he marched, and took in by surrender such Castles as
the servants of his brother John (believing that the King was not returned)
held against him; but Henry de Pumeray, who had fortified Saint Michaels Mount
in Cornwall, hearing for certain that King Richard was come, died for very
fear. And now, forty days of summons Houed. fol. 418.
being exspired, which were allowed to Earl John, and Hugh Bishop of Couentry,
for making their appearance, to answer to such heinous matter as was prepared,
and they not appearing, John was adjudged by the Peers and States of England,
to have forfeited all that he might forfeit in the Realm, and the Bishop to
be punishable by the Ecclesiastical censures, as he was a Bishop, and
likewise as an Officer of the King, by the Laity. Richard afterward bestirres
himself to draw in money more greedily, then did become so great a Majesty,
wherein yet (says * one) he was rather to be pardoned then accused, Math Paris.
for that he was presently to lead a mighty Army against the French.

(56) But first of all, to wipe away both the sadness and contumely of his late
restraint, for a better fortunes beginning, he caused himself to be crowned
again at the City of Winchester; which celebritie was honored with the
presence of William king of Scotland, who bare a sword before Rog Houe. f. 420
Hect. Boat. l. 13. cap. 8.
King Richard: between which two Princes, there* followed great amity and
tenderness of love; then being granted to him, and his successors Kings of
Scotland, a certain pension, with sundry other allowances, To. Houed. f. 419.
and princely attendances, from the first day of their friendly entrances at
any time into England, til their return.

(57) The King likewise caused a new broad Seal to be made, requiring that
all Charters granted under his former, should be confirmed under this, whereby
he drew a great mass of money to his Treasury, subscribing such renewed
Charters thus: This was the tenor of our Charter under our first Seal, which
because Iuter Chart (...) in (...). D Rob. Cotton Equi^.
it was lost, and in the time of our being captine in Almaine was in the power
of another, we caused to be changed, etc. Some have observed, that as this
Richard was the first of the English Kings who bare Arms on his Seals, as
appears by the Wherein are 2. Lions rampant combattant: well ^ting that
Ceurde L^.
former: so was he the first who carried in his shield, three Lions passant,
borne ever after for the Regal Arms of England. And whereas we see here the
Moon in her full, which in the other was but a Crescent, (which is the Turkish
Ensign,) it may seem to be done Emblematically, in that sense, as we read of
another Prince (who going against the Turks) gave a Crescent with this word,
Plenior redibo, I will return more full. The true draught of this second Seal
we have here annexed.



(58) A good (...). Ypod. N^.
Author reports, that after this, the King being at dinner at Westminster, and
receiving advertisement of the siege laid to Vernoil, by his restless enemy
Philip of France; swear that he would never turn his face, till he had
gotten thither with his Army to fight with the French; whereupon he caused
the wall to be cut through, (the sign of which breach appeared In (...) days
who ^ued under Henry 5.
above two hundred years after) never resting, till with an hundred great
Ships he had crossed the seas from Portsmouth into Normandy, where the only
rumor To. Ho^ f. 421. Mat. Paris.
of his approach made the French King raise his siege, and without stroke or
sight of his magnanimous Ypod. Neust.
Enemy, (but not without loss and shame) to quite the field.

(59) Neither was his clemency less then his courage, whereof needs no greater
testimony, then King Richard forgiues his brother John.
when upon Earl John's Nubrigens. l. 5. c. 5
dutiful submission, and his mothers intercession, he so freely forgave him,
as that he calmely said, Tho Walls: in Ypodig. Neust. fol. 456.
Would that thy fault may so be forgotten of me, as that thy self may keep
in memory what thou have done. and Houed. fol. 428.
afterward restored his possessions unto him; the Earl from that time forward
beco^ming his Nubrig l. 5. c 5 Ran. Higd. in Ioh. li. 7. c. 29.
true Knight, and doing him very noble services, (especially against the French
who had seduced him) as a loving brother, and faithful Leegeman, whereby he
made amends for his former excesses, and fully recovered the hearty affection
of his Lord and brother.

(60) There were after this sundry skirmishes, takings of Prisoners and Towns,
and conferences between the French and English, moved belike, by such as
religiously tendered the effusion of Christian blood, so as no great matter was
yet effected; that which was, being rather by Ger. Dor. Ypod Neust.
Stratagems and starts, then by battle; but within *thirty seven days after
the French men's flight from Vernuil, King Richard (in revenge of that
desolation which the French King had brought upon the City of Eureux, where he
neither spared age, sex, nor Church) coming to Vendome, with purpose to
surprise the King of France, had the spoil of the French Camp, their King (a
thing almost incredible) now the second time flying without battle. Many of the
French were slain, and taken, together with Ypod. Neust. fol 456 Nubrig. l. 5.
c. 2.
much treasure, the Rog. Houed. f. 421.
Chapel royal, the Indentures of such as had left Richard to serve King
Philip, and all the * tents, carriages, and other furnitures for war: and
from hence marching in Poictou and Engolisme, he had such successes (howsoever
the silent partialities of foreign Writers smoother them) that Rog. Hou. sol.
422
himself wrote over to his dearest Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, That by
Gods favor, who in all things considers the right, he had taken Tailburg,
Marsiliac, and all the other Castles of Geofrey de Rancune, the City of
Engolisme, and all the Castles and Territories of the Earl thereof, and almost
three hundredth Knights, or men of Arms, and about forty thousand armed
Soldiers.

(61) We will not here ouerpasse, that which Houeden reports, (being an example
of Christian repentance in Princes) of a poor Hermits coming A. D. 1195. To.
Houed. 428.
to this noble Monarch, and preaching to him the words of eternal life; and
bad him be mindful of the subversion of Sodom, and to abstain from things
unlawful, otherwise (says he) the deserved vengeance of God will come upon
thee: The Hermit being gone, the King neglected his words: but not long after
falling sick, he more seriously bethought King Richards amendment of life and
daily exercise.
himself, and afterward waxing sound in soul, as well as body: his daily
exercise was to rise early, and not to depart from the Church till divine
service were finished: whereupon (says Houeden) how glorious it is for a
Prince to begin and end his actions in him, who is beginning without
beginning, and judges the ends of the earth. Moreover, he bountifully
relieved every day much poor both in his Court and Towns about: and restored
gold and silver vessels to such Churches, from which to pay his ransom they
had been taken away.

(62) After this passed sundry interchanges betwixt the French and English,
sometimes of wars, with wastes and spoils, sometimes of truces with
interuiewes and Parlies; in one of which, the Lady Alice, (cause of much
mischief) K. Philips sister, was restored (according to the contract of
Messana) to her brother, who forthwith bestowed her in marriage, upon John Earl
of Pontif. In the mean while the Kings sought to make friends upon all sides;
but King Richard by his munificence, and other means, drew from King Philip a
mighty party of his nearest neighbors: Rog Houed. pa. 436.
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Raimund Polyd Virg. l 13.
Earl of Tholose (to whom also King Richard gave in Mat. Paris.
marriage, his sister Joan Queen of Sicilia) the * Cha^panois and others: so
that Philip was feign to trust wholly upon himself: for whereas he had lately
married the sister of the King of Denmark, of purpose to use the Danish
shipping against the English, that affinity proved enmity: for the Nubrig. l.
4. c. 26 Vide ibidem, with Picardus his notes. Nubrig. l. 5. c. 16.
next day after his wedding, he put her away, pretending (besides * other
things) that she was of too near a propinquity of blood; albeit most
untruly, as her brother, the King of Denmark proved before the Pope, though
he could not be heard, the King of France more prevailing, either by fear or
favor.

(63) About this time, John the Kings brother and An, D. 1197
Markadey Captain of the Brabanters, called the To. Houed. f. 438
Rowtes, had made an incursion up to Beauois, where the Bishop, being also an
Earl of the Royal Blood, and the eleventh Peer of France, valiantly
fighting, was Ot Rutters who s^ued on any side for wages, therefore called by
Houeden, nefanda gens, and accursed in the Lateran Counsel. Ger. Dor. Guil.
Nubrig. l. 5. c. 30.
taken in the skirmish, armed at all points, and bravely mounted; on whose
behalf the Pope (upon the Bishops humble suite, * pleading the Clergies
immunity) wrote somewhat earnestly to King Richard, to set his very dear
son, for so he called the Bishop, at liberty; The King in a kind of pleasant
earnestness, caused the Habergeon and Curaces of the Bishop to be presented to
the Pope, with this question (alluding to that of * Jacobs children to their
father, concerning Joseph's garment,) Genesis 37. 33.
Holin. in Rich. 1.
Vide an tunica filii tui sit an non, See whether it be thy Mat. Paris.
sons coat or no. Whereupon the Pope replied, that he was neither his son,
nor the son of the Church, and therefore should be ransomed at the Kings
will, because he was rather judged to be a seruitor of Mars, then a Soldier
of Christ. Whom the King of England (in Nubrig. l. 5. c. 30.
revenge of many evil offices, especially in the time of his captivity with
the Emperor) handled sharply. The Bishop at length waxing impatient, writes a
passionate letter to the Pope; whose answer in part is here set down, for
that it notably defends the King of England. If (says the Pope) thou have had
ill success, it is no marvel, The Popes answer to the Bishop. Holin.
for putting off the peaceable Prelate, thou did put on the warlike Soldier,
and rashly tookest a shield in stead of a cope, a sword for a Stole, a Curace
for an Albe, an Helmet for a Miter, a Lance for a Bishops staff, perverting
the order, and course of things: neither meant you (as you allege) to repel
violence but virtue, nor did you fight for your Country, but against it: for of
your France we can now publicly pronounce; Woe to that land whose King is a
Child in discretion, not in years, for Philip was old enough.
Child. For your King was strictly bound by corporal oath to the King of
England, not to damnifie his territories, etc. at least wise till his return
from the journey of his Pilgrimage: nevertheless, contrary to his faith and
oath, he without all shame seized by force the good towns of the said King,
and cruelly wasted his Dominions with hostile hand: but that King returning at
last out of captivity, manfully encountered your King, not reposing his hope in
multitude, but in Almighty God, etc. Humility therefore against pride, right
and equity against wrong, measure and modesty against intemperance and
arrogance, have certainly hitherto fought for the King of England, etc. We
have notwithstanding directed our supplicatorie letters to him on thy behalf,
etc. for in such a case we neither can nor ought command, etc. Mean while
bear your bands and sorrows patiently, etc.

(64) While thus sundry warlike matters passed between the English and French,
the King of England increases his side with new associates, Arthur Duke of
Britain, the Duke of Luuain, the Earls of Gynes, Boloine, Perch and Blois
with others: and * Houeden Houed p. 443.
recites three several times within a short space, in which the King of France
was driven with loss and dishonor out of the field by King Richard, beside
the loss of Saint Omers, of Air, and of other Towns won by Baldwin Earl of
Flanders, and besides the wast of the French Dominions by many invasions. But
the greatest of the three victories was the second, which King Richard gained
at the battle between Curceles and Gysors, where the K. of France himself
fell into the river of Ethe, the bridge breaking under him, with the throng of
people which fled for their lives before the English Lion: neither was he
easily saved (twenty of his men of Arms being drowned by that ruin) but
before he could be drawn out, water had gotten into his belly.

(65) This was a famous victory; for besides a long Catalogue of great names
extant in Authors; there The famous victory of Gisors.
were taken by the Kings Army, 100. Knights and Seruitours on horseback, and
footmen without Houed. Math. Paris. Ypod. Neust.
number, besides thirty men of Arms, and other inferior Soldiers not
countable, which Markadey (General of the Rowtes) had for prisoners. There
were also taken 200. great horse, whereof seuenscore had barbs, and caparisons
armed with iron. King Ger. Dor. M. S. Rog. Wend. M. S King Richards warlike
handiworke. In his letter to Philip Bishop of Durisme. To. Houed f. 445.
Richard in his own person did most nobly, for with one spear he threw to the
earth Matthew de Mummerancie, Alan de Rusci, and Fulke de Giseruall, and took
them. So have we vanquished the King of France at Gysors (says the King)
howbeit we have not done the same, but Die^ and mon Droit: the motto of the
English Kings seems hence to be derived.
God and our right by us: and in this fact we did put our own head and
kingdom in hazard above the counsel of all that were ours. Howsoever
therefore the French or others may slubber over such a noble Journey, we have
not doubted upon so good warrant to record the same.

(66) The war continuing still, many virtuous men labored to make a final
accord; and the new Pope Innocentius the third, having proclaimed a new
undertaking of the Holy-warre To. Hou. s. 447
sends a Cardinal Deacon to atone the two mighty Kings of France and England.
At length Articles of peace were drawn; but Richard (being far before hand)
was nothing hasty to conclude, and therefore put it off, till his return from
Poictou, whether he went to chastise his rebels, though * some say, he did
then conclude the peace. Math. Paris.


(67) At this enteruiew or treaty, Philip King of France, Mat. Paris.
(the sower of strife, though he sought peace) showed to King Richard a deed,
in which Earl John An. D 1193 Rog. Houed. f. 449
newly yields himself Liegeman to King Philip, against his brother. A
wonderful thing (says Houeden) that Richard should believe it (being perhaps
but a Copy of that device or trick, if it were a device which they once had
jointly put upon the same John, as in the end of King Henry the second you
heard) who thereupon forthwith disseised the Earl his brother every where. But
the Earl having searched and learned the cause of the Kings sudden
displeasures, (whose love he had before redeemed with many loiall services)
He sends two men of Arms to the French Court, who should on his behalf, in
what sort soever, defend his honor and innocence, against any his Houed. ibid.
accusers: but there was no man found in that Court, neither King nor any
other, who would undertake the proof or maintenance thereof; whereupon ever
afterward Richard held his brother more dear, and gave less credit to King
Philips words.

(68) But now ensued the fatal accident, which drew the black cloud of death
over this triumphall and bright shining star of Cheualrie, the unworthy
occasion of which misaduenture makes it the more lamentable; which
notwithstanding, for a document to the Great ones, against the outrage of
Avarice and Cruelty, God suffered thus to fall on him. Widomare, Vicount of
Limoges having found a great * horde of gold and silver, sent no small portion
thereof to King Richard, as chief Lord, with Houed. f. 429.
which being not contented (as pretending that treasure troue, was wholly his by
virtue of his prerogative royal, or else misliking that the Vicount should
make the partition) came with a power to a Castle of the Vicounts called *
Chaluz, where he supposed the Riches were; the Garrison of which place This
Chaluz the English d^d call Castle Galliard says Fabian.
offered to yield the same, and all therein, if only their lives and limbs
might be saved: but he would not accept of any conditions, bidding them defend
themselves as they could, for he would enter by the sword and hang them all. It
grieves me to think that such a Prince should so forget himself: but behold
the severity of Gods judgment. An Arbalaster (or Archibalista) standing upon
the wall, and seeing his time, charged his steel bow with a square arrow or
quarrel, Ger. Dorob.
making first his prayer to God, That he would direct that shot, and deliver
the innocence of the besieged from oppression. Whereupon discharging it, as the
King was *taking a view of the Castle Roger Houed. Mat. Par. Ypod. Neust.
within the danger and distance of such an Engine, and the King ( Ger Dorob.
upon hearing the bow go off) stooping with his head, was mortally wounded in
the left shoulder; the anguish and peril whereof was extremely augmented by the
butcherly and unskillful hand of the Surgeon, who having drawn out the wood
Houed. calls him Carnifex.
and not the To. Wendouer.
enuenomed iron, Rog. Hou. f. 449.
mangled the arm with cruel incisions before he could prevail; the pain
whereof hastened his end.

(69) Concerning the name of this tragical Archer, there is so much variety,
as that we could willingly take that uncertainty for a warrant to silence it:
being loath to ennoble him with our pen, it being a thing worthily punishable
with vter obliuio^, to have shed (though defensiuely or but casually) the blood
of such a King. Matthew Paris Mat. Paris
in calling him Peter Basilij, seems to allude to some ominous conceit in
Basilii (which with the Greeks signifies a King;) him Thomas Walsingham
follows therein, as Matthew Paris followed *another: there want not * some who
Ypod. Neust. Rog. Wendouer. Ger. Dor.
also give him a third name; but Houeden who delivers this accident, as all the
rest of this Kings life, in the most probable and fullest manner, calls him
Bertram de Gurdonn, applying unto him certain Constitit ante pedes (...),
(...); (...), etc.
verses of Lucan, in commendation of his vnapalled consta^cy, when he came
before King Richard: where thou may perhaps (for satisfaction of thy mind,
with beholding some revenge) desire to know what became of the Actor. After
that the Castle by continual assaults was taken; and (by the Kings command)
none left alive but he (as being reserved Rog Houe. s. 44^
perhaps to some more shameful death) the king (upon a christian magnanimity)
for gave him the fact, which the party (without show of dismay) did neither
deny nor excuse, but alleged the necessity of his case, and the justice of
Gods work in it, for that the king had slain his Father and two Brothers with
his own hand: being hereupon set at liberty, and one hundred shillings
sterling given him by the king: Markadey (Captain of the Mercenarie Rowtes)
after the Idem fol. 450.
king was dead, took him, flead him quick, and then by hanging ended his life.

(70) King Richard feeling the approach of certain death, disposed his worldly
estate, thus: to his brother King Richards will.
John he gave the kingdom of England, and his other dominions, with three
parts of his Treasure, Houed. fol. 449
commanding such as were present to swear him fealty: to his Nephew Otho king
of Almaine, he bequeathed (as it O^nia (...) sua, says Houed.
seems) all his goods and chattels, money excepted, and the fourth part of his
said tresure he gave to his servants, and the poor. And having thus discharged
his last cares toward the world concerning his transitory state, he prepared
himself for the presence of God, strengthening his soul Rog. Wendo. Math Paris.
with hearty contrition, confession, and participation of the holy Sacrament:
commanding further, that when he was dead, To. Houed.
his bowels should be buried at Charro^, among the rebellious Poictouins, as
those who had only deserved his worst parts: but his Heart to be enterred at
Roan, as the City, which for her constant loialty had merited the same; and his
Corpse in the Church of the Nunnerie at Font-Ebrard in Gascoigne, at the feet of
his Father King Henry, to whom he had been sometime disobedient: and God
affording him gracious leisure till he had thus disposed of all; the venomous
vapor ascended to his heart, and drove the spirit forth, with whom (say
*Authors) the glory and honor of Military skill exspired. Mat. Paris.


(70) There has been an opinion, or fancy, that this King was called
Cordelyon, because he encountered a Lion in prison at the Emperors Court: but
(says Fabian.
one very truly) these are fables imagined by English tale-tellers to advance
their King Richard, as the Britains, by the like, advanced their King Arthur.
The like device (though more lofty and Mathematical) may theirs seem, who
conjecture, he was called so of the famous And yet a Star he gave in his
devise, as is seen in both his Seals.
Star called Cor Leonis. But how the conceit of killing of a Lion should
come up, as i^ is not worth the while to enquire, so certainly, Hugo de Neuile
(one of King Richards special familiars) is recorded to have slain a Lion in
the Holy Land, driving first an arrow into his breast; and then running him
through with his sword: whence perhaps that atchieuement is transferred from
the man to the master; and the story applide to the by-name of King Richard,
whereof the true reason is that which * Thomas Walsingham mentions, saying;
That for the magnanimity of his Ypod. Neust.
heart (grossitudinem praestans, says an Ger. Dorob.
other, meaning, as it seems, that his material heart it self, was big and
massiue, which Math. Paris, in Rich. 1. and his Epitaph. Neustria tuque (...)
Cor inexpugn^ Regis.
another also says was inexpugnable) this King was both by the English and
Normans styled Caeur de Lion.

His Wives.
Alice the daughter of Lewis the seventh, King of France, by Queen Alice
daughter of Earl Thibald of Champaigne, is by Mr. Ferrers.
some reputed the first wife of King Richard, though indeed she were A^ilius.
only contracted to him (being both children) and committed to his Father; but
when he demanded her, his father refused to deliver her, or she to com to him,
or both: Wherefore being King, conceiving displeasure against King Philip her
brother, and more then suspecting Houeden.
her continency with his own father (by whom he alleged she had a child) he
refused to take her: yet Mat. Paris p. 113
gave a hundredth thousand pounds to Philip, pro quieta clamantia, to be quite
freed from her. She became the wife of William Earl of Ponthieu, and had issue
Queen Joan of Castile, the mother of Queen Eleanor, wife to King Edward the
first.

Berengaria the second wife of King Richard, was the daughter of Sanches the
fourth of that name, King of Navarre, son of King Garcie* the fourth: her
mother was Beatrice daughter of Alphonso, the seventh King of Castile, called
the Emperor of Spain. She was conveyed by Eleanor the kings mother unto the
king in Sicily, and married to him in Cyprus, whence she accompanied him to the
Holy land. The king (upon what cause we find not) neglected her company for a
while, but upon more settled thoughts, he resumed her again to his love and
society, but had no issue by her.

His natural Issue.
Philip, the natural son of king Richard, seems to have been begotten, while
he was Earl of Poytou, Mr. Ferrers.
of a Gentlewoman Poytouin, and to have had of his fathers gift a town in
Poytou named Sumac, to have taken also his surname, and title of the same
town; and to have been the Progenitour of a family of Gentlemen of the same
surname and title, in the same Country.

Isabel (by * some who mention not Philip at all) is reputed the Natural
Daughter of king Richard, Mr. Millet.
(whose mother the Author names not) and that she was married to Leoline
Prince of Wales.

Three other Daughters, (Bastards no doubt) King Richards three Metaphorical
Daughters.
he is said to have, of whose names and matches we will report as we find
recorded. Whiles he was in France employed in his wars against king Philip,
Fulco a French Priest, came unto him, telling him he had three very bad
Daughters, which he wished him to bestow away from him in marriage, or else
Gods wrath would attend him: when the king denied, he had any daughter, yes
(quoth the Priest) thou cherisest three daughters, Pride, Covetousness, and
Lechery. The king apprehensiue of his meaning, called his Lords there
attending, and said: My Lords, this Hypocrit has found that I have three
Daughters: which I maintain, viz. Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery, which he
would have me bestow forth in marriage; and therefore (if any such I have) I have
found out most fit husbands for them all. My Pride I bequeath to the haughty
Templars and Hospitallers, who are as proud as Lucifer himself: My
Covetousness I give to the white Monks of the Cisteaux Order, for they covet
the Devil and all: But for my Lechery I can bestow it no where better then on
the Priests and Prelates of our times, for therein have they their most
felicity. Doubtless these marriages proved so fruitful, that their issue has
now ouerflowed all kingdoms of the earth.

JOHN DVKE OF NORMANDY Monarch. 45
An. 1199.
GVYEN AND AQVITAINE, etc. THE FIRST, STYLED LORD OF IRELAND, THE FORTIE-FIFTH
MONARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER VIII.


THe luster of Diadems, and Soueraignety, so dazeleth the eyes, and bewitcheth
the hearts of ambitious beholders, that whiles they fondly Greatest happiness
not in greatest dignities.
deem the greatest content to be in highest Titles, running after a seeming
Happiness, they often cast themselves headlong, and whole Kingdoms, into
irrepairable ruin; as the calamities, which after the death of the noble
Ceur-de-Lyon, lighted on the Pretenders to his Crown, and on this miserably
distracted State, will yield us too ruful a President. To the full acting of
which Tragedy (for such it was, and so we must now present it in this our
Theater) concurred The principal Actors in K. John's tragical reign.
as principal Actors, the two (though these Patients rather, as the issue
proved) unfortunate Corriuals for the Crown, John Earl of Moreton Brother to
the late King, and his Nephew Arthur, the Borne after his Fathers death, who
died at Paris 1186. Call. Aug. Ypod. Neustria. Giraldus, Hib. expug c. 22.
Posthumous son of Geoffry Duke of Britain, the Earls eldest Brother: their
two Female (and therefore more emulous and restless) Solicitors, Queen Eleanor
and Lady Constance, each ambitious of their own, in their Sons aduancements:
their two reuengefull Abettors, Otho the Emperor for John, and Philip King of
France for Arthur: thereupon, the two unjust Intruders on the Crown; Lewis the
Philip the 2. of France.
French Kings Son, and Innocentius the Pope, the one by unprincely forces,
the other by vnpriestlie Innocentius the 3.
fraud: and lastly, their two sorts of treacherous Instruments, of the Laity
for the one, and Clergy for the other; all which, like so many Tragic
firebreathing Furies, set this State in so horrible combustion, as that the In
(...) (...) other (...).
smoke is not as yet, so many ages after, quite allayed.

(2) Earl John (the very Center in which those Earl John's (...) so (...)
Kingdom.
calamities met,) had from his infancy been fed with high and royal hopes,
as Quem tenerrime diligebat. Guil. Nubrig.
being his Fathers only darling, from whom he had the Gerald Hib. expug. l.
2. c. 31.
possession of the Irish, and Ger. Dorob. M. S.
intendment also of the English Kingdom: and in his brothers time ( Guil.
Nubrig.
whose return from the holy wars all men despaired) had by gracious
deportment toward the Subject, obtained an Rog. Houed. in Ric. 1.
oath of Fealty to himself, in remainder, in case his brother should die
childlesse: having now therefore the way to those his designs made smoother by
the Trivet. M. S. Roger Houed. Ypod. Neust. and al, except wilful Polydor.
last Will of King Richard, and Rog. Houed. and alij.
allegiance of his Nobles then attending; (for these courses may facilitate,
but not make a just claim;) we may not think, that either he was cold now,
for the accomplishment of The titles of both competitours.
that, which so hotely he had before pursued, or so nice, as to neglect a
Kingdom, upon scrupulous points of Titles and Right. Iure propinquitalis, and
Testamento Successor. Walsing. Ypod. Anno 1199. Trivet.
Propinquity of Blood pleaded for John, as Iure communi Paul. Aemil in Philip.
2.
Lineall descent for Arthur, the Kings Brother being nearer then his Brothers
son; but John, who knew that the weaker use to argue their Titles, whiles the
stronger hold the possession, resolved to try the strength of his claim by no
other Law then of Arms; and therefore, being at time of King Richards death in
those foreign parts, he Earl John's helps for the Kingdom.
makes it his first care to fasten to himself, by present Rog. de Wendouer. M.
S.
largess, and large promises of future favors, (the usual Rhetoric of
Competitours) all the Stipendiary Soldiers, and other Seruitours of his
deceased Brother. To win himself the like assurance of love at home, and
Rog. Houed. in Ioh.
to settle (it it might be) an universal quiet, he Math. Parisians. Hist.
Mayor.
forthwith despeeded into England (there to concur with Queen Eleanor, his
experienced mother) three of the choicest men of the State, Hubert Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, William Marshall a potent Peer, and Geoffry
Fitz-Peter the great Iusticiar, Earl John's Agents.
by whose several interests, the three States of Clergy, Chiualry, and
Commonalty, might best be either allured to him by favors, or awed by fear;
himself, the whiles Wendouer M S. in Ioh.
posting to Chinon, where King Richards great Treasure was kept; as knowing
that he should hardly get or keep a Crown by Forces or Friends, if he
wanted Coin and Crowns, to win and hold such needful Ayders.

(3) The Treasurer, though Houeden in Ioh.
himself with his Store, Castles, and Fidelity, thus assured to the Earl,
Duke Arthurs Adherents.
had yet a powerful Thomas de Fu^nes.
Nephew, the Castellan of Angiers, wholly Paris Hist. Ma^or
devoted to Duke Arthur, to whose use he yielded up that City and Castle, with
whom also Idem. The beginnings of hatred betwixt Earl John and the Prouincials.
sided the Nobility of Aniou, Maine, and Turaine, surrendering those large
Territories, as to Rog. Hou. in John.
their liege Lord, jointly auowing it to be the Iudici^ and consuetudo, ib.
Mat. Westminst. says Iudicium, Ius and consuetudo
Law and Custom of those Signiories, that the heritage which was to accrue to
the elder Brother, if he had suruiued, should descend unto his Son. But
Constance Arthurs mother, no less Polyd. Verg. l. 25
desirous to be Regent to a King (for her son was but Walsing. Ypodig. Borne
An. 1187. die Paschae, his father dying before in August.
twelve years young) then Queen Eleanor Solainuidia, etc Polyd. ibid.
disdainefull to go below a Duchess, did not dare to build her high hopes on
so low grounds, for that such subordinate Princes as favored her cause, might
easily be corrupted by fair means, or crushed by foul: and therefore upon
news of King John's successes in England (for with general applause and
Houeden. John proclaimed King in England.
homages he was now proclaimed King,) distracted with violent and Woman-like
Passions, Ambition of her sons Right, Rage for his Wrong, Fear of his
Safety, and (not the least) Emulation that Queen Eleanor (whose Prudence and
Grace with the English, had Polyd Virg. l. 15
swayed exceedingly) should effect more in a wrong, then her self in a just
cause; Rog. de Wen. MS Constance commits Arthur to Philip King of France.
she flies to Turon to the French King Philip, (to seek a Wolf to whom she
might commit her Lamb,) to whose Protection she wholly surrenders his Person,
his Cause, his Countries. Philip Maguisicis verbis, etc. Polyd Verg. l. 15.
pretending (as Princes use) atender care of his neighbor Princes state, but
Job. de Serres in Phil. August.
meaning indeed out of so wished a prize, to raise advantage to his own,
forthwith ( Nich. Trivet. MS. The beginning of hatred betwixt K. John and King
Philip.
without regard of Truth, or Truce sworn to King Richard) reenforceth all
Arthurs Cities and Castles with his French Garrisons; some of which had scarce
put their foot into Maunz, but Math. Paris, King John takes and ruineth Maunz.
King John was at their heels, to provide them their last lodging, sacking
that City, and demolishing it to the ground, for a terror to all others, which
after fealty once sworn unto him, (as Rog. Houeden.
they had done) should dare to revolt.

(4) Queen Eleanor, who having settled England in Queen Eleanor comes to her
sons aid.
Peace, was now come over to forward her son in the Wars, and was Wendouer,
MS. Mat. Paris.
present at the surprising of Maunz, is Hollensh. Polydor.
censured to have too much sharpened his edge against her Nephew Arthur and his
friends, out of her implacable disdain, and Envy toward Constance her
Daughter in-Law, and appears no less; for the King passing thence into Aniou,
left there his Marchadiune cum ruia sua. Rog. Houed. Queen Eleanor takes and
ruineth Angiert.
Captains and Forces with his mother, who made Angiers participate the
Fortunes of Maunz, the City ruined, the Citizens captiuated; whiles himself
coming to Roan, Mat. Paris.
was there by the hands of Walter the Archbishop, in the Cathedral Church with
great pomp on Saint Marks Festiual, girt with the Gladio Ducatus. Nic. Triues.
M S.
Ducall Sword of Normandy, and crowned Houeden. King John crowned Duke of
Normandy.
with a Coronet of Golden Roses, (taking his Oath for faithful administration
in that Dukedom) which was the pledge or earnest of his unquestionable
admittance to the English Diadem, which every day now expected him. Neither
yet may we think, albeit King John's An. aetat. 32. Walsing. Ypodig. The
fittest age, as a. Sam. c, 5. v. 4. David was 30. year old when he began to
reign.
mature and experienced age, his homebred, and well known education, his
reannexing of Irelands Kingdom to Englands, made his person more gracious then
Arthurs, that yet his Agents all this while in England found no rubbs in their
way, before Rog. Houed. King John's hindrances how removed.
all the Earls, Barons, Burgesses and Freeholders could be induced to
disclaim Arthurs apparent Right, and to swear fealty to King John against al
men living: yea, many of the Ric. Earl of Clare. Ranulph Earl of Chester.
William Earl of Tucesbury. Walram Earl of Warwick! Will. de Mowbray, etc.
Pretense of liberties, the plague of the State.
English Peers (who through their last Kings absence, and others conniuences,
had habituated in them a conceit of uncontrolled Greatness, which they miscalled
Liberties and Rights, under veil whereof, they after drew, not only undue
restraints upon the Regaltie, but also infinite calamities and massacres on the
people, whose good they pretended,) in the great Assembly at Northamton,
yielded only to swear a Sub bac conuent^ne, Houcd.
Conditional Fealty, to keep Rog. Houed. The first seed of the ensuing
troubles.
Faith and Peace to King John, if he would restore to every of them their
Rights: which was the first seed of disloyalties, which after grew to so great
a height. Thus howsoever, all domesticke difficulties ouerblowne, and Queen
Eleanor Vergil. hist. l. 15.
left in Aquitane to provide against Foreign, King John arrived at In Sussex.
8. Call. Iun. Houed. John crowned King of England. True honestly is only true,
Polycy.
Shoreham, and the next day comes to London, preparing for his Coronation to
be at Westminster, the morrow following being Assention day.

(5) Strange it was to consider, (if ought be strange in State-plots) how men,
otherwise very prudent, transported once with Wordly, and seemingpoliticke
respects, can so wilfully cloud their Reason, as to attempt those things,
which leave both a present stain on their Souls, and a lasting disreputation
both of their Integrity and Wisdom, wherein so much they glory. For what else
did Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, the man so Mat. Paris.
famoused as the Singularie Columna stabilitatu. ibid.
Pillar of the Commonwealths stabilitie, and Vir profunds pectoris,
Incomparabilis sapientia ibid.
incomparable for deepe-reaching Wisdom, when in that sacred and celebrious
Assembly of Omnium qui Coronationi interesse debuerant, Wendouer, M S.
all the States, addressing for the royal Inauguration, he added to those
Lay-Peeres Conditionals, his Clergy-Sophismes, and The second root of ensuing
treasons.
second Seede-plot of Treasons; persuading them by a cunning, but disloyal
speech (which yet Polydore forgeth a slight speech of hisovvne brain, and
Hollinsh. as idly follows him. Archbishop Huberts Sophistical Oration
verbatim.
some by transforming, have more deformed) that the English Crown was merely
Arbitrary and Elective at the peoples devotion? That Mat. Paris. Hist. Mayor.
they all in discretion were to know, how that no man has Right or any other
fore-Title to succeed another in a Kingdom, unless first (with innocation for
Grace and Guidance of Gods Holy Spirit) he be by the Body of the Kingdom
thereunto chosen, and be indeed some choice man, and picked out for eminency
of his virtues; by the President of Saul, the first Anointed King, whom God
made Ruler over his own people, though neither the Son of a King, nor yet of
any Regal descent. So after him likewise David the Son of Printed Copies
read Semei falsely for Ishai, 1. Sam. c. 16.
Ishai: the one for being valourous, and a Personage fitting royal dignity,
the other, for being Holy and Humble minded. To The examples do not show it:
for they were of Gods particular commandment, which was not now.
show that so he, whosoever in a Kingdom excels all in Valor and Virtue,
ought to surmount all in Rule and Authority: yet so, as that, if any of the
Offspring of a deceased King surpasses others, it is fit jointly to consent
in election of such a one. Thus he spoke (as he professed) in favor of John,
who then was present, whose most illustrious Brother King Richard dying without
any Heir from him descending, Him they had all (first imploring the He
ascribes that to the Holy Spirit, which after he confesses to proceed from
his own devise.
Holy Ghosts assistance) as being a Provident, Valiant, and For, his Father,
and two Brethren, Kings, his Mother, Queen, first of France, after of England:
Arthur nothing so.
vndoubtedly-Noble Prince, vnanimiously Elected, as well in regard of his
Merits; as of his Royal Blood. So unjust a speech from so great a Person,
could not but move both Offense and Wonder to many, even to John himself, who
doubtless meant to stand to John de Serres, in Phil. August.
his right of proximity by blood: Mat. Paris. N^ ^usi ambigere.
but they durst not then and there move Questions thereof, as afterward Idem,
ibidem.
some did, to whom he gave a reason of it, as strange as the speech it self;
saying, Rog Houed. Mat. Paris. Hubert forecasts to bridle the King.
that he was assured by some divining foresight, that King John would work the
ruin of the Kingdom, and that therefore, to Giraldus Camb. says he was
Principis frenum. See vit. Archiep. Cant. in Hubert.
bridle him from so doing, he had affirmed his Admission was to be by Choice,
and not Hereditary Succession: implying that as by Election he got the Crown,
so by Eiection on demerite he might as justly loose it. But for that present,
the Ceremonies all pompouslie accomplished, (where Rog. Wendouer, Triplici
Sacramento inuolutus Rex. King John first does reward his three Agents.
three Oaths were ministered to him; To love Holy Church, and preserve it from
all oppressors; To govern the State in Justice, and abolish bad Laws; Not to
assume this Royal honor but with full purpose to perform that he had
sworn:) the first act and bounty of his kingly Power, was to reward those,
whose hands had lifted him to it, making William Marshall and Fitz-Peter,
Earls of Pembrooke and Essex, and the Archbishop, Lord high Chancellor; who
seeming Rog. Houeden, d^ gloriaretur in potestate illa.
to glory in that addition of honor, was told by the Lord Bardolf, that the
height of Archiepiscopall dignity was such, as it was ever reputed a great
advancement for a Chancellor to be Archiepiscopall dignity.
made Archbishop, but none for an Archbishop to be made a Chancellor.

(6) The Kings Enemies, Polydore, Francus re^ dissimulanit.
who kept their heads in, whiles he was there in Arms, found opportunities
to impeach him, while he was here settling his Peace: the Pol. Verg.
French King in Normandy surpriseth the City Eureux, and recouers the County of
Main; the Britains regaine the City Angiers with other strong holds: the news
whereof caused King John with all speed From Shoreham to Deep, (13. Call.
July.) Nich. Trivet.
to pass the Seas, to give stoppage to that current; where on his arrival,
his Army of Rog. Houed.
Friends and Voluntaries was so increased, that King Philip was soon content
to take In Crastinum Assumptionis, Houed. ib. A Truce with the French.
truce for fifty days; on expiration whereof, an Enteruiew was agreed on to
establish a lasting Peace. But Philip a With Henry the second, and Richard,
vide supra. Double dealing most unseemly in a Prince.
long time noted of dubling, (ill beseeming any, but chiefly a Prince) the
Crastine Ass^. Math. Paris.
very day before the two Kings should meet, giving Duke Arthur the Militari
Cing^lo, ibid.
Belt of Knighthood, and taking of him Homage for the Signiories of Aniou,
Poytou, Turaine, Main, Britanny, and Normandy, he made him faithful vow, to
yield him powerful helps, for acquiring those possessions. Neither was King
John behind him in that kind of prevention, when Philip Earl of Flanders, the
French Philips professed Enemy, Feria 6. ante Assumptionem. Houeden.
coming to Roan, and dissuading King John from trusting any French
friendship, did there swear unto him both x Rog. Wend^er, MS. A League betwixt
England and Flanders.
faithful Help and Homage. Yet the two Kings keeping touch for the day,
though not for the purpose of amity (and yet making fair show of that too)
held Parley betwixt Butauant and Houeden, which Wend^er and Paris call Wail^.
An Enteruiew of the Kings of England and France.
Guletun, Wend^er.
two days by Commissioners inter-current, the third by presence and priuatie,
that not one of their Nobles or Attendants (who on each side lay far aloof
for the space of an hour) understood any passages betwixt them. This much yet
came to notice by after relation, that Rog. Houeden.
King Philip then required for Himself the large Country of (...), (...),
Wogesin. Houed V^ocasinum. Poly^r. V^o-Casium. (...). King Philips unreasonable
demands.
Veulguessine, pretending that Geffry Earl of Aniou granted it to Lews le
Gross, for aiding his Son King Henry the second against King Stephen: and
for Arthur, all Poictou, Aniou, Maine and Turayne: both which immoderate
demands with others, King John (conceiving with 1. R^g. 2 22.
Solomon, Why does he not also ask for Adoniah the Kingdom?) Not, nec (...),
Part. The Parley ends in discord.
neither would nor ought to grant unto him; whereby their amities intended,
ended in more hostile defiances. But Philips capitulating then for Arthur, was
only perfunctorie and complementall, as his own words, (and afterward his
actions) bewraied; when being questioned by his Favorites of his implacable
Rog. Houed.
hatred against King John, who had never harmed him, professed it was only,
for that he had (not, defeated Arthur, but) possessed himself of Normandy,
and the other Demaines, without asking him leave, or offering him Homage.

(7) The flames thus on all sides breaking forth the stronger, by how much the
more they had been for a time kept in, Houeden.
many Earls and Barons of France (who formerly adhered to King Richard) became
Homagers to King John, they swearing, never without his assent to reuert to
Philip, and he, never to make Peace with Philip, but they therein to be
concluded. In the heat of which sidings (if not before) a Math. Paris.
chief adherent of the foresaid Earl of Flanders (now col-leagued with King
John) being the Bishop Elect of Cambray, fell into the hands of the French, at
which time also Of whom, see in Richard the 1. (...)
Philip Bishop of Beauois, (a great French Peer) was held in prison by King
John; and neither of them willing to forgo their mitred Champions, Mat. Paris.
Petrus de Capua, the Legate, interdicted France for the one, and Normandy for
the other, till they, as persons sacred and inviolable, should be dismissed:
yet King John (whose Person and Title the Pope and Papals as yet much tendered)
had the favor to wring out of his prize, Paris, Houeden, says but 2000.
six thousand Marks for his release, and an Oath, never whiles he breathed to
bear Arms against any Christian. Nic. Tri^et. M. S Rog. Houeden.
This Legate in King Richards time, had made agreement with King Philip for a
five years Truce, which expiring with Richards last breath, he still labored
to establish it betwixt the now Kings: but King Philips great heart would not
so come down, which was likely to have cost him dear. For pursuing whither
his Fury (a bad guide) did lead him, after his King Io^ pursue^ Philip from
place to place.
siege of Lauardin ( Rog. Houeden fol. 452.
Whence upon King John's approach with his Army he fled to Maunz, and thence
again fled, King John coming thither;) seized the Castle of Balun (which
belonged to Arthur) and to prevent his enemy (as is likely) Rog. Houed.
he leuelled it unto the very ground; which fact Duke Arthurs Princeps
Exercitus Arthuri, H^cd. ^8.
General, William de Rupibus wrathfully expostulating with King Philip, as
having done therein contrary to Covenants with his Lord Arthur, he as
scornfully answered, that he King Philips wrongs to Arthur
would not for his Lord Arthures pleasure, forbear his own, in doing as
himself listed, with such forts as he took. The General seeing Arthur was
but the outward mask, under which Philip reuelld for his hidden ends, Mat.
Paris. Rog. Houed.
seriously persuaded his Lord to reconcilement with his uncle King John, and
rather to hazard his hopes on the clemency of a Generous Foe, then on the
guiles of a false hearted Friend: and so making his peace with King John, he
presently yielded up to him both Maunz, and (with Lady Constance) Arthur
reconciled to King John.
the young Duke also, the important matter of so great contentions. But Heavens
were not so propitious to these Reconciliats, as so to hold them long: some
Philippines buzzing such needless Rog. H^d.
terrors of Imprisonment into the Noble Child's ears, that the next night,
Fear giving wings to his flight, Arthur flies from King John.
as Love did to his Mothers, (for leaving her husband Paul. (...) says Guydo
was her second Husbband* but it appears otherwise by Houeden and others.
Ranulph Earl of Chester, she was amorous of, and married Guido a gallant
Gentleman, who the^ fled with her,) they escaped into Angiers. Arthur neither
sure of K. Philip, nor sure to K. John, had now cast himself betwixt two
Milstones; but (howsoever) Philip meant the greist in the end should be his.

(8) The breach betwixt these two great Kings, King P^lip and the Emperors ha
tred, increases the malice betwixt King John and Philip.
was the more irreconcilable, by reason of the hatred betwixt King Philip and
the Emperor Otho the fourth son of Henry Duke of Saxony, and Maud daughter
of K. H. 1.
Otho, King John's Nephew, whose advancement to the Empire (himself perhaps Rog
Houed. f. 457.
aiming to it) Philip still endeavored to impeach, Mat. Paris.
not regarding that the Pope (whose power Kings then regarded only, while it
made for their purpose) had thundered his Anathema against all his Opposers:
and Otho in Mat. Paris.
gratitude to King Richard, who Mat. Westmin. An. 1198.
procured him the Diadem Imperial, and in tender regard of his uncles honor,
sent him advise, Rog. Houed. f. 452. The Emperor offers his aid to K. John.
not to hasten any final atonement with the French King, for that himself
would bring him his utmost Imperial assistance. Notwithstanding, by the
Cardinall-Legates assiduous interceding, a Truce was concluded till the Idem.
ibid. An. 1200. The Kings interuiew again.
Feast of Saint Hilary: at which time, the Kings coming to a Treaty betwixt
Wailun and Butauant Castles, Rog de Wendouer, M. S. Paris. Houed. Articles of
atonement.
it was agreed: that Lewis the Heir of France should marry King John's Niece,
Blanch, Daughter of Alfonsus King of Castile; that King John should give for
Dowry the City and County of Eureux, with sundry Forts in Normandy, and thirty
thousand Marks in silver; vowing also not to aid his Nephew Otho with men or
means to attain the Empire: and further, Nich. Trivet. MS
promising to leave (if he died without Issue) unto Lewis all the Territories he
held in France; all which Articles were Vide Chartam apud. Houed. p. 463
formerly engrossed, but finally concluded betwixt Butauant, and Guletun (the
Houed. f. 456.
one, K. John's, the other, King Philips Castle) the Paris. 11. Call. Iul.
Octaues of Saint John Baptist, when, these Counties were actually surrendered
to Philip; the Lady Blanch Walsing. Ypod. A. 1200.
espoused to Lewis his son; Duke Arthur (Philips once vowed, but now unvalued
charge,) yielded over, and made Home Io^annis. Houed.
Servant and Ypod. Neust. Loco cit. King Philip yields up Arthur to King John,
against his vow. The Emperors two Brethren sent to King John.
Homager to K. John for his own Dukedom; whom yet his uncle was content to
leave with King Philip, who had now so left him, and erst had vpheld him, only
as the bait of his own advantage. If Princes can be thus unprincely
degenerous, what trust can men repose in baser vassals? King John hereupon
proved much more steadfast to Philip, then either Philip was to him, or himself
to Otho the Emperor, who sending his two Brethren Henry Duke of Saxony, and
William (surnamed of Houed f 456.
Winton) to demand the Counties of Eboraci, says Houed perchance for Ebroica,
(...).
York and Poictou, with the Treasure and Jewels which Nich. Trivet, in Rich.
1. M. S.
King Richard bequeathed him: King John denied to yield thereunto, Rog. Houed.
King John's care of his oath to K. Philip.
only in regard of his Oath which he had passed to Philip, to yield no kind
of aid to the Emperor. And further to testify, (yea further then he ought)
his faithful meaning to preserve entire this amity with Philip, Wendouer.
Houed, f 457.
by his advise he divorced So called by Wendouer, Paris. Mat. Westminst. Houed,
etc. but our Heralds (Glouer, Milles, Ferrers, etc) call her Isabel.
Hawisia his wife, as too Grandchild to Rob. base-brother of King John.
near of Blood, by sentence of the Archbishop, and Bishops of Bordeaux,
Poictoirs, and Xanton, and by the Archbishops hands espoused Isabell, Ioh. de
(...).
Heiretrice of Ailmar Earl of Angolisme, a fair young Lady, but Ypodigma.
dedestined to another bed.

(9) This Final Concord (so Apud Houed.
called, but not proving so) with Philip, who now acknowledged John the Ibid.
f. 463.
rightful Heir of King Richards Crown, gave him more leasur, to receive
peaceably all Idem f. 457.
Submitties, and bring in forceably all ib. f. 458.
out-standers of those his transmarine Dominions, and after to look home to the
affairs of his Kingdom, from which he had been (and we there following
him,) too long absent. Yet in the heat of those foreign imploiments, he on
occasions had his recourses hither to settle his State-affaires, and Ib.
Consuet. (...). 463.
Crowne-Reuenewes; to enact wholesome Idem f. 439.
laws for foreign and domesticke Commerce; to collect an Houed.
Aid for his Neeces great Dowry, and Martial uses; which later (being three
shillinges on every See the description of Huntington shire.
Carrucata,) though his first and only Subsidy since his coming to the
Crown, caused much heart-burning; especially by means of his Son of H. 2.
by Rosam^d.
own brother Geffry Archbishop of York (touching whom the King was Houed.
f. 453
forewarned, that he would bring a Sword, and not Peace into England) who
bearing himself too bold on his blood and place, Wendouer. M S.
forbad the Collectours of that Aid in his precincts (though it were Wendo.
granted to the King generally for all England) and also being required by the
King to attend him into France, to conclude the Peace, and his Neeces
Espousall, he very undutifully denied his service. The King Causa multiplex
(...). Paris.
justly moved with those his disloyalties, caused all his Temporalities to be
seized on by his Sheriff; whom therefore Geffry (adding fresh fuel to the
fire) did solemnly excommunicate, caused the Kings Officers to bear blows,
and interdicted the whole Province of York. So partial, and vnhistoricall, is
the report of Polyd. Virg. l. 15.
one; (a Stranger by birth, but more strange for bold untruths) who faines the
only incentiue of such indig nation in the King, was that Prelates
reprehension of his Rapines on the people. For (to give a further taste of that
Authors Gra^, l. 3.
vehement fond malice, justly so taxed) what ancient Judicious Writers call an
Wend. Houed.
Aid necessary for Wars, that he enstileth Rapines and Spoils; where they
make John his Brothers Heir by Will, he makes Arthur; they say he was a
Strenuus Ani^sus. Houed. Cambrens.
valiant man, he says he was a Coward; where they make him Houed.
pursuing, and Philip flying, he charge him to have made only plaints, when
he should have drawn swords; where they charge the Peers for Su^
detrectantibus Militiam. Trivet. MS.
drawing back from his Wars, he makes them the only Hasteings, and John
the Hinderer; briefly, if a Polyd. l. 15.
fire-shooting Meteor appear above, it portends Heavens fury on John; if the
ibid.
watery Element ouerflow, it bodes John's fury on his Land. But surely that part
thereof, which fell on Geoffry, it was (you see) not undeserved:
notwithstanding, upon the Kings 8. Id. October. Paris.
return into England, and Geoffreys to his more loyal carriage and
submission, his Peace was made, at the very time, and for the more celebrity,
of Queen Isabels Dominica ante festum Dionys.
Coronation, with whom the King himself was Paris. Houeden.
again crowned at Westminster by Archbishop Hubert.

(10) The Pomp of that solemnity ended, the King resolved of ending a long
depending controversy with King William of Scotland, who formerlie The
Interuiew of the Kings of England and Scotland.
(before John was proclaimed King) had challenged, as Houeden.
his patrimoniall Right, the Counties of Northumberland, and Cumberland; and
afterward seeing he got but words and delays, was ready, (King John being then
in France) with an hotter and more forceable argument, to win, what he could
not crave: but being in dark At Dunferli^. Houeden.
devotion all Night at Saint Margarets Hearse, the still true She was
Grandchild to King Edmund Ironside, and wife to King Malcolme 3. of Scots.
English-hearted Queen persuaded him by a Dream (for certainly it was no
other) not to infest England her native soil; who thereupon sent back his
Army. But now he comes with a more friendly train, upon King John's sending
to him, in Honorable Houeden.
Embassage, the Earls of Huntingdon and Hereford, King Williams Brother and
Nephew, his three Sons in Law, Lacy, Vescy and Ros with others, to desire him
to give him meeting at So Houeden, VValsing. Westminster. but Hector and Polydor by
error say at London.
Lincoln, where accordingly they both 11. Call. December. Houed.
meet with kingly courtesies; and the next day, King John to auspicate his
Temporal affairs with Spiritual devotions, (and yet to show what he thought
of some superstitious follies of those times) went Idem.
undauntedly into the Cathedral Church, being much dissuaded by many, (for
Monkish Impostures persuaded many it was very ominous for a King to enter that,
and certain As Saint. ^iswides Church in Oxford.
other places) and there offered a golden Chalice on Saint John's Altar, which
King Stephen before dared to enter the City. Paris. in Steph.
no King before him durst do. Where his Devotions performed, the two Kings (in
presence of Cant. Dublin. Raguse.
three Archbishops, thirteen Bishops, the King of South Wales, with a
multitude of English, Scottish, French, and Irish Princes and Peers,)
ascending the top of that conspicuous and high Now called Bore. ^ill.
hill, on the North side of the City, did there in a glorious solemnity,
swear amity and faithful love, Trivet. M. S. VValsing.
upon the Crosier of Archbishop Hubert.

(11) That Spectacle so roial to the beholders, was seconded with another no
less Honorable to K. John, (for Humility in such great ones is more glorious
then their glory,) when the King having lately left Hugh Bishop of Lincoln
(called the Saint, for The funerals of Hugh Bishop of Lincoln.
the opinion of unfeigned integrity, though See Polydor l. 15.
blemished with some obstinacies, and surcharged with Legends of In Wendouer.
Paris. and Legend. of S. Hugh.
fained Miracles) at London very sick, (where himself with gracious care
Paris hist. ^ai.
went to visit him, and both confirmed his Testament and promised the like for
other Bishops after,) now hearing he was Negligent Polydor says he died,
An. 1207. Reg. Job. 6.
dead, and his Corpse then bringing into the gates of Lincoln, he, with all
that princely Train, went forth to meet it; the Rog. Houed.
three Kings (though the Scottish was to depart that very day) with their
royal Allies, carrying the Hearse on those shoulders, accustomed to uphold the
weight of whole kingdoms: from whom the Great Peers received the same, and
bare it to the Church Porch, whence the three Archbishops and Bishops conuaied
The manner of Bishops funerals in those days.
it to the Quier, and the next day (it there lying the mean time Mat. Paris
more Pontific^, p. 197. King John's great humility.
open faced, mitred, and in all Pontifical Ornaments, with Gloves on his
hands, and a Ring on his finger) interred it with all solemnities answerable.
Yet here the King rested not to give proof, in so great a height, of his lowly
mind, and then benign (how ever afterward auerted) to the Clergy; when twelve
Abbots of the Cisteaux Habit (whose See Hollinsh. in K. John. The Cisterians
deny aid to K. John.
whole Order had displeased him, by refusing to give Aid toward his great
payment of thirty thousand pounds) Houed. f 462.
came now to Lincoln, and all prostrate at his feet, craved his gracious
favor, for that his Forresters had driven out (for so the King had given
command) of his Pastures and Forests all their Cattle, wherewith themselves,
and Christ's Poor were sustained. The King touched with remorse on K. John's
facility to pardon offenders.
so venerable a troop of Suppliants, (though so great offenders) commanded
them to rise, who were no sooner up, but the King Rog. Houed. ib.
inspired with divine Grace, fell flat on the ground before them, desiring
pardon, adding, that he not only admitted them to his love, and their The
great wealth of that Order consisted in cattle and wool.
beasts to his Pastures, (a special favor which Kings had granted that
Order,) but would also build an Abbey for men of their sort, (if they would
design some choice seat) wherein himself meant to be enshrined. Neither did
he promise then more then he performed, nor were those wily Humiliates
regardlesse of choosing a delicate plotte for the purpose, where he built a
goodly Abbey of their Order, deservedly for the pleasance of the place, named
The Beauteous place an Abbey in Hampshire by New-F^rest.
Beaulieu, and of valued (at the dissolution under H. (...).) at 428. l. 6.
(...). d. q* yearly.
rich Revenue, and excessive Privilege; continuing long of great renown, as a
Castle of refuge inviolable; our Ancestors thinking it most heinous sacrilege,
thence to draw any, though wilful Murderers or Traitors: wherein the Founders
of such unsanctified Cambden^ Hampshire.
Sanctuaries, and Temples of Mercy (so they called the^) throughout this
Kingdom, seemed rather to take Romulus for their President, the^ Moses, who
granting favor to casual Manslaughters, yet Exodus 21. v. 14
commanded wilful Murderers to be drawn from the Altar to the slaughter.

(12) By what degrees, men not only of such reputed-religious habit, but also
of the Secular-Clergy, fell afterward more and more from such favors of The
first breaches betwixt the King and his Clergy.
the King, and he from theirs, a man that will not purposely wink, may easily
behold, both sorts standing so stiff on their persons, and their possessions
Exemption from Regal command, that whiles the Apud Mat. Paris, pass^.
Pope could have all for any superfluous imploiment, The Clergy stand on a
threefold exemption. 1 Of their Persons. 2 Of their po^ssessions. 3 Of their
Prelacies.
the King could get nothing, though his Kingdom were in hazard, as you heard
by the disloyal obstinacies both of the Archbishop of York, who denied the
King his personal attendance, and those Cisteaux Monks, whose Coffers were
thus locked against him. The like pretended Exemptions of their
Clergie-Prelacies (as well as of their Persons and Purses) wrought also like
offenses, both with former Kings, and now with King John, who on the death of
Bishop Hugh, resolving to confer by gift, (as his See in K. Henry the 1.
Ancestors did, and Successit (...) de Oxe^ in (...) Norwic. Job. de Gray. D^
Io^ regis. Hou. f. 458 (...) Hereford. Rex ^dit ^gydip ibid.
himself elsewhere lately had) that See, on some whom either merit or
affection had endeared to him, (the rather, because Mat. Paris* in Guil. 2.
men of those places, in those days, were usually their Sovereigns
bosom-Counsellors) Rog Houed.
he was with peremptory affronts withstood by the Cannons there, who very
bold on the Popes up bearing, reckt very slenderly their Princes displeasing.
It is not unlikely that Archbishop Offense taken by the King against Archb.
Hubert of Cant.
Hubert (lest Canterbury might be thought inferior to York in daring boldness,)
as being Papal legate, in secret bolstring them had a hand, though closely
carried in a glove: for that the man, who lately, Rog. Houeden.
gloried the King was wholly his, now finding he had not the sway he expected,
and thought he deserved (by obligement of his first Agency about the Crown,)
not only studied to make up that by his Legatine Glory which he wanted by
his Princes countenance, but further, Habe^ hollow heart to K. John.
(as Polyd. Verg. l. 15
one who thinks he extolles his virtue, paints forth his disloyalty) he
repented now, more then any thing in all his life, that he had so advanced
King John to the Crown. Certes, about this time, he showed slender respect to
his Sovereign, (for as God is in Hubert resists the Kings chiefs officer.
his, so are Kings dishonored in their Ministers disgraces) when being
prohibited by Fitz-Peter, the Kings great Iustitiar and Minister (in the Kings
absence) of regal command, Houeden.
from holding a General Council of his Province, (never used to be held, but
by Sovereign permittance) his pleasure scornde to take any countermaund, but
from him especially, who, in Archiepiscop^ in Regno a Rege secunda person.
Mat. Paris.
calling his inferior, by As fellow agents for the Kings advancement. Hubert
outbraues the King himself. An. 1201.
joint deserts toward the King, but his Equal, was now, in neerenesse and
fastness to the King, become far his Superior. But what speak I of
confronting a subordinate power? did he spare to out-beard his Sovereign
himself? It seems no. For having notice, the Feast of the Nativity now
approaching, that the King intended with his Queen, at Guilford to keep that
feastiuity with great magnificence; he whose Palace ordinarily, for Splendor,
multitude of Attendants, and sumptuous intertainements did strive with the
Kings (as one of his own Mat. Parker in Antiq. Ecc. Aug. in vit. Hubert.
Successors auows) thought this a fitting time, to show, both his great state,
and little regard of his Princes discountenance, by Mat. West. Quas cum Rege a
pari contendens.
paraleling to the Kings, his own sumptuous preparations, Wend^, M. S
with rich attires, and costly gifts for his Attendants at Canterbury. The King
(as Kings brook not to be braued by Subjects, nor is it wisdom for
dissauourites to do it,) moved Mat. Paris.
with great indignation, thought the man had too much riches, and too little
Discretion (which seldom lodges in the brain, where Pride dwells in the
Heart,) and therefore to abate somewhat the one, and learn him more of the
other, having first been in the St^ ^eth in saying he then went into Ireland.
North parts to gather money for his better uses, he meant not to lavish it in
keeping his Easter, which he chose rather to do at the cost of Hubert the Mat.
Parker Antiq. ^cc. Aug. Godwin. in. vit. Hubert.
Rich; and not to spare him, who spared not himself, he there increast that
great expense with a greater, of His, and his Queens solemn Rog. Wend^ M. S.
crowning again on Easter day, in the Cathedral Church; where, in lieu of his
expense, Hubert had the formal honor to set on their Crowns, but yet not the
grace to sit near the Kings Heart.

(13) Such being the first ouertures of hart-bur nings betwixt the King and his
Clergy, which after The first br^ches (...) the king and his Lay Peers.
by additament of daily fuelling, brast forth into a more fearful flame; the
Lay-Peeres were so far from laboring to quench it, that they made it the
fiercer: for these Bellows of Rebellion, which before their Homages did
condition for their Rights and Liberties, were not all this while sparing of
their breath, to inflame other Nobles with the like heat of fury. Hell it self
(whence al Rebellions spring, and thither fall again) could not wish a fitter
occasion to broach and actuate such a mischief. For the Rog. H^d.
Poyt^ins with King Phillps conniuence, (taking advantage of King John's
absence, and Springs approach) were up in Arms, dislodged his Garrisons,
beleagured his Castles; tidings whereof recalled King John's thoughts from his
Domesticke Pompes, to his Transmarine Affairs; for the present, he gave
command to his War^. de Clapi^ (...).
Seneschall of Normandy to attempt on them some Counter-seruices, to withdraw
the Seigers, (whom also King Philip, Houed. f. 465.
hearing King John was in person coming over with an Army, forthwith
recalled,) and published his general Apud Tenk sburie, die Ascensionis. Paris.
summons, that his Earls, Barons, and all that held by Knights-seruice, should
be ready at Portsmouth with Horse and Arms, on Whitsonday then instant, to
cross the seas with him. The tumultuous Earls knowing, that the King then
needed Liberties the cause of contention.
their present helps, and therefore might be forced to any Capitulations, in
a conuenticle held at Leycester, by a Houeden.
joint conspiring, sent an audacious message to the King, that they would not
attend him, unless he would first restore their rightes; with which disloiall
refusal, the King justly incensed, Malousus con^lio. Houed.
by some men's too praecipitate advise, (considering the hazardous time which
needed a salve rather then a corasiue) seized into his hands some of their
Castles, to prevent their further attempts, of some he took their children for
pledges, and others, whose Purses were likely to do him truer service then
their owners, he Wendouer. M S.
released upon payments. At which prefixed time, he dispatched before him
William Earl of Pembrooke, and Lord Roger Lacie with Houed.
two regiments to join with Normandies Seneshall. What a Rog. Houeden.
grave Author judged of those bold Barrons here, and other turbulent Great-ones
then abroad, may be gathered by this; that as soon as mention fell in of
those refractary Lords, he straight fell off, to show how in that very year,
Pope Innocent then reigning in Rome, Saffadine the Turk in Jerusalem, By
Houed. so named, but Alexius by Nic. Trivet.
Alexander the Nic. Trivet. M S shows he deprived his brother Cusath of
Empire and eyes not of life.
Fatricide in Constantinople, (for so he yoketh those three together, with some
others following them;) the great Doctors preached, that then was the time (
Apoc. 20. v. 7.
prophesied by Saint John) when after a thousand years restraint, the Devil
was let loose, to seduce the Nations like a v. 2. and 8.
Serpent, and trouble the world like a Ibidem.
Dragon: which how true it proved in this our Nation and little-World, (in
whose Tragedy the Devil also, amongst the Supra 1.
first named Actors, comes now to play his part,) the Diabolical ensuing
practices, both of fraud and fury, will hereafter demonstrate.

(14) The King, though thus disfurnished of his principal home-helpes, yet
Houed. f. 465
entrusting the custody of the land, especially those Southern parts, with
Parker in vit. Arch. Cant. erreth in saying it was Hubert the Archbishop, whose
name was Hubert Walleri.
Hubert de Burgo Lord Chamberlain, and receiving to Houed. f 465.
full reconcilement (for more security of the Northern,) Geffrey Archbishop of
York, whose Ibid.
Churches large Privileges then he ratified; without delay at Portesmouth he
put forth to sea, with Isabel his Queen, though in sundry Bottomes, and with
differing success, a Hollens.
sudden gust disparting the Fleet, whereby the King was driven back on the
Isle of Wight, but the Queen Mat. Westmin. Walsing. and yet Houed. says,
Prosperis ventis ganisa.
with much ado, arrived safe in Normandy, whom soon after the King followed
thither. Upon whose arrival, the French King Paris Hist. minor M S.
perceiving the power of his adversary, presently condiscended to another
personal (but very Nemine conscio Houed.
private) Parley; wherein each gave and received such reciprocal satisfaction
in their desires, that thereupon, not only the former bonds of Amity seemed to
continue strong, butwere also more strengthened with a new knot of Wendouer. M S.
Association, wherein sundry great Lords of either side were by indentment of
Writing, made suerties to the counter-part, with condition, that whither of the
two Kings did first violate the Covenants, all his cautionary Lords should be
released of their alleagiance to him, and become Leegemen and Assistants to the
Prince offended. And that the world might take more notice of their combined
loves, they Houed f. 471.
both agreede to contribute to the Holy-Warres, (which now began to be on
foot) the fortieth part of the whole Revenues of their Crowns; sending their
Epist. (...) Apud Houed. f. 471.
letters abroad into their Dominions, to encourage all their Nobles and people,
by their examples to do the like. With which intercourses, and other
co^plements, three days being spent betwixt them, King Philip the deeper to
serve himself into King John's good opinion, (the Tuta frequensq via est, per
Amici fallerenomen.
surest way to ouerreach another in any commerce) by entreaty obtained his
company, first to S. Denises Palace, Hollias.
where he entered with a pompous Procession of the Clergy, and lodged with
royal entertainment by the King; and the next day, to Paris, where he was
received with Ypod. Neust. Holins.
very rich Presents of the City, and great applause of all sorts, to see so
noble arguments of affection betwixt two so great princes, lately so mortal
enemies: where the French King betaking himself to a more private mansion,
left his own palace to accommodate and honor Englands King. After some days
there bestowed in princely delights, and entertainements, King John conducted
forth of the City by King Philip, and parting with mutual attestations of love
never to be parted, took his journey toward Normandy, in full hope to enjoy
thence forward the contentment of quiet to himself, and peace to his
Dominions: but those windy hopes soon changed with his change of the air.

(15) For whiles at Chinon he was roially entertaining Queen Berengaria his
K. Richards wife
sister (whom Rog. Houed.
he there also bounteously satisfied in performing the A new conspiracy.
Ioynture promised her by King Richard, giving her the cCity and Signiory of
Baion, two Castles, and their Demaines in Aniou, with a thousand Marks
yeerelie for term of life,) and at Mat. West. Ann. 1202.
Argenton in Normandy, where he kept his Christmas, was solacing himself with
his fair Queen Isabel; the Earl of March, Hugh, surnamed Le-Brun, a P. Aemyl.
in Phil. 2.
Peer of great power and alliance, to whom Isabel was first promised (though
for her Nondum aunos nubiles attigerat. Houeden.
unripe years he never bedded her) enflamed with love of her, who was now
thought worthy to be a Queen, Aemil. lo. citat.
drew on other Poictouine Nobles, to think that he was unworthy to be a
King, who wrongfully had taken her Houed. says her father gave her to King
John. fol. 457.
from him, and would, if not prevented, do the like in time with them. So, Ypod
Neustriae.
once again young Arthur, whose former hopes were all cold, is re-kindled by
these firebrarnds, and set up by their malice, to supplant his uncle, but by
Heavens Decree, to overthrow himself, howsoever the Mills his Catalog of
honor in Richmonds Earls.
Britains, then fascinated with his ominous Name, dreamed that the ancient
Great Arthur was risen again in him, and that the Translation of the English
Kingdom was now The French king breaks amity with K. John.
by him to be effected. Neither was the Wendouer M S.
French King, for all his late painted pretensions of love, deaf to their
suggestions, who labored to incense his hatred against John; whereto he had
these further inducements; that King John might quickly wax too potent a
Neighbor in that Continent, if his quiet and power were not timely rebated;
that now the means to work it, were more then before, the Rog. Houed.
English Peers being alienated in affection from him, for denying their
claimed Liberties; but chiefly, that the Nico. Trivet, M. S.
profit (such base ends can some propose of so Noble a Band) which he hoped
for by his amity (being the Walsing. Ypod.
enjoying of those Signiories in the Continent, if he died sans Issue) was now
in a manner cut off, Queen Isabel beginning to give apparent hopes of some
fair fruit from so fair a stem. Thus whiles Earl Hugh out of his love,
Duke Arthur out of Ambition, King Philip out of Avarice, (ah that the noblest
person should have the basest end,) but all out of Hatred, were contriuing King
John's ruin; he was farthest from suspicion, when nearest his danger, and yet
they, who thus were forwardest to undermine his Greatness, were themselves
foremost to be crushed with the weight thereof. An other enteruiew of the two
kings.


(16) But these sly Serpents shrouded in secret their enuenomed heads, till
the warmth of the Mat. Paris. hist. min. M. S. says in Lent.
Spring (a time suiting for martial mischiefs) called them forth; when King
Philip (having newly cast his skin, and as most able, so was Mortali armatus
odio. Wend. M. S.
most willing to break the way) desired another enteruiew with King John: who
coming thither (the Nich. Triu. M S. Mat. Paris says it was near
place was twixt Vernon and Lisle Dandale) with expectation (...) Castle.
of some fruits of those lovely courtesies which their last meeting seemed to
have engrafted; he there found that this last winter had nipt all those fair
blossoms. For Philip, Hist. min. Paris. MS.
forgetful of all former Compacts, and Tr^et. M. S.
pretending some imaginary wrongs, in outrageous manner Mat. West. W^douer, M.
S Paris hist. min. M. S.
required him without delay to redeliuer into Arthurs hands, all his
Transmarine dominions, Normandy, Turayne, Aniou, Poictou; or otherwise as Lord
Paramount of those Countries, which John held by Homage, he peremptorily
VValsing. Ypod.
cited him personally to appear in In qumdena Paschae, ibid.
Easter Term at Paris, there to Nich. Trivet. M. S.
answer what should be laid to his charge, and to abide the Arrest of his
Court of Justice. The color on which he thus did cite* him, was (say Ralph
Cogshall. John Stow.
some) King John's sharp repressing of some rebellious attempts of Hugh le brun
the former year, whereof the Earl complained to King Philip, as to the chief
Lord. King John much amassed to see, not only honey so soon distempered into
gall, but the French King also turned into an Apparatour, Hist. mayor. Mat.
Paris.
disdained both his Citation and Commands, as very unnoble for Englands King
to accept, or the French to offer; neither indeed did Philip thus put the
matter to daying, as intending any such legitimate proceeding, but only to
make his adversary secure of any other assaults, then by Petty-foggers. For
whether it be true or no, Ralph Cogshell. John Stow.
that King John for his nonappearance, was by sentence of the French Peers
adjudged to loose all his Territories in the Continent: certain it is, that
Die sequenti, say Mat. Westminster. and Rog. Wend. M. S.
no sooner was the Conference with indignation broken off, but Philip (he had
before prepared to effect what he had proiected) with power and fury assailes
Butauant Castle, whose Turrets (high-reared by Stowes Annals
King Richard) he Hist. minor. Mat. Paris. MS.
leuelled with the Foundations, and thence suddenly like a flash of lightning,
began to inuolue the Mat. Westminster. King John forces King Philip to raise his
siege.
neighboring parts with ransakings and ruins, till giving an assault, (which
had held him eight days) to the Castle of Radepont, King John coming to the
rescue, forced him with shame to speed away. To repair which dishonor, d
Confusus recessit. Wendouer. MS.
and to empaire the English forces by distraction of imploiments, returning to
Paris, he there Paris. min. hist. MS.
appoints for Arthur (to Stowes Auncles.
whom he had now affianced his younger daughter) both certain selected Nobles
to be protectors to secure and guard his person, and also bands of Soldiers
to attend his command, amongst which were 200. the Mat. Westminst.
choice Knightsof France; all which in Mat. Paris hist. mayor.
very pompous Troops followed him, (with Philips Paul. Aemil. in Philipp^ 2.
directions, and also supply of The. Walsing.
great sums of money) into Poictou, to reduce those parts to his Allegiance;
which was no hard matter to effect; the greater part of Commanders there
(being fore-wrought) expecting nothing more, and the better part suspecting
nothing less, then these perfidious assaults.

(17) Queen Eleanor Regent of those provinces, attended with a Mat. Paris.
hist. min.
very slender guard, yet strong enough for days of quiet, (which both her
Magno nat^ (...), Aemil.
Age did now desire, and her Idem.
Homage done to Philip, and Philips fair shows to her did promise;) having no
speedier notice of those incursions, then the unpleasing effects thereof, (for
on Arthurs good successes, Paulus Aemil.
K. Philip proclaimed him Lord of those Dominions) betook her self into
Mirabeau, one of the most tenable towns in (...) says Andeg^s agri (...).
Poictou, sending to King John, (whose force^ were then in Mat. West.
Normandy and King John's letter, see Hollin. Queen Eleanor besieged in Mirabe^.
Main, repressing or preventing Philips attempts) for present aids. Which yet
could not so speedily come, but Arthur (who knew that upon seizure of such a
prize as Eleanour, he might draw her son to any conditions) had prevented
them, besieged her, and John S^rres Paulus Aemil.
possessed himself of her town, though not of her person, as A^il. Polyd.
some by misunderstanding have mis-related. For she Westmin. Paris
retiring into the Castle, made it good against her Grandchilds incessant
battery; about which, whiles he, with his Paris. (...).
continual supplies of Poit^ine u Paris(...), MS.
and Mat. West.
Anio^ine princes, was Paris. (...). MS.
indefatigably busied, King John's Army near at hand (for his expedition both
by day and night to his mothers rescue, is recorded as W^douer, MS King John's
letter in Hollin.
admirable) brought the news of their own approach; which caused Mat. West.
the great Army of the Leagers so industrious before to impeach others, no
less sollicitous now to defend themselves. Both Armies Wendo. M. S.
martially ranged, and Arthurs Battalions not only Paris hist. (...). MS.
undauntedly, but also very W^douer.
pompously coming on to the shocke, the fight proved Mat. West.
most fierce and terrible, each side resolving, by reason of both the
Competitors presence in the field, that the End and vpshot of all their
designs, depended on that days succese: which in the end by the fortunate
Paris. hist. (...).
prowess of King John and his English, fell disastrouslie on Arthur, his
French, and other Assistants, who after a Polydore,
great slaughter made amongst them, Trivet. MS.
turning their backs to him, from whom they had before turned their Faithes,
took their flight Mat. West.
toward the Town, to shelter their lives within those walls, which so late
the Seat of their triumphs, became now the cage of their captiuation, and the
Toombe of all Arthurs ambitious hopes, though himself so unhappy as to survive
them: for VVendouer. MS
together with the tumultuary flyers, the victorious King and his Army entered,
renewed a Mat. West.
most bloody fight, repossessed the Town, freed his mother, enthralled his
Enemies, and recovered all the provinces which had revolted.

(18) This victory was so glorious to King John, and so dreadful to his
Enemies, (for King Philips two chief confederates, Paris.
Arthur and Hugh Brun, Litera K. Job.
Raymund, Father to Guido the husband of Constancia, Rog. VVend.
all the Peers of Poictou and Aniou, Litera Regis.
above 200. French Knights and others of command, besides the vulgar multitudes
were taken prisoners) that both then King Philip, though very hot in the siege
of Argues in Normandy, presently cooled and Mat. West.
confounded with news thereof, brake up his fortnights fiege, and returned
home; and since, the French fawning favorites, and King John's maligners have
sought to extenuate the matter, auerring against VVend. Paris. Tri^et.
VV^lfing. West.
all truth of record, that it was exploited So Aemelius,
before the French were come to Arthurs aid, and So Polydor.
when all his Soldiers were both unarmed and unordered. But, as others highly
extolling king John's valor herein, Trivet. Walfing.
interpret those fore-doomes of Merlin to have been meant of him, M^rlini
V^ticinia.
that he should he crowned with the head of a Lion, should cut out the
tongues of Bulls, and lay iron chains on the backs of r^ring Beasts (and
indeed he VVend^.
chained them hand and foot, and so conuayed them away in Carts, a kind of
riding till then unusual with them,) so King John himself, Litera Regis apud
Hollins.
duly acknowledging the greatness of Gods goodness therein, sent his Letters
to all his Barons wheresoever (thereby to encourage the loiall, and hold in awe
the tomultuous) inciting them so render all praise unto God for so admirable a
work, and so gracious assistance: and soon after Paris (...). MS.
he dispersed his noblest Captives into sundry Castles in Normandy and
England; Arthurs sister Eleanor, called the Damsel of Britain, being
Yp^digma. Neustr.
committed to Bristow Castle, where she She lived till 1241. Paris (...). 3
long lived with VV^lfing. Anno 1203.
very honor able usage. And though the kings displeasure was justly incensed
against her brother Arthur, for so frequent wavering in his faith, yet meaning
to try all means of winning him who had thus lost himself, Holl^sh.
he sent for him (being then at Falaise in the custody of (...).
Hubert L. Chamberlain) and entreated him very gently, promising him all
honorable respects, if (as yet) he would resolve to forsake the French kings
amity, and frame both his mind for hearty love, and his Actions for peaceable
observance toward him, his uncle and Leege Lord. Which exceeding clemency,
the ill-aduised young Gentleman (for what wisdom is it to show pride where
we need mercy, and to give threats beyond possibility of performance?) Mat.
^st.
requited only with arrog^nt and undutiful language, furiously obraiding the
king with violent and fraudulent detention of the English Crown, which
menacingly he there required of him, and allother King Richards Countries, as
his lawful inheritance, affirming with an Oath, that unless he did forthwith
restore them, he should not long line in peace. With which incorrigible
pertinacy the King provoked, as seeing no place left to better hopes, Mat.
Paris.
committed him to stricter custody Stowes Annals
under Robert de Veypont, in the Castle of Roan.

(19) The Britains fury and conspiracies, which King John hoped to abate by
this their Princes durance, Rad. Cogshall.
were thereby much more augmented; like Serpents, most struggling with their
trains, when they feel their head in pressure. Which moved the King, who was
now returned into England, (and in triumph of his late victory, Wendouer. MS
wore his crown again at Canterbury at the cost of his former host) to take
advise of his Council touching his troubled affairs, whose sentence was (if
we will credit the Rad. Cogshal.
reporter) that Arthur should loose his eyes. But the escaping of such
tortures, is by Holins.
some ascribed to the commiseration of Lord Hubert; by Paul. Aemyl.
others, to the mediation of Queen Eleanor, who interceded with her Son for
her Grandchild as long as she lived, which was not long; Deaths impartial
hand (and John de Serret
grief of heart, some say) laying that great and prudent Queen, (the wife of
Jews of France and Hen. of Eng.
two mighty Kings, and mother of Hen. Rich. John. 3. sons of H. 2.
three) where Princes and Pesants are all equals. Her Nephew much behind her in
age, soon ouertook her (if not By Paris it seems she outliued him.
outwent her) in destiny; whose death diuulged on King John's return from
England, Paris. min. hist. M. S.
gave his maligners fresh colored occasion, both to molest his quiet, and to
distaine his estimation, as if he had not only been the Causer, but also the
executor of it with his own hands.

(20) As the Tongues of Parasites are no true scales to weigh the worth and
virtues of Great men; so neither King John slandered about Arthurs death.
ought we to judge of their (or any man's) blemishes, by the deforming pencils
of Envy or Rancour; with one of which, no eminency, either of place or of
virtue, was ever vnattended. And that this bloody aspersion on the King, came
from no other fountain but malignity; such as then lived, and might therefore
best know the truth, and were also (as Monks gnerally were) his most bitter
Taxers, and therefore far from saluing his infamy with partial falsehood, can
best witness. It was (says Paris. hist. min. MS.
one) by certain persons auowed that Arthur attempting to escape secretly out
of hold, was by casualty drowned in the River Seyne (on which the Castle of
Roan is seated;) and yet the Frenchmen, the Kings mortal enemies (and
therefore plenary credit not to be given them) give it out, that he was
murdered by the Kings command, yea and by his own hands: thus by the malice
of slanderers, Englands King became not a little defamed. With whom other the
approuedst Authors accord (though differing in the Some saying he died of
grief, some of wilful abstinence from food.
manner of his death) that this imputation sprang only from the Trinet.
Walsing.
French emulation, as since it has been kept on foot, only by Serres.
Aemylius, Polydor.
French, or Italianate spirits; Sabellicus Ennead. 9. l. 5.
one of which has not blushed to charge King John with murdering of his own
Brother King Richard, and Paris ad Ann. 1241.
another with killing Arthurs sister, who yet outliued him 24. years; so
shamelesly will the pen blur the truth of Actions, where its once dipped in
gall against the person. But sharper showers then of tongues (which being
undeserved, are a John Harding. Chron. c. 142. erring also in his Sisters name,
saying: Thus slew he both Arthur and Isabell, To joy the Crown of England, as
men tell.
to be unregarded) were sequels of Arthurs death: it seeming to give new life
to King John's troubles, and King Philips hatred, which yet once again must go
masked under the roabe of Justice. For Philip cites John as Duke of Normandy,
to appear at a set day, to be tried upon point of Mat. West.
Treason by his Peers; Constance Arthurs mother (well brooking her name for
her immutable hatred to King John) is made the John de Serres.
plantiffe, requiring justice of Philip, as both their Sovereign; King John
not appearing, is condemned Paul. Aemil. in Philipp^ 2. The Peers sentence
upon King John.
of a traitorous outrage, for that careless of his oath made to the French, he
though an uncle, had murdered his elder brothers son, being an Homager to
the French, and that within the French Territories; without any legal course,
nor by cognizance of those to whom it appertained; whereupon he is adjudged to
be held an enemy to the French State, to forfeit all his Signories which by
Homage he held of the French, and those to reuert to the Crown of France, and
a re-entry to be made by force of Arms, if any deny possession. Thus now the
second time, by solemn sentence the King and Peers of France disherited and
condemned King John, though absent, unheard, neither confessing, nor convicted
of the Action; albeit at that time Ex Combdeni Brit. in Richmundiae Commit.
he sent them his royal promise to come, (if they would give him public
faith and safe conduct for his coming and returning) and answer at Paris
touching the death of Arthur, though he was his Leegeman, had sworn him
fealty, had violated the same, had raised a rebellion, and was taken in battle.
Upon which grounds, if King John had caused the pretended execution on so
capital a Complotter both against his Life and Crown; and one, who had caused
so much bloodshed of his people, and more would if he had escaped; in Ingenia
Regum prona ad formidinem, Salust.
which cases Princes are and ought to be very jealous; what understanding
Statist can justly condemn him, or justify the French injustice? Especially
it being questionable, and even then Cambd. loco citato.
much debated, Whether the Peers of France were competent Judges on a King
anointed, and so their superior, the King of England and Duke of Normandy
being but one person, and mayor dignitas absorbet minorem, the greater dignity
was to swallow up the less. But when the will of a Ruler, is a rule, or
ruled-case to his Judges, no other could be expected then by these Peers was
performed.

(21) Neither did they here stay; but (as in most Ann. 1203.
States, the Acts and Decrees aduantageous to the Princes, are carefully
pursued, though others seldom or coldly executed) that heady sentence was Ioh.
de Serres.
seconded with as hasty force, on Philips part, and on John's (if some Authors
say true) as much neglected. It is no rare thing to see Princes (because on
their safety depends the State of their Kingdoms) often suspicious of dangers
where there is no cause; but it is inexcusable in them, under a show of
resolution to be secure, where they see their Person or State may be near
unto hazard. An intelligent man would think, that whiles so vaste indignities
were in hatching (yea and now on wing) by so insatiate enemies, King John had
been whetting his revenge, leuying his forces, strengthening his confines,
combining his friends and Allies, so to regret their pride and malice, who thus
proceeded to vnstate him of that Paulus Aemil. in Phil. 2.
goodliest portion of France, Job. de Serres says ab An 885.
part whereof for above three hundred years had been the inheritance of his
Ancestors. But whether it were the Male filijs infatuatus. Wendouer.
bewitching dalliances of his fair Isabel, with whom he was in arms, when
he should have been in Arms as Paris hist. min.
some Authors tax him; or his deceived expectation of Aides from his Barons,
as Apud VVendo.
himself alleged; or promised redress by the Pope, as the Ypod. Neust.
sequel showed: too true it seems, that beginning his Christmas at Cane in
Normandy with festival pleasures not unfitting the season, he continued them
so unseasonably and unreasonably too, that he gave both to the De Serres.
French leisure to execute their Peers sentence, and Paulus Aemil.
to the Brittons and Poytouins, an edge to prosecute their old rebellions, now
newquickned with the loss of their young master: whereby his strongest Towns
and Castles daily fell away, either by force of Assailants, or treachery in
defendants, or on despair of needful aides.

(22) Treachery as it was foremost (for it gave beginning and means to the
rest) so did it most in undermining King John's possessions, which stirred him
to take sharp revenge Th. Walls.
by hanging up all his Hostages of Poyton for their Countrimens treasons. But
such a death (though of all other most disgraceful) is not so hateful to a
Spirit truly enobled, as is the stain of dishonor, especially for Treachery
or Cowardice: from either of which I wish I could with truth acquit S^r. de
Quincy. Rob. Fitz-walter. Paris. hist. ma.
those two great Barons (whose names we will here forget) to whom King John
entrusted the defense of the famous Castle called Vall-de Ruill; who no sooner
saw King Philip Rog. Wend. M. S.
engirding it with his great host, and mounting his Engines of battery against
it, but eftsoons, before one stone of the walls was shaken, or any one of their
men had lost the least hair of their heads, they dishonourably surrendered the
Fort (a matter of very great consequence) to King Philips pleasure: who though
abundantly pleased with the deed, yet so Mat. Paris.
contumeliously (but most justly, and prince-like) recompensed the Doers, for
Traitors always become odious, though the Treason becommodious,) that, for so
base a part he commanded them to be fettered in chains, and basely entreated
in close prison, till they had dearly redeemed their liberty, though they
could hardly their reputation. Another noble Baron, Hugh Gur^y. Polyd. l. 15.
Captain of Castle Galliard (which being built on a very high Rock over
Seyne, Ypod. Neust.
King Richard had made impregnable) by his undaunted prowess, and Pol. Virgil.
great slaughter made upon Philips host, lying Walfing. Aemil.
6. months in siege about him, was far from any suspicion of dastardie; but
yet Wendouer. M. S.
escaped not the blemish both of ingratitude and infidelity, in that at length
he not only yielded up that Castle to the enemies, but also Mat. Paris. ^a.
hist.
secretly by night brought them into the Castle of Montfort, which he betrayed
unto them, not weighing his faith to his Leege Lord, who had bestowed on him
that Castle, with all the honor and demaines thereto belonging. Otherwise for
his first surrender, his case had been more excusable, the famine (an
irresistable enemy) in the Castle being so great, that, as the Paul. Aemil.
French Recorders themselves confess, when the Women and others of the
unserviceable sort were put forth for sparing of prouant, and being betwixt the
Castle and the Enemies, found pity and relief of neither, in the sight of
them all a Woman great with Child was delivered, and her infant presently eaten
up. Amongst those, and other of King John's reuolting Barons, like so many
falling Stars, if we should pretermit that fixed and bright Star of
immovable fidelity and resolution, the Lord Constable of Chester.
Robert de Lacy, we should be guilty of high offense against true honor; who
having received of his Prince the custody of the goodly Castle Rocke-Andely (
Rog. Wed. MS.
which was builded also by King Richard) Paris. ad Ann. 1204.
did bravely bear of the siege and power of King Philip and his host almost a
whole year; in which space, though by their continual batteries and
underminings VVend. MS.
a great part of the walls were flatted, yet they could never make entry upon
him, but were repulsed with slaughter, till his provision of victuals being now
spent to the last hour, he called his Soldiers together, encouraging them,
after so long proof of their Manhood not to faint now in the last Act; but to
consider, that though it were better for them to die by famine, then to live
with reproach of false or faint-hearttednesse, yet it is more noble for
soldiers to die fighting, then famishing, and together with their own lives,
to sacrifice to their Countries honor the blood of their slaughtered enemies.
Whereupon fiercely Pridie Non. Mart. Paris.
sallying forth with his Resolutes, after a bloody shambles made in the midst
of his beleaguers, he was by multitude ouerborne and taken; but De Wend^. MS
in regard of his exemplary faith and prowess, in maintaining his charge by
King Philips express command, (a second princely and prudent fact, to
discipline his Subjects by thus entreating his foes,) he was honorably used,
and Sub libera custodia, Paris.
without r^int of a prisoner.

(23) But as the fact of this Peer was peerless, so was this Clemency in
that King, but rare and unaccustomed toward such Cheiftains as stiffly
out-stood his assaults; Paris. hist. ^a.
some of whom formerly he had caused to be dispiteously dragged at
horse-heeles, for the terror of others. Of which indignities, and other
irksome extremities, (the inseparable companions of war) endured by his
people, when King John had notice by Messengers sent unto him for relief and
aides; no marvel is it, if Polyd Uirg.
his grief were above belief or measure, finding himself utterly destitute
of means to relieve their wants, or his own losses; albeit for the time he
bare it out with a manly show, saying, Virg. l. 15.
that these were but the French pilferings, of which he meant in due time to
exact an account with interest. For what else could he do? The Normans (to
omit those others in open Rebellion) Mat. Paris. ma hist.
either wholly fallen away from him, or but dissemblingly adhering to him; his
Paris. min. hist. MS. in ipso ar^culo deseruissent.
Barons from home, failing him at his need; his Wend. MS.
Nobles there about him, being under pretext of a speedy coming again,
returned into England: by which means the King Paris. hist. ma.
was left very dispeopled, having only a small train, which could in so great
a need do him but very small service: but that these important and vnportable
matters Mat. West.
did no whit move him, nor could retriue him Wend. West.
from the bosom of his too-dear Enchantresse, (which occasioned some to think
him infatuated with So^ilegijs vel male^s. ibid.
sorcery) is a thing past capability of belief.

(24) The King thus disfurnished of all helps, Innocentius, the stirring
Bishop of Rome, made fair The Pope interposeth betwixt the two Kings.
show to salve these temporal wounds with a spiritual plaster; which
doubtless made King John more secure then stood with his good: for, (...) in
so great distresses, there was no foreign Prince fitter for the King to
conbine with, then Otho the Emperor, his own Nephew, and Philips professed
enemy: so the Pope on the one side beginning to bee-iealous of Otho's
greatness, mistrusted the concurrence of two such great friends, and therefore
undertook to vmpeere the debates betwixt those two great Enemies: and King
John on the other side, willing to make use of the Popes favor, durst not yet
comply with any, whom his Sanctitude any whit disfauoured. His Legates for this
business, were the Abbots De Cas. Marij, and Trim ^ontium. Ypodi^.
of Cafmer and Troisfons: his motive, that Polydor.
these dissentions The Popes Nunce^.
of Christendom weakened the wars against Turkey: his color, Paul. Aemil.
that this contention being a matter of faithbreach (as of Leagues, Oath and
Covenants) the cognizance thereof did properly appertain to his sacred
judicature; whereof he made so little doubt, as that the Aemilius in Phil.
August.
very letter then sent to the French Peers, is to this day registered for
(...), De^tal. l. 2. Tit. 24. de iureiur. c. 29.
a pontifical decree: and this audacious Law then by Innocentius first brought
to the world for current, Blon^ Decad. 2. l. 6.
That whenever one Prince is delinquent against another, the correction
thereof appertains to the Pope. Their Commission was, Tr^t. MS.
to call the Bishops and Princes of both Kingdoms, for settling a Peace; to
inhibite all hostility; to reserve the further trial of the Right to the Pope
as Ioh. de Serres.
Sovereign Judge; Ypod. Ne^st.
to enjoin that all Religious places by the wars destroyed, or empouerished,
should be restored to their due State; P. Aemil.
if either of the Kings should be refractary, his whole Kingdom presently to
be put under Interdict. Philip, albeit the Pope was then offended with him
upon other terms, (for that he Ioh. de Serres.
imposed toward his wars a tax of certain Tenthes upon his Clergy,
(against the Popes will) alleging it was necessary that out of their private
abundance, they should bear a charge in the common preservation,) yet knowing
the Pope had need of his friendship about settling the Empire, he meant so long
to side with the Popes authority, as the Pope would stand with his commodity,
and repining to have so fair a prey taken out of his talents, made bold^ to
despise both the commands and the curses: yet this he did Walfing. Polyd.
in smoother fashion then he had done once before, when he rigodrously
punished all the Tri^t. MS. ad An. 1201.
Bishops and Prelates, whom, for consenting to such a Papal censure, he
turned out of their Sees and dignities; for now, he Gagui^.
appealed from the sentence for a fashions sake, Polyd^.
but yet violently proceeded with his wars, and Wend. MS.
did swim with the full current* of his victories. The waves whereofso fast
surrounded King (...), that Grast^, (...).
fearing also further treason of his own men, he thought good, till some
better days would shine upon him, (especially winter season enforcing
surceasse of wars) to abandon the place of his injurious foes, to expostulate
in England with his perfidious friends.

(25) For that was the first work he did, alter his arrival, ( Paris. hist.
ma.
which was at Portsmouth on Saint Nicholas day in December) when Man. West.
laying to the charge of his Earls and Barons, that in his wars they
suffered him to be destitute of requisite aides, and VVendo^ MS. Paris. min.
bist. MS.
had left him in the midst of his enemies, by which their defaults, he was
thus despoiled of his Castles and Countries; thereuppon, by Paris. hist. (...).
advise of Hubert Lord Archbishop, and Lord Fitz-Peter Chief Iustitiar (who
knew these were no Ao^d M^. VVestmin. occasiones cauillatorias.
forged cauillations) he put them and other delinquents to their Fines, (for
his Wars made him desire their money more then their lives) wherein these two
great Counselors were Wend. MS.
overseers for the receipts the one for the Clergy, the other for the Laity) of
both whom they received no less sums of curses, then of Coin. The like
repining among the people, (who judge of the goodness of a King only An. 1204.
by sparing their purses) ensued on the grant of a large Subsidy (two Marks
and half of every Knights Fee) in a Parliament In cras^ circumcisionis. Paris.
presently after held at Oxford, where the King and Peers conuening about
redress of those remediles mischiefs, the issue ( Rand. Cogshal.
as seems) was, that Ambassages should be addressed into France, two
Prelates, Canterbury and Norwich, with two Earls Marshall and Leicester, to
treat from the Body of the Kingdom, touching those Provinces, which being
incorporated with Englands Soueraignety, could not without apparent injustice*
be abstracted from a Nations common interest, upon colored pretenses against
any particular. Philip, having Mat. Parri,
upon King John's departure thence used his whole Forces and wits, to weary,
or to win diverse other Cities and Forts; which had till then stood faithful
(for which purpose he also employed sundry Polydor. l. 15.
instruments, themselves first corrupted, that they might corrupt others to
defection, with great rewards and greater promises,) he meant not now to
re-commence Questions of Right, having already near decided that point by the
point of his sword: yet because he was to deal with a mighty Nation, he
would not abruptly refuse to capitulate, and yet again by proposal of Stow.
Hollins^.
conditions exceeding either Reason of Possibility, he dammed up all passages
to peaceable agreement: Rad. Cogshal^. Stowes Annals.
his King Philips demands.
demands were to have either Arthur, whom he knew to be dead, redeliuered
into his hands alive, or else, his Sister Eleanor in marriage with all those
Countries in that Continent: but those Statesmen easily perceived that Philips
heart, aimed farther then his tongue, and that with Eleanor he hoped to
purchase a higher dowry, even the English Diadem, whose claim glided down from
her brother to her; which perchance was the secret ground of his Hollinsh.
Oath, that he would never linne to pursue that quarrel, till he had deprived
King John of his Kingdom.

(26) This Embassage was not only thus issuelesse, but produced also effects
tending to further irritation: for this seems to be the time when Annals
Hibernia, apud Camb. in Hris.
Philip sent a brauing Champion, to justify by Duel before the States here in
England, what his Master had done in France against their King in open war;
and Campians hist. of Ireland. l. (...). c^ 3
though it was not deemed expedient to ieopard a Title of such weight on the
Arms and Fortune of one man; yet it was resolved the Challenger should not
pass unanswered, whereto none was held fitter then John Curcy Earl of Vlster,
(for Annals Hiber.
rebellion and denying his homage to the King, condemned to perpetual
imprisonment in the Tower,) a man of Giantlike limme and strength, and of some
dispositions not despicable, if they had not been sauaged with a too careless
rudeness: which appeared not only in his Ibidem.
wild speeches, touching the Kings misusage of his Nephew Arthur (which Campion
hist. of Ireland, John Stow Anna.
some by error allege as cause of his indurant durance,) but even now, when
the king demanding him, whether he would combat in his quarrel? Annals Hib.
No, (quoth he) not in thy quarrel, nor for thy sake, but for the Kingdoms
right I will fight to the death. Against which day, whiles he repaired with
large diet his impaired limbs and sinews, the Frenchman hearing of his
excessive feeding, and strength answerable thereto, thereby fearing he had been
some Monster of Nature, rather then a man, he secretly sneaked away Campian
la. citat.
into Spain ashamed to show his face in France again Curcy finding the King
gracious, was hereupon released, and Annals Hib.
is said (if this be not to digress) to have crossed the seas for Ireland
fifteen times, and evermore beaten back to the shore: Compian ibid.
(acknowledged himself herein justly punished of God, never again to see his
own seat, for displacing God out of his, when he converted the Church of
Prebendaries in Doan consecrated to the blessed Trinity, into an Abbey of
Monks, to the honor and name of Saint Patrick, Annals Hib.
whose Image was erected in a stately seat, wherein before the Trinity was
deportracted, which was thence rejected into a private Chapel. The Ibidem.
Irish relate, that the two Kings being afterward together (belike when they
made the next truce in Erance) King Philip hearing Curcy to be in the English
Camp, entreated to see some experience of his so much feared and reported
strength: where a Helmet of excellent proof The great strength of C^rcy.
full farced with Mayle, being set upon a great wooden block, the Earl
lifting his trusty Skeyne, first louring round about him with a dreadful
aspect, cleft so deep quite through the steely resistance, into the knotty
wood, that none there could draw it out but himself, who did it with ease, and
being asked by the Kings, why he frowned so irefully before the stroke; he
told them, that he then intended if he had failed of his blow, to have killed
them all, both Kings and others the lookers on.

(27) But what Philip could not in England by one Champion, he accomplished in
Normandy by many; where having a Paris. hist. ma.
mighty power attending him from City to City, yet he thought fair words
would be for himself both cheaper and safer, and with the Prouincials more
forceable then force it self; especially, where such troops of armed Orators
were at hand, and where golden preparatiues had made way with the chiefest.
Philip told them, VVendouer MS
their late Lord had quite forsaken them, and that therefore himself, as their
supreme Liege came to provide that his own Countries might be indemnified,
desiring, them lovingly to admit and embrace him as their Lord, since now they
had no other to protect them from skath; but menacing withal, that if they
forced him to use force, they should die no other death then hanging, or to be
flead alive: with which fawnings and fears, though many well munified places
were fetched off without any resistance, Walsing. Ypod. Neast.
their Captains violating their faith to curry favor with the French; yet
Roan, the Polyd. l. 15.
place ever honored for fidelity to the English Crown (and Supra in King
Richards reign.
therefore worthily selected by King Richard to be the Shrine of his Leonine
Heart,) was better fortified both in affection and munition, then to wane upon
parties. Which neglect incensed Philip to turn his Oratory into Battery, (it
being the chiefest City, and therefore of greatest consequence for consumating
his victories,) which he continued in a most fierce and Pol. Virgil. l. 15.
horrid manner of siege, the space of two months; but finding it to be with
small advantage, he fell again to D^is and promissis ad defectio^em, Ibid.
golden Eloquence, attracting some in special with present pay, and all in
general with Paul. A^il.
promises of future inioying all their wonted laws, and liberties without
impairement of any their commodities whatsoever: aduising them Polydor.
not to reject those proffered conditions, which ere long they would gladly get,
when they should not be granted. The Roanists, seeing their dangers, feeling
their wants, fearing their ruins, yet desired respite till King John might
know their State: who finding himself at home as ill bestedde as theirs
abroad, his Barons Rog. Wend. Suis detrectantibus militiam.
refusing to follow the wars, returned them answer, he could not presently
relieve them. Whereupon the Paul. A^il. is Phil. August.
Great men who could sway the multitude with cheaper reasons, then Philips open
hand had swayed with them, persuaded them to weigh, that in truth they were all
originally Frenchmen, though now called Normans, of that Roan lost, circa omn.
Sanct fest. Mat. West.
noblest and richest part of all France, and the French king being Supreme Lord
thereof, there was no cause at all of continuing this new hostility, but very
many of renewing that antique amity.

(28) The Caput totius Normaniae Rothomagum, Polydor.
Head, yea and Heart of all Normandy thus fainting; who can expect that those
few inferior members, yet untainted should so continue long? neither did they.
So as eftsoons all that Dukedom, one of the goodliest gemmes in the Normandy
fallen from English allegiance.
English Diadem, and disbranched from France Ioh. de Serres. so that Aemyl.
much erreth in saying Rollo had it but 270. years before.
since the year eight hundred eighty five, was again rent away, ingloriously
for them who lost it, iniustlie by them who got it, but perfidiously by such as
should, and might have kept it. For whatsoever necessity then, or malice since
has laid on the King; this Eulogie, and memorial thereof, written by Waling.
Ypod. ad An. 1203. Trivet. MS.
impartial pens, will stand indelible on his Subjects, A rege Angliae,
Normannia fraudibus suorum alienata, Englands King lost Normandy by treachery
of his own people. And no less treacherously dealt Philip with them, when he
had caught them with the trappe of his glosing proffers (as such Princes more
usually then princely, square their promises to others liking, their
performances to their own) causing without delay their Cities goodly walls
Trivet. MS. Walsing.
to be utterly demolished, and giving strict charge that they should never be
built up again. The other neighboring Countries, Main, Turaine, Poictou, who
were all forerunners in the rebellion, would not be now behind in the final
revolt; Angiers in this more happy, that she fell away by others falsehood, not
her own, when standing on her guard, Ypod. Neust.
William de Rupibus cladde his choice Soldiers upon their armor in the habit
and other furniture of market-men, who so getting access into the City gates,
made easy entrance for a greater host; which soon after became absolute
Lords of all Aniou.

(29) Woeful experience had now taught King John a lesson fit to be learned
of all Princes, whom the fawning world enstyleth most Mighty, that this Ann.
1205.
their might is not only liable to the check and dispose of that Highest
all-ruling power, who vnthrones them at his will; but even depends of the
wauing humors, and wills of those Involuntate obsequentium potest^s Principum.
Trivet. MS. dNic. Trivet. MS
inferior vassels, of whom they think themselves irresistable Commanders.
But King John was not vnsenfible either of his foreign dishonours, (though asd
often as he endeavored to redeem it, by leuying any Army, suitable to so
great a design; so often was he crossed by his own Nobles) or of those his
domesticke affronts; which notwithstanding, by counsel and assistance of his
better affected, and truer hearted friends and subjects: at length Cirea
Pentecost. Paris. f Hollinsh.
he gathered a Royal Host and a mighty Navy, (therein 14000. Mariners f some
say) with full resolve to revenge his wrongs, and repair his losses. Which
great enterprise managed with immovable determination (for now with full
sails, and fuller hearts at Portsmouth they were ready to embarke) brought to
the Kings further knowledge, and to the worlds, who had been all this while
the secret underminers of his fortunes, and hinderers of his employments. For
Hubert VVend. MS. Paris. hist. min. M. S.
the Archbishop, and Papal Legate with many others, (amongst whom, Cogshall,
some find William Marshall Earl of Pembroke numbered) thither comes unto the
King, and flatly Wendouer. Paris
forbids him to proceed in the voyage. Some Cogshal. Hollin.
Writers have labored to coniect the true cause and reasons of this audacious
Prohibition; but if we consider on the one side the Popes use of Philips
Forces, to counter-ballance if need were Oaths greatness; on the other, the
interest which both the Pope and Hub. de nimia familiaritate Philippi suspectus
(...). Paris.
Philip had in Huberts affection: we may without Huberts Supra S.
divining Spirit pry into the mystery of his secret workings, as an
Archbishop, and now open command as a Legate to hinder King John, for fear of
hindering King Philip.

(30) But whatsoever was the reason, Hubert was the Instrument that so resolute
proiects, so Cogshal. Stow.
inestimable charges, so necessary an action fell suddenly to the ground,
whereby, besides the self mischief which therewith fell on the King, many
fresh grudgings accrewed unto him, for suffering himself to be thus violently
repulsed from so behouefull a purpose. The Archbishop and Marshall as
principals were rewarded with the Hollinsh.
curses of the dismissed multitudes, as the just fee for their unjust counsel;
and the King himself was so little pleased with so unexpected a countermaund,
that albeit at the present, (either awed with the authority of the Papal
Legate, or with the weight of his colored motives, or with hazard which he
might leave behind him) he durst notwithstand it; yet Ibidem.
the very next day, checking himself for ouerprizing the command of any man,
above the value of his kingly honor and state, he Rog. de Wend.
resolved to recollect his disparkeled troops, and to Idi^us Iulij Paris.
put forth to Sea. To which end, taking order for his Nobles to follow, they
gave him leave Mat. Paris. ma. hist.
with a small company to waffe up and down two days in expectance of their
attendance, till seeing them more obsequious to Huberts command then his, (
Mat. Paris. hist. min. MS.
the Archbishop also sending his Inhibition after them on the sea) he was
forced to come again to land. How a King of any royal sparkle, could brook
such Sea-and land-Tempests, without disgorging his Kingdom of the causers
thereof, I cannot conceive; and yet so unevenly does some men's judgment poyse,
whose affection guides the Beam, that this defeating of the Kings weightiest
affairs, is censured as apud Mat. Par.
too light to deserve the punishment which insued, when the King put many of
his Earls, Barons, Knights, yea and Clergy men to a grievous pecuniary
redemption for thus refusing to follow him for recovery of his Inheritance.

(31) The Archbishop though their Ringleader, Archbishop Hubert dies at his
Manor of Tenham, Paris,
might well have been exempted from this judgment, by his passage to a
higher, dying, (if Windouer, Paris
some err not) the very same week, either of Polydo.
grief, or of a Vit. Arch. Cant.
fever, which killed him in four days: but the Ibidem,
king forthwith in person at Canterbury seized upon all his wealth and
possessions, showing himself Paris. hist. ma.
right joyful, that now he was rid of him, whom men suspected of too familiar
practicing with the French King; and saying, Mat. Paris. min. hist. MS.
he was never a King till now, by reason of Huberts too presumptuous daring to
cross his royal resolutions as late he did. But this joy and hope of happier
b Idem,
days, was soon choked and buried in the same Toombe with Hubert; out of
whose Ashes sprang Archbishop Huberts end the beginning of greater troubles
to King John.
up a root yielding more, and more bitter fruits, then King John had as yet
tasted, by how much more lamentable are the wounds which are in the bowels and
heart of a State, then those which only light on the skirtes or more remot
members. The first seeds of which fast growing mischiefs, were to the eye,
(as are the beginnings of all Kingdoms ruin) very small and contemptible, and
the Sowers of little better regard, being but Cloistered monks, who craftily
The Monks of Canturbury the seedmen of Englands troubles.
factious to advance a private friend, (which once mounted into Hubers chair,
might befriend them again,) they gave a deadly blow, both to themselves; their
Sovereign, and the State in general. The (...) Paris min. MS, Wendouer MS.
younger heads amongst them (whose vnexperience makes them in acts of Societies
more foreward and daring) having secret notice of Huberts death, M^. Westmin.
meant by a slight (whereunto they doubted not to find the Popes furtherance)
to defeat their Sovereigns interest in that Election, (and perchance in all
other, ever after) of a Primate for the Sea of Canterbury, the most important
place of his Kingdom. Trivet MS. (...) him (...),
Reginald, the Sub-prior of their Covent, One (as you shall hear) fitter for
their proiects, then for that place, was the man they chose, and that at Wend.
MS. Paris West. etc.
midnight, when singing Te Deum, they lifted him first upon the High Altar, and
after into the Metropolitan chair. They ought to have first obtained the Kings
assent, and leave to elect, and therefore to prevent both his Paris. hist.
(...).
interposing and displeasure, till it were too late for him to redress the
wrong; the same night they caused their Elect to enter Prastita cautione
i^toria, VVestmin.
caution by oath, never to carry himself as Archbishop, nor to make it known
to any man living, till he had further especial warrant from them, upon proof
of the success it might find at Rome, whither forthwith they sent him for his
dispatch.

(31) Reginald taking Flaunders in his way, was both so Vit. Arch. Cant.
proud, VVendou. MS.
periurious, and VVestmin.
impudent, (the virtues of their most choice man) that he could never conceal
the purpose of his journey, and boast of his dignity from any man's Ears, nor
from their Eyes the Conuentuall letters ratifying the same. Whereof when the
Covent had notice, vehemently incensed against him who had thus diuulged their
secret, and prouidently casting how to euade the Kings offense, M. Fox
mistaketh saying, it was the next day after Reginald went, also Polydor,
Holinsh and Mils saying, it was not till they heard from Rome.
out of hand they despeeded certain of their Crew, to crave both In vit. Arch.
Cant.
pardon of their fact, and license for choice of some worthier Primate. There
was then in high grace and imploiment about the King, John Gray Bishop of
Norwich, a Godwins Catal.
man of great wisdom, learning, and Integrity, (qualities truly befitting that
high place) whom the King much desired to advance, commending him, as one
Paris. hist. ma.
most dear unto him, and of his secretest Counsels (of Gra^, Hollin.
which, some say, he was President) most behouefull for the Commonwealth, for
Himself, and them: which message from the King faithfully delivered, VVend. MS.
all of them glad thus to redeem the favor, which they had hazarded, with
unanimous consent elected him; and sending for him from York (where he was in
the Kings affairs) the Mat. Westminster.
King himself graced his entrance into Canterbury with his presence in great
pomp; and the next day, the King with a multitude of People assembling in the
Metropolitan Church, the Prior did there publish his Election solemnly, and in
due form performed; where the Monks carrying him with Te Deum to the high
Altar, did forthwith enthronize him in the Chair of his Primacie; The King
there in presence of them all, giueing him actual possession of his
Temporalities. This loving correspondence betwixt the King and his Clergy, gave
great hope of more blissful fortunes henceforward unto them both; but the
Infernal Author of debate, and his chief Agent, took a hint hereby to
intrude a Tyranny both upon Clergy, King and all.

(32) Little thought false Reyner what was doing at Canterbury, whiles he was
trotting to Rome; whither when he came, and showed his letters of Ratifi
cation to his Holiness and his Cardinals, VVendouer MS
he received this short answer, that it was a business which asked mature
deliberation and better informations; the Pope soon finding, that the Sub-prior
was too slight an instrument for him to work with, and for King John to be
wrought with, and therefore bethought him of some fitter hammer for so hard an
Anuile. But sundry stoppes were in the way, which wisely and by degrees were to
be removed. The first was (which Reginald in likehood had imparted to hasten
his own dispatch) that the Bishops of the Province claimed a joint interest
with the Monks, in choice of their Primate: a point which could no way suite
with the Popes advantage, because Bishops were generally much obliged to
their Sovereigns, and so likely still to Elect a Royalist, whereas
Cloystermen, professing ignorance of worldly affairs, and obedience to one
Superior, might more facilly be swayed to bend as the Pope would bow them, in
preferring his creatures. Which was the Motive (we may suppose) of the Popes
Dated 6. Id^ (...).
letters, soon after sent to the Suffragane Bishops, exhorting them by Paris
hist. (...).
sacred example, and precept of filial obedience, to desist from vexing, like
undutiful sons, their Mother Church with such vnd^ claims. The Bishops
notwithstanding, who knew themselves in sacred writ to be styled Fathers, would
not thus acknowledge the Monks for their Mothers, till I^centius to his light
Reasons added the weight of his Keys, and by his power swept both that and
other rubs out of his intended way. For the King keeping his Christmas An. 1206.
at Oxford, (attended as it seems by his Bishops) (...) Mat. VVestmin.
Wendouer MS. Paris. hist. min. MS.
meaning not to pretermit any fair means to work the Popes inclination
toward the new Elect, he sent for Mat. Parri, hist. ma. ad an. 1207.
twelve of the Monks, whom with some other of his own Clerks (which carried
his letters to the Pope) he put in trust for transacting this business at
Rome; allotting them very bountiful expenses out of his Exchequer for their
whole journey. They to leave with the King (who knew well the trains of Rome,
and the ouer-reaching fetches of Innocentius,) a pledge of their duty, and
assurance of his hopes, Ibidem.
entered with him Prastito iuramento, ib.
a covenant by oath, that no man, nor means should remove them from him, whom
the King and themselves had already appointed. The Bishops sent Mat. Westmin.
the same time their Procurators also, to plead their right of Co-election; so
as, four obstacles stood at once in the Popes way, (the two elections of the
Monks, and the two claims of the King and Prelates, he for his Royal assent,
they for their joint consent, in the choice) which all must be done and voided
before the Pope can have his full forth.

But because these will ask long time for contriuing, (which moved his
Holiness to adiourne the hearing to the very 12 Calen. Ian. We^r. Paris
end of the year,) we will see the while how the King and State of England is
employed.

(33) The dorre, which deceased Hubert did put upon K. John and his late
design, gave both K. Philip advantage, to take surer footing in his new
possessions, and King John greater stomach and edge to recover his old. The
last task (almost) of the one, and hold of the other, was Chinon a place of
great strength, but in nothing more, then in the euer-trusty valor of her
Captain, Roger Lacy; who (if Polydo.
some mistake him not in steed of Hollinsh.
Hubert de Burgo) being redeemed from the French, resolved here to give Philip
another taste of his prowess, and King John of his fidelity; had not others
faithless fear defeated his brave resolution. For the besieged having P.
Virgil.
no rest night or day, from a long and incessant battery, their Commanders
inuinceable constancy against yielding, which enheartned the better sort,
dismayed the baser, as more prizing their ease, then their faith or fame; some
of which by night slipping over the walls, so instructed the enemy of all
secret advantages to possess the town, that by a sudden assault, both it and
Lacy (more worth then it,) was again surprised. Here seemed to have been the
Garland of Philips conquest; had not news been thither brought unto him of
some new risings in Britain, where Guido, the husband of Constantia, Arthurs
Mother, (sensible belike King John strengthens himself with new Leaguers.
of the false-grounded wrongs offered to King John, under pretense of Arthur,)
Paul. Aemil.
returned gladly both into Amity and a strong league with the English: and with
him also Sauary Malleon, and Almerick Lusignian, Polyd. Aemil.
two Peers of heroicke valor and great command, whom King John of his They
were taken when Artbur was. (...)
prisoners, had made by prudent and lovely usage his trusty friends. The French
King fuming to see his unjust intrusions thus prejudiced, (especially by
Arthurs own father in law) was hastening from Chinon into Britain, to work
revenge on them, whose exemplar equity should have been his mirror of
amendment; Englands King on the other side, was no Polid.
less heartned with this new confideration, Mat. P^.
leuying once again a puissant Army, which he 7. Id. Iulij.
landed at Rochel, being the only noted place, which in all these turmoiles
and mutabilities of Fortunes, kept her self entire from entrance either of
enemy, or of disloiall thought.

(34) The King having his Army much augmented King John's successes.
Paris. hist. (...).
with great concurses of his best-affected Prouincials, marching confidently
forward, subdued a great portion of that Country; till coming to Mount-Alban,
a Wend. MS.
Castle of much renown, (as being repuputed VVestmin.
inexpugnable, and now the Rende-uou of his most potent enemies, and all their
flower of Chiualry, he gave a terrible assault thereto for 15. days together;
where at last his Paris.
Englishmens valor was so aduenturous in scaling the walls, and both giving
and taking blows vnportable, that in those few days he entered Conqueror
into that very place, Mat. Westmin.
which Charles the great, could not get with his seven years siedge. The VVend.
MS.
multitude of Nobles therein taken was so great, that he sent into England a
bedroll of their names, for a memorial of so great a victory. Which auspicious
beginnings he seconded with no less expedition, providence, and prowess, in
the siege of Angiers, where on his first approach, he Les Annals de Franc.
Polyd.
gave present instructions to his maine Army, suddenly to enuiron the whole
City, and by assault to seek entrance at the walls on every side, whiles
himself and his selected band, with fire and Engines would assail the Gates;
where with great celerity, and no less hazard then hardiness, breaking
through, he became Lord of his own. But whatsoever were the Citizens
demerites, pittious it was, that their offenses, and the Conquerours wrath, lay
so heavy on those stately walls, as Paul. Aemil. Polydor.
to throw them flat to the ground; which hasty doom, (it being the Idem.
cradle of his birth, and City of his chief delight,) he as hastily (and very
deerly too) repented, when with excessive expenses he encircled it again with
a beauty far beyond the former. These fair successes, humbling all the
Country before him, cleared his passage into Picardy, whither King Philip was
now converting all his power to oppose himself against the violence of this
Torrent: which P. Aemil.
now more facilly he might stop, having in his way by laying secret
ambushments, laid hands upon Duke Guido, * Infidijs excepti.
Sauary, and Almericke, King John's principal hopes, as they were busily
advancing his present affairs: by which surprise, though the English forces
missing their Prouincial aids, were greatly impaired, yet their Fractus animo
Anglus, says Aemil.
great hearts were not much amated, as the Frenchmen Polyd. Uerg.
found, when both the Armies near approaching over night, the next morning
alacriously they addressed to the fight, and with great spirits on each side
expected the Signal. Notwithstanding, the day likely to prove dreadful with
expense of blood, upon earnest interceeding of Mat. Paris.
foreign Prelates and religious persons, who undertook equably to compose all
things; both Kings condescended to a twoyeeres Infesto om. Sanct. Westmin.
Truce, King John chiefly out of affection to his Captive friends, whose
liberty was foremost in the conditions.

(35) Having thus settled those Countries in far better terms then last he
found them, he embarked K. John returns to England.
for England; where he laid not aside a careful (though distasteful)
providence, for still bettering those his successes: for which ends, whiles
from his Subjects (both Lay and Clergy) he Wend. MS.
gathered money, Ann. 1207.
the Sinews of war, he lost their affections, the ioints of Peace; whereof
Geffry Archbishop of York (his Natural and unnatural brother) was a
principal incentiue; who Mat. Paris. hist. Min. MS.
solemnly cursing all the Kings receivers within his Province, fled secretly
out of the land. Which peruicacie, Paul. Aemil.
a bitter enemy of K. John, yet bitterly taxes, saying, In Phillppo Augusto.
the English Bishops were far from that dutiful observance toward their
Sovereign, which the French Bishops performed to theirs, at whose command
they maintained Soldiers in his wars against King John, acknowledging they
were so bound to do, as often as the King pursued the wars in person; though
now also they did it, where he was not in person. And indeed how
hollow-hearted to the State those money-murmurers were, their Mat. Westminster.
own friend bebewraieth, showing, how with curses they wished, and prayed to
God, that these exactions might never have any good success, though they knew
it was purposelie for preserving a maine part of the Kingdom. A disloyalty the
more insufferable by the King, knowing that but a Paris.
very little before, the Popes Legate, Io. Io. de Florentia. Trivet MS.
Fiorentinus, nicknamed Paris, a ferendo, Hollinsh.
Ferentinus, for bearing away so much money,) had Mat. West. Mat. Paris. MS.
gathered of the Clergy a huge mass os money which in full chests he conuayed
to Rome. Yet all these domesticke grudges abated not the Kings due care, nor
yet his good hopes, which were soon after much augmented by the encouragements
of Othoes Imperial presence, Idem.
who in person arriving here in England, to project for his own and his uncles
wars, was with great joys met by the King, and conducted through London The
Emperors entertainment.
by night, where all the City was seen in her glory, and all the streets
adorned with richest hangings, beautified all along with the luster of pendant
Crowns, and burning lamps: who after some days of royal entertainements,
hence departed not unfurnished with helps to defray his wars.

(36) Whiles King John is thus busied about his The Popes beginning of wrongs
toward King John.
open hostilities, Pope Innocentius is plotting his secret Stratagemes against
him at Rome: where, like unto that Q^abco inter Nolan. and Neapolit. arbiter.
other old Roman, who, being chosen vmpere touching some march-lands betwixt
two neighbor Nations, impartial to either, Cicer. offic. l. 1.
adjudged it from them both to the Roman State; so he now, being Arbiter
betwixt the King, Bishops, and Monks, concerning their choice, he means to
defeat them all, and Hoc decipere est non indicare. ibid.
adiudge the right of disposing thereof to his Romish See. Therefore, at the 12.
Call. Iun.
fore-limited day of hearing, his first care was, that the Paris.
Bishops lips for ever should be sealed up, (notwithstanding their Wendouer.
M. S.
allegations of Law, Reason, Decrees, and Practice,) from intermedling in
choice of their own Primate. Will you hear the maine reason? because himself,
and some other Popes would have it so. Which definitive sentence being Dated
(...). Call. Ian. Paris.
sent to the Prelates into England, it was thought a point of prudence also, to
Mat. Paris.
prepare the King and work him pliable before hand, to entertain that which
was to follow: which must be done by amiable lines, and gemmes, wherewith he
knew the King was much delighted. His Present, being 4. gold Rings, The Popes
present and letter to King John.
with four precious stones, an Emrauld, Sapphire, Ruby, and Topaze, he so
vainly and childishly (though John Stow in Annal.
ignorance enstile it eloquence) celebrateth in his Epist. Innocent. apud Paris.
Epistle, for their number, form, and color, that no man will question
whether it were dictated with an Apostolic Spirit. The Rings Roundnesse must
remember the King of Eternity; the Quadr at number of Constancy, and of the
four Cardinal virtues, Justice, Fortitude, Prudence, Temperance; the Golds
price, of Wisdom; the Emraulds greenenesse, of Faith; the Saphires
brightness, of Hope; the Rubies readnesse, of Charity; the Topazes
clearenesse, of operative Sanctity etc. Which, though toys, were yet accepted
as pledges of love for a while, till at last, the King finding by the sequel,
they were but baits to beguile him, esteemed the Popes Gold as dross, his
Jewels as Ge^ Gemi^. ib.
Jewish frauds, and his love as most rancored hatred. For shortly after came
to his notice, the most indignious injury, which the Pope meant to obtrude
upon him and his Kingdom, having not only hunted both Reynard and Gray out of
their holds, but also imposed upon him, for the chief place and managing of
his State, one whom he reputed a chief and dangerous Enemy to himself and
it: which thus was fetched about.

(37) The Monks freed from the Bishops impugning, were hot now in the strife
amongst themselves; the Paris.
one side against Reyners election urged, it wanted Royal assent, the greater
and sounder part of Electoro, due solemnities, due Being by night.
time: the other, against Norwich, that no second election could be validous,
unless the former were first annulled. Both their Reasons pleased well the
Pope; who (as pre-possessed Judges often use) made show of Wend. MS,
great diligence in pondering the Pleadings, whereas himself long before had
resolved on his Sentence; which was, that by Apostolical definitive dome,
neither of the Elects should ever be capable of that See. So great rubbes has
the Pope with so little breath blown out of his way. The man whose advancement
all this while he had aimed at, was now commended to them, who must be there
presently chosen for their Primate, Stephen de Langton, a Cardinal, English by
birth, apud Mat. Par. hist. ma.
French by education and affection, one of so Mat. Paris. min. hist. MS:
transcendent power in the Roman Court, that the Pope was thought not for
love, but for envy, (as being himself eclypsed by his necrenesse) to have
wished his service in some remoter dignity. But the Monks ill apaide with what
was done already, and very tremulous to enter matter of new intrications,
alleged against all further courses, that Mat. West. Paris
no Canonical Election could be there made, they having consent neither of
King nor Covent; at which word the Pope snapping them up, bad them know, that
Nor, Wendouer MS. Westminster says vos as of the Monks.
he had there plenitude of power over the Church of Canterbury; and besides,
that no consent of Princes used to be expected in Elections celebrated where
the Pope was: he therefore charged them under pain of his high curse, (a
terrible bugbear in those days) there presently to choose him for their
Primate, whom himself thought good to nominate unto them. Thus trembling under
the crack of his Thunderbolt, they (all Idem,
excepting one Helias de Brantfield (whose constancy shall perpetuate his
memory,) durst not sor fear but elect him, though very unwillingly, and with
murmurations: whose 10 Call. Iul. Paris 25. Mat. Westmin.
Consecration followed by the Popes own hands at Viterbium, and his earnest
recommendation by the Popes Rog. Wend. MS.
flattering letters, to the Kings favorable acceptance. And this was the
unblessed beginning of those new miseries which brought the King to his ending,
and his Kingdom to vn-reportable calamities; all which, little did his
Holiness or his Charity reckon of, so his desperate Policy might take effect.
Yet not unduly fell those judgments on many Princes of those times, who
neglecting the domesticke execution of Supreme justice, suffered their
Subjects, at so high a rate both of expense and travels, to buy such arbitrary
and dangerous forms of a foreign, and falsly-named Justice.

(38) Two very presumptuous Laws has Blandus Decad. 2. l. 6. Pope Innocentius
his three strange laws.
one observed to have been first hatched by this lawless Pope, the one
occasioned by King John's and Philips formet strife, that Princes delinquent
must be liable to correctionfrom the Pope; the other, upon the choice of the
Emperor, that wherein elections voices are equal, or concord wanting, the
Pope may gratify whom he please: unto which we now may add a third no
less arduous and insolent, that the Pope may strike up Elections, both where,
and of whom, and with, and without what consent him lists. Which lewd
obtrusion, that it galled the King to the quick, we need not marvel, if we
balance in one scale, the Popes mere will and pleasure; in the other, the
dishonor to The wrongs offered unto King John.
the King (thus to be triced out of that, which so vehemently, and with his
own presence he took care to see effected;) the prejudice to his Crown, to
be defeated of Sovereign assent; the hazard to the State, to have his Publi^
inimic^; Regi Franc. ffamiliariss. Mat. Paris. hist. min: MS.
Enemy. (a Phillippine, and French favorite) the In regno secundum, ibid.
chief man over his English: besides wrongs more particular; as both the
disgrace to his best-deseruing Counselor, the disloyalty of the Monks, first,
to choose without his license, then to mock him with a second choice, next, to
beguile him with oaths, after to travail upon his excessive charge, and lastly
to do, and undo all, with their perjury. With all which so far the Kings
patience surfetted, that he began on them to disgorge his wrath, who with him
began these affronts; proscribing first all those Monkesas Mat. VVest^.
Traitors, and afterward writing his apud (...), and Paris.
letters to the Pope, with relation of those great wrongs to Himself, and
exceptions to Langton; vowing immutably to stand for his own Elect, and to die
in defense of the Liberties of his Crown; putting the Pope in mind, that Rome
reapt more gain from England, then from all the Trans-alpine Regions;
threatening also, if he were now crossed in this, he would stop all from
crossing the Seas to Rome, nor would any longer emendicate their foreign
Justice, since his own Kingdoms, so abounded with Bishops and learned men of
most accomplished perfection in all professions.

(39) If, when this Kings Father uttered some such threats to Gratian the Popes
vassal, he then replied Paris. in H, 2,
Sir do not threaten us, for we fear no menaces, because we are of such a
Court as uses to be imperious over Emperors and Kings, (which as a remarkable
Apothegme, Baron An. 1169.
Baronius sets forth in greater letters;) we may then guess, how this great
Lord of that Court did himself brook such tart salutations. Nay the effects
bewray it: when in his sublimed Literae Innocentij apud Paris.
Reply, he snebs the King for comminatory obraydings, and contumacious
malepartnesse; and threatens him, that if he do not, by referring himself
wholly to his good pleasure, seek to deserve his Grace, he should plunge into
those difficulties, whence he should hardly ever get forth; intimating, that
himself (being unworthy vicegerent to him, unto whom every knee in Heaven,
Earth, and Hell must bow,) must in the end needs have the upper hand; and that
to resist him is to oppugn God himself and his Church, for which glorious
Becket spilt his blood. These were indeed bloody words; to affright the King
with expectance of more such blows, and bloody stripes from Rome, as had
lighted on his Father. And he threatened no more then he acted; for thereupon,
he VVend. MS.
sent An. 1208.
his doubled Apostolical command, the one general to all the Prelates, for
submitting and adhering resolutely to Langton, the other, to some BB. Land.
Ely, Wigorn.
particular Bishops, for Paris. hist. ma.
conuenting the King, and Interdicting his whole Kingdom, if him they found
still contumaciously rebelling. Neither was he more insolent in the command,
then they in the execution, whereby (on The Monday in Passion week, Paris. on
Easter day, says Polyd.
a day ill suiting so unchristian an Action) this flourishing Church (though
the King had sworn their banishment, and confiscation if they did it) was
deprived of the very face of Christianity for many ensuing years; as if, not
Innocentius Christ's Vicar, but Julian his professed Enemy, had mured up the
doors of the Christians Temples for despite of their Chron. Angl. MS.
God.

(40) But this High Priest had forgotten what another Caiphus, John c. 11. v.
50. 2 Rog. Houed. 456.
taught him, and a he himsefe sometimes thought, about interdicting France for
their Kings offense; that better it was one should suffer then a whole Nation
perish: whereas now, for the Kings only crossing the Popes good pleasure, God
is censured to loose his worship, and all the People to hazard their souls,
Vide apud Wend. and Paris
living almost like Infidels, without Gods service and blessed Sacrament, yea
and dying More Canum. Mat. Paris.
like dogs tumbled into every ditch. But what? did such woeful effects fasten
only on the Layty? The Clergy bare their part too; whom the flames of the
Kings justly incensed wrath did so scorch, that his Dominions were too hot for
their abode: for, their Mat. Paris.
persons he proscribed and sent packing to the Pope, their revenues, he
confiscated their Bishoprics, Abbeyes and Priories; he deputed to Laymens
custody: their women (for such as had not wives, had Lemmans) were dearly
ransomed: and every where they suffered wrongs without ordinary protection of
Justice. Whereof, though our Hollinish. Stow. etc.
vulgar perfunctary Writers produce no other reason, but the only ouerflowing
of the Kings gall, as if first stirred by some few delinquent Bishops, through
furious revenge it ouer-whelmed the whole Clergy; yet indeed these were but the
due chasticements of their generally disloyal hearts. As (to instance) when
the King sent his Ex libro S. Alban (...) vita Job. Abbot. MS.
mandate to S. Albans, that not regarding the Popes command in the Interdict,
they should continue the celebration of Gods service; the Abbot calling his
Monks into the Chapter House, persuaded them to obey God rather then Man
(meaning the Pope rather then the King) and to bear resolutely the Kings
anger, Debit Deus (...) quoque ^nem. a cunning speech indifferently touching
the Kings end or his anger.
whom God in due time would bring to an end. What marvel then, if the Clergy
carried so generally with this stream of a foreign usurped power, against
Gods service, and their Sovereigns godly desire, and due authority, were
likewise generally inuolued in that reward of their disloialty. And yet, even
in the Clergy, many of eminency detested these cruel and irreligious courses
of the Pope; Mat. Paris, Godwins Catalog. of BB. Lib. S. Alban. in vit. Abb.
Ioh. MS.
Philip the Bishop of Duresme, and his Successor, with the Bishops of Norwich
and Winchester, heartned the King to contemn the Papal curse; the Mat. West.
Cicestertian Abbots (neglecting the Interdict) continued their divine
celebrations, till the Pope suspended them for their contempt; Alexander Balam.
Abbot of the Benedictines, a Divine of Literatum plenitudine imbutu^, Mat.
West.
exquisite learning VVend. MS.
published in his Sermons, that their present calamities were no reproach to
their Sovereigns proceedings, but due rewards of the Subjects heinous
trespasses, because kings ought to govern, yea and strongly bridle all
disobedient Subjects whomsoever; but as for Popes they ought not to intermedle
in the civil affairs, and regiment of any Princes over their vassals, seeing
Peter himself received no power, but only in matters appertaining to the
Church. And though the He was deprived of his dignity and livings.
Pope were revenged on him for his plain truth, and some Monkish humors have
aspersed other such men with bitter reproaches, yet what may be thought both of
these the Popes courses, and of such his opposers, a late Jesuit (no partial
man to Princes) shows, saying, Persons against Cooks, part, 2. c. 9.
that many, and godly wise men at that time did wish, that Pope Innocentius had
not stood so hard with King John in such a point as this was, for contenting
him with a person grateful unto him in that See. And no marvel they so
wished, seeing that was the graund cause of such infinite confusions, factions,
and wrongs, hurrying so indignely the Prince, Peers, Clergy and Commons; the
very contemplation whereof to all godly wise men must needs be ghastly and
rufull: yet welfare those Anathematizing Bishops, the Instruments of al these
evils, who patiently endured under the name of Exile, Paris. Omnimodis viuent^s
in delicijs.
to live the while abroad in all variety of delights.

(41) Such perplexities in the People could not Ann. 1209.
but breed as great hatred and hazards to the King; who therefore to prevent
the issue of such discontents, (which though causlesse, yet kindling in the
multitude prove often unquenchable,) he Mat. Paris. VVestmin.
required of his Nobles new Oaths of allegiance, pledges of such as he most
suspected, and homage of all Freeholders, Paris. hist. ma.
even of twelve years old, whom he dismissed with a kiss of peace. Misdoubting
also the Popes further intent to absolve his Subjects from their due
allegiance, he gathered about him (by Supra in H. 2.
example of his Father Henry on the like ground) a mighty Army for all
occurrents. The terror whereof he first displayed in the North, offended
(says Trinet MS.
one) with Not Alexander as Polyd. mistaketh.
William King of Scotland, for marrying his daughter to the Earl of Bulloigne;
for receiving (says Paris hist. ma.
another) Fugitives, and enemies of his State: for throwing down (says a
Mector Boet. l 13
third) a Castle built by King John against Barwicke: but whatsoever were the
breach, the cloze was amiable, each accompanying other to York, where King
Williams Boet. ibid.
two daughters were promised to King John's two sons, and Wend. MS.
delivered as pledges of united love, with a Paris. hist. mi. M. S. but
VVendou. MS. says xi, (not ix.) millia.
gift of nine thousand marks. The dread of this his power so glyded out of the
North into the West, that upon his return, the Mat. Paris.
Princes of Wales, and others rich and poor came to him at Woodstocke (the like
thing never heard of before) to do him homage. But all these linkes of
allegiance were soon cracked by another thunderclap The King excommunicated by
name.
(from Rome) of Anathema on the King by Name, with strict iniunction for all
men to abandon his presence: Rog. de Wend. MS.
which sentence being sent to be diuulged by the Bishops and Prelates in
England, al of them for fear or favor of the King, were content to neglect
the Popes command, and let the Apostolic process escape without execution.
The fame yet thereof was in all men's mouths, but came first (as seems) to
the Kings Ears, Paris. hist. ma.
by a servant of his own Exchequer. Geffry Archdeacon of Norwich, who
secretly persiading his fellow-officers, that they were boundin conscience to
relinquish the Kings service, gave them example himself by leaving his duty
and charge; for which hote-braine trick, he was put in a Ca^d Plumbed, Paris.
Cool of lead, the weight whereof (as a punishment of his leuitie) soon
hastened his end in prison: but the greater and wiser sort, both of VVestmin.
Ann. 1210.
Nobles and others, continued their due attendance on their Soueraigns Court
and person, without Non obstante Senten^a, ibidem.
regard of the censure.

(42) Those Romish furies thus infesting all at home, gave also courage and
opportunity to il-affected members further off; some of which in Ireland having
The King setleth the State of Ireland.
surfeited long of the Kings Indulgence or absence, Gyrald. in Proem ad Reg.
Ioh.
began now to play the Kings themselves. The noble spirit of this Prince in
his tender years Idem Hibern. expug. l^. c. 26.
made choice (on bended knees to his Father, in presence of Heraclius Patriarch
of Jerusalem) rather in devotion to conduct an Army against the Turks, then in
Ambition to take possession of that goodly Kingdom. But being now possessed
thereof, and intending (by a kind of compensation for his losses in France) to
annexe and assure that Kingdom to the English Crown, he resolves with a
powerful Army to quell the disturbers, and reform the disorders, of his
first, and long unvisited charge. Whose approach such fame and dread did
forerunne, that Paris. hist. ma.
more then twenty Petty Kings of that nation hastened to Dublin, there to
honor his 8 Idus Iulij, Paris.
arrival with their submissiue attendance, homage and oath of alleagiance;
others, either upon confidence of their good holds, or diffidence for their ill
deserts, flying his presence, and some of them, the Country. The Walter and
Hugh the sons of Hugh. Campians hist. of Ireland,
two Lacies (whose only praise was, that they were the sons of a
nobly-deseruing Father) having been, through ambition of Soueraignety, the
fountain of dangerous garboyles, ( Annals Hib. Campians. hist. of Ireland.
tyrannizing over the Commons, and making away such of the Nobles, as stood
either in their light, or in the Kings favor) fled into France, where they
lived in S. Tauri^.
an Abbey as poor Gardinars, until the Abbot descrying by their deportment
some state above their habit, upon penitent humility reconciled them to the
King. The Lord William de Breuse, (a Hist. Cambr^a.
Baron lately of great command and wealth in the Marches of Wales,) showed not
the like penitence, nor found the like grace; who, upon Wend. MS.
refusal to deliver his son as a pledge of his fidelity, spedde into
Ireland to fly the Kings wrath, and now, to avoid his pursuit, fled also
into France, then the common Sanctuary of all traiterous fugitives; but
Famished (some say) in Windsor Castle.
sharp revenge ouertooke both his Son and his Lady (taken in a strong Castle
of Meth) whose virulent and railing * tongue had more exasperated the fury of
the King (whom she immodestly Paris.
reviled as a Tyrant and Murderer,) then could be pacified by her strange
present, Old Chron. of Flaunders. Helli^.
(four hundred Kine, and one Bull, all milke-white, except only the ears,
which were read,) sent unto the Queen.

(43) But Ypod. Neust.
Catalus, the unquiet King of Connaught, trusting to his own Forces, King John
subdued by strong pursuit: Walsing. Paris. Annals Hiber. Campian. hist. of
Ireland.
and after all carried him captiued in triumph, imprisoned the English
Fugitives, took pledges both of English and Irish Inhabitants, punished by
death malefactors, turbulent persons by ransomes, established all their Laws,
Coins, and Officers, to the English form, and deputed (which was worth all) a
wise, stout and upright Iusticiari^ Paris.
Governor over them, the Bishop of Norwich, Langtons competitor: thus
settling on that barbarous Island so noble and ordered a face of government, as
was the stay thereof in those tumultuous times, and a pattern even to more
peaceful ages to imitate. By which both glorious and Red^ 3. Col. September.
speedy conquest and reformation, he better merited that Style of Irelands
Lord, then when it was confirmed to him by a Crown of Walsingham. Ypodig. So
the Pope sent Tyrone a Ph^nix feather Cambden. in Hiber.
Peacockes feathers from the Pope, at what time (long before) he inioyed it by
his Fathers gift, as his Broad-Seale (here not unfit to be annexed) will
show.

This Seal is at a Charter granted to Dublyn, before John was King.


(44) The Banckes of King John's estate, were not An. 1211. King John subdueth
Wales.
unlike to those in Grounds ill-neighboured with an encroching Sea, where
before one breach is well made up, another no less dangerous is laid open:
which endless turmoils kept his Body still in Action, his Mind in passions, and
his Prowess in ure. The vaste expenses of his Irish expedition were no sooner
repaired (by a 140000. l. whereby they redeemed their possessions from Laymens
custody, Lib. S. Albon, MS.
great tax charged on all the Conuentuall houses) but Lewylin Prince of
North Wales, with his great spoils on the English Marchers, made new matter of
charge and exploit for the King; Hist. of Cambria.
having, to prevent due revenge, caused his Wallians to convey all their
cattle and better substance to the scarce-accessible refuges of Snowdowne
Hill. These difficulties much more whetted and excited the Kings resolution;
neither had the vertuall power of the Popes fulmination as yet so blasted his
good fortunes, but that hence also he Ibidem.
returned in great Triumph, as Conqueror of all Wales, where, with wonderful
celerity and valor, he Paris. hist. mi. MS.
subdued all their Princes and Cheefes, whom he received upon Oath, homage,
and hostages, with an absolute Hist. of Camb.
grant of all their Inland unto the King for ever. Notwithstanding, perceiving
that Pol. Virgil.
very many slipped away for dread (at least for color) of the Popes curse, from
those his martial and other civil services, (though Paris. hist. ma.
he punished by fine all such Reuolters) whereby his person could never be
free from danger, nor his State from trouble; he resolves (seeing the Pope
unflexible, and insensible of so many Christians calamity) at length to relent
from his vowed stiffenes against the Popes Elect, in hope so to settle his own
and his Subjects tranquillity, though with insufferable indignity to himself.
In his Rog. de Wend. MS.
return from Wales, two Nunces from the Pope, Randulph a Subdeacon, and Durand
a Knight Templar, meet him at Northampton to make the atonement: English
Chron. MS. compared with Paris his min. hist. MS:
whereto he was so propense, that he accorded to assure under his Seal, that
Archbishop Langton with the Bishops, Monks and others, should be restored
both to his favor, and to their possessions; that, holy Church should have all
the Franchises, as in Edward the Confessors time: that he would never take any
thing of holy Church against the owners will: but, because he Rog. Wend. MS.
would not also make full satisfaction for all confiscations, and other
emoluments received of the Clergy, (nay, he could not The Kings offers
rejected.
having expended all his treasure in his continual wars,) the Clergy and
their Factors (the Legates) more prizing their private gain, then the weal
public of their Native Country, contemned the sweet proffer of peace, and
exposed all to the bane of a reuengeful contention. For hereupon they did not
only English Chro. MS.
denounce the curse upon the King by name (which the Prelates before durst not
do) and upon all other who conuersed with him; but, as if he had most Paris.
hist. ma.
contumaciously contemned quietness, by their relations they incensed The Pope
absolues the kings people from allegiance.
the Pope (too procliue of himself to set forth his own greatness) to put on
him a far more indignous wrong and contumely then Interdiction, by Paris min:
MS,
absoluing all Kings and People, poor and rich, having dependence on him, from
all Fealty and Subjection to him.

(45) This being the third step, whereby, both Ann. 1212.
the Pope ascended to the height of his usurped power, and merciless revenge,
and the Subjects Paris hist. min. MS.
daily descended from their loyal observance, made king John more circumspect
to strengthen himself, both with an Army no less faithful then powerful,
and also with the love of his Neighbour-Princes. King William of Scotland,
Hector Boet. ^13
at this time infested with a dangerous rebellion, (stirred up within his
Kingdom by one Gothred, Lib. de Bernwel
laying claim, under color of some antiquated title, to his Crown) being
himself infirm with age, sent his son Prince Alexander into England, to
crave assistance of King John, who (by his own princely love and readiness,
to demerite theirs,) resolving with his Army in person to chastise the
disturbers of his trusty Confederate, before his setting forth, did Paris.
hist. ma.
on the Table in a solemn feast, (which he kept in the Hospital of
Clerken-well) adorn Prince Alexander with the belt and Order of Knighthood; and
Lib. de Bernwel.
afterward with his host vanquishing the Rebels, advanced their Chiefe-leader
far higher then his own Ambition expected, and left that Cothred hanged by
King John.
Kingdom in a settled peace. But whiles he is thus kindly careful in
suppression of another Rebels, Fruits of the Popes curse.
his own at home are as unkindly vigilant to undermine his State; the Popes
Absolution, like magic spelles, having let loose many tumultuating Spirits,
which will not easily be laid again. For the Mat. Paris.
Chiefes among the Wallians, whom neither breach of their 28 Welsh hostages
hanged at Nottingham. Paris.
Oaths, nor loss of their noble hostages, (*which soon after perished for
their parents sins) could deter, suddenly fell off from the King, and fell
on his Subjects with VVend. MS.
much slaughter of men, burning of Towns, and surprizall of Castles: whereof,
whiles the King meaning to take sharp revenge, was on his way at Nottingham
with an irresistable Army, letters of great speed and secrecy were delivered
to him (as he sat at meat) from his faithful and grateful friend the
Scottish King, and instantly others from his daughter Joan, Prince Lewylins,
Lady, both giving him intelligence of imminent Treasons Mat. Paris.
plotted by sundry of his Peers, who meant either to murder him, or betray
him to the butchery of his foes. Which dreadful notices from so true-harted
Informers, could not yet affright his manly heart, till coming to Chester,
he there understood by sundry other Intelligencers, that his Nobles Idem.
held themselves quite discharged from his allegiance; and knowing that they
wanting fidelity, he himself could not but want security, he dismissed his
host, took hostages of his Barons, pursued the detected Conspirators, and
Fitzwalter, Vesci, Ridel. apud Paris. and Trivet. MS.
the three principal of them flying the land, he prosecuted their persons,
demolished their Castles, and confiscated their possessions. But many of as
vile and virulent affections they left behind them, as that Apud Mat. Par.
Wendou. and alios.
traiterous Act of those Nobles bewrayed, who sent to Philip of France their
sealed Charter, promising to settle on his head the Crown of England, if he
would come to receive it. And that the minds of the vulgar should, not be
vnpossessed with like expectation of John's vn-crowning, the prophesies of an
Peter of Pom-frait. VVend. MS.
Heremiticall wisard (foretelling, that on the day of Ascension, King John
should be no King) were buzzed into their ears. Whether by Gods inspiring, or
the Diuelles, these were revealed, Polyd. Verg an magicis artibus.
some do doubt; but he that considers the quotidian impostures of these
times, and the secret machinations of the Pope, the French King, and the
English Barons, all for diverse ends, complotting against King John, will easily
perceive both what use there was of suborning such a Prophet, to deter the
popular maynie, from sticking to the King, and to beguile their credulity, as
if the thing were to be done, by Gods fore-appointment, and ordinance, and also
Wendouer. Paris
that his punishment by death as a Traitorous Impostor, was no other then he
deserved.

(46) Neither is the Popes revenge thus appeased, some higher greeces yet
remain, on which his Greatness, and greatness of his holy rage must display
it self: the underprops whereof (a thing almost incredible) were not only
Englishmen, but English Bishops also. For Stephen Langton with the BB. of
London and Ely (thirsting after revenge though with the destruction of their
Country, and bloodshed of innumerable their Compatriots) going to Rome with
complaints on the King, Paris, Trivet. Westmin. Polydor.
made humble supplications to the Lord Pope, that he would vouchsafe in a
touch of pious compassion, to support the English Church, being at the point of
ruin. At whose earnest solicitation, the tenderhearted Pope (grievously
lamenting the desolation of the Kingdom Sentence of deposition of King John.
of England,) decreed by solemn sentence: That King John should be deposed
from his Kingdom, and that the Pope should provide some other, who should be
deemed worthyer to succeed. To effectuate the former clause, Innocentius
eagerly pursued the latter, sending speedy letters to (whom but King John's most
mortal enemy?) Philip King of France; Rog. de Wend. MS.
requiring him to undertake the labor of the dethroning King John, with no
less reward then pardon for all his sins, The Pope bestows John's Crown of
Philip.
and enjoying of the English Crown to him, and his heirs for ever. A goodly
large patent both for a Spiritual and Temporal Kingdom, which (more like Mars
his Priest, then Christ's Vicar) he means to seal, with a deluge of Christians
blood. For not thus yet satiated, he transmits his Letters general: Paris.
hist. ma. Wendouer. MS.
To all Potentates, Soldiers, men of war of all nations, to sign themselves
with the Cross, and to follow their Captain Philip for the deiection of King
John, assuring all that their assistance (whether in Person or Contribution)
shall be no less meritorious, then if they visited our Saviors Sepulcher.
That this Pope under color of such Crusadoes, did formerly cloak his own
Avarice, his VVendouer MS Mat. Paris. ad an. 1202.
own Monks auerre; but here he cloakes therewith both his Pride, and a far
more savage vice, the thirst, not of men's gold but of their blood. In which
service with King Philip, he used the same English Prelates for his
Negotiators, which were before his Solicitors thereunto; with whom also he sent
his Factour Pandulph; Mat. Paris.
giving him in private, secret instructions how to manage every particular of
the whole design, to the most behoof of the holy See. The French king
prepares for England.


(47) The French King likewise receiving Mense Ian. Paris.
from the Archbishop and his Associates (in a Rog. de VVend. M. S.
council) the Apostolic sentence; was very apprehensiue of that employment,
whereto not so much the Papal command, as his Mat. Paris.
own ancient malignity, and the English Barons traitorous requests, had
prepared him, both which he was now Trivet. MS.
willing to mask with the speous pretext of justice and devotion. Under which
colors he had Octauis Paschae.
speedily marshalled an immense Army at Roan, and drew a mighty Navy richly
furnished to the mouth of Seyn, VVend. MS.
al his Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, and soldiers being su^moned to the
exploit under pain of hie Treason and disherizing, who therforeboth in fear
and hope of spoil came flocking without number.

(48) A preparation of so great importance, that all Christendom took notice
of, could not long be hidden from King John; whose care, by reason of King
John's preparation for resistance.
his now doubled opposition (foreign and domestic) could be no less for his
own and his Kingdoms safety, then was his Enemies for impugning both. Wherefore
his Summons being 3. Martij. Paris.
sent to all his officers both for Sea and land, for speedy furnishing both of
a Navy, and an Army, equivalent to encounter so powerful an Invasion, such
Wendo. MS.
innumerable multitudes swarmed to Dover, and other harbors for landing, that
the Chiefe-leaders for want of provision, dismissing the rest, Paris. hist. ma.
encamped at Barham-Downes, only with 60000. choice, valiant, and well
appointed men, who, if they had carried all one mind, and true affection
toward their King, and safeguard of their Country, there breathed not any
Prince under heaven, whose assault England had not been able to repel. And
being no worse appointed for a Sea Fight, his intent was to graple first with
the French Fleet, Wend. Paris.
making no doubt of sinking them all: so secure and confident was he in
expectation of all Inuaders. In which brave address, whiles both shores of the
Sea are thus belaid with both those Kings puissant Armies, the one waiting for
the Enemy, the other for fair winds, and more forces, behold Pandulphus (the
Popes Pragmaticke) having Ibidem.
first desired safe conduct of King John, arriues at Dover, to put in execution
those Mat. Paris.
secret Instructions which his Lord (who made his advantage of the Foxe-skinne,
as well as of the Lions) Papa for mam euidenter expressit Paris.
had expressly prescribed. He there vnfoldes to the King, the innumerable
multitude both of King Philips ships, and of his Soldiers Horse and Foot,
(all in readiness to pass, and yet more expected to follow) to bereave
Pandulphus persuasion to King John.
him of his Kingdom by Apostolical authority, and to enjoy it himself with
his Heirs for ever. That with him were also coming all the English Exiles,
both Clergy and Lay, they, by his forces to repossesse their estates (maugre
the king) and he from them to receive allegiance, as from his sworn Subjects.
That he had the fealty of almost all the English Peers obliged to him by
their own Charters; which made him distrustlesse of attayning easily his
wished success: which calamities (the more insufferable, because imposed by
his insulting enemy, and his own Subjects) he might yet euade and retain his
Crown, which by Sentence he had already lost, if penitently he would submit
himself to the Churches judgment. Doubtless the straites whereinto the King
saw himself plunged, were very dreadful; so many deadly enemies abroad to
assault him, so few trusty friends at home to guard him: which drove him into
this sad cogitation Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat. Paris.
that those his perfidious Peers would now with their followers abandon him in
the field, or betray him over to the Sword of his Enemies. Yet not unlikely
other motives also might forcibly persuade him to relent: the remembrance of
the Emperor Otho whom this very Pope (not without foul blot of Paris. hist.
ma.
Injustice and Mat. Westminster.
Leuity) had both eagerly advanced, and furiously dis-empyred; the boundless
furies of the Crusado promulged against him, wherewith this Pope As Serres
shows in Ludon. 8. touching the Albegois, and Paris touching Otho, etc.
used to ouerflow, as with a merciless Ocean, all such Princes as withstood
his will, which once broken in would never end, but with the end and ruin of
all. Thus thinking it better to yield to the time, with assurance both
Wendouer. MS.
of his Crown, and of the Mas. West.
Popes favor, then desperately to hazard Life, Crown and all, to his
immortal foes; he redeemes his safety on such conditions, as (...) tiable,
that with money either paid or promised, he might be wrought like wax and
made pliable to all wicked actions. Thus having the true length of the Popes
foot, he fittes him accordingly with rich presents, and golden promises,
craving (by such moving Rhetoric) not his aid only, but his Curse also
against the Archbishop and Barons, who so incessantly distressed him. But
Innocentius (forward of himself without any Motives, to put in ure those his
Papal virtues, and the execution of his late-vsurped power,) upon the first
gladsome news of Englands Vassallage to his See, had presently dispatched for
England an Agent of greater port then Pandulph, a Subdeacon, Nicholas Bishop
of Tusculum, The Popes Legate comes into England.
with no meaner credence and instructions for preserving what the Pope had
guilefully gotten, then Pandulph had to purchase, what he ambitiously gaped
for: by whose Circafestum S. Michael^. Rog. Wend. MS.
arrival the King seemed to be possessed of those his desires, before his
golden letters arrived at Rome to crave them.

(54) For this Legate was infected with the like itches ( Paris hist. min. MS.
Ambition and Avarice) as his Master, and The new Legate sticks close to king
John.
therefore King John knew how to demerite his fastness and love, by supplying
him with like Donatina preciosa, ibid.
ointments; whereby the Archbishop and Barons soon perceived, that the Legate
was Summo opere regi placere, etc. ibidem.
wholly Regal, and the King Papal; which jealousy made both their Actions
more distasteful. The Ouert and professed end of his coming, being to release
the Interdict, he first tampered a little to accord the King and Prelates upon
couenantes of Restitution; toward which, though the king offered ten thousand
marks, yet the Prelates ( Mat. Paris MS.
repining at the Legates Pl^ (...) parti, regia, etc. ibid.
partiality to the King in approving that offer,) Nic. Trivet. MS.
chose rather to suffer the whole land to groan under that unchristian, and
truly-styled Curse, Cler^ interdict^ relaxari ^lente, vsque satisfactum esset
ad plenum. ib.
then to defalcate any jot of their covetous demands. Under which color, the
Popes Agent, (a fit helue for such a hatchet,) brake his mind to the King of
a more secret and principal cause of his Legacy, which was Wend. MS.
for the contriuing of a more validous and vnexceptionable conueyance of his
Kingdoms to the yoke of Romish Soueraignety; pretending doubtless, (as
Pandulph had done) that VVestmin. Trivet MS.
he could never be safe or quiet, but under the powerful protection of the
Popes wings. What just exceptions the World might take to the former Grant,
his Holiness was not ignorant; it Exceptions to the first grant.
being an Act in the King, both of manifest* Perjury 1.
against his oath at his Coronation, and also of* Constraint, 2.
* Circumuention, and * Fear; he being driven thereto by the Pope himself,
who had set up 3. 4.
both the French power, and his own Barons against him; an Act of one *
actually excommunicate, as also were the * Witnesses conuersing with 5. 6.
him in that action, whereto, as neither the * next Heirs, nor the * Clergy,
nor * Body of the Kingdom, 7. 8. 9.
gave any consent, so an * open disclaim thereof was made by the very
Archbishop of Dubleyne.
Principal man there present, 10.
in the name (as is likely) of all the rest: and that all was engrossed with so
many gross * untruths, as 11.
if done most voluntarily; without any fear or force; in Gross untruths
prescribed by the Pope in that grant. The Pope renounceth his first Charter,
and seeks a new.
a general Assembly of the Barons; only by a divine inspiration, and because
the King had nothing fit to pacify God for his sins, but the giving away
of his Kingdoms: Well might the Pope blush at these shameless abusions; and
therefore if now the King, standing on calmer terms, can be wrought to ratify
his former Grant, though the dealing be more fraudulent, yet the Act will
seem more colorable, because sauouring of less constraint, and more free
devotion. But if we look with an impartial Eye, we shall see both the plight
of King John, and the action King John's present condition.
of Innocentius, still like it self: the Interdiction still burthening his
land; his Barons more molestious to him then foreign foes; his Prelates
greedily grating on him to empouerish his means; his Archbishop stopping all
proceedings against foreign or homebred enemies; and if he had thwarted the
Popes command herein, he foresaw far greater storms at hand, then he had
hitherto escaped. Thus in desire to settle his Kingdoms quiet for his own
time, and in hope, perchance, that his Successors would (as since by divine
blessing they have) vindicate The new Charter to the Pope.
it again from such an enforced slavery, he condescended to renew his Dated
3. Octo.
Charter of Subjection, knowing belike that his express Saluis nobis and
^aeredibus. See the Charter. Mat. Paris, Westmin. etc.
reservation to himself and his Heirs, of all due administration of Justice,
all Liberties, and Regalties, (as being excepted out of the Grant,) was
forcible of it self to make it vnforceable. For how has he his wonted power
of Justice, who was supreme, and is made subordinate? how his wonted liberties,
who was absolute, and is made Homager and Pensioner? how his fore-vsed
Regalities, whom another may name, and command as his vassal? Yet this
Charter, adorned with a Golden Bull, (fit for the Roman Phalaris tortured men
in a brazen Bull.
Phalaris, whereas the former was but sealed with wax) was at a meeting in
Saint Paul's Cathedral Church ( Paris. hist. mayor.
pretended for other businesses about the Interdict) presented for more
authenticke solemnity at the High-Altar, where, in the King and Legates
presence, the Archbishop of Canterbury, himself also both a Cardinal and a
Legate The Archbishop of Canterbury appeals against the Kings subjection.
(in this, acting the office of a stout Patriote, and noble Prelate, as the
Archbishop of Dublein had done at the first Grant,) stepped forth, and in the As
appears in Mat. Paris. ad An. 1231. Iuri and appellationibus Steph. Cant, and
in Rossus Warwic.
name of the whole Clergy and Kingdom, Paris. hist. min. MS. says also
Procaciter. ad Ann. 1214.
boldly and earnestly presented Paris. hist. ma. in Henrico 3. ad Ann. 1231.
Rossus Waruicanus.
at the same Altar in solemn manner, his Appeals against that Charter so
execrable to the whole world, as likewise formerly Paris. hist. min. MS.
he had used all possible endeavor to divert the kings heart from that subjection
to the Pope and Court of Rome. That the Peers of the land accorded with the
Archbishop in the Appeal, (and more then in Appeals) both the Kings own
Dated at Dover, 5. September. Citat. in respons. ad Apolog, Bellarmin. cap. 3.
letters to the Pope saying, they openly professed, that they forcibly made
head against him, because he had so enslaued his land, and their own bitter
exclamations against it, so frequently in In VVendouer, Paris, Westmin. and
alij.
Authors reiterated, do demonstrate: and yet both the Archbishop and other
Barons, are so cunningly named in the Popes In Original. in custod. R. Cotton
Baronetti.
Transcript, as if they had not only been present and witnesses at the doing,
but also approuers of the deed. What comfort then had Innocentius of renouncing
his old Charter, and thus shuffling for a new? Surely but little, it seems;
especially when he saw both his own Creatures in England thus oppugn it, and
Christian Princes abroad; yea King John's King Philip and the Peers of France.
mortal enemies, who not only denied, that England (notwithstanding this
Transaction) Paris hist. min. MS.
was any patrimony of S. Peter, and condemned the Pope for holding an error so
pernicious to all Kingdoms; but also vowed to die before they would yield,
that any King can of his own will, make his Kingdom Tributary, and his Nobles
slaves to others. By which universal detestation, of this the Popes usurping,
it is not improbable (though for the present he flourished the Transcript
thereof, which he sent into England, with the Ex originali Transcript. Dat.
October. 3. 1214.
Preface of Christ, and Melchised^h being Kings and Priests, and that therefore
in one person of Christ's Vicar, as the Soul and the Body, so both Kingdom and
Priesthood did now concur,) that yet ere long he was no less ashamed of
this latter, then of his former Charter. Whereto well suteth his testimony, who
writes that a Author. Eulog^. Citat. in Tortura Torti, per Epis. Cicestrens.
Parliament was held at London the year 1214. Where the Archbishop sat as
President with all the Clergy and Layty: wherein by commandment of the Pope,
the Charter, Fealty, and homage by which the King was obliged to the Pope, was
absolutely released on the 7 day of July: which if be true, no marvel if the
Court of Rome cannot produce, though often challenged thereto, this Charter
whereof so much they vaunt. Notwithstanding some unquiet Spirits, aspiring long
after to the Papacy, though pretending (perhaps) the Mat. Paris. hist. mai^r.
An; 1245
Original Charter was consumed at Lions (where the idem ibid.
Pope causing, some say, his own Conclaue to be set on fire, so have a
pretense to extort a contribution from the Prelates there in council, the fire
went farther then Could the Pope rule Purgatory fire, and not this.
he meant it should) they made some flourish to See Parliament Rolls, temp.
^d. 1. and Ed. 3.
renew their claim of homage and pension, till in a General Parliament, the
Prelates, Lords, and Commons, severally and jointly An. 4. Ed. 3. Parl^ament
Rolls. No. 8.
enacted, that for so much as neither King John, nor any other King, could bring
his Realm and people to such thraldom, but by common assent of Parliament,
(the which was never The like answer to this was made, Ann. 3. Ed. 1. Rot.
Claus. m. 9. (...) Schedule.
done,) and that in so doing he did against his Oath at his Coronation;
besides many other causes of just exception; if therefore the Pope thence
forward should attempt any thing therein, the King with all his Subjects See
Cambden in Hibernia, p. 732.
should with all their Forces and powers resist the same, and rather hazard all
their lives and liuelyhood, then endure that usurpation. If Pope Paschall (in
the Houeden in Henry. 1.
time of King John's grandfather) having with much solemnity made some graunts
to the Emperor Henry, and confirmed them with an Florent. Wigorn. ad an. 1111.
Anathema, with the Houed. ib.
oaths of thirteen Cardinals, and with Idem. ib.
religious receiving of the blessed Sacrament; yet, because such grants were
thought prejudicial to his See, Paris in H. 1. Houed.
solemnly disclaimed his own Act, and such his doing was aproued by a Clergy
Council, as pretended to be done Boethius Florentius.
by fear: how much more justly might King John's Successors and his State, by
such approbation of their grand Council, free themselves of those seruitudes
wherewith by another unjust, forced, unwarrantable Act, they were supposed to
be enfettered?

(55) Though the Archbishop were so unkind against the Pope (the Aduancer of
his Fortunes,) as to give by his appeal so fatal a blow to his desired An.
1214. The Popes displeasure against Stephen Langton.
Crown, yet the Pope was not so ingrace as to die in his debt; as quickly he
found in Mat. Paris, hist ma.
another Appeal which he made to the Pope against his Legate, for that he,
relying on See Innocentius his letters in Paris.
Apostolical indulgence, not only disposed of all Spiritual dignities to
Regijs nutibus, Paris. hist. min. MS.
such as best liked the King, but also to his own Idem.
Italians, and Kinsmen, though absent, unknown, insufficient, unworthy, yea,
and some Ibidem.
unborn. Which Legatine Legati Tyrannis. ibid.
Tyranny insufferable in a Christian State, though Simon Langton (the
Archbishops brother and Proctor) urged earnestly before the Pope, yet the
Legates Agent Pandulphus, so displayed both the Archbishoppes feruentnes in
using suck Contra factam subiectionem procaciter appellasse. Paris. MS.
eager persuasions and appellation against the Kings subjection, and the
Prelates Rigidos and auaros, (...) Mat. Paris. hist. ma.
avarice, in their unreasonable exactions for restitution from the King; being
the most benign, modest, and humble Prince that his eyes ever beheld; that his
Holiness not only conceived Paris, hist. min. MS.
exceeding hatred against the Archbishop and his cause, but sent also his
Authenticke Letters for repealing the Interdict, upon restitution only of
13000. Marks The King had paid 27. thousand before, and was to make it up
40000.
more to the Prelates (the King before had voluntarily offered them 100000) and
that but by equal portions of Nic. Trivet.
five years payment. But the King, who knew the Popes pleasure before these
letters came to impart it, having found that his French affairs had sustained
vnreparable impeachments by his hitherto enforced delays, Wendouer. MS.
entrusting his Kingdom to the Legate and Earl Marshals custody, was with his
Forces passed into Poictou, (whiles in his absence, the relaxation of the
Interdict, after 6 Annos menses 3. 14. dies.
more then six years continuance, was by the Legate in a Parliament solemnly
promulged) where his Successes were so fortunate, that Lit. Regis Ioh. apud
Wendou.
it being powerfully subdued, great hope was conceived the other Provinces
would follow. Whence breaking with Mat. Paris.
like victories into Britain, being there at the point to give Rog. Wend. MS.
battle to Lewis the Dolphine, his euerfaithlesse Poyctouins suddenly Paris
min. MS.
forsook him, and made him forsake his purpose. But a greater impayrement of
those his hopes, was the Paul. Aemil.
defeature of his Confederate Otho the Emperor, at the renowned Battle of Ad
Po^tem de Bouines. 6. Call. Augusti, Paris. MS.
Bouines, where King Paris hist. (...). See in Aemylius this battle at large.
Philip, stricken from his horse by the hand of Reginald Earl of Bulloigne,
had there with his life ended the quarrel, if a faithful Soldier had not
covered him with his own Body, and bravely sacrificed his life, to save his
Sovereigns; who thereupon recovered both his footing, and the victory. The
heavy news whereof, concurring with his Barons outrages at home, drove King
John on (...) 8000. (...). Paris MS.
dear conditions, to capitulate on a five years Truce, and return to bridle
them at home, whose attempts he ever found most dangerous, The Barons new
d^sloyalties.
when he was most busied abroad. For under a (...) gratia. Wendouer, MS.
pretext of Devotion (the usual mask for Treachery the Barons assembling at
Saint Edmunds Mat. Paris. hist. ma.
did every man on the high Altar severally swear, to renounce their sworn
fealty to the King, and pursue him by Arms, till they had enforced his consent
to the Charter of liberties formerly by the Archbishop recomme^ded to them.
Which An. 1215.
when VVend. MS.
afterward they came in person to challenge of the King, as a part of his Oath
taken at his Absolution; he Mat. Paris.
seeing both their forces and affections addressed for violence, was enforced
with gentle language and promised satisfactions, to desire, till after Easter,
mature deliberation on so important a matter; in which breathing time, both in
policy, he took new oath of loyalty through all the land, and Idem.
in devotion, undertook the Vow and Sign of the holy Wars, choosing belike
to die against faithles Turks, rather then to live amongst such unfaithful
Subjects. But neither Oaths, nor holy vows Literae Innocentij apud Wend. and
Paris.
(then esteemed the supreme privilege of protection) could be sufficient
Bucklers to protect against such desperate attempters; who at the prefixed
week of Easter, preparing themselves not for a Conference, as with their
Prince, but for a Battle, as against some hostile power, trouped together at
Stanford, with Paris. Wend. MS.
an Army inestimable for number, whose Coniurati principalem consentane^m
habuerunt Stephanum, ibid.
very principal Abetter and conspirer was Stephen the Archbishop, the more
pernicious person, because (to hide his false entendementes) most assiduous in
attendance about the King. And Idem.
him the King selecting to send to the Barons Army (who were come on as far
as Brackley, not far from the King, residing now in Oxford) to know the
contents of their desires; he brought a Rog. de Wend. MS.
Schedule of their claimed liberties, with a message of their resolutions, if
presently he sealed not a Charter thereof unto them, they would compel him
thereto by forcible entrance on all his possessions. Whereat his great heart Cum
(...) indignatione. ibidem.
highly disdaining, he demanded, why they also demanded not his Kingdom?
those their exactions being grounded on no color of reason, and swearing never
to enslaue himself to them by such a concession, he dismissed his Archbishop
to return them his peremptory answer.

(56) Neither were the Barons less resolute in performance of their vow and
message, appointing The Barons in open rebellion.
for Head unto that huge and heady rout, Robert Fitzwalter, whom they enstyled
Rog. Wend. MS.
The Marshall of Gods Army and holy Church: who first assayling Northampton
Castle, after fifteen days fruitless fury, departed to Bedford, whose Will.
de Bello. Campo.
Castelan being a Confederate gave them easy entrance; but the Londoners
(displeased with the King for burthening k Mat West.
them with taxes) not only admitted them, but (...) n^ncijs. (...).
invited them by request, to enter their City by night: where having that Key
(as it were) of the land in their dispose, they by their VVendo^r. MS.
threatfull letters not only drew most of the Nobles from the King, but also
had almost locked him out of his Regal Seat. To prevent which outrage, by
gentle messages entreating of the Barons a place and day of meeting, who
thereto designed Betwixt Windsor and Stanes.
Runingmead, ( Glouer Catalogue of honor. p. 954. but Mat. West. says quod
interpreta^, Pratum (...).
since called Counsel-mead, for such consultations of State,) they thither came
Rog. de Wend. M. S.
with armed multitudes out of all the Kingdom beyond all number, that the
King, Paris. hist. ma.
seeing his power far inferior unto theirs, was constrained to 15. a^e Iunij.
Paris.
grant them their uttermost desires, not only for Liberties, (specified in See
these Charters at large in Wend and Paris.
Magna Charta, and Charta foresta,) but also for a kind of sway in the
Government, by twenty five selected Peers, to whose commands all the other
Barons also were bound by oath to be obsequious. Thus one of the greatest
Sovereigns of Christendom, was now become the Paris.
twenty sixth petty king in his own Dominions; as appeared that very night,
when all the rest following the pompous stream of the new vpstart-Kings, left
their Sovereign vix 7. (...). VVend^. MS.
only with seven Gentlemen to attend him. What marvel, if high disdain
hereof pierced his swelling heart, (...) sitian both bodily and ghostly: and not
only forgave bey he gave a Legacy, December Libra^ terrae. Paris.
gladly all his mortal persecutors (holding that a matter, though very
difficult to flesh and blood, yet salutary to the Soul) but also sent command
to Henry his son to do the same: to whom he caused all present, to Idem.
swear fealty, as to the Heir of his Crown, and sent his letters to all his
Officers abroad, exhorting them to assist him. And Ibidem.
thus he commended his soul to God, and his Body to be buried in Worcester
Church, where the Bishop solemnly interred it, by the Kings He died on S. Lukes
night, 14. Call. Nou. Godwins Catalog of ^B.
appointment, near the Body of Wolstan, a saincted Bishop renowned for
constant fidelity to his Prince against the rebellious Nobles of In the Reign
of William Rufus
his time: with which kind of men, King John's government had been miserably
encombred.

(62) This, being the Catastrophe of his Tragical Reign, might also have
been the close of his Story, The manner and cause of King John's sickness.
had not the suddenty of his death, exacted some search into the cause of his
sickness. Such Authors as touch the matter but in general, content themselves
with saying, he dyed of a Ioh. de Walsing^.
grief, or a Polydor.
fever, or a Tho. Otterborne
flux, or a Mat. West.
surfeit; but those who have entered into the particulars, insist on such a
Surfeit, as whereof both grief, fever, and flux were most probable effects and
Symptoms. For coming (say Chronicle of S. Albans, MS. Sundry English
Chronicles, MS. Caxtons Chron.
they) from the Washes to Swinshed Abbey, (being of the Cisleaux Order, which
of old he had much incensed) he added new matter of offense, as he sat at
meat, when, in speech English Chron. MS.
of his enemies too large provision, he swear, if he lived but half a year
longer, he would make one halfe-penny loaf as dear as As dear as 12. ob.
Lecestrensis. as 12. d. Otterborn ^s 20. d. Polychro. ^s 20. t. Caxton.
twelve: which to prevent, a Monk of that holy habit, whither in love to
Lewis, or hate to the King, or pity on the Land, presenting him with an
enuenomed Cup, (whereof the King commanded him to be his Taster) became the
Diabolical Instrument of his own and his Sovereigns destruction. This
relation, delivered by Monks, and men of Monkish humor, as a thing so
undeniable, that they auow (at what time they wrote this) Chron. of S. Albans,
MS. Caxton and alij.
five Monks in that Abbey did sing for this their Brothers soul specially,
and so should whiles the Abbey stood, which if it had been forged every Child
might easily have refuted; and the rehearsal of all circumstances thereof, (of
the Kings speeches, of the Monks conference with his Abbot, of his preparing
the drink with a Toade in the garden, of his dying in the Firmary) might
deserve credit with the greatest Patrones of Monkery; yet Parsons in his
Warn-word, Enc. 2. cap. 15
one of them (as if by acquiting Simon of Swinshed, all Yet Iacob^ Clemens a
Monk did kill Henry 3. of France.
other of such Orders were cleared from assasinating of Princes) strives
eagerly, to asperse some late M. Fox his Martyrolog; Sir Francis Hastings his
Ward-word. Parsons censure of Foxes pictures in his Mart.
Relaters hereof, with the blots both of malice and forgery. Wherein is the
malice? in adding to the narration, Pictures also of the fact, so to move
hatred to Monks and their Religion,; whereas of truth, either Monks, or men
of that Religion, were the very first, who not only so depictured, but also
lively and richly depainted it in their Where the king is limmed with his
Crown and rich roabes, fitting at a banquet and four Monks in their habites
coming to him, whereof one presents him with the poisoned cup. Uide MS. of
S. Albans i^ Bibli^theca Archiep. Cant.
goodliest Manuscripts. Wherein then the Forgery? in adding to Caxton, that
Parson^ ibidem.
his Abbot gave him absolution for the same before hand, there being no such
matter at all, nor any mention thereof in the story? No? let the very story
speak; Caxton^ Chron.
The Monk went to the Abbot, and was shriuen of him, and told the Abbot all
the King had said; and prayed his Abbot to assoile him, for he would give the
King such a drink that all England should be glad thereof and joyful: the
yode the Monk into the Garden, etc. Yea farther, Lecestrensis.
one Monkalleadgeth, an inducement for the Abbots assent thereto, for that the
King had sent for the Abbots sister (a fair Prioresse) with purpose to have
deflowred her. Yea, but the Story it self is charged with By Parsons loco Cit^.
novelty, the first author thereof being but An. 1483. and all other former
Writers making no mention of it. This if true, were somewhat, and doubtless,
it is as true as the former: for how could he be the first Author, when not
only Borne in the reign of Henr. 3.
Ranulph the Monk of Chester, Cl^t, A. 1336
John of Tynmouth, and He ended his story An. 1420.
Thomas Otterbourne the Francistan Friar, recorded it as (...) vulgata.
a fame generally received; but sundry other ancient stories, as John of
Lichfield, the Monk of Leicester, and Scala Mundi (to omit other Hist. de
gestit Reg. Ioh. MS. in custodia D. Rob. Cotton. English Chronicles, MS.
namelesse Authors before Ann. 1483,) so confidently avouch his poisoning at
Suinshead, that impartial Ioh. Mayor. Georg Lillius Caxton and alij.
after-Writers, though friends to Monkery, made no scruple to believe it. And
why should they not, since an K. Henry the 3
Author, more ancient and vnexceptionable then all the rest, (even king John's
Son and Successor in his Kingdom) auerred it, Paris. hist. ma.
when, the Prior of Clerken-well saucily telling him (being then in that house)
that as some as he ceast to do Justice toward his Prelates, he should cease
to be a King; the King enraged with his traiterous threat, replied; What? mean
you to turn me out K. Henry 3. acknowledges his Father was murdered.
of my Kingdom, and afterward to murder me, as my father was dealt with?

(63) But not to trouble our selves with refuting a Gooses gagling against
Foxes true relation; easy it is to observe the hatred of Monks against that
King, both in thus procuring his death then, and his Monkish slanders against
K. John.
dishonor (a second death) in their slanderous inventions ever since. For,
whereas he Rog. de VVend. MS.
writ by some of his Bishops to certain foreign Princes, for aides against
his faithless Rebels; the Monks charge him, that he counterfeited his
Bishops Seals, and writ abroad, that all Englishmen were become. Infidels
and Apostates from Christ's faith, and therefore such should come to subdue them
and take their possessions: Mat: Paris.
when he said, a Stag which he killed, had never the less fat, though he
never heard a Mass; they charged him he doubted of the Resurrection of the
dead; P. Vergil.
and in saying, he never sped well after his yielding to the Pope, that he
said he was unfortunate since he was reconciled unto God: that, In Record.
Turr. London.
when he gave leave to a servant of his own, to enter any religious Order, he
gave him leave to be of what Religion and Faith he list. That moreover, Mat.
Paris.
he offered his Kingdom to a Sarazen, and would embrace the Turkish faith,
though this tale were told by one Robert of London (a Lib. S. Alban. MS. in
vit. Ioh. Abb.
wicked Mass Priest, or rather a Monster, M. Paris.
having a face like a Jew, with one arm long, and another short, his fingers
deformedly growing together two and two,) with such senseles improbabilities,
as, Ibidem.
that he found that Moorish King reading of Saint Paul's Epistles, and that
he refused the Kingdom of England being offered him, with the like. That
lastly Paris. A. 1226.
it was revealed to a Monk, King John was in Hell; though a Poet for so
saying, is by M. P. ( Idem in vit. Johan.
who ^de no doubt of King John's salvation) censured for a Reprobus
versificator. Paris. in vit. Ioh. K. John's princely des.
Reprobate. These all are demonstrations of so incredible hatred, as should
rather alleuiate their Authors credit, then the Kings; whose Reign had it not
fallen in the time of so turbulent a Pope, so ambitious Neighbor- Princes, so
disloyal Subjects, nor his Story into the hands of exasperated Writers, he
had appeared a King of as great renown, His Acts of devotion.
as misfortunes. His works of devotion inferior to none; as his Foundations
declare at Nic. Trivet. MS
Beauley, Cambd. Brit. in Berkshire.
Farrington, Cambd. Brit. in Wilsthire.
Malmsbury, and Campian hist. of Ireland, l. 2. c. 1.
Dublin, and that other for Nuns, at Godstow by Oxford, Trivet. M. S.
Walsingham. His civil Acts.
for which, some have interpreted that Prophecy of Merlin as meant of him;
Since Virgin gifts to Maids he gave, Mongstblessed Saints God will him save.
His Acts and Orders for the Weale-publike were beyond most: he being either
the first, or the chiefest, who appointed those noble Forms of Civil
government in Houeden. Polydor. Stow.
London, and Ex Record. and Charti^ Ciuitat.
most Cities, and Incorporate Towns of England, endowing them also with their
greatest Franchises; The Cambd Brit. in Striueling.
first who caused Sterling money to be h^re coined; The Cambd, Brit. in
Ordinib^ Ang.
first, who ordained the Honorable Ceremonies in Creation of Earls; The
first, who Houed. Paris, Vit Arch. Cant. in Hubert:
settled the Rates and Measures for Wine, Bread, Cloth, and such like
Necessaries of Commerce; The VVendouer MS. Paris.
first, who planted English Laws and Officers in Ireland, and both annexed
that Kingdom, and fastened Wales to the Crown of England, thereby making amends
for his losses in France. Whose whole course of life and actions, we cannot
shut up with any truer E^loge, then that which Rog. H^ed. MS. Cit ^ex hist.
(...) Eulogi^ apud Fabian and Fox.
an ancient Author has conferred on him: Princeps quidem Magnus erat, sed
minus foelix; atque vt Marius, vtramque fortunam expertus; Doubtless, he was a
Prince more Great then happy, and one, who, like Marius, had tried both sides
of Fortunes wheel.

His Wives.
(64) Alice, the first wife of King John, was the eldest of the two daughters,
and heirs apparent at that time of Humbert the second, Earl of Maurien, now
called Sauoy: her Mother was Clemence daughter of Berthold the fourth, Duke of
Leringen, who had been the divorced wife of Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony.
This marriage was in their childhoode concluded by their Parents at
Mountferrant in Auerne, in February, Anno, 1173; he should have had with her,
her Fathers Earldom, but all altered by her untimely death; and after ensued
the death of her Mother, the new marriage of her Father, and issue male of the
same, whereof the Dukes of Saxony are descended.

(65) Isabel, his second wife (by Houeden in K. John.
some called Hawisia or Auis) though the Sea Glouers Catalogue of Honor, p.
363. and p. 134.
youngest of the three Sisters, yet was in regard of this marriage, the sole
Heir of William Earl of Gloucester, son of Earl Robert, the Natural son
of King Henry the first; her Mother was Hawis the daughter of Robert Bossu
Earl of Leicester. She was married unto him when he was Earl of Mortaine,
in the first year of his brother Richards reign: and after ten years having
no issue by him, was (the first year of his Reign) divorced from him, under
pretense of Consanguinity, and married to Geffrey Mandeuill Earl of Essex, and
lastly, to Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent; but died without any Issue by them.

(66) Isabel also his last wife, was daughter and heir of Aymer Earl of
Angolesme; her Mother was Alice daughter of Peter, Lord of Courteney, fifth son
of Lewis the Gross, King of France. She was married unto him in the first
year of his Reign, and crowned by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, 8. Id.
October. Anno 1200. and suruiuing him, was married to Hugh Brun Earl of March,
and Lord of Lusignian and Valence in Poytou, to whom first she should have
been married, but yet (as seems) continued her affection to him till now. By
him she had diverse Children, (greatly advanced by the King, Henry 3. their
half brother, and as greatly maligned by his Subjects) Hugh Earl of March and
Angolesme, Guy of Lusignian, slain in the battle at Lewise, William of Valence
Earl of Pembroke, Aymer of Valence Bishop of Winchester, Geffrey of
Lusignian L. of Hastings.

His Issue.
(67) Henry, the eldest Son of King John, and Isabell his last wife, was
borne at Winchester, 1. October, 10. of his Fathers Reign, Anno, 1208. K. John
dying at Newarke, ( Mat. Paris. VVendou.
whither he was broughtina Horselitter from Swynshead,) the Barons malice was
ended, their offense amended, Lewis of France rejected, and the young Prince
seated on his Fathers throne.

(68) Richard, his second son by the same Queen, was borne the next year
after Henry; by whom afterward he was made Knight, created Earl of Cornwall,
and appointed Earl of Poytou. After the death of William Earl of Holland,
Emperor of the West, he was by the Electours chosen to succeed him in the
Empire, and crowned King of Romans, and of Almayn at the City of Acon in
Germany, by Conrade Archbishop of Coleyne, Maij 27. being the Ascension day,
Anno 1257. deceasing at the Castle of Berkhamsted, April 20. Ann. 1271. the 13.
year of his Empire, his body was buried in his Monastery of Hayles in
Gloucestershire, but R^ssus VVarwicanus.
his Heart at Oxford in Reuly Abbey (founded by him) under a Pyramid of
admirable work. He had three wives, the first was Isabel daughter of William
Marshall Earl of Pembroke, widow of Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester; by
whom he had issue, Henry slain at Viterbo in Italy, and John, both dying
without Issue. His second wife was Senches, (daughter of Raimond Earl of
Province, and sister to Queen Eleanor his brothers wife) who was crowned with
him at Acon, and had issue by him Edmund Earl of Cornwall, and others. His
last wife was Beatrice, Niece to the Archbishop of Coleyne, who seems to
have suruiued him, and to have no Issue by him.

(69) Ioane, the eldest Daughter and Child of K. John and Queen Isabel his
last wife; was the first wife of Alexander the second, King of Scots, married
unto him in York, Iunij 25. Anno 1221. who returning into England to visit
her Brother, deceased at London, and was buried in the Nunnery at Tarent in
Dorsetshire, 4. Martij, in the 21. year of her Brother king Henry's reign in
England, and the 23. of king Alexander her husbands in Scotland, Anno 1236.

(70) Eleanor their second daughter, was first married to William Marshall the
younger, Earl of Pembroke: and after his decease without issue, and seven
years Widow-hood remarried to Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, (son of
Simon Earl Montfort in France, by Amice Daughter of Robert Blanchman Earl of
Leicester) who maintaining the Barons wars against King Henry her brother,
was slain at the battle of Euesham, in the 19. year of her brothers reign,
1265; after whose death, she and ^er Children were forced to forsake England;
she died in the Nunnery at Montarges in France. Henry her eldest son, was
slain with his father at Eueshan: Simon, the second, was Earl of Bigorre, and
ancestor to a Family of Mountfords in those parts of France. Almaricke, her
third son, was first a Priest, and Treasurer of the Cathedral Church in
York, and after a Knight, and a valiant seruitour in sundry wars beyond the
Seas. Guy the fourth Son was Earl of Angleria in Italy, and Progenitour of
the Mountfords in Tuscaine, and of the Earls of Campo bachi in the Kingdom of
Naples. Richard the fifth son, remained privily in England, and changing his
name from Mountford to Wellesborne, was ancestor of the family of Wellesbornes
in England. She had also a daughter named Eleanor, borne in England, brought up
in France, and married into Wales to Prince Lewellen ap Griffith.

(71) Isabel, their youngest daughter, was born, An. 1214; when she was 21.
years of age, she was married (being the 6. and last wife) to the Emperor
Frederick the second, at the City of Worms in Germany, 20. of July, 1235. She
had issue by him, Henry appointed to be King of Sicily, and Margaret wife of
Albert, Landgraue Thurin: she was Empress 6. years, and died in Childbed,
December. 1. of her husbands Empire 31. of her brothers reign 38. Anno, 1241.

(72) Jane, or Ione the daughter natural of King John (by Agatha Daughter of
Robert Ferrers, Earl of Darby) married to Lewin Prince of Wales. Anno 1204.
her Father gave with her the Castle and Lordshippe of Elinsmore in the Marches
of Southwales; she (like a most loving Child) gave her Father secret
intelligence of the Treasons intended against him by the Welsh and English.

(73) Geoffrey Fitz-Roy, a base son, who transported some Soldiers into
France, when Archbishop Hubert forbad the King his father to go thither.

(74) Richard, who married the daughter and heir of Fulbert de Dover, who
built Chilham Castle in Kent, which Castle he had with her, and had Issue by
her, of which some families of good esteem are descended.

stant Lords, at Newarke, where the General assembly for that service was
appointed. The whole Army Mat. Paris.
after the Musters, rested there some days, which they spent not in vanities,
but in devotions and receipt of the Sacrament, humbling themselves before the
offended Majesty of God; and so all of them (says Paris) being prepared,
resolve either to return victorious, or to die in defense of their country,
their Sovereigns right, and their own Liberties, and possessions, all which
seemed now to lie at stake. To give them the greater edge and spirit, Wallo
with great solemnity accurseth Lewis and his Lewis and his followers accursed.
Coadiutors; and thus the Army marches toward Lincoln, and the Lewisians
there in siege of the Castle: the King himself being left with a strong guard
at Stow (about eight miles short of Lincoln) accompanied Molinsh.
with Wallo and others, there without peril of his person to attend Gods
pleasure, in the event of the enterprise.

() Upon their approach, if the Counsel of ^er de Quincy and Robert Fitz.
Walter.
some English Lords had been followed, the Lewisian Army had issued forth of
the City, and given them battle in the open field; but the Earl of Perch (the
French General) thinking the Kings party to be greater then it was, for that
the Noblemen and Bannerets thereof had each of them two Ensigns, the one born
with themselves, the other advanced among the The policy of K. Henry's friends
in their march.
Carriages, which doubled the show of their numbers; they did thereupon change
that course, closed the Gates of the City, and plied their endeauours against
the Castle more fiercely then before. The Earl of Pembroke therefore lets
Falcasius slip in at the Castle-posterne with his Arbalasters, whiles others
break up the South-gate of the City, at which the Kings Army most courageously
entering, and they of the Castle sallying out in Flancke of the Enemy, scattered
and utterly defeated the Lewisians. The Earl of Perch their General, being
environed with the Royalists, and willed to render himself, swear that he
would never become Prisoner to any English: upon which refusal he was run
through the sight of his helmet into the brains, and so dyed without speaking
any word. In this conflict (being The fearful end of the Earl of Perch.
on Saturday in Whitson-weeke) the force of natural propension was apparent;
for notwithstanding the fiery resolutions of the Kings People, yet when The
Kings Army has a strange victory, called Lewis Fair.
they saw the faces of their kinsmen, friends and countrymen on the other side,
that fury relented so strongly, that the most part of the revenge fell upon the
Horses, and not upon the Horsemen, whom only they labored to make their
Captives. The whole riches of the Lewisian Camp, and of the City of Lincoln,
became the booty and spoil of the Kings Army, whereupon this discomfiture was
called Lewis Fair; Neither did the Clergy of the place escape, for the Popes
Legate had commanded that they also should be rifled to a penny, as persons
excommunicated in partaking with Lewis. The Chase was but coldly and fainedly
followed upon the flying Barons, otherwise not a man could have escaped;
wherein Rog. de Wend. M. S.
yet the chiefest Barons were taken, with about Mat. Paris.
400. Knights, besides Esquiers, and of other sorts without note or number,
though Walsingham. Ypodig. Neust.
some say that this number of Knights were slain, and matrons and women of the
town flying by boat, which they had no skill to govern, were drowned. Such
as escaped the fight were not therefore past the danger; for the Country people
fell upon them as they fled, killing great numbers, so that almost all the
footmen took up their last lodgings before they could reach to London, where
Lewis was. The Marshal of France, the Chastellan of Arras, and about two
hundredth The perilous e^ state of Lewis.
Knights came safely thither, but were not otherwise then sowerly welcome of
the Prince, who laid upon their cowardice the loss of all the rest. His fear
of being taken Prisoner justly increasing, he fortifies London by the best
means he can, and dispatcheth Posts into France for more relief. This great
victory was much the stranger, if (as Wend. MS. Paris hist.
some write the fame went) that only three were slain upon both sides, the
Earl of Perch, one of Du-Brents Knights, and an obscure fellow belonging to
some, or other of the Barons.

(8) The Kings Governor after the victory rode presently with the gladsome
tidings in the height of speed to the King and Legate, who with tears of joy
gave God thanks. But the noble Earl not leaving his work imperfect, seeks
to embarre Lewis from forraging about London. Mean while by the diligence of
Lady Blanch the wife of Lewis, Eustace the ruffianly Apostata, (who of a Monk
becoming a Ypod. Neust.
Demoniacke) was now upon the Sea with a fresh supply of men and munition bound
for London; But God was no better pleased with these, then with the other
scatterlings at Lincoln. For the English Navy, having the wind of the French,
sunk diverse Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat. Paris.
of their ships by tilting at them with the iron Prowes or Beakes of their
Galleys; using also unslaked lime in dust or powder, which they threw into
Eustace and the French succors defeated at Sea:
the faces of their enemies, and blinded their sight: so were the hopes of
Lewis for any present succors absolutely frustrated. Eustace himself, found
after long search, and drawn out from the bottom of the Pumpe in a French
ship, at Dover had his head cut off, though Stow in Henry 3
some say he was slain by Richard, a base-sonne of King John. The news of
which success being brought to the King, did not more rejoice him, then they
wounded Lewis, for the loss was not only great in men, but in all sorts of
riches and provisions. To give now no rest to Lewis his declining fortunes, the
Earl of Pembroke with a mighty Army besieged London, and Lewis therein, as well
by Water as by Land; seeking to drive him by penury London besieged.
to render the City. It came to capitulation, and in an Ilet in the River of
Thames, not far from Stanes, the King, Wallo the Legate, and William Marshall
the Kings Governor, met with Lewis and the Barons to finish the Peace: for
Lewis had promised to do as Wallo and the Earl would devise, so that it might
not tend to his dishonor or scandal: Heads or Articles of the agreement
which Lewis swear upon the Gospel to perform, were, 1. Articles of peace
between Henry and Lewis.
That Lewis, the Barons, and other his partakers should stand to the judgment
of the Church (whose censures they had now some years contemned) and from
thenceforth be and remain true to the same. 2. That he and his should
forthwith depart the land; never to return again with a purpose to do harm. 3
That he should do his best to draw his Father to make restitution of all such
things in France as belonged to the King of England, and that Lewis when
himself was King should quietly part with them. 4. That Lewis should
immediately render to King Henry all holds and places taken in the war. On
the other part, the King, the Legate and the Earl swear; 1 That the King
should restor* to the Barons and others, all their rights and inheritances,
with all the Liberties formerly demanded of his Father. 2. That none (of the
Layty) should suffer damage or reproach for taking part on either side. 3. That
Prisoners should be released, etc. Whereupon Lewis with his adherents was
formally by Wallo absolved from the sentence of Excommunication, and so they
ran on all sides into embracements, and parted in the kiss of Peace. The
Doct. Pow. hist. Cambr. p. 278.
Welsh, who had held with the Barons, were left out of this Conclusion, being
thereby laid open to spoil. Thus was Lewis Job. Til. Chron.
driven out of England, whom the Earl of Pembroke brought to the Seaside, and
the Realm was cleared.

(9) There are Paul. Aemil. in Phil. 2.
who write how that Lewis had a great sum of money paid him for restoring
the Hostages; but Mat. Paris whom Hollinsh. in H. 3.
some cite to that purpose, affirms no such matter in any printed Copy. Reason
surely is utterly against it; for when even the life of Lewis was after a sort
in King Lewis had no money granted to him by this composition.
Henry's hand, with what sense can it stand that the King should set all the
French free without ransom; and ye^ ^imselfe pay money for the Hostages? which
also were not his, but the Hostages of his enemies the Barons; so that, if
money were due, it must have come from them, not from the King, who both in
honor and profit was rather obliged to the contrary. Writers of that very
time do in plain wordssay; The Poverty of Lewis was such, that he was Rog.
Wendouer. M S. Math. Paris. The same Math. Paris. at A. D. 1227. Says that
King Henry charged the Londoners for having given Lewis 5000 marks at his
departure forcing them to give him as much.
compelled to borrow five thousand pounds of the Londoners, to set him out of
England: and therefore that other seems nothing else but a vain gloze to salve
the honor of Lewis, who was plainly driven out of England, after so high hopes
with loss, sorrow, and eternal disgrace, which the French are so sensible of,
that they scarce seem to write of the whole action, otherwise then Enguer de
Mon. Gagwin. Paul. Aemil. Job. Tili. An. 1218.
laying the misfortune of Lewis upon the Barons mutability.

(10) The Realm of England purged of those foreign dregs, was not therefore
presently freed from other manifold encombrances, such as after so great a
tossing of all laws and things divine, and humane, do ordinarily flote up and
down, like the froth and working of a troubled Sea. For diverse men presuming
upon their former services to the State, or thinking the old bad world would
either continue still, or soon return, if justice grew confident against
Trespassors, or for what other corrupt motives soever, did dare intolerable
things. The Rog. de Wend. M. S. Mat. Paris.
principal Lords of this misrule, were William Earl of Aumarl, Falcasius de
Brent with his Garrison Soldiers, Robert de Veipont, with others, who having
had the Castles and possessions of certain Bishops and Great men, either to
keep in trust, or otherwise by iniquity of the times converted violently to
their uses; did still withold the same, both against the minds of their
lawful owners, and the Kings express Prohibition. Among others, Robert de
Gaugi defended the Castle of Newarke (being the Fee of the Bishop of
Lincoln, as was also the town it self) against the Kings Army, conducted by
the So ancient Writers call him and well might.
Great Marshall Earl of Pembroke, for eight days, and did not first yield the
place, before (by mediation of friends) the Bishop paid to Gaugi one hundredth
pounds. There was in that great Earl, a perpetual care to conclude things
without bloud-shedde, wherein shined his Christian piety and moral wisdom,
there being no other so safe way to settle disordered humors. The greater was
his loss both to the King and State by his death An. 1219.
soon after ensuing, whose In the Temple-Church in London.
monument yet remaining, does not so much eternize his memory, as that
well-deserued Paris ad an. 1214. says. Geruasius de Melkel^y made these verses.
Epitaph, the Epitome of his noble virtues; Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit
Hybernia, Solemn
Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem.
Irelands Saturn, Englands Sun am I,
The Mars of France, and Normans Mercury.
He left behind him five Sons, all Earls of Pembroke successively, and dying
without issue; his five Daughters advanced by great marriages, brought as great
advantage to their husbands issue, by the inheritances of their issuelesse
brethren.

(11) The King (governed after Marshals death, by Peter Bishop of Winchester,
and such Hollinsh, p. 202
other, Ann. 1220. An. Reg. 5.
whom the Bishop had procured to join in administration of publik affairs)
seeming now to have a settled and calm estate, resolves (for good hopes sake)
to be crowned again; which was performed by Stephen Archbishop of
Canterbury at Westminster King Henry crowned again.
with the attendance and confluence of all the Prelates, Peers, and People.
Upon the* Saturday before his Coronation, the Mat. Paris. Walsingham.
Westminster Church enlarged by Henry 3.
new work of the Abbey Church at Westminster, (Paris calls it the Chapel of
our Lady,) was begun, whereof the King himself in person laid the first
stone, as if he meant the world should know, his intention was to consecrate
his future actions to raise the glory of God. This calm but new beginning, was
almost Ann. 1221.
as speedily distempered and disturbed by sudden storms; by reason that,
while the King kept his Christmas with great royalty at Oxford, in the company
of the Prelates and Peers of England, William de Fortibus, Earl of Aumarl,
incited by Falcasius de Brent, and the like riotous Gentlemen, suddenly
departed from the Court without leave, and (whither it were upon
coffeehouse, because the King had against the Earls will the last year
taken Wend. M S. Paris. hist. ma.
some Castles into his hands, or out of an evil ignorance how to live in
quiet) he man's the Castle of Biham, victuals it with the Corn of the Chanons
of Bridlington, spoils the Town of Deeping, and under show of repayring to
the Parliament, seiseth on the Castle of Fotheringhay, committing many other
furious riots in contempt of the King, and breach of his peace; many Ypodig.
Neust.
others in other places following his lewd example. Yet at length the Earl
coming in under the conduct of Walter Archbishop of York, was at the suite of
Pandulph (who succeeded Wallo in the place of Legate) pardoned; and the like
hurtful clemency was extended toward his Accomplices and Retinue, whom the King
(in regard belike of some former better deserts) set free without punishment or
ransom. And to prevent any further disturbances of that nature, Hubert de
Burgh Earl of Kent, for his rare integrity and fidelity (approved in all King
John's troubles) was also made governor of the Kings Person, and Chief
Iustitiar of England, with the general allowance of all the States. What need
the land then had of a severe proceeding, we may judge by this, that Foulk de
Brent held the Earledomes of Northampton, Oxford, Bedford, Mat West.
and Buckingham, with the Castles and Holds; Philip de Marc, the Castles of
Peke and Nottingham, Nottinghamshire and Darbishire; and others detained other
portions, without any other right, then that which the iniquity of the late
tumults gave.

(12) It was no small addition to the troublesomnesse of this time, that
certain D. Pow. bist. Camb.
Lords of Wales, and (as Mat. Paris.
some say) Prince Lewelin himself, desirous to rid their Marches of the
English, rose in Arms, and laid siege to the Castle of Buelt, which invited
king Henry to draw thither with an Army; but the work was made easy by the
voluntary departure of the Welsh; upon the fame of the Kings approach: which
appearances of some ensuing stirs, moved the king to think of strengthening
himself with faithful alliances; and not long after, Alexander King of Scots
came to York, (who in the year To Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. hist. ma.
before had met King Henry at the same place) and there took to wife the Lady
Joan King Henry's sister; and Hubert de Burgh, in presence of both the Kings
married the Lady Polyd. Vergil.
Margaret sister to Alexander; Boethius H^t. Scot. 13.
says, that two great Lords of England married two sisters of King Alexander
at that place. About which time, Tho. VValsing. in Ypod. Neust.
Isabel Queen Dowager of England, without the leave of her son the King, or
of his Council, crossed the seas, and took to husband the Earl of March in
France. The young King supposing his estate at home now somewhat settled, and
his eyes beginning to grow cleare-sighted by the benefit of experience,
forgets not to look about his affairs abroad; and first sends Polyd. Verg.
lib. 16. Hollinsh. p. 203.
Sauarie de Malleon to be his Lieutenant in Aquitaine, where yet the English
held the greater part, and dispatcheth Ambassadors to Philip King of France,
for restitution according to the Articles with Lewis: whereunto Rog Wend. and
Mat. Pa^. place this Embassage at An. D. 1223.
answer was made that nothing ought to be restored which by right of war
had been achieved; but (as it seems) there was a Truce for Ypod. Neust.
four years agreed upon between the two Monarchs, concerning the County of
Poictou.

(13) The State both of Church and Commonwealth in those troubled days, seem
to have much resemblance; every man daring to attempt in either, what his own
audaciousnes would suggest, or others conniuency permit. But Stephen Archbishop
of Canterbury (who himself was lately the ringleader of disorders both in
State and Church) is now beecome very diligent in his Provincial Synod at Ox-

to, in rage of this unexpected reuocation, like a brave Roman threw the Popes
letters into the fire, yet durst not disobey the Contents. And whereas the
message it self had been scanned and sifted to the very branne, both here and
in In Concilio ^ituricensi. Mat. Paris.
France, and judged to savor of so universal an oppression, as might cause a
general discession from the Church of Rome; the King in presence of his
Prelates and Peers, turned off the Popes covetous demand with this thrifty
answer: The King puts off the popes demands. Mat. Paris.
The things which the Pope would persuade us unto, do stretch themselves as
far as the Christian world is wide, and because England is but an Out-Angle
thereof, therefore when we see other Kingdoms give us an example, he shall
then find us the more forward to obey.

(21) That difficulty so avoided; the King was earnestly bent to make a voyage
in person to the aid of his brother Earl Richard, who pursued the affairs of
Gascoigne; which though by the late Earl of Sarisburies death it received some
maime; yet by the fortitude and counsel of other noble persons, it did still
prosper. This intention and desire was staide by the receipt of letters out of
France, which declared the Earl his brothers health, and the good success of
affairs. The King (some say) among his Counselors of State, had one William
de Perepound a great Astrologer, who fortold that Lewis King of France should
not prevail; and this affirmation did the rather withhold him at that present.
There is who Polyd. Vergil. l. 16. Mat. Pa^is.
writes, that King Henry (upon the Popes letters) forbear to attempt any thing
in France at that time, lest he should hinder Lewis, who was then upon an
enterprise against the remains of the Albigenses in Languedoc, Province, and
the parts about. These men were traduced for Heretics, and What kind of
Heretics the Albigenses of Waldenses were. Frater R^ynerius, de Ualdensibus.
so condemned by the Sea of Rome; but what their Heresy was, a * Friar (who
writes against them,) reports, saying, they were of all other the most
pernicious Sect; for antiquity, some holding they were from the Apostles time;
for generality, there scarce being any Nation where they are not; and lastly,
for show of piety, in that they live justly before men, and believe all things
touching God aright, and all the articles of the Creed, The Master herefie of
the Albigenses.
only they blaspheme and hate the Church of Rome. No maruail if this horrible
heresy did trouble his Holiness; and therefore, whereas his Predecessor, and
himself had kept much ado in Christendom, to excite men to take the Sign of
the Cross, and war against the Turk, (which the Friars did persuade men
unto, teaching, that Apud Auentinum.
whosoever were polluted with any heinous offense, as Parricide, Incest,
Sacrilege, he was presently acquitted both from the sin, and the punishment
of it, if he thus took the Cross upon him,) now, because the Earl of
Tholous, and his people entertained the foresaid Heresy, the Cross, and holy
wars The holy wars denounced against Christian Princes.
were by the Pope denounced against them. Of which Earl yet let us hear the
judgment of another Math. Paris.
Friar then living. Those (says he) who thus took the Wars and Cross
against him, did it more for fear of the French King, and the Popes Legate,
then for zeal of Justice; it seeming to many a wrong thus to infest a
faithful Christian man, and one who with many tears desired the Legate to
examine the faith of every one of his Cities, and if any one held against the
Catholic faith, he would punish him, according to the judgment of the
Church, and if any City should resist him, he would enforce it to make
satisfaction. As for himself, he offered to be examined by the Legate
touching his faith, and if he were faulty, he would make satisfaction to God
and the Church. But all these things the Legate scorned, nor could that
Catholic Earl find any favor, unless he would for sake his Inheritance,
and abjure it both for himself, and his heirs for ever. These were the
Heretics against which Lewis was now employed by the Pope, and King Henry the
while Math. Paris.
commanded to surcease from impeaching his holy enterprise. Wherein Lewis had
spent a month in the siege of Auinion, and endured (for all his sacred
Crossings) maruailous losses, by a terrible plague dedeuouring his Army, by a
strange kind of venomous flies, dispatching many, by a sudden drowning of The
Popes crossings attended with few blessings.
a great part of his Army; and lastly, by being himself Mat. Paris.
poisoned by The Earl of Campaigne, and the Popes Legate, were publicly
charged of adultry with Lewis his Queen. apud Mat. Paris.
one of his Earls (an unchaste Rival of his Bed) though it was given forth
of him (as Ranalph^ O^terbourne and alij. Roger Wend. M. S. Math. Paris.
of his late Enemy King John, whom some think that Lewis his friends did make
away) that he died only of a Flux.

(22) The news of the French Kings death seconded with sure relations of
sundry discontentments, and open factions under the young King (who was but
Til^us. Aemylius. Walsing: says 14. Paris. scarce 10.
about twelve years of age) bred an hope in King Henry's mind, that now the
time was come, wherein he might recover those ancient inheritances which his
Forefathers held in France: and to advance his hopes, he had his mother Queen
Isabel (wife to the Earl of March in those parts,) an earnest solicitor.
Peter Duke of Britain was the principal man who took offense that himself
had not a chief hand in directing the young King Lewis; Likelyhoods for a
war with France.
but his prudent mother Queen Blanch Paul. Aemil. in Iud. 80.
weakened his party by drawing his brother Robert Earl of Dreux from him; and
albeit the Duke had repaired the breach, by affinity with the Earl of
Champain, (one of the twelve Peers of that Realm, to whom the Duke marries
the Lady Blanda his daughter and heir,) yet was the Earl driven by a short
war to continue quiet. The Duke hereupon castes himself upon King Henry;
Sed sera auxilia Anglica, the English aides come slowly says Aemylius.
Aemylius.
These and the like inducements moved the King to send Walter Archbishop of
York, with others, to the chief men of Normandy, Angiou and Poictou, that by
large promises they might procure them to acknowledge Henry for their King, or
by partakings, facilitate their reduction to the English Souereigntie; who
accordingly prosecuted their emploiment.

(23) These opportunities for that design, moved the King to bethink how to
gather money, to An. 1227. The King begets enemies at home by raising money to
make war abroad.
furnish so chargefull an enterprise; whereby while he sought to provide to
recover that which was lost, he ministers occasion to hazard that which he
had. The only great man in Court now was Hubert de Burgh: For the King
protesting himself of age to govern without a Tutor or Protector, did
principally confer with him about all his most weighty affairs. Hence grew
more envy against Hubert, and peril to the King. From Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat.
Paris.
the Londoners (besides the granted aides of a fifteenth, which all degrees
were subject unto) he wrung five thousand Marks, for that they had (as was
alleged) to his prejudice, The King perhaps had this sum for the things
which Fablan says he granted. The Charters of liberties revoked and cancelled:
given Lewis the like sum. In the Parliament at Oxford, by advice of Hubert
his Lord Chief Justice, he reuokes the Charters of Liberties, which now for
about two years had been practiced through the Realm: pretending, that at the
time of their Grant the King was under age, and had then no liberty either of
his person or Signature; though otherwise, the royal power of the English
Monarchy never pleads pupillage or minority. It served the turn for the
time, and all men were feign to pay, what Huberts Mat. Paris. Peace in France
frustrates the English designs for France.
pleasure was to assesse, for obteining the new Seal. The fortune of such
Arts, whereby they were wont to fill Princes Treasuries, was not always
without repentance to the Authors, and Authorisers. The Clergy was compelled
(under pain of Papal Censures) to pay the Fifteenth, not only for their
temporal goods, but also for their Ecclesiastical; and yet in the end, (after
so much tossing of the People,) the Kings Ambassadors return out of France,
without having effected that which they went about, so that the whole
enterprise quailed. For Queen Blanch by sweet and prudent courses, so
prevailed among the factious, that there was left no place for Henry to take
sure hold upon. The Duke of Britain (who expected the English succors not till
the Spring,) was so nearly pressed, and almost oppressed, with a winter war, that
he thought himself beholding to his brother Robert Earl of Dreux, for
procuring his peace though it were with such a condition, as ever after, left
upon him, the by-name of Mauclerk or Maledoctus. He Mat. Paris, ad An. 1234.
Scriptores Brit. apud Paul. Aemil. in Ludou 9.
acknowledged the Duchy of Britain, to be the Fee of the Crown of France,
and that by right it ought to hold thereof; this acknowledgment, because
against all apparent truth and Record, procured to him that By-name. Such
conclusion at this present had King Henry's French designs. Our Rog. de VVend.
MS. Mat: Paris. at A. D. 1234.
ancient Authors write, that this dishonorable homage was done long after,
and with an halter about his neck, at such time as the King of England refused
to go in person to his succors, but offered four Earls, and other competent
Forces, which he refused, as harboring a reuoit in his bosom, and turned
Pyrate.

(24) The evil will which the other great Lords secretly harbored against
Hubert, (whose Envy the Kings favor in Yet Walsingham names him Earl of Kent
before that Ceremony of girding him with the Sword.
creating him Earl of Kent had lately increased,) now openly discovered it
self, upon this occasion. Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings brother,
(lately returned with honor out of Gascoigne,) had seized into his hands a
certain Manor, then in the tenure of one Waleran a Dutch-Gentleman, (to whom
King John, for his good services had formerly given it,) which he alleged was
parcel of his Earldom of Cornwall. The King hereupon directs his letters to
his brother, commanding him to come immediately, and show a reason of his fact.
He does so, and without any pleaders help defended, as just, the seizure which
he had made, concluding, among other words, that he was ready to stand to the
judgment of the Kings Court, and Peers of the Realm. When the King, and the
Chief Iustitiar heard him name the Peers of the Realm, they (suspecting his
bent that way) were exceedingly offended; and (said the King) either restore
the Manor to Waleran, or thou shall depart out of the Kingdom, never to
return: at which peremptory sentence, the Earl boldly (but too rashly)
answered; that he neither would give his right to Waleran, nor without the
judgment of the Peers depart the Realm. The Wend. MS. Mat. Paris.
Earl in this heat returns to his lodging; thence (upon surmise that Hubert
had persuaded the King to lay hold on him) he posts to Marlebourgh, where
finding William Marshal the young Earl of Pembroke, The Barons in Arms at
Stamford.
he enters into a fast confederacy, ratified by oath; and Ranulf Earl of
Chester is easily drawn to make another. Letters thence flying about to all
their friends, at Stanford there assembled unto them, the Earls of Gloucester,
of Warrenn, of Hereford, of Warwick, Earl Ferrars, many Barons, and an huge
multitude of armed men. Their strengthes being in likelihood able to bear out
their darings, they address a bold message to the King, by which they require
him in lofty Phrase, to make present amends to his Brother for the wrong he
had done; the fault whereof The Barons rebellious message to the King.
they imputed not to him, but to the chief Iustitiar: and that if he did not
without delay restore the Charters of Liberties, which he had cancelled at
Oxford, they would drive him by dint of sword to give them therein competent
satisfaction. The King seeing it no safe time to deny their requests, appoints
to meet at Northampton in August next; where the Earl of Cornwall (upon his
Associates resolute demand of the King) had large amends of any injury
sustained, his Patrimony being augmented with large accessions. The moderation
and equanimity of the King (terrified by his Fathers example) peaceably
finished this contention (the matter of the Charters being for the time hushed,
as seems) which might otherwise have cost many thousand lives, and have
hazarded the ruin both of King and kingdom.

(25) That danger was not a little augmented The Welsh in Arms.
by the insurrections of the Welsh. The King had given the Castle of
Mountgomery to his most trusty Counselor Hubert de Burgh; the Garrison of
which place, issuing out, meant to stock up the Trees, and shrubbes, which
grew near upon an highway leading through a great wood of Quinque Leuc^rum.
Mat. Part.
five leagues long, that trauailers (ordinarily there spoiled) might pass more
safely. The Welsh not suffering that waste, violently assailed the Workmen,
and not without slaughter on both sides, drove them into the Castle; which drew
the King (who even in little matters used to make one) to come thither in
person, who, with a competent strength, gives not over, till he had with fire,
and other force, consumed the whole Forest. From whence he peirceth farther
into Wales, and consumes with fire a place called Rog. VVend. MS Math Paris.
Ceri says D. Powel in Hist. Cambr.
Cridia; where whiles the King is building a Castle to bridle them, Mat. Paris.
Lewelin drew thither his forces, where many were slain on both sides, and a
man of special worth William de Hist. Cambr.
Brausia (or de Bruise) by the Welsh intercepted, as he went to forage in the
Country; Rog. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris.
many great persons there in the Kings Army being secretly confederated with
Lewelin. By which treacherous practice, victualles grew so scarce, that the king
was compelled to yield to a very dishonorable peace, the conditions whereof
were: that the King should raze to the ground the new Fort now almost finished;
that This William was afterward hanged by Lewelin for lying with his wife, as
is reported i^ Mat. Paris. ad An. 1230. though elsewhere he says it was by
reason of Hubert de Burghs letters to Lewelin. Mat. Paris. ad An. 1232.
William de Bruce should still remain Prisoner till the Welsh thought good;
that Lewelin should give the King toward his expenses three thousand Marks.

(26) These home-bredde garboyles thus appeased; whereas Ambassadors had
formerly repaired to the king out of Gascoigne, Poictou, and Normandy, to
offer him their services for recovery of those his inheritances, if himself
would com in person with a royal Army, he about Michaelmas is now ready at
Portsmouth for the exploit; whither all his Nobles were come with so great a
multitude, not only out of England, but out of Ireland, Wales and Galloway, as
none of his ancestors ever had. Many were the motives which encouraged the king
to this attempt, but none greater then the busy workings of Queen Dowager his
mother. Lewis king of France had created his brother Alfonse Duke of Poictou,
commanding the Lords of that Country to do their homages to him; one of these
was Hugh Earl of March, now husband to Queen Isabel, who because she had
once been the Wife of a King, and now the Mother, disdained that even her
present husband, though but an Earl, should do homage to a Subject, and
thereby her self (bearing the style of a Queen) seem inferior to the Lady
Joan, wife of Duke Alfonse. The Earl was hereupon Queen Isabels practices for
her Son against the French.
drawn to a refusal of homage; and the like spirit she had breathed into the
hearts of the princely family of Lusinian, whose Ancestors had been Kings of
Jerusalem and Cyprus. Nor thus contented to have plotted a party, for her Son
among the French, she is charged to have sought by poison to make riddance of
Lewis himself, and that her Agents for that purpose were discovered, and
executed. But Queen Isabel falsely charged.
Aemylius shall pardon us, if we herein credit not his judgment, as also in
thinking her the Author of suborning Assasines to murder the King; for that
we find him singular therein, the Nich. Guilles Chr. Fran.
received opinion being, that they were sent underhand by the Sarazens out of
Asia, to take away the danger which they foresaw was coming, in regard King
Lewis was so devoutly addicted to Christian piety, and the hatred of Mahomets
Infidelity. There were also at the same time great Divisions among the The
noble form of war among the old English praised by strangers.
French Nobility; but the English (says Aemylius himself) wrought not by
treachery, but after the manner of fair war, which they first by defiance
denounced, and then did openly prosecute with sword in hand.

(27) The King of England being thus provided of men, munition, and other
necessaries fit for the field, and now ready to embarke; there was not
shipping sufficient to transport half the Company. Earl Hubert in the Kings
displeasure.
Which enraged the King so far, that turning himself to Earl Hubert, (upon
whom he charged the blame,) he called him rank old Traitor, affirming,

that he had of purpose been slack herein, as in other things, in regard of
five thousand Marks, with which the Queen Dowager of France had (as he said)
embribed him, and withal ran at him in great fury with his drawn sword, but
Ranulph Earl of Chester and others stepped between, and saved the King from so
foul a blemish, who soon after received him into grace again. But that
assembly was dispersed by the arrival of a Mat. Paris calls him Henry Earl of
Britain, Walsing. Peter Duke of Britain.
great man out of Britain, a principal confederate with the English against
Lewis, who showed the unseasonable time of the year, and other reasons; and
the enterprise thereupon adiourned to the Spring. So after Easter he
transports from Portsmouth with a full Army into Britain. Ann. 1230.
The The great humility and charity of K. Henry. Ypod. Neust.
same day in which he set sail from England, himself did in person, visit
the poor and feeble, and dealt large Alms, not refusing to kiss the sick
and leprous. The success of this voyage is so diversely reported, that without
prejudice to an obseruant Reader, it might be all left out. Much certainly was
not done. The King of Englands purpose Rog. de Wend. MS.
was to have marched through Britain (where many received him) into Poictou;
and as Polyd. Vergil. li. 16. Lib. Statu^. ad A. R. 20. Hen. 3
some write he did so, and took homagein Gascoigne. To empeach this passage,
the King of France lay with a great Army at Angiers, and the King of England
at Nants in Britain, expecting the repair of more force. Fulk Paganel a noble
Norman, with about Polyd. Vergil. l. 16. says but forty.
sixty valiant Knights persuaded the King of England, it was easy for him to
reduce Normandy to his obedience; but Hubert de Burgh diuerted the King from
acceptance of that enterprise. The Normans therefore made an ill journey and an
unlucky, for Mat. Paris.
they prevailed not with King Henry, and for their conspiracy were disseised at
home by King Lewis. But whether it were by loss in battle (wherein, if any
battle were at all, some say the Paul. Aemil.
French had the better, taking about four thousand of the English,) or
otherwise, this is agreede on, that after the wast of infinite Treasures, and
the great diminution of his numbers, the King of England returned Roger Wend.
M. S. Math. Paris. Walsingham. in Ypodig. Neust.
without accomplishment of his purpose; leaving for the defense of Britain,
the three great Earls of Chester, Pembroke and Aumarl, with forces answerable.

(28) It is not unlikely that the dangerous rebellion of the Irish, hastened his
return; for the King of Connaught and his Irish, seeing the King and the Earl
of Pembroke (who as Heir to the great Strangbaw The Irish attempting to
recover their Country from the English, miscarry.
had goodly possessions in those parts) wholly embusied in the enterprise of
Britain, had invaded the Kings people, with a purpose and hope, utterly to
expel and amoue our Nation from among them: but their devises proved
mischievous to themselves, that rebellious King himself being taken Prisoner,
not without the loss of many thousands of the Irish. The Welsh also soon
after brake out again, whose Prince Lewelin, (in revenge of those Welshmens
heads, which Hubert de Burgh had cruelly caused to An. 1231.
be stricken off in cold blood, and presented to the King,) had burnt certain
Churches and Gentlewomen in them; for which, at Math. Paris.
Oxford in the presence of the King, all the Nobility, and Clergy, he was
solemnly excommunicated; and the King there gathering a great Army, in person
went to repress the Welsh, though not without loss.

(29) Another Garboyle thereafter no less disturbed the whole land, the Math.
Paris.
Insolency of the Romans (who were charged to have wrought innumerable
confusions and infinite grieuances to the King, his Kingdom, Peers and
People) stirring up multitudes through the Land, by a common consent, to seek
by force to shake off the importable yoke of their oppressions. It was
alleged by these reformers, Idem ibid.
that they had under hand the Kings Letters Patents, the Lord Chief Justices
assent, the Bishop of Londons countenance, and the Shiriffes aid in sundry
Shires, whereby the armed troops took heart every where, violently to seize on
the Romans Corn, and their other wealth; which booties they employed to Rog.
de Wend. M. S.
good purposes, and for relief of the poor, the Romans the while hiding their
heads, for fear of loosing them. And though the King, on the Popes complaint
thereof, seemed to mislike the outrage, yet had the King himself no less
cause to be moved with the insolency of the Pope, then were his subjects of
those Popelings. For that very time the Sea of Canterbury being void, Ralph
Neuill Bishop of Norwich was elected by the Monks, and gladly approved by the
King, whose Mat. Paris.
most faithful Chancelour he was, an unshaken pillar of truth, doing right to
all without delays, especially to the poor, without declining to the right
hand or the left. But the Pope being told he was a Royalist, and one that would
join with the King and whole Kingdom (who now all strugled to shake off the
Popes servitude,) and would to the death stick to that law, and those
Appeals, which Stephen Langton solemnly before the Altar in Saint Paul's
Church urged against King John's submission to the Sea of Rome; his Election (as
being a person very dangerous) was presently pronounced void. Whereupon the
Monks choose a second, and him the Pope misliked, for being too old, and soft
spirited, then a third was elected, a man of eminent learning, a Student in the
University of Oxford, and him also the Antiquit. Brita^nica in vit. Edmunds
Pope rejected; never resting till they had chosen Edmund of Abington, a man
more pleasing to the Roman palate. But the King seeing the Great Emperor
Frederick, even this very time whiles he Mat. Paris. in Hen. 3.
was winning the Kingdom of Jerusalem from Infidels, so Turkishly in his
absence deposed from his own Empire by the Pope, upon a private spleen; no
marvel, if in this his unripe age, and distracted government, he feared to
draw on himself by any opposition, so merciless an enemy. So that for the
time these indignities were winked at in these parts: in France also by the
wisdom of Paul. Aemil.
Queen Blanch, and mediation of the Archbishop of Reims, and Philip Earl of
Bollein of one part, and the Earls of Three years truce with France. To.
Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. An. 1232. The memorable deiection of Earl Hubert.
Britain and Chester on the other, a three years cessation from mutual
hostilities was ratified by oath, between the French and English.

(30) Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent, Chief Iusticiar of England, having with
few rubbes hitherto, enjoyed the most inward love and favor as well of this
King, as of King John, seems now to have run the Stage of his best fortunes.
For the King (upon occasion of such inrodes and spoils, as the Prince Lewelin
continually made in the Marches of Wales) being advertised by Peter Bishop of
Winchester, and certain other of the Council, once for all to give an end to
those braues and insolences of the Welsh, complained; that he was not able,
in regard of his wants; saying, that his Treasurers told him, all the rents of
his Exchequor would do no more then scarce maintain apparel, household and
ordinary Almesdeedes. This was not unknown to the Bishop, and the rest of that
faction, who watched this opportunity of purpose to lift the Earl of Kent out
of favor: wherefore they boldly answered the King: that if he were poor he
might thank himself, who gave away to others such Honors, Custodies, and
Dignities, The causes of the Kings wants seen into.
as were vacant, alienating them from his estate; that he was only to be
called a King in name, rather then for any riches which he had; that his
Ancestors, magnificent Princes, abounding in all sorts of worldly glory, and
wealth, heaped to themselves inestimable treasures, out of no other means, but
the Rents and Profits of the Kingdom.

(31) The King stung with this just reprehension, began (by their
instructions) to call the Sheriffs of Shires, Baylifes, and other his Officers
to a strait account, for all such receites, as appertained to the Exchequor,
thrusting some out of their places, and wringing out of all their full Polyd.
Verg. lib (...). VVendouer. MS.
spunges, store of coin, till he satisfied himself both for the arrerages
and interest. Out of Ralph Briton Mat. Paris. Pol. Verg. l. (...).
Treasurer of his Chamber he screwzed a thousand pounds, and also put him from
his place, into which (by the Bishop of Winchesters suggestion, who now
predominated in Court) he substituted Peter de Oriuail a Wend. MS.
Poictouine, the Bishops Mat. Paris.
Nephew or Son, if Paris say true; and so, says he, the Kings coffers
otherwise empty and lean, were by these means stuffed again, though not to
their full surfeit. For these were but preparatiues to a farther scrutinie and
ransacke, intended against the Earl of Kent, whom (upon the Wendouer. MS.
Bishops suggestion) the King removed from the Mat. Paris.
Proto-Iustitiarishippe (or high office of his Chief Justice) and put in his
place Sir Stephen Segraue a Knight only in name. Then is a strict and captious
account demanded of the Earl of Kent, for all such things as he was in any
sort chargeable with; as, 1. For such receipts or debts, as were due to King
John, or to this King Henry himself: 2. For The principal cords in the
scourge prepared for the Earl of Kent.
the mean profits of such lands, as the King was seized of, from the day of
the death of the first great William, Earl of Pembroke, his Iustitiar and
Marshall, whither those lands were in England, Wales, Ireland, or Poictou: 3.
For such Liberties or free Customs which the King had in Forests, Warrens,
Counties and else where, and how they were kept or alienated. 4. For such
things as the King lost by Huberts negligence: 5. For the wrongs and damages
offered to the Roman, and Italian Clerks, and to the Popes Nuncios against the
Kings will by authority of Hubert, who would take no order to correct the
misdoers, as by virtue and nature of his place he was obliged: 6. For the many
escuages coming by Carrucages, gifts and presents, or for the rents of
Custodies belonging to the Crown.

(32) To all which heads, the Earl answered, that he had the Charter of the
Kings Father, by The Earl of Kents defense disallowed.
which he was freed from giving any account either for things passed, or to
come, and that he had given such proof of his fidelity unto King John, as he
would not endure to hear him make an account. Peter Bishop of Winchester
replied hereunto, that such a Charter after the death of King John had no
force, and therefore the Fathers Charter, and grant of Privilege, was no
reason why he should not stand accountant to the Son. This defense for money
dangers in this sort trauersed or avoided, they labored to draw Articles or
calumniations of treason objected.
him in for his head, by charging him with sundry Articles sounding
treasonable; as, 1. That Hubert had dissuaded the Duke of Austria from matching
his Daughter with the King who sought it; 2. that he had hindered the King from
entering upon foreign lands to him belonging, whereby the King, Peers, and
People consumed their Treasures vainly: 3. that he had enticed the Daughter
of the King of Scots (whom King John had entrusted to his custody, meaning
himself to marry her) and traitorously defiled the noble young Lady, whom he
married in hope to be King of Scotland in her right, if she suruiued her
Brother: 4. that he had stolen out of his Iewel-house a precious stone of
wonderful value, A precious stone to make a man invincible, if you l^st
believe it.
whose virtue was to make him who had it, invincible in Battle, and that he
gave that stone to Lewelin prince of Wales, the Kings enemy: 5. that he by his
letters had caused Lewelin to hang William de Breuse.

(33) The Earl much preplexed with these accusations (whither true or false)
could hardly obtain a short respite to make his answer: Thus; that The Earl
takes Sanctuary:
Hubert (say Wendouer. Mat. Paris.
the Monks) who for love of the King, and defense of the Kingdom, had
provoked the hatred of all the great Lords, now being forsaken of the King, is
left sole and solitary, without friends or comfort. Only Luke Archbishop of
Dublin, never fosooke him, but with prayers and tears besought the King on his
behalf, but could not be heard against so great opposites, on so great
pretenses. When the cry was thus up, and that the world saw it was no
superficial displeasure, into which the Earl was fallen with the mutable King,
there rise forth many accusations (sauouring of much malignity) round about,
upon hope to oppress and bury Hubert under them Other malicious Articles
objected.
for ever; as, 1. that he had poisoned the two noble Earls of Salisbury and
Pembroke; 2. that he had also procured Falcasius de Brent, and Richard
Archbishop of Canterbury to be made away; 3. that by Sorceries and
Enchantments, he had drawn the King to favor him above all other; 4. that in
the victory gotten against the French by Sea, he forceably took many
Prisoners from the Kings Sailers, and made his benefit of their ransoms,
contrary to right, and that he had spoiled and disinherited many; 5. that he
had without trial unjustly put to death Constantine, for which excess the
Citizens of London The hanging of Constantine objected.
required justice against the said Hubert. The King hereupon makes Proclamation
through the City, that all such as could charge Hubert with any wrong; should
repair to Court, and there receive immediate redress. This strange course of
proceeding did so appale and terrify the Earl, that he forthwith fled to the
Priorie Church of Merton in Surrey, where among the Chanons, he sheltered his
head The Earl of Kent takes Sanctuary.
for a time.

(34) The King with his Prelates and Peers meeting at Lambeth, at the On
Holyrood day, 14. Sept.
day appointed for Huberts answer, he (being made to believe that the King
would put him to a most soul death) durst not appear, or peep forth of his
sacred refuge. The Londoners were assembled in Arms (by the Kings command)
to the number of about twenty thousand under banners displayed to dragge the
Earl out of Sanctuary: but upon the Earl of Chesters wiser Counsel, the prey
was taken out of the hands of a bloody multitude (who mortally hated him for
Constantines death) and they returned again to their City. The Archbishop of
Dublin still performing the office of a true friend, ouerslips not this
occasion, and by his importunity obtained day for Hubert, till about
Twelfe-tide then next ensuing, and the King for his assurance, during the
Interim, gives him letters Patents. Hubert thinking himself secure for the
present, is now upon his way toward his wife at the Abbey of Saint Edmund in
Suffolk, but his enemies so prevailed by their suggestions, that Sir Godfrey
de Crancumb Knight, with three hundred armed men, was sent to apprehend the
Earl in Essex. He having intelligence of their approach, fled into a
Chapel at Fab. Cone. MS.
Brentwood, The Earl again takes Sanctuary.
which adjoined to his lodging; from whence those rough Soldiers haled him
(he holding in one Rog. Wend. M. S. Mat. Paris.
hand a Crucifix, and in the other the Sacrament) and sent for a Smith to make
for him shackels of iron. But when the Smith understood, that it was for Hubert
de Burgh Earl of Kent, he refused, uttering such words (if Matthew Paris do
not Poetize) The honest and noble mind of a poor Artificer.
as did well show that honorable thoughts are sometimes found in the hearts of
men, whose fortunes are far from honor; for having first drawn a deep
sigh, he said; Addit^ M. Par. ad VVendou.
Do with me what ye please, and God have mercy on my soul; but as sure as
the Lord lives, I will never makeyron shackles for him, but will rather die the
worst death that is. For is not this A pithy speech of that Artificer.
that most loyal and courageous Hubert, who so often has preserved England
from being destroyed by strangers, and restored England to England? He who
faithfully and constantly served his Sovereign Lord King John in Gascoigne,
Normandy, and else where, that he was compelled to eat the flesh of horses,
whose high courage even Enemies admired? he, that so long defended Dover
Castle, the Key of England, against all the exquisite sieges of the French, and
by vanquishing them at Sea, brought safety to the Kingdom? What need I
rehearse his excellent doings at Lincoln and Bedford? Let God be judge between
him and you, for using him so unjustly and inhumanely, repaying good with
evil, nay, requiting his most excellent deserts with the worst recompense that
can be. But Sir Godfrey, and his black band regarded not such speeches, but
otherwise binding the Earl hard, they set him on horseback, and so conuayed
him to the Tower of London.

(35) This breach of Sanctuary being made known to Roger Bishop of London
(whose Diocese it was) he confidently tells the King, that if the Earl were
not restored to the Chapel, he would excommunicate all the Authors of that
outrage. The Earl is accordingly restored: but the Sheriffs of Essex and
Hertford, at the Kings commandment, The Earl restored to the Sanctuary from
whence he was taken.
with the powers of their counties besiege the Chapel so long, that at last
(they having cast a Trench about it that none might go in or out) the Earl
was compelled to come forth and render himself, bearing all things with an
equal mind, as* one that had a clear conscience before God, which he
professed to have. While the Chapel was thus beset round, *To. Wend. M. S.
Mat. Paris.
the Kings indignation was so violent, that he forbad all men once to make
mention of Hubert in his hearing. No marvel then if it be said, that the
Princes indignation is death. The Archbishop of Dublin nevertheless was not
dejected, but with The Archbishop of Dublin a faithful friend to Hubers.
prayers and tears besought the King, who remained as yet inexorable, Huberts
enemies possessing his soul and senses. Hubert therefore is again imprisoned
in the Tower. There was no sacrifice as it The Earls treasure delivered to the
King.
seems could appease the Kings i^e, but that of the Earls Hoord of gold, and
other riches, which the Knights Templars had in their custody upon trust, and
without Huberts consent refused to deliver. Hubert therefore willingly yields;
which when the Depositaries did give up, the value seemed incredible. This
hoording perhaps was Huberts crime, whereof being thus purged, he had hope to
recover out of these deadly pangs and conuulsions of fortune, and himself to
be made capable of curing. Well, the king obtains this precious booty, but his
enemies would have his blood also; saying, since he was convicted of theft and
fraud, it was meet he should die a most shameful death. It seems, they
thought, that the very finding of so much treasure was a conviction of fraud
in the getting, and that the King must be interpreted to have lost, whatsoever
the Earl had gained. But the displeasure of the King was mollified with this
golden balm, for he answered them thus; Hubert from his childhood has (as I
have heard) faithfully enough served my uncle King Richard, The King relenteth
toward the Earl, and will not take his life.
and my Father King John, and if he have done ill toward me, he shall never
therefore die an evil death. For I had rather be reputed a foolish or a
negligent King, then a cruel Tyrant, or a bloody man toward him, who has long
served me and mine ancestors; nor will I weigh more his evil deeds, which
are not as yet manifest, nor proved true, then all his good deeds, which are
plainly known to the Realm, and to us all. Hereupon Hubert had all such
lands granted unto him, as either King John had given, or himself had
purchased. There undertook for him to the King (as sureties) the Earls of
Cornwall, and Warrenn, Marshal and Ferrars, and himself was committed to the
In Wiltshire.
Castle of Devises, there to abide in free Prison, under the Custody of four
Knights, belonging each of them to one of these four Earls. This Court-storme
thus in part ouerblowne, let us take our standings, to view what other weather
followed, and what countenance of things in this Kingdom did next present it
self to the world.

(36) The King being naturally, as it seems, addicted to repose himself upon
some one man's counsel, was now wholly swayde by Peter de Rupibus An. 1233. An.
reg. 17.
Bishop of Winchester, who had therefore wrought the Earl out of grace, that
he might soly reign, and predominate in the gentle King. Which the better to
effect, the Bishop procures him to displace the Wend. MS.
English Officers, and in their rooms to surrogate Poictouines and Britons;
who coming over to the number of about two thousand, he stuffes his Castles
with them; and (in brief) did as it were wholly entrust himself, his
treasures, strengthes, and the Realm to them. So that Math. Paris ex Reg.
VVend. Iuditia commit^ (...), leges, ex legibus, pax discordantibus, instit^
(...).
Judgments were committed to the unjust, Laws to the Out-lawes, Peace to
Wranglers, and Justice to wrong-d^ers. Such as would have prayed redress for
these abuses, were interrupted, and put off by the Bishop of Winchester.
Among them who were removed from their places in Court, was one Sir William de
Redune a Knight, and Deputy Marshall to Richard Earl of Pembroke. This was to
the Earl very displeasant, which joined with The king by advancing strangers
discontents his Nobles.
a consideration of the public cause and danger, he associates unto him
certain of the great Lords (as was the fashion of those Lording times, upon
every discontent,) and in the Company of them aduanceth confidently to the
King, whom in the hearing of many he reproves; for that he had, through
sinister advise, called in the Poictouins, to the oppression of the Realm, of
his natural subjects, of their Laws and Liberties: humbly therefore he
beseeches him that he would spedily reform such abuses, which threatened the
imminent subversion both of the Crown and Kingdom: which if he did not,
himself and other Lords, would so long withdraw their attendance, as he
entertained Strangers. The Bishop hereunto makes answer; That the King might
well and lawfully call in what Strangers himself thought good, for the defense
of the Crown and Realm, and such, and so many of them, as might be able to
compel his proud and rebellious people to due obedience. When the Oracle would
The English Peers confederate against the strangers.
speak no otherwise, they departed from Court greatly discontented; firmly
promising one to the other, that in such a cause which did so touch them all,
they would like men stand together while any breath was in their bodies.

(37) Those who were now most potent about the King, nothing sorry for the
coffeehouse of so great a Peer as the Earl Marshall, but counting it a
part of their strengthes, to use the regal power toward the weakening of the
English, nourish in the King his auersion. The minds of men sufficiently
inclining of themselves, to doubt the worst upon such divisions, had their
fear increased by sundry prodigies of strange thunders and raines, but
especially of four read Parhelions (or resemblances of Five Suns in the
sky in April. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris.
the Sun) besides the Sun it self, (appearing about the parts of Hereford
and Worcester) from morning till night in the Skies: and indeed much trouble
immediately ensued as well in England as Wales, and Ireland. The Poictouins, and
other Strangers thus bearing the sway, so as the Kings person went guarded with
troops of such, the Earls and Barons being by the Kings command summoned to
another Parliament at Oxford, refused to come. While The Barons contemn the
kings Summons.
the King was there, one Paris calls him Bacum. The frank speech of a Preacher.
Robert Bacon, who used there to preach before the King and Prelates, freely
told him, that if he did not remove from him Peter Bishop of Winchester, and
Peter de Riuallis, he could never be in quiet. The King did hereupon a little
come to himself, and Roger Bacon a Clergyman also of a pleasant wit, did
second Roberts advise, telling the King that That is, Rocks and Stones.
Petra and Rupes were most dangerous things at sea, alluding to the Bishops
name, Petrus de Rupibus. The King therefore (as he had the happiness in his
mutability, to change for his more security) taking that good advise of
Scholars, which he would not of his Peers, summons a Parliament to be holden
at In July.
Westminster, giving the world to know withal, that his purpose was to amend
by their advise, whatsoever ought to be amended.

(38) But the Barons, considering that still there arrived sundry strangers,
men of war with Horse and Armor, and not trusting the Poictouine faith, The
Barons second contempt of the kings command.
came not, but presumed to send this traitorous message to the king, that if
out of hand he removed not Peter Bishop of Winchester, and the Poictouines out
of his Court, they all of them, by the common assent of the The traytero^
errand to the king.
kingdom, would drive him, and his wicked Counselors together out of it, and
consult about creating a new Sovereign. The king (whom his fathers example
made more timorous,) could easily have been drawn, to have redeemed the love
of his natural Liegemen, with the disgrace of a few strangers; but the
Bishop of Winchester and his friends infused more spirit into him. Whereon,
to all those whom he suspected, the King sets down a In August next.
day, within which they should deliver sufficient pledges to secure him of
their loialty. Against that day the Lords in great numbers make repair to
London, but the Earl Marshall (admonished of danger, by his sister the
Countess of Cornwall) flies back to Wales; and chiefly for want of his Rog.
de VVend. MS.
presence nothing was concluded. The King not long after is at Gloucester with an
Army, whither the Earl and his adherents required to come, refused; the King
therefore burns their Manors, and gives away their inheritances to the
Poictouines.

(39) This Rebellion had not many great names in it, but took strength rather
by weight then number: The Earl Marshal in Arms.
the known Actors were the Earl Marshal, the Lord Gilbert Basset, and many
other of the inferior Nobles. The Bishops Arts (...) ^luckt from him, the
Kings Brother, and the two Earls of Chester and Lincoln, (who dishonourably
sold their love Mat. Paris.
for a thousand Marks,) and otherwise, as it seemed, secured the rest:
nevertheless, these may well be thought, not to have borne any evil will to
their now forsaken confederate, the Earl Marshall, who took himself to
handle the common cause; certainly he handled his own safety but ill, as the
event shall demonstrate. The Earl hearing these Confederates himself with
Lewelin Prince of Wales.
things, contracts strict amity with Lewelin Prince of Wales; whose powers thus
knit together, by advantages of the Mountains, were able to counterpoize any
ordinary invasion. To the Kings aid, Baldwin de Gisnes with many Soldiers
came out of Flanders. The King now at Hereford in the midst of his Forces,
sends from thence (by Winchesters counsel) the Bishop of Saint David's, to
defy the Earl Marshall; how far soever this word defy extends it self,
sure it seems that the Earl hereupon understood himself discharged of that
obligation, by which he was tied unto the King, and freed to mak^ his defense.
The King notwithstanding after some small attempts, and better considerations,
did *Rog. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris.
promise and assume, that by advise of his Council all that was amiss should
(at a The Sunday after Michaelmas. Hubert de Burgo escapes into Wales.
day appointed) be rectified and amended. About which time, Hubert de Burgo,
having intelligence that the Bishop of Winchester (who was a Poictouine)
Thom. Westminster. Roger Wend. Mat. Paris.
plotted his death, escaped out of the Castle of Devises (where he was
prisoner) to a neighbor Church, but was haled from thence by the
Castle-Keepers. The Bishop of Sarisbury (in whose Diocese it happened) caused
him to be safe-restored to the same place, from whence by the Earl Marshall,
and a Ypod. Neust.
troop of armed men his friends, he was rescued and carried into Wales.

(40) The King, at the day and place appointed, holds his great Council or
conference with the Lords; but nothing followed for the peace of the Realm; it
was not an ordinary passage of speech, which happened there between the Lords,
and the Bishop of Winchester. For, when the English Bishops and Barons humbly
besought the King, for the honor of Almighty God to take into grace his
natural Subjects, whom (without any trial by their Peers) he called
Traitors: the Bishop (offended it seems, at Peers) takes the words out of
the Kings mouth, and answers; That there are not Peers in England, as in the
Realm of France, and that therefore the King of England, by such Iusticiars as
himself pleases to ordain, may banish offenders out of the Realm, and by
judicial process condemn them. The English Bishops relished his speech so
harshly, that with one voice they threatened to excommunicate and accurse by
name the Kings principal wicked Counselors; but Winchester appealed; then
they accursed all such as alienated the heart of the king from his natural
subjects, and all others that perturbed the peace of the Realm.

(41) The Earl Marshall, this while had by force resumed a Castle, which he
had a little before surrendered to the King, which stirred the King to gather
his forces at Gloucester, and thence to advance toward Wales. But the Earl had
politickly barred the Country of al Provisions, for man and beast, that the
King was feign to strike aside to Grosmont Castle; where the Earl, with his
Confederats and the D^ct Pow hist. Cambr p. 289.
power of Wales, so awaited their time, that assailing the Kings Camp
unawares, there were taken about five hundredth horse, with the Sumpters,
riches, and carriages of the Army; upon which loss (his men also greatly
scattered) the King leaving Viz. Ioh. de M^nmouth. Ralph. de Thorney.
two noble Gentlemen with the Poictouins, to make good the Marches against the
Welsh, returned more empty and inglorious then before. The Earl found them
work, whom the King had left behind; and (as he was a man of no less courage
then deep wit,) whereas Baldwin de Gisnes (the valiant Flemish knight) with
a thousand Horsemen, thought to have surprised him, who having but a tenth part
of that number, came to view the Castle of Monmouth; the Earl alone defended
himself against The Earls great courage and agility.
twelve of his enemies; and when his horse was cowardly slain by them, he
pitched one of them by the leg out of the Saddle, and leapt into it himself,
never giving ground till his Arruie came to the rescue, and obtained a fair
victory, with the slaughter and captiuation of many Poictouines and others.
His other exploits in and about Wales, were not few nor unfortunate; if it were
not only in this, (as what indeed could be more grievous or vnglorious to a
noble mind?) for that his Sovereign was upon the contrary side.

(42) The King about this time, to strengthen his life and State, with the
prayers of Beneficiaries, and other devoted affections, founded the Now the
Rolls in Chancery Lane, Stowes Suruay.
house of Conuerts, where such as forsook the Judicial Superstitions, had
provisions for maintenance under a sober rule and ruler; he also erected and
endowed a Saint John's Hospital by Magdalene College, the first stone whereof
was laid by the ^ing himself. Rossus Leolines opinion of K. Henry's
Almesdeedes. Mat. Paris, D. Powel. hist. Camb. page 292.
famous Hospital at Oxf^rd, both for the entertainment of Forrainers and
Pilgrims, (who thither much frequented,) and for relief also of such as were
diseased: So that Leoline Prince of Wales, (the Earls chief Confederate) when
he was threatened sore, if he would not live in quiet, did not speak more
magnificently of charity, then honorably of the King; I more fear (quoth he)
the Almesdeedes which the King does, then all the men of war which he has,
and the whole Clergy, put together.

(43) The Earl Marshall increasing in strength and hatred against such as were
the Kings reputed Seducers, makes spoil and booty on their possessions, An.
1234. An. reg. ^8.
and joining with the power of Leoline, puts all to fire and sword, as far as
Shrewsburie, part whereof they burnt to Ashes, and sacked the residue. The Rog.
VVend.
King then at Gloucester for want of sufficient Forces, departed thence (greatly
grieved) to Winchester, abandoning those other parts as it were to wast and
ruin. It therefore seems, that he was not The King gives way to the fury of
the rebellious.
grown stronger or richer, by the displacing of Hubert Earl of Kent, and the
rest, and by taking new into their rooms, who commonly bite and suck hard
till they have glutted themselves, (if at leastwise there be any satietie in
avarice) whereas the old officers, having provided in a sort for the maine
chance, have the less reason to be grievous.

(44) Therefore the Lions skin not being large enough for the Bishop of
Winchester, and his factious purposes, they piece them out with the Foxes case;
an inevitable stratageme is devised. The Earl Marshall had in Ireland all the
ample Patrimonies of his Grandfather, the famous Strangbow. To make that member
of his strengthes improfitable, if not also pernicious, they devise certain
letters directed to Maurice Fitzgerald (Deputy Justice of A practice to ruin
the Earl Marshal.
Ireland) and other principal men, who held of the Earl. In them they
signify, that Richard, once Marshall to the King of England, was for manifest
treason by the judgment of the Kings Court, banished the Realm, his Lands,
towns and Tenements consumed with fire; other his Hereditaments destroyed, and
himself The pestilent tenor of the letters.
for ever disinherited; that if upon his coming thither, they did take him
either alive or dead, the King did give them all the Earls lands there, which
now were forfeited by virtue of his Attainture; and for assurance that the said
gift should continue firm and good, they, by whose advise the King and
Kingdom were governed, faithfully undertook. To these letters (which the
Monks call bloody) they caused the King to set his Seal, as they themselves
also (being eleven) did theirs; upon receite of which lines, the parties
signify back under the seal of secrecy, that if the Contents of those
letters were confirmed by the Kings Letters Patents, they would perform that
which was desired. The Letters patents be made accordingly, and To. Wend. MS.
Mat. Paris.
having fraudulently gotten the Great Seal from Hugh Bishop of Chichester,
Lord Chancellor, who knew not thereof, they make them authentike with the
impression.

(45) The Kings mind therefore being still exulcerated toward the Earl
Marshall, he grievously charged Alexander Bishop of Chester, that he had
Alexander Bishop of Chichester clears himself from disloyalty.
too much familiarity with the Earl, affirming that they sought to thrust him
from his throne; the Bishop to clear himself from so heinous a scandal, puts
on his Episcopal habit, and solemnly pronounces all those accursed, who did
but imagine a wickedness of so foul a nature, against the Majesty or person
of the King: and thereupon by the intercession of other Prelates, he was
received into grace. The King was The English Bishops deal with the King about
redress of the common evils.
then at Westminster; where Edmund the Archbishop of Canterbury elect, with
other his Suffragan Bishops, bewailing the estate of the kingdom, present
themselves before him, telling him, as his loyal Liegemen, that the Counsel of
Peter Bishop of Winchester, and his Accomplices, which now he had, and used, was
not found nor safe, but cruel and perilous to himself and his Realm. First
for that they hated and despised the Objections against the Bishop of Winton
and the Poictouines.
English, calling them Traitors, turning the Kings heart from the love of his
people, and the hearts of the people from him; as in the Earl Marshall, whom
(being one of the worthiest men of the land) by sowing false tales they drove
into coffeehouse; 2. that by the Counsel of the same Peter, his Father King
John first lost the hearts of his people, then Normandy, then other lands; and
finally, wasted all his treasure, and almost England it self, and never after
had quiet; 3. that if the Subjects had now been handled according to Justice
and law, and not by their ungodly counsels, those present troubles had not
happened, but the Kings lands had remained undestroyed, his treasures
vnexhausted; 4. that the Kings Council is not the Council of Peace, but of
perturbation; because they who cannot rise by Peace, will raise themselves by
the trouble, and disinherison of others; 5. that they had the treasure,
Castles, Wardships, and strengthes of the Kingdom in their hands, which they
insolently abused to the great hazard of the whole estate, for that they, made
no conscience of an Oath, Law, Justice, or the Churches censures. Therefore we,
o King (said they) speak these things faithfully unto you; and in the presence
both of God and man, do counsel, beseech, and admonish you, to remove such a
Council from about you, and (as it is the usage in other Realms) govern
yours by the faithful and sworn Children thereof. The King in brief answered
hereunto, that he could not suddenly put off his Council, and therefore
prayed a short respite, till their accounts were audited. Meanwhile the
behauiours The outrages of the Marshalline faction.
of the Marshalline faction (having this backing at Court) grew more and more
intolerable: for while the King was at Huntingdon, the Lord Gilbert Basset and
others, set fire upon Alekmundbury, a Town belonging to Stephen de Segraue,
the flames whereof were seen of the owner, being then with the King at
Huntingdon. They also took prisoners upon the Welsh Marches, and according to
the Law of War (which, says one, is Quae exlex est. Math. Paris.
lawless) did put them to their ransomes.

(46) Nothing had hitherto preserved the King The King facile^ in taking and
leaving favorites.
more, then that he could, without great grief forgo any favorites, if he
were nearly pressed; the contrary quality whereof has been the cause of
final desolation to so many Princes. For albeit the choice of Counselors
ought to be free, yet by common intendment, they should be good; or howsoever
Of Princes Counselors and Favorites.
they are, or are not, it is madness to hazard a Crown, or leese the love of
an whole Nation, rather then to relinquish or diminish a particular dependant.
The rights of amity ought nevertheless to remain inviolable, but in such
distance, that the public be not perverted, nor interuerted for a private. The
King therefore, in this point not unfortunate, commanded Bishop Peter to
betake himself to his residence at Winton, without once meddling in affairs
of State; but against Peter Riuallis The king remoues the Bishop of Winchester
and others from his Council. England purged from Poictouines.
his Treasurer, he was so vehement, that he swear, he would pluck out his
eyes, were it not for reverence of holy Orders; commanding also their
Poictouines to depart the Realm, never to see his face more.

(47) Then are the Archbishop of Canterbury with the Bishops of Chester and
Rochester sent into Wales to pacify things there. But the invincible Earl
Marshall had now crossed the Seas into Ireland, to take revenge for the spoils
and disseisures, which his hired enemies had made in his lands there; by whose
plots, according to that secret agreement, he was finally taken, and died of a
wound given him in The Earl Marshal dies in Ireland.
the back, as he with admirable manhood defended himself. His Body was
buried in Kilkennie, (which pleasantly-situated Town our Sovereign, King
James erected into a City,) where himself in his life had appointed, in the
Oratorie of the Minorites: in which Town, as yet some small tokens of this
great name are remaining; for in the East window of the Abbey-Church of S. John
Baptist, and in the Abbey of S. Dominicke, the ancient Armories of Party per
pale, Or and vert, over all a Lion rampant, gules.
Marshal, Lord of Kilkenny, are yet extant. The Patrimony of this Earl was
shared by the Contractors according to the purport of the Letters patents: but
when the King heard of his death, he (to the wonder of all that were by) brake
forth into tears, bewailing The king laments the Earls death.
the loss of so brave a Knight, affirming that he had left no Peer behind him
in the Kingdom. A blessed King, says Paris; to love even those who had
offended him.

(48) The Archbishop of Canterbury with the Ann. 1235.
other Bishops, repaired to the King at Gloucester, upon their return from
Leoline Prince of Wales, who pretended he could not conclude, till the King
had received into grace such of the banished Nobility, with whom himself had
been confederated during the late displeasures. The King hereupon The king
calls home his rebels.
moved with Pity, sends forth his Proclamations, that all such as were
outlawed or proscribed, should be at Gloucester upon a certain day, there to
be received into the Kings favor again, and to have restitution of their
inheritances; but lest they might suspect any evil measure, it was ordered
that they should be in the Churches protection, and come under the
safe conduct of the Archbishop and the other Prelates. Thither at the time
and place limited does Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent (and lately chief Hubert
de Burgh is reconciled.
Iusticiar of England) repair; upon whom, by mediation of the Bishops, the
compassionate King looks graciously, receiving him in his Arms with the kiss
of peace; in like sort was the Lord Gilbert Basset, and all others of that
fellowshippe, received into favor, their several livings and rights fully
restored; and both Hubert and Basset admitted to be of his Council. And, that
nothing might be wanting to make the joy universal; Gilbert, Brother to the
late Earl Marshall, had the whole Earldome Gilbert brother to the late Earl
Marshal has his brothers lands and honors.
conferred upon him with all the lands and rights thereof wheresoever,
notwithstanding the foresaid treacherous conueyance; whom also the King made
Knight at Worcester, and delivered into his hands the Rod of the Marshalship,
according to the custom. Howbeit in all these points the King may seem but to
have temporized (as thereto driven by ouer-bearing inducements) or else greatly
afterward to have changed his judgment, because he openly at one time Math.
Paris. ad An. 1239.
called the said Richard a bloody Traitor, and caused this Gilbert to be
forcibly kept out of the Court upon a Christmas day.

(49) Upon this reconcilement the practice, by which the late great Marshall
was destroyed, and his possessions dismembered, came to light; the copy The
practice to destroy the late Earl Marshal openly read.
of the letters, which had been sent into Ireland, being by commandment of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, openly read in the presence of the King, the
Prelates, Earls and Barons. It moved tears in all of them; the King with an
Oath affirming that he knew not the contents of the said letters, though by
the urging of the Bishop of Winchester, Riuallis, Segraue, Passeleu, with
other of his Council, he had caused his Seal to be put unto them. At the
sound of Summons to make their several appearances, the Malefactors take
Sanctuary, the Bishop and Peter de Riuallis in Winchester Church, Segraue in
Leicester Abbey, Passeleu in the new Temple, and others otherwhere. In the end,
upon the intercession of Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, who piously
endeavored to extinguish all occasions of further dissension in the Kingdom,
and undertook they should have a lawful trial, the delinquents appeared at
Westminster before the King, who Rog. de Wend. M. S. Math. Paris.
sat in person with his Iusticiars upon the Bench. Peter de Riuallis was first
called (for the Bishop came not,) whom the King shot through with an angry
eye, saying; O thou Traitor, by thy wicked advise, I The king sits in
Westminster with the Judges on the Bench.
was drawn to set my Seal to these treacherous letters for the destruction of
the Earl Marshall, the Contents whereof were to me unknown; and by thine and
such like counsel, I banished my natural Subjects, and turned their minds and
hearts from me. By thy bad counsel, and thy Accomplices, I was moved to make
war upon them to my irreparable loss, and the dishonor of my Realm, in
which enterprise I wasted my treasure, and lost many worthy persons, together
with much of my royal respect. Therefore I exact of thee an account as well of
my treasure, as of the custodies of Wards, together with many other profits
and escheates belonging to my Crown. Peter denying none of the accusations,
but falling to the ground, thus besought him. My Sovereign Lord and King, I
have been nourished by you, and made rich in worldly substance, confound not
your own Creature, but at leastwise grant me a time of deliberation, The king
himself gives sentence on the Bench.
that I may render a competent reason for such points as I am charged with.
Thou shall (said the King) be carried to the Tower of London, there to
deliberate till I am satisfied. He was so, Stephen de Segraue, the Lord Chief
Justice (whom the King also called most wicked The Bishop of Winchester went
to Rome, for he was in Pope Gregory's Army, against the mutined Romans, say
both Wendouer and Paris, ad An. 1^35.
Traitor) had time till Michaelmas to make his accounts, at the Archbishops
and other Bishops humble entreaty; and for other matters, he shifted them off
from himself, by laying the blame upon such as were higher in place then he:
into whose office of Chief Justice, Hugh de Pateshull is advanced. The like
evasion Robert Paslew had, by leaving the fault upon Walter Bishop of
Carleil, who was above him in the Exchequer: and thus were these civil
enormities reformed, not without reducing store of Coin to the King.

(50) As those continual turmoiles, and plagues of the Sword, much afflicted
the land, so this was the third year, wherein God inflicted also for sin, the
plague of famine, whereby the poor did miserably perish, there being no
Samaritan to pay for their The divine virtue of charity actually commended by
God.
barbouring, or to anoint their wounds with the oil of consolation. Our
Authors, to make manifest, how odious the merciless heart is in the sight of
God, relate a story of that time with protestation, that they do it, left so
memorable an example should be in time forgotten. Certain Of Alboldes^ a
village in Cambridgeshire.
poor, while as yet the Corn was green, plucked the ears in the common
fields, to sustain their lives; whereupon the Owners call on the Priest, to
curse all such as had so done: but one in their company adjured A miraculous
conf^sion of hard heartedness toward poor Christians.
the Priest in the name of God to exempt his corn from the sentence, saying,
it pleased him well, that the poor driven with famine, had taken his corn,
and so commended that which they had left to God. The Priest, compelled by
importunity of the rest, was entered into the sentence, when by a terrible
interrupting tempest of thunder, lightning, wind, hail, and rain, all the
corne-fieldes about were desolated, as if they had been trodden down with
Horse and Carts; that no kind of beast or foul would feed upon the corn thus
laid. But (as say our Authors out of the Mat. 5. 7.
Scripture) seeing God has a care of the liberal.
they who are pitteous find mercy, that honest and compassionate hearted man,
found all his corn and grounds (though interlaced with theirs,) altogether
untouched and vnharmd. Whereupon (say they) it is more clear then any light,
that as glory to God on high is sung of Angels, so there is peace on Earth to
men who are of goodwill. This dearth was in An. 1235. An. reg. 19.
France and Gascoigne as well as in England. A Jewish impiety may well be
annexed to want of Christian Charity. There were brought before the King at
Westminster seven Jews, who circumcised a Child, and purposed in contempt of
The Jews conspire to crucify a child.
Christ and Christianity) to have crucified him in Easter at Norwich.

(51) These now calmer times, were made more happy, by the marriage of the
Emperor Frederick The Emperor marries the kings sister.
with the Lady Isabel, the King of Englands sister, a beauteous young Lady
about twenty years of age. The messengers arrived in March with the Emperors
letters, closed under a Seal of gold; and there were sent to conduct her over,
the Archbishop of Colein, and the Duke of Louain. The King brought her to
Sandwich with about three thousand horse in his train; and being imperially
furnished with all worldly abundance, she took shipping in May, and in one
days and one nights space arrived at Antwerpe, a City of the Empire, and was
every where most magnificently entertained; her sweet humility, and excellent
beauty, drawing The magnificence of the Nuptials.
all to love and honor her. At the solemnity of her At Worms in August.
marriage were present three Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat. Paris.
Kings, eleven Dukes, thirty Marquesses and Earls, besides the number of great
Prelates. On whether superstition, or observation, of the Emperor is noted at
this marriage, that he forbear the Empresses company, till a certain hour,
which his VVisards or Astrologers Marriage consu^mated by calculation of the
Stars.
had assigned, and in the morning he caused her to be carefully tended as a
woman with child, and sent word to his brother the King of England, that he
should have a son, so skillful or confident he was; and God did favor his
judgment, for it proved so. This Imperial affinity gave a Rog Wendouer in
hist. MS. in Biblioth D. Roberti Cotton. Baronetti.
worthy Historian occasion here to display and emblazon the Majesty and glory
of the English Princes; but amongst them all, none were higher advanced then
the Children of King John, one of whose sons was now a K. Henry 3 of
King, the other afterward chosen to be an Richard king of the Romans.
Emperor, and one of his daughters a Joan Queen of Scots.
Queen, this other (here mentioned) an Isabel.
Empress. And here does VVendouer end his history, to whom we have hitherto
been beholding for his labors, sorry we can enjoy his good company no longer.

(52) There were spread through England about this time certain Roman Usurers
called Quasi Capientes vrsi, devouring Bears, quoth Paris.
Caurfini, who had entangled the King himself, most of the great men, and all
others as had to deal with the Court of Rome, in their cunning snares. Their
first entrance into England was some few years past, when the Pope requiring
the Mat. Parid.
tenth of all moveable goods in England, Ireland and Wales, toward his wars
against the Emperor Frederick, sent Stephen his Nunce hither to collect it,
Idem ad An. 1227
who brought with him that race of deuouring-Monsters under humane shape,
called the Ibidem.
Popes Merchants, under color of Richard late Earl Marshall) to commit that
Math Paris (...) seth this word.
assassinate upon him. This execrable wretch having been a Courtier, and one
of the Kings Polyd. Virg. lib. 16. Armiger quidam literatus, says Part, but
page 566 ^hesame M. Paris a^th his name was Clement, and a Clerk.
Knights, supposing to have found the King in his own retiring Bed, had about
midnight gotten in at the Chamber window; but God (in whose special protection,
the lives of Princes are) disappointed him, for the King was elsewhere in bed
with his Queen. Nevertheless he gave not over, but with naked knife in hand,
sought up and down in some other Chambers. One of the Queens Margaret Biset.
gentlewomen (sitting late and very devoutly at her book by candlelight,) at
sight of the furious villain, with her shriking noise wakened the Kings
servants, who starting out of their Bed, laid hands upon him; and afterward The
Traitor drawn in sunder with horses.
he was drawn in pieces with horses at Couentree. And worthily: for (as
Holinsh. p. 123.
a vulgar Chronicler hereupon says truly,) in wounding and killing a Prince,
the Traitor is guilty of homicide, of parricide, of Because Kings are anointed.
Christi^ide, nay of Because in holy Scriptures they are called Gods.
Deicide. William de Marisco, who was said to be the instigator of this
Treason, knowing his danger, became a Pyrate and fortified the Isle of Lundey
in Seuern, where he did much mischief, the situation of that little Island
being Mat Paris. ^d A. D. 1242.
inexpugnable. At length he was surprised therein, and sixteen of his
Accomplices, who all of them after conviction were put to death at London.
William to the last gasp denying his priuity to the former treasonous attempt
of killing the King. About the time of the Kings danger at Woodstocke, the
Legate was in very little better case at Oxford, where being at first
honorably by the University Paris.
entertained in Ousney Abbey, the pride of his Romans there proved so
intolerable, that a troop of the younger Students, provoked therewith to arm
themselves, not only slew the Legates own brother, but would have done the
like with the Legate himself, whom they termed an Usurer, Symonist, Rentraker,
Idem.
Money-thirster, peruerter of the King, subuerter of the Kingdom, enriching
strangers with spoils of the English; but he lurking in the Belfrey, at
midnight escaped over the river (not without danger of drowning) and fled to
the King for his protection. For which outrage, the King sending the Earl of
Warren with an armed band, In Walling ford Castle.
imprisoned about 30. of the offenders, and the Legate interdicted the
University, till all the Bishops of England (purposely 16 Iunij. Lo^ini. Paris.
meeting in a Synod) pleaded for the University, as being the second of
Christendom: to whose importunity the proud Legate would not condescend,
unless all the Bishops would yield to go on foot with the Students from
Paul's Church to the Legates house, (which was about a mile,) who there
vngowned and unshod, should humbly crave absolution; which accordingly they
performed.

(60) The Legate was (not long after) called home by the Pope, Mat. Paris.
upon notice of the scandal daily Ann. 1239.
given in England, by the insatiable avarice of the Romans: but by the earnest
workings of the King, who feared lest his great ones would rise against him,
he was detained as a necessary evil to establish the good of Peace. For it
was in a manner taken up for a fashion among the Lords, to glorify themselves
with the senseless multitude, by seditiously disparaging and taxing the Kings
discretion and government, being far too gentle and amiable for spirits so
perverse and insolent; which might well force his loving nature, to seek
kindness and advise among strangers, seeing he could not have it for any his
deserts among the homeborne. Great faults in the Lords toward the King.
A great reason why (perhaps) he did some few things rashly and passionately
enough: it being a thing forceable to distemper a very wise man, to have so
many imperious censors to observe his actions, and few to humble their
abilities to obsequious services, all bearing themselves rather like Tutors or
Controllers, then like Subjects or Counselors. About which time, one William
an ordinary Calumniator, and accuser of great men to the King, was for that
impious practice condemned to die; though he sought to piece out his days by
the help of new appeachments and false criminations; but that being
discovered, he Worthy justice done upon a Court-Rat or Promoter.
was hanged upon a Gibbet in London. Now also the King began to smell out the
indirect and false dealing of his beloved Legate, whose familiar friend (Peter
Saracen) being taken Captive by the Emperor, and to pay 10000 l. Sterling for
his Math. Paris.
ransom; the shameless Legate counseled the king to bind himself and his
Crown for that payment. Whereby the King perceiving what toiles were laid to
entrap him, (the Romans not caring what loss happened to the Kingdom, so
they might be gainers) (wore in great rage, that it repented him he had ever
admitted the Legate into the land, to dissipate the wealth thereof. But the
Bishops of the land meeting in Council at London, to redress the
oppressions of the English Church, told the Legate flatly, that the Romans
importunity had so long exhausted their Church-goods, that they would no longer
endure it. These English repentances seem somewhat too late; but that
providence which the King of Scotland soon after used, was, as more
tempestiue, so more commendable, when meeting the same Legate (for now into
Scotland he is going to gather coin) he denied him entrance into his Kingdom,
telling him, he was the first Legate which ever entered that Kingdom; yet by
entreaty to save the Legates credit, he was permitted; first making a
declaration, that his entrance should never go for a President of any after;
whereto the Legate should put his Seal at his departure; but having gotten
what he came for, he suddenly stole away without leave of the King, and
carried his writing with him. By all which vile and indigne vsages, a man might
think the Church of Rome did purposely strive to draw the hatred of all
nations against her; especially, since (as we showed) the Greeks were fallen
from the Roman union, so now the Church of Antioch had both excommunicated the
Pope, the Church and Court of Rome, and challenged Allegations for Antioches
Primacy above Rome.
the Primacie above the Pope and the Roman Church, as being an ancienter See,
wherein S. Peter first sat Bishop for seven years; and more excellent and
dear, since there Peter lived with love and reverence, whereas both he and
Saint Paul were continually persecuted in Rome; which Church was now also
defiled with Simonie, Usury, Avarice, and other heinous offenses.

(61) But (doubtless) it was worthy of reproof in the King; that after so
manifold trials of faith and constancy in Hubert Earl of Kent, he should
Hubert Earl of Kent tossed with a new Courtstorme.
now again afflict his honorable old age with reuiuall of accusations, when
he rather ought to have tendered him as a Father. Among other the Articles
(engines of vexation) which the King bent against him, these were 3. new ones,
by which any reasonable man may take a scantling of the rest. 1 That Hubert had
taken the money out of the barrels which were sent for the relief of Rochel
and Poictou, and Strabo.
stuffed them with sand. 2. That to dissuade a great Lady from marriage with
the King, he had said the King A strange description of a king.
was a squint-eyd fool, a lewd man, and a kind of leper, deceitful, perjured,
more faint-hearted then a woman, only terrible to his own friends; and utterly
unfit for any fair or noble Ladies company. 3. That at Wodstocke, when the
King was alone, he rusht in with a naked knife to murder him: Which and many
other accusations the Earl did modestly and clearly refute. But with the last
(being most wicked of all) he was so grieved, that making low obeisance to the
King, he could not forbear to say, that he was never traitor to his father,
nor to him, which by Gods grace did well appear in the King: as if he should
have said, (quoth Paris) That if the Earl would have been a Traitor, the King
had never obtained the Crown. This seems to have been a public trial, upon
a Suit or Action of trespass, brought against the Earl by the King in the
Kings Bench, at which trial the King himself was also present. But howsoever
the Earl answered, he was condemned to give to the King Ypod. Neust.
four his Mat. Paris.
dearest Castles, Blanch Castle, Grosmount in Wales, Skenefrith and Hafeld; and
then also (as it seems) he was Cambden Brit. in Kent. this man died An. D.
1243.
deprived of his Title of Earl.

(62) After so many mischiefs patiently brooked, at last the King upon receipt
of letters from An. 1240.
the Emperor (whom as his brother in law, he was loath to offend,) commanded
Otho the Popes Legate, in regard of the great enmities between the Pope and
Emperor, to depart out of England. England a most Christian Country.
There was also strait commandment given to the Italian Usurers, to leave the
most Mund^ssimam terram. Paris.
pure earth of his Realm (meaning that his own people was most innocent and
free from such a sin,) but (says Paris.
one, who durst write any thing he thought) by giving the King money, which is
too much used to justify the wicked, they for a great part remained still, as
loath to forsake such fat pastures. And the Legate himself also stayed so long,
till the Pope by wily inducements and Imperatoris liter^ apud Paris.
forged calumniations had drawn the King, both to relinquish the Emperor his
brother in law, and to suffer the Papal Excommunication to pass here against
him, and money also to be gathered to his impeachment. A brief taste of all
the Popes proceedings against this glorious Emperor, we may take from the
Nobility of France, who An. 1241.
(when the Pope offered the Empire unto Robert the French Kings brother) in
their grand Council refused to accept it, charging the Pope with the Spirit of
audacious rashness, for deposing the Emperor, not convicted of any fault, and
whom a General Council only ought to censure, not the Pope, to whom no
credit ought to be given, being his Capital Enemy. For that themselves knew he
was a virtuous and victorious Emperor, and one who had in him more religion
then the Pope had Our Legate Ottho (who now at length is gone) was no sooner
departed, but Peter of Sauoy the Queens Uncle arrived, to who^ the King gave
the Earldome of Richmo^d, and entertained otherwise most magnificently. This
and the like largess to strangers, drew on the King much evil will, who also
in favor of his Queen, procured her Uncle Bonifacius to be chosen Archbishop
of Canterbury in place of Edmund a Saint, thoughdying an Exile in detestation
of the Popes oppressions.
Edmunde, who weary of his life in England, by reason that he could not
redress the Popes detestable exactions and oppressions, made choice of a
voluntary Exile at Pountney in France, where he died with the honor and
opinion of a Saint.

(63) The Kings imploiments hitherto have (almost wholly) been taken up either
in the impatiencie An. 1242. A reg 26. The King goes to recover Poictou.
of civil disturbations, or in the too-patient sufferance of some foreign
greeuances, nourished within his Kingdom; which gave him perhaps little
leisure, mind, or means, to pursue any transmarine design. But now better
provided with money, then with men, (and yet not sufficiently with money) he
takes ship immediately after Easter toward Poictou, where the Earl of March
(now husband to Queen Isabell his mother) expected his arrival. He committed
the Government of the Realm in his absence to the Archbishop of York.
Thirty Hogsheads or Cadum.
Barrels fraught with sterling money were shipped for that service. There also
went with him Richard Earl of Cornwall, (who was returned with much honor out
of the Holyland not long before) and seven other Earls with about three
hundredth Knights, besides other soldiers. To resist the English, the King of
France (who The French Kings preparations to resist.
had given Poictou to his brother Alfonse) assembled an Army royal of four
thousand men of Arms, excellently well appointed, and about twenty thousand
choice Soldiers; with a thousand Carts to carry their other necessaries. King
Henry understanding that the King of France lay before Frontenay, (a Castle
belonging to the Earl of March,) seeking to force it by assaults, sent a
messenger of defiance to him as a breaker of Truce. Lewis a most just and
valiant Prince, denied that ever he brake the truce, but that the King of
England by ma^ntenance of his Rebe^s, did rather seem to i^ringe the Peace.
Nevertheless he offered (so as the English would not protect his enemies the
Earl of March and others) to give him Poictou, and a great part of Normandy,
in satisfaction of his Vide s^pra at his de^ing from England.
Fathers Oath, and moreover, to enlarge the last truce with a longer term of
years. These so honorable, safe, and profitable conditions, by the practice
of the Poictouines (who feared the French Kings indignation would prove too
heavy for them to bear, if the English abandoned their cause) were
unfortunately refused.

(64) When the French King heard hereof, it repented him that he had humbled
himself so far; telling his Lords, that he neither feared his Cosen of
England, nor all his forces, but only that Oath, A most Christian fear of the
Christian King.
(for restoring of the lands in France) which his father made when he was in
England. This scruple did so trouble the Kings mind, on the behalf of his dead
Father, that he would admit no comfort till one of his Lords told him, that
the King of England, by putting Constantine Fitz-Arnold to death, for having
spoken some words in honor of King Lewis (his Father) had first broken the
truce. This satisfied the French. That whole business is thus concluded by Io.
Tili. Chron.
Tilius; Hugh Earl of March overcome with the pride and persuasions of his
wife ^sabel, would not do homage to Alfonse the French Kings brother: for she
was a cause to draw the English thither, where things thriuing on his part but
meanly, Hugh is constrained in the end to do both homage and fealty unto
Alfonse. This only must be added, that he did unfaithfully provide for his
private safety without the knowledge of the King of England, at such time as he
Math. Paris.
pretended otherwise.

(65) This treachery lost the King all Poictou, for whereas he principally
took care for money, Isabel Queen D^ger forgeth writings to draw her son
the King into France Mat. Par. p. 570
presuming upon the Earl for men, when it came to the point, the Earl was not
only not provided, but swear by the throat of God, he never promised any such
matter, and denied he had set his Seal to any writing concerning such
promises, and that if any such sealed writing were (as the King and his brother
the Earl of Cornwall affirmed) their mother his wife had forged it. They were
now in sight of the French Host before Tailbourg in Xainctoing when this
improuident expostulation was made. The King of England manifestly seeing his
peril, and having by his brother Earl Richards mediation (whom many of the
French did greatly honor because he had by composition Poictou lost by the
Eng^sh.
been a mean at his arrival to free them from the Saracens in the holy land,)
raised his camp by night, and retreated with much more have then good speed.
Not long after this, the fair City of Xainctes in Xainctoing, upon
displeasure conceived by the Citizens against the King, because he had given
the same to the Lord Hugh his halfe-brother (son to the Earl of March) first
contrived a perfidious Xaincts also and Xainctoing
revolt so closely, that if first the said Lord Hugh, and then Guy de Lusinian
his elder brother, had not in good time signified the danger, the King and all
the English had been surprised by the French. There was none (among all the
mutable Poictouins) found respective of honor and loyalty, but only one
called Hertold, Captain of the famous Castle of Mirabell, who in great sorrow
repaired to the King of England, praying counsel and assistance, where the
King with a downecast look gave him this answer: Thou do see (o Hertold)
that my forces are scarce sufficient to defend my self. Our Lord and The
French Earl of March compared by the King to Judas. Hertold an example of
loyalty.
Savior was betrayed by his Disciple Judas, and therefore who shall be safe?
Behold the Earl of March, whom I took and reverenced as my Father, has given
a pernicious president. I have trusted in a staff of reed, and the splinters
thereof have wounded my hand. Thou art the only man who have behaved thy self
honestly: whatsoever therefore thou do tossesse of mine by any just title,
take it to thee as thine own, I give it thee: Provide other-

want could make him forget his magnificence, and bounty, he caused the
East-part of the great Church at Westminster to be taken down, and by advise
of expert Workmen newly to be builded and joined to the West. The effect of
the Kings expedition into Wales was, that after he had The effect of the kings
iourny into Wales.
fortified the Castle of Gannocke in North Wales, upon the passage into
Anglesey, and by the Irishmen wasted that fertile Island, he was himself
enforced by sharpness of the weather, and for want of victuals to return
about the end of October, having taken all courses he could to sterue the
Welsh, forbidding the Irish upon pain of death to bring any relief into Wales;
and left that they of Cheshire, or the neighbor parts should give them any
succor, he so spoiled them of all their provisions, that they were scarce
able to feed themselves; and if the Welsh compelled by famine ventred out of
their strengthes or fastnesses, in or about Snowdon, the Garrison Soldiers of
Gannocke were ready to intercept and kill them; and on the other side the Lords
of Brumfield and Powys, though Welshmen, Hist. Camb.
held with the King, so that they were miserably straightened. The King pawnd his
Jewels to his brother Richard at this journey for 3000. Marks, which help to
piece out the charge thereof. Paris has a long list of great names, which
dying about this time, left neither name, nor issue to preserve the memory of
their Greatness; but none so strange as of the Marshals, five brethren of them
successively Earls of Pembroke, and all dying issulesse; which he attributes
to the judgment A judgment of God on a withholder of church lands.
of God, for the iniquity of their Father, and of themselves, who would never
restore certain Manours, which their Father in warre-time had taken in Ireland
from the Bishop of Ferus, an holy Irish man, who often required restitution,
and for want thereof, did put them under Gods curse and his. Gyr^ld. Cambren.
One does indeed observe, that the Irish Saints are vindicatiue; but certainly
the examples of punishments for Sacrilege, and violent extortions are terrible
in holy Scripture; and most fearful was the sentence it self which Gods
Prophet pronounced against Ahab for 3. Reg. cap. 1. verse. 21.
Naboths vineyard; agreeing with the very plague which this year fell upon the
house of Marshall.

(72) The Popes fury was now so much inflamed against King Henry and the
English, for so disgracing An. 1246. A. reg. 30.
him publicly in the General Council, Mat. Paris.
that he used lofry threats, if once the Emperor were quelled, to tame
England also; and whetted on the French King, to enter on the land, promising
him all the helps of the Church and Papal power. But the just King, not The
French King rejects the Popes motion as unchristian.
only refused so unjust an offer, (as having no title to England, themselves
also knit by kindred, and by truce, their Queens being sisters, the attempt
bloody for Christians, etc.) but further ratified the former truce, and
enlarged it with the addition of more years, because King Lewis was prepared to
make war against the Infidels, which voyage King Henry would not hinder, but
advance. And that nothing might disturb the peaceful life, with which the
King of England was most delighted, David Prince of Wales departed out of the
vale of the dying, (as Paris elegantly David Prince of Wales.
says) into the vale of the dead. The King seeing all things quiet and safe
about him, does now convert his whole cares to the reformation of the inward
maladies of his dominions, calling the estates of the land together for that
purpose. To whom he there delivered in writing, sundry Articuli super Gr^amin.
a pud Paris.
Articles of the greeuances and oppressions of his Kingdom and the Church. 1.
that the Pope extorts great Contributions of the Clergy, without the Kings
assent, against ^he rightes and liberties of the Kingdom. 2. that Patrons
cannot bestow Church livings on fit men; but the Pope gives them to his Romans,
who can speak no English, (^r celebrate divine service, nor preath, nor keep
hospitality, nor c^e for souls, etc.) but only beggar the Land with carrying
away the Coin. 3. that the Popes Provisions and Pensions are insufferable. 4.
that Englishmen are d^awne forth of the Land to end their causes. 5. that the
Pope by his non obstante overthrows Oaths, Customs, Charters, Graunts,
Statutes, Privileges, Rights, etc. whereupon, the King, Bishops, Nobles,
Abbots, and Priors, did all write See their several Letters in Paris.
their several complaints to the Pope, requiring speedy redress of those
infinite wrongs to the King, the Kingdom, the Clergy, the Nobles, and the
People, who would rather die, then thus daily endure those oppressions.
Notwithstanding sundry Prelates (either out of ambition or fear) underhand
furthered the Popes desires, when secretly he craved an annual tallage of the
Clergy for maintenance of his Soldiers; and that the State should take no
notice thereof, the Pope caused his Agents to make them Math. Paris.
swear not to reveal this their Contribution to any man living for the space
of half a year. Yet the King came to the knowledge thereof; and sent forth
his writs, forbidding under great penalty that the money should be carried
forth of the Land. This the Kings displeasure was much augmented upon the
return of his messengers from the Council of Lions, who related how proudly
the Pope rejected the just complaints of the State, saying, the King himself
did Frederize, and holding his People as Schismatics. Which incensed the King
to publish his Proclamation in Every City and Town, that none of his subjects
should dare to contribute any money to the Pope: but it came to no effect, for
that some (...) Episcoporum. Mat. West.
Popizing Bishops and ambitious Clerks (of his Council) fearing the Papal
threats, where no cause of fear was, drew him to leave his purpose womanly,
which he manfully undertook.

(73) The Bishop of Worcester (a principal worker herein) was said to Paris.
have had authority from the Pope to interdict the land, which perhaps was it
which the King so greatly feared, and which the Monk said, was not worth the
fearing. The Earl of Cornwall also with others (who favored not the Emperor
Fredericks cause) labored to change the Kings mind, so that the wonted
extortions were as current as ever; insomuch that a Johannes Anglicus.
Cardinal truly told the Pope, that England was to the Pope as Balaams Ass,
which being so often wronged, spurgalled, England the Popes Ass.
and cudgeld, it was no marvel, if at length she opened her mouth to
complain: and for themselves and their Roman Court, they were like Ismael,
Genes. 16. 12.
every man's hand against them, and theirs against every man. But if we should
so often insist on the relation of this Kingdoms Ann. 1247.
distresses, as the popes endless Corrasions from year to year, and the
States remediless complaints give us occasion, we should but cloy the Reader
with rufull matter, which Mat. VVes^. Math. Paris. Ioh. London, etc.
Monks themselves have mournefully and copiously endited unto us, and set forth
the too servile affections of our own Ancestors, who still entered new
consultations about the disease, but never brought the medicine unto a perfect
receipt. For upon fresh angariations from Rome, the King In Crasti^
Purificationis.
again assembles his State to think of redress, Ibidem.
the commonwealth, as well of Laity as Clergy, being brought to the point of
utter desolation, as the like was never heard in any age, whereof they again
made their lamentable complaint to the King, whose duty it was to protect the
land from such wrongs and dangers. Their only remedy was, again to write
letters to the Pope, which slender means he could as slightly put off; and
though (to stop the clamor for the present) he promised never to send any
Legates into England, but on entreaty of the State, yet daily did he send his
raking Clerks, with the power, though not the Title, and Ensigns of Legates,
both into England and Ireland, so to delude the King, and still purloine his
Subjects.

(74) The State of the Kingdom still requiring An. 1248. A. reg. 32.
reformation, there assembled again at London certain Prelates, Earls and
others, at the Kings commandment, where after so much purloyning by others,
now the Kings own errand and affairs was to get money for himself. But they
(who gave such way to the Popes collections) were now all close-handed, and
open mouthed; for, besides their undutiful vpbrayding the King with some
ouer-sights, The seditious Nobles exposlu* l^te their gree ^ances with the King
in stead of granting money.
they untruly and seditiously charged him to have done contrary to the example
of his magnificent Predecessors, in that his chief Justice, Chancellor and
Treasurer were of his own choosing, and not by the Common Council of the
Realm, as they ought. The King inwardly touched herewith, yet seeing no other
help, promises redress and change for the better. Whereunto they answered;
that they would expect a while with patience, and as the King shall carry
himself toward them, so will they perform their ^beysance to him. So the
meeting was adiourned from that Candlemas till Midsommer; at which time also
there was nothing done, but all parts rose disconte^ted. The cause of that
disco^tentment was, for that the King, instead of satisfying their audacious
demands, answered them, That they sought to bridle him at their surly
pleasures, proudly forbidding that in him, which was lawful for themselves.
For that every private man may use, what, and whose Counsel he list; every
master of a family prefer or remove what officers in his house he list;
which yet they sancily denied unto him, their Lord and Sovereign, as if
Servants and Vassals were to rule their Lords; whereas indeed he is no King but
a servant, who must bow at others beck. That therefore he would neither place
nor displace either Chancellor, Iusticiar, or Treasurer as they thought good.
Nevertheless he required money at their hands, to recover such foreign lands
as concerned as well them as him, to see it done. Hereupon the Parliament brake
up, and the King was left to furnish himself otherwise so well as he The king
driven to sell his Jewels and Plate to the Londoners.
could, even by sale of his Jewels, Plate and other precious stuff, after a
dishonorable manner.

(75) The affairs of Gascoign (which one Guasto A. D. 1249. An. reg. 33.
de Biard had greatly troubled) by the manhood and wit of Simon Earl of
Leicester were now brought Simon Earl of Le^cester returns with honor out of
Gascoign.
into better quiet, which made his presence (being returned, as it seems for
more supplies, which went again with him) very acceptable in the Court of
England. The King intending to furnish that enterprise afresh against the
coming spring time, left no means unthought of, which either by Art or strong
entreatie he could use, to replenish his exhausted Coffers. In which he embased
too much the Royal name and dignity, telling some (and perhaps truly) whose
bounty he craved, that it was more alms to aid him with money, then one that
went begging from door to door. Meanewhile the king neglects not his
administration of Justice; for, whereas the whole County of Hampshire swarmed
with felons and murtherous robbers, himself so ordered the Hampshire purged of
thieves by the King himself sitting in judgment.
matter, sitting in person in Winchester Castle, that the infamy and danger of
those places were cleared by hanging the Offenders; many of which were very
wealthy, and some the kings own servants. Walter de Clifford also (a Baron of
the Marches of Wales) for enforcing an officer (whom he had otherwise A. D.
1250. A. reg. 34.
handled badly) to eat the kings writ, wax and all, ran so far into the
kings displeasure thereby, Walter Clifford makes an officer eat the kings writ,
wax and all.
that while he lived, he was made the less able to feed himself; paying to
the king a very great sum of money, and hardly escaping without confiscation
of his whole patrimony. The king desirous to be friends with the Citizens of
London, to whom of late he had been ouer-hard, publicly reconciled himself
unto them, whom for that cause he had commanded to appear at Westminster, and
there immediately received the badge of the Cross at the hand of Boniface
Archbishop of Canterbury; but whatsoever his intention was, it never came into
action on his part. In the mean time contrary to his Forefathers example, he
so much abridged the expenses of his house, and his Alms, that he underwent
The king lesseneth the charge of his Household.
some dishonorable imputation. Nevertheless he wisely wound himself out of
many a Mercha^ts debt; whereto he wrung great helps from the Jews, (as the
ordinary Clippers and defacers of his Coin,) and the forgers of seals and
Charters; from one of whom he had at times drawn thirty Thirty thousand
marks wrung from one Jew in a few years.
thousand marks Sterling, besides two hundredth marks in gold.

(76) It seems an inseparable quality in his nature, to be extremely
violent, in doing whatsoever he had a mind to do, and that sometime without
the due respect to secular Majesty; as in the Course he took for advancing
his halfe-brother Aethelmare to the Bishopric of Winchester. For not
contenting himself to have sent his messengers to the Covent by them to work
the election, he came thither in person, where the Chapter being set in the
Cathedral Church, he entered, and placing himself in the Presidents seat,
makes to them The king prea^ cheth to the Covent.
a speech in the nature of a Sermon, taking for his Theme those words of David:
Justice and Peace kiss each other. Whereon he showed them, That, whereas
Justice belonged to him, and to such as had the rule of Nations, and to the
Clergy calmnesse and Peace, both these should that day kiss together, if they
elected his brother for their Bishop: For which he gave them many reasons, but
concluded, if they did otherwise, they should feel his Princely displeasure.
When therefore they published to the King their Choice, they did it with this
reservation (because Aethelmare was to remain under the title of the Elect of
Winchester, for that he was not a Priest) if such an election might stand by
law, or lawful favor. But the Pope, who meant to make his advantage hereof,
as well as the King, exacted of him for confirmation of the same election, five
hundredth Marks of Church revenues, to be passed over unto the Earl of
Burgundies son a child; which makes Paris.
the Monk to break forth into this bitter lamentation; O Pope, the Chief of
Fathers, why do thou suffer thus the Christian world to be defiled? worthily,
worthily, therefore art thou The pope was now fled from Rome for fear of the
Emperor.
driven out of thy own City and See, and like a runnagate and another Cham,
art enforced to wander up and down. o God, thou God of just revenge, when will thou drawforth thy sword to imbrue it in the blood of such oppressors? Though
in these universal abuses, the Pope would neither redress himself nor
others, yet God raised up a stout and learned Prelate, Robert Grostest, Bishop
of Lincoln, who undertook to reform the Monks and Friars; but they (who knew
R^e was from the beginning Liuie.
Asylum Latronum) appealed to the Pope. Whereupon the aged Bishop going to his
holiness, told him that all offenders escaped, by his opening his bosom to
such as brought him bribes; who snapping him up with angry Countenance and
speech, sent him home with reproach. The Pope was at this time at Lions, where
not long after the Counsel breaking up, Cardinal Huge made a Sermon of farewell
to the Citizens; wherein, amongst other benefits which the Popes lying in
their City had brought them, he told them this was a He calls i^ (...)
profitable Al^s. deed. Paris.
Principal, that whereas at their coming there were three or four
Whore-houses in the Lions, now at their departing they left but one, but indeed
that reached from the Eastgate of the City to the West. Whereby we see,
France had some part of the Popes Alms, as well as England.

(77) The King now wholly intent upon increase of treasure, neither gave any
rich presents according An. 1251. A strange description of the Kings par^mony
or poverty.
to the ancient Custom of England, and also shortneth yet more the allowances
of his Househould and entertainements, without any regard to Maicstie or rumor.
And to spare his own charge the rather, he inuites himself sometime to this
man, and sometime to that, but no where contenting himself with his diet and
hospitage, unless both he, his Queen (...) son Edward, yea and chief
favorites in Court, were presented with great and costly gifts, which they
took not as of Courtesy, but as due. This was the dishonorable face of the
Kings estate at that time. But in the depth of his wants and rigor of his
Parcimonie, he could not shut up himself against the suites and advancement of
his Poictouines and Pr^ncois, so that it was become a common murmur in England;
Our inheritance is converted to aliens, and our houses to strangers. The matter
seemed the more grievous, for that their pride and violence were intolerable.
About this time the clause Non obstante (brought in first by the Pope) was
taken up in England by the King, in his grants and other writings, as
Notwithstanding any former commandment.
Non obstante priore mandato, Non obstante Or former privilege.
antiqua liberate, etc. This our ancient Author calls an odious and detestable
clause: and Roger de Thurkeby Iustitiar, fetching a deep sigh at the sight
thereof, cried out both of the times and it, saying, Mat. Paris.
it was a stream derived from that sulphurous fountain of the Clergy.

(78) Another of the Kings Iusticiars, and a learned Knight, Sir Henry de Bath,
(whose Lady, because herself was well descended, filled him with pride,) was
so confidently greedy, the better to satisfy her ambition, that in one
circuit, he appropriated to himself above two hundredth pound lands.
Corruption in Justice (which must needs be suspected to be there, where
excessive wealth is gotten by the Officers of Justice) is but a sandy
groundwork of a vainely-hoped greatness, and may well be reputed in the
number of crying sins; and this moved a Knight, Sir Philip de Arci, to
appeach him Sir Philip Darey appeacheth Sir Henry Bath a bribing Judge of
treason.
before the King, both for unfaithfulness in his office, and treason against
the King. The King had no hold of himself, after he was once thoroughly
kindled. Bath knows it, and therefore writes to his wives friends to come
strong in his defense, that the King should not dare to call him to his trial;
yet withal he seeks all secret means how to appease the King; who
understanding of this combination, was the more enflamed. The Earl of Cornwall
his brother could not appease him; no, not though he knit up his intercessions
with these minatorie words; We must not forsake Gentlemen in their right, nor
in preserving the peace of the tottering Kingdom. In March there was holden a
Parliament The disorderly weak and violent carriage of trial^.
at London; there the King caused Bath to be sharply prosecuted. Thither Sir
Henry Bath repairs, strongly attended with Knights and Gentlemen of his own
friends, and his wives, to daunt the edge of Justice, which he deservedly
feared. The accusations were many, (for all me^ were called to say what they
could against him,) and among all, these two, most heinous: that he troubled
the whole Realm, and stirred all the Barons thereof against the King, so that
a general rebellion was to be feared, (which one of his fellow-Iusticiars did
openly testify:) that he had for reward discharged a convicted Malefactor out
of prison without punishment, in prejudice of the King, and to the peril of
his associate Iusticiars. The King was so enraged herewith, that seeing no
other way to punish him, being so strongly backed, he mounted into an higher
place then before, and cries out, Whosoever kills Henry de Bath shall be quit
of his death, and The King proscribe^ Sir Henry Bath.
I here do acquit him; and presently departs. Nevertheless, although he left
behind him many men, who would have readily executed the Kings terrible doom;
yet by the wisdom of Sir John Mansel, (one of the Kings private Counselors)
they were restrained. His words are worthy to be remembered; Gentlemen, an^
friends, it is not necessary for us Sir John Mansel stays the Kings servants
from killing Bath.
to put that presently in execution which the King has in his anger commanded.
It may be when his wrath is ouerblowne, he will be sorry he said it.
Moreover, if any outrage be done to Bath, lo here are his friends who will
take all sorts of revenge. Sir Henry escaping thus from so present a danger,
found means upon promise of Two thousand Marks.
money and great mediation of friends, to obtain his peace and safety; for at
thi^me, Justice and all things grew saleable. The North-East part of Wales was
committed to Alan de Zouch, who had it in Farm for eleven hundredth Marks
yearly, whereas John de Gray (whom he supplanted in the place) paid but five
hundredth: so Additam. ad Math. Paris. An. 1252.
miserable Wales was let out to such as would give most.

(79) Alexander the third, succeeding his Father in the Kingdom of Scotland,
coming in Christmas to York, there espoused, though very young, Alexander the
third King of Scots espouseth the Lady Margaret.
the Lady Margaret, daughter to King Henry. There were present the two Kings in
person, with a most choice multitude of either Nation, the English being in
number above a thousand Knights, beside greater States, as Prelates, Earls
and Barons, and of the Scots about six hundredth Knights and Gentlemen, all of
them well appointed. There was also two Queens, the Mother of the Bride, (who
was to be Queen) and the widow or Queen Dowager of Scotland, who for that
cause was returned out of France, attended upon in royal manner with many
Lords and Gentlemen of France. The Scots were lodged in one place of the City
by them selves. Upon Christmas day the King of England gave the order of
Knighthood to the King of Scots, and at the same time to twenty others richly
apparrelled. Upon the next day the princely couple were espoused. Take a
scantling of the cheer and multitude of guests by this. The Archbishop of
York, who was Prince (as it were) of the Northern Six hundredth Oxen spent at
one meal.
parts (and the common host of all that most noble fellowshippe, which cost him
about four thousand marks) gave toward that feast six hundredth fat oxen, all
which were spent in the first general service; and whatsoever the vain Mat.
Paris.
Stage Play of the world might afford either for pomp or delight, was there
all enjoyed. More worthy to be remembered, then that magnificent gluttony,
(the natural vice of these our Nations) was the orderly and no childish action
of the young Bridegroom, in reconciling Philip Louell (whom King Henry had
lately fined and discourted for taking Bribes) to the King his Lord. K.
Alexander undertaking the business, and finding The young King of Scots a
suter to the King for bringing Philip Louel into favor again.
a fit time, presents himself to the King of England upon his knees, holding
up his hands, neither would he rise, though earnestly requested, but with a
gesture which seemed to draw tears of joy and love from the eyes of such as
Circumsedentium
sat round about, prosecuting his intent, says; My Lord King, your Majesty
knows, that though I my self am a king, and through your goodness honored
with the girdle of Knighthood, yet that I am withal both a Child, as well The
most witry and princely in^inuations of the young king, to the king his father
in Law.
in age as in knowledge, and also an Orphan, my father being dead, and my
mother leaving me, though at your sending for, she is now pleased to be
present; therefore from henceforth, and for ever after, I here do take you,
both for Father and Mother, that you may supply both their wants, and with your
paternall care help and protect all mine insufficiencies. The King scarce able
to refrain from tender tears, or to hold down his throbbings, said no more
but only this one word, Willingly. The princely Child replied thereupon: I will
make experiment of that, and know it by proof; seeing you have graciously
heard me hitherto, in trying whether I shall reap the effect of my first
suit. Philip Louel reconciled to the king.
Then he declared his request, and had it; so that Louell was afterward
Treasurer.

(80) The State and fidelity of the Gascoignes was so desperately shaken and
plunged by the reuenges which Simon de Montford (to whom the king had given the
government of their Country for six years,) had exercised upon them, for that
they had accused him to the King of tyrannous and proditorious dealing, and
affirmed, that his name ought Simon Earl of Leicester rather to be called
Sinon, as the Gascoigns said.
rather to be Sinon then Simon, that but for the vent of their wines, (in
which respect their subjection to England was very beneficial to their
Commonweal) it was thought they would generally have revolted. But the King
though ready thus to leese Gascoigne, would yet needs hope to obtain
Normandy, and his other lands in France without blows. The King of France
(whose conscience was wonderfully tender and sincere) had indeed written out of
Palestine to that purpose, as thinking King Henry's title was better then his
own: but the French, among whom their Kings misfortunes in the loss of
Damiata in Egypt, (which was wholly Per Papa auarisia^ to^ (...) infortunium.
Paris
ascribed to the Popes avarice, who for money released those who should have
aided him,) had brought him into less regard then his excellent virtues
merited, did universally and constantly refuse, adding, that before the King of
England The Kings hope to recover Normandy frustrated.
should have any more land among them, he must pass through a thousand sharp
Lances, and a thousand bloody Swords when the Lances were burst. On the other
side, the King of England was but in little credit with his people: for,
whereas (by an agreement between the Pope and him,) the Tenths of the Clergy
through England during three years should have been received toward his
charges in his pretended journey to the Holy Land, yet in a general assembly
at Westminster very few were drawn to give their names to that service,
notwithstanding that two Bishops and the Abbot of Westminster labored in their
Sermons all they could to stir the people to that martial Pilgrimage, and
though the King himself in all their view took a most solemn oath, that within
three year he would set forward; the only reason of their unwillingness
growing upon suspicion, that he only sought (as the Pope had given him
example) to draw by this color the treasure of the Realm into his hands. This
their diffidence of sincerity in him, made him the rather incline to foster
and favor strangers, and that with a kind of peruicacie, though himself by
manifold neglects of his word, had worthily bred that diffidence.

(81) The King could more hardly find followers in such an enterprise, for
that his people had no The common opinion of the Kings design for the holy
Land.
conceit of his valor, but said: What reason encourages him, who was never
trained up in Martial discipline, nor has managed an horse, nor drawn a
sword, nor charged a staff, nor shook a Target; to hope for a triumph over
the Sarazens, against whom the Cheualrie of France has miscarried? or
wherefore dreams he of recovery of more land, who could not keep that which
he had in for rain parts? concluding, that he was a man only borne to draine
their purses, to empty his own, and to multiply debts. This was the opinion of
men, and behind his back; but not only of men, for Isabel Countess of
Arundel, widow of Henry Earl of Arundel, a young Lady receiving the repulse at
the Kings hands in a matter which she alleged to be A perilous bold
Dialogue between the Countess of Arund. l and the King.
hers in equity, durst say thus to his face: O my Lord King; why do you turn
away from justice? we cannot now obtain that which is right in your Court; you
are placed as a mean between God and us, but you neither govern us, nor your
self, neither dread you to vex the Church diversely, as it has not only felt
in present, but often heretofore. Moreover you doubt not manifoldlie to afflict
the Nobles of the Kingdom. The King fired at so free a speech, with a
scornful and angry countenance, answered with a loud voice; O my Lady
Countess? What? have the Lords of England, because you have tongue at will,
made a Charter, and hired you to be their Orator and Advocate? whereunto the
Countess replied: Not so my Lord, for they have made to me no Charter, but
that Charter which your Father made, and which your self confirmed, swearing
to keep the same inuiolably and constantly, and often extorting money, upon
promise that the Liberties therein contained should be faithfully observed, you
have not kept, but without regard to honor or conscience broken. Therefore are
you found to be a manifest violator of your faith and oath. For where are the
Liberties of England so often fairly engrost in writing? so often granted? so
often bought? I therefore though a woman, and all the natural loyal people of
the Land, appeal against you to the Tribunal of the fearful Judge, and
Heaven and Earth shall bear us witness, that we are used unjustly, and God
the Lord of reuenges right us. The King abashed at these words asked her, if
she did not look to obtain her suite upon favor, in regard she was his
Kinswoman? whereunto she answered: That seeing he had deni^d that which the
Law gave, how could she hope to obtain her suit by favor? Therefore (said
she) I do appeal to the presence of Christ, against also those your
Counselors, who bewitch and dull your judgment, and draw you out of the path
of truth, gaping only after their own commodity. But the King (says Paris)
remained incorrigible, and the Lady lost both her charges, hopes and travel.

(82) Thus harsh were the former years to the King and Kingdom: let us see
what more gentle An. 1253. An. reg. 37.
or rougher accidents rise unto us in the next. But it then the first little
better appears; for the King having bought out the time which Simon de
Montfort had in the government of Gascoigne (which now he gives to Prince
Edward) was truly advertised, that Guasto de Biard was turned Spanish, and
labored The king of Spain claunes Ga^coign.
by all the means he could to pluck that part from the English obedience.
Alfonse K. of Spain, claimed the same by virtue of a Charter made thereof by
Henry the second, confirmed by Richard and John Kings of England. Simon Earl
of Leicester thus displaced, to let the world see that he would not Simon
Earl of Leicester refuses high honor in France to avoid the suspicion of
disloialty to England.
for any preferment incur the suspicion of disloialty, refused most honorable
offers, which, (after the death of Lady Blanch, Queen Dowager, and Rectrix of
France,) the French Nobility made him, if he would with his counsel and Force
help to sustain that Monarchy, while Lewis their king was absent. In the
mean time the king of England (all old matters being buried in oblivion, upon
hope of future amendment) for advancement of his martial Pilgrimage had large
aides granted him in Parliament; but upon condition that he should now at
last, once for all, submit himself to govern by a Law, not at his pleasure,
confirming the Charters of Liberties, against the breakers whereof a most
solemn curse was pronounced by the kings assent. The Archbishop, Bishop,
and the rest of the Magna Charta confirmed, help^ the king to money.
Prelates pontifically apparelled, pronounced that curse with Tapers burning,
which when they had thrown away upon the pauement, where they lay extinguished
and smoking, the King (having laid his hand on his breast all the while,) swear
to keep all Liberties upon pain of that execratory sentence; as he was a Man,
a Christian, a Knight, and a King The kings oath to observe that confirmation.
anointed and crowned. The businesses of Gascoigne soon after called him to a
nearer war, whether upon his promise made to the Gascoigns, he set sail,
leaving his son Prince Edward, and his kingdom to the government of his
Brother, the Earl of Cornwall, and the Queen his wife: his arrival there
giving a light and stay to all the affairs thereof. Such Holds as held against
him he reduced to obedience, but with too faulty a Clemency sparing most open
Traitors, whereas if an Englishman had offended, he was sure to smart for it,
and that rather more then less.

(83) His fear now was, lest the Gascoigns should draw in the Spaniards, and
relinquish his Sovereignty. The king requesteth the king of Spaines sister to
be given for wife to his son Edward.
To prevent this, he very prudently and seasonably sent Ambassadors to
Alfonse King of Spain and Castile, to desire that the Lady Elianor his sister,
might be given in marriage to Prince Edward. The motion was well approved, and
besides that they brought Letters Patents from the King of Spain, in which,
among all other Clauses it was contained, that the King of Spain did quit his
claim and whole right, which by virtue of any Grants from Henry, Richard and
John Kings of England, he had, or The King of Spain quitteth his claim to
Ga^coigne.
ought to have. Hereupon he sends both for his Son (whom the king of Spain
desired might be conuaied to him, only with a noble intent to see and do him
honor) and for his wife the Queen. Among other Acts of sincerity and love,
Alfonso sent to the King of England good advise: that, after the example of
good Kings and Princes, he should be The king of Spaines advise to the king of
England.
a Lamb toward his Subjects, and Seruitour^ (...) Lion to Aliens and Rebels.
Simon Earl of Leicester with a gallant Troop of Soldiers offered his service
to the King, who admiring the Earls charity, received him with all joy
possible: at which reconcisiation (...) to a better estate, and to govern
them, who have willingly His most noble protestation.
elected me, for their Lord, in modest, just and honorable manner. These words
exhaled joyful tears from off many of the hearers, and the Ambassadors
returned to deliver the news of this acceptance, who from thenceforth was King
of Romans, that is Emperor elect, which title is used till they receive the
Crown imperial; though to all other purposes he is Emperor, so that King of
Romans seems The king of Romans what and who.
to answer to the Title of Caesar, which under the ancient Roman Emperors was
given to the heir apparent of the Empire or Coadiutors. After the German
Ambassadors were gone, the King permits his brother to send some over to
sound the truth of the Electors and Peoples affections, which The English
tongue in the days of Matthew Para agreeable to the Dutch.
(in regard the English were originally Germans, and by late affinity
incorporated, and for that English (says Paris) was in a sort agreeable to the
Almain tongue) they found entire, and with that certitude return. The King of
England hereby seemed to have his designs for recovery of Normandy, greatly
strengthened, the Almaines and French hardly brooking one the other; but
howsoever, sure it is that his brother the new King, had occasion to spend the
golden Oil, which was so long in gathering, to maintain the light of this
Imperial lamp; and without question he might be liberal, for he was
reputed to possess so much ready coin, as would every day for ten years
afforde him an hundredth marks upon the maine stock, without The huge sums of
ready money which Richard King of Romans had of his own at his Election.
reckoning his rents and revenues in Germany, and the English dominions. The
Earl 6. Call Iun. di^ Ascension^.
was soon after crowned King of the Romans, at Aquisgraue, by Conrade
Archbishop of Colein, with great pomp and sole^nity.



(90) In the mean time, while his brothers royal preparations were in hand,
the King being for a weeks space at the Abbey of S. Albans, certain masters
of Oxford brought a great complaint against the Bishop of Lincoln, for some
encroachments upon the Contra antiqua statut^ and libertates. Paris.
ancient liberties of that University, to whom the King was gracious and
assigned a day; and Matthew Paris, whom the King in honor of his learned
pains, admitted every day to his table, and Chamber, said to him upon this
Complaint; Mat Paris. in hist: ma^ori. The University of Oxford the second
School of the Church next Paris. protected by the king
My Liege, for Gods love have a care of the shaken State of the Church. The
University of Paris (the Nurse, and mother of so many holy Prelates) is not a
little disquieted. If as the same time the University of Oxford should be
disturbed, which is the second School of the Church, yea the fundamental base
thereof, it is greatly to be feared, least the whole Church do fall to ruin.
Whereunto the King made answer, God forbid that should happen at all; but
chiefly in his days. Which the Parliament then at hand, he accordingly
provided for, to their contentation. The memory of the King seems by this to
have been excellent, for beside that he recounted to Paris all the Kings of
England which had been Canonized Saints, all the Princes Electors, and great
Princes of Germany and France, he called to mind the names of about two
hundredth and fifty Baronies in England.

(91) At this Parliament, (which was exceeding great) holden at London, the
King in sight and view of all the people, brings forth his younger son Edmund
attired like an Italian of Apulia, (which Country The King commend^ the cause
of his son Edmund for the kingdom of Sicilia.
is a member of the Kingdom of Sicilia) and used this speech: Behold here good
people, my Son Edmund, whom God of his gracious goodness has called to the
excellency of kingly dignity; how comely and well worthy he is of all your
favors, and how cruel and tyrannical Note that by this it appears Edmund was
not deformed a^ Henry 4. did afterward allege.
they are, who at this pinch, would deny him effectual and timely help, both
with advice and money. The sum of all was to draw a vast contribution from
the Clergy for atchieuement of this shadow (it proved no better) into his
Coffers. Neuertholesse he obtained a grant of above fifty thousand Marks, upon
covenant that the liberties of the Realm should be really and finally once for
ever established: which was done. There were present in this Parliament six
Archbishops, Canterbury, York, Dublin, Colin, Messana in Sicilia, and Tarentum
in Apulia. The politic Germans knew what they did in choosing Richard their
King, for they saw a cloud of gold and silver would dissolve it self into
showers among them at his arrival; and all elections of strangers turn to
their profit, because none is chosen that relies wholly upon the rents of the
Empire.

(92) It was a worthy care in this King, that when A. Do. 1258 A. reg. 42.
by the provision of his brother Richard King of Romans, there arrived in the
river of Thames fifty sail of German Ships, laden with corn to relieve the
great dearth, which then reigned through the Land, he caused proclamation to be
made, That no Citizen of London should buy any of that corn to store up, which
they were wont to do, to the intent they might sell it the dearer afterward,
to such as wanted. But no warning, The practice of Londoners to engrosse corn
forbidden by the king.
prayers, aduises, nor sense of wants were able to make him frugall of his
expense; whereby he was miserably straightened, neither would the Laity in
Parliament contribute anything, but (hammering some great attempts in their
thoughts) in plain words concluded, That they neither would, nor could any
longer endure such (they called them) extorsions. Moreover they there uttered
many greeuances, and Simon Earl of Leicester complained of the dishonor and
injury done him by William de Valence, calling him Traitor; so that against the
Session to be holden upon prorogation, he, the Earl of Gloucester, and
Marshall, confederated themselves and (pretending the fear of strangers the
Kings favorites,) determined to come strong to Oxford at Saint Barnabas day.
The Barons combine.
They also sent messengers to the King of France, praying at least so much
assistance, as that he would not hinder the good purpose which they held of
ordeining and settling the troubled estate of England. They had also taken order
to watch the Mat. Paris. page 940.
Ports against strangers. Thus they prepared to abate (as it seemed) or banish
the loftiness and insolency of Poictouines and of other Forreiners, by whom
the King was powerfully lead, for they despaired of redress at his hands, who
like another Proteus (as Paris says) took all shapes upon him to serve his
turns, and then slipped out at his pleasure, no promises, or ties being strong
enough to hold him. These were the beginnings of bloody evils, and the
seedesparks of those factious fires which afterward brake forth, from the sight
and sense whereof, many thousands were taken by death, whose mortal stroke of
pestilence raged over England, specially among the poor through scarcity of
food.

(93) When the time appointed for the Parliament at Oxford was come, the
seditious Earls and Barons (with whom Pontifices, ne dicam Pharisai, etc. Mat.
West.
sundry Bishops had taken Counsel against the King the Lords anointed)
repaired thither, and sternely propounded sundry traiterous Articles to the
King, to which they required his assent. The chief points were, That the King
would unfeignedly keep and observe the Charter of liberties, which he had so
ofen granted, and sworn to maintain inviolable; That such a one should be in
the place of Chief Iustitiar who would judge according to right, without
respect to poor or rich, etc. Then they renewed their confederacy, solemnly
swearing, That neither for life nor death, nor love nor hate, they would be
arawne The Barons take an oath among themselves.
to relent in their purpose, till they had cleared England (in which themselves
and their Forefathers were borne) from vpstarts and aliens, and had procured
laudable Statutes. Those turbulent Nobles had yet a further plot, then all
this; which was first broached (says Mat: Westminster) by the disloyal
Bishops, which Mat. West.
was, that 24. persons should there be chosen, to have the whole administration
of the King and State, and yearly appointment of all great Officers, reserving
only to the King the Primos accubitus in canis etc. Mat. West. Ibidem. The
provisions of Oxford.
highest place at meetings and salutations of honor in public places. And
because they would not be crossed in their purposes, they * came exquisitely
armed and appointed, that so the King and his Aliens should be enforced, if
they would not willingly assent. To al these their ordinations the King and
Prince Edward was enforced to swear, for fear of perpetual imprisonment, the
traitorous Lords having by an Edict, threatened death to all that resis^ed
Whereupon all the Peers and Prelates took their Corporal Oath to be
faithful in this their infidelity, and made all who would abide in the
Kingdom, to swear they would stand to the trial of their Peers: the
Archbishops and Bishops solemnly accursing all that should rebel against it.
The Mat. West. Mat. Paris.
Monks themselves detesting this impudent treason, ask with what forehead,
especially Prelates, durst thus impair the Kingly Majesty, expreslie against
their sworn fidelity to him? This coniuration they so prosecuted, that when
William de Valence the Kings halfe-brother, denied with Oaths to render up any
Castle which was given him, the Earl of Leicester, and the rest of the Barons
answered, they would either have his Castles or his head. This violent
proceeding so terrified the Poictouines, that sodeinely they left Oxford, and
shortly fled into France, where also the Barons had made them odious. Hugh
Bigod, brother to the Earl Marshall, was made chief Iustitiar. The people,
seemed wholly theirs, which made the Barons so rough and peremptory in all their
conferences, that when the Lord Henry son to the King of Almain, refused to
combine or take their oath, without his Fathers consent, they roundly bad him
know, That if his father himself would not hold with the Baronage of England,
he should not have a furrowre of earth among them. And least any thing which
might tend to their security, should seem to be omitted, they using the Kings
name, commanded London to stand upon her guard, by keeping their Cities gates
carefully shut, and by maintaining strong watches night by night, upon pretense
of danger to the Realm through the practices of strangers, and after they
dispatched thither certain fit Agents, who in the Guilde-hall made known their
commission, which was directly to understand, whether they would i^utably
adhere to the Barons and obey The City of London ^oines with the Barons to
red^sse the kingdom.
their constitutions, by manfully aiding and effectually supplying them in the
common cause. Whereunto the Citizens condescended, binding themselves thereunto
under the public seal of London.

(94) The Barons did as yet forbear to declare, what those reformatorie
Provisions should be, because the Earl of Gloucester (a principal man among
them) was in danger of death, whose sickness did perplex and suspend their
proceedings, and the manner of his malady did put them in doubt of their own
safeties, making them grow in distrust of their Cooks, their butlers, and
sewers, for the Earl his body breaking out into pustules, and his hair,
nails, teeth and skin it self, falling away, was (as many others, of which
some died) thought to be poisoned. But whither they were or no, the Poictouines
and strangers had the blame laid upon them, to make them the more odious to the
Commons. But the Earl partly recovered his health in time by the benefit of
medicines and diligent attendance. The Mat. Paris p. 951.
poisons were said to have been tempered in the house of Elias a Jew afterward
baptized. The King himself perhaps would not have been sorry, if that he,
Simon Earl of Leicester and some few others of the Barons had been with God,
for howsoever his body was among them, yet his heart was not at quiet, which in
this wise well appeared. For being in the month of June upon the river of
Thames in his barge, the aier sodeinly grew dark, and there ensued a terrible
shower with thunder and lightning, of which the king impatient commands
himself to be set on land at the next place which was Durham house, whereas
then, the Earl of Leicester lay. The Earl being thereof certified The King
fears the Earl of Leicester more then thunder and lightning.
came out to entertain him, saying, Sir why are you afraid? the tempest is now
past: whereunto he answered with a severe look: I fear thunder and lightning
above measure, but by the head of God, I do more fear thee then all the
thunder and lightning of the world. Whereunto the Earl replied: My liege, it
is injurious and incredible, that you should stand in fear of me, who have
always been loyal both to you and your Realm, whereas you ought to fear
your enemies, such as destroy the Realm and abuse you with bad Counsels. The
Barons therefore remaining firm in their first purpose, send messengers abroad
to will all such as had been wronged by the Kings halfe-brothers and other
Poictouines and strangers to present their greeuances to the Barons, and to
prosecute them. Moreover (because sundry other petty-tyrants of the English
nation, encouraged by their example, had exceeded their limits, in oppressing
their inferiors) they procured the King to Commissioners to certify what
oppressions in every County.
appoint four Knights Commissioners in every shire, to enquire of all such
injuries, and certify the same under their seals within a certain time
limited.

(95) The Barons in the mean time neglect not their enterprise, at whose
instance (principally of Officers put from their places.
Hugh Bigod the new chief Iustitiar) Philip Louel the Kings Treasurer, for
abuses committed in the Kings Forests and game about Stony-Stratford, and many
Officers of the Exchecquer, were likewise removed, to give room to such as the
Barons better liked. The Sherifs likewise of Shires, their practices, and
extortions, were diligently seen into, and it was The abuses of Sheriffs
noted and provided against.
ordained, that as well the giuers as takers of bribes should be severely
punished. The welsh seeing these ^und proceedings in England, the peace and
reflorishment whereof they feared, labored for reconciliation but could not
then obtain it.

(96) Richard King of Romans, having a desire to A. Do. 1259 A. reg. 43. The
King of Romans suspected of the Barons, arriues in England (...) takes an oath.
see the King his brother, and his lands in England, not without a purpose to
bring an Army, or such a number of men as might greatly strengthen the King
against the Barons, as they suspected, was advertised that they provided for
his resistance as well by land as sea. This made him, his wife, and son, to
lay aside that purpose, and to arrive in a private manner at Dover with a small
train, in which there were only two Earls, and about nine Knights. The king
met him with great congratulation at the Sea side, but nor King, nor he could
be suffered to enter into The King not suffered to enter his own Castles.
Dover Castle, because (forsooth) it was the principal Key of England; for the
safeguard whereof they openly exacted an Oath of him at Canterbury in this
manner. The holy Gospels being laid upon the Pulpet in the Chapter House of
Canterbury, the Barons reverently brought in thither the Kings of England and
of Almaine; then Richard Earl of Gloucester (for Simon Earl of Leicester was
gone with others into France, to deal with the King and States thereof about a
perpetual league) standing in the midst openly, and in humble sort calls
Richard King of Romans unto him, by the name only of Richard Earl of
Cornwall, who obeyed accordingly, to whom he distinctly ministered the Oath
following: Hear all men, that I Richard Earl of Cornwall swear upon the holy
Gospels, to be faithful and forward to reform with you the Kingdom of
England, hitherto by the counsel of wicked men too much deformed. And I will
be an effectual Coadiutor to expel the Then the Barons too.
Rebels and troubles of the Realm, from out the same. This oath will I observe
upon pain to forfeit all the lands I have in England. On the other side (had
the King known how to use it) there fell out such dissension between the Earls
of Gloucester and Leicester, that Leicester departed from England discontented,
saying, he took no joy to live among men so mutable and deceitful.
Nevertheless such means were used, that these two chief Captains of the
Barons, brake not forth into any farther division. Thus whiles the Barons using
the Kings name, disposed of all things, and Simon de Montfort Earl of
Leicester, was gone with others to transact with the French about an
indissoluble league; the King himself through desire not to Polyd. Vergil.
lib. 16.
be interrupted with foreign matters, if war should rise at home, or through
want of money or better advise, was induced (if not betrayed) to an act of
little honor, though it carried with it the face of profit and settled quiet.

(97) For (the affairs of the realm thus strangely The King sails over into
France to demand restitution of Normand^e.
managed) the King in person sails over into France, there to demand a
peaceable restitution of such Signiories as Philip and Lewis (Father of this
Lewis) had injuriously withdrawn from his father King John. The French
replied, that no restitution was due for many respects, specially, because the
Guil. Gemetice^s.
ancient grant made to Rollo the first Duke of Normandy, was not voluntary, but
extorted by fear and force of Arms, in the days of the weak state of
France. The King having Ypodig. Neust.
no disposition to recover his claims by battle, and destitute of money
wherewith to wage an Army, but principally for that his own Peers and people
stood on their guard against him, did Pol. Verg. l. 16.
unwillingly ratify a conclusion; the Articles whereof were, that the King of
France should quietly hold the Dukedom of Normandy, and Earldom of Angiou (
Paul. Aemil. John Tilius. Ypod. Neust. Mat. Paris.
Main also, Tourain and Poictou) for Polyd. Verg. says 15 0000. Crowns in
hand, and 10000. Crowns yearly, in name of Tribute.
three hundredth thousand small pounds of Tourain, and upon promise to receive
other lands to the yearly value of twenty thousand pounds. Polydor says, that
the reputed limits of the English Pale in France, were from thenceforth the
river of Charent in Xanctoing, and the mountains Pyrenaees; and that he
should peaceably have Angoumois, Quercy, and Limain, being Countries marching
upon Gascoigne, in lieu of the rest, yet so as the King of England should John
Tilius.
hold them of the Crown of France by homage and fealty. Upon these Articles
the king acquitted, and for ever renounced all his challenge to Normandy and
the other lands, and thenceforth abridged his Style, and changed his Seal,
using a Scepter in place of a Sword: whereon these Monkish and mockish verses
were written. Est M. CCLIX. vtinam concordia, foelix,
Andegauis, Picta-uis, Neustria, genterelicta
Anglorum, dantur tibi France, Sigilla nouantur,
Nomina tolluntur, fugit Ensis, Sceptra geruntur.
M CCLIX, God grant firm peace thou fix,
Poictou, Angiou, Normans, to France range yon,
New Seals are made; old Styles forsaken,
Down laid the Blade, Scepters up taken.




(98) The King (at these unworthy rates) having secured himself from the
French, labors to vindicate A. D. 1260. A. reg. 44.
the Regal power out of the usurping Barons hands (whose ouer-toppings at home
had driven him to those foreign indignities,) alleging, that the Oath which
his son and he had taken at Oxford, was void, in regard it was compulsorie,
that the Barons also, who pretended the profit of the Realm, sought only
their own honor and gain, Ann. 1261. An. Reg. 45.
contrary to their decrees. For his more security Polyd. Vergil. l. 16.
he takes the Tower of London, preparing force by the help of his brother King
of Romans. There followed a grievous perturbation of the Realm, although at
this time it brake not forth into the extremity, Arms being laid down for a
little space. Edward the Kings eldest son would not trauerse the oath he had
made at Oxford, but held with the Ypod. Neust. A. D. 1262. An. Reg. 46.
Barons for the present. The King, the Queen, and his selected friends, still
remain upon their guard in the Tower; where he (in the year before) had
burst The King seifeth the ancient stock of the Crown.
up the locks of the ancient Depositum, or dead stock of the Crown, to employ
against the Barons. Peace was notwithstanding brought about again by the
Queens special diligence; and Dover and Rochester Castles (whither he went
in person) are delivered unto him. This makes him resolve to pursue the Barons;
the rather also for that the French King (who much condemned the Barons unjust
courses) had promised his assistance. Henry therefore thrusts out the Barons
Chancellor, and Chief Iusticiar, placing Walter Merto^ and Philip Basset, men
of much more loyal affections in their rooms. The Barons hearing of this,
hasten in Arms to Winchester, where the King was, who (having intelligence by
his faithful Clerk, Sir John Mansel) got back into the Tower of London. The
King of France was made Vmpire The Barons drive the King from Winchester.
in the quarrel. The Addit. ad Par.
cause was heard at Amiens, where he gave judgment with the King of England
against the Barons, pronouncing all the Statutes A. D. 1263. An. Reg. 47.
and Acts made at Oxford, to be utterly void: provided nevertheless, that the
Charter of Liberties which King John had made to the English nation, should in
no sort be thereby infringed. This prouiso animated Simon Earl of Leicester,
and the Barons, Simon Montfort in apparent fault.
to maintain all the Statutes of Oxford, (because they were pretendedly
founded upon that Charter) notwithstanding that just judgment which King Lewis
had given. The secret confederacy with Lewelin Prince of Wales, ministered to
the Barons no little encouragement; who about this time wasted the Dominions of
Prince Edward in the Marches of Wales. This judgment of the French King did
much disadvantage the Barons, of whom diverse being drawn with persuasions,
gifts, and promises, revolted from Simon Montfort. There was now a taking of
Towns and Prisoners on all hands. Prince Edward (who now was wholly for his
Father in despite of the Barons) takes the Castle of Bristol, and fines the
City at a thousand pounds. Simon Montfort executes his greatest reuenges upon
the Queens friends which were Aliens, not sparing the Kings. Marching forward,
he recouers Gloucester A. D. 1264. An. Reg. 48.
Castle, enters Worcester and Bridgenorth; lastly, surpriseth the I Will of Ely,
subduing that fastness or fenny strength to the Barons use. Sir John Mansel
the Kings Counselor, fearing the event of things, flies secretly from the
Tower where the King was. Henry son to the King of Almain, was after this
taken by the Barons. Meanewhile Prince Edward fortifies Windsor Castle with
strangers. Mutual weariness at length begat a desire of peace, and the
Additam. ad Mat. Paru.
King had yielded that the Statutes of Oxford should stand: but the Queen was
utterly against it, not without cause; for it did enfeeble the arbitration
which the French King had made. The Queens opposition in this point was known
to the Londoners; which put the baser sort into so lewd a rage, An intolerable
villainy offered by rascals to the Queen.
that she being to shoot the Bridge from the Tower toward Windsor, they with
dirt and stones and villainous words forced her to return. Prince Edward under
the conduct of the Bishop of Worcester, came from the Castle of Bristol (by
reason of quarrel between his men of war and the Burgers) and contrary to
his promise entered into Windsor Castle; but afterward going forth to meet Simon
Montfort at Kingston upon Thames, with purpose to offer peace, the said Simon
got Windsor Castle, and would not permit him to depart. At London yet in a
Parliament, matters were pieced again, and the Kings side grew stronger daily.

(99) There were with him his brother King of Romans, his son Edward, William
de Valence (whom Prince Edward had brought out of France) John Common The Scots
aid the King.
of Scotland with a multitude of valiant Scots, (whose King was Henry's son
in law,) John de Baliol Lord of Gallway, Robert de Brus, etc. with whom he
marches from London to Oxford, where the Rendeuou of his friends and forces
was appointed. The king takes Northampton and many chief (...).
The King meaning to make that place (where his chief blow was given him) his
chief seat to consult for remedies, dismissed thence all the Students, by
reason of their multitude, W. Risha^ger MS. i^ Bibliotheca D. Rob. Cotton
Baronetti.
being above 15000 (says William Rishanger who then lived) of those only whose
names were entered into the Matriculation book, amongst whom being so many
young Nobles, the King doubted how they might be affected to the Barons.
Whereupon many of them went to Northampton, where then the Barons were strong;
and thither the King coming with his host, and breaking in at the
Towne-walles upon Passion Sunday, encountered his enemies, amongst whom the
Chron. M. S. Fox in (...). Hollinsh.
Students of Oxford had a Banner by themselves advanced right against the King,
and they did more annoy him in the fight, then the rest of the Barons: which
the King (who at length prevailed) had vowed sharply to revenge, but that his
Counselors told him, those Students were the sons and kindred of the
Great-men of the Land, whom if he punished, even the Nobles who now stood for
him, would take Arms against him. The King there took Simon Montfort the
younger, and fourteen other principal Barons and Milites vexilliferos.
Knights Banerets, forty other Knights, besides Esquiers, etc. Encouraged with
this success, he aduanceth the Standard royal toward Nottingham, burning and
wasting the Barons lands wheresoever he came. To divert this tempest, Simon
Montfort hastneth to London, and attemptes the taking of Rochester Castle,
which John Earl of Warren defended for the King: who coming to raise the
siege, takes Kingston Castle, which belonged to the Earl of Gloucester; then
unexpectedly falling upon such as maintained the siege of Rochester, while
Simon was absent, kills very many, and scatters the rest. Then seiseth he the
Castle of Tunbridge, and therein the Countess of Gloucester, whom,
notwithstanding he nobly set at large, as professing not to war against
Ladies; from thence the Cloud of power borne upon the wings of indignation,
speedes to Winchelsea, and receives the Cinque-Portmen to grace, settling at
last in Lewis, where himself rested in the Priorie, and his son in the
Castle, whither the Barons sent letters to him, protesting their loyal
observance to his person, but all The Baron^ letters.
hostisity to their enemies which were about him.

(100) But the King flaming with desire of revenge, sets slight by these vowed
(but fained) fidelities; and The kings letters
returns a full defiance as to Traitors, professing that he takes the wrong
of his friends, as his own, and their enemies as his. The King of Almaine,
Prince Edward, The king of Almaines letter, and Prince Edwards.
with other of the Kings chief friends, sent their like letters of defiance.
The Barons, loath to let it come to the hazardous and unkind trial of steel,
(though The Barons send the second time.
they then encamped about six miles from Lewis,) not acquitting themselves in
this repulse, iterate their message, with an offer to pay to the King thirty
thousand pounds, in satisfaction of such hurts as their people had done through
the Realm; so as the Statutes of Oxford might stand. The king of Almaine
(whose honor they had touched, and spoild part of his inheritances) hindered all
harkening to any their offers.

(101) It came to a battle; wherein Simon de Simon Earl of Leicester takes the
kings of England and of Almaine in the battle at Lewis.
Montford commands his traitorous Army to wear white Crosses on breast and
back, to show they fought for Justice; great was the effusion of blood on both
parts; chiefly of the Scots upon the Kings side, and of the Londoners upon the
Earls side; whose Battalion, (lead by the Lord Segraue,) Prince Edward most
furiously charged, and had the execution of them for about four miles, which
he pursued the more bloudily, in revenge of the extreme disgrace which they
had offered upon London Bridge to the Queen his Mother, and after that the
Garrison of Tunbridge follows, and slew many at Croyden. But while the Prince
spent himself in that revenge, his Father (who, having his Horse slain under
him, had yielded himself prisoner to Simon de Montfort) his uncle the king of
Romans, and others great Peers were taken, and the whole hope of that day
lost. There fell in all on both sides, about five thousand. Prince Edward
returning from the slaughter of the Londoners,

ed at Westminster on the Northside of the high Altar, under a fair monument
of stone, with his Portraiture, and the arms of him and others of his house,
and many noble houses of that time.

(108) Richard the third son of King Henry and Queen Elenor, (bearing the
name of his uncle Richard, King of Romans Almaign,) deceased in his youth, and
lies at Westminster, enterred on the south side of the Quire.

(109) John the fourth son of King Henry and Queen Fleanor, (bearing the
name of King John his grandfather,) deceased young, and at Westminster his bones
lie enterred with his brother Richard.

(110) William the fifth son of King Henry and Queen Eleanor, is mentioned by
Thomas Pickering, (a Priest of the monastery of Whitby in Yorkshire, who lived
in the time of King Henry the sixth, and wrote a large Genealogy of the Kings
of England, and their issues,)'and that he dying in his childhood, was buried
within the new Temple, by Fleete-streete in London.

(111) Henry the sixth son of King Henry and Queen Eleanour, is also reported
by the same Pickering, to have died young, and to be buried at Westminster.

(112) Margaret the eldest daughter of King Henry and Queen Eleanor, borne the
twenty sixth year of her Fathers reign. 1241. was the first wife of Alexander
the third, King of Scotland, married to him at York, An. 1251. by whom she
had issue, Alexander and David, (who died both before their Father without
issue,) and Margaret Queen of Norway, wife of King Erike, and mother of
Margaret the heir of Scotland, and Norway, that died unmarried: she was
Queen twenty two years, lived thirty three, deceased before her husband, in
the twenty third year of his Reign, the first of her brother Edwards in
England, and was buried at the Abbey of Dunferinling in Scotland.

(113) Beatrice the second daughter of King Henry, and Queen Eleanor, was
borne at Bordeaux in Gascoigne, June. 25. An. 1242. of her Fathers reign 27.
At the age of eighteen years, she was married to John the first Duke of
Britain, (son of John the last Earl of the same,) and had issue by him,
Arthur Duke of Britanny, John Earl of Richmont, Peter, and Blanch married to
Philip, son of Robert Earl of Artoys; Eleanour a Nun at Amsbery, and Marie
married to Guy Earl of Saint Paul: when she had been his wife twelve years,
and lived thirty years, she deceased in Britany, in the first year of the
Reign of her brother King Edward, and was buried at London, in the Quire of
the Gray Friars within Newgate.

(114) Catherine the third daughter of King Henry and Queen Eleanor, was borne
at London, An. 1253. of her fathers reign 37. Nouemb. 25. being Saint
Katherines day, whose name was therefore given unto her, at the font, by
Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, her mothers uncle, who christened her, and
was her Godfather. She died young and at Westminster her bones lie enterred,
with her brother Richard and John, in the space between the Chapels of King
Edward and Saint Bennet.

EDWARD THE FIRST, LORD OF Monarch 47
Edward 1.
IRELAND, AND DVKE OF AQVITAINE, etc. THE FORTIE-SEVENTH MONARCH OF ENGLAND,
HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER X.


EDward, who followed K. Henry in wearing the English Crown, but far Ann. 1273.
out-went him in all regal virtues, was abroad at the time of his fathers
death, still pursuing his high desires for the Holy Wars: wherein what he
performed, (being yet but a Prince,) against the public enemies of Christians,
it shall not be impertinent to touch, before we come to his actions as a
King; having already remembered, with what valor and felicity he had subdued
his Fathers domesticke enemies, settled the peace of his Kingdom, and
reestablished the raines of Sovereignty in his Fathers hands, which those
potent Rebels had formerly extorted.

(2) King Lewis of France, whose persuasions had enflamed this noble-spirited
Prince to associate him in this glorious quarrel, having first set forth for
the enterprise, lay now in siege of Tunis in Africa; where Prince Edward with
all his forces arriving, the French King (greatly rejoicing in his wished
Prince Edward at Tunis in Africa.
presence,) together with the King of Navarre, and other Princes of his Army,
went forth to meet him, and received him in the kiss of Peace. This place
which they beleaguered, was (as then) not great, yet by reason of the
situation, Paul. A^yl. in Lud. 9.
it greatly impeached the Christians in their passages through those Seas;
being built out of the scattered ribs, and wasted ruins of that mighty and
famous City Carthage, riual once in Majesty and Ambition with ancient Rome, as
contending with her about the Empire of the World. Therefore to secure the
Mediterranean Seas, it (...) Mat. Par.
was thought necessary to begin that enterprise for Asia, with this in
Africa; but not long after Lewis yielding up his holy Soul to God at the
siege, and sickness (by reason of the heates in those Regions, for it was
August) raig (...) of homage) to seize upon the whole Fee of the said Prince,
marched with an Army into Wales; his good fortune there was accidentally
augme^ted by a prize, which four ships of Bristol took about the Isles of
Silly, wherein the daughter of Simon Montfort late Earl of Leicester, (who,
according to a secret contract between their friends, went to be given in
marriage to Lewelin) and Aimericke her brother were surprised, but she found
honorable usage of the King her near kinsman.

(11) Meanewhile, Lewelines affairs, by the manhood and diligence of Pain de
Alias Cam^rcijs
Canusijs, and others, A. D. 1278.
who had taken West-Wales in, and brought it to the Kings peace, thriuing but
poorly, and the said Prince feeling the foundations of his safety beginning
manifestly to fail, and shrink from under him, Lanquet. in Epit. Chr ex Tho.
Walsing.
sued for peace, and had it upon such terms, which in likelihood were not (as
Hist. ^ngl. l. 17.
Polydor Virgil would have it seem) granted by King Edward, lest he should
leese his cost, and care, by warring against bogs and mountains. In the
conditions of Peace (which was procured Fabian.
with great difficulty) the most remarkable (as carrying the show of a far
greater riches in the possession of the Welsh, even at that time, then some
preiudicated can easily believe) David Powel. Page 334. and 335.
were these. 1. That the Prince should pay to the King for his peace and
goodwill, fifty thousand pounds sterling, the Thom. Walsing. in Edw. 1. and in
Ypod. Neust.
payment whereof, should be in the Kings will and grace; that is (as we
conceive it) how much thereof the Prince should pay or not pay, and when. 2.
That the said Prince should have the Isle of Anglesey in Fee-farme of the King,
to him, and to the lawful issue of his body in general tail, for five
thousand Marks ready money, for Or in Garsuma, as some use the word.
gressom, or a fine in hand paid, and the yearly rent of a thousand Marks. The
rest of the articles (being about eight,) amounted to so much as a plain
Conquest, or dissolution of the Principality of Wales, after Lewelins death,
who was to enjoy the same, during his time upon conditions.

(12) Now whereas the said Lewelin had three Brethren, David (whom King Edward
favored) Owen, and Rodericke, it was enjoined to him at this conclusion (made
by the Lord Robert Tiptoft, and certain other Da. Pow. p. 336
Commissioners, upon either side appointed) that he should appease and
satisfy his said Brethren: but because David was afterward a principal Actor
in the calamities which fell upon himself, his house, and his Country, we must
not neglect to speak somewhat particularly of him. This Gentleman for some
causes, Tho. Walls.
flying into England from his Brother Lewelin, for his faithful service to the
State of England, was there honored (contrary to the manner of his Nation)
with the order of Knighthood, and received also, by the bounty of King Edward,
for his maintenance, the Castle of Denbigh, with lands to the yearly value of
one thousand pounds, and the Daughter of the Earl of Derby (being then a
Widow) to wife: with all which bounty, the King did but entertain a reuealer
of his secrets, as Fabian. in Ed. 1. An. 1279.
some (not improbably) do affirm. The State of Wales thus composed, and the
Castle of Da. Pow. p. 336.
Aberistwith (which seems to be the same, that by Tho. Walls. Fabian.
another is said to have been built in West-Wales at La^pader Vaur) being
built by King Edward for assuring those parts, the King (as he was munificent,
and royal) the more to tie Lewelins faith, gave unto him the Lady, of whose
surprise at Sea we have mentioned, to be his consort, honoring the Nuptials
with his own presence, and his Queens. And whereas Alexander King of Scots
came about the same season into England to treat with Edward concerning
important affairs, and had formerly sent to the Welsh wars, certain aides
of the Scots, the said Alexander being jealous (on his Countries behalf) that
those aides might be interpreted, to have been sent upon duty, obtained
letters testimonial from King Scottish aides protested not to be sent of duty
to K. Edward, but of love. An. 1282.
Edward, declaring that they were not sent of duty, or in respect of service
due.

(13) Though King Edward were thus desirous to gain the Welsh-Nation rather by
his largess, then puissance, having so honorably used Lewelin, he could not
yet retain their hearts; for whether it were (which Da. Pow. p. 336.
some, to amoue the note of ingratitude, and turbulency from them, affirm) for
that there was partiality used by the English officers in distribution of
justice upon the Marches, or (which seems to some as likely) for that they
aspired in vain to their ancient liberty (being miserably seduced with
certain Poly. Verg. l. 17.
blind prophesies) the Welsh betook themselves afresh to Arms: for David
himself, whom the King had laden with so many benefits and graces, became to
them a principal leader, and to give them full assurance of his fastness to
their cause (reconciling himself to his brother the Prince) he suddenly and
treacherously upon Palme-Sunday seized the Castle of Tho. VValsing.
Hawardin, surprising Roger de Clifford, a noble and famous Knight, whom the
King had dispatched into those parts, as Iusticiar of all Wales, and slaying
such unarmed men as offered to resist that violence, whence marching, he laid
siege together with the Prince his brother, to the Castle of Ruthlan. Da. Pow
page 337.
Rodolan, doing many outrages, and killing all such as they could reach, yea
some (as it is said) whose ransomes Arc^. of Cant. apud Da. Powel. Page 339.
they had taken, though against Lewelins mind. And while King Edward spent his
Easter at the Vises in Wiltshire, and afterward visited the Queen his mother,
who lived in the Nunnerie at Ambresberie, the Welsh, under diverse Captains,
had taken sundry of the Kings Tho. Walsing.
strengthes and Castles in diverse parts. There are extant the Da. Pow. p. 336.
Copies of certain grieuances, exhibited to John Archbishop of Canterbury by
the Welsh, at such time as of his own accord (so say the said Copies) he
interposed himself (without the Kings leave) to settle their quiet; which
Articles in show, (for the answers of the English are not set down) contain
indeed sundry great abuses; but the fate of Wales had now inuolued them all in
a desolating war, and made them incapable of relief. For after the
Archbishop had traveled in person to the Prince of Wales, being then in Tho.
Walsing.
Snowdon, and returned without any Conclusion made, Antiq. Brit. in vit. Job.
Peckam.
coming unto Oxford, he there sent out the lightnings of Polyd. Verg. l. 17
excommunication against him and his seduced adherents: We say seduced,
because they did capitulate in such sort, as if they had been able to make
their party good.

(14) But though the old British Principality was now to expire, yet it must
be confessed, that as Lewelin A. D. 1283.
had an end unworthy of his blood, being rather unfortunately slain, then
otherwise, so on the other side the same happened not without revenge: for at one
encounter in open field, Gilbert Earl of Gloucester lost William Valence (a
younger Cosen of the Kings) slain in the fight, and four other Knights, though
at the same time also, many of the Welsh left their bodies dead upon the earth,
together with the victory to the English: but the day certainly which they had
of King Edward himself, may not be forgotten, in which the Welsh slew the
Tho. Walsing. King Edward repulsed by the Welsh.
Lord William de Audeley, and the Lord Roger Clifford the younger, and got
fourteen Ensigns from the English Army, K. Edward being enforced to enter
into the Castle of Hope for his safety. These things, though not contemptible,
but rather certain deceitful favors, usual when the ruin of a Nation is by
God decreed, could not uphold the cause. For first the Prince, having upon some
occasion withdrawn himself with some few others from his Army, which then was
in the land of Buelth, was set upon by two principal Gentlemen, John Giffard,
and Edmund de Mortumar, with their Forces, and there by the hand of one Dan.
Pow. p. 374.
Adam Francton was run through with an Horsemans staff, who at the first
being unknown, had his head stricken afterward off, and presented to King
Edward, at whose commandment it was Tho. Walsing.
crowned with Iuie, and set up for a certain time upon the Tower of London.

(15) This (says the Page 374.
History of Wales) was the end of Lewelin, betrayed by the men of Buelth, who
was the last Prince of Britains blood: and with him ( Polych. li. 7. Tho.
Walsing.
whom one Versifier calls the Captain, the praise, the law, and light of
Nations, and another defaceth with as many ignominious attributes) the liberty
of that people did also die. For it was not long but that King Edward subdued
in a manner all Wales, and reserving to himself the Coast-Towns and strengths
toward the Sea, distributed the Inland Countries to the Lords his followers:
therein prudently following the counsel of Augustus, who thus under pretense
Cambden. in Comitat. Flint.
of defense for the Provinces, had the brideling of all their forces at his
pleasure. Nevertheless the whole flame was not as yet extinguished, for David
the Princes Brother, and Polych. l. 7. c. 38.
chiefest firebrand in this fatal An. D. 1284.
combustion, was at large: who being taken and brought to King Edward at the
Castle of Ruthlan, could not obtain admission to his sight or speech, but was
amanded, and sent Prisoner to Shrewsburie. Thither the King, having settled the
State of Wales, repairing to a Parliament which he had summoned, there to be
kept after Michaelmas, caused David (having first had a Legal trial Tho.
Walsing. ad A. D.
before certain Iusticiars for that cause appointed) to be severely put to
death, by Ra^l. Cestr. in Polych. l. 7.
hanging, heading and quartering, whose head was set up at London, and his
quarters in four other principal Cities of England, to the terror of all
ungrateful and disloy all persons. The Welsh line thus thrust from the
Principality, King Edward upon Saint Marks day had a son borne unto him in
Wales at Caernaruon, who also was called Edward, and reigned after him; and
that with the birth of a new Lord, the Welsh might be inured to A. D. 1285.
new laws, the King established (by example of K. John his Grandfather in
Ireland) the English laws and offices among them.

(16) But the King that he might not seem forgetful of his French affairs,
repaired into France, where he obtained sundry favors, though they A. D. 1287.
continued not long, and sat in person there with the French King in his
Parliament at the City of Paris, as a Lord or Peer of that Realm, in respect
of such lands as he had in those parts. Nor may A. Do. 1289.
here be forgotten an Act of singular munificence, and charity in this
renowned King, for the redemption Tho. VValsing.
of Charles Prince of Achaia, son and Heir of Charles King of Sicilia, who
had some years before been taken in a battle at Sea before Naples, by the
Galleys of Sicilia, fighting on the behalf of the King of Arragon: for whose
speedier enlargement, K. Edward disbursed thirty thousand pounds sterling, and
gave his own Knights in hostage, till Charles had sent in his two sons,
Robert and Lewis, as pledges to Alfonse king of Arragon: which done, Pol. Verg.
l. 17.
King Edward returned into Gascoigne, and there took upon him the Cross, in
full purpose to finish the journey which once he had undertaken, and had in
part performed against the Sarazens.

(17) In the mean time, to purge England (whither he was now returned) from
such corruptions, King Edward confiscates the Jews, and fines his Iusticiars.
and oppressions, as under which it groaned, and not neglecting therein his
particular gain, he banished the Jews out of the Realm, confiscating all
their An. 1290.
goods, leaving them nothing but money to bear their charges. And whereas they
by their cruel vsuries had one way eaten his people to the bones, and his
Iusticiars (like another kind of Jews) had ruined them with delays in their
suites, and enriched themselves with wicked corruptions, he (like a father of
his Country) put all those from their offices who were An honorable way to
enrich a King.
found guilty (and they were Tho. Walsing.
almost all) and punished them otherwise in a grievous manner, being first in
open Parliament convicted. The particulars whereof, by reason of the most just
and commendable example, John Stow ex Adam. Merius. Chron. Dunst. etc.
we will not think needless (the order of naming them only changed) to
recapitulate here. Sir Ralph Heugham, Chief Justice of the higher Bench, 7000.
marks. Sir John Louetot, Justice of the lower Bench, 3000. marks Sir William
Brompton Justice, 6000. marks.

S. Solomon Rochester, chief Justice of Assizes, 4000. M.

S. Richard Boyland, 4000. Marks.

S. Thomas Sodentone, 2000. Marks.

S. Walter de Hopton, 2000. Marks.

S. William Saham, Justice, 3000, Marks.

Robert Littelburie, Clerk, 1000. Marks.

Roger Leicester Clerk, 1000. Marks.

Adam de Stratton (beside other riches incredible) 32000. Marks. But with one
Sir Thomas Weyland the Kings Stow in Edwa. (...)
chief Justice, (being found belike most false) he dealt far more sternely,
for he not only seized upon all his moveable goods and Jewels (which he had
done to others) but also upon his immovable, and banished him moreover out of
the Kingdom. At which time the King constrained all his Justices to swear,
that from thence forth they would take no pension fee or gift of any man,
except only a breakfast, or the like present. O divine and still necessary
severity, only able to break the pernicious combination of men that under the
profession of law and offices of Justice make merchandise of honor, justice,
law, and conscience, which cannot in the end but ^ring forth ruin, and
confusion.

(18) That tempest now, which * Thomas Ersilton, a Scottish Rimer, is said to
have obscurely prophesied, Scottish affairs, Hect. Bo. trans. lib. 13.
alluding to the troubles of Scotland by reason of King Alexanders death;
happened about these times; which raised so great, and bloody contentions, that
it had almost blown up the regalitie of that kingdom by the very roots. For
when, by the violent fall from his horse, King Alexander had most unfortunately
lost his life, that Realm was woefully destitute of any apparent heir, sundry
persons standing in competition for the same. These things were thought to be
foreshewed from heaven by many Hect. Bo. lib. 13.
fearful presages, as extraordinary Meteors, Floods, Fires, and Pestilence.
But King Edward intending to sway that affair, and being upon his way toward
the borders, the death of his royal consort, and Queen, which he lamented
while himself did live, called him back to the celebration of her funerals:
as her excellent A. D. 1291.
virtues did well deserve: To our Nation she was a loving mother, and (says
Walsing.
one) the Column, and pillar (as it were) of the whole Realm. In her honor
the King her husband (who loved her above al worldly Creaturs) caused those
many famous As Charing Cross, and at Waltham, S. Albans, Dunstaple, etc.
tropheis, or crosses to be erected, wheresoever her noble coarse did rest, as
it was conveyed from Lincolneshire to burial in Westminster. Nor could any
thing, but the respect to other weighty matters, now presently in hand,
with-holde our pen from paying to her memory a far more copious commendation.
A. D. 1292.


(19) Those mourning offices as mournfully performed, the King repaires into
Northumberland, whither the greatest, and sagest persons of the Scottish nation
being come, He^. (...). li. 14.
themselves having sought to him, Edward makes claim to the superiority of
Scotland, and requires that the Competitors would quietly assent to his award,
alleging that the Crown of that Realm was held of him: for more credit to
which assertion he vouched sundry Marian. Scot. VV^. Mal. Henry Hu^. To. Houed.
etc.
books, and actss, whereunto the Scots replied, Tho. VValsing. in Edward. 1.
That they were ignorant, that any such superiority belonged to the King of
England: neither could they make answer to such things without a King the
head, upon whom it lay to hear such a denunciation, and protested, that other
answer they ought not as then to give, in regard of their Oath, which after
the death of Alexander their King they had made one to the other, and the same
to keep under pain of excommunication. Whereupon the King delivered to them
his letters Patents, in which he acknowledged, that the coming of those Scots,
on this side the water of Twede, should not be at any other time urged to
prejudice them, for coming again into England: that is, That their example
should not so be drawn to an argument of King Edwards right over them, as if
they were to come again upon duty; so prudentlie jealous were these Patriots
of their Countries liberty.

(20) The names of the Competitors were these, according to Walsingham: Erick,
King of Norway; who appeared by his Attorneys; Florence, Earl of Holland;
Robert le Brus, Lord of Annandale; John de Baliol, Lord of Galway; John de
Hastings, Lord of Abergeuenny; John Comin, Lord of Badenaw; Patrick de Dunbar,
Earl of March; John de Vesci, on his Fathers behalf; Nicholas de Sules;
William de Rosse. These all peaceably Tho. Walsingh. Ranul Higd. Polychr. lib.
7.
submitted themselves, for so much as concerned their several titles to the
Scottish Crown, to the final award and arbitration of King Edward, passing
thereof an authentic Instrument unto him; who having given caution to restore
the realm of Scotland, (within a certain prefixed time,) to that party to
whom the Crown thereof should be adjudged, had seisin delivered to him, the
better to put the sentence in execution, or (say the writers of that nation)
they giving him Bellendens transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14.
power to constrain the parties to stand to this sentence. The whole carriage
of which weighty business, being so diversely related and censured by the
writers of both nations, (though for the present it be not material, both
Kingdoms now blessedly acknowledging one absolute Superior) we will so trace
the steps of truth in a middle way, as resolving neither to impeach the action
of that glorious vmpier, nor preiudicate the right of our noble sister nation.
The State of Scotland now was not without manifest peril; for the Scots Hect.
Boe. lib. 14.
denying that their Kingdom was in any point subalterne to the Crown of
England, and King Edward either persuaded that it was so, or resolving and
plotting now to make it so, would not neglect the advantage of this So Boniface
calls (...) in his letters to king Edward.
Akphalisis or want of a known head in Scotland.

(21) Upon full ventilation therefore and scanning of all rights, the maine
doubt rested upon Lord Brus and Baliol, for the residue might seem rather to
affect the honor of having pretended title in blood to a Diadem, then to have
color to contend with either of them. Great was the advice, and deliberation
(as there was cause) which King Edward took therein, for not trusting to his
own judgment, he caused (says Hect. Boe. lib. 14.
Hector Boethius) twelve of the best Clerks or learned men of Scotland, and
twelve of England to concur as Assessors with him in that great decision.

(22) While this weighty cause was in debatement, A. D. 1293.
there fell out deadly strife between the English and Normans, occasioned by
one of them casually slain by the English; which mischief the King of France
forwardly nourisht, as thirsting for the duchy of Gascoigne, which best he
might attain by troubling the foreign affairs of King Edward, whom they saw
now entangled at home in so weighty emploiments. Whereupon the Normans slew
sundry of the English, and hung up one upon the mast of a Ship, whom they had
taken at Sea: but, ere long after, threescore A famous Seavictorie of the
English against the Normans
English ships encountering with two hundredth sail of Normans, laden with
wines, after a most bloody battle (wherein many Thom. Walsingh. ^aith 1500.
thousands of the French were slain) took, with their whole fleet, their
full revenge, and brought them into England.

(23) At last yet King Edward returning to Berwicke, having with him the said
twenty four Assessors, Hect. Boe. lib. 14.
as it were a jury of either nation, Edwardi (...) ad Pap^m apud Tho VValsingh.
and, with the good will and assent of the Scottish Lords, gave solemn
judgment with Baliol, as being descended of the eldest daughter of David,
Earl of Huntington, a Judgment gi uen by king Edward.
younger son of Scotland; whose issue (the line of the elder brother being
extinct) was to inherit, without question. But the strife being between the
descendents of the said David, of which the Lord Robert Bruce was also a
principal, reasons of importance were produced, which drew many men's
judgments, lib. 14. cap. 1.
to incline to him, as having a nearer interest to that Crown. But according
to the sentence, Baliol was solemnly crowned King of Scotland upon S. Andrews
day, and, in Christmas following, repaired to King Edward, A. D. 1294.
at Newcastle upon Tyne, and Hect. Boet. transl lib. 14. Cap. 2.
there (against the minds of many Scots) did homage unto him for the whole
Kingdom of Scotland.

(24) Meanetime the French King pursued the revenge of the Normans, demanding
restitution, and citing King Edward iudicially to appear to answer such
wrongs, as were done in Aquitaine: who, (desirous to settle his own affairs
at home, or, as some write, Polychr.
eager upon a match for himself in France) while he discovered either his
unwillingness to appear in that kind, or to war, suffered himself by a
French devise, to be merely deceived, and put out of his possession of
Gascoigne, to the great mischeife, and disadvantage of the English: whereupon
K. Edward highly incensed, called a Parliament at London, where John king of
Scotland was present; and had the full consent A. D. 1295.
of the whole Realm, to regaine that honestly by the sword which was
craftily gotten away by a cunning trick, Ypod. Neustr.
renouncing to the French his homage for Aquitain. Wales also was at the same
time full of troubles; but the fires of rebellion, there rashly kindled, were,
not long after, quenched with the blood of the Actors, and thousands of their
Accomplices.

(25) Baliol having thus obtained the Crown A. D. 1296.
of Scotland, and finding his party, by the homage which he had made to King
Edward, much empaired among the Scots, who greatly repined thereat; for
regaining their loves, Tho. UUals.
attempted a secret combination with the French against the English; which
Edward ignorant of, and Hect. Boe. li. 14.
requiring him by virtue of his homage to aid him with all his powers against
the King of France, Tho. Walls.
discovered (by Baliols delays, and trauerses) the said conspiracy. Whereupon
he advanced forward against the Scots with a puissant army to Newcastle upon
Tyne: The first blood which was drawn was of the English, of whom, the Scots
Tho. Walls. Polyd. Verg. lib. 17. says but one hundredth.
slew almost one thousand in a village under the leading of one Robert de Ros,
who had fled from King Edward: The City of Carlisle likewise was assaulted, and
the County of Cumberland spoiled by seven Earls of Scotland, and their
companies, which to Edward was not greatly displeasing, (as was said) for that
the first hostile acts were done by them, whom he had a full purpose to subdue,
that at last he might be sole in Albion; which, had not God reserved for other
times, we might wonder he effected not.

(26) King Edward therefore presented himself A. D. 1297.
before the strong Town of Berwick with a mighty host, there to auspicate his
entrance to a conquest of Scotland; and, after summons sent to the Town, abode
one whole day, without offer of violence: The Townsmen refusing to render, had
a victory of the English Mariners, who rashly entering, with twenty and four
Ships into the harbor, were repelled with the loss of four of their vessels,
which was soon revenged by the forceuble taking of Berwick, where Tho.
UUalsingh. Berwick taken by king Edward.
Hector Boethius says, there was exercised great lib. 14.
cruelty by the English. In the Town, the Flemish Merchants (who were
smothered by the English with fire) had a very strong house in the manner of a
Tower, from whence they leueld, at the entering of the English, with darts, and
iauelins, one of which casually slew Richard of Cornewal, a gallant Gentleman
brother to the Earl of Cornwall, which, in an army heated with former
contumelies, for the Scots upon the slaughter and repulse which they had made
of the English mariners, published certain rimes in derision, as ( Fabian.
What wenys King Edward with his Longshancks,
To have won Berwicke, all our vnthancks? etc.)
together with the remembrance of many fresh shrewd turns, might stir up
bloody effects. After the Town was thus taken, the Castle after stood not long
out, but rendered it self. Tho. Walls.
Sir William Douglas, captain thereof, was detained prisoner, and (as Fab.
some write) Sir Robert Bruce: others were suffered to depart, upon oath, to
bear no arms from thenceforth against the King of England. The loss of this
important Berwick the key of Scotland.
Town, and Castle was very great, for it was the key, and common Bulwark of
Scotland.

(27) While the English, at this place, were busy to cast a very deep ditch,
to hinder the sodeine inroades of their enemies, John King of Scotland sent two
religious men to the King of England with Tho. Walls.
letters; in which, alleging that he was by Oath bound to defend his own
kingdom, and people, he renounced his homage, and fealty, as extorted by
violence, and void in it self, being made without assent of the three estates
of his Realm. The resignation was admitted, King Edward commanding his
Chancellor to record the same for perpetual memory, as a justification of his
proceedings.

(28) The Scots hereupon, under the conduct of the Earls of Bucquhan, Menteth,
Strathern, Ros, Athol, Mar, and other of their nobility, made an incursion
into England, whence with the spoils of two religious houses, and other
booties they returned: But Patrick Earl of Dunbarre came to King Edwara
submitting himself; and the Castle of Dunbarre (by this submission being under
King Edwards protection) was regained by Scots: For recovery, or surregaining
whereof, the King sent John Earl of Surrey, and Sussex, and William Earl of
Warwick, who were entertained with battle by the Scottish nation, of whom the
English, Tho. Walsingh. Hect. Bo. l. 14. Fabian.
after cruel fight, obtained a victory of great importance, the chase holding
about eight miles, in which the slaughter was not small. The siege of Dunbarre
being reinforced. King Edward had it yielded unto him, at his coming, wherein
were taken three Earls, six or seven Barons, besides many knights, and
Esquires, which were all sent prisoners to diverse Castles of England, and (if
some say true) not put to the sword (as Hector transported perhaps with hatred
to Edward writes) contrary to his word, and faith given.

(29) King Edward knowing as well how to use a victory, as to get it, having a
present spirit upon all advantages, and turns of fortune, takes the Castle of
Rocksbrough, and (for a final end to this affair) marches to Edinburgh it
self (the chief Town of Scotland) which Hect. Boet. l. 14. Polyd. Virg. lib.
17 Tho. VValsing.
was shortly rendered: Then took they Striueling also, and drove Baliol to the
Bellind. transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14.
Castle of Forfar: where John Comin Lord of Strabogie submitted himself to
King Edward. About this time there came to the English camp great numbers of
Welsh soldiers, with whom he relieved many of the English Welsh aid against
Scotland. Irish aid against Scotland.
footmen, tired with service, sending them back into England. Thither also
came the Earls of Vlster with bands of Irish.

(30) The King of England prospering thus, passes with his army over the Tho.
Walls.
Scottish Sea, where while he kept the feast of Saint John Baptist Polyd. Ver.
li. 17.
at Perth (or Saint John's Town) there came messengers from Baliol, and the
Lords his factors, to sue for mercy, which was granted upon condition, that
they should render themselves to him as his subjects. lib. 14.
Hector Boethius says, that after this agreement (wherein Tho. Walls.
Anthony Bishop of Durham was used) John Comin brought Baliol, void of all
kingly habiliments with a The Baliol resignes.
white rod in his hand, to the English camp at Montros, where he resigned his
whole right that he either had, or might have to the Crown of Scotland, into
king Edwards hands, and made thereof a formal Charter in French, and at the
same time also (for fear of life) gave his son Edward for hostage, and
assurance of his fealty; by which final disclaim, the Lord Bruces right might
seem now unquestionable. But this resignation being thus made, king Edward
returns to Berwick, where Bellind. transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14. ca. 3.
all the Nobles of Scotland (at a Parliament there holden) were sworn to be
loyal, and true subjects to king Edward for ever after: and Tho. Walls.
hereof a solemn instrument was sealed by the said Lords (of whom John Comin
of Badenaw was first) bearing date at Berwick in the twenty fifth year of the
reign of their Sovereign Lord King Edward.

(31) John the late King, was sent to the Tower of London, and there was
honorably attended, having liberty for twenty miles about. The Scottish Lords
were confined within Trent, over which River they might not pass toward
Scotland, upon pain of life: The custody of Scotland was committed to John de
Warrenn, Earl of Surrey and Sussex, and the Treasurershippe thereof to Hugh de
Cressingham, but William de Ormesby was ordained Iusticiar, with this
particular commandment, that he should take the homages and fealties of all
such as held lands of the King. And the more to show his purpose, utterly to
dissolve the distinct Regality of Scotland, and to unite it to the English
Monarchy, as he had done Wales. he took out of Edinbrough the Crown,
Scepter and Cloth of Estate, offering them up at Fabian.
Saint Edwards shrine in Westminster, if the Author mistake not, for at Saint
Thomas at Canterbury, Tho. Walsingh.
he offered up Baliols Crown says another; and (besides many other Acts
tending to the abolishment of the Scottish Name, which Bellind trans. lib. 14.
cap 7.
Hector relates, as the burning their Records, abrogating their laws, altering
their forms of divine service, and transplanting all their learned men thence
unto his University of Oxford,) he took out of the Tho UUals.
Abbey of Scene the Cambden in Scotland. (...). 709. says it was a stone
enclosed within a wooden Chair.
Marble Chair, in which the Kings of Scotland were wont to be crowned, and
sent the same to Westminster, for Priests to sit therein at Celebration. This
Chair is the same upon which was engraven, the famous Prophetical Distichon:
Ni falat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Inuenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem,
If Fates go right, where ere this stone is pight,
The Regal race of Scots shall rule that place.
Which by whomsoever it was written, we who now live, find it happily
accomplished. But these great Acts of this year brought to the Commons of
England small commodity, upon whom the charge of the wars lay heavily, and it
is not often found, that the people gain much by their Princes Conquests.

(32) The force of Scotland with a greater force being thus for the present
broken, who would suppose, An. 1298.
that it could once again have lifted up the head, and that chiefly by the
particular virtue of a private man, as it after happened? which he had the more
opportunity to do, for that the King of England was diversely diuerted by
occasion of wars in Gascoigne for recovery of his own, and for aid of his
friends in Flanders, whom the French did afflict in hostile manner. The
Captain of the revolted troops in Scotland, was one William Wallace (the
son of Bellendens transl of Hect. Boet. l. 14. c. 4.
Sir Andrew Wallace of Cragie Knight, though some Tho. Walls. Polyd. Verg. lib.
17
upon hearesay, write contemptibly of his course of life, as of a public
robber) who, by the assistance of such as were outlawed, for refusing to do
their homage to King Edward, drove William de Ormesby (the Kings Iusticiar) out
of Scotland. Which King Edward hearing, discharged John Comin of Badenaw, and
the Earl of Bucquhan from their confinement, to the intent, that he might by
their endeavors, the sooner settle matters, but withal he gave John de Warren
Earl of Surrey commission to levy an Army: and the king (loath to be hindered
from his other destinations) easily yielded to such requests as were propounded
on the Scots behalf for that time. The voyage which he had then in hand, was
to transport from Winchelsea an Army, to assist the Earl of Flanders his
confederate.

(33) England at this time was not without great discontentments, which
Humphrey de Bohun Earl o^ Hereford and Essex Constable of England, and Roger
Bigot Earl of Norfolk, Marshall of England, did countenance; for present
satisfaction whereof, the King yielded (among other things) to confirm Magna
Charta, and Charta de Foresta, and that there should no Subsidy nor taxation
be levied upon the people, without the consent of the Prelates, Peers, and
people. But before this time, and while the King was absent out of the land,
the Scots under the leading of William VVallas, put to Tho. Walls. Hect. Boet.
lib. 14. Polyd. Vug. l. 17.
flight, the Earl Warren and all the English Forces which were with him,
taking them at advantage, as they were passing over a narrow Bridge, near unto
the Castle of Striuelin: the slaughter of the English was not small. There Hugh
de Cressingha^m Treasurer of Scotland for King Edward, feel in battle, whose
dead body for special hatred borne unto him, the Scots did flea, dividing his
skin among them. The King hearing of this overthrow, commands the Lords of
England by his letters to be ready to assist the said Earl Warren (his
Custos or Guardian of Scotland) with their Forces, in the Octaues of S. Hilary
at York, and also to proclaim such of the Scottish Lords as came not thither,
enemies of the State; but they kept themselves within Scotland, and came not.
Whereupon the English Captains marched to the rescue of the Castle of
Rocksbrough, whence William VVallace fled upon notice of their approach to
raise his siege. But King Edward (advertised of these accidents) having taken a
truce for two years with the A. D. 1299
King of France, by mediation of Bonifacius the Pope, who interposed himself
(non tanquam Iudex, sed amicabilis Compositor, says Walsingham, not as a
Judge, but as a friendly Composer, made have into England, where his presence
was extremely wanting: but in his way home, at a Town called Tho. Walls.
Ardeburg, all the Scots almost, which he had brought with him to serve in the
Flemish wars, forsook him, and went to Paris.

(34) After his arrival in England, he summoned a Parliament at York, giving
the Scots a day to appear thereat; which they not doing, nor acknowledging
that they ought to do, he entered with a mighty Army into their Country, his
Navy laden with victuals coasting along; which by contrary winds being holden
off for a time, put the Scots the rather in hope of victory, by reason of the
scarsity of provisions among the English; but three days before the Scots
appeared, the ships came, and plentifully refresht the fainting soldiers.
Hereupon the king led forward his people, and upon the next morning, a terrible
showt being heard from the Scottish host, the English ran to arms; but the
kings horse (affrighted with the sudden tumultuous noise) as he was putting
foot in stirrup, threw him to the earth, and striking with the hinder heels,
brake two of his ribs; who nevertheless upon the same horse proceeded in
person to the battle. William VVallace, who had won to himself, by many his
hardy enterprises a singular opinion among the Peers, and people, having set
his Scots in array (whose numbers far exceeded the English) used every where
this short speech unto them in stead of Orations, I have brought you to the
King, hop gifyee kun. For their more security, he had Tho Walsingh. The bloody
ourethrow at Pawkirke.
fixed between them and the English, certain Pales or stakes, bound together
with ropes, which the English Vauntguard brake down, and came to strokes. The
first which fled, were the Scottish Horsemen, leaving their Infanterie, or
battles of foot, open to that great destruction which followed, the victory
resting clearly to the English.

(35) Our Scottish Hect. Boet. l. 14.
Author writes, that by reason of emulation against VVallace, the Scots burning
in mutual hatred, made the enterprise easy to their enemies; which as it may
be very true, so certainly there was scarce any battle between the two
Nations, in which more Scottish blood was spilt then in this, for thereof
Universe. Cousin. lib. 2.
Sebastian Munster seems to mean, saying, that there were slain threescore
and ten thousand, which though we take not to be the true number, (for some
have Tho. Walls. Ypod. Neustr. Reu. Cest. Polychr. lib. 7.
threescore thousand, Fabian, and Harding.
others not so many) yet shows it that the slaughter was vast, as it could not
otherwise be, the Scottish footmen valiantly Polyd. Ver. lib. 17. Hect. Boet.
l. 14.
fighting as it were to the last man. Blood worthy to have been shed on both
sides, against another kind of enemy, then Christians, the deformity of which
effusions may justly represent to us the blessed estate of our now settled
union. This victory was obtained by the English upon Saint Mary Magdalens day,
at a place called Fawkirke: from which William Wallace, opening his way with
his Sword escaped. The Welshmen deserved ill of the King at this journey, for
that they foreslowed to charge upon the Pallisado, or fence of the Scots, in
hope (the English being vanquished, which by the inequality of their numbers,
they presumed would happen) that themselves might jointly with the Scots,
execute upon King Edward the hatred, which they bare him for the Tho. Walls.
evils he had brought upon their nation. After this victory the King took
sundry places, and returned into England by Carlisle.

(36) The two years truce formerly taken between the English and French, was
now, by the A. D. 1300.
interceding of Boniface Bishop of Rome, turned to a settled peace, who (among
other things) brought it about, that K. Edward should marry the French kings
sister Margaret, and Edward the kings son, the same kings daughter, though
(says Walsingham) he advanced not the good of his Realm by this match in any
point. To this affinity were added the greater strengthes of a domesticke
quiet, for the king (whom wars had together made renowned, and aged) graciously
and wisely yielded to confirm such grants of laws and liberties, as the Earls
and Barons (the pretended Conseruators of the Peoples interest,) did declare,
were by his promise to be confirmed to them at his return from Scotland: and
which he accordingly did, in a Parliament holden at London, upon prorogation,
in Quindena Paschae, where for their fuller satisfaction he Tho. Walls.
left out this Clause in the end, Saluo iure coronae nostrae, saving the right
of our Crown: and what at this time was wanting, he made up afterward in a
Parliament at Stamford.

(37) But that he might not seem willing to deny the Pope any just request, or
not to know the The Baliol set at liberty.
sweetness of an others freedom, he delivered to the hands of the Popes
Nuntios, John the late King of Scotland, (upon their assuming for King Edwards
indemnity,) whom they conveyed to his inheritance in France, where (upon every
side unfortunate) he remained as under the note of a false seducer, and of a
perjured person in king Edwards judgment, and with out any part of his regal
office over the Scottish nation; who found that the peace which King Edward
made in other places, did but turn to their more grievous affliction; for
albeit they had gotten Striuelyn by surrender of the English, and began with an
immortal desire of their ancient Liberty, to assemble again under William
Wallace, yet the time was not come of their deliverance; for King Edward
(according as it was formerly appointed,) having accomplished his marriage with
the French Kings sister at Canterbury, made it his whole affair, to finish the
annexation of Scotland to the Crown of England.

(38) He therefore accompanied with his son, and a dreadful Army, pursued
the matter so close, that whereas the Scots had gotten together again in
exceeding great numbers, under their several Captains, (whose Hect. Boe. lib.
14.
Envy had caused Wallace to give up all such authority, as the commonwealth of
Scotland had formerly granted unto him, for preservation of their freedoms,)
and flying before King Edward, whose fortune in war had worthily made him
terrible; that day (in Walsinghams judgment) had been irrecouerably fatal to
the Scottish name, if the English had been able to have followed them in their
Armor, over their bogges and mountains, or that the Welsh had with their
natural nimblenesse supplied the same. Sure it is, that Edward held himself
so fast in possession, that he neither would grant the Scottish Lords their
Baliol to reign over them, (which they requested says Walsingham) nor suffer
them to redeem such lands of theirs, as he had given to the English among
them.

(39) Arms failing, and the Scots having made their way in the Court of Rome,
procured inhibitory The Pope interposeth his authority for the relief of
Scotland.
letters from the Pope, which were brought by one Lumbardus into Scotland: but
the King swearing a Per sanguinem Dei.
terrible oath, said, that he would not desist. Nevertheless the Scots, after
a few days, requested the King to let them live in peace till they had taken
counsel of the Peers, and of the King of France, threatening that otherwise
the Pope would take the matter upon him. But the King with a disdainefull smile
answered: Have you done homage to me (as to the chief Lord of the Kingdom of
Scotland) and now suppose that I can be terrified with swelling lies, as if
(like one that had no power to compel) I would let the right which I have over
you to slip out of my hands? Let me hear no more of this, for if I do, I swear
by the Lord, I will consume all Scotland from sea to sea. On the other side,
the Scots did boldly enough reply, That in this cause they would shed their
blood for defense of justice, and their Countries liberty.

(40) About this time the King made his son Edward, (who was borne at
Caernaruon) Prince of The constancy of the Welshmens love to the first English
Prince of Wales.
Wales, and Earl of Chester, which so greatly contented the Welsh, because (in
regard of his birth place) they held him as one of theirs, that when all
friends did afterward forsake him (as the following reign will show) they
always stuck most loyally unto him, expressing wonderful love and affection,
and bewayling his heavy fortunes in woeful songs, which neither the dread of
his enemies, nor length of time could ever make them to Tho. UUalsingh.
forget.

(41) But, in the matter of Scotland, the King not to seem altogether to
neglect the Court of Rome, addressed thither the Earl of Lincoln, and the
Lord Hugh de Spenser with manifold complaints against the Scots, and
justification of his own proceedings; how beit at the Popes request, he
granted them truce from Hallowmas to Whitsontide. This very year, Cassan King
of Tartars gloriously slew one hundredth thousand Turks in a battle upon the
plain of Damascus, and was baptized thereupon, as acknowledging the victory to
come from the son of God: the joy whereof filled England, as other the parts
of Christendom.

(42) The justice of the English Arms against the Scots, being now again
directly impugned by the A. D. 1302.
Papal letters, comprehending sundry arguments on the behalf of that Nation,
King Edward in a Parliament at Lincoln published their contents, and by
consent of the whole representative body of the Realm, returned a copious
defense of his whole proceedings, with protestation, first, that he did not
exhibit any thing as inform of judgment, or trial of his cause, but for
satisfaction of his holy Fatherhoods conscience, and not otherwise. But whereas
the Pope had required the King to stand to his decision for matter of claim,
he writes, that thereunto he would make no answer, as having left that point
to the Earls and Peers of his land: who with one mind directly signify, that
their King was not to answer in judgment for any rights of the Crown of
England before any Tribunal under Heaven: and that (by sending Deputies or
Atturneyes to such an end) he should not make the said truth doubtful,
because it manifestly tended to the disinherison of the said Crown, which with
the help of God, they would resolutely, and with all their force maintain
against all men. So Polyd. Verg. lib. 17. A. D. 1303.
ceased that Action, and the sooner also, for that Bonifacius had much to do
at home, by reason of some great controversies between the French and him.
Mean time Sir John Segraue, Lord Segraue, a renowned Soldier, was sent
Governor or Custos into Scotland, with an Army, after the Truce expired, which
at the French Kings instance, King Edward had yielded unto for a time; John
Cumin, who had also been a Competitor for the Crown, was chosen by the Scots
Hect. Boe. lib. 14.
for their Governor.

(43) We may not here ouerpasse a victory (at Rosselin) which the Writers of
that nation celebrate, wherein the English were by them overcome, howbeit A. D.
1304.
there is in our Writers much variety in that relation. It is the saying of
Hector Boethius, that the English were about three for one, our ancient and
later authors say that the Scots had far the Thom. Walls. Abington. Tolyd.
Virg lib. 17
more people; he affirms, that it was in the plain field, ours that it was
Thom. Walsingh.
an Ambush; he that the Scots did put to flight, and took the spoils of three
whole battles, in either of which were Bellind. transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14.
cap. 6.
10000. English, ours, that the Scots by reason of their multitudes did only
ouerbeare the Vauntgard, from which the nearest of the other battles was Pol.
Virg. lib. 17.
four miles off. All agree in this that the Lord John Segraue (Ralfe Confrey
says Hector) who had the point or voward of the English (whose General he
also was) by dividing his army into three parts for their better relief,
weakened so his whole force, that thereby, and his unadvised forwardnes
(impatient to stay for his other powers) he gave occasion to the Scots of such
a victory. They had also taken the person of the said Lord General, but
Abington.
Sir Robert de Neuilc, who with others was at divine service, hearing thereof,
came with his troops of horse, rescued Segraue, slew many, put many to flight,
and brought away back the rest of the prisoners, without Tho. VValsing.
the loss of any one man of his own. The said Scottish Chronicle makes no
mention of William Walleys, at this discomfiture of the English, but gives the
whole glory thereof to Cumyn, and to Simon Fraser: whereas we attribute all to
Walleys, and make no mention of the other, with far less wrong to the
immortal deserts of Walleys; for he undoubtedly, was the only man, who kept up
Scotland, till near the time of deliverance.

(44) The Scottish Nation (as Bel^endens transl. lib. 14. Cap. 6.
Hector reports) had for their warrant in conscience, and justification of
resistance, the Popes judgment, who upon ripe deliberation in their matter,
decreed (says he) that the Scots had just action of battle in defense of
their liberties against King Edward: who not much esteeming the doom of that
Oracle, upon the other side was persuaded he might proceed to subdue them
wholly to his dominion: and therefore, (upon report that the Scots were not only
up in Arms) but encouraged to greater attempts by this late success,) came in
person with a dreadful host, piercing therewith Belindens transl^. lib. 14.
cap. 6.
through all Scotland, from one end thereof to the other; from Rocksbrough to
Catnes, which is the farthest point in the length of that Land, being about
three hundredth miles: whither he marched by small iourneys, not an enemy
appearing with power to empeach him. For they, unable to make head, being so
continually wasted, did either for their safety betake themselves to the
woods, and Mountains, with their Walleys, or wholly submitted themselves,
Hect. Boet. lib. 14. cap (...).
swearing to be true to king Edward, there being in all Scotland but one Castle
(the Castle of Striueling) which stood out, and that also (upon King Edwards
return from Catnes) was Tho. VValsing.
absolutely surrendered to him; and therefore no great cause, why Hector should
call King Edward false Tyrant for committing the Captain and Garrison of that
Castle to sundry Prisons: So that had not God in his eternal providence,
favoring the liberty of that people, ordained some inaccessible places, and
natural strengths, where no Army could march nor be maintained, the Scots had
in all liklihood perpetually undergone the same fortune, which we the English
were brought into, for want of the like, by William the first, and his Normans:

(45) Therefore let profane discourses (with their Father Epicurus and
Lucretius) blush and tremble, as often as they shall dare to insin^ate any
thing against Gods wisdom in the Fabric of the world, as if the Craggy, and
desert places, thereof, had no use in nature, when (omitting all other reasons
of their being) the conservation of kingdoms, and nations was thus by them
effected. We had an Mat. Part.
Herward in the Conquerours time, as well as the Scots had a Walleys in this;
and we might perhaps at this hour have been without French mixtures, if God
had provided our Country of such Wastes, and deserts as either they or the
Welshmen did enjoy, who for many hundreths of years, after the ruin (...) in
Saint Peter's Church at Westminster, the twentieth day of November, in the first
year of his Fathers reign, Ann. Dom. 1272. in the same place, and under the
same Tomb where his brother John lies with his picture also in the Arch above
it.

(60) Alphons, the third son of Edward and Queen Elenor was borne at the
Town of Maine in Gascoigne, as his father and mother were in their return
toward England from Jerusalem, November 23. in the second year of his fathers
reign, 1273. he deceased at Windsor, August 4. in the twelfth year of his
age, 1285. and was buried at Westminster in Saint Peter's Church by Saint
Bennets Chapel, where his body lies under the Tomb of his Brothers, John
and Henry, his Image also there portraied with theirs.

(61) Edward, the fourth son of King Edward, and Queen Elenor, was borne
April 25. in the thirteenth year of his fathers reign, 1284. at Caernaruan in
Northwales, and after the death of Lewelin ap Griffith, in regard of the place
of his Nativity, was by his fathers Creation, with the consent of the Welsh
made Prince of Wales, the first of the sons and heirs apparent of the Kings
of England, that bare that Title, which afterward became ordinary to most of
the rest: he was also Earl of Ponthieu and Chester, and being made Knight by
his father at London on Whitsunday, in the thirty fourth year of his Reign,
1306. succeeded him the same year in the Kingdom of Wales.

(62) Elenor, the eldest daughter of King Edward and Queen Elenor was borne at
Windsor in the fiftieth year of King Henry her Grandfather, she was married
with all Ceremonies of Proxy to a Deputy for Alphons King of Arragon, son of
King Peter, who deceased A. Do. 1292. before the solemnization of marriage,
leaving his Kingdom to his brother James, and his new wife to another husband,
who was married at Bristow in the two and twentieth year of her fathers
reign, 1293. to Henry the 3. Earl of Barrie, whose Earldom lay in the
Eastborders of Champaigne in France. She had Issue by him Edward Earl of
Barrie, from whom descended the Earls and Dukes of that Country, whose
inheritance by Heirs general deuolued to the Kings of Arragon, and from them
again to the Dukes of Aniou that were Kings of Sicill. Henry another son of
hers was Bishop of Troys in Champagny. Helen her Daughter was marrird to
Henry Earl of Bloys; and Joan to John Warren Earl of Surrey, she was his wife
five years, and deceased 27. of her fathers reign, A. D. 1298.

(63) Joan the second daughter of King Edward, and Queen Eleanor, was borne in
the first year of her fathers reign, 1272. at a City in the holy land
sometime named Ptolomais, commonly called Acon and Aker, where her mother
remained during the wars that her father had with the Saracens: She was, at
eighteen years of age, married to Gilbert Clare called the Red, Earl of
Gloucester and Hereford, by whom she had issue, Earl Gilbert slain in
Scotland without issue; Eleanor, married first to Hugh Spencer (in her right,
Earl of Gloucester,) and after to William Zouch of Ricards castle. Margaret,
first married to Peter Gaueston, Earl of Cornwall, after to Hugh Audeley Earl
also of Gloucester; and Elizabeth Lady of Clare, married first to John son and
heir to Richard Burgh, Earl of Vlster in Ireland, mother of William Burgh
Earl of Vlster, and Grandmother of Elizabeth, Duchess of Clarence; secondly,
to Theobald Lord Verdon, and lastly, to Sir Roger Damary. This Joan suruiued
her husband, and was remarried to Sir Ralph Monthermere a Baron, father to
Margaret the mother of Thomas Mountacute Earl of Salisbury, of whom the now
Vicount Mountacute is descended; she lived thirty eight years, and deceased
in the first year of her brother King Edwards reign, and is buried at the
Friar Austines in Clare.

(64) Margaret the third daughter of King Edward and Queen Elenor, was borne
at the Castle of Windsor in the third year of her fathers reign, and of our
Lord, 1275. When she was fifteen years of age, she was married at
Westminster, July 9. in the eighteenth year of herfathers reign, A D. 1290. to
John the second, Duke of Brabant, by whom she had issue Duke John the third,
father of Margaret, wife of Lewis of Mechlin Earl of Flanders, and mother of
the Lady Margaret, the heir of Brabant and Flanders, who was married to Philip
Duke of Burgundy.

(65) Berenger the fourth Daughter of King Edward and Queen Elenor, was born
the 4. of her fathers reign, An. 1276. as John Eueresden the Monk of S.
Edmundsburie in Suffolk, has recorded in his book of English Annals, but
other mention there is none, but only from him: whereby it is likely that she
did not live to be married, but that she died in her childhood.

(66) Alice the fifth Daughter of king Edward and Queen Elenor, is by Thomas
Pickering of the Monastery of Whitby, (who wrote the large Genealogy of the
Kings of England and their issue) reported to have deceased without Issue.

(67) Marie, the sixth daughter of king Edward and Queen Elenor, was borne at
Windsor, April 22. in the eight year of her fathers reign, 1279. and at ten
years of age, A. D. 1289. September 8. she was made a Nun in the Monastery
of Ambresberie in Wiltshire, at the instance of Queen Elenor her Grandmother,
who at that time lived there in the habit of the same profession, although her
Parents were hardly enduced to yield their consents to that course.

(68) Elizabeth, the seventh Daughter of king Edward and Queen Elenor, was
borne at the Castle of Ruthland in Flintshire, in the thirteenth year of her
fathers reign, An. 1284. When she was foureteen years of age, she was
married at London to John the first of that name, Earl of Holland, Zeland, and
Lord of Freezeland, who died within two years after without Issue, and she
was remarried to Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Lord of Breknoke,
and high Constable of England, by whom she had Issue John and Humfrey, both
Earls successively after their Father; Edward, that died in Scotland without
issue; and William, who being created Earl of Northampton, while his Brothers
lived, after their deceases, was also Earl of Hereford and Essex, Lord of
Breknok and high Constable of England, and father of Earl Humfrey the tenth of
that name, and last of that house, who died without Issue male: she had also by
him two daughters, Elenor married to James Butler Earl of Ormond, and Margaret
to Hugh Courtney the first, Earl of Devonshire. She was this Earls wife
fourteen years; lived thirty three, deceased in the ninth year of the reign
of king Edward her brother, A. D. 1316. and was buried in the Church of S.
James, at the Abbey of Saffron Walden in Essex.

(69) Beatrice, the eight daughter of King Edward and Queen Elenor, bare the
name of Beatrice Duchess of Britannie her fathers sister: she is by some
Genealogists mentioned to have lived till she was marriageable, but yet no
mention being made of her match, it seems she died unmarried.

(70) Blanch, the ninth daughter of king Edward, and the last of Queen Elenor,
is so mentioned by Thomas Pickering, and some others, but not at all by Thomas
Ebraham a Monk, who made a Pedigree of the Kings of England, but she is by
the rest reported to have died in her childhood.

(71) Thomas, the fifth son of king Edward, and the first of Queen Margaret
his second wife, was borne at a little village in Yorkshire called Brotherton,
June 1. in the nine and twenteth year of his fathers reign, Ann. 1300. he
was created Earl of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England, which Earledomes
the last Earl Roger Bigod, leaving no Issue, left to the disposition of the
King his father. He had two wives, of which the first was Alice the daughter of
Sir Roger Hayles of Harwich in Suffolk, by whom he had issue Edward, who
married Beatrice the daughter of Roger Mortimer the first, Earl of March, but
he died before his father without Issue; and two daughters, Margaret twice
married, first to John Lord Segraue, by whom she had Elizabeth Duchess of
Norfolk, wife of John Lord Mowbray (from whom the Mowbrayes and Howards Dukes
of Norffolke, and Earls Marshall descended;) secondly, to Sir Walter Manny a
Knight of Cambray, and by him had Anne wife of John Hastings the elder Earl of
Pembroke, and mother of Earl John the younger, that died without Issue; his
youngest daughter Alice was married to Sir Edward Montacute, and had by him
three daughters, Elizabeth and Joan married to Walter and William two of the
Vffords, and Maud that died unmarried. The second wife of this Earl Thomas,
was Mary the daughter of William Lord Ros, and widow of Sir Ralph Cobham, who
suruiuing him without Issue by him, she was married the third time to William
Lord Brerose of Brember.

(72) Edmund, his sixth son by Queen Margaret, was borne at Woodstocke in
Oxfordshire, August 5 in the thirtieth year of the reign of his Father, A.
1301. He was created Earl of Kent, and married Margaret daughter of John, and
sister and sole heir of Thomas Lord VVakes of Lydel in the County of
Northampton, by her he had Issue two sons and one daughter: Edmund his eldest
son was Earl of Kent after his father, and died under age without wife or
issue: John the younger was Earl also after his brother, he married Elizabeth
the daughter of the Duke of Gulike, and died like vise without Issue; His
daughter was Joan, for her beauty called the fair Maid of Kent, first married
to William Mountacute Earl of Salisbury, and from him divorced, and remarried
to Sir Thomas Holland, in her right, Earl of Kent, and by her, father of
Thomas, and John Holland Duke of Surrey, and Earl of Huntington: and lastly,
she was the wife of Edward of Woodstocke, the Black Prince of Wales, and by
him, mother of King Richard the second. This Earl Edmund was beheaded at
Winchester the 1^. of March, in the fourth year of King Edward his Nephew.

(73) Eleanor the tenth daughter and fifteenth child of King Edward, and the
last child of Queen Margaret his second wife, was borne at Winchester the sixth
day of May, in the five and thirtieth, and last year of her fathers Reign,
being the year of our Lord 1306. she deceased in her Childhood, and was
buried in S. Peter's Church at Westminster, by her brother John, Henry and
Alfons, under the monument before named with her picture over it.

EDWARD THE SECOND, LORD OF Monarch 48
Edward II.
IRELAND, AND DVKE OF AQVITAINE, etc. THE FORTIE-EIGHTH MONARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS
REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XI.


THat the Mind is not derived from Parents, certainly the second Edward
(called of Caeernaruon) might (if nothing else) abundantly show, being of a
most valiant, wise and fortunate father, an unlike son; yet not to begin
our description of his courses, with prejudice of his person, we will so temper
our style, that by his own actions sincerely related, rather then by any
verbal censures the man may be judged. This cannot be denied, that whereas
from the Conquest till his time, England though it endured (by Gods just
judgments) many bitter, sad and heavy storms through some headiness,
ambition, or other sicknesses of mind in the Princes thereof, yet had she Men
to sway and govern her, and those distempers were as the perturbations
incident to vigorous dispositions; whereas under this Edward, who could neither
get nor keep, it seemed to endure the leuities of a Child, though his years,
being about twenty and three, might have exempted him from so great infancy of
judgment, as his reign discovered.

(2) Never came Prince to the crown with more general applause then he: so
great hopes of doing well, his Victorious father, Edward of Thom. de la Moor.
Winchester had left upon him, besides the right of succession, whose last
warning and terrible adiurations you have heard: with the Tho. VValsing.
utter contempt and breach whereof, to the destruction of himself, and his
friends, he in a manner auspicated his government.

(3) After that Edward had in his best manner provided for the Pol. Virg. lib.
18.
affairs of Scotland, where (at Domfrees) many of the Scottish Hect. Boe. lib.
14 Bellind. his tran. lib. 14. cap 9.
Lords did their homage to him, as they had to his Father; the first task
which he gave of his future behauiours at home, was a rigorous revenge taken
by him upon Walter de Langton Bishop of Chester, Treasurer of England, and
principal Executor of the last Will of the deceased King, whose body was not
as yet interred, but by the care of the Executors, conveyed with funeral pomp
to Waltham, and (after sixteen weeks) to Westminster, where under a plain
monument the same at this present rests. The Bishops crime was a kind of good
freedom, which he used in the late Kings days, in Thom. Walsingh.
gravely reproving the Prince for his misdemeanors, and shortning his waste of
coin by a frugall moderation; and particularly, Fabian. A. R. 28. Edw. 1.
for that he had complained of Peirs Gaueston, whereupon ensued Prince Edwards
imprisonment, and the others banishment, and therefore coming now to the
Crown, he arrested the Bishop by Sir John Felton Constable of the Tower,
and imprisoned him in Will. Packington apud John Stow.
Wallingford Castle, seizing upon all his temporal goods and The Abbot of
Saint Albans was compelled to pay great sums which he ought to the Bishop,
and the king acquitted him. Lib. Monast. S: Alban. MS. A. D. 1309.
credites, there being not a man in the Realm who durst speak a word on his
behalf, (so great displeasure he had conceived, seeking utterly to ruin him)
till afterward by means of the Papal authority, he was restored, and in a
faint sort reconciled.

(4) The thing which suited best with his youthful affections, to wit, the
marriage of young Isabel, daughter of Philip the Fair, King of France, he
performed with wonderful magnificence at Bolein, at which solemnity were
present besides all others, The King of France Father to the Bride; The King of
The meeting of 5 Kings and 4 Queens.
Navarre his son; The King of Almaine; The King of Sicill; Marie Queen of
France; Margaret Queen Dowager of England, her daughter; The Queen of
Navarre. There was also present (as no Sunshine but has shadow) Tho. de la
More.
Peirs of Gaueston, the beloved Minion of this Edward, whose reentertainement
the dying King had so seriously forbidden, whom notwithstanding, together with
his own new wife, he brought into England.

(5) This fatal favorite of this young King was a stranger borne, but a Tho.
Walls.
Gentleman, and (in regard Peirs de Gaueston described.
of good service done by the Father of Peirs in Gascoigne, Ypod. Neust.
brought up (at old king Edwards own appointment) with this Prince: from whom
not to derogate in any point, as if he had without some appearances of worth
and value embraced Peirs, it is certain (by that which a Tho. de la More
Knight and seruitor of this very King has left written) that he had a sharp
wit in a comely shape, and briefly, was such an one, as we use to call very
fine; Neither yet was he vnhardie in Arms, but of commendable performance,
whereof (says de la Moore) he gave proof against the Scots, (to whom Be^ind.
transl. lib. 14 cap. 9.
he was alike hateful as to the English) till he was recalled to satisfy
such as (says their Courtier) did envy his graces, and good success; but of
his Christian or moral virtues (which only make men truly commendable) there
is great silence in Authors, though not of his vices, whereof we shall have
occasion enough to speak hereafter.

(6) At the Coronation of the King and Queen, (which the Lords would have
empeached, had he not promised reasonably to Act. and Mon. p. 459.
satisfy them about Gaueston) none was Tho. de la More
near to Peirs in bravery of apparel, or delicacie of fashion, which (and
for that the King gave him Tho. Walls.
S. Edwards Crown to carry in that pomp,) greatly increased the offense of
the Lords against him: But he that (having a King to back him) knew no other
means to extinguish hatred, but by daring it to the uttermost, spared not
afterward to scoff and reproach the principal Peers, Tho. Walls. in fine
Edw. 1.
calling Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Stage-plaier; Aimerie de Valence Earl of
Pembroke, Joseph the Jew, because he was pale and tall; and Guy Earl of
Warwick, the black dog of Ardern: all whom, and others, he at a Idem Tho.
Walsingham in Edw. 2.
Turneament by him proclaimed and holden, handled vilely.

(7) But King Edward was daily more and more possessed with the familiarity of
Peirs, who to establish his interest in the vnprudent Prince, by sensualities
and riotous practices, filled the Court Polyd. Virg.
with buffons, parasites, and the like pernicious instruments, drawing Edward
from the thought of al great enterprises, in accomplishment of his fathers
will, or discharge of his particular duty, to all sorts of unworthy vanities,
and sinful delights; while himself in the mean space reuelled in all
outward felicity, wasting the riches of the Kingdom, or converting them to his
private uses. For (fearing belike that the time might come again to undergo
banishment) he transported much treasure into foreign parts, and much he had
to transport; for not only by the Tho. Walsingh. lib. S. Alban. MS
sale of his favor with the King, to which there was no speeding approach but
by Gaueston, (who used to peize the gifts, more then the causes) but also by
the kings prodigality, he had whatsoever could be powered upon him: for
(though it might seem incredible) he both gave him his jewels and ancestors
treasure, and Chr. Dunstab.
even the Crown it self of his victorious father; not sticking to profess,
that (if it lay in him) he should succeed him in the kingdom.

(8) The Lords (who for reverence of the King sat down by their private
injuries, in hope there would A. D. 1311. Peirs de Gaueston Earl of Cornwall
banished for ever
be a season, in which their Soueraign might by timely and sweet admonitions
recover the use of himself,) not thinking it tolerable to be now any longer
silent, (and the rather, lest that Peirs, farther abusing his greatness,
should Tho. VValsin.
bring in Forreiners, not only to the prejudice of the English laws and
customs, but of their authority also and places,) prevailed so much with the
King, in a Parliament holden at London (where sundry provisions concerning the
liberties of the people, and execution of Justice, were enacted, and by
corporal oath confirmed by the King himself,) that among them, the decree of
Gauestons perpetual banishment, was by the king (overcome with a mere
necessity for satisfaction of the Kingdom, to whom the said Earl of Cornwall
was odious) unwillingly suffered to pass; and the king was thereupon
regratified with a Subsidy of the twentieth part of the subjects goods. The
king also took his Oath not to revoke the said Earl of Cornwall from
banishment (if it may be called a banishment) wherein S. Th. de la More
he had the kingdom of Ireland entrusted to his charge, and for the securing
thereof against rebels, was furnished with men and money by the king.

(9) Yet forgetting, that those affections, which The Earl of Cornwall revoked.
oftentimes deserve praise in a private person, are subject to much
construction in a public, and neglecting both his deceased fathers so solemn
adiurations, and also his own oath, as careless of the sequel, he calls
Earl Peirs home, with whose love he was most fondly, and most passionatelie
transported, and (as if he had received some divine benefit) gave him most
joyous welcome at the Castle of Flint in Northwales, and John Stow. Tho. Walls.
Tho. de la Moore.
bestowed upon him for wife Joan of Acres, Countess of Gloucester his sisters
daughter, resolving with himself to retain his Gaueston, maugre all his
Earls and Barons, or (for the love of him) to put his Crown and life in
peril when time should serve. In which, whether the king or his favorite
showed less discretion, it is not at the first sight easily determinable; it
being as unsafe for the one, with so offensine behavior, to affect immoderate
show and use of grace, as for the other, to the injury of his name and realm
to bestow the same.

(10) The contemptibilitie and vanity of this effeminate argument detaines us
longer, then for the Is the third time banished, and returns.
quality thereof were fitting, did not so much mischief issue out of it. For
Peirs (of his own nature insolent) being thus (above reason, or his own
dareings) advanced to alliance with the blood royal, was so far from all
amendment, as he rather seemed to strive to outgoe himself in his former
courses, consuming so much of the kings treasure and means, that he had Tho.
VValsingh.
not wherewith to defray ordinary charges, or to pay for the necessaries of
his Court. The young Queen also took herself not to be a little wronged by
this ungracious man's predominancie, and thereof sent her complaints to the king
of France her father, which concerned injuries in the highest kind, as in her
bed (the King being drawn by Gaueston to Act and Mon. p. 460. Fabian.
adultery) and in her honor and Tho. Walsingh.
maintenance. Whereupon the Peers of the land, animated by the King of France,
so confidently dealt with Edward, that his Earl now the third time did abjure
the Realm: but (the King of France and his enemies making foreign parts
unsure for him to abide in) he returned in Christmas to the general
perturbation of the Kingdom, and to his own certain ruin, for that the
Barons (his adversaries) had gotten him banished with this Prouiso, Act. and
Mon. 461 colom. 1. Tho. Walls.
that if at any time afterward he were taken in England, he should be
forthwith apprehended and suffer death. But an Angel from heaven could not
seem more welcome, then this most faithful friend (as that Tho. de la More.
Courtier calls him) was unto King Edward, who Continuator Trivet. MS.
forthwith advanced him to be his principal Secretary.

(11) Upon report of Gauestons return, the chief Lords, as well
Ecclesiastical as temporal (Walter Bishop of Couentree excepted, Tho. Walls.
who allowed the Kings affections toward Gaueston; and procured him to break
the former agreements, which were made and sworn in the Parliament at London,)
consulted upon a desperate course of reformation in this point, and made choice
of Thomas Earl of Lancaster to be their leader. This Thomas was son of
Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Leicester and Ferrers, second son of Henry the
third King of England, and in right of his wife (after her fathers decease,
which happened about this time) Earl of Lincoln, Salisburie, and (besides many
other great Lands in Yorkshire, Cumberland, and Wales) he had the Earledom of
John Stow.
Artoys in Picardy, so that without comparison he was the greatest subject of
the Kingdom.

(12) The Issue of which combination before we pursue, we may not here in our
way ouerslippe a strange alteration both here in England, and in all
Christendom, by the universal extinguishment of the Order of the Templars,
wrought about this time by the procurement of the French King, who being so
gracious with Pope Clement, that formerly Nic. Trivet ad an. 1306. In those
days it was thought the Pope might be an heretic.
he sent Ambassadors to crave of his holiness with great importunity, that
the bones of his Predecessor Pope Boniface might be burnt as being an
Heretic; so now also he so far prevailed with him, that in the Council at
Vienna this so highly esteemed Order, was upon clear proof of their general
odious sins, and scarce credible impieties, utterly abolished through
Christendom. The French King Fox Martyr^log. page 460.
caused 54. of that Order, together with their Great Master to be burnt at
Paris; and though that King hoped to convert all the Lands of that Society to
his sons use, whom he intended to make King of Jerusalem; yet the Pope and
Council annexed their possessions to the Order of the Knights Hospitalers,
called commonly Knights of the Rhodes. Notwithstanding, in England (where such
Papal commands went not always for laws) the heirs of the Donours, and such
as had endowed the Templars here with lands, entered upon those parts of their
ancient Patrimonies after the dissolution of the Order, and (says our Tho. de
la More.
Courtier) detained them until not long after, they were by Parliament wholly
transferred unto the Knights of the Rhodes, John Stow. Ypod. Neust.
or of S. John of Jerusalem.

(13) King Edward was now at York, and Earl Thomas, according to that which
had been concluded among the combined Lords, who resolved to A. D. 1312.
try all extremities, rather then any longer to endure Peirs Ga^eston, (as
being persuaded while that Kingbane breathed, peace could neither be maintained
in the Realm, nor the King abound in treasure, nor the Queen enjoy his love)
sent humble Thom. Walsingh
petitions by honorable messengers to their Sovereign, requesting him to
deliver the man into their hands, or to drive him from his company out of
England. But the selfe-wild King Act. and Mon. page 461. col. 1.
preferring the dearness of one stranger before the love of the whole Realm,
would not condescend.

(14) Afterward, Peirs (whom Polyd. Virg. li. 18
the Earls pursued with an Army) being Chron. R. Auelburie. Tho. de la More.
Tho. Walls.
entrusted for his safeguard to Aimerie de Valence Earl of Pembrok, was left
by him but one night at a Village or Manor called Dathington between Oxford
and Warwick, (being a place neither Tho. de la More
far enough off, nor strong enough) pretending to have conuaied him on the
next day to the Castle of Wallingford, the said Aimerie in the mean space
departing to lodge with his Countess, who lay hard by: but, the said Aimerie
conniuing thereat (as our Tho. de la More.
Courtier charge him, who also writes, that he took a solemn oath before
the king to do his best to safe conduct Gaueston, the king purposing in the
mean time to labor his peace with the Lords Ran. Cestr. l. 7. c. 41.
upon any conditions) Guy Earl of Warwick with his people surprised him the
same night, and took him to his Castle of Warwick, where in a place called
Blacklow (afterward Act. and Mon. pa. 462.
Gaueshead) his head was stricken off at the commandment Tho. de la More.
and in the presence of the Earls of Lancaster, Warwick, and Hereford, Tho.
Walls.
as of one that had been a subuerter of the laws, and an open Traitor to the
Kingdom. In which bold attempt, themselves (who yet pretended so much standing
for the liberties of the land,) did most unadvisedly infringe a Capital branch
of the same Franchises, in putting to death an Earl, and so dear a friend of
the Kings, Continuator Nich. Trivet.
without any judicial proceeding by trial of his Peers, which caused a
lasting hatred betwixt the King and his Nobles.

(15) There wanted nothing now to King Edward but present means to revenge the
blood of his friend, or rather of his halfe-selfe, the lack whereof did
increase the sorrow he took for his death; which being well known to the
Lords, they resolved not to lay down Arms, till they had provided for their
security, and the performance of all such points, as concerned the temperament
of the Regal power, that (under color thereof) the Nobles themselves might
finger some part of the Sovereign government. The King was then at London, and
the Lords at Dunstaple: but by the continual interdealings of the Prelates,
and of Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, who stood neutrall, the kindling
displeasures were for the present allaied, upon condition that the Lords should
restore to the King all such things, once belonging to Peirs Gaueston, as they
had taken at Newcastle, which they accordingly did.

(16) King Edward nevertheless, as if his soul were ouercast with some black
cloud, continued Edward of Windsor borne.
mourning, till it pleased God to enlighten the world with the birth of a young
Prince, whose noble Acts did afterward redeem all the blemishes wherewith his
Fathers infelicities had darkened the brightness of the English name, and at
this present cleared the mind of the sorrowful King his father: for Ran.
Cestr. lib. 7. cap. 41. Fabian.
upon Saint Brices day, Isabel his Queen brought forth her first son at
Windsor, which caused great rejoicing through the Kingdom. Her French kindred
and friends (which were there in good numbers of either sex) and among them as
chief, the Queens own brother, Lewis the French Kings son, would have had
the Infant at his Baptism named Lewis, but the English Lords would Act. and
Mon. 462. Col. 1.
not permit, who therefore was after his Fathers and Grandfathers name, called
Edward. This was he who afterward raised the honor of English Cheualrie to so
high a point, by his famous victories in France and elsewhere.

(17) The evil will which the King bare in his mind against the Barons for
their ouer-ruling his affections, and the death of Gaueston, by sundry bad
offices and sycophancies of the Tho. Walls.
French at Windsor was rubd so hard upon, that it grew raw again before it was
half healed. Therefore in a Parliament at London the king sharply charged
those presumptuous Lords with their contempt against him in the spoils they
had committed at Newcastle, and (which most afflicted his languishing spirit)
in taking, and wickedly killing Peirs Gaueston. To all which, they stoutely
answered, Act. and Mon.
that they had not offended in any point, but deserved his royal favor, for
that they had not gathered force against him, but against the public enemy of
the Realm, etc. How beit, to prevent the feared mischief of civil Arms, by
the working of the young Queen, of the Prelates, and Earl of Gloucester, the
Lords in open Court at Westminster humbled themselves to the King, praying
grace; and the King granted to such of them, as would desire the same, his
gracious pardon. The whole house of Parliament seeing the kings wants, of their
own accord granted a Fifteenth; and al parts hereupon returned with joy and
peace, but not long after the Lord Guy de Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, who in
this Parliament was appointed to be of Privy Council with the King, deceased,
being (as by the Barons wel-willers Tho. Walls.
it was said) impoisoned by such of the Kings secret friends as did malign him.

(18) The mischievous effects of the Kings former misgouernment, began now
most perillouslie A. D. 1313. Scottish affairs.
to discover themselves. For the Scots his neighbors, who could not be
ignorant of all such griefs and maladies as festred in the heart and entrals
of England, had long since made their timely use thereof, adhering so to the
undaunted Bruce, that by degrees he had gotten a great strength, and was
again publicly received, and obeyed for King of Scotland, from most places
whereof he Tho. de la Mor. This according to Hector Boeti^, lib. 14. happened A.
D. 1309.
drove the English, and (in contempt of Edward) committed great spoil by
slaughter of People, burning of Towns in Northumberland, and other Acts of
hostility. The principal charge of Scotland for King Edward had been
entrusted to the Lord John Cumin a Scot, Earl of Bucquhan, whom Hect Boet. l.
14. Geo. (...).
King Robert had vanquished in battle, and was now (while Edward sat
bewitched with most unworthy languishments) grown potent, sending his Brother
Edward Bruce to besiege the Castle of Striuelin, which was in the hands of the
English.

(19) The King of England awakened out of his slumbers with these Alarums,
marched thereupon with a very great Army toward the said Castle. It An. D.
1314. King Edward with a mighty Army in Scotland
pleases Hector Boethius (putting off, as it were the Historian) to report
marvelous things of the numbers of Soldiers which came with King Edward in
this journey; for (if he say true) there were not fewer then one hundredth and
fifty thousand horsemen, and as many thousand footmen; and that we may not
suspect the multitude to be far greater then either the cause required, or the
realm of England could well afford, he informs us, that besides the English
there were in his aid at this time, Hollanders, Zelanders, Brabanders,
Flemings, Picards, Boloners, Gascoignes, Normans, with much people of many
other Regions; and that besides these three hundredth thousand men of war,
there were infinite families with their women, children, servants, and
household stuff: but because other Writers do ingenuously grant, and contain
probable matter enough for the honor of the Scottish Nation in this journey,
we will as near as we can, (being things to us neither up nor down, in
regard of the long time since these hostilities happened,) truly and freely,
though briefly inform our selves hereof.

(20) The Earls of Lancaster, Warren, Warwick, and Arundel (the greatest
Peers of the land) Tho. Walls.
refused to attend their King in this service, for that he had delaied to
ratify the points of their desired liberties, and provisions for the pretended
better government of England, by himself so often consented unto. In which as
their loyal affection cannot be much admired: so it is certain, that King
Edward hereby undertook that voyage with far the less force either of men
or counsel. Nevertheless his host was great enough (if numbers did sway in
such affairs, more then religion, discipline, and valor,) to have effected
more then it self did suffer. But King Edward and his people rather seemed to
go toward a Wedding or a Triumph, then to a battle, Tho. de la Mort Tho.
Walsingh. Polyd. Verg lib. 18 Bellind. the Scottish transl. of Hect. Boe. lib.
14. cap. 11.
adorning themselves with all sorts of riches, gold, silver, and the like
toies, in a kind of wanton manner, correspondent to the humor of the Prince
whom they followed.

(21) In this journey it was made manifest, what true and sober valiancie could
effect against light bravery and insolency. King Robert lodged with his forces
(being inferior in numbers to the English) not far off, where was nothing
but a religious, Hect. Boet.
devout and modest care, quickened (after manifold calamities, with a most noble
desire to recover the liberty of their Country, and to settle the same into
the hope whereof they were the rather erected by a fresh victory, which they
had obtained that day upon certain of the English Tho. UUalsingh. Hect. Boet.
lib. 14.
horsemen. King Edward on the contrary part nothing esteeming so slight a
presage, resolved upon the very next (being Midsommer, or Saint John Baptists
day) to take a terrible revenge upon the Scots: but how to effect the same the
care was not excessive; for in his Camp, Th. de la Mo^.
Wassaile, and Drinkehaile were thundered extraordinarily, as accounting
themselves sure of the victory: which kind of impiousselfe-trust, if God
Almighty did not sometime scourge with just and terrible confusions, what
outrages would not be executed.

(22) Far otherwise the Bruces Army: which by his commandment spent Bellind.
trans^. lib. 14 cap. 1.
the evening in making humble confession of their sins, that they might
(says our Author) be ready on the morrow to receive the blessed Sacrament, as
accordingly they did: Moreover to leave nothing undone which might advance
their cause; the Scots had dug before their Battalions, certain Hect. Boet.
lib. 14 ca. 11.
trenches or dikes Tho. de la More
three foot deep, and three foot broad, which (having fixed Hect. Boet. l^. q^
supra.
sharp stakes in them with their points upward) they covered so with The la
Mo^.
hurdles, that footmen treading warily) might pass, but not troops of horse.
Next to Gods anger against the English, (whom courtly Pride and Sloth had now
effeminated) this stratageme was the cause of their ruin: for whereas they
reposed much upon their Cauallerie, in these Pit-falles, the fury of their
charge was intercepted and broken, the riders being miserably slain by the
Scots, whom King Robert marching foremost on foot, had presented most
courageously to the enemy.

(23) The King of England not altogether careless, neither yet by his care
able to do much (as The English overthrown at Bannock^bourne.
one whom God was not well pleased with) had ordered his battles with some
advise, but upon the dismal and unexpected discomfiture of his horse in those
mischievous holes or ditches, was enforced, (after some troubled resistance) to
leave to the Scots the greatest victory that ever they had before or after.
Tho. VVals^.
Hardly could K. Edward be drawn to fly: the courage which it became such a
Monarch to have then first disclosing it self, till by his friends he was
enforced to seek his preservation by that more necessary then noble means,
and with him (besides others) the Lord Hugh Spencer (whom our Tho. de la M^.
U^s (...).
Courtier calls a ^aint hearted Kite) betook himself to like remedy.

(24) All things proved unfortunate to the English in this journey, for when
they perceived their Cauallerie thus miserably overthrown in the ditches, they
shot their arrows compass, with purpose to kill or gall such Scots as came to
the execution, but did them little or no harm, as they who were armed in the
fore-parts, and in stead of that, Tho. de la Mo^.
slew their friends, whose backs being toward them were unarmed.

(25) The loss fell much upon the Noblest, for there were slain in this
Battle, Hect. Boet. l. 14. Tho. de la Moore. Ypod. Ne^st.
Gilbert Earl of Gloucester (a man of singular valor and wisdom) the Lord
Robert de Clifford, and besides other Lords, about Tho. Walls.
seven hundredth Knights, Esquiers, and men of Armories. Of the rest the
slaughter could not be but great, though much the less, in regard the Scots
fought on foot. Hector says, that there were not slain fewer then fifty
thousand English, no Writer else, that hitherto we can meet with, exceedes the
fifth part of that number; the riches gotten by spoils and ransomes of the
English, were doubtless very great. Among the number of prisoners, the
principal was H^y de Bohun Earl of Hereford, but recovered af^rd by exchange
for King Roberts wife, who all this while was detained in England. This battle
was fought at Banocksbourne near Striuelin in Scotland.

(26) From this overthrow King Edward escaping to Berwicke, King Robert (who to
his great glory, as having himself been trained up among the English, used
such as were taken prisoners with singular Ypod. Neust.
humanity) sent thither to him the bodies of the Earl of Gloucester, and Lord
Clifford, that they might receive honorable interrement among their own
friends. But Edward (under whose unfortunate leading the English name sustained
so great dishonor and damage) withdrew to York, resolving (therein only
Princelike) to assemble new force, and either to be revenged, or to die. But
Polyd. Ver. li. 7. cap. 41. An. D. 1314.
all enterprises and attempts of that nature miscarried, for above twelve
years after; insomuch that great fear reigned among the Northern^e English,
who lay open to the first brunts and violences of the Scots, over whom many
fair days shone. And to augment the calamities of the North, many of the
disloiall English Tho. Walsingh. Ypod. Neust.
conspired with the enemy, and jointly spoiled the west parts of
Northumberland, nothing being secure, but that which walls defended.

(27) God, to humble the English, who through long prosperities had forgotten
both themselves and him, drew not back his heavy hand so; for seldom A. D.
1315. The woeful estate of England under the three plagues of Sword, dearth and
pestilence.
has so terrible a famine been heard of here, as succeeded to this overthrow:
so that for moderation of prices, a Parliament was assembled at London: but
(says Walsingham) as if God had been displeased at the said rates (which not
long after were repealed) Tho de la More. Tho. Walls.
things grew scarser day by day: and the dearth was generally such, that upon
Saint Laurences Eve, there was scarsely bread to be gotten for sustentation of
the Kings own family. This famine which lasted about two years was
accompanied with much mortality of people.

(28) But neither the dishonours taken in Scotland, nor innumerable afflictions
and discontentments at home, made Edward suspend the celebration of his
Gauestons funerals; whose Body with great pomp he caused to be transferred
from the place of his Gauestons funerals.
former burial, (which was among the Friars Preachers at Oxford) to
Kings-Langley in Hertfordshire, where he in person with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, four Bishops, many Abbots, and principal Churchmen did honor
the exequies, but few were present of the Nobility, whose great stomachs would
not give them leave to attend. Somewhat also to sweeten these general
acerbities, Lewelin Bren and his two sons, were brought up prisoners to
London, having burnt many towns upon the Marches, and committed some murders
with their Welsh adherents. A. D. 1316.


(29) Meane-while the state of the Kingdom was miserable, there being no love
betwixt the King and the Peers, nor any great Tho. UUals.
care in him or them of the common affairs; nevertheless they assembled at a
Parliament in London, where no great matter was concluded: for the famine and
pestilence increased. The famine was grown so terrible, that horse, dogs, yea
men and children were stolen for food, and (which is horrible to think) the
thieves newly brought into the Gaoles, were torn in pieces, and eaten
presently half alive, by such as had been longer there. In London it was
proclaimed, that no corn should be converted to Brewers uses, which Act the
King (moved with compassion toward his Nation) imitating, caused to be
executed through all the Kingdom; otherwise (says Walsingham) the greater
part of the people had died with penury of bread. The bloody flux or
dissenterie caused through raw and corrupt humors engendered by evil meat and
diet, raged every where, and together with other maladies brought such
multitudes of the poorer sort to their end, that the living could scarce
suffice to bury the dead.

(30) The King was now in so great dislike and An. D. 1317.
distrust with the Lords and Barons, that they would not appear at Clarendon,
where he held a great Council. To augment this fatal auersion, a certain
Knight belonging to John Earl Warren, stole away from Caneford in Dorsetshire,
the wife of Thomas Earl of Lancaster (chief of the Lords faction) not without
the Kings consent (as it was said) and brought her to the said Earl Warrens
Castle at Rigate, with great pomp, and in despite of the Earl; whom one
Richard de Saint Maurice, a wretched, lame, and bunchbackt Dwarf challenged
for wife, pretending that he was formerly contracted, and had lien with her,
which she (the greatest and noblest Inheretrix of her time) did openly
confess, to her immortal infamy, incurring alas (says Walsingham) the
public note of a most filthy strump^t. This deformed Elfe (having mighty
seconds) durst hereupon claim the Earledomes of Lincoln and Salisburie as in
her right, and in the mean time, the name and honor of Thomas the great Earl
was baffold, as it were, by a light and wicked woman.

(31) The parts of England beyond Humber, were now more and more afflicted; for
such as till then had opposed themselves against the Scots in defense of the
Country, perceiving all things left at large, in stead of Protectors became
Tyrants, Tho. VValsing.
says our Author; of defenders, destroyers; and of valiant Champions,
treacherous Chapmen; so that as between the hammer and the anuile, the Scots
upon the one side, and these false English on the other, all was lamentable,
and brought in a manner to nothing: and this face of things continued there
about four years.

(32) Neither did the King seem to have any will or power to relieve the
common calamities, but rather to convert his whole both wits and forces upon
reuenges against the Lords, who under pretense of their extorted provisions,
manifestly withdrew their loves, service and duties from him. wherefore feeling
himself thus weak and disfurnished, he besought the spiritual assistance of
Pope John the two and twentieth; who thereupon sent certain Cardinals to set
all things in quiet without bloodshed. Between the King and Earl of Lancaster
they established a peace, who, in a Tho. de la More.
certain plain near Leicester met, embraced and kissed each other; but when
they could not work the like with the Scots, they put that Country under
Interdict.

(33) For they (as it is the manner of prosperity) An. D. 1318 Edward Bruce
king of Ireland vanquished by the English, and slain.
after the victory at Banocksbourne, which clearly got them Scotland, did
begin to bethink themselves of gaining new Empire in Ireland. Thither Edward
Bruce Brother of King Robert had passed with an Army, procuring Bellind. (...).
lib. 14. cap. 12. Tho. Walls.
himself to be crowned King thereof by favor of some of the Irish Nobility,
whom nevertheless about three years from his first entrance, the English
under the conduct of the *Th. de la More.
Archbishop of Armagh, and of John Lord Brinningham *Pol. Virg. lib. 1^.
Iusticiar of Ireland, valiantly encountered, where, together with his late
usurped Kingdom, he lost his life. There were slain in that battle many
honorable Scots, besides the new King Edward, and above Tho. Walls.
five thousand others: his head was cut off Tpod. Neust. Polyd. V^g. lib. 18
at Dundalke (says Walsingham) but Hector Boethius writes that he was slain
in the battle it self. Thus did God temper one with another, and the just
reioycement which the Scots had conceived of their so happy victory over the
English at Banocksbourne, was sowred with this loss.

(34) But King Robert (as a most expert and vigilant Prince) did not suffer
this joy to continue long to the English, for by practice with one Hector.
Boet. lib. 14. Tho. Walls. Pol. Virg. lib. 18.
Peter Spalding to whom King Edward had entrusted the keeping of Berwicke, he
recovered it from the English, says Cap 17.
Harding, By treaty, with Peace, Spalding, and treason; after it had remained
twenty years in their possession; which when King Edward thought to have won
again, the Scots diuerted him from the siege, with incursions and slaughters
of his people in other parts of England, not failing much of surprising the
Queen in a village not far from York, where she soiourned during the siege
at Berwicke, the plot being laid, and drawn* between the Scots and some
perfidious English, whom King Robert had mouied for that purpose. But Spalding
after the treason done had the reward of a Ioh. Stow. Harding c. 172.
Traitor, for King Robert put him to death.

(35) To give some breathings after these so manifold troubles, a truce was
agreed upon and confirmed The beginning of civil wars.
between the two Kings of England and of Scotland, for the space of two
years, which brought forth confusion and not refreshment. For thus it happened;
The King upon the commendation of the Tho. de la More
Lords themselves, had made Hugh de Spenser Lord Chamberlain, who being at the
least of equal insolence, vices, and ambition to Gaueston, so wrought that he
succeeded in short time to all the graces of familiarity and power which ever
Gaueston enjoyed, as in like sort to all his hatred and envy. Hugh his father
an ancient Knight, the better to strengthen his sons courses, was likewise
employed, and grew in special favor with the King, who afterward also created
him Earl of Winchester, but the father in manners unlike to the son, was
ruined rather by a natural tenderness, then any malicious will. The son, as
he was of shape most lovely, so the very spirit it self of pride and rapine,
carried him to all sorts of intolerable behauiours and oppressions, that
Gaueston might with good reason seem to be wished for again. Against these
two, who wholly swayed the unfortunate King, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, The
Spensers banished.
and in a manner all the Barons of the Kingdom, (who meant the King should
love none but with their leave) did swell with such impatience, that (not
contented with the wast of their lands) they never rested till (by the terror
of civil Arms) those two favorites (father and son) were banished; they
thus revenging under public pretexts both public injuries and Tho. VValsin.
their own.

(36) In all contentions which happened between the King and his Lords, Queen
Isabel had ever hitherto A. D. 1321.
been a maker of Peace, doing therein worthy offices, but the evil stars of
the Earls of Lancaster and Hereford would not suffer her to continue any
longer so: for the Queen being denied lodging one night at the Castle of
Leedes in Kent, which belonged to the Lord of Badlesmere (one of the Earls
faction) she withdrew her good conceit, and was an author to the King of
presently revenging that dishonor, who upon her complaint, came in person with
many thousand Soldiers before the Castle, took the Holinsh. p. 331. col. 2.
Captain, and put both him and all the men therein to shameful death.
Moreover, longing to be righted against the Lords for their late insolences,
marched on to Circester taking many Castles, and besieging others: The Lords
(who little suspected any such sudden assaults) providing in the mean time
for their defense.

(37) Thither repaired to him (at his commandment) Hugh Spenser the son, who
had houered upon the Sea, expecting from thence the success of King Edward
pursues the Lords. Polyd. Verg. li. 8. A. D. 1322.
things upon the land. The Lords, who had fallen from their Sovereigns good
conceit, and wanting now their wonted Mediatri^ the Queen, lay open to all the
mischief which enemies could work them by the King, who (as taking his regal
power and authority to be in danger) resolved wisely and manfully, to die in
the quarrel, or to bring the Lords to be at his commandment. Mean time the
judgment given against the Spensers was reuersed as erroneous, and their
reuocation decreed at London by the Tho. de la More.
Arch-bishoppe of Canterbury and his Suffragans.

(38) The Lords not all of a like temper began to misdoubt, and many of them
forsook their Chief; (the Earl of Lancaster) and rendered themselves to the
King, or were apprehended; among which were the two Rogers Mortimers, who were
committed * Tho. VValsingh. Tho. de la More.
to the Tower of London, and others to Wallingford Castle. The faction weakened
by this defection made head in the North, under the Earl of Lancaster, who now
was to sight for his life. Thither the King marches, and with the only show
of his Army, made the Earl to fly from Burton upon Trent, whose forces in
their retreat or flight behaved themselves outragiously.

(39) But Gods heavy displeasure, and the Arm of the Kings power left them
not so: for at Burrowbrigge, Humfrey de Bohun was slain by a Welshman, who
thrust him into the body with a Spear from under the Bridge; and the Earl of
Lancaster himself with other principal men, Barons and knights, to the number
of above Th de la More.
fourscore and ten were taken prisoners, by a man of small fortunes, Andrew de
Herckley Captain of the City of Carleil, and Sir Simon Ward, Tho. Walls.
Captain of York, who with great forces out of those parts, stopped their
farther passage at Burrowbrigge, as the Kings forces took all safeguard from
them behind.

(40) The third day after their apprehension, the Tho. VValsing. Execution of
Nobles.
King in person being set in judgment at Pontfract, and with him Edmund Earl
of Kent, Aymerie Earl of Pemb^ke, John de Warren Earl of Surrey, and among
Holinsh. p. 330 col. 2.
others, the Lord Hugh de Spenser the Father, as also Ypod. Neust.
Hugh Spenser his son; the Earl of Lancaster was brought before them, and
had sentence pronounced against him Tho. de la More.
by the said Andrew de Herckley (created afterward Earl of Carliel) and the
Kings Iusticiar, the Hollinsh. p. 331. col. 1.
Lord Maplesthorpe, as against an Arch-Traitour; nevertheless, for reverence
of his blood (being the Kings near Kinsman) drawing and hanging were remitted
unto him, but his head was stricken off the same day without the Town of
Pontfract.

(41) Nor satisfied herewith, the King gave full way to revenge, putting to
shameful death, by drawing, * Act. and Mon. p. 463. col. 2 John Stow.
hanging, and (as some write) Tho. Walls.
quartering in sundry places, all the Barons (the Lord Roger D'amarie only
excepted, who died of his natural death) with sundry Baronets and Knights
taken at Burroughbrig and elsewhere. The Lord Badlesmere (at whose house this
tragical fire began) was executed at Canterbury. And that so great and
mighty a man as Thomas Earl of Lancaster, should not seem to die without a
bloody complement suitable to his condition; there were hanged and quartered
upon the same day at Pontefract Holinsh. p. 331. col. 2.
five or Ioh. Stow.
six Barons; and the next day at York were hanged in iron chains, the Lords
Clifford, Mowbray, Dey-uill; and others afterward * Act. and Mon pa. 463. col.
2. Fabian.
in other places, to the number in all (though all of them not Barons) of
Continu. Nich. Trivet. MS.
twenty and two, the chiefest Captains of the Realm suffered death for their
disloyalties. Threescore and twelve Knights * Tho. de la Moore says but about
18. and 5. banished.
more were dispersed into sundry prisons, who (says De la Moore) upon fines
paid had afterward their Liberties.

(42( As for the said Thomas Earl of Lancaster, there are so many reasons why
he cannot reasonably The quality of Earl Thomas described.
be judged either a good subject or a good man, that we may worthily wonder why
some at that time should repute him a Saint. Certainly, the wise and discreet
old Writers are not so opinionated of him; but note his private life for R^l.
Higden. Mo^st. Cestren^ Polych. l. 7. c. 42.
vicious, himself to be nothing S. Th. de la More and Polych. ib.
valorous, and of the public Thom. Walsingh.
not well deserving, omitting his contumelious behauiours toward the King his
Soueraign Lord in his discomforts, which as Walsingham forgets not to relate,
so thinks he that the like was worthily used toward that Earl himself, who,
when he was brought prisoner to Pontfract (his own Castle but then
surrendered) the whole multitude derided, and called him in scorn King Arthur:
by which name he was designed (as Holinsh. p. 329. col. 2.
some write) in the Scottish Cipher intercepted, proving a conspiracy with
Scots: but the very shop, where his and the other Barons original Treasons
were forged, was the Parliament house, wherein from time to time, they forced
on the King presumptuous and treasonous Ordinations, whereby the Peers
challenged, Continu. Nich. Trivet. MS.
not only to reform the Kings house and Council, and to place and displace
all great Officers at their pleasure, but even a joint interest in the Regiment
of the Kingdom together with the King, which William Inge (a Judge of the
Common Law) with other like sticklers, traitorously persuading them to be
according to Law.

(43) Of his ill deseruings toward the Commonweal (who for the good thereof
could not digest any indignity) let this be a kind of demonstration: for when
King Edward having by strait siege brought Tho Walls. ad A. D. 1319.
Berwicke near to terms of yielding, chanced once to break forth (after his
vain manner) into these words; The Lord Hugh Spenser shall be captain of the
Castle, when it is taken: the Earl forthwith with others of his affection
abandoned the service: by reason of which departure, it was thought that
Berwicke was not as then obtained, Continu. Nich. Trivet. MS.
and that the enemy thereby had great advantage in all their attempts. The names
of such Barons (besides Banerets, and some few others of special note) as
perished by hatchet and halter for this business, as out of so great variety
of Writers we could now gather them were, At Ioh. Stow. Chron. Will. Risanger.
apud VVal^.
Pontfrait, Thomas Earl of Lancaster. The Lord Warren Lile. The Lord William
Tochet. The Lord Thomas Mandute. The Lord Henry de Bradburne. Thom. Walsingh.
The L. William Fitz-Willia^ the younger. The Lord William Cheyney.

At John Stow.
York. The Lord Roger Clifford, son of that Robert Lord Clifford, who was
slain by the Scots with Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, at the battle of
Banocksbourne in the service of this King. The Lord John Mowbray. The Lord
Iosceline Deynuile.

At Gloucester. The Lord Hollinsh. p. 331. col. 2.
John Gifford-
At London, The Lord Tho. VValsingh.
Henry Teyes.
At Windsor, The Lord Frances de Holinsh. p. 331. col. 2.
Aldenham.
At Canterbury, The Tho. VValsing.
L. Bartholmew de Badlesmere, The Hollinsh qu. supra, and Fabian.
L. Bartholmew de Ashburnham.

Never did English earth at one time drink so much blood of her Nobles in so
vile manner shed as at this, which, whatsoever could be pretended (as
doubtless their offense was capital) yet all was taken to be done as in the
quarrel of the Spensers only, nor was it unrevenged, as will appear: in the
mean space their enemies not contented with their blood, procured also the
Fabian. Holinsh. p. 332. c. 1.
confiscation of their estates and inheritances.

(44) King Edward thinking that this exploit had made him terrible as well to
the Scots, as it had done to the English, marches with a mighty host into
Scotland, from whence not long after (for want of victuals King Edward
endangered by the Scots.
) he was compelled to return without the honor of any atchieuement, and being
Tho. de la More. Tho. Wels.
upon his return, was suddenly by Scots assailed in the night, very narrowly
escaping in his own person, and with a few saved himself by flight, leaving
his Tpod. Neust.
treasure and furniture for pillage, and so came sorrowful to York. John de
Britain Earl of Richmond, was taken prisoner by the enemy, and the rest of the
Country defaced with destructions as far as to the walls of that City.

(45) Thus Tho. de la More
passed this year, to the English full of loss, reproach, and lamentation, by
reason of their intestine discord and the shambles of their Nobles: to the King
infamous, and hateful also for his unfortunate journey into the Northern
parts, etc. But these bloody and tempestuous winds blew some to profit; for
Fabian.
during the space of about five years after, the fortune of the Spencers
hugely increased, and the Queens decreased, who (for her relenting toward the
Lords, and expressing some dislikes of these ranckly-growing weeds) was grown
to bear a share in the persecution. And that these with such like violent men
working upon the Kings inclination, were the only Authors of that sharp
revenge taken upon the Lords, for their particular and inglorious enrichment
(for what else can we call the same, since that they betraide thereby their
Sovereigns Crown and Life to speedy destruction?) let it by this in part
appear, and move the world the rather to pity the seduced.

(46) Among them who were condemned for rising with the Earl of Lancaster,
there was one of a A. D. 1323. King Edward most bitte^ly vpbraids the Earl of
Lancasters death.
mean Family, for whose life nevertheless, because he had once served in
Court, and was pleasing to some of the Grands, or Potent favorites therein,
many interceded, and pressed the king so far on his behalf, that he brake
out into these Walsingham c^ them verba imperij.
most vehement words; A plague upon you, for cursed whisperers, malicious
backe-biters, wicked counselors, entreat you so for the life of a most
notorious knave, who would not speak one word for the life of my near
Kinsman, that most noble Knight Earl Thomas? Had he lived, we and our whole
Realm should have had special need and use of him. This fellow the longer he
lives, the more villainies he will commit, as having already filled my Kingdom
with his desperate outrages. By the soul of God he shall therefore die the
death he has deserved.

(47) By this then it is evident, that these tragedies against the Lords were
exploited by others; in which it is plain that this King (otherwise so devout
to God, so noble and so full of natural good propensions) was fatally
ouer-wrought by wicked counsel; though he therein be inexcusable, for good
nature (as we call it) cannot satisfy for public errors. But the condemned
man was forth with put to death accordingly; the King being most highly
offended, that none had entreated him on the Earls behalf, whom (says
Walsingham) he did in wardlie love. Nevertheless, he had not long before
created the elder Spenser Earl of Winchester, and decked the plume of his
fortunes with a toppe-feather taken out of the said late Earl of Lancasters
estate, that is to say, with the Castle and honor of Tho. VValsin.
Donington, parcel of the Earldom of Lincoln. Having thus far showed the
original of the mischief, we will hasten now to the last Act or Catastrophe
of our Edwards tragedy, only we will first remember some intercurring
matters.

(48) You have heard before, how that the Cardinals sent from the Pope, had (in
favor of the English) put Scotland under Interdict; wherefore King Robert now
at last dispatched the Bishop of Glascow, and Thomas Randolfe Earl of Murrey
to Rome, for obtaining release and absolution, but they returned without
effecting it. Whereupon King Robert moved to have a truce for thirteen years,
which King Edward accordingly granted, and the Pope Pol. Vir^. lib. 1^.
then absolved the Scots. The matters of Scotland seemed thus to be
sufficiently provided for during that time, and the rather for that somewhat
before the motion for truce, the King had caused the newly created Earl of
Carlisle Andrew de Herkley to be degraded, hanged, drawn and quartered for
treason, which he was convinced to have entered into with the Scots, upon Tho.
Walls.
whom he had before done special services, as having for that cause the Castle
and City of Carleil committed to his government. The truce with Scotland being
thus confirmed, the King makes his progress through the Ypod. Neust.
Counties of York and Lancaster, and the Marches of Wales, from whence the
late seditious had their nourishments, taking wise and careful courses for
ministration of Justice there, and prevention of like inconveniences, by
punishing their Authors severely. And Justices Chron. Dunst. apud John Stow.
void of all corruption, were appointed elsewhere.

(49) In the mean space, the new King of France Charles the fifth, a most
earnest enemy to the English A. D. 1324. An. Reg. 17. The I. Roger Mortimer
escapes out of the Tower
men's possessions there, sought occasions of quarrel with King Edward, who
while he consuled at home how to order that affair, the young L. Roger
Mortimer, one whom the Devil says our Tho. de la More
Courtier) reserved to kindle new dissension with, and to stir up a most
miserable civil war, having corrupted his Keepers, or (as some others write)
having potioned them with Ypod. Neust.
a sleepy drink, escaped out of the Tower of London, getting over clearly
without any empeachment into France.

(50) The Spensers both father and son, the one thus created Earl of
Winchester, and the other Earl of Gloucester, aspiring to the fullness of
command, and desirous to leave nothing in their eye, which might stumble their
sway with the King, failed not to beget immortal enmities both against
themselves and the King. The Queen took their carriage so heinously, because
(besides other things) they had abridged her means of maintenance, (while
themselves abounded in all riches and magnificence) as she complained S. Th.
de la More
That the daughter and sole heir of the king of France was married to a
gripple miser, and that being promised to be a Queen, she was become no
better then a waiting woman, living upon a pension from the Spensers.

(51) Thus was the matter, and as it were, the Embrion, of their common
destruction laid, and begun in the impotencie of a woman's will, to help out
the which with shrewd drifts and directions, they increase her side with Adam
Bishop of Hereford, by stripping him out of all his Temporalties as a
Traitor, for that he had supported the Mortimers in the Barons quarrel. This
Adam (says our Knight) was a man of most subtle wit, and in all worldly
policies profound, daring to do great things and factious withal, who for
this cause conceiving deepest hate, and therefore easily growing dear to the
Queen, made a great secret party. To which Henry Burwash Bishop of Lincoln,
who (for like causes) had been kept from his temporalties (about two years)
joined himself. Neither would the Spensers avarice suffer them to weaken the
multitudes of their enemies, for they sold the Kings gracious favor to such as
had been in the Barons quarrel, at so great rates that they by granting away
lands and Manours to the said Lords Spensers for their pardons etc. very many
of the Nobles were empouerished. To be short, the royal power being in the
hands of the Spensers, and Roger Baldock Chancellor, or of their Creatures and
Favorites; this other faction had the general discontentments of the Realm
to work upon for their advantage.

(52) The King thus guiding himself, and having sent his Brother Edmund Earl
of Kent (upon An. D. 1325.
notice of the first troubles) with Forces into Gascoigue, who gave some little
stay for a time to the French proceedings, till they might otherwise be
provided for, it came to this point at last: that whereas the King had a
purpose to have gone in person into France, the Spensers who were afraid to be
severed from his person, the only reverence whereof they knew to be their
safeguard, and yet not daring to attend him thither, or stay behind, Tho.
Walsingh.
persuaded the King contrary to the minds of all the rest, that the Queen (who
sought it) should go and negociate her husbands affair in France. She did so;
and whereas before her departure, things were in great extremity between the
two Nations, insomuch that all the French were banished out of England, not
they who were attendant on the Queen her self in nearest place being spared,
all matters by her negotiation and suite were quieted; upon condition that King
Edward should give to his son Edward of Windsor (afterward King) the Duchy
of Aquitaine, and Earldom of Pontine, for which the king of France was
pleased to accept his said young Nephews homage.

(53) This was done, and the Prince sent over for that purpose to his mother,
to the utter undoing of the King his Father, and of all his favorites. For the
heir of England being in foreign parts, among the contrary faction, all the
consultation was (under color of ruining the Spensers,) to accomplish farther
matters. The Prince, having (at Boys de Vincens) done his homage for that
Duchy and County to his uncle Charles de Valois King of France, was (as also
the Queen his mother) sent for back by the King about Michaelmas; but the
Queens conspiracy being not yet ripe, she deferred to obey, detaining her
son still.

(54) There went over with the young Prince, among many others, Walter
Stapleton, Bishop of Polyd. Verg. li. 18.
Excester, who perceiving into what familiarity the Lord Roger Mortimer was
grown with the Queen, which Tho. Walls.
seemed greater then either stood with her honor or duty, and seeing both him
and other of the Kings enemies, and fugitives enjoy that priuacie in counsel,
which was assigned to himself, who was now (as being none of theirs) Th. de la
More.
excluded, returned secretly (though unsent for) into England, faithfully (as
it became a good man) declaring his knowledge.

(55) The King now clearly beholding his error in his dangers Polyd. Ver. li.
18 The Queen and Prince proclaimed Traitors.
solicited the King of France to send home his wife and son, but that not
succeeding, he caused them Tho. Walls. Polyd. Verg. lib. 18. Fabi^n. Their
death plotted by the King.
openly in London to be proclaimed enemies of the Kingdom, banishing them with
all their adherents out of the same. For his more assurance also he caused the
Ports to be most narrowly watched. Finally, to draw all his dangers to a short
dispatch, there was (as was supposed) a plot laid for M. Fox. Act. and Mon. p.
464. col. 1.
making away the Queen and Prince, but Gods will was to frustrate it.

(56) The Queen, on the other side, fearing that the Ypod. Neust.
Spensers gold had laid trains to blow her whole proceedings up in France,
kept herself out of the way, till with the Prince, the Lord Roger Mortimer,
and other their adherents, they were safely gotten into Henault: There might
be some other reason also and necessary to move Queen Isabel to depart out of
France, beside the doubt of that kind of corruption in the Peers thereof: as
to turn off a war from thence being her native Country, which for her cause
was afflicted in the Sea-strengthes thereof; for Sir John Oturwin, Sir Nicholas
Kiried, and Sir The English scowre the narrow seas.
John de Felton, with the Navy of the Ports, and of other places, had by
commission from the King so scowred the narrow Scas, that they within a short
time brought into England as lawful prize, Tho Walls.
an hundredth and twenty Norman ships or vessels. Moreover, whereas those two
Bishops which the Pope had sent, were returned sorrowful out of England, not
only without doing any good on her behalf, but also without hope of doing
any, she might easily be persuaded that the sword must do it, or nothing.

(57) But in Henault she found most honorable and loving welcome of the
Earl, where, therefore An. D. 1326. A. reg. 19.
(without the consent or advise of the Peers of England) she ensured (says
our Tho. de la More.
Author) that delight and terror of the whole world, her son, being then
about fourteen years old, to Philippa the said Earls daughter, and with the
money of her portion waged soldiers out of Henault and Germany, to transport
into England. There her friends expected her arrival daily, of which the
Bishops of Hereford and Lincoln were not meanest: Her men and Navy being
now ready, she with her son the Prince, the Lord Edmund Earl of Kent his
uncle, Harding. c. 176.
Aimerie de Valence Earl of Pembroke, the Lord John of Henault, the Earl of
Henaults brother (a valiant Gentleman) the Lord Roger Mortimer, and many other
Englishmen of name and note, with above two thousand and seven hundred
Henowayes and Germans, under the leading of the said Lord John, arrived at
Orwell in Suffolk upon the Friday before Saint Michaels day.

(58) Her arrival being reported to the King (who was, poor Prince, not only
destitute of friends and The kings proceedings after the Queens arrival.
means, but as it seems, of courage, and counsel also) it did not at first
seem credible. The truth appearing, he demanded assistance of the City of
London, whose answer was, That they would honor with all duty, the King, the
Queen, and Prince, but would shut their gates against forreiners, and traitors
to the Realm, and with all their powers withstand them. In this answer the
King and his few friends reposing no assurance, he committed an error worse
then that former of sending his son out of England, by retiring himself into
the West, with his inseparable favorites the Spensers, Baldocke and others
there, to raise a force against the Queen: but before he went, he left his
other son, the Lord John (called of Eltham) in the Tower of London with the
Countess of Gloucester, the Kings Niece, wife to the younger Spenser Earl of
Gloucester, committing the Tower it self to Sir John de Weston, who was well
provided of men and victuals. He commanded all men also to destroy and kill
the Queens partakers, none excepted but her self, her son, and Edmund Earl
of Kent, the Kings brother by the Father, and that none, upon pain of death,
and loss of all that they might leese, should aid or assist them: and that he
should have a thousand pound, who did bring the Lord Mortimers head. Thus took
he his last leave of London, and in a manner also of his Rule or Domination.

(59) On the contrary part, there repaired to the Queen the Earl Marshall,
and Henry Earl of Leicester, the Bishops of Lincoln, Hereford, Ely, and of
Barons, Knights, and armed Soldiers no small multitude, whom as well to retain,
as to draw more, letters and rumors flew about, declaring (though falsely) that
the King of France had in the aid of his sister sent so many Dukes, Earls,
and others, that England could scarce suffice to feed them. This, for such whom
the opinion of warlike strength would win: but those whom show of Religion
might move, it was as cunningly, and as falsely spread, that the Pope had
excommunicated all such as did take arms against the Queen, and (the more to
Thom. de la Moor.
countenance the fiction) that two Cardinals employed about the Premises, were
seen in the Queens Camp. Then was it proclaimed that the causes of her coming
were to deliver the Realm from the misleaders of the King, which were named to
be the Spensers, Roger Baldock Bishop of Norwich, Lord Chancellor and their
Fautors; all others to be Ypod. Neust.
safe, and that nothing should be taken from any other subject without true
payment; but finally, that he who brought the younger Spensers head should have
two thousand pounds. These things first thus ordered, the Queen with her son
and whole power pursues the King (as it had been agreede by the Council of
war) taking first her way to Oxford: where the Tho. de la Moor.
whole University being called together, in the presence of the Queen, the
Prince, Roger Mortimer and the rest of that troop, the Bishop of Hereford (the
Queens bosom Counselor) preaching to them on this Text, 2 Kin. c. 4. v. 19
My head, my head aketh, delivered to them the reasons of the Queens coming
with her Army, concluding (more like a Butcher then a Divine) that an aching and
sick head of a kingdom, was of necessity to be taken off, and not to be
tampered with by any other physic.

(60) The Londoners in favor of the Queen, and hatred of the Spensers
committed sundry outrages, The Londoners for the Queen.
besides bloody sacrilege in cutting off the Bishop of Excesters head, and some
others (whom the King had made Guardian of London) in their popular fury, among
the which one of them was a Citizen of their own John le Marchal, who had
been of the younger Spensers acquaintance. The Tower of London they get into
their possession, placing and displacing the Garrison and Officers therein at
their pleasure, under the name of the Lord John of Eltham, the Kings second
son, whom they proclaimed Custos of the City, and of the Land. They also set
at liberty all prisoners, which by the popular Queens commandment was done
through the whole Realm: and all banished men and fugitives were revoked; who
all Ex Hist. quae Brut. dicitur. MS
flocking unto London, brought no small increase to her forces.

(61) Whither in the mean space does woeful Edward fly? what force, what
course, what way takes he poor Prince? O fearful condition of so great a
Monarchs State, when a Wife, a Son, a Kingdom are not trusted, and those
only are trusted who had nothing strong, but a will to live and die with him.
The Queen passing from Oxford to Gloucester (onward to the siege of Bristow
Castle) grew all the while in her strengths like a rolled snow-ball, or as a
River which spreades still broader from the fountain to the Ocean, Verg. Aene.
3
vires acquirit eundo. For thither repaired to her (for the love of the young
Prince) the Lord Percy, the Lord Wake, and others as well out of the North, as
Marches of Wales. But Edward (having left the Earl of Winchester, the elder
Lord Spenser, in the Castle of Bristol for the keeping thereof) meditates
flight with a few into the Isle of Lundie in Seuerne Sea, or into Ireland, and
while he wandreth about not finding where to rest safe, his royal credit,
name, and power, (like a Cliffe which falling from the top of some huge
rock, breaks into the more pieces, the farther it rolls) are daily more and
more diminisht as they scatter, till now at last they are come unto a very
nothing. After a week therefore spent upon the Sea, Sir Thomas Blunt forsaking
him, and coming to the Queen, he came on shore in Glamorganshire, where with
his few friends he entrusted himself to God, and the faith of the Welsh (who
indeed still loved him) lying hidden among them in the Abbey of Ypod. Neust.
Tho. de la Moore.
Neath.

(62) Now had the Queen and her son (for his name was abused to all sorts of
turne-seruings) The elder Spenser put to death.
taken the elder Lord Spenser at the Castle of Bristol, who (without any form
of trial) was cruelly cut up alive and quartered (says de la Moore our
Knight) being Tho. Walls. Historia quae Bruti dicitur MS.
first at the clamours of the people, drawn and hanged in his proper Armories
upon the common Gallows without the City: but his grandchild Hugolin stood so
valiantly in defense of himself within the Castle of Kerfilli, that he had
his life and the lives of all his assistants saved.

(63) The King not appearing, Proclamations were every day made in the Queens
Army, declaring, Proclamations recalling the king.
Tho. Walls.
That it was the common consent of the realm that he should return, and Act.
and Mon. p. 465. col. 1.
receive the government thereof, so as he would conform himself to his
people. This (whether Stratagem or Truth) not prevailing, Henry Earl of
Lancaster the late Earls Brother, Sir William la Zouch, and Rhese ap-Howell a
Welshman, who all of them had Lands in those parts where the King concealed
himself, were sent with coin and forces to discover and take him. The Queen
and her people lay in the City of Hereford, the Episcopal See of that great
Tho. de la Moor calls him, Omnis bui^s mali Architectum, but the Actor was
doubtless Roger Mortimer. The Prince Custos or high keeper of England.
Arch-plotter of her courses Adam de Orlton, where by advise and consent of the
Lords, her son the Duke of Aquitaine was made High-Keeper of England, and
they as to the Custos of the same, did swear him fealty. And here also the
Bishop of Norwich was made Chancellor of the Realm, and the Bishop of
Winchester Treasurer.

(65) What will not money, diligence and fair words do; with corrupt
dispositions, even to euerting of all bands of either religious or civil
duties? By such means therefore the desolate, sad, and unfortunate King, 16
Calend. Dece^b.
came into his cosen of Lancasters hands, and with him the younger Lord Spenser
Earl of Gloucester, Robert Baldock Lord Chancellor and Simon de Reding, there
being no regard had to the detention of any other. The King was conveyed by the
Earl from the place of his surprise to Monmouth, to Ledburie, and so to the
Castle of Kenelworth belonging to the Earl of Leicester, who was appointed to
attend him, that is, to keep him safe. The other three, Spenser, Baldock and
Reeding were strongly guarded to Hereford, there to be disposed of at the
pleasure of their most capital enemies.

(66) Before whose coming to satisfy Roger Mortimer, the Lord Edmund Earl of
Arundel, and two Gentlemen Daniel and Micheldene were beheaded at Hereford: The
Lord Mortimer was so high in the Queens favor, that she could do no less
(as weee may suppose) then gratify him with a few hated heads. But (Mortimer)
there will be a time, when the cry of this, and other blood sacrificed to thy
private revenge (while thou abusest the public trust) will never give over the
pursuit, till it has deservedly drawn thine in lieu thereof.

(67) The Lord Spenser and the rest, Continu. Nich. Trivet. MS.
on whom William Trussell the Judge gave sentence of death, The younger Spenser
put to death.
being now drawn to Hereford* the said Lord being clad in his coat armor, was
most despitefully dragged to the place of execution, where being first hung
upon a gallows fifty foot high, he was afterward headed, and cut into
quarters; they who brought him to the Queen, having the promised sum of two
thousand pounds distributed among them for reward. His head was set up at
London, and his quarters in four parts of the Kingdom. Simon de Reding was
hanged ten foot lower then he in the same place.

(68) This Execution (says Walsingham) was done M. Fox Act. and Mon. pa. 465.
col. 1.
upon a Monday in revenge of the death of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, whose
blood was likewise shed upon a Monday. Robert Baldock late Lord Chancellor was
committed to the keeping of the Bishop of Hereford, who after a time caused him
to be brought up to Hereford-house in London, where the tumultuous people (not
without the Bishop of Herefords secret approuement as was said) took him
violently away, and (though he were a Priest) thrust him into Newgate, where
they used him so vnhandsomly, that albeit they had no accusation, but only for
being faithful to his Sovereign, wherewith to Tho. de la Moore
charge him, he not long after died in prison; to whom (says De la Moore)
might be applied that of Quintilian, Whosoever is killed by torment, ouercomes
the Tormentor. An. D. 1327. An. Reg. 20. and vlt. King Edward yields to resign
his Crown.
Torquentem vincit quisquis occiditur.

(69) The mournful King being at Kenelworth Castle, there repaired thither
the Bishops of S. Th. de la More
Winchester, Hereford, and Lincoln, Tho. Walls.
two Earls, two Abbots, four Barons, Polych. lib. 7. c. 43.
two Justices, three Knights for every County, and for London, and other
principal places (chiefly for the five Ports) a certain chosen number,
selected by the Parliament, which then the Queen and her Son held at London.
The Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln (as it was agreede upon) came thither
before any of the rest, as well to give the King to understand what kind of
Embassage was approaching, as to prepare him by the best Arguments they could
to satisfy the desire, and expectation of their new molded commonweal,
which could only be by resignation of the Crown, that his Son (whom the
body of the then confused State had elected) might reign in his stead.

(70) When they were admitted to his presence, (the Earl of Leicester being
by) they together so Reasons to persuade his resignation.
wrought him, partly with showing a necessity, partly with other reasons drawn
out of common places, thoroughly studied for that purpose, that (though not
without many sobs and tears) he finally did not dissent, if his answer were
truly reported (which Hist. Bruti MS.
some doubt of; unto the Parliament. Tho. de la More
For they told him that the Commonweal had conceived so irreconciliable
dislikes of his government, the particulars whereof had been opened in the
general assembly at London, that it was resolved never to endure him as King
any longer. That notwithstanding, those dislikes had not extended themselves so
far, as for his sake to exclude his issue, but that with universal applause,
and joy, the Commonweal had in Parliament elected his eldest son the Lord
Edward for King. That it would be a very acceptable thing to God, willingly to
give over an earthly Kingdom for the common-good and quiet of his Country,
which they said could not otherwise be secured. That yet his honor should be
no less after the resignation, then it was before, only him the commonweal
would never suffer to reign any longer. They finally durst tell him, that
unless he did of himself renounce his Crown and Scepter, the people would
neither endure him, nor any of his Children as their Sovereign, but
disclaiming all homage and fealty, would elect some Polyd. Ver. li. 28
other for King, who should not be of the blood.

(71) The whole Company sent by the body of State (if it may be called a Body
which then had no * Tho. de la Moor.
Head there) from London, where it attended their return, being placed by the
Bishop of Hereford, according to their degrees, in the Presence Chamber at
Kenelworth Castle, the King gowned in black came forth at last out of an
inward room, and presented himself to his vassals, where (as being Privy to
their errand) sorrow stroke such a chillness into him, that he fell to the
earth, lying stretched forth in a deadly swown; The Earl of Leicester, and the
Bishop of Winchester beholding this, ran unto him, and with much labor
recovered the half-dead king, setting him upon his feet. As rufull and heavy as
this sight was, we read not yet of any acts or effects of compassion expressed
toward him at this present; so settled (as it seemed) was the hatred and
auersion. The King being now (we cannot say) come to himself, but to the sense
of his misery, the Bishop of Hereford declares the cause of their present
Embassy, and running over the former points, concludes as before, saying, (as
in the person of the commonwealth) That the King must resign his Diadem to
his eldest son, or after the refusal suffer them to elect such a person as
themselves should judge to be most fit and able to defend the Kingdom.

(72) The dolorous King having heard this speech, brake forth into sighs and
tears, and being (says his Sir Tho. de la Moore his servant.
most favorable reporter) more ready to sacrifice his body for Christ's cause,
then once to behold the disinherison of his sons, or (through his occasion)
the perpetual disturbance of the Kingdom, (as knowing, says he, that a good
shepherd should give his life for his flock,) made at the last his answer to
this effect. Pol. Virg. lib. 18
That he knew that for his many sins he was fallen into this calamity, and
therefore had the less cause to take it grievously: That much he sorrowed for
Tho. Walls. Thom. de la Moor.
this that the people of the Kingdom were so exasperated against him, as that
they should utterly abhor his any longer rule and soueraignety: and therefore
he besought all that were there present to Polyd. Verg li. 18
forgive and spare Tho. VValsin.
him being so afflicted. That nevertheless Tho. de la More.
it was Tho. VValsingh.
greatly to his good pleasure and liking, (seeing it Tho. de la More.
could none other be on his behalf,) that his eldest son was so Tho. Walls.
gracious in their sight and therefore he gave them Tho. de la Moore
thanks for choosing him to be *Tho. VValsing. Polyd. Verg. lib. 18.
their King.

(73) This being said, there was forthwith a proceeding to the short ceremonies
of his resignation, which principally consisted in the surrender of his Diadem
and Ensigns of Majesty, to the use of his son the new King. Thereupon Th. de
la More.
Sir William Trussel (as being a Judge who could fit them with quirks of law to
color so lawless and treasonable a fact) on the behalf of the whole Realm
renounced all homage, and alleagiance to the Lord Edward of Caernaruon late
King.

(74) The form of that renunciation, as being obsolete, you shall have in the
like Polychr. lib 7. c. 43
obsolete words of Treuisa, which was this; I William Trussel, in name of all
men of the land of England, and of all the Parliament Procurator, resign to
thee Edward, the homage that was made to thee sometime; and from this time
forward now following, I defy thee, and prine thee of all royal power, and I
shall never be tendant to thee as for King after this time. Which being done,
Sir Thomas Blunt Knight, Steward of the household, by breaking his staff,
resigned his office, and declared that the late Kings family was discharged.

(75) Edward being thus dekinged, the Embassy rode joyfully back to London to
the Parliament, with the resigned Tho. Walls.
Ensigns, and dispatch of their employment. Here (for that this seems the last
hour of his reign and kingly state) we will make a stop, referring you for
the rest to the next Kings life, under whose name and abused authority they
were acted.

(76) Notwithstanding, we may not forget in all these doings to call to mind,
who it was that sat at the helm of State, ouerlooking, and ouerswaying
Queen, Prince and all; to wit, the most ambitious and vindicatiue man living,
Roger Lord Mortimer of Wigmor: for, as for the Tho. Walsingh.
Queen, when she was (God knows how far guilty,) advertised of her
husbands dethronization, she outwardly expressed so great extremity of passion
(notwithstanding that at the same time she was told of her sons
surrogation) as if she had been distraught in her wits: which the Prince
her son (then about fifteen years of age) beholding, he made an oath, never
to accept of the Crown against his fathers good will; and thereupon it was
(says Walsingham a Writer worthy of belief) that the said Embassy was sent
to Kenelworth Castle, (where the now no more a King remained) to work his
assent, whose answer thereunto (says Hist. Bruti. MS.
another) was by those Messengers related at full, and fuller then in truth it
was sent by the King; but the Peers then in Parliament made their use thereof,
in procuring such a Prince to take the rule of the^, whom they hoped, by reason
of his tender years, themselves should be able to rule and ouermaster.

His Wife.
(77) Isabel, daughter to Philip the Fair, King of France (sister to Lodowicke
Hutin, Philip the Long, and Charles the Fair, all Kings of France) was married
to Edward the second, at twelve years of age, in our Lady Church of Bulloigne,
the 22. of January, 1308. She was his wife twenty years, and his widow thirty,
and lived threescore and three years. She died at Risings near London, the
two and twe^tieth of August 1357. and was buried in the midst of the
Gray-Fryers Quire in London, the 27. of September following.

His Issue.
(78) Edward (surnamed of Windsor) the eldest son of K. Edward and Queen
Isabel his wife, was born at the Castle of Windsor, the thirteenth of October,
the year of Christ, 1312. and the sixth of his fathers reign: he was created
Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitane, in a Parliament holden at York, Anno
1322. and in the troubles of the Realm and absence of his Father, in an
assembly of Lords met at Hereford, and in presence of the Queen, was made L.
Warden of England by a common decree: unto whom all the Lords made their
fealty, in receiving an Oath of Allegiance to be faithful and loyal unto him
as to the Lord Warden of the Realm: and shortly after, the Father deposed, he
was crowned King of England, by the name of Edward the third.

(79) John (surnamed of Eltham) the second son of King Edward and Queen
Isabel his wife, was borne at Eltham in Kent, the 15. of August, and year of
Christ, 1315. and at twelve years of age was created Earl of Cornwall in a
Parliament, Anno 1327. and third year of the reign of King Edward his brother:
he died in Scotland unmarried, in the flower of his youth, the tenth of his
brothers reign, and year of Christ, 1334.

(80) Joan the eldest daughter, and third child of King Edward and Queen
Isabel, was borne in the Tower of London; she was married being a child at
Barwicke the eighteenth day of July, in the fourth year of the Reign of King
Edward her brother, 1329 to David Prince of Scotland, son and heir apparent
of King Robert Bruce, whom he succeeded within one year after in the kingdom,
being but seven years of age, and was the second King of Scotland of the name
of David; she was his wife twenty and eight years, and being come into
England to visit her brother, she deceased here without Issue, in the two and
thirtieth year of his Reign, 1357. and was buried at the Gray-Fryers in
London.

(81) Elenor, the second and youngest daughter, and fourth child of King Edward
and Queen Isabel, was the second wife of Reynald the second, Earl of Gelder,
married unto him with a portion of fifteen thousand pounds 1332. being the sixth
year of the reign of king Edward her brother, who being the Vicar general of
the Empire, to the Emperor Lewis of Ban^r, created him first Duke of Golder:
she had issue by him Reinald and Edward both Dukes successively after their
Father without Issue; the later of them leaving his Duchy and his wife to his
Nephew William Duke of Gulik his half sisters Son.

EDWARD THE THIRD, KING OF Monarch 49
Edward III.
ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc THE FORTIE-NINTH MONARCH OF ENGLAND,
HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XII.


THe sickness and wounds which the commonwelth The happy change under King
Edward 3.
sustained by the reign of the late deposed king, upon the change of her Leach
and Physician, recovered not only health and strength, but beauty also and
ornament; and the elements themselves, which in the former times seemed to
suffer and sympathize with the public grieuances of the English, grew Ranulph.
Cest. Thom. Walsingh.
gracious and propitious to the use of man, the Air becoming more healthful,
the earth more fruitful, as if Nature herself were privy to the worth of the
succeeding Prince. But this his worth did not display it self, until he had
plucked the sway of things out of the hands of the Queen his mother, and of
that aspiring danger and tempest of England, Roger Mortimer who wholly possessed
her.

(2) This Edward of Windsor, being not fifteen years of age, when (without
any guilty thought in him) his throne was thus established upon his Fathers
ruin, took the beginning of his reign by public sanction at the Tho. Walls.
twentieth day of January, and by direction of such as sought to color their
treasons against their deposed Sovereign, proclaimed his peace in these words.
Edward by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Aquitaine, to N. N. our Sheriff of S. Greeting. Because the Lord Edward our
Father, late King of England, by the common Council and Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other the chief men, and the whole Comminaltie
of the Kingdom, did voluntarily remove himself from the government thereof,
willing and granting that we as his eldest son and heir, should take upon us
the rule and regiment of the same, and we with the counsel and advise of the
Prelates, Earls and Barons before said, yielding therein to our fathers good
pleasure, and will, have taken upon us the governance of the said Kingdom,
and as the manner is, have received the Fealties and Homages of the said
Prelates and Peers. We therefore desirous that our peace for the quiet and
calm estate of our people should be inuiolablie observed, do will and
command you, that presently upon sight of these presents, you cause our Peace
to be openly proclaimed through your whole Bailywicke, forbidding all and
every one on our behalf, under pain and peril of disinherison, and loss of
life and limbs, not to presume to violate or infringe our said peace, but that
every one pursue or follow his actions, and complaints without any manner of
outrage, according to the laws and customs of our Kingdom* for we are ready
and always will be, to administer full right to all and singular co^plainants,
as well poor as rich in our Courts of Justice. Witness our self, etc. in the 1
Februa.
Calends of February upon sunday being Candlemas Eve.

(3) Upon the Candlemas day it self, the young King receiving the Order of
Knighthood, by the King Edward provided for wars with Scotland.
hands of the Earl of Lancaster, and upon the same day the Crown of England
at Westminster, Walter Archbishop of Canterbury performing the offices
accustomed therein, judged nothing to be sooner thought upon then to recover
the honor of his Nation upon the Northern enemies, whom his unexperienced
youth, and their former happiness had emboldened; in which preparation while
he was busied, the Queen his mother, and her Mortimer, forgot not other
things tending to their own benefit and assurance.

(4) First therefore there was procured for the Queen mother so great a Dowry,
that the young Mortimers high practices.
King had scarce a Ypod. Neust.
third part of the Kingdom left for his maintenance; which excessive estate,
in title the Queens, in the use was Mortimars, and from this treasonable
defalcation and weakening of the royal means, he sinewed his own devises
with authoritity and riches; so that his hatred against Spenser was not on
behalf of the Commonweal, but for that any one should abuse it for his
private but himself. Lastly, when they had certain intelligence, that sundry
great persons and others, as the whole order of Friers-preachers, took pity
of the late Kings captivity, and seemed to consult for his deliueranco, they
knowing that by recovery of his former estate, their just confusion must
follow, they resolved to strength^n (as men supposed) their other impieties
with murder.

(5) For albeit the Queen in her outward gestures pretended nothing but sorrow
for her Lord and husbands distress, yet in stead of bringing to him her person
(which the deposed Prince did wonderfully Tho. de la More
love) she only sent unto him Tho. UUals.
fine apparel and kind letters, but contrary to the laws of God and man,
withdrew her self from nuptial duties, bestowing them (as the fame went,
which will blab of Princes as freely as of meaner Dames) upon the bloody
Adulterer Mortimar, fathering her absence upon the State, which (she fained)
would not suffer her to come unto him. The desolate Prince was hereupon taken
from Kenelworth Castle, by express order from the Grafton.
young King, at their procurement, for that the Earl of Lancaster (Lord of
that piece) was suspected to pity too much his calamity. He was delivered by
Grafton.
Indenture, to Sir Thomas de Gournay the elder, and Sir John Mattrauers, two
merciless and most unworthy Knights. Tho. de la More.


(6) These two Instruments of the Devil, having conducted him first to the
Castle of Corf, then The late King Edward murdered.
to Bristol, and lastly in great secrecy, and with more villainous despite,
then it became either Knights, or the lewdest varlets in the world, as (out of
Sir Thomas de la Moore, you may read at large in the collections of Annali.
John Stow) to the Castle of Barkley, where after many vile devises, executed
upon him in vain, they Hector. Boet. and ^mnes.
more then barbarously murdered him.

(7) Never was the fallacy of pointings, or ambiguitie A bloody fallacy or
Sophisme.
of Phrase more mischieuously used to the destruction of a King, or defense of
the Contriuers, then in this heinous Parricide, for it is said that a bloody
Sophisme conceived in these words was sent; Tho. de la Moor
Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est
To shed King Edwards blood
Refuse to fear I count it good.
Where the Comma or pause being put after Nolite, bid them not to make him
away, but after timere, insinuates a plain encouragement to the fact.

(8) The Sphynx who is said to be the Author of The Actors forced to fly the
Country.
this ambiguous Riddle, sent by the Lord Ioh. Stow.
Mortimar, was Adam de Torleton, who Lanquet. Grafton. Fabian. Tho. de la Moore.
utterly denied any such intention, when the Murderers for their own
justification, produced the writing it self under Queen Isabels Seal, and
the seals of the other Conspirators, and therefore the said Bishop Adam was
the cause, why Gorney and Mattrauers were with terrible menaces shaken up,
pursued and outlawed, who more pursued with the memory and conscience of so
heinous a Tragedy, fled out of England. Gorney after three years banishment,
being discovered at Massels in France, and apprehended, was conuaied back, but
had his head taken off at Sea, in his passage, Tho. de la Moor Tho. Walls.
lest he should reveal too much at his arrival, but Mattrauers lay hidden in
Germany a long time, doing penance.

(9) This Parricide was committed about S. Mathews day, and (that you may note
what confidence The murdered Edwards body laid to view.
they had in their Art of secret murder, as also an ordinary mockage of the
people in like cases) the noble body was laid forth, and Walsingham.
many Abbots, Priors, Knights, and Burgesses of Bristol and Gloucester were sent
for to see the same; upon which, although there appeared no manifest outward
sign of violent death, but the skin all over whole and unbroken, yet the cry
of murder could not so be smothered, but the means and manner came to light.
This happiness certainly the poor Prince had, that after his emprisonment
he reformed his life in so pious and Christian sort, that it gave occasion
when he was dead of disputation, whether Ranulp. Cest.
he were not to be reputed a Saint, even as (say our Authors) there was Tho.
VValsing. Fabian.
the like Question concerning Thomas Earl of Lancaster, though beheaded for
apparent Treasons. His body Polyd. Verg. l. 18
without any funeral pomp was buried among the Benedictins in their Abbey at
Gloucester, and so (says Tho. de la Moor.
our passionate author) the stately height of the Angels Kingdom received this
Scholar, and Disciple of Christ, thus rest and spoiled of his English Kingdom.

(10) The young King was now upon the borders of Scotland with a puissant Army,
where also the The Scots environed, escape.
Queen mother, and Mortimar, with many other Nobles were present, and having
environed the Scots (who had pierced into England with inuasiue arms) in the
woods of VViridale and Stanhope Park, made Adam Merimouth Holinsh. Act. and
Mon.
sure account of a certain victory; but by the treason of the said Lord
Mortimer (as afterward was laid to his charge) they were suffered to escape out
of that mischief, and the young King with grief returned inglorious after an
huge waste of treasure, and peril of his own person.

(11) For while the English host thus held the Scots, as it were besieged Sir
James Dowglasse in the dead of night, with about Froishard. Ypod. Neust.
two hundredth swift horse assailed the Kings own Pauilion, and missed so
little of killing him, that a Priest his Chaplain a stout and Hector Boet.
loyal man was slain in his defense, and Sir James escaped back without
hurt, but not without honor for his bold attempt. In the Scots Camp Fox in
Acts and Mon.
one notes, that the English found five hundredth great Oxen and Kine ready
killed, a thousand spits full of flesh, ready to be roasted, five hundred
Cawdrons made of beasts skins, full of flesh, over the fire seething, and about
Hect. Doct.
ten thousand pair of raw-leather shoes, the hair still upon them. In King
Edwards Army were (as Grafton
some write) thirty thousand Archers, and five hundredth good men of Arms, which
perhaps is one of the greatest hoasts that you shall lightly read to have been
of our Nation, and the reason was, for that the world conceived such hope of
the young King, that many more went Tho. VValsin.
voluntary then constrained. All which puissance was notwithstanding thus
eluded.

(12) About this time died stricken with leprie, Robert Bruce King, and
recouerer of Scotland, and the A. D. 1328. Tho. Wals^n Edw 3 Hect. Boet. writes
that King Robert died 7. Iun. A. D. 1329. An. reg. 24. whom we have therein
reason to believe
most approved Warrior of the world in that age, by whose loss it was soon
found, how much the virtue and fortune of one man are worth in any Nation. But
before he died, that peace was made with the Scots by the means of the Queen
and the Lord Mortimer, which is so much dispraised by our Writers, and in the
end proved capital to the principal Actor Mortimer.

(13) For at this treaty it was that the King (then in his Minority) sealed
Charters to the Scots at Northampton, The peace with Scotland at the Parliament
of Northampton.
whose contents were contrived by the Queen, the said Lord Mortimer, and Sir
James Dowglasse, without the priuity of the English. There was also delivered
to them that famous Evidence called the Act. and Mon.
Ragman Roll, and the King acquitted them of Tho. Walls.
all Geor. Buchan. Hect. Boet.
claim and pretense of right to the Superiority of Scotland, rendering back
sundry Jewels taken by the English from the Scots, among the which was one
special, called the Black Cross of Scotland. There was it also granted, that
Fox. Fabian. Grafton.
all Englishmen should leese their lands in Scotland, unless they would
inhabit upon them, and become Liege-men to the King thereof, besides many other
things to the high discontentation (as was the humor of those times) of the
English Subjects. Moreover, under the specious color of restitution of
damages, King Robert was to pay to King Edward thirty thousand Marks sterling,
with which (as the meed of treason) the Lord Mortimer was afterward publicly
charged, and for the same, and other his crimes was executed as a Traitor.
Finally, upon the seventh of July, David Bruce Prince of Scotland, a child of
seven or eight years old, and son and heir to King Robert, married Joan,
sister to K. Edward at Berwicke: by which peace the English were made-obnoxious
to some reproaches, the Scottish Nation in scorn, calling the said Lady, Jane
Make-Peace.

(14) And therefore says one of this part of King Edwards reign: that drawn
aside with evil advise, by reason of his age, he committed many foul errors
in E. S. lib. 3. commentariol. de rebus gestu. Brit.
State, at the beginning of his Government: which is also the general opinion
of all our Writers, whereunto this verse is by Vowels. Holinsh.
some applied; Vae pueri terrae, saepissime sunt ibi guerra,
Where Children Rulers are,
There often is woe and war.


(15) There died likewise about this time Charles the Fair, King of France,
(to whom King Edward had not long before done homage for his Duchy of
Gascoigne) the third and last son of Philip the Fair, King of France, by
whose decease the Crown of that noble Kingdom, deuolued to this our Edward
King of England in right of his mother Queen Isabel: And because upon this
Polyd. Verg.
Title king Edward did afterward claim the said Crown, we will here once for
all instruct you in the justice thereof.

(16) Three sons there were of King Philip the Fair, (to wit, Lewis Hutin,
Philip le long, and Charles the Fair) who all successively reigned in France
one after the other; and none of them leaving any Issue, at such time as king
Edward made his claim, the whole right seemed to be in Isabel the only Child
of the said Philip which had any issue, for an other sister which she had died
an Infant.

(17) The case thus seeming plain, was not for such accepted by the French,
who received to the Crown Philip of Valoys, whose father Charles of Valois was
younger Brother to Philip the Fair, advancing the Brothers son before the
daughters son, not following the propinquity or descent of blood, but the
meliority of sex, upon which ground they had also freshly put by Joan daughter
of Lewis Hutin, preferring Philip le long her uncle. The French in bar to her
interest, pretended a fundamental law or entaile, by which ^ex Sa^ca. which
law* as their greatest Lawyers since acknowledge, no whit concerns the French
Crown. Ho^tomanni Francogall^a. cap. 8.
no woman was inheritable to the Crown of France, and in defense of that
opinion withstood King Edward afterward with so much loss and calamity, though
that very law made Edwards title the stronger ( Chart. Original. Ed. 3 de iure
suo in Reg. Gal.
as himself truly pleaded) he being the Male, albeit his right descended by
the Female.

(18) This Title to so glorious a Monarchy though it accrewed to the English,
by this match with Queen Isabel, yet does Walsingham Ypod Neust. and (...) E^w.
2.
freely pronounce; That neither that affinity, nor any other contracts with the
French, was ever available or brought any benefit to England: which opinion
as it may seem strange, so will it answer a wise Readers pain in the fruit,
to observe through the course of our stories, whether the said grave Writer had
just occasion so to speak or no. Another conceit there was of this Edwards
King Edward marries Philip the Earl of Henaults daughter.
marriage with Philippa the Earl of Henaults daughter, which about this time
was consu^mated, though Philip de Valoys (king of France by intrusion as our
Annals repute him) was her uncle, her mother being his own sister.

(19) There stood now at home against the stream of the Queen, and her Lord
Mortimers absolute sway, some great personages, who did not wholly allow their
doings, among which was the Kings uncle, Edmund Earl of Kent, whose death they
shortly procured. Meane-while the more to despite and dare their ouerlookers,
Roger Mortimer was created Earl of the Marches of Wales, at a Parliament
holden at Salisburie: at which time also John of Eltham the Kings Brother was
made Earl of Cornwall, and the Lord Butler of Ireland Earl of Ormond. From
whence the Lord Henry Earl of Lancaster, and sundry other of the Peers,
seeing the King Tho. VValsing. in fine Edw 2.
trodden (as it seemed to them) under foot, did absent themselves, meditating
civil arms for redress, who notwithstanding (by the labor of Simon de
Mepham Archbishop of Canterbury) was reconciled: This Archbishop very
worthily also excommunicated all such as had any hand in the sacrilegious
parricide of that This worthy Prelate founded Exceter College, and also
Hart-hall in Oxford.
noble and loiall Prelate Walter Bishop of Excester, or any ways violated
him, their aiders, accomplices or abettors whosoever. But after the Coronation of
Philip the young Queen, in another Parliament at Winchester, the said Earl
Edmund was condemned for conspiring to deliver his brother, late King of
England, Edmund Earl of Kent the Kings uncle put to death by practice
whom (likely enough by Mortimers practice) he was drawn into an absurd
belief to be still alive. Thus, for devising to set a dead man at liberty,
this noble Earl Edmund the kings half uncle had his head stricken off, though
from Tho. Walls. Harding.
Noone till five at night, he stood at the place of death without the
Castle-gates, none being found to behead him, till a base wretch of the
Marshal-sea was sent, and did it: so little conscience did the malice and
ambition of his potent adversaries make of shedding the Royal blood, which by
Gods iuster judgment was not long unrevenged.

(20) To supply which loss to the regal stem, with a very large amends, the
young Queen Philip An. D. 1329. The Black Prince borne. Adam Merim.
at Woodstocke in Oxfordshire, upon 15. June, being Friday, brought forth her
first begotten son, the amiable and famous Edward, by-named (not of his
color, but of his dreaded Acts in battle) the Black Prince. King Edward not
long after with a small company went into France, and did homage to Philip de
Valoys for his Duchy of Gascoigne.

(21) Nemesis, or rather Gods vengeance with swift pace did now approach and
summon Mortimer to a bloody account; for the young King addicting himself The
fall of Mortimer.
to serious thoughts, and putting on the Man before his years required, easily
saw his own peril in the others potencie. The Queen his mother (to the
common dishonor and grief of the Kingdom) being generally bruted to be with
child by Mortimer, he upon ripe advise suddenly and aduenturouslie surprised
the proud man at Parliament holden in Nottingham; with whom were taken the L.
Geofrey Mortimer his son, and Sir Simon de Bedford says Adam Merimouth
Bereford says Holinshead. Burford says Stow.
Bedford, who all three were sent prisoners to the Tower of London, under a
strong guard. Which done, the king by common consent of the Parliament took
into his hands his mothers excessive Dower, and put her to a narrow pension of
Adam Merim. Ypod. Neust.
one thousand pounds by year, circumscribing her within as narrow Holinsh.
limits for her abode, but doing her yearly the honor and comfort of once or
twice visiting her, though otherwise scarce thinking her worthy of life, in
regard of her priuacie with Mortimer, and his many heinous practices.

(22) Oh, what enchantments are Honor and Power to the minds of men! how
suddenly, and how strangely do they blow up the same with the contempt of
others, and forgetfulness of themselves? Certainly the frail estate of man's
constitution is clearelie seen in this high Lord, who drunken with felicity,
and fearing neither God nor man, fell into utter confusion when least he
feared. The probable manner whereof is worthy the relating. There was The
manner of Mortimers surprise at Nottingham.
in the Castle of Nottingham (and at this day is) a certain secret way or Mine
cut through a rock, upon which the said Castle is built, one issue whereof
opens toward the river of Trent, which runs under it, and the other venteth
it self far within upon the surface, and is (at this present) called
Mortimers hole; through this, the young King well armed, and Uide Io. Stowes
Annals.
strongly seconded, was conducted with drawn swords, by some his trusty and
sworn servants, (among which was that brave Montacute, whom his virtues under
this King raised to the Earldom of Salisbury, etc.) up to the Queens
Chamber, whose door (so feareles is blinded affection) was unshut, and with her
was Mortimer (the kings Master as the rumor spread him) ready to go to bed,
whom with the slaughter of a Knight, and one or two that resisted) they laid
hold upon. This was not reputed a slender enterprise, in regard that in
Mortimers retinue were not fewer (they say) then one hundredth and fourscore
Knights, besides Esquiers and Gentlemen.

(23) The causes for which he was condemned in open Parliament at Westminster,
these ragged Mirr. of Mag.
verses following comprehend, which without any disparagement to their makers
judgment, might very well have been in Prose, but for brevity and change
we have here inserted them. Five heinous crimes against him soon were had,
First that he causde the King to yield the Scot
(To make a peace) towns that were from him got.
And therewithal the Charter called Ragman;
That of the Scots he had bribed privy gain.
That through his means Sr. Edward of Carnaruan,
In Barckley Castle most traitorously was slain.
That with his Princes mother he had lain,
And finally with polling at his pleasure,
Hadrobd the King and Commons of their treasure.
But the most barbarous murder of the kings father, and specially the
dishonorable peace and contract with the then professed enemies of England,
were principally insisted upon as heinous treason. He was after sentence
ignominiouslie drawn to Tyburne, the common place of execution, then called
the Elms, and there upon the common Gallows was as ignominiouslie executed,
hanging (by the kings commandment) two days and two nights, a public and
gladsome spectacle. There died with him Sir Simon de Bedford Knight, and John
Deuerel Esquier, as well for expiation of the late King Edwards death, as in
complement, as it were of so great a man's fall, whose lives do seldom, or
never perish single.

(24) Now came Scotlands turn about to suffer again most grievous losses and
afflictions, an ordinary effect of Childrens government, whether Children in
age, or in discretion: for the Lord Edward Baliol hearing of King Roberts
death, and the tender age of King David as son and heir of that Baliol, to
whom king Edward the first had adjudged the Scottish crown, with such
voluntaries as he could raise (though his Father the Lord John had Hector.
Boet.
released his claim to king Robert, and though King Edward in favor of his
sister Joan Queen of Scotland, would not openly at first Ypod. Neust.
support him) embarkt himself in Yorkshire, and invaded Hect. Boet.
that Realm, where, upon his landing, he slew Alexander Setoun at Kingorn, and
about nine hundred others, putting the rest to flight. Not long after (that no
mischief might come alone) near to the water of Ern, at a place called
Dupline, where the Earls of Mar and March, with two puissant armies The
Balliols two victories against the Scots.
of Scots, for the defense of their young King David lay encamped, the said Lord
Edward (whose small numbers, not exceeding three thousand English, the Earls
as securely and as fatally contemned, as the English under Edward the second
had contemned the Bruce and his Scots) obtained of them a wonderful victory.
Boethius (who never, or rarely, leaves any overthrow purely to the manhood of
the English) will needs have this discomfiture effected by a Camisado, the
Baliol and his English with others passing the water of Erne by a Foord in the
night, when the enemy little suspected it.

(25) The slaughter even by his report was miserable: for there were slain
(says he) the Earls of The great slaughter of Scots at Dupline or the water
of Erne.
Mar and Carricke, and three thousand of the Noble, beside Commons. Our Adam
Merim. Tho. VValsing.
Writers agree that this Foord was passed in the night, but that the fight
endured from Sunne-rising till three of the Clock afternoon, and that,
besides the Earls of Mar, and Carricke, three other Earls, Menteth, Athol,
and Murrey, twelve Barons, eight hundredth knights and men of Arms, beside
above thirteen thousand other, lost there their lives. Of the English there
were only slain thirty and three Scutifers.
Esquiers: so that not without cause this victory was attributed rather to
power divine then humane.

(26) Yet this was but the beginning of farther The Baliol crowned king of
Scotland.
calamities to the Scottish Nation, which was in it self divided into factions,
the one for Bruce, the other for Baliol. The Lord Edward making use of his good
fortune, got himself to be crowned King of Hect. Boet. Georg. Buch.
Scotland at Scone. But king David Bruce with his Queen fled into France to
Philip de Valoys, who reigned there, and entertained them with much compassion
and honor, giving them Castle Galliard for the place of their abode, till
fairer fortune shone. Meane-time the Scots sustained new damages; for a prime
man among them, the Lord William Dowglasse, was taken prisoner by the English,
not without loss of many his men. Before which time by Adam Merim. Tho. UUals.
no honorable means the new King of Scotland was driven to seek his safety
by flight into England.

(27) King Edward considering those foiles which his father had endured, and
the opportunity of the Berwick besieged by the English.
time, neither holding himself liable in honor to that contract made on his
behalf by the predominant sway of his mother and her Paramour Mortimer, as
wherein he took both himself, and the rights of his Crown to have been
wronged in his minority, which in point of government he was more bound to
respect then his Sisters estate, and for that he was informed that the Town
and Castle of Berwicke belonged to the Crown of his Realm; he raised his
power, and having with him Edward the new-crowned of Scotland, he laid siege
to that Town and Castle in May. But before he did this, there is who writes,
that he summoned his Rich. Grafton:
brother in law King David to do homage and fealty unto him, which when David
would not yield to do, nor confess he ought, no more then his father King
Robert, he made that a ground for the justice of his war, as reputing the
Acts and releases at Northampton void.

(28) To the rescues of Berwicke, Archimbald King Edwards victory at
Halydon-hill.
Douglas Earl of Angus, Governor of Scotland for King David, came with a
puissant Army, and gave King Edward battle at Halydon-hill, where with a
lamentable slaughter of his people he was vanquished and slain. This battle
devoured in a manner all the remainders of the Scottish Nobles which preserved
it self at Dupline by retrait, or by absence from that field. There Hector
Boet.
perished besides Archimbald, the Earls of Ros, Sutherland, and Carricke,
three sons of the Lord Walter Steward (whose issue afterward reigned in
Scotland, when war and death had made way to that line, by extirpation of the
Male-Competitors in the races of Bruce and Baliol) and at least fourteen
thousand others, with the loss (say some) of one Knight, and ten other
Englishmen. Our Adam Merim. Walsingham.
Writers affirm that the Scots were at this battle, threescore thousand
strong, and that there Ypod. Neust.
were slain eight Earls, 1500. horsemen, and of the common Soldiers five and
thirty thousand; which is not improbable, for so much as Hector confesses they
were stopped in their flight, and put to the sword upon all sides without mercy.

(29) Hereupon Berwicke was rendered, which the King of England detained as a
supposed parcel Berwicke rendered
of his Patrimony, and dismissed the Baliol to the government of the Scottish
Kingdom, with sundry Lords and others of the English. And now the bloody
tallies and cruel scores seemed even between the two puissant (though then
unkind) neighbour-Nations, and Edward thoroughly redeeemed the dishonor
sustained at Banocksbourn by his late father, delivering his younger years
from that contempt, in which his enemies might otherwise have holden him, as
they had done at the entrance of his reign, playing upon the English with
Truffes and Rounds; of which this one is every where noted; Long beards
heartlesse, Painted hoods witless,
Gay coats graceless, make England thriftlesse. Fabian.



(30) As for the subornation of poisoning Earl Thomas Randal, and the hanging
of Sir Alexander Setons two sons, contrary to faith and law of Arms, at
Berwicke with the like stains which Hect. Boet.
one would feign leave upon this victorious Prince, we have found no color of
warrant but his own liberty of auouching, which therefore our freedom of not
believing him shall as easily take away and cancel. Neither would we so far
have touched this iarring string of discord between these two Nations, but
that each out of their own harms of old, may have the more true sense of their
felicity, by their new harmonicall concordance.

(31) After that the Hect. Boet.
Nobles of Scotland had unanimously confirmed Baliol in the kingdom thereof,
and sworn unto him faith and allegiance An. D. 1333.
at Perth, he repaired to the King of England at Newcastle upon Tine, where
he Adam Merim. Ypod. Neust.
submitted to Edward King of England, as his Father had done to Edward the
first, and with the like success; for by occasion of such his submission, our
Writers say, the Scots (as before they had done) fell off again, Which
auersion, or defection was augmented upon Hect. Boet.
private quarrels, and titles of inheritance to lands of great value, between
powerful Competitors, and by other particular reuenges, to which a people so
continually exercised in fight and battles were not slowly prone.

(32) Notwithstanding all which (the Balliols party having once had all the
Holds of Scotland at Edward King of England again in Scotland with an Army.
their commandment, Hect. Boet.
five only excepted, Dumbritaine, Lough^ijm, Kildrummie, Vrwhart, and the pile
of Lowdon) Edward king of England having with him the Balliol, and a sufficient
Army, prevailed so much, that there was no appearance of rebellion; whereupon
he took back with him the Lord Edward Balliol late crowned king of Scotland
(of whose sted fastnes he was (says Hector) always jealous, and returned,
leaving Adam Merim.
David Cu^in Earl of Athol, governor for the parts beyond the Scottish sea,
with sufficient force and authority (as was judged) to take in such strengthes
as yet stood out, but needed not his royal power or presence for their
expugnation.

(33) The King of England hoping now that all was well there, had news brought
unto him not The Lord Robert Stewart against the Baliol.
long after, at the Parliament at London, that the Scots were out in Arms
again; whereupon he obtaines aid of money from his Subjects for repressing
their attempts, promising to go against them in person. Hect. Boet.
The Lord Robert Stewart, son of the Lady Mariorie Bruce, daughter of King
Robert (upon whose line the remainder of the Crown of Scotland had been
estated) was the man that first lifted up the head of his Country in this
dangerous, sad, and desolate condition (though put into action upon a private
injury done unto him by the Earl of Athol) to whom diverse did adhere, though
the quarrel seemed properly to be the said L. Roberts, for that if the Bruces
were cut off, his hopes perished in them. The Earl of Murray and he were then
chosen governors for King David's party, but by reason of the diligence and
power of David Earl of Athol, they were not able as yet to conuene, or effect
any thing against the English. nevertheless it was not long before they slew
the said Earl David. At this Parliament the King of England purposed to Adam.
Merim.
go upon his own charge into the Holy Land, and to send the Archbishop of
Canterbury to deal with King Edwards ouerture for the Holy Land.
Philip de Valois King of France, for appointing a certain time, wherein they
two with their united forces, might take their voyage thither, from which the
desire of obtaining the Crown of France, upon the forementioned title, did
quickly divert him.

(34) Meanwhile, in accomplishment of the Parliaments The King of England once
more with an Army in Scotland.
expectation, King Edward after Ypod. Neust.
Michaelmas marched again into Scotland with an Army, and sent his Navy to
the Forth: The Sea-Force whereof* spoiled the Coasts on both sides of the Forth,
or Scottish Sea, and putting on land in Saint Colms, they spoiled the Abbey;
which Sacrilege, Lib. 15. Sacrilege punished.
Hector notes was severely punished, the whole Fleet being battered with
tempest, and some of the ships perishing. At another time also the like
sacrilege being perpetrated there, (he says) that the ship wherein the
unlawful prize was, sunk suddenly to the Sea-ground without any tempest. The
King himself coming to Hect. Boet.
Perth, to order the Scottish affairs, whiles he abode there, the Earl of
Murray one of the Governors was taken Prisoner, who was after Fabian out of the
French Stories. Grafton.
delivered upon Exchange for the Earl of Namur, (who^ the Scots by like Art
had taken) or as Hector will have it, for the Earl of Salisbury.

(35) By the mediation of the French, the Scots * Hollinsh. A. D. 1334. King
Edward the fourth time in Scotland with an Army.
had a short truce granted them. But about the end of May, the King sent his
cosen the Lord Henry, son to Henry Earl of Lancaster, with a great Army to
the aid and service of the Lord Edward Balliol King of Scotland, which wasted
all the Countries about Perth; where, while they lay, the King with a very
small Company came suddenly unto them, and from thence pierced farther one way
then ever his Grandfather Edward had done, suffering fire and death (the common
furies of war) to work upon all that might suffer destruction to establish a
Conquest. He marched up as far as Adam Merim.
Elgin and Buquhan, and in his return to Mar, Hect. Boet.
burnt the Town of Aberden, in revenge for Adam Merim.
Sir Thomas Rosselin, a Knight, whom the Townes-men thereof had slain. The
Lord Robert Steward had great lands in those Bellind. trans. of Hect. Boet.
lib. 15. cap. 7.
parts, for Murrey and Buquhan were his, which also

the young Prince Edward, many Earls and great Captains, with a gallant
Company of men of war, In July.
sailed to Antwerpe, whom Lewis the Emperor met at the City of Colein, where
amity was confirmed, and King Edward was constituted his Lieutenant, with full
authority to govern in his name on this side Colein. By reason of which
Vicegerencie King Edward Fabia^
made out his commandments, and did many things to his advantage and profit.
Howsoever it neither lasted long (for Lewis within a while dishonourably
revoked it,) and did undoubtedly scarce quit the cost: for the bravery of that
meeting was so exceeding great, as Edward easily wan the general opinion of a
very noble and puissant king. Histor. lib. 19.
Polydor writes, that Edward refused not the office, yet would not exercise the
same, because he would not displease Pope Benedict, whose enemy the Bauarian
was.

(49) This Emperor (whom belike the Pope hated, for being as proud as
himself) took it ill, The King of Englands prerogative. T^. W^lsin.
(as report went) that the King of England humbled not himself (at their
meeting) to the kiss of his foot. But it was answered; that the King of
England was a King anointed, and had life and member in his power, and
therefore ought not to submit himself, so much as an other King that was not
anointed. After his return to Antwerpe with his new power, he seriously
prosecuted his affair of confederation with the Lords and people of Dutchland,
among whom (with great love and favor) he and his royal family abode above an
whole year. The principal Nobles which entered into this league against the
French were these. The Archbishop of Colein Prince Elector; The Duke of
Brabant; The Duke of Gelderland, (who had married the Lady Isabel King Edwards
own sister, and about this season was of an Earl created a Duke; The
Marquess of Gulick, etc. And finally, the Hanse towns.

(50) The Flemings, being the most necessary part * Polyd. Ver. li. 19 An. D.
1338. The first quarteting of the French Armories with the English.
of this association, in regard of their neerenes to the French, would not
engage themselves in an offensive war against the Crown of France, unless
King Edward would first assume the Title and Armories of that Realm, as the
only lawful King thereof. This * Adam Me^m. Tho. Walls. in Edward. 3. Ypod.
Neust.
Proposition was thoroughly debated, and the law of Arms allowing it, he with
the common assent of the Flemings and others, took the Style, and quartered
the Flower de Lize with the Leopards, or Lions of England, as here we see
annexed; albeit we see his former Seal also adorned with two Lize or Lillies;
whether in token of his mothers French descent, or as a covert note of his own
right to the Frenchcrown it is uncertain.



(51) Polydor In Guli^l. 1. l. 9
Virgil must have a wary and favorable Reader, or he will be thought to be
of opinion, that William the Conqueror bare his Leopards quartered, then which
nothing is more untrue, nor more unlikely. Others again may suppose, that we
have not here described them according to their right bearing, as certainly
according to their present bearing we have not; but the truth is, the golden
Lillies of France, which now are borne in triangle, were in those days born,
and advanced Semi.

(52) And whereas the Armories of France are placed here in the dexter and more
honorable quarter, The Arms of England set before those of France at the
first. Sir Robert Cotton has such a seal of Q. Is^bel.
yet there are probabilities, that it was not so at this their first
conjunction. For in the* Seal of Queen Isabel (this King Edwards mother) the
Armories of England, as being the Armories of the husbands line (and therefore
to have precedence) were marshalled where now the Flower de Luces shine. But
whether to gratify the French, or because that was the more ancient and
greater Monarchy, they were in this Kings reign disposed as here we see.

(53) When King Edward had thus assumed the Title and Arms of that Realm, he
published the same under his seal, setting the name of England first, and sent
his Letters Patents to the frontiers of the enemies Dominions, fixing them upon
the doors of Churches, as well to declare the right and reason of his doings, as
to exempt such from the danger of the coming storm, who upon this notice
would acknowledge him their Lord and rightful Sovereign. These proclamations
or admonishments thus diuulged, he burnt and spoiled the North parts of France
up as far as Adam Merim. Tho. VValsing.
Turwin, though the time of the year were very unseasonable, and contenting
himself therewith for a beginning, gave place to the sharpness of Winter,
returning to the Queen his wife at Antwerpe where he kept a royal Christmas.
In which City this year was Lionel (afterward Duke of Clarence) borne.

(54) His affairs growing ripe in those parts, he leaves his Queen and
Children in Brabant, as an assured pledge of his return, and about Candlemas
ships himself for England; where in a Parliament King Edwards pardons and
grants in lieu of his Subjects contributions*
at Westminster, he obtained liberal aids for supportation of his intended
Conquest. In lieu of which loving assistances, he granted a general large
pardon both for trespasses, and of all Aides for making his son Knight, and
for marriage of his daughter during all his time; forgiving also all arrerages
of Farmers and Accountants till the tenth year of his Reign, and all old debts
due to any of his Predecessors. Finally, he confirmed that famous Magna
Charta, and of the Forest with some other.

(55) There was no talk now but of conquering France; Musters taken throughout
the Kingdom, Armourers and trades of war (to be cherished even in the
securest peace) were full of employment, and the desire of battle waxt fervent
every where. Mean while to hold the world in suspense of the success, God
distributed the fortune of attempts diversely. Bordeaux (the capital City of
Aquitaine, and then English) gave an excellent testimony of her A Strategem of
the loyal.
loyalty, nor less of martial wit and valor. For the French Army coming
before her, she to abuse their hope, set open her gates, and displayed upon her
Towers the golden Lillies, as if she were theirs; but the French which
securely entered, found little good hospitality. Sir Oliver de Ingham was
Captain and Lord Warden there for King Edward, who with his Garrison-Souldiers,
and aid of the inhabitants, slew of them great multitudes, and preserved
Bordeaux. But in the opposite parts, William Montacute Earl of Salisbury, and
Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk, Tho. VValsin.
after many honorable deeds performed for advancement of King Edwards
affair, were by the French taken Prisoners, while presuming too much upon
their courages and fortune, they * ran too far into their danger, at the Town
of Lile in Flanders.

(56) But King Edward being ready now to repasse the Seas, had certain
intelligence that the Gagiun. Serres.
French lay in wait about Sluice in Flanders, to intercept him with a mighty
Navy of 400. ships; who therefore prepared accordingly, intending to open
his way by force. He set sail from Harwich upon Saint John Baptists Eve,
toward the Coast where his enemies attended, strengthening himself Tho. Walls.
with the Northern Navy of England, which the I. Robert Morley brought unto
him, so as he had in all about two or three hundredth sail. His battles A very
great victory at Sea obtained by King Edward.
having the advantages of winds and sun, he set on the French with
incredible fury and force, in the very mouth of the Haven of Sluice upon
Midsommer day, where began a most bloody and terrible fight, the end whereof
set the Garland upon King Edwards head. Himself was Serres, Holinsh.
wounded in that fight, and lost Rich. Southw.
four valiant Knights (Monthermer, Latimer, Boteler, Poynings) with sundry
other of his English slain therein. But the slaughters of the French party
were lamentable, for thirty thousand are confessed to have perished, not half
of their ships escaped untaken or vnsuncke. A greater glory then this, the
English are scarce found to have achieved at any battle at sea.

(57) The Crown of France seemed already to be placed upon King Edwards
Temples, so much was attributed to this great victory, but such a Conquest was
not the work of one day. Which King Edward well understanding, refreshed his
victorious Army, and augmenting it with his Confederates forces (which
repaired to him on all sides) marched forth, having one of the most puissant
hosts that ever any King of England led, as wherein were near an hundredth
thousand Soldiers English, and Dutch. He had also in his Company the Dukes of
Brabant and Gelder, and many other potent members of the Empire, and (as Serres.
some write) the imperial Eagles displayed in the head of his Army, as he
that was Vicegerent of the sacred Roman Empire. In this wise he approached the
Northerlie parts of France, where exposing all to spoil and fire, he sat
down with his whole Forces about Turney, meaning to take in the same, as well
to be a seat of War, as place of sure retreat and refuge.

(58) Philip, though justly grieved with his woeful loss sustained at Sea, yet
to encounter, and crush so great an evil in the first approaches thereof, had
provided such an Army, as beseemed the Majesty and greatness of that
renowned Kingdom. Writers speak of an hundredth thousand fighting men assembled
under his command, and that besides Princes, Dukes, Earls, and other
illustrious Persons, there was the valiant old King of Bohemia, and Pol. Virg.
lib. 19.
Lewis king of Navarre. K. Edward hearing the same, drew forth his people into
the open field with purpose to give battle:

(59) It may seem a thing greatly tending to King Edwards glory, to remember
the Tho. Walls.
offer which he sent to King Philip before he laid his siege to Turney. In
which, without saluting him by any other title then of Philip of Valors, he
challenges him, for avoiding the effusion of Christian blood, to fight with
him hand to hand in single battle; or (if that misliked) then each to bring an
hundredth to the field, and try the event with so small an hazard; or
otherwise, within ten days to join full battle with all their forces near
to Turney. Whereunto Philip made no direct answer, neither with his honor
could, alleging that the letters were not sent to him, the King of France, but
barely to Philip of Valois. Nevertheless, he gave him to understand, that his
meaning was to beat him out of France, having hope in Christ (from whom he
derived his power) so to do.

(60) The honor of the war in those ages cannot be enough commended, in
which the noble old forms of hostility were put in practice, by defiances,
Heraldes, and public assignations of day and place of fight, and not by
skulking surprises and underhand stealthes, more nearly resembling highway
robberies, then lawful battle.

(61) These two huge hoasts (which had they been united for the good of
Christendom, might have worthily made the Turk look pale) being now in
sight, and the cloud of war ready in a manner to dissolve it self into
showers of blood, do nevertheless without one stroke fall off, and return to
their several Countries, not without the wonder and reioicement of peaceable
men, but not of the English and German Soldiers, who propounded to themselves
death with glory, or riches by Conquest and victory, who now had scarce their
wages.

(62) It is not meet that the name of that person who did perform so blessed
an office, should be concealed. It was a woman of honor (but at that time a
professed Serres.
Nun in the Abbey of Fontenels) the Lady Jane of Valoys, sister to this
Philip, widow of William late Earl of Henault, and mother to King Edwards
wife; her charitable endeavors were strongly helped by Ypod. Neust.
two Cardinals, who solicited peace together with her. Great interest of
mediation she had in either respect, here a brother, there a son in law, and
she failed not to plie them both. The Truce was concluded; the rather for that
King Philip was advised from all parts, not to set his whole fortunes upon the
Die and chance of a Battle. And Edward (on the other side) meaning nothing
less, then not to have prosecuted the war upon the encouragement of his late
Sea-victorie, was so destitute of money through the fault of his Officers in
England, as he was the sooner drawn, if not enforced to embrace so honest a
color of returning from the siege of Turney; which nevertheless did but
defer the miseries of France, not determine them: and whereas that glory,
which the upper hand in this journey would have brought, could not have been
pure and mere unto him, because the Dutch (whose aid he used) would have
claimed no small share therein, the English Cheualrie only had the name and
burden of such great Acts as after followed.

(63) The chief Articles of the truce were; That it should endure till
Midsommer day then The chief points of the Truce.
next ensuing, and that the Prisoners should be set at liberty without any
ransom on both sides, upon condition to render themselves again, or pay their
several ransomes, if peace were not in the mean time concluded. By virtue of
this treaty and truce, the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk were delivered.
Here it troubled our Walsingham.
Walsingham, that King Edward should be left so destitute, and needy by the
avarice or fraud of his officers at home, as for that respect to give over so
fair an opportunity, by which he might as it were by a continued line, and by
insisting and pressing upon the steps of his late suc-

friend to life, gave life notwithstanding about this The most noble order of
the Garter instituted
time to an invention, which as for the present it served (he having so great
use thereof for his French enterprises) as a vehement Incentiue to martial
valor, and a golden band of unity, so the same is continued with likelihood
of perennity, and multiplication of splendour in these our days. It was the
foundation of the English order, worthily called the most noble order of the
Garter. The causes why our Edward erected it, are not evident, though there
could none be greater or better, then those before recited; Honor expressed by
external and illustrious ensigns, devised by a victorious Author, and
appropriated A. D. 1350. An. Reg. 24. The Patent of the foundation bears date
22. Reg. Edw. 3. says Stow, who nevertheless places the first feast thereof
at this year.
to a fellowshippe of most exemplar and eminent persons, being in nature like a
flame, to kindle in the apt and worthy, al heroicke affections. The vulgar
opinion is, that whatsoever the remoter causes were which moved to this
foundation, the near cause, or the occasion was, a Garter of his own Queen
(or as Cambd. Brit. in Barksh.
some say) of the Lady Joan, Countess of Salisburie (wonder of that age for
shape and beauty) which slipping off in a dance, king Edward stooped and took
up. Such of the Nobles as were present, smiling, and (...) cauillationibus,
Polyd. Verg. l. 19. in Edw. 3.
playing in sport with that action of the Kings, as amouros, he seriously
said, it should not be long before there should Sovereign honor be done to
that silken tie. Whereupon he afterward added the French Motte, or Symbolicall
word HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE, as well in complement of the whole invention, as
in retort or check of his Courtiers sinister suspicion. Polydor Virgil
troubles himself to make an Apology for the coursenesse of this Original,
if (without injury) an office of honorable love in so renowned a Monarch, may
undergo the note of coursenesse; but the same Polydor among his other defenses
theref truly says; Nobilitas sub amore iacet.
There want not some who conjecture, that he entitled it the Order of the
Garter, for that in a battle wherein he was victorious, he had given the word
Garter, for the word or sign. But if credit may be attributed to the
original Pe^es D. Gulliel (...) Dethick, Equitem auratum, oli^ Garter,
principalem Armorum Reg^. Cambden in Brit.
Book of the Institution, the invention is deduced from times more ancient,
and that when Richard the first King of England, set forward against the Turks
and Sarazens to Cyprus and Acon, and waxed weary of longer delay, while the
siege of Acon was with wonderful care protracted, courage at the length (by
the coming of S. George among them as it was thought) quickening in him, it
came into his mind to tie about the legs of certain his choice Knights, a
Garter or small thong of leather, the only stuff fit for such a purpose,
which he had then at hand, to the intent that they (as it were by joint
consent) being mindful of future glory, if they were victorious, might be
stirred up, to demean themselves nobly after the example of the Romans, with
whom that variety of Crowns or Garlands given for sundry causes as
honorable Ensigns to the Soldier was in use; to the intent, that by such
incitements, they might shake off sloth, and the spirit of courage might
rise, and break forth the more fervently.

(80) And into this opinion of stirring up virtue thereby, the Cambden.
Author of the Britannia seems to pass, where he says, that King Edward
the third founded this Order, to Vt militarem vir^em honoribus, praemijs atque
splendors decora^et
adoru Martial virtue with honors, rewards and splendour.

(81) There was in the Castle of Windsor (the ordained seat of the Order now
first to be consummated) before King Edward did accomplish his intention, in
honor of God, Camd. vbi supr^
our Lady, and S. George, a Stow in Edw. 3
Chapel erected by King Henry the first, and other Progenitors of Edward,
with an allowance for eight Canons, to whose College this Prince added a
Deane, fifteen Canons more, and twenty and four poor impotent Knights, with
other officers and servants, as appears by his Charter. These were to pray
for the good estate of the Sovereign and Brethren of the most noble Order. The
Sovereign and Knights themselves had their particular laws and constitutions,
which they were by solemn oath bound to observe, of which one Polyd. Verg. in
Edw. 3.
was, That they should defend and assist one the other: which afterward made
Alphonse Duke of Calabria receive the habit of that Order with so exceeding
reverence at Naples, as erroniously thinking himself secured thereby from the
French, who claimed that Kingdom. But that custom of mutual assistance
(says Hist. Angl. lib. 26. in Hen. 7.
Polydor) was then worn out of use, and discontinued every where; for those
Italian Potentates who (within the memory of Polydor) being driven forth of
their Country, and imploring aid of those orders, whereof themselves were
companions, found no supporture, either from the French or Burgundians, who had
formerly elected them. Besides laws and Officers, King Edward also devised
particular Ceremonies and distinctiue habites and ensignements, whereof the
principal was the azure Garter, wherein the French Motte of the Order was
wrought in letters of gold, and the Garter it self fastened a little under the
left knee with a buckle of gold, in In Concordiae symbolum, says Camden.
token of Concord. There are special Manuscript Books of the Constitutions,
and other things peculiar to this Order, to which (this place being not aptly
capable of their recapitulation) we must refer the curious. Saint George the
Ioh. Canta^z Imperat. Constant. in Apolog. 3
esteemed pattern of Christian fortitude, is entitled to the Patronage of
this Order, and the beauteous Chapel in Windsor Castle (where his 23 Apr.
day is yearly celebrated) consecrated by King Edward to his memory. The
fortune of this invention has been such, that the most mighty Princes *Camd.
qua supra.
of the Christian world have thought themselves most highly honored, in being
chosen thereunto, so that there have been about two and twenty foreign
Emperors and Kings (besides many others of most noble quality) since the first
institution thereof, elected and admitted Companions of the Garter. The Kings
of England are in their several times Sovereigns of the Order, and the whole
number of Knights is circumscribed in twenty and six, whereof the Sovereign is
one. The names of the first twenty and six (who are also styled Founders of
the Order) you shall find intabled in our Map of Folio 28.
Barkeshire.

(82) Our Edward Polyd. Verg.
having thus honored S. Georges memory, assigned to his Image mounted in
Armor upon Horseback a silver Shield with a cross Gules ( Faer. Qu. C^. 1
lib. 1.
the dear remembrance of his dying Lord) and Pol. Virg. in Ed. 3.
appointed his Soldiers to wear white coats or Iackets, with a red Cross
before and behind over their Armor, that it was not only a comely, but a
stately sight to behold the English battles, like the rising Sun to glitter
far off in that pure hew; when the Souldies of other Nations in their baser
weeds could not be discerned. The glory therefore of this Order seemed such
to one, no Epitha. Thamis. apud Cambd.
unlearned Poet, that in an Apostrophe to Windsor, speaking of the Garter, he
breaks forth into these scarce Hyberbolicall verses. -Cappadocis quanquam sis
clara Georgicirc;
Militia, etc.
Far spreads thy fame, wherewith S. Georges knights
Has made thee glorious; where rich-robed Peers,
Whose manly legs the golden garter dights,
Combine that light which through all lands appears.
That now Burgundians scorn their Fliece of Gold;
The French, the Escalopt Collar setwith grace;
Their Crossed weeds, Rhodes, Elba, Alcala, hold
As worthless: all macht with thy George, are (...).


(83) Let us not dwell too long in the lesser things: It was the month of
Iulie, and King Edward was now upon the Sea with about a thousand Serres
Sail. No man is said to know whether he bent his course, so well he could
trust himself, and so wisely free his Councels from the possibility of
discovery. King Edward in France with bloody colors. Froissard.
He went not to war by rote, but by book; Wisdom was Herbenger and marshall
of his valor; who shall say he knew not how to conquer? It was not long but he
came to anchor in the Haven of Hogy Saint Vast, in Constantine, a great cape of
land or penile in Normandy. His Giou. Villain.
land forces did muster twenty and five hundred horse, and thirty thousand
foot, most of which were Archers. The lights, and glories of his Army, were
the Prince of Wales (then about sixteen years old, who was then by his father
knighted) many brave Earls, Lords, Knights, and expert Chiefs, the English
going cheerefullie, as having gotten such a King as answered their warlike
dispositions. The Earl of Huntington had charge of his Navy: himself takes
severe revenge for the blood of his friends upon the Norman Towns and people,
protesting he sacrificed them Serres.
to Clisson, Baro, Percie, and the rest. Their heads were set upon the chief
Gate of Carentine, for which cause he slew all that could be found therein,
and turning the whole town into Cinders gave it to their funeral. He took the
populous and rich City of Caen, and with his dreadful host burning and
spoiling round about, marched up almost as far as the very walls of Paris,
brauing King Philip so near.

(74) Who had not slept all this while, but was Polyd. Verg. and omnes.
purueied of one of the fullest armies which ever were seen in France. King
Edwards people rich with spoil seemed not unwilling to return. They were now
in the enemies Country between the two good rivers of Sein and Some, for they
had passed the Sein at Poissie, whose Bridge (as all other between Roan and
Paris) had been broken down by the French, and now (notwithstanding any
opposition) in a short space repaired. It was thought fit to seek passage out
of these straights, which could not be by Bridges, for they were broken by the
French. This search for passage, was by the enemy interpreted a kind of flight,
and Edward could not but be willing to nourish their temerity, to draw them on
securely to destruction by such a seeming fear.

(85) The river of Some, between Albeuille and the Sea, at a low water has a
passable and grauelile foord, known by the name of Blanch Taque; this was
discovered to him by one Gobin a prisoner. But the French King (best acquainted
in his own Country) to empeach this passage, had before sent thither a Norman
Baron of special note, one Godmar du Foy, and a 1000. thousand horse with at
least 6000. foot; but Edward, (whom as obstacles made impetuous, so nothing
could dismay,) enters himself into the Foord, Serres
crying, He that loves me let him follow me, as one that resolved either to
pass, or die. Who can tell the efficacy of such a Generals spirit, but they,
who have had the happiness to follow under the conduct? The passage wan, and
Du Foy defeated in a manner, before he was almost fought with, (the
incomparable courage of his enemies appalling him,) he brought to King Philip
fewer by a pair of thousands, then he carried forth, besides terror, and an
evil sign of that which followed. The English, who knew not what it meant to
run away, but were before resolved to live and die with such a Sovereign, had
reason now much more to resolve the same.

(86) King Edward was near to Crescie in the The great battle of Crescie.
County Ponthieu, lying between the rivers of Some and Anthy (which
unquestionably belonged unto him in right of his mother,) there most vigilantly
prouides he for his defense. King Philip, set on fire with this disaster,
precipitates to battle for accomplishment of Gods anger against France; being
the rather drawn, by the unruly vanity of his huge multitudes, (for by what
other words do *an hundred Serres says but 60000.
or six-score thousand men deserve to be caled?) who never left ouer-taking
one the other, till the view of the English banners and battles put them to
stand. We profess that the nature of our undertakings will not brook
descriptions at large; you shall have it as we may, that is, as remembering,
that innumerable great atcheiuements rest behind, somewhat impatiently
attending their relation.

(87) Therefore, the holy name of God first ritely The English put into battle.
inuocated, King Edward, without showing the least sign of perturbation, but
full of an Heroic assuredness, had ordered his people in three battles, with
their wings and succors. The Vaward disposed into the form of an Hearse,
where the Archers Frolssard.
stood in front, and the men of arms in the bottom, was under the young Lion
of Wales, Prince Edward, and with him many of the prime and sagest Captains:
Beauchamp Earl of warwick, Godfrey of Harecourt, Holinsh. Graston.
The Lords, Stafford, Laware, Bourchier, Clifford, Cobham, Holland, etc. In the
second battle were, The Earls of Northampton, and Arundell; the Lords, Rosse,
Willoughby, Basset, Saint Albine, Multon, etc. The third and last battle was
commanded in chief by King Edward himself, with the residue of his Nobles and
people. In every one of these battles, beside the wings, were a just proportion
of men at arms and Archers, but nothing so thin and few as some of our
Grafton!
writers allege, who mention not above 9000. all together, who were at least
thrice as many in their whole numbers, and not without need.

(88) King Edward closed his battles at their back, (as if he meant to
barricado them from flying,) by felling and plashing of Trees, placing his
carriages there and other impediments whatsoever, having commanded Grafton.
all men to put from them their horses, which were left among the carriages.
Thus all Not an Englishman on horseback in this battle.
ways of safety by flight being prevented, the necessity did undoubtedly
double their courages. Thus placed to the best advantage, King Edward visits
the ranckes in person, riding upon a pleasant Froissard.
Hobby, (having only a white rod in his hand, as if he would chastise
fortune,) between the two marshals of his field; whose very presence, with a
few seasonable and vnenforced words on behalf of God and his right, in steed
of long Orations, did inspire the faintest hearts among them with freshest
vigor and alacrity.

(89) Our writers describe not unto us the quality or face of the gound of
Crescy where this battle was determined (though very much does depend upon
choice of place,) neither the exact figures, or several numbers of every
several battle, their distances, wings or other warlike forms, nor finally
what Pallisado, trench, or other devise was in this or that quarter used, to
keepe-off and break the furious charge of men of Arms, before they came at
the Archers, principal workmen at this bloody journey. The culpable ignorance
and negligence of Generals.
But thus lamely are things commended to Posterity, where the Actors themselves
take no care to see the particulars orderly and according to the truth
delineated; but either are unlearned, or give themselves to the bodily fruition
of their passed travels, rather then to exercise their minds in profiting
themselves and others by such relations as are made with life and art. This we
find, that the place of the Englishmens battles was the Town of Crescie, and
Forest, and therefore apt with small labor to be made inaccessible, or at
leastwise difficult for horse to enter upon; that also the English battles were
marshalled to the most advantage for giving succor one unto the other; and
that there were Poly. Verg lib. 19.
Shields or Pauises to shelter our Archers from the Genowaies shot.

(90) By this time King Philip (whose countenance is Grafton.
said to have changed thereat,) was in sight of the English. He had with him
the two Kings of Boheme and Maiorea, and almost innumerable other great
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons and Gentlemen of inferior mark bearing arms;
nor those only French, but very many of them Almains and Dutch, lest you
should suppose, he had drawn away Lewis the Emperor from the friendship of K.
Edward, to little purpose. The Serres.
night before the battle, there alighted in the French host, with intention
to lop off one branch of Laurel from the tree of victory (though it fell out
to be Cypress and Taxus) Amie Earl of Sauoy, with a thousand men of Arms; so
that all things seemed to concur to nourish fury for a sudden ruin. We
need not describe the order of the French, where disorder was a principal
Actor: The Holinsh.
King of Bohem, and Charles Earl of Alenzon, King Philips brother German, had
charge of the point or vantgard, King Philip himself was in the maine battle,
and the Earl of Sauoy had chief command in the Rere.

(92) That is almost ridiculous, which Serres.
one writes The Auriflambe of France, and Dragon of England.
of the etymology of the Oiliflame (as he calls it) advanced at this battle,
as a sign of taking none to mercy, no more (as he says) then Oil does use
to extinguish fire; when indeed it was an hallowed Sir Tho. de la More, apud
John Stow.
Banner of red silk, whereof the French had a wonderful *Gag^. Elements of
Armories.
high conceit, as of that which was sent from heaven, and called Oreflame or
Auriflames. King Edward on the contrary side, is reported for sign of like
rigor, to have erected there his unconquered Standard of the Dragon-Gules.
Lewis of Luxemburg, the most valiant old King of Bohemia, being either blind or
very badly sighted, hearing in what goodly order the English (like sober
Spartan soldiers) atte^ded the charge, said plainly (contrary to their
ouer-weening judgments who had given out of their flight,) Here will the
English end their days or conquer. And even as the first wounds were ready in
a manner to be given and taken, behold, God, to let them know he was awake,
and that there was one above to whom so many thousands should within a few
minutes appear, to give an account of their whole lives till that present; he
caused the black clouds to pour down upon them store of funeral tears,
enarching the air with a spacious Serres.
Rainbow, and discharging sundry tire and peales of thunder: the Sun also,
at the same time drawing near to set, would gladly have hid his face, by
thrusting it under a partill Hollinsh. Froissard.
Eclypse; but God (who meant good to the English) would not suffer him to
withdraw his more necessary office, so that freed from that temporary shadow,
he shone directly into the Frenchmans eyes. At the same time also Walsingham.
sholes and clouds of balefull Ravens, and other birds of prey and rauin, as
foreshewing the harvest of carcases at hand, came flying over the French host.

(93) The sign of battle being given by King Philip, and entertained with
shoutes and clamors, all things showing the horror of war, Drums and Trumpets
sounding to a charge, Banners flying in the wind, and every where shining
weapons, menacing brave extremity, reason herself acknowledged it only safe
to leave them to their brute faculties, passion and fury, and the event
itself to God. The French calamities began at their Genowayes, who under Gio
Villam.
Carolo Grimaldi, and Antonio Dorta their Coronels, being all of them
Crosse-bowmen, were to open a way for the French horse with their shot. This
was the success of their service: Their Crosse-bow strings wet with the late
rain, their bodies weary The Genowayes defeated.
with a long march, their ranks (after the English had intercepted upon Polyd.
Virg. l. 19.
targets their first volue,) filled with innumerable gappes, occasioned by the
The Earl of Alansons furious temerity.
fall of their fellows slain, or overthrown with home-drawne arrows, were
lastly most outragiously scattered by Charles Earl of Alanson, at whose
commandment (derived from K. Serres.
Philip himself) his horse gave in among the^, to drive them by plain murder
from the honor ofhauing the point, upon only pretense that they hindered
their race. This hot young Count (contrary to good discipline,) had also
otherwise unjustly discontented and disgraced them, even when they were ready
to ioin in battle, whose bodies (being as most write about twelve thousand) by
bearing the first brunt might have been of great use, if in nothing else, but
in serving as buttes and quiuers, to take into them the chief first storms of
the English arrows. Whereas now The first confusion of the enemy
they themselves were not only thus most miserably trodden under foot, and put
to the sword, but many of the French Gallants by that occasion mingled among
them, were overthrown by the English arrows, who equally pursued the
destruction both of French and Genowayes, shooting thickest where the tumult
and confusion were greatest. Some Grafton.
rascals also following the English Army, as they saw opportunity, stepped in
among them, and help to cut throats, sparing neither Lord nor lozell.

(94) The French men of Arms half out of breath with headlong haste, and
terribly disordered The French horse charge the English battalions.
with the perpetual storms of singing arrows, were now at hand-strokes with
the Princes battle; neither was it long, but that the shining Battle axes,
Battle.
swords, lances, and other weapons of our nation had lost their splendour, being
covered with humane gore, which having thirstily drunk out of enemies wounds,
they let fall in bloody tears. The fight was sharp and fierce: but to what
purpose serves writing, if the high resolution of the king of Bohemia should be
unremembered? he (as only The king of Bohemias high resolution and death.
seeking an honorable grave for his old age) put himself into the first rank
of his own horsemen, and with full random charging the English, was slain
with sword in hand, the troop of his faithful follower* with their
slaughtered bodies covering him even in death. There lay this Trophea of the
English Cheualrie, by whose fall (evidently seen in the ruin of the Bohemian
Standard,) his noble son, the Lord Charles of Boheme (lately elected Emperor,
whilst Lewis was as Lanquet.
yet alive) was wisely warned to provide for himself, the matter appearing
desperate. For now was Philip himself in person, with the full power of his
Army, come to the rescues of his brother and friends, who were hard at work
(while they had breath) about their dreamed victory, but finding the metal
infinitely more tough which they had to deal upon, then they could possibly
have supposed, were beaten to the earth in great numbers. The young Prince
nevertheless was not without danger, though now the second battle of the
English, for preservation of their Prince, dashing in among the enemies, fought
most courageously.

(95) Therefore King Edward himself was sent unto, whose battle houered like a
tempest in a cloud, King Edward refuses to aid his son the Prince.
over which, upon the hillocke of a Windmill, with his helmet on, (which never
came off till all was done) he iudiciously watched, beholding the whole field,
and ready to enter into the conflict when just necessity should inuit. You
shall hear a most noble answer: The messenger dispatched from the Earl of
Northampton and others, Paul. Aemyl. in Philip. 6. Serres. Holinsh. His most
noble answer.
upon a tender respect to their young Princes safety, having declared to the
King, that the Lords required his presence, for that his son was in danger,
Paul. Aemyl. in Philip 6. Serres. Holinsh.
he bad him return and say; Let them send no more to me for any adventure that
may befall, while my son is alive; but let him either vanquish or die,
because the honor of this brave day shall be his, if God suffer him to
survive.

(96) The Messenger returned, and though he brought not men to their succors,
he brought such accession of courage and spirit, as he that should say that
King Edward failed them at their need, should neither understand what belongs
to magnanimity, nor the effect of such a check from so excellent a General:
who nevertheless, was maturely watchful over the good of his child and
people: on the other side King Philip (whose quarrel it was) King Philips
person far engaged, escapes by ^light.
did not forsake the duty of a noble Chief: but so long contended in his own
person, till his horse was Serres. Ypod. Neust. Adam Merim
slain under him with arrows, himself *twice dismounted, and wounded both in
the neck and thigh: but then the Lord John of Henault, Earl of Beaumont, (who
had long since quit King Edwards service) sets him again on horseback, and
the Serres says, that King Edward came at last to the battle, and with his
coming made an end thereof. The former words sent to his son (which are also
in Serres) infinuate nothing less.
French (out of a loyal desire to his preservation) cried to retire him out of
the fight, who rather seemed willing to end his days in so noble company:
which voice was as it were the vp-shot and last Gasp of that most cruel
conflict, where none as yet were taken to mercy upon any terms.

After their King had preserved himself, the whole power of the French gave
away, and sought to save it self by flight, whom the English, warely fighting
upon the defensive, and loath to hazard such a victory, by breaking their
rancks to pursue the enemy too far in the night time, (which now was come
upon them,) suffered them to be holden in chase by their own just fear,
contented to make good their Hollinsh.
ground, by standing still upon their guard according to true discipline. For
they saw not as yet the bottom of their danger, and knew that there were so
many escaped, as might well serve to ouerwhelme their Army with their
multitudes.

(97) King Edward seeing the coast for the present clear of all his enemies,
aduanceth with his untouched King Edward and the Prince meet.
battle toward his victorious son, and most affectionately embracing and
kissing him, said; Fair Son, God send you good perse^erance to so prosperous
beginnings; you have nobly acquit your self, and are well worthy to have the
Governance of a Kingdom entrusted unto you for your valor. To which the most
cheualrous of young Princes replied in silence, most humbly falling on his
knees, before his triumphant father.

(98) Here there may be some controversy, whether the exemplary manhood of the
English, or their The modest and wi^e behauior of the English.
singular piety, were more to be commended: but who will not infinitely
prefer the latter, chiefly in Soldiers, among whom it is usually most
wanting? Great was the victory, great was their prowess, and great the glory;
but they like true Christian knights and Soldiers, forbear all boast,
referring the whole thanks and honor of their preservation to God the true
Author thereof. The night was so very dark, as if it had mourned for the day
times bloodshed, therefore they made Gr^*
store of fires, lighted torches, and candles, carefully tending their wounded
companions, and modestly rejoicing in their own fair adventure.

(99) But the next morning presented new work; for such a mist having
ouerspread the earth, that they could scarce see hard at hand, yet were Ypod.
Neust. Holinsh. The French are again encountered and utterly broken. Paul.
Aemyl. says that the English set up French Banners, and by that stratagem drew
them to destruction.
new swarms of French abroad, who came from sundry Cities and good towns, as
Roan, Beauois, etc. to have joined with King Philip in the designed spoil of
the English; these being met with by King Edwards people, were in sundry
places overthrown and slain, and multitudes of such as had lost their way in
the last flight, were severely put to the sword, as the English chanced upon
them, Froissard.
where they lay lurking in hedges, bushes, and by-ways: The Earls of
Northampton, Will. Northbr^gh apud Rob. de Auesbur^.
Suffolk and Norfolk, Ypod. Neustr.
had the execution of the French which fled from this last overthrow, for the
space of about nine miles English from the ground where they encountered.

(100) There was leisure now to take an account of the slain; which upon the
enemies side amounted, not only in the number to very many, but in their
quality to very great. For search hereof, king The field viewed by Heralds.
Edward caused certain principal commanders, and three Heraldes, (who by the
Coat-Armours might judge of the persons, it being then a thing perpetual and
solemn not to fight without those signs of Noblesse,) to take an exact view
of the field, who about supper time returning, made report to the King, that
they found the dead bodies of Grafton.
eleven great Princes, and of Barons, Knights, and men of Arms, above Will.
Northb. Serres.
one thousand, and five hundredth. Among the owners of such bodies as were
beaten to the Earth upon the first day, these are worthily reckoned chief: The
Serres. Polyd. Virg. l. 19:
King of Bohemia, the Sir Tho. de la More, apud John Stow. Harding.
King of Maiorca, Serres.
Charles Earl of Alanson, brother-German to King Philip, the Duke of Loraine,
John Stow.
the Duke of Burbon, the (...). (...).
Earl of Flanders, the Will. Nort^.
Earl of Sauoy (both great Princes,) Serres (...) also reckon^ (...) Earl of
^ys (...) at this bat^, who was alive sundry (...).
the Dolphin of Vi^nois, son to Himbert, the Earl of S^erre, and Hareconrt
(whose brother Godfrey in pity of his house, his two Nephews being slain
with their father, forsook the King of England after this battle, and
returned into Grace with the French,) the VVil. Northb.
Earls of Aumarl, Neuers, etc. six Earls of Almaine; beside others of great
account of all sorts. Upon the second day, the Grand Prior of France, who with
his Archbishop of Roan, had on the behalf of their Prince and Country put on
Arms. Of the Commons, in 26 and 27. A^g. A. D. 1346.
both of these black days, there fell about thirty thousand, and some say,
four times more in this last, then in the other.

(101) We find not one man of honor, or note slain upon the English side, so
that this victory may safely be accounted among the wonderful. The Polyd.
Verg.
spoils of the Enemies bodies and carriages, King Edward gave wholly to his
well deserving soldiers. The rule of their safety (they being in a most
populous enemy Country) would not permit them to use much courtesy to others,
as that which might have proved cruelty to themselves, but upon the second day
they took many VVil. Northb.
prisoners, though none of great name, for they were spent in the day before.
It pleased the conqueror to proclaim a truce now for three days in the
Country about, that the people might come in to bury their dead; but the
bodies of the most noble, he himself caused to be conveyed to Monstreal, and
there (in his March toward Calais) enterred.

(102) Thus by Gods favor, and the irresistable force of the English Archers,
(who in a manner did Polyd. Verg.
only fight) was King Edward put into a full and peaceable possession of a
perfect victory; which after he had one night only enjoyed in the Forest of
Crescie, he dislodged with his conquering host, and marched straight toward
Calais, which Calais besieged.
he Serres says 30 September. A. D. 1346.
presently invested, having decreed never to rise with his Army from before
it, till without assault he had carried the same. For which cause he
entrenched and fortified his Camp on all sides, built up Grafton.
Sheds covered with Reed and broom, and other places and offices as to dwell
in, and stopping all relief by Sea, (whereof he was Master) with his Navy.
There commanded in Calais for the French, Sir John de Vienne, Serres.
Marshall of France, and the Lord Dandreghan, with a very strong Garrison, who
concluded like good men of war, to try all extremities, rather then to
surrender the Piece, which was so strong, that to assault the same, otherwise
then with famine had been frivolous. These great Captains seeing King Edwards
resolution, thrust forth of the Town (for sparing of food) their poorer
people, above fifteen hundredth; whom he, like a true Christian Prince, turned
not back upon the Town, but relieved for Gods cause with fresh King Edwards
Charity.
victuals, and two pence sterling each; permitting them freely and securely to
pass through his Camp, to his great glory, and (undoubtedly) profit also,
having their hearty prayers for his happy success, and God for play master, and
rewarder of such his Beneficence.

(103) Many ways were thought upon by king Philip to raise this obstinate
siege: two principal; The French devise to succor Calais.
an Army of French to fight with King Edward, and a diuersion by invasion,
wherein the Scots (their perpetual allies) were forward. Both in their
several times, were put into execution. That of the Scottish invasion was
first, but with such success, as well declared it was Gods will (all people
having their encreasings, zeniths, and declinations) that the English name
should now be brought to the vertical point thereof, without any thing being
able to resist it.

(104) For David the second King of Scots, to grasand old Crowns. The Pope
sending a Messenger from Auignion, with an ouerture to intercede for a peace,
had answer, that the message must be sent to the King his father, for he co^
not meddle without commandment from him. Mean while he disposed of things
without impeachment, and returns laden with honor and spoils to Bordeaux,
where the winter being spent, he sets forth to new adventures. He had in his
Army about eight thousand brave, expert, and well disciplined Soldiers, and
with them aduanceth through Perigort, and Limosin into the bosom of France, up
to the very gates of Burgess in Berie; the terror of his name flying before
to his great advantage. Thus satisfied for the present, he wheels about with
purpose to return by Remorantine in Blasois (which he took) and so through
the Country of Iurain, Poictou, and Saintoin to his chief City Bordeaux. But
John King of France (hasting to go beyond his father in misfortune) having
assembled a complete host, followed, and about the City of Poictiers
ouer-tooke the invincible Prince.

(115) When the Armies (with the ods of six to one against the English) were
embattelled, two Cardinals The English victory at Potiers, 19. Sep. 1356.
sent from Pope Serres, Polyd. Verg^ says his name was Innocentius.
Clement, labored (as they had done before) to take up the quarrel without
stroke, whereunto the Prince was with reason yielding enough, but King John
fatally presuming on his advantage, propounded such conditions, as if in a
manner the Prince of Wales had already been at his command; which with just
indignation were rejected. It came hereupon to a most bloody trial, where (if
ever) the Prince and English gave full experiment of their valor; for after
long conflict and absolute discomfiture of all the 3. French battles, (the least
of which exceeded all the Princes numbers) the King himself valiantly fighting,
and Philip his Serres.
youngest son (who with such boldness and zeal defended his distressed
father, as it purchased unto him the Honorable surname of Hardy) were taken
The French king taken prisoner.
prisoners.

(116) The English whose valiancy was most conspicuous, were the Earls of
Warwick, Suffolk, Salisburie, Oxford, and Stafford, the Lords Cobham,
Spenser, Audley, Berkley, Basset, etc. of Gascoigne, subjects to the Crown of
England, the Capital de Beuf, the Lord Pumier, Chaumont, with others of lower
title, but not of unequal valor. Froissard.
James Lord Audley wanne immortal renown at this bloody battle, where he
received many wounds, and shared the Princes gift of 500. Marks land in Fee
simple, to his four Esquiers, who had continued with him in all the brunt and
fury of danger. It is the misfortune or glory of the French Nobles, that in all
great battles the loss falls heavily upon them. In this most disasterous
overthrow, there fell Serres.
fifty and two Lords, and about seventeen hundredth Knights, Esquiers, and
Gentlemen bearing coats of Arms: The chief Lords were Peter of Bourbon Duke
of Athens high Constable of France, John Clermont Marshall, George of Charney
Lord great Chamberlain, etc. and as many other as made up the former account.
Fabian out of the French Chronicles.
Sr. Reginold C^ian, who that day bare the Oriflamb, was likewise slain: of
the common Soldiers there died about six thousand: Great God of victories,
how abundantly did thou in these days bless thine English? The list of
Prisoners comprehended these great names, John King of France; Philip his
son, afterward Duke of Burgoin; The Archbishop of Sens; James of Burbon Earl
of Pontheiu; John of Artois Earl of Eu; Charles his brother Earl of Longu
neuile; Charles Earl of Vendo^e; The Earls of Tankeruile, Salbruch, Nassaw,
Dampmartine, La Roch, and many other great Lords, and about Ypod. Neust.
two thousand Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen bearing Armories. The English at
this journey took an Serres.
hundredth Ensigns.

(117) Now albeit nothing wanted to the title of a perfect victory, yet in two
points the incomparable Prince out-went that fame and merit; for having
vanquished the person of the French Monarch The Prince does things more
commendable then his victory.
by force of battle, he much more overcame his heart with true and princely
courtesy, delivering his mind in a style and kind of eloquence so ponderous,
proper, grave, and natural, and with that stately humility, as only the best
soul with the best breeding could be capable of; and yet Paul. Aemyl.
he spoke not more officiously then he performed really. More then all this.
The next day causing his Chapleins and the other Priests of the Army, to
celebrate divine service, he put off from himself the whole glory, and gave
it most devoutly to Poly. Verg lib. 19.
God; which being first done, he, in the sight and hearing of the Prisoners,
highly commends, and most heartily thanks his Soldiers, with speeches full of
sincerity and life, sealing his words to every one, as his present means would
permit, with liberal deeds and largess.

(118) Then having settled all other things, he marches with joy and just
triumph to Holinsh. and omnes.
Bordeaux, the Archiepiscopall See, and chief City of his dominions in
France. How the news were entertained in all places of the English Empire, is
not hard to conjecture, but specially by King Edward, who took speedy order by
Simon Archbishop of Canterbury, that eight days together should be Bolyd.
Verg. lib. 19.
spent in giving God the thanks and glory. But the Prince having sufficiently
refreshed, and rested his people, set sail for England with his Prisoners,
where he happily arrived in 5 M^. A. D. 1357. Ypod. Neust.
Plimmouth and was most ioifully welcome every where. At his coming to London
(where at that time a magnifice^t Citizen, Henry Picard, he who afterward at
one time so nobly feasted the 4. Kings of England, France, Scotland and
Cyprus, was Lord Mayor,) which received him with A Lord Mayor feasted four
kings at once.
exquisite honor; the multitudes of people coming to see the victorious
Prince, the French King, and his son the Lord Philip, and the rest, were
such, that they could hardly get to Westminster, between three of the clock in
the morning and noon: but who will think the humor of the gazing vulgar worth
the noting?

(119) Great Edward, saving that he forgot not the Majesty of a Conqueror,
and of a King of England, The two Prisoner kings lodged
omitted no kind of noble courtesy toward the Prisoners. King John and his
son were lodged under a sure guard at the Sauoy, being then a goodly Palace
belonging to Henry Duke of Lancaster; the rest in other places: David King of
Scots was at this time straightly kept at the Castle of Adam (...).
Odiam, but not long after, when he had endured about eleven years
imprisonment, at the incessant suit of Queen King David set at liberty after 11
years durance.
Joan his wife (sister to king Edward,) was delivered: his Fourdon.
ransom was one hundredth thousand Marks striueling, and a condition to raze
certain Castles.

(120) About this time Isabel Queen Dowager of England, and mother of King
Edward, (having first seen her son the most respected King of all A. D. 1357.
Christendom,) 27. Nouemb.
deceased, and was interred at London, in the Church of the Friers-Minors
there. To her birth France was slenderly beholding, as being about this time in
most woeful and broken state, through occasion of that title which the English
challenged by her, it suffering more by far under their puissance, then Guil.
Tilli^.
^uer it did since the times of the Romans. Serres. Till^.
Charles the Dolphin, Duke of Normandy, who had escaped from the battle of
Poitiers, governed during his fathers imprisonment; but by the dangerous
practices of Charles King of Navarre, and bad disposition of the Parisians,
toward the delivery of their Sovereign, he was lamentably encumbred, and
beset with mischiefs, not being able to work as yet his fathers liberty.
Moreover, the English under Sir Robert Knowles, Sir James Pype, and An. D. 1358
A. reg. 32.
Thomalin Foulk, and others, did commit great wastes, and heaped huge wealth by
incursions, ransomes, and other warlike license, in Britain, and Normandy,
under the title of serving the Nauarrois. To be brief all France swarmed with
dissolute soldiers of sundry Nations, which having no General, made havoc
at their pleasure. They were called people without an head, and by innumerable
insolences made the wretchedness of Anarchy apparent. In England also swarmed
another sort, no less burthenous to the commonwealth and Church, which were
the four orders of Franciscan Friars, whom the Walls. in Edward 3. fol. 173.
English Clergy found to be so pernicious to the regiment of the Church, that
they selected that renowned Clerk, Richard Fitz-Ralph (who was Chancelour of
the University of Oxford, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland) to
appear in person before the Pope, and there allege the Armac^. in Defensori^
curator^. Fox Mart^log. in Edward 3.
intolerable harms by them accrewing to the Laity, the Clergy, and the
Universities, together with their disobedience to Gods word, their avarice, and
pride. All which that noble Prelate learnedly performed, as appears by the
handling of his 9. propositions against them, which are extant. In his second
proposition, he shows, how ordinary a matter it was with them, to allure
youth, without consent of their parents, to enter their Orders; which made men
withdraw their sons from the Universities, least the Friars should so steal
them away; whereby (says he) it came to pass, that (...) i^.
whereas in his own time there were thirty thousand Students in Oxford, soon
after there were left but six thousand. But how infinitely these Friarlie
swarms increased in all lands, may appear by that Sabelli. Ennead. 9 l. 6.
strange offer made by the General of this one Order, to Pope Pius, who
promised to bring him (being then about a Turkish Expedition) thirty thousand
cunning warriors, out of the number of Saint Francis Friars, and yet enough
should remain at home to perform the devotions. But the Pope had such use of
those Friars, that Armachanus prevailed not in the matter, Tho. Walls. in Edward
3.
though he proved the cause stoutly and manifestly against them, because (ah
for pity, says our Author,) the Clergy stuck not close as they promised, and
the Friars had great store of money to procure favor in the Court of Rome. But
here in the English Court, two Cardinals, (one of them, he of Pierregost, who
had so diligently traveled for a conclusion at the battle of Poictiers) could
not with two years labor, draw any thing to such* an head, as the French
would, for their Kings deliverance, perform; which put King Edward into a new
resolution against France.

(121) King Edward (houlding himself deluded King Edward 2. gain in France.
by the French) with a fleet of eleven hundred Sail passes over from
Sandwich to a new invasion. He arrived at Calais, from whence he set forward
in three 24. October
great battles, whereof the first, being least, was under Henry Duke of
Lancaster, the second being greater, under the brave Prince of Wales, and the
last which was greatest, was led by King Edward himself. They marched through
Paul. Aemil.
Artois to the City of Rheims in Champain, where the Kings of France use to be
crowned and anointed. The City of Serres.
Sens (an Archbishops See) and Neuers do yield without resistance. The Paradi^
in les Annals de Burgo.
Duke of Burgundy, for two Froissard. Paulus Aemilius says 100000. crowns.
hundredth thousand florens of gold, obtained that all Burgundy was spared from
sackage or spoil. It was told the King, that the Normans had landed at
Winchelsea in the time of divine service, and among other their most impious
outrages, a like execrable villainy, as that which Gibeonites, (sons of
Beliall) are recorded to have committed upon the Iud. 19. 11. 25. and 26.
Levites wife, was more wickedly perpetrated by them in the Church it self,
where the woman, being of singular beauty, was by their insatiable violations
murdered; and they got back to their Ships before the Country could rise
upon them to take due vengeance. Hereupon Tho. Walls.
King Edward presently raised his Standard, and set forth out of Champain,
(where not far from the City of Rheins he had Polyd. Verg. lib. 19.
kept his Christmas) toward Paris.

(122) He came before it with his army divided into Tho. Walls. An. D. 1360.
nine Battalions, where he honored four hundred Esquires and Gentlemen with
the Order of Knighthood. Charles the Dolphin, Regent of The English before
Paris. Four hundred Knights made at one time.
France, was within Paris with a great force, but could not by any means be
drawn to hazard battle. There were ample conditions in humble manner tendered
to Edward, but he was as yet inflexible and deaf against any other, then such
as himself (like a Conqueror) propounded. Paris (up to whose Polyd. Verg.
very walls King Edward ran) not being fesible, he Serres and Polyd. Verg.
retires into Britain to refresh his Army, but upon his return finding it
stronger then before, he turns his wrath into the very bowels of France,
exercising hostile Actions up as far as Paul Aemyl.
Charters, and Tho. VValsing.
Orleans, and as yet continued inexorable. God was displeased thereat, and to
let Edward know so much, he caused the Minister of his wrath, a terrible
tempest, to as^aile his Host, and Serres Paul. Aemyl.
to kill therein many both men and horses. King Edward is Tho. Walls. Ran. Cestr.
said, upon this occasion, to be so wounded with remorse, that repairing to our
Lady-Church of Charters, he prostrated himself to God, and sorrowing for the
bloodshed and wast-full burning which he had made, vowed to give quiet to the
Christian world upon equal conditions. This, and the Duke of Lancasters
persuasions, softened him so, that finally (by mediation of the Popes Fabian.
Legate one Simon de Langres) a peace was concluded at Bretagnie near to
Charters upon the Ti^.
eight of May; and in November following K. John himself was transported to
Caleis, and there by King Edward (according to the Capitulations of the
Treaty) set at liberty, after he had been a prisoner above four years.

(123) Articles of this accord, so necessary for the distressed Estate of
France were these. 1 That (to Articles of peace.
the intent these conditions which the French condescended unto, should be more
forceable, and not seem to be extorted by advantage, ods; or inquitie of the
times) the two Edwards, Father and Son, should for ever release to K. John
and to his heirs, all the right and claim which they had to the Paul. Aemyl.
(...) Johan. (...).
Crown of France, Serres Fabian. Holinsh. Paul. Aemyl.
to the Duchy and Estates of Normandy, Aniou, Turain, and Main, as also to the
homages of Britain Armorick, and the Earldome of Flanders. 2. That King John
and his son, for them and their heirs, should by a day certain restore, and
release to King Edward and his heirs, etc. the whole Country of Aquitain,
enlarged with the bordering and spacious Countries of Santoin, Poictou,
Pierregort, Limosin, Quercie, Angolesm, Rouergne, etc. with all the Cities,
Castles, and appurtenances, to be holden free, without any dependencie but of
God. 3. That the Tho. Walsing.
County of Pontheiu (the proper inheritance of Isabel late Queen Dowager of
England mother of King Edward) the Towns, Countries, and Lordships of Calais,
Guines, Mountril, Haim, Wale, Oye, Merck, S. Valary, etc. and all the Islands
which either the English then held, or which lay before any of the Premises,
with only certain limitations concerning private men's interest, should remain
in like freedom as the rest of the premises to the Crown of England. 4 That
King John should pay for his ransom (part thereof to be in hand, and part upon
days) the sum of Paul Aemyl. Polyd. Uerg. Froissard.
thirty hundredth The huge ransom of John King of France.
thousand scutes of Gold, every two of which should be Tho. Walls. Fabian. The
City of Paris gave toward this ransom one hundredth thousand roial^. Edw. Gri^
his English Serres.
six shillings and eight pence sterling. And that for assurance there should
be assigned certain number of Hostages (by King Edward named) to remain in
England. 5. That the French should not aid, nor assist the Scots against the
English, nor they the Flemings against the French. 6. That it should be
lawful for either King notwithstanding to aid the Titlers for the Duchy of
Britain at their pleasures. There were sundry other Articles, as in cases of
so transcendent quality must needs happen, but, as these were principal, so
the most of them might have been well left out here, unless they had more
exactly been observed by the French. Yet were they ratified with hands,
seals, and Oaths at 24. October. 1360.
Calais, where the two Kings, in stead of kissing the Pax at mass (either
having for honors sake refused to take it first) (...). par. 7. Caxton.
saluted each the other with a most brotherly embracement and loving kiss.

buse the King of Englands credulity, till he had gotten before hand as far
as dissimulations could advance: he Courts the good old Prince with loving
letters and presents, while in the mean time his plots ripen abroad, and the
County of Pontieu (the king of Englands undeniable inheritance) was first
surprised before King Edward heard thereof. And whereas the Prince of Wales had
at a Parliament in Gascoigne propounded a demand for fowage, or of money to be
levied by the chimney, the Earls of Armignac and Cominges, and other Lords the
Princes subjects, bearing no sound affections toward the English Empire (the
less for that by the policy of Glequin, and the Chancellor of France
Inventory of France in Charles the 5. Serr^:
Dourmauns, all or most of the Countries and Towns (which by virtue of the
peace made at Bretigney) were annexed thereunto, were cu^ningly wrought to
return to their old Lords) repair to the French Court at Paris, there to
pursue an appeal for redress of this oppression against the Prince (who was
not so happy as to follow the counsel of Sir Robert Knols and other wisest
Captains who dissuaded this imposition,) pretending that he was to answer
before King Charles as before his superior Lord, of whom (they said) he held
by homage and fealty. This practice of the disloyal Lords (for what could
they be else? seeing King Edward and his heirs were absolutely freede (by
virtue of the said Treaty) from all manner of service for any of their
Dominions in France) King Charles did openly at last entertain, and (upon hope
to recover by surprise, and plot, what the English had won by dint of sword and
perfect manhood) proceeded to summon the Prince of Wales to Paris, there to
answer such accusations as his subjects made against him.

(137) To increase the indignity of these devises, you should hear the French
kings Orators before the Pope and Emperor, to whom king Edward had severally
sent Ambassadors, full of complaints against King Charles, laying wholly upon
the French, the blame of the new war, as upon open breakers of faith, and
violaters of the league, most confidently on the contrary part charge the
English.

We had suffered the French hostages to visit their Paul. Aemyl. in Car. 5.
friends at home upon the French Kings word, that they should come back by a
day, contrary to which word, they, nor any of them, either were or are
returned. That not so much as the Law of Nations was kept with us, which ties
Princes to demand restitution by their Officers of Arms, or upon denial to
defy them, but where (say we) are the Serres rashly affirms he did:
Heralds which King Charles did send? We say, that without notice he
surpriseth by stealth the Earldom of Ponthieu, King Edwards unquestionable
right, and has disseised us in Aquitaine, which does no less belong unto us
then Pontheiu. That Pol. Virg. in E. 3.
Margaret the Inheritrice of Flanders, which had been promised to the Lord
Edmund, one of our Kings sons, was by their injurious practice won away,
and bestowed in marriage upon Philip Duke of Burgundy. Finally, we say, that
Lewis Duke of Aniou, one of the pledges, making an escape by that, contrary to
honor, and the league, was by them received, and not returned, which points
being all of transcendent quality, are (say we) directly contrary to the
Treaty and sworn agreement at Bretigny.

The French hereunto answer, and charge upon us, to show the fault of first
breach, not theirs, but ours.

That we by virtue of the said Treaty were bound immediately to withdraw our
Army out of France, The points charged upon the English.
which yet (they said) we did not during all the reign of John their King.

That the peace was made thereby more noyous, and hurtful then the war, and
that they were feign to purchase the departure of our Soldiers with a greater
charge then would have maintained a very gallant Army: That this breach was
ours, because the Soldiers were ours. That King Edward was bound in an open
assembly of the States In Charles 5. Serres.
of both Realms, to renounce his right in the Crown of France: when (say
they) was this done?

Thus they, and Serres ads that the Estates of those Countries which had been
assigned by the Treaty to the English asseuered, that it was against the
fundamental laws of France to alien any part, and that they neither could,
nor would cease to be members of that Crown.

(138) So ye behold that the fortune of the great is never to want friends to
speak for them, nor occasions to slip out or in, whenever profit and
advantage do inuit. Memorable (if true) is that part of the Frenchmens
defense, in that polite and learned Italian, P. Aemylius, where it being
objected with what honor and clemency King John was used by us, they break
out and affirm, that we (being their Beneficiaries or Freeholders for such
Countries as we held in France) took more gold for the only ransom of King
John, then they paid to redeem S. Lewis their king, and his brother, the
Peers, and whole French Army captiuated in the Christian wars by the
barbarous Sultan. But (good Aemylius) The dealings of the English defended
against P. Aemilius.
say that were so, yet cannot you say, that the sum we took was worth the
least Country in France, and when all France was ours, was it not great
bounty to take so small a pittance? If you reply that we had many Countries
besides, we reioine and truly say, that we quit more then we acquired. But
let us proceed: for now all claims and quarrels were as open, as if no
obstacle had ever been interposed: the ignominy of their late terrible foiles
wounded all true French hearts, and they desire (king Edward grown aged) not
to seem by sitting still upon so many thorns of disgrace, and loss, to have
been outwarred, though ouer-warred, and though in two or three battles
inferior, yet not to have been clearly debellated.

(139) What does our King Edward now? He An. D. 1369 John Duke of Lancaster
sent to invade France.
Polyd. Verg. in Edw. 3. Froissard
calls a Parliament, declares the breach, prays aid, obtaines it, and claims
the crown of France afresh. John Duke of Lancaster and Humfrey de Bohun Earl
of Hereford are sent over to Calais with a great force to invade France. No
great matter as then ensued. Ypod. Neust.
Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick coming over in hope to have work for his
Curtelax, for the French affronted our army under the conduct of Duke Philip
le Hardy (though at this time scarce showing himself worthy that surname) but
rose upon the Earls arrival, and retired, accused the Lords for sloth, and
swear he would abroad among them to find fighting, while English bread was as
yet undigested in his soldiers stomachs. Somewhat he did, but death by a
pestilentiall dart prevented the rest. This Earl had with him a learned man
(as Scipio had Polybius) to register the acts which he saw done: A worthy
example ill followed by posterity. The Polyd. Verg. l. 19 Holinsh. in Edw. 3.
Duke of Lancaster peirced up with his army so far as Roan. The same Polydor
wondering why they of Pontheiu having for an hundredth and twelve years (that
is, ever since King Edward the first had it given to him with his wife) been
ours, should revolt, only daring the greatness of the English, can find no
other reason for their doings but this pleasant one, that as dispersed cattle
gather to their own heard, so Frenchmen flock to the French, and English
follow English.

(140) Stirring Princes cannot contain themselves within their own quietly
possessed rights: An. D. 1370 Sir Robert Knolles sent General into the parts
about Britain.
Otherwise, who sees not how much better it is for the people, that their
Princes should manage well that which they have, rather then graspe at more?
For King Edward (notwithstanding his continual manifold victories) comes back
to the Subject (who yet had gained hugely by the wars, and therefore might
the better do it) for supportation: and they yield it, but his age was abused,
for the money was not expended as the pretenses were made. Private turns were
served with public loanes. Nevertheless, Tho. Walsing. in Edw. 3.
after Midsomer day, that renowned Captain Sir Robert Knols, whom martial
virtue had raised from the lowest rank to the highest reputation (though some
also affirm him Paul. Emyl in Car. 5.
borne noble) was sent by King Edward into France with an Army, where (while
obedience lasted to his direction) all things prospered. But by the instigation
of one Sir John Paul. Emyl. Iac. Meir. Holinsh.
Mensterworth the young Lords Grandsonne, and Fitzwalter, and other vainelie
scorning to be under Knols, for that they held themselves his betters, and
thereupon dividing themselves after they had done sundry exploits, marching up
even to Paris, were beaten and foild by the French under Glequins conduct, but
Knols wintred safe in Britain. Mensterworth comes into England, and knowing
accusers have the vantage, complains to King Edward of Knols: but not
altogether believed: he ads treason to untruth, and turning French becomes a
wicked enemy to his King and Country, Tho. Walsing. in fine Edw. 3.
promising the French to procure the Castilian Navy to invade England, for
which being in the last year of King Edwards reign taken, he by due course
was condemned and cut in pieces, dying the death he had deserved. He was laid
hold upon in the City of Pampeline in Navarre, and from thence conueighed to
London, upon whose bridge his wicked head stood Sentinel.

(141) Tho. Walls. in Edward 3.
Pope Urban the fifth, coming from Rome to Auinion with purpose to unite these
two mighty Kings, their wills, and mights against the common enemy of
Christendom, put off mortality at Marsils, and so that holy intention ceased
for the present: but the same being Holinsh.
continued by his next successor Gregory 11. yet took no effect, no more then
that which the Emperor to like cause would have undergone: which the Serres.
French impute to King Edward, who confident by reason of his former
atchieuements, would try it out by the sword. Wherein he seemed to forget the
mutable condition of war, the searnesse of his body, and the greenness of
his Grandchild young Richard, who was to succeed, if the Prince of Wales died,
as shortly after he did. Neither did God seem to approve his opinion herein,
for that crosses came fast upon him, both at home and abroad. There is no
greater wisdom nor happiness then to know when we are well, and then to
preserve without hazard or empairment, that honor wealth or quiet which we
already have.

(142) Among the States and Towns (assigned to the English by virtue of the
treaty at Bretigny) which had revolted to the French, was the City of Limoges
in Limosin, whither the Prince marches, and sits down with his army before
it. Thither Holinshed.
came unto him out of England his brethren the D. of Lancaster and the Earl of
Cambridge, with a fresh supply of valiant Chiefs and Soldiers. The City stood
it out to the uttermost, and was forceably entered, where mercy had nothing to
save nor spare, the sword and fire for terror to other killing and defacing in
a manner all. He Serres (an Author) distrusted.
who writes that the Prince flew up near to Paris, and scarsely, by reason of
Glequins valor, got back to Bordeaux, seems to have mistaken therein, as in
many other things concerning us of great importance. After this service, the
Prince, (health failing him more and more) leaves his Brethren in Aquitaine,
and sails into England.

(143) The French in the mean time won towns and places in Aquitaine,
gathering new hopes after so long and perpetual infelicities. The loss of
that expert Captain Sir John Chandoys (unfortunately slain) was a great
advantage to their desires, whose whole care for war rested upon Glequin (not
long before advanced for his military virtue from low estate to so great
eminency, as to be Constable of France, the chiefest officer for war which
that Kingdom has) and he a man of much proof, in good and evil fortune, so
tempered his courage with discretion, that he only first bad his Country rise
again, and endeavor in despite of evil fortune to reflourish.

(144) The Prince of Wales (wanting health) upon coming to his fathers sight,
rendered up the Duchy of Aquitaine, to be disposed of, as to his royal
pleasure seemed good. While King Edward was at Clarendon, there repaired to him
the factious king of Navarre, whose errand was to make an ouerture of
association against the French; but as his offers were acceptable, so his
cautions not seeming sufficient, he returned (after great entertainment)
without concluding.

(145) John Duke of Lancaster, and his brother the Earl of Cambridge, do now
return out of Aquitaine, An. D. 1372
with the Ladies Constance and Isabel daughters of Don Pedro late King of
Spain, whom they married: The Duke thereupon instiling himself King, and his
wife Queen of Castile and Leon. Nor was the English name only increased in
titularie honors; for about this time, the Flemings (who had provoked us) were
vanquished by the Holinshed:
Earl of Hereford at The Flemish Name distressed by the English.
sea in a sharp fight, Ypod. Neust.
about twenty and five of their ships being taken, and all the men slain.
The sweet of this victory was sowred not long after with a grievous loss: for
the French having besieged the strong City of Rochel in Santoin, with the aid
by sea of Henry King of Castile; to relieve the Rochel besieged by the French.
English, John Earl of Pembroke was sent with about forty ships, men,
victuals, munition, and money, to the value of twenty thousand marks, forth
uses of the war; but being suddenly assailed with the Spanish Armado, which
consisted of many great ships, under the command of Ambrose Buccanigra and
others, the English after a long and cruel The English Navy distressed by the
Castilian.
conflict were utterly distressed, the Earl taken prisoner, and almost all the
rest either taken, or put to the sword. Polyd. Verg. l. 19
Rochel held out notwithstanding, to whose relief while King Edward himself
in person, with an extraordinary force set sail, the wind (always King Edward
at sea to relieve Rochel is blown back.
till that time favorable to his voyages for France) came Easterly, and drove
him back into England with great grief, and the waste (they write) of Tho.
Walsin.
nine hundred thousand pounds sterling. Neither did he so give over the care
of that strong Piece, which the English most manfully made good against the
enemy.

(146) Polyd. Verg. lib. 19.
Rochel thus persisting in loyal resolution, John Duke of Britain (who had
married the A. D. 1373 Rochel continues English.
Lady Marie daughter of King Edward) a Gentleman of much gratitude toward the
English, the authors of his fortunes, resolves to adventure his state in their
quarrel; ships away for England: has aid ministered unto him: he returns,
and wars with various event. But John Duke of Lancaster with a very great
Army comes to Callis, and from thence marches over the whole face of France,
and (though with loss of many thousand Tho. Walls.
horse in the desert countries of A^ergn through famine) came safe, but with an
almost-hunger-starued Army to Bordeaux. Not long after he drew into the field,
and a day was appointed between him and the Duke of Anion the French Kings
brother, to have tried the quarrel of their Nations by set battle, before the
City of Tholouz in Languedoc, but by an untimely and a pernicious short truce
(to which K. Edward yielded because his son the Prince lay dangerously sick)
the hoped victory not only slipped out of the English men's hands, but almost all
advantage also of doing any thing else seasonably. The French boasted Tho Walls.
lib. 19.
themselves as of a Conquest, who notwithstanding did help out their valiancy
with policy. Glequin makes his use of all occasions, and works much harm to
the English party in Guien and Britain: But in Britain 1. Tillius Chron.
Sir Robert Knols did so nobly acquit him self on the behalf* of his
Souereignes son in law the Duke, that he only seemed a fit parallel to
Glequin, like as he stopped the current of his fortune.

was borne at Gaunt the chief Town of Flaunders, Anno 1340. and 14. of his
fathers reign. In his Childhood he was created Earl of Richmond, which title
was afterward recalled in, and bestowed upon John Duke of Britanny, who married
his sister, to whose Duchy it had formerly belonged. He had three wives; the
first, Blanch, daughter and Coheire, and in the end the sole heir, of Henry
Duke of Lancaster (son of Edmund surnamed Crooch-back) in whose right he was
at the first Earl, and after Duke of the same, and with that Duchy also Earl
of Leicester, Derby, and Lincoln, and high Steward of England. He had issue by
her, Henry of Bullingbrooke Earl of Derbie, after Duke of Hereford, and lastly
King of England, named Henry the fourth, who first placed the Crown in the
house of Lancaster; Philip, wife of John the first, King of Portugal; and
Elizabeth, married first to John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, (brother of
Thomas Duke of Surrey) and after him, to Sir John Cornwall Baron of Fanhope.
His second wife was Consiance, the eldest daughter of Peter King of Castile and
Leon, in whose right for the time he entitled himself King of both these
realms; by her he had issue one only daughter, named Katherine, married to
Henry the third, son of King John, in possession before, and in her right,
after, King of both the said realms. His third wife was Katherine the widow of
Sir Hugh Swinford, a Knight of Lincolnshire, eldest daughter and Coheire of
Pain Roet a Gascoigne called Guien King of Arms, for that Country, Miller. p.
992.
his younger daughter being married to Sir Geoffrey Cha^cer, our Laureat Poet.
By her he had issue (borne before matrimony, and made legitimate afterward by
Parliament holden in the twentieth year of King Richard the second,) John
Earl of Sommerset, Thomas Duke of Excester, Henry Bishop of Winchester and
Cardinal; and Ioane, who was first married to Robert Ferrers (Baron of Wemme
and Ouesley, in the Counties of Salop and Warwick) and secondly to Raph Neuil
the first, Earl of Westmerland. She and all her brethren were surnamed
Beaufort, of a Castle which the Duke had in France Id^ ib.
where they were all borne,) in regard thereof bearing the Porculleys of a
Castle for the cognizance of their family. This Duke in the thirteenth year of
his Nephew King Richard, at a parliament holden at London, was created Duke of
Aquitaine, but in the sixth year after, he was called home, and this Title
recalled in, and in the third year after, the sixtieth of his age, Anno 1399.
he dyed at Ely house in Holborne, and lies honorably entombed in the Quire of
Saint Paul.

Edmond, their 5. son, surnamed of Langley, was created Earl of Cambridge
Anno 1362. in the same Parliament, wherein Lionel was created Duke of Clarence.
He was afterward made Duke of York, Anno 1386. and married Isabel daughter
and Coheire to Peter, King of Castile and Leon. His son Richard Plantagenet
Duke of York, took to wife Anne Morti^er heir of the foresaid Lionel elder
brother to Edmund Langley.

William another of their sons, surnamed of Wynsore, where he was borne dyed
young, and is buried at Westminster.

Thomas the youngest son of King Edward and Queen Philip surnamed of
Woodstocke (where he was borne) was first Earl of Buckingham, created by his
Nephew King Richard the second on his Coronation day, An. 1377. by whom, after
also he was made Duke of Gloucester, 1385. The Earledomes also of Essex and
Northampton and the Constableshippe of England, fell to him by right of his
wife Eleanor, the only daughter and heir of Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford
and Essex. He was a man of valor, wisdom, and vigilance for the behoof of
the King his Nephew and the State, but those noble virtues (distempered with
too much wilfulness and froward obstinacy) bred him, first Envy, and
afterruine. For the King surmising him to be a too severe obseruer of his
doings, consulted with Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk how to make him away;
whom Mowbray unawares surprising, conuaied secretly to Callis where he was
strangled 1397. 20. of his Nephews reign. Himself in his life had provided a
goodly tomb at Playsie in Essex (his own Town, and Lib. Eliens.
the usual seat of the great Constables of England) Cambd. Erit. in Essex.
where he founded a College; whither his body was brought, and laid with all
funeral pomp, but afterward it was translated to Westminster, where also
lies Eleanor his wife, who dyed 1399. Their issue was Humfrey Earl of
Buckingham, Milles. p. 381.
who dyed at Chester of the pestilence An. 1400. Anne (married first to Edmund
Earl of Stafford, by whom she had Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, secondly to
William Bourchier Earl of Eve, by whom she had Henry Earl of Essex) Philippa,
Ioane, Isabell, who died all issulesse.

Isabel, the eldest daughter and second child of K. Idem. p. 428.
Edward and Queen Philip was married at Windsore with great pomp to Ingelram
of Guisnes, Lord of Coucy, Earl of S^ysons and after Archduke of Austria,
whom K. Edward (his father in law) created also Earl of Bedford 1365. by whom
she was mother of Milles. p. 441.
two daughters, Mary, (married to Henry of Bar, to whom she bare Robert de
Bar, and Ioane, the wife of Lewis of Luxemburg, Earl of S. Paul) and Philip,
the wife of Robert de Veere Earl of Oxford, Duke of Ireland and Marquess of
Dublyn; this Robert in the height of his fortunes forsook his noble Lady, and
married one Idem. p. 689.
Lancerona a Ioyners daughter (by report) which came with King Richard the
seconds wife out of Boheme; and being, for his pride and abusing the Kings ear
to the hurt of the State, driven out of the land by the nobles, he dyed at
Louain, in great vexation of mind, and extreme penury, An. 1392. Isabel his
wives mother was buried in the Church of Friars Minorites near Algate in London.

Ioane their second daughter and third child was borne 9. of her fathers reign
An. 1335. B^ng 14. years of age, she was desired in marriage by solemn
Embassage, from Alphons the eleventh King of Castile and Leon, son of King
Ferdinando the 4: was espoused by Proxy, entitled Queen of Spain, and
conveyed into that Country, where she presently deceased of a great plague
that then reigned; so as the King coming to meet her to solemnize the
espousals, with great grief accompanied her to Church only at her funeral 22.
of her fathers reign. An. 1348.

Blanch the 3. daughter, died young, and lies buried at Westminster.

Mary, their 4. daughter was married to John Montford Duke of Britain.

Margaret their youngest daughter was the first wife of John de Hastings Earl
of Pembroke, but she dyed without issue.

RICHARD THE SECOND, KING OF Monarch 50
Richard II.
ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND. THE FIFTIETH MONARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS
REIGN, ACTS, AND TROUBLES. CHAPTER XIII.


RIchard of Bordeaux, son to that Great Star of English A. D. 1378.
Cheualrie, Edward, by-named the Black Prince, and grandchild to the most
renowned The Coronation of the King.
Edward the third (both of them lately deceased) was crowned in the eleventh
year of his age, and upon the sixteenth day of July. Seldom has been seen so
magnificent a Coronation, as that of this young King, but the thing which gave
a better luster of hope at his beginning; then the shine and majesty of that
public Act, was the wise course which in this his childhood was taken; to wit,
the reconciliation of the Lord John Duke of Lancaster, and the Citizens of
London, with the restitution of Sir Peter de la Mare Knight, Speaker in the
late Parliament, (whom King Edward had committed to prison, at the instigation
of Dame Alice Peers now banished, and confiscated) not only to former liberty,
but likewise to favor and honor extraordinary.

(2) At this Coronation, (which, as matters not unworthy to be kept alive,
we following the immethodicall (...) MS. ap^d D^ Rob. Cotton.
order of the Record, have here for perpetual memory thought good to abridge
out of authentike Monuments) John the Kings eldest uncle, under the style of
John King of Castile and Le^, and Duke of Lancaster, by humble petition to the
King, claimed to be now Steward of England, in right of his Earldom of
Leicester; and as he was Duke of Lancaster, to bear the Kings chief sword
called Curtana; and as Earl of Lincoln, to cut and carue at the royal
Table before the King. His petitions being found just, were confirmed to him,
Services by ^a on of (...) Coro^ion found and ^ed in that (...).
and to his Assigns, the two Earls of Derby and Stafford, the first to bear
the Sword, while the Duke should be busied about other offices as Steward, and
the other to cut and carue. The Duke then in great estate, held this the Kings
high Court of Stewardship The Court of hig^ S^wardship.
in the White Hall of the Kings Palace at Westminster,

Knight the Constable thereof; which yet the Earl of Northumberland upon the
ninth day after recovered by force, putting those, who had surprised it, to the
sword.

(9) Neither was the spirit of the English (after it A. D. 1379.
began to requicken) idle elsewhere; for as Sir Robert Rous had diverse ways
vexed the French, and taken Ol^uer (the brother of that renowned Bertrand de
Glequin) prisoner, so Sir John de Harleston, Captain of Cherbrough after him,
slew and took diverse French in a skirmish. These the few foregoing drops of
greater approaching showers. For Sir Hugh Caluerlee and Sir Thomas Percy, made
admirals of the narrow Seas, took many rich prizes, and exploited sundry other
things very praise worthily, bringing home The Britons dislike of the French
Government: matter of new troubles.
the acceptable news of the dislike which the Britons had conceived against
the French Kings Government; for he commanded them to render up to him all
their strengths, Castles, and walled Towns, and many of them, who refused to
obey, he put to death.

(10) These emploiments, and fresh designs The commons spared in the subsidy.
for other like, found need of pecuniary supplies; whereupon, in a Parliament
holden at London, it was agreed, that for supply of the Kings wants, the
Commons should be spared, and the burden be wholly undergone by the able. The
rates then of that tax were these; Dukes, Archbishops, Earls and Bishops at
ten marks each, mitred Abbots at as much, besides forty pence for every Monk
under their subjection. Briefly (says Thomas Walsingham) there was no
religious person, man or woman, Iustitiar, Sheriff, Knight, Esquire, Parson,
Vicar, or Si^plex Capella^. Walsing.
Chauntry Priest free from this tax^ rated according to the value of their
yearly receipt^.

(11) We formerlie mentioned, how John Shakell A m^morable example of a noble
young gentleman's faith* keeping.
(the other companion of Robert Haulee so execrablie murdered in Gods-house)
was taken. He now upon condition that the King (besides 500. marks in money)
should give him lands to the yearly value of one hundredth marks, and should
also found and sufficiently endow, at the Kings costs, a Chantrie with five
Priests for their souls, whom the kings Officers had wickedly murdered, he
rendered up his Hostage, the eldest (but natural) son of the said Earl of
Dean. At the discovery and bringing-forth of whom, all men were stricken with
wonderful love and admiration: for the young Gentleman (having given his faith
not to disclose himself,) appeared in the shape of a base groom, in which
(unknown to all the world but his Master) he had of his own accord lurked.
An example of such a point of perfect honesty as cannot be forgotten without
injury.

(12) The same year, the Lord John Mountford, whom the French had driven out,
being invited home by his Barons, returned into his Duchy of Britain,
accompanied with the valiant Knights Caluerley and Percy aforesaid, where he,
his friends, and followers were received with singular honor. Soon Aids sent
into Britain drowned.
after Sir John of Arundell, brother to the Earl of Arundell, being sent into
Britain to aid the Duke, was with many other valiant Knights and Esquires
drowned. It is imputed by our Author to a just effect of Gods anger against the
said Sir John, and his household, for their manifold vices and outrages,
practiced by him and them, before they set out from England, for which they had
the bitter curses of the people; and the Angel of destruction to execute those
imprecations upon the delinquents.

(13) But the action of ^iding did more deeply Other aids pierce into Britain
from (...) by land. An. D. 1380.
import, then that it should be abandoned for the loss of that unfortunate
fellowship, and the exceeding riches which were with them: therefore the Lord
Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Buckingham, with Caluerlee, Percy, Knols,
Windleshores (or Windsor) very valiant knights and other competent forces, was
sent to assist the Duke of Britain. But because the French Galleys houered
upon the narrow Seas, they landed at Calleys, and from thence march through
France, spoiling Countries, burning towns, the French not Io. Til^. in Chron.
daring to empeach them, and killing people, till they and their whole equipage
came safe into Britain.

(14) There were about these times civil divisions in France; for the Duke of
Burgundy, younger brother of King Charles (lately dead) being made French
troubles profitable to the English.
Guardian of the person and dominions of his Nephew Charles then in minority,
had the Duke of Aniou (being an elder brother to the Duke of Burgundy) a
mortal enemy. Their bloody quarrels fell out luckily for the English aides in
the Duchy of Britain, out of which as Duke John had been driven for
adhering to his father in law the late king Edward, so the English did their
best to uphold him in it, as there was cause.

(15) The French in these extremes are relieved by their ancient diuersion: for
the Scots entering about that time with fire and sword into Cumberland and
Westmerland, and the forest of Inglewood, drove away much Cattle, slew the
Inhabitants, rifled the booths and houses of Perith in the Fair time, killing
and taking many, and driving away the rest. The Earl of Northumberland
preparing a bloody The Earl of Northumberland countermanded from pursuit of
the Scots.
revenge, was (not without wonder) prohibited so to do by letters from the
King, that is, from such as were about the King.

(16) But how coldly soever the public affairs were followed, the want of
money for supplies was The Parliament at Northampton.
still pretended. And therefore in a Parliament holden at Northampton, was
granted to the King a general supply of money; the pretended occasion of
monstrous mischief which followed, by reason of a clause in that grant of
Subsidy, that every one of each sex, being above a certain age, should pay by
the head, or per Pol as they call it, twelve pence.

(17) The English Cheualry began now again to display it self far off, to
gratify the private ends A. D. 1381. The Earl of Cambridge sent with an Army
into Portugal.
of John Duke of Lancaster, who claimed the Crown of Castile and Leon, in right
of Constance his wife: For John King of Portugal had a defensive war against
John then King of Castile, who challenged the Crown of Portugal R^der. Santi^
part. (...). hist. Hisp. cap. 2^.
in right of Beatrix his wife, (by whom he had no issue) the only daughter of
Ferdinand king of Portugal, which this other John (a bastard son of
Ferdinands) had by faction usurped. There were sent to his aid the Lord Edmund
de Langley Earl of Cambridge the Kings uncle, and sundry Knights and others of
good experience with an Army. These arriving in Portugal valiantly defended
the same for about two years, and were the chief cause of giving the
Spaniards an overthrow in battle, where they lost Polyd. Vergil. (...). l. ^0.
ten thousand men. At last the two Kings agreeing together bare the charges of
conueighing home the English in common, that their Countries might be freed
from them, being both alike jealous of their puissance. In this time Edward
son to the Earl of Cambridge uncle to Richard king of England, married the
daughter of the king of Portugal, but afterward neither would the Earl leave
his son behind, as suspecting the Portugeses faith, nor the other entrust his
daughter to the Earl, so as they remained disioined in body, howsoever united
by Ceremony.

(18) Not long after the time of that Earls employment into Spain, there fell
out accidents which The dangerous rebellion^ of Wat. Tyler, Jack Stra^ and
others.
do plainly convince their error to be great, who think that any madness
is like that of an armed and ungoverned multitude, whereof these times (by a
kind of Fate proper to childrens reign) gave a most dangerous document. The
extreme hatred borne by the people to John Duke of Lancaster, calling himself
king of Castile and Leon, and the coffeehouse taken at an extraordinary
tax, levied per Pol, upon all sorts of people, who were above sixteen years
of age, which (as all other the evils of the time) they imputed to the Duke
(the manner being to count them the authors of evils, who are supposed to have
the greatest power of doing them) moved the enraged multitudes upon slight and
small beginnings to run together in so fearful a Torrent, that it seemed
the King and kingdom were suddenly fallen under their most wicked fury. There
were in this most rebellious insurrection, the Commons and Bondmen (who
aspiring by force to a free manumission) principally those of Kent and Essex,
whose example was followed in the Neighbor Shires of Surrey, L. S. Alban. MS
Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and other places by incredible herds and
droues of like qualified people: who (specially in Norfolk) forced sundry
principal Gentlemen to attend them in their madding.

(19) They of Kent embattelled themselves under two Banners of Saint George,
and about threescore and ten Penons upon Blacke-heath by Greenewich, and from
thence came to London, where, the generality of people inclining to them, they
are masters. The Priory of S. John's without Smithfield they kept burning for
about seven days, and the goodly Palace of the Sauoy, belonging to the Duke,
with all the riches therein, they consumed by fire, in a kind of holy outrage,
for they threw one of their fellows into the flame, who had thrust a*peece of
stolen plate into his bosom. The Rebels of Essex came to Lambeth, burnt all
the Archbishops goods, and defaced all the Writings, Rowls, Records and
Monuments of the Chancerie, as having a special hatred to the Lawyers, little
to their disgrace, for that they shared herein with good men also, whom they
hated. But their desperate wickedness extended it self beyond the spoil of
houses and substance, laying bloody hands upon the most eminent and worthy men
in the kingdom, for that they had dissuaded the King to put himself into
their hands at Greenwich, where he talked with them out of his Barge, and
thereby had their maine design disappointed. Simon Tibald Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Chancellor of England, a right worthy Prelate, and Sir Robert
Hales a Knight of high courage, Lord Prior of Saint John's, and Treasurer of
England, with others, they without respect to the Majesty of the King, or
privilege of their most honorable dignities, most barbarously murdered by
beheading them upon Tower Hill, among infernal showtes and devilish yels. For
the Tower it self (from whence they had haled them, the young King being there
in person) was open to their execrable insolences. Neither does the authority
of Hist. Ang. l. 20.
Polyd. Vergil, affirming that they were not haled forth, but only stayed by
the Rebels, to whom (he says) they were sent, induce us rather to credit
him, then Authors living about those very times. There was no little store of
other innocent blood shed by them in these tumults. Nor was the Kings own
person without manifest peril, against whose life they had damnably conspired.
It were long to reckon up the kinds of such villainies as they wrought, but
endless to recount the particulars. The common Ioh. Stow.
Annals set forth this whole Tragical business very diligently.

(20) They had many Captains of mischief, VVat. Tyler the Idol of the Clownes.
but two principal, Wat Tyler of Maidstone in Kent, (whom Walsingham pretily
calls the Idol of Clownes) and Jack Straw, who together had followers to the
number (as they were estimated) of about one hundredth thousand, and at one
Sermon made to them by John Ball, Walsingham says, there were about twice as
many. Their Petitions were full of pride and malice, but easily granted by the
King, the necessity of the times extorting them. They had a Chaplain as
graceless as themselves, one John Ball an excommunicated Priest, who with his
wicked doctrine nourished in them their seditious furies to his own just
destruction in the end: but when a great multitude accepting the Kings mercy
were gone, Wat Tyler and his Camp departed not, but upon pretense of disliking
the Articles of peace, sought to win time till he might put into full
execution his incredible Treasons, which (as Jack ^traw at the time of his
execution confessed) were upon that very night of the day, wherein Wat Tyler
was slain, to murder the King, and chief men, and to erect petty Tyrannies to
themselves in every shire: and already one John Littistar a Dyer in Norwi^h,
had taken upon him at Northwalsham in Norfolk, the name of the King of the
Commons, and Robert Westbroome in Suffolk, to whom John Wraw another lewd
Priest had assigned it.

(21) Never was the kingly race and commonweal so near to an utter
extirpation, as at this present, which was (we may truly say) miraculously
prevented. The young king in these fears and dangers repairing to Westminster,
most devoutly commended his Crown, Life, and whole estate to God, nor that in
vain. For Wat Tyler with his Camp of Rascals esteemed to be ten or twenty
thousand (according to the Kings Proclamation, attending in Smithfield, but
cauilling of purpose upon the conditions of peace, as he that meant a farther
mischief, though they of Essex were returned) was entreated to ride to the
king, who also sat on horseback before Saint Bartholmewes, in whose company
was that renowned Lord Mayor of London, William Walworth, with many other men
of birth and place.

(22) Wat Tylar scarce at the last coming behaved himself so insolentlie,
offering to murder one of the Kings knights, Sir John Newton, for omission of
some punto of respect, which he arrogated to himself in more then a kingly
manner, was (upon leave given him by the king) boldly arrested with a drawn
weapon by the Lord Mayor, a man (say Writers) of incomparable courage, which
blow was seconded by the said Lord, and others so speedily, that there this
prodigy of a Traitor was field and slain. A death too worthy, for that he
died by the swords of honorable persons, for whom the axe of an Hangman had
been far too good.

(23) The Commons perceiving the fall of their Captain, prepared to use
extreme revenge, when the most hopefull-young king with a present wit and
courage (it being for his life and kingdom) spurred forth his horse, and bad
them follow him, without being grieved for the loss of a ribauld and
traitor, for now he himself would be their Captain, Hereupon they thronged
after him into the field, there to have whatsoever they desired. But the most
worthy of all Londoners, Walworth, speeds with one man only into the City,
raises a thousand Citizens in armor, brings them (being led in good array by
Sir Robert Knolles and others) with Wat Tylers head (which the Lord Mayor had
commanded to be chopped off from his dead carcass) borne before him upon a
Spear to the king. That very head, the cursed tongue whereof had dared to
say, That all the Laws of England should come out of his mouth.

(24) This act restored the Crown (as it were) and Realm to King Richard, for
the Rebels seeing themselves girt-in with armed men, partly fled, partly fell
upon their knees, and (throwing away all hope in weapon) they answerably to
their baseness, begged their lives, who but even now reputed themselves
masters of the field, and of the king. And albeit there was a general desire
in the hearts of loyal men to expiate so many villainies with the blood of the
Actors, yet things abroad in the Realm being as yet unsettled, they had a
general Charter of pardon sealed, and were so sent home into their Countries.

(25) Certainly although the City of London (the most noble and able part of
the English Empire) has otherwise deserved of the Kings of this land very
well, yet the honor of this service worthily stands highest in the many great
praises thereof. Which the King did thankefully and publicly testify by
knighting Walworth, and by bestowing upon him (when he modestly excused his
unworthiness

(41) That which followed, may give us just cause to suspect the truth of that
Friars accusation: for the Lord William la Zouch was also by the Friar accused,
of having been the Inuenter, broacher, and prouoker of him, to set down all
that which was comprehended in the accusation; who thereupon sent for to
Salisburie (though then very sick of the gowte) repaired thither in an
horse-litter, where he was compelled to answer to all such points as were
objected, like a felon, or a traitor standing bareheaded: but the priuitie, or
least thought of any such matter as the Friar affirmed against the Duke, he
confidently forsware, and was thereupon acquitted and dismissed. Howbeit (says
Walsingham) La Zouch was from that time forward a professed enemy, not only
of Carmelites, but of al other orders of Friars whatsoever. But these disgraces
came unseasonably upon the Duke, whose head was undoubtedly full of designs,
and of cares, how to atchieue to himself the crown of Spain.

(42) There were then sundry incursions made by the English and Scots, each
into the others country, the Earl of Northumberland being leader to the
English, with little advantage to either. But to take away the very cause of
this continual bad neighborhood, or to lessen it by an established peace with
France, the Duke of Lancaster sailed to Callis, about the beginning of August,
there to treat with the Duke of Berrie, on behalf of the young French King
Charles 6. but after he had in that voyage expended (as was said) fifty
thousand Marks, he brought into England nothing back, except only a truce, to
continue till the first day of May next. His desire to have procured a surer
peace both with the French and Scots, seems to have been great, that so he
might the more freely pursue the conquest of Spain which he intended.

(43) Whiles he was absent in this Embassage, John Cumbertowne once Lord Mayor
of London, confined and confiscated.
there ensued the arraignement of a great favorite of the Dukes, John
Northampton, alias Comberton, whom his adversaries by-named Cumber-towne. This
man is by them reported to have exceedingly troubled the City of London, during
his late Maioralty there, nor less afterward; for that being followed with
many abettors, he publicly disturbed Sir Nicholas Bramble his successor, (but
a Tho^. VValsing. Ypod. p. 539.
bloody minded man by report,) and wrought other maisteries, till Sir Robert
Knowls caused one of the busiest companions to be drawn out of his house, and
(as some say) shortened by the head. This Comberton was by his household Clerk
accused, as privy to some practices, in prejudice as well of the King, as the
City, and when sentence was to be pronounced in the Kings presence (being then
with great store of his Nobles at Reading,) he durst (as is said) affirm,
That such judgment ought not to proceed against him in the absence of his
Lord the Duke. This again vnraked the burning coals of envy, and suspicion
against the said Lord Duke; and perhaps malice to the Duke procured this hatred
against his favorite. Whereupon he was confined to the Castle of Tyntagel in
Cornwall, and all his goods seized upon by the Kings Servants, whom Walsingham
expresses, by calling them after the name of those Poetical ravenous Birds,
Harpyes.

(44) That here which Polydor Vergil (assigning causes to actions, not always
such as are, but such Polyder. Vergil. not to be rashly believed.
as seemed to him most probable, not seldom confounding and changing persons,
times, names, and things) tells us concerning a combat within lifts, between
Sir John Aunsley Knight, and one Carton has little ground, (so far as we
can find) in history. He says they were teterrima capita, both very wicked
men, and that there was a real plot to murder the king. We can neither find
the crime nor the me^: there Sir John A^eys reputation redeemed from slander.
had been a solemn combat long before between such a knight and one Re^ he
is called, Ypod. Neust. A^. 13^0.
Katrington an Esquire, in which the knight was Challenger and victor, but the
crime was not treason against the kings person, nor for any thing done in his
time, but in his noble Grandfathers. Neither was Ansley, teterrimum caput, but
a valiant and loyal man of Arms. The crime which he objected to that Esquire
(his kinsman) was, that for money he had traitorously given over the Castle of
Saint Savior in the Land of Constantine in Normandy, when he had store of
victual and munition. The Esquire was vanquished in fair fight and died
frantic the next day. Polydors error therefore is joined with manifest wrong
to the knights name, wherein we ought to be very circumspect, for that,
honor is inestimable and descends to posterity. There was indeed, at the
time he speaks of, another combat, fought also within listes before the king,
(for Duels then were performed, not on private choice or quarrel, but on
public appointment) between one John Welsh an Esquire of England, and one
Henry Knighto^ Can. of L^c. A^. apud. Holinsh.
Martilet a Gentleman Nauarrois, who in revenge against Welsh, for having at
Cheirbrough (where the said Esquire was vnder-captain) committed (as Martilet
said) adultery with his wife, accused him of high treason against the King and
Realm. But Welsh prevailed; and the Nauarrois, at his execution (for he was
The UUals. in Richard 2.
drawn and hanged after he had been foild in battle,) confessed the cause of
his evil will, and the innocence of Welsh in the matter of treason.

(45) The Scots had this while by practice and money gotten the Castle of
Berwick, whereof the Custody belonged to the Lord Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland. The Duke of Lancaster was not sad at this, but so pursued the
matter, that the Earl (as if by his negligence and priuity the same royal
Hatred increases between the Duke and Count Northumberland.
Castle had been lost) was condemned in Parliament. But the king relieved him
with extension of favor. This was a great cause of confirming the rancour
already kindled in the hearts of these two principal Peers. But the Earl to
wipe away all blemishes of disgrace, encloseth the Castle with a siege both of
forces and large proffers, so that after Berwick recovered by the Earl.
some time spent therein, he had it redeliuered upon payment of two thousand
marks.

(46) The Flemings had heretofore in the fifth year of this King, sent
Ambassadors at the time of A. D. 1385. The Souereignty of Flanders offe^red to
king Richard by the Flemmings.
Parliament, to submit themselves and their Country to his dominion, renouncing
allegiance to their natural Lord the Earl, whom they had by force of Arms
expelled, upon pretense o^ oppression used by him, and for other causes; but
because they seemed not either persons sufficient, or sufficiently instructed
with authority, to transact with the King in a matter of so high nature, they
were commanded to return, and fetch more ample power, and to bring certain
men of every good Town in Flanders. Now again, the Citizens of Gaunt, though
they had in battle against the French King, (who was there in person on
behalf of the Earl,) John Tylli^ in Chron.
lost twenty Paul. Aemyl. says 40000. in in fight, and in ^ight, and that in
those whole civil wars there perished ^00000.
thousand men not long before, desired of K. Richard, that they might have an
English General to command in their wars; to whom was sent a wise and
valiant Gentleman, the Lord Edward le Bourser, who demeaned himself in that
charge with much commendation. And when afterward he went more abundantly and
strongly to have supported them, they sodeinely turned French, showing Senescire
(says In Rich. 2. ad. A. D. 1386.
Walsingham) vni amico, vel domino, fidem diuseruare.

(47) The Duke of Lancaster (whose, or the like greatness may perhaps seem
more, then can stand The Duke of Lancaster stands upon his ke^ping.
with the narrow limits of England, which, without danger to the common wealth,
can hardly afford such a proportion of estate to any Subject) was about this
time informed, that the King had a purpose to arrest his person, and to try
him upon capital points before Sir Robert Trisilian, his Chief Iustitiar, a
man ready, (under the Kings protection) to deliver judgment without respect to
Titles. The King was nourished in this *deliberation by young men, who combined
against the Dukes life. This The. VValsing. in Rich. 2. ad. ^unc ann.
being discovered, the Duke (a potent Prince) withdrawes upon his guard to his
Castle of Pomfret in the North; nevertheless the hopes of wicked men,
delighting in their Countries miseries, and civil combustions, were made void
by the great diligence of the Kings mother, the Princess Joan, who spared not
her continual pains and expenses, in travailing between the King and the
Duke, (albeit she was exceeding tender of complexion, and scarce able to bear
her own bodies weight through corpulency) till they were fully reconciled.

(48) It had indeed been a most wretched time for a civil war, not only
because the French Admiral, John de Vienna, had been sent with forces
embarckt in threescore sail of Ships, to be employed out of Scotland against
the English, but for that the French prepared a general invasion of England,
The French prepare an invasion against England.
having in hope already as it were devoured it. There reigned at that time in
France, Charles the sixth a young and foolish Prince, (says Tilius) who having
in his treasury, left to him by his prudent father, Ex Record. ap^d Tiliu^.
eighteen millions of Crowns, (and not only eighteen hundred thousand, Paul.
A^myl.
as some, fearing perhaps that the other sum might seem incredible, have
written,) and being moreover set on fire with an inconsiderate love of glory,
rather then upon any sound advise (though Polyd. Uerg. lib. bist. Angl. 20. and
Paul. Aemyl.
some impute the Counsel to the said Admiral) would needs undertake the
conquest of our Country. These news stirred all the limbs and humors thereof,
though the event (God not favoring the enterprise) was but like that of the
Mountain, which after long travail brought forth a ridiculous mouse,
nevertheless it had been a most desperate season for a civil war to have
broken forth in England.

(49) The preparations of the French do hold Fr^issard. I^. Meir.
notwithstanding, and the general Rendeuou of their huge forces was at Sluse,
in the Port whereof, and other places about, there were assigned to assemble
for their transportation, Paul. Emyl. Three hundredth thousand English men in
arms together*
twelve hundredth sail of ships. At the same time (as if the two young kings
had been riuals in show of men) Richard raises so great an army to ouerrun
Scotland, as the like for beauty and number was never seen together,
consisting wholly of Englishmen. But may we believe that England could spare
three hundredth thousand men, and as many horses for the use of a war?
Certainly a needless multitude, but only to terrify the French with the
fame, for there might have been fewer, for any great Act which Richard (full
of jealousy against his uncle of Lancaster, wherewith his head and heart were
full,) effected. But we may the rather believe the account, for that Walsingham
voucheth Seruientes ad arma.
Serieants at Arms (if he mean not Heralds by those words) whose office (he
says) it was to number the Host, and they affirmed the same. This is sure,
that Paul Aemyl. in Carol. 6.
among other the arguments used by the Duke of Bury (one of the French Kings
uncles) to frustrate this enterprise, he alleged, that the King of England had
mustred ten thousand horsemen, and one hundredth thousand Archers for his
defense; whereas the Admiral John de Vienna affirmed, that having seen the
forces of the English, they were but eight thousand horsemen and threescore
thousand foot; and he might well say having seen: for, though Aemylius bring
him in speaking to the French King, and vaunting that he had encountered them,
yet nothing is truer, then that the English returned out of Scotland without
the least offer of battle. The Admiral was willing indeed to have fought, but
when he saw our Army from the hil-tops, his fury gave place to reason.

(50) While the Army was upon the way toward Scotland, the Kings halfe-brother
the Lord John Holland wickedly slew the Lord Stafford, son The Kings mother
dies being denied a pardon for her son the Lord John Holland.
to the Earl of Stafford not far from York, being upon his journey to the
Queen, whose favored Knight he was. For which heinous homicide the King
seized upon his whole estate, denying to his mothers most earnest prayers any
pardon or grace for his brother. Which was to her so grievous, that within five
or six days after she gave up the Ghost at Wallingford. The young Lord took
Sanctuary at Beuerley, and the King by his justice herein wanne the hearts of
the said Earl of Stafford, the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Basset, and other
great men of Staffords kindred and friends; neither did this empeach at all the
present voyage.

(51) The Scots and French in Scotland, seeing themselves unable to withstand
such forces, had so retired themselves and all their goods, that when the
English should come, they, (as Walsingham pleasantly says) could see no quick
things left but only Owls. That which was green in the fields, the horses
devoured or trampled down, yet such harm, as the materials of buildings were
capable of, was done. Edinburgh also and the Ypod Neust.
noble Abbey of Mailrosse were fired. The Duke of Lancaster persuaded the King
to march beyond the Frith or Scottish The Duke of Lancaster suspected for
persuading the King to pass the Scottish Sea.
Sea (as his great Ancestors had done) to seek out his enemies; but he, very
suspicious that the Duke gave him this counsel with a purpose to betray him to
destruction by famine, and want, which he was there to look for, expressed
much displeasure and returned. The Dukes words notwithstanding and behavior
were tempered with much duty and modesty; but that would not serve, till the
Lords peeced their affections together by intercession in the best manner the
time would suffer. But the English host was scarce returned and discharged,
when the Scots and French sodeinely powered themselves forth upon our Country,
and did whatsoever hurt the shortness of time in their incursion could permit.

(52) To resist and endammage the French, there were appointed Admirals for the
narrow Seas, the Master of Saint John's, and Sir Thomas Percie Knight, (the
Earl of Northumberlands brother,) who did nothing worthy their fame or place.
Only the Townsmen of Portsmouth and Dart, maund forth a few ships at their
own peril and charge, wherewith The virtue of priuat^ men in the publik^
cause.
entering the river of Sein (upon which the renowned Cities Roan and Paris are
situated) suncke some of their enemies ships, took others, and among them one
of Sir Oliver de Clisson's, the goodliest that France had. The success
answered their hopes, and they were enriched with the spoils of their
adversaries, whom thus they compelled to bear the charge of their proper
mischief.

(53) Meanewhile that the French lay at Sluse, attending the approach of their
kings uncle the Duke of Bury, (who favored not this enterprise of invasion,
but sought John Tilli^
as well by delays, as by persuasion and authority to make it frustrate,) they
of Ga^t had gotten the Town of Dam by the good liking of the Inhabitants, to
whom the French government was odious. For recovery whereof, the French King
drew his army (prepared against England) to the siege of Dam, which (the same
being first secretly abandoned, after a months siege and many repulses given
to the French) was by him recovered. This, and other things, did so protract
the great expedition intended, that (after wast of infinite treasure) Charles
returned home, without having seen England, which was by these means most
graciously freed by God, from so dangerous, and greatly-feared an impression.
But that the English might the better endure the same, John King of Portugal,
having lately in a great and bloody battle (where some of the English The
Portugese^ ^d the English.
deserved well of him,) overthrown the Castilians, and thereby settled his
estate, sent into England six Gall^ys thoroughly well appointed, for
Sea-seruice, though (as God would) there was no need of them.

(54) Of those French, which (after the Cloud of war at Sluice was dispersed
into ayte,) passed ouerland into their Countries, many were taken and slain by
the Gauntiners. Their navy was not less unfortunate; for at one I^ (...).
^xal S. Cr^. 14. September.
time the English of Callis took of them eighteen, and the rage of weather
brake and sunk diverse, so that this Brauado was not only costly to the
French, by reason of the charges, The bad event of this French design for an
invasion.
but hurtful in the loss of time, men, ships, and hoped glory. Such are
the events of humane enterprises, where God is not pleased to give success.
The English thus delivered from fear make a road into France out of Callis,
and with a prey of four thousand sheep and three hundredth head of great
cattle, besides an hundredth good prisoners, returned safe to their Garrison.

(55) The multitude of memorable things which present themselves to us in the
lives of our English Monarchs, is such, that if we did not use choice, and in
their relation breuity, we should not relieve our Readers of that molestation,
with which the vaste volumes of former labors do oppress the memory. The
Laity, at the Parliament now holden at London, had yielded to aid the King
with a The attempt of the Laity to dispossess the Clergy of their temporal
estates.
Fifteenth upon condition, that the Clergy should succor him with a Tenth and
an half; against which unjust proportion, William de Courtney Archbishop of
Canterbury most stiffly opposed; alleging that the Church ought to be free,
nor in any wise t^ be taxed by the Laity, and that himself would rather die
then endure that the Church of England, (the liberties whereof had by so many
free Parliaments in all times, and not only in the reign of this King been
confirmed) should be made a bond-maide. This answer so offended the C^mons,
that the Knights of the Shires, and some Peers of the land, with extreme fury
besought, That Temporalities might be taken away from Ecclesiastical persons,
saying, that it was an Almesdeed and an Act of Charity so to do, thereby to
humble them. Neither did they doubt, but that their petition which they had
exhibited to the King would take effect. Hereupon they designed among
themselves, out of which Abbey, which should receive such a certain sum, and
out of which, another. I my self (says T^o. Walls.
a Monk of Saint Albans) heard one of those Knights confidently swear, that
he would have a yearly pension of a thousand Marks out of the Temporalities
belonging to that Abbey. But the King having heard both parts, commanded the
Petitioners to silence, and the Petition to be razed out, saying, He would
maintain the English Church King Richard the Clergies friend.
in the quality of the same state or better, in which himself had known it to
be, when he came to the Crown. The Archbishop hereupon having consulted with
the Clergy, came to the King, and declared, that he and the Clergy had with
one consent, willingly provided to supply his Majesty's occasions with a
Tenth. This grant the King took so contentedly, as he openly affirmed, he was
better pleased with this free contribution of one Tenth for the present, then
if he had gotten four by compulsion.

(56) Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford (a young Gentleman in special grace with
the King) was at this Parliament created Marquess of Dublin in The first
Marquess made that ever was in England.
Ireland, which moved great despite against him, those rough times being
impatient to bear the unequal advancement of favorites. Nevertheless,
though the gentle King was thought herein to please his own fancy, rather
then to reward merit, yet did he so sweetly temper it, as there was no
justice, nor reason to envy to him that solace which he took in his friends
increased honor; for at the same time he advanced two of his uncles, Thomas
of Woodstocke, Earl of Buckingham to the title of Duke of Gloucester, and
Edmund of Langley Earl of Cambridge, he created Duke of York, allotting
several proportions of pension to be paid out of his Exchequer. In Vere there
was ancient Nobility to justify his new degree the better; but in making the
Lord Chancellor Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, with the yeerelie
pension of 1000 Marks, was matter of more envy; because he was not descended
of such honorable Parents: a defect (if it be a defect) which none more
willingly vpbraid to men of worth, then who themselves are not always the most
worthy. The first raiser of this family of De la Pole was Edward the third,
who made William de la Pole, of a brave Merchant, a Ex libr. Monast. de Melsa,
and ex Record. apud Guil Cambd. in Torkesh.
Knight Baneret, and gave him great possessions, in requital of an
extraordinary and voluntary loan of treasure, advanced by him to supply the
King in a time of special necessity, when money could stand him in more steed
then a thousand men of Arms: no little merit in a subject, nor a slender
reward of a most munificent Prince.

(57) Henry Spenser the martial Bishop of Norwich found grace with the King at
this Parliament, to be restored to his temporalities, at the special suite of
Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely: whiles the Bishop of Ely thus besought his
Majesty of Grace, the said Michael de la Poole (Lord Chancellor and Earl of
Suffolk) stood by, and brake out with much offense into these words. What is
that (my Lord) which you ask of the King? Seems it to you a small matter for
him to part with that Bishops temporalities, when they yield to his Coffers
above one thousand pounds by year? Little need has the King of such
Counselors, or of such friends, as advise him to acts so greatly to his
hinderance. Whereunto the Bishop of Ely not less truly, then freely replide.
What says your Lordship, my Lord Michael? Know that I require not of the king
that which is hi^, but that which he (drawn thereunto either by you, or by
the Counsel of such as you are,) withholds from other men, upon none of the
iustest titles, and which (as I think) will ^euer do him any good: as for
you, if the Kings hinderance be the thing you weigh, why did you so greedily
accept of a thousand marks by year, at such time as he created you Earl of
Suffolk? The Chancellor was hit so home with this round retort, that he
never offered any further to cross the restitution of the Bishops temporalties.

(58) After this the King being with his Queen at their manor of Eltham in
Kent, there came thither A. D. 1386. A. reg. 6.
Leo King of Armenia, a Christian Prince, whom the Tartars had expelled out of
his Kingdom. The pretense of his negotiation was to accord the realms of
England and France; that the Princes thereof might with joint forces remove the
common enemy from Christendom. Therein he could effect nothing, but his
journey was not otherwise unfruitful to himself, for King Richard (a Prince to
speak truly, full of honor and bounty) gave him besides a thousand pounds,
in a Ypod. Neust.
ship of gold) letters Pattents also for a thousand pounds yearly pension
during life.

(59) The time now was come, wherein K. Richard should see himself delivered
of all that fear and jealousy, which the greatness of his uncle the Duke of
Lancaster stirred in him. His Forces were now ready, and his Navy (increased
with ^olinsh.
seven Galleys, and eighteen ships sent out of Portugal) attended at
Bristoll, to transport him toward Spain, (for Castile is high Spain) the
crown whereof he claimed in right of Constance his second wife, daughter of
Dom Peter the cruel. Before he set forth, the news came that such English as
were already in Portugal with their friends had overthrown the Spaniards,
French, and Britons, at a battle in Spain. This was a spur to quicken the
Dukes enterprise, which Pope Urban the sixth (by granting plenarie remission of
sins to all such as gave the Duke aid) did specially favor, as against them
who did partake with his enemy the Antipape; Tho. VVal^. p. 321. The noble army
of the Duke of Lancaster for Spain.
but the frequent grant of such pardon and releasement, was now grown so vile
and contemptible amongst the people, that few were found open handed toward
this Cruceato. Admiral of this Fleet was Sir Thomas Percie, Sir John Holland
(who had married one of the Dukes daughters afterward created Earl of
Huntington) was Constable of the host, and Sir John Mereaux (who had to wife
one of the Dukes illegitimate children) was one of his Marshals. There were in
this noble and excellently-well appointed Army, the Lords Talbot, Basset,
Will^ghby, Fitz-walter, Poinings, Bradston, Fitzwarren, Beaumont, Beauchampe,
the Lord Pomiers a Gascoin, etc. with very many worthy knights and valiant
Esquiers, and a choice number of men of Arms, Archers and other Soldiers, to
the number of Heur. Knighton.
twenty thousand. The Duke took also with him his wife, the Lady Constance,
and two daughters, which he had by her, as * one relates. Oklands Ang. prael.


(60) It was now the month of May, when the great Duke of Lancaster coming to
take leave, had of the kings gift a Diadem of gold, and his Duchess of the
Queen another: he also commanded the English to call, and hold his uncle for a
King, and to do him answerable honor. But after all this, he lay for a wind
so long, till his whole provisions were almost spent; at length yet, he set
forward. The first land they touched was near to Breast in Britain, where Sir
John Roch the Governor against the French, complained of two Forts built about
him to empeach his quiet egresse; whereupon the Duke of Lancaster caused the^
to be assaulted; so both of them being taken by surrender, were razed to the
ground, though some English first lost their lives, among which, was Holinsh.
ex Hen. Knigh. p. 449.
Sir Robert Swinarton, a valiant Knight of Staffordshire, and John de Bolton a
courageous Esquier of Yorkshire, whom the sudden ruin of a Tower (ouerturned
by mining) whelmed and slew outright. Sharpened with the success of this
victory, they commit themselves to God, and the Sea, and prosperously arrive
with the whole Fleet in the Port Corone, or the Groyne, Uigil. S. Lauren.
in August.

(61) The French (belike) thought England could not furnish an other Army for
France, as she had for Spain: whereupon there was now no false nor vain rumor
spread again, that the French would besiege Calis. The King to secure that
precious transmarine part of his Dominions, sent thither store of men and of
all provisions. The most eminent person was Henry Lord Percie, son to Henry
Earl of Northumberland. This was he whom the Scots The Lord Henry Percie
by-named Hotspur sent to Calis.
by-named Hotspur, a young Gentleman, in whom (says Walsingham) the pattern
of all virtue and martial prowess shined: and indeed his nature did answer
his by-name; for he made such ridings into the quarters about Calis, that they
could never wish a worse neighbor. After which, when the fame went that the
French king would not delay, or (as they call it) beleaguer Calis, but rather
invade England, he returned to be present where the greatest danger was
expected. At this time, the English Seamen of war, brought two French prizes
to Sandwich, in which was taken a part of an huge strong Timber-wall, which the
French king, preparing now for Englands invasion, had caused to be built in
length three miles, in height twenty foot, which had at every twelve paces a
Tower (ten foot higher) and each capable of ten men, the whole to be a defense
for the French encampments against our shot, and a shelter for theirs, there
was also in the same Ships the Enginer and master workman, who was an
Englishman, and great quantities of powder, and store of Ordinance, together
with the French Kings Master Magister Gunnarius. A Parallelization of the
English and French States in these times.
Gunner.

(62) There was in this time a great resemblance between England and France in
the chief points of State. As England had Richard, so had France her Charles,
both young Kings. Charles with an huge army had prepared to invade England,
but did nothing: Richard with no less forces entered Scotland, and did no great
thing. Richard had uncles which bare great sway in the Realm; so had Charles.
Richard had his uncle John more potent then the rest; Charles had his uncle
Lewis. John upon his wives title claims the kingdoms of Castile and Leon;
Lewis by the gift of Joan the Queen, claims the Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicil. Lewis went with an Army of Paul. Aemyl.
thirty thousand horse into Italy to atchieue his claim; with what force John
set forth you have heard. But Lewis died without obtaining; John prevailed so
far as to settle his child by marriage. The King and great Lords of France
were glad (with any charge) to enjoy the absence of Lewis, and Richard and his
favorites were not sad, that the Realm was for the present rid of John.

(63) The forces of the French provided for this invasion of England, were
reported in open Parliament (which the King held about Michaelmas in London) to
consist of Ypod. Neust.
15 Dukes, 26. Earls, two hundredth Lords, and an hundredth thousand soldiers,
and a thousand Ships, assembled about Sluse, with full purpose to take revenge
of all the evils which the English nation had formerly wrought in France, and
to destroy the English kingdom. But though these reports were not fained, (for
the French attended nothing in a manner but a fair gale of wind to bring
them,) yet could not the King, without Capitulations made by the Duke of
Gloucester, obtain any aides of money; so that, whereas it seemed to the King,
that by the Duke of Lancasters departure, he was become more free, yet had he
left behind spirits much more stiff and intractable. O dear Country, had
thou not then been apparantlie in Gods protection, (for the French having
stayed for a wind till Hallontide, and then having it halfe-way, were beaten
back, and the voyage made utterly void) certainly thy ruin had then been
certain. What shall we think or say of those popular Lords, by this gentle
King armd (to his own bane) with power and greatness, who under the specious
pretext of reforming abuses, did satisfy their envy and inbred insolency?

(64) The King tells them, that England is, as they saw, in manifest danger, and
prays their succor in money: what is the answer? That the Duke of Ireland
(for now the Marquess of Dublin was made a Duke,) and Michaell at the Pole (so
they scornfully called the Earl of Suffolk) and other must be removed. Things
are badly carried at home, say The first seeds of the civil wars.
they; (and they perhaps said truly,) but where was now the care of our
Country? God indeed turned from us the merciless point of the French sword:
but here began the seeds of innumerable worse miseries, never to be remembered
without sighs and tears.

(65) The seeds (we say) of those fearful calamities were then first here
sown, whose sum a flourishing Sam. Dan. in his civil wars.
Writer in our age (willing nearly to have imitated Lucan, as he is indeed
called our Remains.
Lucan) does not unfortunately express, though he might rather have said he
wept them, then sung them; but so to sing them, is to weep them. I sing the
civil wars, tumultuous broiles,
And bloody factions of a mighty land;
Whose people hauty, proud with foreign spoils,
Upon themselves turn back their conquering hand;
While kin their kin, brother the brother foiles,
Like Ensigns, all against like Ensigns band;
Bows against Bows, a Crown against a Crown,
While all pretending right, all right thrown down.
But Robert de Vere, says Thomas Duke of Gloucester and his party, was
unworthily created Duke of Ireland, and De la Pole the Lord Chancellor seemed
to the only great Lords (for so they would seem) to be in the Kings debt.
Strange colors for Subjects to capitulate with their King; upon giving their
joint aides against the common enemy, now ready with one destruction to
ouerwhelme them all. The time they took to work this pretended amendment in
state, was not well fitted. It sauoured of somewhat else besides the love of
commonweal. Private ambitions and passions could not be wanting in such
oppositions. This is some men's judgment, let the sequels show how just.

(66) There were called up at this Parliament for defense of the Realm
innumerable people out of al Shires, which forces lay about London within
twenty miles round, and had no pay but lived upon spoil. These at last were
licenced to depart to be ready at warning. There was also the Lord Chancellor
accused, of (we wot not what) petty crimes (for the abuses of following ages
have made them seem so,) as for paying to the Kings Coffers but Tho. Walsing.
in Rich. 2.
twenty marks yearly, for a fee-farme, whereof himself received threescore
and ten, and some such other. To pacify these great Lords, the Lord
Chancellor is disgraced, and the seal taken from him, against the Kings will,
and given to Thomas Arundell Bishop of Elye, and then the houses of Parliament
yielded to give half a Tenth, and half a Fifteenth, but upon condition that
it should be disposed of, as the Lords thought fit, for defense of the Realm.
The money was thereupon delivered to the Earl of Arundell to furnish himself
for that purpose to the Sea. But to rid the Duke of Ireland out of the realm,
the Lords were willing he should have those thirty thousand marks, for which
the heirs of Charles of Bloi^, (who heretofore challenged Britain) were
transacted to the French, upon condition that the said Duke should pass into
Ireland before the next Easter.

(67) The Parliament was no sooner dissolved, but the King recals the Earl of
Suffolk to the Court, keeps both him, the Duke of Ireland and Alexander Ne^ile
Archbishop of York about his person, in greater favor then before. Insomuch
that at Christmas he made De-la-Pole to sit at his own Table not in the usual
garment of a Peer, but Princely robed. Surely therein not well; for some of
those great Lords, (though not by so sweet means as were fit) did desire to
waken him out of Courtly drowsinesse, and (as men that knew not what peace
meant) to put him into actions worthy of his name and greatness. These other
persons were not so friended, or qualified, that they could support a King
against an universal mislike. But the King upon a stomach does it; so that
(says Ypod. Neust.
Walsingham) here first grew the Kings hatred against the Peers, that from
thence forth he never, as it is said, regarded them but fainedly. So much more
dangerous sometime is the remedy then a very grievous malady.

(68) King Richard (whose age and place stood in need of wiser instructions)
not thus contented to have whetted the displeasures of the greater Peers, as
if he had said to himself, Rumpatur Mar^al.
quisquis rumpitur inuidia; is further drawn, as was said, to plot the death
of his uncle, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester, and other enemies of
De-la-pole; who together being invited to a feast (by the bloody devise of Sir
Nicholas Brambre late Lord Mayor of London) should together have perished. But
the present The Lord Mayor of London refuses to be of conspiracy against the
Duke of Gloucester.
Lord Mayor Nicholas Exton (whom the conspirators would have had their
Partaker, if it may be believed) honestly refused to assent. The Lords hereupon
having admonition, refrained to come.

(69) The persons which were in the public envy for their ouer-swaying grace
with the King, An. D. 1387.
were (as you have heard) Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pole
Earl of Suffolk, the said Archbishop, Sir Simon Burley Knight, and Sir
Richard Stury: These men hearing that Richard Earl of Arundel and Thomas Earl
of Nottingham, Marshall of England, Aprilis. 24.
had encountered with a great Fleet of Frenchmen, Flemmings, Normans, and
Spaniards, and taken above one hundredth sail of ships, and in them nineteen
thousand tons o^ ^ine, depraved the victory, saying, that the vanquished
were but Merchants, whose loves had been more profitable to our Country, then
so to stir them to inexorable hatred. But these (says Ypod: Neust: A
description of King Richards chief favorites.
one) who thus judged, were rather the Knights of Venus then Bellona, fitter
for a Canapie then a Camp, for language then a lance, as they who were awake
to discourse of martial actions, but drow^e when they should come to do them.
Such therefore c^ersing with the King (not * without suspicion of Tho. VValsin.
in Richard 2. ad A. D. 13^6.
foul familiarity) never took care to put into his mind any matter which
beseemed so potent a Prince, we say not (quoth our Author) as concerning the
use of Arms, but not even concerning those very recreations, which most of all
become great spirits, as hunting, hawking, and the like. But the Earls did
more then meddle with Merchants (who yet were able to make dangerous
resistances) for they landed at Breast in Britain, and with great difficulty
delivered it again from so bad neighbors as the two wooden Forts nearly
built, The malignant construction made of the Earl of Ar^dels service.
where the other had stood, one of which they fired, and the other they mand
with the English Garrison of Breast. Then stuffing it with all sorts of
provisions for a year, and furnishing the wants of the Soldiers with all
necessaries, they returned, having worthily won the love and praises of the
people. Which, as they were also due to them from the king, yet coming to his
presence, they (by these men's evil offices) had so cold entertainment, as
they eftsoons withdrew themselves from Court to live quietly upon their own
at home. After them the brave young Henry Hotspur, Lord Percy was sent (ill
provided) to the Sea; nevertheless he ventred, and returned (when his
commission was expired) with honor.

(70) One thing done by the Duke of Ireland was surely full of wickedness and
indignity. For The Duke of Ireland puts away his wife the Kings cosen.
he having to wife, a young, fair, and noble Lady, and the Kings near
kineswoman, (for she was Grandchild to king Edward by his Tho. Walsin. in
Rich. 2.
daughter Isabel,) did put her away, and took one of Queen Annes women, a
B^hemian Sellarij Filia, a Sadlers daughter, some aay a Ioyners. Walsing.
of base birrh, called in her mother tongue Lancecrone. This intolerable
villainy offered to the blood royal, King Richard did not encounter; neither
had the power, some say, who deemed that by witchcrafts and sorceries
(practiced upon him by one of the Dukes followers) his judgment was so seduced
and captiuated, that he could not see what was honest or fit to do. But where
Princes are wilful or slothful, and their favorites flatterers or
time-seruers, there needs no other enchantments to infatuate, yea and ruinate
the greatest Monarch.

(71) The Duke of Gloucester took the matter more to heart, resolving to be
revenged for the infamy A new ^tion of the King how to bring the popular Lords
to a trial.
and confusion, which was brought thereby upon his noble kinsewoman. Meanewhile
the king, as if he meant to conduct his dear friend, the Duke toward Ireland,
went with him into Wales. There the King deuiseth with him, the Earl of
Suffolk, Sir Robert Tresilian and others; (who were equally affrayd of the
Lords) how to destroy the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick,
Derby, Nottingham, and such others, as from whom they thought fit to be
clear. Much time being trifled thus away in Wales, they come together (as if
the Dukes appointed voyage, or rather banishment into Ireland; were quite
forgotten) to the Castle of Nottingham, there more freely to deliberate. A
fearful estate of a Monarchy. He among a few, generally ill beloved, and
ill advised, and ill provided; for their whole strength was the king, and these
emulations made that force feeble both to him and them: the Lords, potent,
martial, rich, and popular; he at Notingham, they not near him: but abroad
farre-off, the Duke of Lancaster with the flower of the English forces, and
mighty neighbors watching for the ruin of all. The course agreed upon by the
King and that illchosen Senate, was first to have the opinion of all the Chief
Lawyers concerning certain Articles of The Lawyers sent for to make treasons.
Treason, within whose nets and sprindges they presumed the reforming Lords
were; and if the Lawyers (who seldom fail Princes in such turns,) did
conclude, that those Articles contained treasonable matter, then under a show
of justice they should be proceeded against accordingly. These Lawyers (who
were the very men, which in the last seditious Parliament, gave advise to the
Lords to do as they did) now meeting, were demanded, whether by the law of the
land, the King might not disanull the Decrees of the last Parliament: they
jointly At Shrewsburie says Hist. Lecestrens.
answered; he might, because he was above the laws: confessing, that
themselves had in that Parliament decreed many things, and given their
judgment, that all was acording to law, which Hist. Lecestrens.
now they acknowledged to be altogether unlawful. The King thus informed,
appoints a great Council to be holden at Nottingham, and sent for certain
Londoners, some of them such as were beholding to the King for mercy in cases
of attaindour, to be there empanelled for Quests of Inquiry. The Sheriffs of
Shires (being questioned) denied, that they could raise any competent forces
against the Lords, their whole Counties were so addicted in their favor: and
being further willed to suffer no Knights to be chosen for the Shires, but such
as the King and his Council should name, they answered, that the election
belonged to the Commons who favored the Lords in all.

(72) Upon the 25. of August there met before the King at Nottingham these
Lawyers, Robert Trisilian his chief Iustitiar, Robert Belknap chief Iustitiar
of the common Pleas, John Holt, Roger Fulthorp vide Book of Statut. A. 11.
Rich. 2. cap. 4.
Stilethorpe, and William Burgh Iustitiars in the same Court, and John Lokton
the Kings Serieant at Law: all which being upon their allegiance charged to
deliver their opinions, whether such Those Articles are set down in the Book
of Statu. A. 21. R. (...). c. 12
Articles as were there in the Kings behalf propounded (which Articles
comprehended all the points of advantage taken against the proceedings of the
last Parliament, and the displacing of the Lord Chancellor, Michael de Pole)
contained matter of treason, they all of them answered affirmatively, and
subscribed; which afterward cost them dear. Judge Belknap foresaw the danger,
and therefore was very unwilling to put his seal to the answers; saying;
there wanted but a In MS. it i^ ratis for Crat^ in likelihood.
hurdle, a horse, and a halter, to carry him where he H^st. (...).
might suffer the death he deserved; for if I had not done this (quoth he) I
should have died for it, and because I have done it, I deserve death for
betraying the Lords. The King in the mean space puruaies himself of people
to fight, if need required.

(73) The Duke of Gloucester (sadded with these news, sent the Bishop of
London to bring his purgation upon oath to the King, who inclining to credit
the same, was in an evil hour diuerted by De la Pole. The Duke makes his and
their common danger known to the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, and Derby, eldest
son to the Duke of Lancaster. They severally gather forces, that united they
might present their griefs to the King, who to keep them from joining, sends
the Earl of Northumberland to arrest the Earl of Arundel at ^eygate in
Surrey, where he abode. But by reason of Arundels power, it was too dangerous
a work. Northumberland returns, and Arundel (admonished by the Duke of
Gloucester of his farther peril) escapes in post to Haringey, where the Duke
and Earl of Warwick had store of people.

(74) As yet no blood was drawn. Peaceable men procured that the Lords should
repair safe to Westminster, and there be heard. Thither approaching they are
advertised by the Bishop of Elie and others (who had sworn on the kings
behalf for good dealing to be used during the Interim) that, at the Mewes by
Charing Cross, a thousand armed men (which without the Kings priuity Sir
Thomas Tri^et and Sir Nicholas Brembre Knights were reported to have laid for
their destruction) attended in ambush. The King swears his innocence, but the
Lords come strong and trust no longer. The King royally adorned keeps state in
Westminster Hall with many his Prelates and Peers about him; the Lords
present themselves upon their knees, and being required by the Eishop of Elye
the Lord Chancellor (for The popular Lords bold answer to the king
the Lord De la Pole never had that place again) why they were in warlike
manner assembled at Haringey Park, contrary to the laws, their joint answer
was, That they were assembled for the good of the King and kingdom, and to
weed from about him such Traitors as he continually held with him. The
traitors they named to be, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland, Alexander Neuile
Archbishop of York, Michael at the Pole Earl of Suffolk, Sir Robert
Tresilian that false ^stitiar (quoth they) and Sir Nicholas Brambre that false
Knight of London. To prove them such, they threw down their gloves, as gages
of challenge for a trial to be had by the sword. The King hereunto replied,
as knowing that they were all hidden out of the way: This shall not be done
so, but at the The kings reply.
next Parliament (which shall be the morrow after Candlemas) all parties shall
receive according as they deserve. And now (says he) to ye my Lords; how or
by what authority durst you presume to levy force against me in this-land?
did you think to have terrified me by such your presumption? have not I men
of Arms, who (if it pleased me) could enuiron, and kill you like Cattle?
Certainly in this respect I esteem of you all no more, then as of the basest
scullions in my Kitchens. Having used these, and many the like high words; he
took up his uncle the Duke from the ground, where all this while he kneeled,
and bad all the other rise. The rest of the conference was calm, and the whole
deferred till the next Parliament, then shortly to be holden at Westminster. In
the mean time (that the world might see how little able the King was to equal
his words with deeds) a Proclamation is set forth, in which the King clears
the Lords (before any trial) of treason objected, and names those person for
unjust accusers, whom the Lords had before named.

(75) The factious Lords nevertheless thought not good to sever themselves,
but to keep together for fear of the worst; which fell out to their
advantage; for the Duke of Ireland (with the Kings priuitie) had gathered a
power in Wales and Cheshire, which they intercepting near to Burford and
Babblake, slew Sir William Molineux leader of the Cheshire men, and some
others, and made the Duke to fly in great fear. Among the spoils of the
Dukes carriages there were found (as the Devil would have it) certain letters
of the King to the said Duke of Ireland, by which their counsels were plainly
discovered. The Lords hereupon march with speed up to London, having an Army
of about forty thousand men. The King shuts himself up in the Tower, but is
glad before long to admit them to his The Lords ^harge the king with sundry
matters,
presence. There they (irreverently enough) object mutability to him and his
underhand workings; they objected also, that he had secretly practiced to fly
with the Duke of Ireland into France, and to deliver up to the French Kings
possession Callis, and such pieces as the Crown of England held in those
parts: to prove which dishonorable act, they (as some write) produced the
French packets intercepted. This wrung tears (perhaps of disdain) from the
King, and he yielded to come to Westminster upon the next day, there to hear
and determine farther. The King in sign of amity stayed his Cosen the Earl
of Derbie (the same who afterward dethroned him) to supper. O where was the
courage of a King? The Lords in their own quarrel could draw up forty
thousand men; but in the general danger of the Realm, when the Commons were
up, and the French hung over their heads, with no less hatred then
preparations, no such numbers appeared. Was it fortheir honor or praise, that
their most rightful King should by their violence be driven to consult upon
flight out of his proper Kingdom? The City An. D. 1388. An. Reg. 11.
of London was also in no little peril at this present by their access, which
drawn by just fear was contented to open the gates and harbor the Lords and
their partakers. These Lords, who so often are called here the Lord, are named
in our Stat. A^. 11. (...). 1
Statute books to be but these five; The Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of
Derbie, Arundel, Warwick and Marshal.

(76) The next day, he would have deferred his repair to Westminster. This
being signified to the Kings Lords (for so they might be called, as being more
Masters then the King) they labor not, by humble words, and dutious reasons to
persuade the use or necessity of his presence in that place, but contrary to
their allegiance, and all good order send him word, That if he came not
quickly according to appointment, they would choose them another King, who The
rough and harsh behavior of the Lords.
both would, and should obey the counsel of the Peers. They had him indeed
amongst them, whom (belike) they even then meant to have surrogated, that is to
say, the before said Earl of Derby, heir to the D. of Lancaster. The Lords
certainly had so behaved themselves toward the King, that they well saw they
must be masters of his person and power, or themselves in the end perish.

(77) The King (after a preposterous and inuerted manner) attending his
Subjects pleasures at Westminster, heavily and unwillingly is drawn to
disclaim Alexander Neuil Archbishop of York, the Persons removed from about
the King.
Bishops of Duresme and Chichester, the Lords Souch and Beaumount with sundry
others. Neither was the Male-sexe only suspected to these curious pruners; the
Lady Poinings, and other Ladies were also removed, and put under bail to
answer such things as should be objected. Sir Simon Burley, Sir William
Elinham, Sir John Beauchampe of Holt, Sir John Salisbury, Sir Thomas Trivet,
Sir James Berneys, Sir Nicholas Dagworth, and Sir Nicholas Brambre knights with
certain Clerks were apprehended, and kept in strait prison, to answer such
accusations (what if mere calumniations?) as in the next Parliament at
Westminster should be objected.

(78) The Parliament began at Candlemas, where the King was unwillingly
present: The first day of the Session, all the Judges Fulthrop, Belknap, Care,
Historia Lecestren.
Hott, Burgh, and Lockton were arrested as they sat in Judgment on the Bench,
and most of them sent to the Tower. The cause alleged was, that having first
ouerruled them with their counsels and directions, which they assured them to
be according to law, they afterward at Nottingham gave contrary judgment to
that which themselves had fore-declared. Trysilian the chief Justice prevented
them by flight, but being apprehended, and brought to the Parliament in the
forenoone, had sentence to be drawn to Tyborne in the afternoon, and there to
have his throat cut; which was done accordingly. Sir Nicholas Brambres turn
was next. This The Duke of new Troy or London.
Brambre (says Walsingham) was said to have imagined to be made Duke of new
Troy (the old supposed name of London) by murdering thousands of such
Citizens, (whose names he had billed for that purpose,) as were suspected of
likelihood to resist him. Then Sir John Salisbury, and Sir James Bernes two
young Knights, Sir John Beauchamp of Holt, Steward of the Household to the
King, and John Blake Esquier, were likewise sacrificed to revenge. Sir Simon
Burley only had the worship to have but his head stricken off. Lo the noble
respect which the gentle Lords had to justice and amendment. This was no age
(we see) for a weak or slothful Prince to sit in quiet; for now the people,
and then the Peers, foil and trample the regal authority under foot: the
Duke of Ireland, the Archbishop of York, the Earl of Suffolk and others,
had their estates confiscated to the kings use by Act of Parliament, as in the
An. 10. and 11. Rich. 2.
book of Statutes may be seen, together with a great part of the whole
proceedings.

(79) These troubles boiling and burning within, in the Bowels of the State,
the Scots abroad had opportunity to invade the North of England, under the
conduct of Sir William Dowglasse, a noble young knight, a parallel and rival
in the honor of Arms to Henry Hotspur, Lord Percy, whom Hotspur fighting hand
to hand slew in battle: but the Earl of Dunbar coming with an excessive
number of Scots, took Hotspur and his brother prisoners, killing many English,
not without such loss to themselves, that they forthwith returned.

(80) But these vnneighbourly hostilities soon A. D. 1389. A. reg. 12.
after found some surcease, there being a meeting at Calis between the English
and French, about establishing a peace: and albeit, because the French would
have the Scot and Spaniard included therein, the conclusion was deferred, yet
shortly after it was resolved upon for three years, the Scots being
comprehended therein.

(81) King Richard (being now of age) declares The King declares himself to be
of age, and takes the government upon him.
himself free to govern of himself, without either controlement, or help of
any other, then such as he selected to that place, and in token that he was at
liberty, he takes the Great Seal of England from Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
York, (Alexander Neuill being attainted and fled) and departs out of the
Council Chamber. After a while he returns, and gives it back to William
Wickham (the He was founder of the two famous Colleges in Oxford and
Winchester.
renowned Bishop of Winchester) who was unwilling to have accepted the same.
He also puts out sundry Officers, substituting such others as best liked him.
From the Council Table he removed his uncle Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of
Gloucester, the Earl of Warwick, and others; which (as it might) encouraged
the Dukes enemies about the King, to do evil offices between them. Yet the
king did not presently credit what was whispered into his care, concerning a
purpose suggested to be in the Duke, to raise forces again; but acquainting
him withal, was satisfied. Nevertheless, he would not suffer the Duke to
pursue an orderly or any revenge upon the Authors, whom indeed it had been
wisdom to have punished in an exemplary manner.

(82) Michael de la Pole late Earl of Suffolk (whom the popular Lords had
made most odious to the English) died at Paris in exile, bequeathing such goods
as he had there to Robert Duke of Ireland, who also breathed out his griefs
in banishment, and died at last in Brabant.

(83) The Duke of Lancaster the mean while, returns into Gascoigne out of
Spain, and not long after into England. The success of that voyage (being
made to claim the Crown of Castile and Leon) was briefly this* John King of
Castile Roder. Santius. Archiep. Toletan. Hist. Hisp. part. 4 cap. 22.
alleged that Constance the Dukes wife was not right heir, but he. For,
albeit the Lady Constance was eldest daughter and heir to Peter son of
Alfonse, whose father Fernand the fourth was son of Sanchez the fourth, and
he son of Alfonse the tenth; all Kings of Spain successively; yet, that
neither Constance, Peter, Alfonse, Ferdinand, nor Sanchez had the right. His
reason was; for that Alfonse the tenth, (chosen Emperor of Almaine) had,
before he begat the said Sanchez, an elder son called Ferdinand de la Cerda,
who married Blanch the daughter of Saint Lewis King of France, from whom
descended Alfonse de la Cerda (who entitled himself King, but died without
issue) and Fernand, who had a daughter married to John, son of the Infant of
Portugal Emmanuel, mother to the Lady Ioane, wife of King Henry the second,
father of John King of Castile defendant.

(84) This Apology made by the Castilian, would not serve; for kingdoms are
not used to be pleaded for by Bil and Answer; The English and Portugals join
their forces. To the Duke (by reason of his wives presence,) many did
voluntarily submit themselves; all did not; for Don Polyd. Verg. l. 20 Hist.
Ang.
Aluarez de Perez on the behalf of his Lord, the King of Spain, offered to
stop the Duke in his march to Burgos, and was overthrown. Other adventures
that war afforded, but sickness happening in the English Army, consumed
Froissard.
many of the principal, and among them the Lord Fitzwalter, with other Lords,
Knights, Esquires, and men of arms, almost three hundredth. Moreover the
penury was such, that sundry revolted to the enemy to get relief, which
being Tho. Walls.
seen of the King of Portugal, he told the Duke he would set upon them as
Enemies, but he said no, for that he knew they did it only for lack of
food. Thus having said, he held down his head, as he sat on horseback, and
wept most bitterly, The Duke of Lancaster in his distress calls upon God,
and is heard.
secretly pouring forth his prayers to almighty God, and most humbly beseeching
mercy. From which time forward his affairs in Spain succeeded happily.

(85) The wars had been ^harpe and tedious, but the end acceptable. For Don
Iuan king of * Roder. San. qua supra.
Castile, a Prince of no evil conscience, seeing the right which the Duke of
Lancaster urged, and foreseeing Conditions of perpetual amity between the K.
of Spain and the Duke of Lancaster.
what calamities might happen hereafter, if (as was feared the French should
match with him, sought and obtained a firm peace. The Principal conditions
were: That the Lord Henry, his son and heir, should marry the Lady
Katherine, daughter and heir to the Duke and Constance his wife; That the Lord
Henry (during his fathers life) should be called Prince of Asturia, and
Katherine his wife Princess: That Tho. VValsin. in Ric. 2.
for default of issue between the young Princely couple, the Crown should
come to the Lord Edward Duke of York, who had married the other daughter of
King Peter. That the king of Spain should lade Fabian. Caxton.
eight Cars with wedges of gold for the Duke, or (as Holinsh. page 450.
some write) pay two hundredth thousand nobles, toward the defrayment of the
Dukes huge charges; That finally, he should give sufficient Caution for an
Annuitie of Ypod. Neust.
ten thousand pounds, during the lives of the said Duke and Duchess, to be
duly paid to their uses at the City of Holinshed. The Duke of Lancaster does
good offices.
Bayon in Gascoigne.

(86) The King, at such time as the Duke of Lancaster returned, was at Reading,
whither he had commanded the Peers to repair. To that meeting the Duke makes
have, as well to present his duty to his Soueraigue, as to be an author of
love and peace between the king and Lords, against some of whom the King was
not thought to be very favorably disposed. Which he graciously effected, as
seeming to addict his mind to offices of piety and public benefit. Certainly
the wisdom and moderation The Duke of Yorkes carriage worthily praised.
of the Duke of York his brother, were such, in all the late, and other
tumults, that he is not so much as once named among the factious; which
Christian spirit if it had reigned in all the rest, England had never been
polluted with such infinite bloodshed of her noblest Children; neither had the
goodly fabric of state, laden with innumerable trophies, fallen under that
most hideous Chaos, which succeeding ages saw and sighed for.

(87) The King upon the Duke of Lancasters A. D. 1390. An. reg. 13. The Duke of
Lancaster made Duke of Aquitaine.
return, whether he felt the keeping of Aquitaine an unprofitable burden, or
the absence of his uncle the Duke, a thing worthy to be purchased at any
rate, certain it is, that in a Parliament held at London, he vested in him
that famous Duchy, by delivering the Cap of State, and Ducal Rod; whither he
shortly went to take possession. His son, Henry of Bullingbroke Earl of
Derbie, loath to spend his hours in sloth, but desirous to pursue renown by
martial Acts in foreign parts, sailed over to the wars in Prussia, where in
sundry enterprises against the Lithuanians, he wan great honor, which, by
comparison Henry of Bullingbroke seeks adventures into Germany.
of King Richards Calmnes, prepared a way for him in the Englishes affections,
to points more eminent.

(88) The Pope now understood, that the English State began again to be
sensible of Romish encroachments; and as in a A. R. 13. vid. lib. Stat.
former Parliament they had enacted against all Collations of Bishoprics and
dignities by the Pope, with banishment to all which did accept such Collations,
and death to all that brought in any excommunications from the Pope, to hinder
the execution of that Act; so in this last Parliament, Ypod. Neust. 544.
another severe Act was made, against such as went to the Pope to procure any
such provisions. A Proclamation also was made at London, * that all beneficed
men ibid. p. 545.
then being in the Court of Rome, should return by a day prefixed, or loose
all their livings. The Pope himself (says Walsingham) troubled with (...)
frigore turbat^.
so great a thunderclap, sent with all speed into England, to persuade the A.
D. 1391.
King, that such Statutes as had been thus made in their prejudice, who
followed the Court of Rome, and such other clauses as tended to the damage of
that See, should be made void; whereto the Kings answer was, that the Popes
Nuntio must expect till the next Parliament. At which Parliament the King, as
also the Duke of Lancaster, seemed to have some respect to the Pope, (whose
messenger was their Present) but the Ypod. Neust.
Knights of the house would not in any wise give their consents, that such
R^mipetis.
Rome-gadders should without due punishment pursue their wonted course, longer
then till the next Parliament. To furnish the Duke of Lancaster into France, to
treat of a peace, and upon condition that the King should that year invade
Scotland, large contributions were there made, both by Clergy and Laity.
Hereupon the Lord Ioh. Stow. calls him Earl of Northumberland.
Henry Percy, Hotspur (who had redeemed himself) was called from his charge at
Callis, and made Warden of the Marches against Scotland; Thomas Moubray Earl
of Nottingham succeeding in the Captaineship of Calys. The Dukes chargefull
emploiment in France bare no other flower, then a years short truce.

(89) The Kings wants still increasing with his imploiments, the Londoners
(carried away with evil A. D. 1392. London in disgrace with the King.
counsel) did a thing most unworthy of their City and themselves, and it
might to them have proved as hurtful, as it was unworthy, at such time as the
King Tho. Walls.
desired the loan but of one thousand pounds: which was not only churlishly
denied, but a certain Lumbard, honestly offering to lend the same, was badly
used, beaten, and almost slain Their liberties for that and other Fabian and
Caxton; but. Stow mistikes their additions of other disorders.
disorders are seized, and their proper Magistracy dissolved, (Guardians being
given them, first Sir Edward Dallinging, then Sir Baldwin Radington) and their
Mayor, and some chief Citizens laid in prisons far off from London. The
punishment brought the fowlenesse of their errors to their sight; but by the
Duke of Ypod. Neust.
Glocesters intercessions (who did not unwillingly lay hold upon such occasions
of popularity) the king and Queen are won to enter the City, which gave them
triumphall entertainment. The sea is not suddenly calmed after a tempest,
neither a Princes anger. By degrees yet, and not without dear repentance, they
were at last restored to their former condition in all A. D. 1393.
points.

(90) The king declaring his purpose to cross into Ireland, had an aid of
money conditionally A. D. 1394.
granted: four years truce by the travail of the two Dukes of Lancaster and
Gloucester being concluded in France. This year was farther notable for many
great Funerals. Constance Duchess of Aquitaine and Lancaster, a Lady of great
Ypod. Neust. The death of Queen Anne and many great Ladies.
Innocence and devotion: the Countess of Derby her daughter in law, Isabel the
Duchess of York, and a Lady noted for too great a finenesse and delicacy,
yet at her death showing much repentance and sorrow for her love to those
pestilent vanities, left this present life. But all the grief for their deaths
did in no sort equal that of the kings, for the loss of his own Queen Anne,
which about the same time happened at Sheene in Surrey, whom he loved even to a
kind of madness: but Ladies only died not; for Sir John Hawkwood, whose
cheualrie had made him renowned over the Christian world, did in this year
depart The famous Sir John Hawkwood dies.
an aged man out of this world in Florence, where his ashes remain honored at
this present with a stately Tomb, and the statue of a Man at Arms, erected by
the gratitude of that State and City, which chiefly by his conduct, courage and
valor (to this day admired amongst them) was preserved. The Italian Writers,
both Paul. (...) in ^log (...). (...).
Historians and Julius Feroldus
Poets, highly celebrating his matchless prowess enstyle him, -Anglorum
decus, and decus addite genti
Italicae, Italico prasidiumque Solo.
Englands prime honor, Italies renown,
Who vpheld all Italy from sinking down.
But the Duke of Lancaster having all things ready, sets sail to Bordeaux,
there, with the consent of the State to take possession of his lately granted
Duchy.

(91) The King does the like for Ireland; where that sort of the Irish which
are called the wild, had greatly invested the English Pale, and other good
Subjects there, to the great damage of the Crown of England. In the times of
Edward the third, Ireland yielded to the kings coffers Tho. Walsin.
thirty thousand pounds yearly, but now things were so grown out of order, that
it cost the King thirty thousand Marks by year To reduce the rebellious,
himself conducts thither an Army, attended upon by the Duke of Gloucester, the
Earls of March, Nottingham and Rutland, all the Irish being commanded to avoid
out of England. The terror of the preparatio^s, and shining presence of a king
(which above al worldly things is pleasant to the Irish) had such effects that
sundry great men were compelled to submit themselves. To supply the Kings
wants, grown in the Irish expedition, Edmund D. of York, the Kings uncle, and
Custos or Warden of England, called a Parliament at London (whither the Duke of
Gloucester repaired to declare the Kings wants) and has contributions granted.
Nevertheless, so strong a party against the Clergy, and Fryarly abuses of
those times discovered it self therein, that the Archbishop of York, the
Bishop of London, and others, pressed over Sea to the King at Dublin, beseeching
him to return, the sooner to repress the Lollards (so called they the
embracers of Wicliffes doctrine) and their Ypod. Neust.
favorers, who sought not only (as they untruly pretended) to wring away all
the possessions of the Church, but that which was worse, to abrogate and
destroy al Ecclesiastical constitutions, whereas they aimed only at the
redress of exorbitancy in the Papal Clergy. The King hereupon returns: by
whose arrival and authority, those consultations of the Laity were laid down.
Sir Richard Story a servant of his had been forward against the Prelates; of
him therefore he takes an oath upon the holy Gospel, that he should not hold
such opinions any longer. The Knight takes that oath, and we (says the King)
do swear, that if thou do break it, thou shall die a most shameful
death. The rest hearing the Lion roar so terribly, drew in their horns, and
would be seen no more.

(92) The King caused the body of the late Duke of Ireland to be brought into
England. His exceeding love to him was such, that he commanded the Cypress
chest wherein his body lay embalmed, to be opened, that he might see, view,
handle, and openly express his affection. The dead remains of that noble
young Gentleman, (by his birthright Earl of Oxford, and by race a Vere) were
buried at the Priorie of Coln in Essex, there being present the King himself,
the Countess Dowager of Oxford, the Dukes mother, the Archbishop of
Canterbury with many Bishops, Abbots, and religious persons, but few of the
Lords, for they had not as yet digested the hate they bare him.

(93) The Duke of Lancaster was this while in Aquitaine, where he had sought to
win the people An. D. 1396.
with incredible largess, to accept of his Sovereignty, according to the tenor
of King Richards grant. Little did he then think, that within less then
sixescore and three years after, an Doct. Tailor ex Autograph^ ipsius. A. D.
15^.
Ambassador of King Henry the 8. should write thus of Bordeaux it self, the
Capital City of Gascoign and Guien: Anglorum nulla fere vestigia remanent,
etc. There are (says that learned Gentleman) scarce any foot-prints of An
excellent note concerning the vanity of worldly ambition in Princes.
the Englishmen remaining. In the Churches, and other places newly refreshed
and reedified, such Armories of the English as stood, were utterly blotted and
defaced: yet in the Church of the Friars Preachers, the Armories of the Duke of
Lancaster stand entire in a Glasse-window, and in the oldest wall of the City
those also of England, though consumed in a manner with age: The Laws,
Statutes and Ordinations which were made by the English, are notwithstanding
observed at this day. But the Dukes eye could not look so far into the times
to come. Nevertheless we that see these things must confess, that the best
kingdom under heaven is not so worth the getting, as that with the wilful
contempt of God and conscience any man should seek to purchase it.

(94) But while the Duke was thus busied in Courting the Gascoignes good will,
Froissard.
who had sent into England, to show causes why they should not atturne to the
Duke, (and yet were wrought at last to the point of yielding,) he receives a
commandment from King Richard to return, that he might go with him into
France; which he obayed. The King keeping his at Langley in Hartfordshire, the
Duke The Duke of Lancaster marries the Lady Katherine Swinford.
was there entertained with more honor (as it was thought) then love. Being
licenced to depart for a time, he repaired to Lincoln, where he a widdower,
married his old love the Lady Katherine Swinford, now a widow. Men did wonder
at it, but he therein obeyed the remorse of a Christian conscience, without
respect to his own unequal greatness; for having had sundry Children by her in
his former wives time, he made her and them now the only sufficient amends,
which the law of God or man enioineth. And further in a Parliament held the
year following, the Duke procured an Act to pass, by which, such children as
he formerly had by his new Duchess, were legitimated; and surnamed them
Beufot, being Stow, Holinsh. erreth in saying but three.
four of them, John, Thomas, Henry, Ioane; the second of which was by the
Kings bounty created Earl of Sommerset.

(95) The King, being specially accompanied A peace and marriage with France.
with those his uncles of Lancaster and Gloucester, at a most sumptuous and
chargefull enteruiew between him and Charles King of France, in the parts of
Calis and Gynes, espoused the Lady Isabell, daughter of the said Charles. At
the delivery of her, King Richard, in the presence of all the greatest Princes,
Peers, and Ladies of either nation, gave the King his father in law great
thanks for a gift so noble and acceptable, adding, he took her upon the
conditions made between the two nations, to the intent that living in peace
and rest, they might attain to the establishment of a perpetual amity, for
avoiding the effusion of Christian blood, which would in likelihood have
followed, had not at that time affinity been contracted between them. The
young Lady was not above seven or eight years old, but the truce was taken for
thirty years. Her person therefore was committed to the Dutchesses of
Lancaster and Gloucester, and other great Ladies, who conducted her to Callis.
From whence, after a short stay, the King, his young Queen (with whom he had
great riches) and all the glorious company came over into England. Their
persons arrived safe, but the Kings gorgeous Pauilions, and a great part of his
stuff was cast away by tempest in the transportation. This journey (besides
his losses at Sea) cost the King above forty thousand marks.

(96) The outward felicity of England seemed A. D. 1397. A. reg. 20.
at this time very great, and the rather seemed so, because it was likely to
continue. In the Duke of Glocesters person that bright prosperity was first
ouershadowed. He, Vir ferocissimus and pracipitis ingenij (as Hist. Ang. lib.
20.
Polydor censures him,) a most fierce man, and of an headlong wit, thinking
those times, wherein he had mastred the King, were nothing changed, though the
King was above thirty years old, forbear not, roughly, not so much to admonish,
as to check and school his Sovereign. The peace with France displeased him,
that therefore he calumniates. The King had restored Breast in Britain to the
Duke, upon reembursements of the money lent; he tells the King that he should
first conquer a Town, before he parted with any; yet the King answers, that
he could not in conscience detain the same, now that the Duke had repaid his
loan. There were other things which could not so well be answered. For a vain
rumor Ypod. Neust. Grafton Chron.
that he should be chosen Emperor, put him belike into such a vain of
spending, as carried a proportion with that majesty; his coffers in a short
time sounding like empty Caske, there was no great monied man in whose debt he
was not, nor any in a manner so mean to whom he was not burthenous.

(97) The King had heretofore complained of this uncle to the Earl of Saint
Paul a Frenchman, (then in England,) whose judgment was, that such insolency
was to be revenged; but complaining to his other uncles of Lancaster and York,
they wisely advised the King, not to regard his words but his heart, which he
and they knew sincere unto him. Nevertheless, partly to weaken the
intolerable humor of their brother, who like a constant Admirer of his own
ways, thought nothing well done, but what himself either did or directed, and
partly to avoid the scandal of the Kings bad courses, they withdraw their
presences from the Court. The King notwithstanding is the same man still, as
the Duke of Gloucester thinks; wherefore, he breaks his mind to such as he
durst trust. Arundell in Sussex is appointed the Consultation-place, where he,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earls of Arundell, Warwick, Marshall and
others, take an Oath of Secrecy, and conclude to raise a power to remove
Fabian. Concor. Hist.
the Dukes of Lancaster and York, and such other as they thought best, from
about the King, so to enact a reformation.

(98) They are charged by A French pamphlet apud Ioh. Stowe in Hollinsh. page
488. Lanquets. Epito^.
some to have plotted the imprisonment of the King and Dukes, and the death of
all other Councillors: which, howsoever it was perhaps no part of their
intention, might yet have been a necessary consequent. The blustering Duke had
breathed out dangerous words; as, Hist. Angl. li. 20.
that he would put the King (of whose courage he spoke contemptiblie) into some
prison there to spend his days in ease and peace, as himself thought best.
His brethren hearing hereof, brotherly admonish him to beware; but, as it
seems, they found him deaf on that side. This though some of the late Authors
write, yet there are both Tho. VValsin.
old and Grafton Io. Stow. Annal.
new, who mention no such matter, but the contrary, not obscurely teaching us,
that the Dukes ruin was but an effect of old malignities.

(99) Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham and Marshall, a party in the reported
plot, though son in law to the Earl of Arundel, reueileth the same to the
King. *The Duke of Gloucester is hereuppon surprised by Mowbray Milles. p. 427.
(lying in wait in the woods where he was to pass) sent to Callis (where
Nottingham was Captain) and there imprisoned; the Earls of Arundel and
Warwick, the Lord John Cobham, and Sir John Cheiney, are arrested.
Proclamation is then made that they were not committed for any old matters,
but for heinous things newly contrived, as in the next Parliament should be
made manifest; though the event (as Ypod Neust.
Walfingham truly says) declared the contrary. But the Duke of Gloucester, and
the two said Earls are endited at Nottingham. The King to maintain the
accusation of treason objected, had (as some say) suborned Edward Earl of
Arundel, Thomas Earl Marshall, Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, John Holland
Earl of Huntington; Thomas Beaufort Earl of Somerset, John Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, Thomas Lord Spencer and Sir William Scroope Lord Chamberlain.

(100) In September begins the Parliament at London, where the king had a great
guard of Chesshire A. reg. 21.
men to secure his person, and the Lords attended also not without sufficient
numbers. The Kings chief Agents were Sir John Bushy, Sir William Bagod, and
Sir Henry Green knights. In the first act (after the liberties of the Church
and people confirmed,) we find these Libr. Statut. An. 21. Rich. 2. cap. 2.
words. The commons of the Parliament have showed to our Sovereign Lord the
King, how in the Parliament holden at Westminster, the first day of October, in
the tenth year of his reign; Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and Richard Earl of
Arundell, traitors to the King and his Realm and his people, by false
imagination and compassing caused a (...) br^ad. An. 10. (...).
Commission to be made, etc. and that the said Duke of Gloucester, and Earl of
Arundel, did send a great man and Peer of the Realm in message to our Lord
the King; who of their part said, that if he would not grant and assent to the
said Commission, HE SHOULD DE IN GREAT PERIL OF HIS LIFE: and so, as well the
said Commission, as the said Statute touching the said Commission, were made by
constraint, etc. Wherefore the Commons pray their Sovereign Lord the King,
that the said Commission etc: be utterly anulled, as a thing done TRAITEROVSLY,
etc.

(101) The sanctuary of former laws, and all particular Charters of pardon
being now taken away from the Duke, Earl, and others, they lay open to
manifest ruin. The Holinsh.
Duke of Lancaster sat in judgment as High Steward upon Richard Earl of
Arundel, where, for no other but for the old attempts, (though the other
accusations seem to have been auerred by the eight Appellants) by which, as ye
have heard, so many were displaced and put to death, he adjudged him to die
that soul death of a common Traitor: but the King satisfied himself with
only his head, which was at one stroke taken of at Tower Hill. That he was a
traitor either in word or deed, The Earl of Arandel beheaded.
he utterly did deny, and died in that denial. The constancy of this Earls
carriage as well at his arraignement, passage, and execution, (as in which he
did not discolor the honor of his blood with any degenerous word, look, or
action) increased the envy of his death upon the prosecutors. The Earl of
Warwick confessed with tears, (and as some say, drawn by fair hope of life)
that in adhering to the Duke of Gloucester in those ridings and assemblies he
was guilty of treason. The same sentence was therefore pronounced upon him. The
King nevertheless did only banish him into the I Will of Man. But the Duke of
Gloucester (whom, as the peoples darling, it seemed not safe to bring to a
public trial) was secretly smothered at Calis with pillowes and featherbeds.
The Duke of Gloucester murdered.


(102) The great Parliament (for so it seems to have been called, by reason
of the extraordinary A. D. 1398.
numbers of Peers, and their retinues, which came thereunto) was helped by
adiournment at Shewsbury. In it, those Iustitiars, who were partly put to Libr.
Statu. An. 21. Rich. 2. cap. 12.
death and partly banished, but all attainted (at such time as the Duke of
Gloucester and the rest were in arms,) do all of them stand thereby cleared
from dishonor, and such Tho. Walsin.
Articles as they subscribed, (being, together with their answers, set down
in the Act) are publicly ratified, and the offenders against them pronounced
Traitors. Amongst these Articles, one, containing these great Lawyers
judgments concerning the orderly proceedings in all Parliament, is very
obseruable: Book of statut^. A. Ric. 2. 21. ca. 12. artic. 6.
That after the cause of such assembly is by the Kings commandment there
declared, such Articles as by the King are limited for the Lords and Commons
to proceed in, are first to be handled; but if any should proceed upon other
Articles, and refuse to proceed upon those limited by the King, till the King
had first answered their proposals, contrary to the Kings command; such doing
herein contrary to the rule of the King, are to be punished as Traitors. But
the King, to content all parts, and to kindle new lights in the place of such
as he had extinguished, having first created himself Tho. Walsing. The King
(Prince of Chester) creates Dukes and other States.
Prince of Chester, made his cosen Henry Earl of Derby, Duke of Hereford; the
Earl of Rutland Duke of Aumarl; the Earl of Nottingham Duke of Norfolk; the
Earl of Kent Duke of Surrey; the Earl of Huntington, Duke of Excester; the
Earl of Somerset Marquess Dorset; the Lord Spencer Earl of Gloucester; the
Lord Neuile Earl of Westmorland; William Scrope Earl of Wiltshire; Thomas
Percy Earl of Worcester. The King also (says Walsingham) added to his
Scucheon Royal, the armories of Saint Edward King and confessor.

(103) The foremost in this goodly rank, being Henry Duke of Hereford, not long
after accused Thomas Duke of Norfolk, of certain words sounding to the kings
dishonor, which he should privately utter to the said Henry. Hist. Ang. lib.
20.
Polydor (though very negligently he makes Mowbray the Accuser, and Hereford
Defendant) may yet be heard in reporting the effect of the words, as That King
Richard held the Peers of the land in no account, but as much as lay in him
sought to destroy them, by banishing some, and putting others to death. That
he never troubled his mind with considering how his Dominions were diminished
through his Idleness. Finally, that all things went to wrack, as well in
peace as war. But the Duke of Norfolk, (who unless it had been to feel how
the Duke of Herefords heart was affected to the king, had little reason so to
complain) most constantly denying that ever he spoke such words; it should
have come to a combat within lists; but the king to ^uoid (as he pretended)
such deadly fewds as might rise in the families of two such potent Peers, but
(indeed to be rid of an enemy with the loss of a friend) banished Norfolk
for ever, and Hereford first for ten years, then for six. Walsingham Ypod
Neust.
says that this censure was given against Norfolk, upon that very day in
which the year before, he (by the kings commandment) had taken order for
putting to death the Duke of Gloucester at Callis, whereof the said Duke of
Norfolk had the Captaineship.

(104) Fearful were the tragedies which ensued these times; and hear now
what is written of An. D. 1399. An. Reg. 22.
some Portents or wonders, presaging the same. The Ypod, Neust.
Bay or Laurel trees withered over all England, and afterward reflourished,
contrary to many men's opinion; and upon the first of January, near Bedford
town, the river between the villages of Swelston and Harleswood where it was
deepest, did upon the sudden stand still, and so divided it self, that the
bottom remained dry for about three miles space, which seemed (says
Walsingham) to portend that revolt from the King, and the division which ensued.

(105) Roger Mortimer Earl of March, Lieutenant of Ireland, having in the
year before, while he too much Tho. Walls. in R. 2.
trusted to his own Forces, been slain with very many others, by Annal.
Hibern. apud Cambd.
O-Brin, and the Irish of Leinster, at a place called Kenlis; King Richard
determines in person to revenge the blood of his Noble kinsman, being the man
to whom he meant the Crown of England, if issue failed to himself. He
remembered not how broken an estate he had in England, where the peoples hearts
were strongly alienated, not only for the death of the late great Lords, and
banishment of the Duke of Hereford, (whose calamity increased his popularity)
or for the like passed exasperations, but for that (to furnish his Irish
voyage) he had extorted money on al hands, taking up carriages, victuals, and
other necessaries, without any recompense; whereby the hatred of his government
grew universal.

(106) But the evil fortune which hung over his head, laid forth an alluring
bait to haste his destruction, by occasion of the Duke of Lancasters decease,
which happened about Candlemas, and the absence of his banished son and heir
Lord Henry. The king (most unjustly) seizes upon the goods of that mighty
Prince his uncle, and as if all things now were lawful, which but liked him,
he determines to banish the new rightful Duke of Lancaster Henry, not for a
few years, but for ever; for which cause he revoked his Letters Patents
granted to the said Henry, by which his Atturnyes were authorized to sue his
Liuerie (and to compound for the respite of his homage at a reasonable rate;
whereby he made it seem plain to the world, that he had not banished him to
avoid dissentions, but (as many said) to fill up the breaches which his riote
had made in the royal treasures, with plentiful (though an undue) Escheate,
as that of his deceased uncles fortune.

(107) The one steadfast base and buttresse of all lawful Empire, is Justice;
that supports the kingly throne. This he overthrew, and how then could
himself hope to stand long? He lands at Waterford in Ireland with a Navy of
Annal. Hibern. apud Cambd.
two hundredth ships, having with him the son of the late Duke of Gloucester,
and of the now Duke of Lancaster, to secure himself the rather. Tho. Walls.
His forces consisted much of Cheshire men. But that king is deceived, who
reposeth his safety in violence. It was no great matter he did there, that
which fell out to be done elsewhere, was great indeed. His war in Ireland
was more dammagefull, then fishing with an hook of gold, for here the bait
and hook was not only lost, but the line, rod, and himself, were drawn
altogether into the depthes of irrecouerable ruin. Duke Henry sees the
advantage which King Richards absence gave him, and uses it. In his Company
were Thomas Arundel the banished Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Nephew the
son and heir of the late Earl of Arundel, and not above fifteen Lanciers.
His strength was (where the Kings should have been) in the peoples hearts.
Nevertheless, the Duke did not suddenly take land, but houered upon the Seas,
showing himself to the Country people in one place now and then in another,
pretending nothing but the recovery of his rightful Heritage.

(108) Edmund Duke of York, whom King Richard had left behind him to govern
England, hearing this, calls unto him Edmund Stafford Bishop of Chichester,
Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Wiltshire, Lord Treasurer, and the Knights of the
Kings Council, Bushie, Bagot, Green, and Russell. Their conclusion was to
levy a force to impeach Duke Henry's entrance. The assembly was appointed to
be at S. Albans, which came to worse then nothing, for the protestation that
they would not hurt the Duke, whom they knew to be wronged was general. This
made the Treasurer Sir John Bushie, and Sir Henry Green fly to the Castle of
Bristoll, Sir William Bagot to Chester, from whence he got shipping into
Ireland. Mean while Duke Henry lands at a village heretofore called
Rauenshire, to whom repaired Henry Earl of Northumberland, his son Henry
Lord Percie, lands at Neuill Earl of Westmerland, and many others, who (says
Walsingham) greatly feared King Richards tyranny. With an Army of about
threescore thousand (multitudes offering their service) they come to Bristoll,
besiege the Castle, take it, and in the same the foresaid Treasurer Bushie and
Green, whose heads (at the cries of the Commons) were the next day after
their surrender severed from their bodies.

(109) King Richard was in the City of Dublin, when these most heavy news
arrived. His courage which at no time seemed great, was shortly none at all.
Somewhat must be done: he leaves the sons of Duke Henry, and of his late
uncle of Gloucester (which he retained as pledges for his own indemnity) in
the Castle of Trim, and returns himself into England, entending to encounter
the Duke before his force should be too much established. The great names
which accompanied him, were his late noble Creatures, the young Dukes of
Aumarle, Excester, and Surrey, the Bishops of London, Lincoln and Carleol, and
many others. There had been some more hope for upholding his right, if he had
not made the world know, that ten years space was not able to bury in him
the appetite of revenge, which made many forget their own loyalty to him, and
the Crown. Princes see in him the use of oblivion: but some conscience of
evil deserts seeming to have taken from him all confidence, he dismisseth his
Army, bidding his Steward Sir Thomas Percy and others to reserve themselves
for better days.

(110) His last refuge is in Parlea. For that cause there repaired to him, at
the Castle of Conway in Northwales, (for thither he was now come) the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Northumberland at the Kings
appointment: The sum of his demaundes were, that if he and eight, whom he
would name, might have honorable allowance, with the assurance of a quiet
private life, he would resign his Crown. This Northumberland did swear
should be: whereupon he forthwith departs to the Castle of Flint in their
company. After a short conference there had with the Duke, they all ride that
night to the Castle of Chester, being attended by the Lancastrian Army. If,
to spare his peoples blood, he was contented so tamely to quit his royal
right, his fact does not only not seem excusable, but glorious; but men
rather think that it was sloth, and a vain trust in dissimulation, which his
enemies had long since discovered in him, and for that cause, both held his
amendment desperate, and ran themselves into these desperate Treasons.

(111) The King did put himself into the Dukes hands upon the twentieth day of
August, being but the forty and seventh from the Dukes first landing. From
thence they travel to London, where the King lodged in the Tower. Mean while
writs of Summons are sent out in King Richards name, for a Parliament to be
holden at Westminster, Crastino Michaelis. The tragical form of Resignation,
you have Ed. 2.. 33. and 34.
had already in Edward the second, of whom this King is a Parallel. There are
named to have been present at this wofull-ioyfull Act, Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury, Richard Scrope Archbishop of York, John Bishop of Hereford,
Henry Duke of Lancaster, (who in this serious play must seem as if he were
but a looker on) the Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland, the Lords
Burnell, Barckley, Ros, Willoughby, and Abergeuenie, the Abbot of Westminster,
etc.

(112) In their presence Richard as yet a King, and in his Tower of London, but
not otherwise then as King Richard resignes upon Michaelmas day. A. D. 1340.
a prisoner, reads the Instrument of his surrender, with a seeming cheerful
countenance, as if he were glad the hour was come, in which he might taste
what it was to be a private man, and (having otherwise first done and said what
then he could to put all right out of himself) subscribes it with his hand;
but prays, that his Cosen the Duke of Lancaster might succeed him in the
regal government, and in token that it was his desire (for he must seem to
desire what he could not hinder) he Holinsh. pa. 504
plucked off his Signetring, and put it upon the Dukes finger. Then did he
constitute the Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Hereford his Procurators,
to declare to the whole Body of Parliament what he had done, and how willingly,
where every one ( D. Hayward. i^ Hen. 4.
except the loyal and magnanimous Bishop of Carleol) being particularly asked,
did particularly accept of the resignation. Nevertheless, it was not thought
enough to have his Crown, unless they also published his shame. Thirty Fabia.
Concord. hist. says thirty and eight.
and two Articles are therefore openly (but in his absence) read; of all which,
it was said (for then men might say what they listed) that he had confessed
himself guilty. In the front was placed his abuse of the public treasure, and
unworthy waste of the Crown-land, whereby he grew intollerably grievous to the
Subjects. The particular causes of the Dukes of Gloucester and Lancaster, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and Earl of Arundel filled sundry Articles. They
charged him in the rest with dissimulation, falsehood, loss of honor abroad in
the world, extortions, rapine, denial of Justice, rasures, and embezelling of
Records, dishonorable shifts, wicked Axioms of state, cruelty, covetousness,
subordinations, lasciviousness, treason to the rights of the Crown,
periuries,; and briefly with all sorts of unkingly vices, and with absolute
tyranny.

(113) We may be assured, that nothing could then be objected so untrue or
incredible, but would have gone for current and undeniable with affections so
thoroughly prepared. Hereupon it was Tho. Walls.
concluded, that in all those thirty and two Articles, he had broken the Oath
of Empire taken at the Coronation, and all the States of the Kingdom (strange
that so many should so concur in disloyalty under pretense of equity) being
asked what they thought; did hold that those causes seemed notorious, and
sufficient to depose King Richard. Commissioners were therefore nominated by
consent of the whole house, to pronounce the sentence of Deposition; which
were, the Bishop of Asaph, the Abbot of Glassenbury, the Earl of Gloucester,
the Lord Barkly, William Thyrning, Chief Justice of the common Pleas, and some
others. The form of pronuntiation was, IN THE NAME OF GOD, AMEN. We John
Bishop of Saint Asaph, John Abbat, etc. Commissioners specially chosen by the
Lords spiritual and temporal of the Realm of England, and Commons of the
said Realm, representing all the States of the said Realm, sitting in place
of judgment, etc.

(114) The definitive sentence of Deposition given thus in open Parliament,
there were further named certain persons, amongst whom Ypod. Neust.
William Thirning Chief Justice of the Common Pleas was thought the fittest
man, by whose lawless mouth that unjust doom should be delivered to the King,
and who on the behalf of the Realm, should renounce to the said Richard the
fealties and homages heretofore made unto him, and to make relation of the
whole manner and causes of their proceedings. The Regal seat was now reputed
void; whereupon Duke Henry rises from his place, and stands upright, that he
might be seen of the people, then Ypodigma. Neust.
signing himself with the sign of the Cross upon the forehead and breast,
and inuocating the name of Christ, he challenged the Crown and Realm of
England, with all the members and appurtenances. His words are said to be these.

In the name of God, Amen. I, Henry of Lancaster, claim the Realm of England,
and the Crown, with all Ypod. Neust.
the appurtenances, as coming by the blood royal from King Henry, and by that
justice which God of his grace has sent to me, by the help of my kinfolke and
friends, for recovery of the said Realm, which was in point of perdition,
through default of Government and breach of laws.

(115) Which challenge and claim being thus made, all the States of the
Kingdom do with one consent grant, that the said Lord Duke should reign over
them. The Archbishop of Canterbury (brother to the late Earl of Arundel) takes
him then by the right hand, and the Archbishop of York (the late Earl of
Wiltshires kinseman) being his assistant, places him in the royal throne,
with the general acclamation and applauses of the people. Lastly, in full
complement of the present solemnity, the Archbishop of Canterbury (that we
may see how the Divinity as well as the Law of those times were degenerated
into temporizing Policy) made a Sermon upon these words in Samuel, A Man shall
reign over the People. By occasion whereof Fab. 1. Concord. Hist. Holinsh. ex
Fab.
he describes out of the holy Scriptures, the happiness of that Kingdom
which is governed by a man, and the infelicity of those Realms where a Child
(whether in age or discretion) weeldes the Scepter. The evil whereof as they
had dangerously felt under the late King, so they hoped abundantly to enjoy the
other in King Henry. To all which the whole Auditorie ioyously answered Amen.
Then rose the affable new Monarch, and among a few other words, he gave the
world to understand, that none should think he would as by way of Conquest,
disinherite A necessary protestation.
any man, certain bad members only excepted.

(116) From henceforth he was taken for King, and all Writs issued, and went
forth in his name: which disorderly matters being orderly related to the
deposed Prince in the Tower, by Thirning the Chief Justice, he only used
these words; That he looked not after such things, but (quoth he) my hope is,
that (after all this) my cosen will be my good Lord and friend. The Archbishop
(otherwise inexcusable in those proceedings) yet in his said Sermon seems
gravely and truly to have described the cause of this effect; for (quoth he)
the child or insipient (which are with him aequiparable) drinks the sweet and
delicious words unadvisedly, and perceives not intoxication, which they been
mingled with, till he be environed and wrapped in all danger, as lately the
experience thereof has been apparent to all our sights and knowledges, and
not without the great danger of all this Realm. Being thus brought down to
the show, and littleness of a private man, we leave him to draw his comfort
out of holy meditations, as one whose violent death ensued before long, and
turn over to his politic and martial Successor.

(117) Yet in our way, we may not quite ouerpasse a cursory consideration of
the affairs of the Church under this King, which, for avoiding often
interruptions of other argument, we have put off to this last place. For albeit
the Kingdom endured great crosses in the affairs of State, yet Mornay. Mist.
iniquit. p. 482.
some have thought, that it found as great blessings in matters of religion,
which in those days took so deep root in this our land, by the preaching of
John Wicliffe, that the branches thereof did spread themselves even into
Bohemia, opera Io. Huss. To. 2.
over the Seas: Nor were the common people only allured with his doctrine,
(though the Walfi. p. 205. and p. 208.
Londoners favoring of him is thought by Walsingham to have deterred the
Prelates from proceeding against him, and a scholar of his in Leicestershire,
is said to have drawn by his preaching, Ibid. p. 285.
all the Laymen in that Country) but (as the same Author reports) sundry
of the Friars themselves fell to him and embraced his opinions, amongst whom
one p. 327.
being also the Popes Chaplain, so discovered by preaching the murders,
luxuries and treasons of Friars of his own Habit, that the common people were
astonished with the horror thereof, and cried out to have them all utterly
destroyed; which his accusations he particularly justified by public writing,
professing he came forth of that Order, as out of the Devils nest. But that
which Walsingham much more p. 285.
admires, is, that Wicliffes opinions were not only entertained in ordinary
Cities, but even in the University of Oxford it self, where was C^lmen
Sapientia and scientia. p. 201.
the very top of wisdom and learning: and where not only two Chancellors
successively. p. 286.
Doctor Nicholas Hereford, and p. 201.
Robert Rugge were most earnest maintainers of Wicliffes doctrine, but also,
when the pope (to suppress the same doctrine) sent his Bulla Gregorij. ib.
Bull to the University threatening the privation of all their privileges, the
Proctors and Regents thereof were very doubtful, whether they should receive
the Popes Bull with honor, or rather reject it with open disgrace. Yea, the
whole body of that glorious University (as the Pope there calls it in his Bull)
gave a glorious Vide op. Ioh. Huss. 10. 2.
Testimony (under their public seal) of Wicliffes religious life, profound
learning, orthodoxe opinions, exquisite writings, all farthest from any stain
of heresy.

(118) And therefore no marvel, if not only the Duke of Lancaster, with
Nimio fau^re P^ocerum and militum. VValsin. p. 351. and p. 328.
sundry Peers and great ones, but King Edward 3. himself, were (as Capgraue
testifies) a favorer of him, and Ypod. Neust. p, 552. ibid.
King Richard 2. and the whole Parliament did (according to his instructions)
much labor to abrogate the Popes Transcendent power, which was a principal
cause of the Popes hatred against him. Notwithstanding to discountenance the
truth which he taught, in defense of Regal Supremacy against Papal
Usurpation, (as also against the Mass, Transubstantiation, Merit; against
Adoration of the Host, of Saints, Images; and Relics; against Fryarly
Orders, Pilgrimages, Indulgences,) many lewd opinions by misconstruction (as
his books Varia Wicliffi M. S. in biblioth. Oxon.
yet extant, euince) are fathered on him, yea some so monstrous and diabolical
(as, Tho. Walls. p. 285.
that Men ought, yea, ib. page 283.
that God himself ought, to obey the Devil) that that any man which hears
them, will presently believe (without further persuasion) that they are but
malicious figments. This famous Doctor An. 1385.
dying of a palsy, has this charitable Euloge or Epitaph bestowed on him by a
Walsi. p. 312. Ypod. Neust. p. 537.
Monk; The Devils Instrument, Churches Enemy, Peoples Confusion, Heretics
Idol, Hypocrites mirror, Schisms broacher, hatreds sower, lies forger,
Flatteries sincke; who, at his death dispaired like Cain, and stricken by the
horrible judgment of God; breathed forth his wicked soul to the dark mansion
Atri Ditis, is in M. S: not in the printed copies.
of the black devil: Whereby, Gods best children may learn, not to regard,
whiles they live, the malice of the wicked, nor to respect after their death
ought else but their slanderous rancor. And thus we conclude the reign, though
not the life of King Richard:

His first wife.
(119) The first wife of King Richard the second, was Anne, daughter unto the
Emperor Charles the fourth, and sister to Wenceslaus Emperor, and King of
Bohemia, who was crowned Queen the 22. of January 1384. Having been ten
years his wife she dyed, without any issue, at Sheen in the County of Surrey,
1394. whence her body was conuayed and buried at Westminster, the seventh of
the Ides of June.

His second Wife.
(120) Isabell, daughter unto Charles the sixth, King of France, was a virgin
about seven years of age, when she was affianced unto King Richard, 1396.
Neither had her husband (it seems) any nuptial fruition of her, by reason
of her tender age, before such time as his traitorous Lords, (to compass their
own disloyal purposes, and gratify an usurpers ambition) had dethroned him.
What became of this young Lady, we shall further see in the ensuing story.

HENRY THE FOVRTH, KING OF Monarch 51
Henry IIII.
ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTY ONE MONARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS
REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XIIII.


HENRY of that name the fourth, having thus obtained the title of king, in
full accomplishment of all rites peculiar to Majesty, had the Crown of England
set upon his head, with all worldly magnificence and honor at Westminster, by
Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, upon the Tho. VValsin.
self day twelve month, in which he had formerly been banished under
Richard the second. Power and favor can set up and maintain a King, though
they cannot create aright. But such transcendent courses deuiating from all due
regulation of Justice, have been too frequent in this Kingdom. What right had
William surnamed the Conqueror? what right, (we speak of a right of Equity,)
had his sons William the second, and Henry the first, while their elder
brother lived? what right had that valiant and princely Stephen? what was the
interest of Henry the second, during the life of his mother Mathildis? or that
of King John, till his Nephew Arthur Duke of Britain died? yea, or that of
Henry the third, till Arthurs sister died in her prison at Bristow? How beit,
in this present case, not only Richard the late king, but the house of
Mortimer, claiming from the only daughter* and heir of Lionel Duke of
Clarente (an elder brother of John D. of Lancaster) doubly might have withstood
the legal challenge of this Prince? That obstacle which grew by Richard, was
in appearance greatest, but the other was only dangerous. Richard had no issue
but the line of Mortimer (engraffed by marriage into the house of York)
feeling it self unable to prevail, and during Richards life time, having no
right* secretly fostered in it self those fires, which afterward brake forth,
and taking hold of the roofe-tops of both the royal houses, never left
burning, till no one principal timber was unconsumed in either, all the
Male-Issues which could claim by a direct line, utterly lopt down

thousand friends at Pomfret; they proceed to Wallingford, then to Abingdon,
and so to Circester. The rumors used by them to increase their numbers were;
that Henry of Lancaster (meaning the King) was fled with his sons and friends
to the Tower of London, and that King Richard was escaped. Maudlen also, one of
Richards Chapleins, took upon him the Ex Anonym. apud Io. Stow. Annal. Holinsh
p. 515. Polyd. Verg. lib. 21.
person of his said Lord, the more strongly to seduce the multitude, by so bold
and perilous a fiction. Thus seemed they to fit their words and suit their Arts
to the place. At Sunning, Richard (they said) was at Pomfret, for there the
guile had been transparent; but at Circester, Richard was not at Pomfret, but
present.

(17) How beit the success was not answerable to the devise; for, besides that
King Henry was in the heart of his strengths at London, where six Hall. Chron.
thousand men were put into a readiness, and would come upon them like a storm,
the Townsmen of Circester assailed the Lords, took them, and (because their
Town was fired of purpose by some of their followers, the better to recover
them while the quenching found the people employment,) haled them forth, and
without longer tarriance severed their heads from their bodies: The Earl of
Huntington, with a trusty Knight of his, Sir John Shellie, as others have it.
Sheuele, having (after the fail at Windsore) in vain attempted to escape by
Sea, was taken by the Commons at Fab, Conc. Hist.
Pitwel (perhaps Prittlewel) in Essex, brought first to Chelmsford, and lastly
to Pleshie, the house of the late Duke of Gloucester (whose Ghost a tragical
Poet would suppose did haunt his persecutors for revenge,) where, partly also
by this Earls instigation, the said Gloucester was first arrested. The Commons
(out of whose hearts the image of that Duke was not vanished) at Harst. cap.
119.
the Countess of Herefords instigation who was the Dukes widow, took
satisfaction upon the Earl, with the escheate of his head, which there was
sundred from his shoulders. The Lord Spencer called Earl of Gloucester (one of
the Conspirators) had like execution done upon him by the Commons at Bristol.
Some other of them were put to death at Oxford, and some at London; where John
Maudlen (the Counterfeit Richard, who as it seems was a beautiful and goodly
person) and one William Ferby were drawn, hanged and headed. The Bishop of
Carleol nevertheless was by the Kings clemency preserved alive after the
condemnatory sentence. There were Hall. Chron. Holinsh. p. 516.
nineteen in all (whereof two had been Dukes) put to death for this
conspiracy, most of which were men of special note.

(18) The designs and misfortunes of King Richards friends being made known
unto him, could not but work strongly in a soul oppressed with grief; but
whether so strongly as to make him resolve by voluntary abstinence to starve
himself (as Tho. Walsing.
the fame went) may be doubted, though it be past doubt that King Henry was
not sorry he was dead howsoever. That he was starued seems very plain;
though, as it is not certain, (neither yet unlikely) that King The late King
Richard starued to death.
Henry was privy to so foul a parricide, so neither is it known, but that
Richard might as well be starued of purpose, Ypod. Neust.
as starve himself. Annal. in H. 4.
Master Stow (a man for honest industry very praiseworthie) says that king
Richard was fifteen days and nights together kept in hunger, thirst, and
cold, till he died. How true that was in the circumstance, who knows? but in
the point of staruing he is clearelie with Walsingham: and a Sir John
F^rtescue.
Knight living about those times calls it a death never before that time
known in England. Harding Chron. c. 200.
also, living under King Edward the fourth, agrees of the rumor of staruing.
In Yorkshire page 567.
Master Cambden says of Pomfret Castle, that it is a place principum cade and
sanguine infamis, but seems to insinuate, that some other torments were most
wickedly practiced upon this King, as made out of the way with hunger, cold,
and unheard of torments. Hist. Angl. 20. in ^in. Rich. 2.
Polydore therefore may in this be believed, who writes of this poor deposed
Monarke, that, (which may well be called unheard of torments) his diet being
served in, and set before him in the wonted Princely manner, The fiction of
Tant^lus verified in King Richard.
he was not suffered either to taste, or touch thereof. Idle therefore seems
Lanquets Chron. in Hen. 4.
his dream, who writes he was murdered in the Tower, and not more credible
Fab. Conc. Chron.
theirs, who tell us of Sir Peirs of Extons assault, and the murder basely by
him acted upon this most miserable Princes person: but much more are Holinsh.
p. 517.
they to blame who negligently for credit of the fable quote Walsingham, in
whom no syllable of such a thing is found. Only Lib. 16.
Hector Boethius wills us to believe that Richard fled disguised into Scotland,
was discovered to King Robert, and honorably entertained, but Richard who
would no more of the world, gave himself wholly to contemplation, and both
lived, A counterfeit King Richard buried in Scotland.
died, and was buried at Striueling. Which fond fable has nevertheless
somewhat in it, for that some personated Richard might so do is neither
impossible, Tho. Walls. in Hen. 4. ad An. D. 1044.
nor improbable, and indeed it was so.

(19) The late King Richard thus cruelly and heinously murdered (for in regard
of pining death the Richards dead body showed openly at London.
seeming fable of his fight with Sir Peirs of Exton was a sport, it being both
noble and full of comfort, for a man of honor and courage to die with weapon
in hand) King Henry causes his dead body to be brought up to London. O Henry,
if thou were Author, or but privy, (though for thine own pretended safety,
and for that errors cause which is lewdly mis-called reason of state) of such a
murder; we do not see, how the showing of the people his uncovered face in
Paul's, did either conceal or extenuate the execrable crime. But to let the
world know that there was no hope nor place for a Richard, that course was
used, which may the rather confirm the truth of his enfamishment: for a
violent death by braining could not but deforme him too much: and it is most
probable that such a death would be sought, as might least appear. Surely he
is not a man, who at the report of so exquisite a barbarism, as Richards
enfamishment, feels not chilling horror and detestation; what if but for a
justly condemned galley-slaue so dying? but how for an anointed King, whose
Character (like that of holy Orders) is indeleble? The tragical spectacle of
his dead body (perhaps because it moved too much both pity and envy) was
after a From thence is carried to Langley, and afterward to Westminster.
while transported without honor to Langley in Hartfordshire, where the last
rites were performed by the Bishop of Chester, the Abbats of S. Alban and
Waltham, but neither King Henry present, (as at the exequies in London) and the
great Lords and such other as were had Thom. Walsing. in Henr. 4.
not so much as a funeral feast bestowed on them for their labor. But Henry
the fifth, in the first Fab. Conc. Hist.
year of his reign with great honor did afterward cause those royal
remains to be interred in the Sepulture of his Ancestors at Westminster. Among
the riming Latin verses of his Epitaph, ye may marvel to read these,
considering upon what points he was triced out of Majesty and State; Ecclesiam
fauit, elatos suppeditauit,
Quemuis prostrauit, regalia qui violauit.


Fabians English of them.

The Church he favored, casting the proud to ground,
And all that would his royal State confound.


The said Author therefore Robert Fabian, observing the scope of those lines
(to dampe their force) does vnderwrite and annex this Stanza, with much greater
discretion then elegancie: But yet alas, though that this meeter or rhyme,
Thus does embellish this noble Princes fame,
And that some Clerk which favored him sometime,
List by his cunning thus to enhance his name,
Yet by his Story appears in him some blame:
Wherefore to Princes is surest memory,
Their lives to exercise in virtuous constancy.
More tart and severe is the censure of Gower upon this Prince, one of whose
verses Annal.
Stow gives us thus, So God does hate such rulers as, here viciously do live.
That beautiful picture of a King sighing, crowned in a chair of estate, at
the upper end of the Quier in Saint Peter's at Westminster, is said to be of
him, which witnesses how goodly a creature he was in outward lineaments.

(20) King Henry to divert the humors and eyes of the people from the
remembrance of this Tragedy, prepares now a puissance, therewith to invade
Scotland; some subjects whereof, together with their Admiral Sir Robert Logon
a Scottish Knight, were taken at Sea by certain English ships. But K. Henry may
seem to have done any thing rather, then to have made a war; for albeit he
did some hurt by Ypod. Neust.
wasting the Country, yet did not the Scots offer battle, and the rest will well
appear in these words of Hist. 51. li. 16. and by Belindens division. cap. 13
Boethius. He did small injuries to the people thereof: for he desired naught
but his banner to be erected on their walls. He was ever a pleasant enemy, and
did great humanity to the people in all places of Scotland where he was lodged.
Finally, he showed to the Lords of Scotland, that he came into their Realm
rather by counsel of his Nobles, then for any hatred he bare to Scots. Soon
after he returned into England. Whether the remembrance of the courtesies
showed to his Father Duke John, or the fear of his own great state so near
to an overthrow by the late furious conspiracy, wrought these gentle effects,
it was not long before the event showed, that his providence in not creating
new acerbities was therein needful.

(21) For albeit the face of England seemed smooth, yet God thrust a thorn
into King Henry's side, when and where he little expected; for the Welsh, whom
Owen Glendowr draws the Welsh into rebellion.
former Kings of England had so yoaked, and subjected, did contrary to all men's
expectation, break forth into open acts of hostility, under the conduct of a
Gentleman of that Nation surnamed Glendowr, of the Lordship of Glendowr in
Merionithshire, whose owner he was; the wrath and justice of heaven is always
so well furnished with means to exercise the mightiest, those chiefly at whose
amendment God aims by chastisement. The original of so great an evil was in
the seed but little, as but this: Owen Glendowr, Hist. of Wales D. Powel, p.
385. 386. 387.
whom the Welsh call the son of Gruffith Vachan, descended of a younger son of
Gruffith ap Madoc, Lord of Bromfield, was at first a Student of the common
laws, and an Utter Barister, (but not therefore an apprentise of law, as Doctor
Powell mistakes, for an apprentise of the law, is he that has been a Sir Edw.
Cook Epist. part. 3. report.
double Reader) did afterward serve the late King Richard in place of an
Esquier, and was well beloved of him, but in King Henry's time (retiring
himself as it seems to his Manor of Glendourdwy, the L. Gray of Ruthen
entered upon a piece of common, which lay between Ruthen and Glendowr, which
Owen (despite the Lord Gray while Richard continued King) had formerly holden,
though not without contention. Owen (a man of high courage, and impatient of
force) arms hereupon, and encounters the Lord Gray in the field, where he
scattered the said Lords people, and took him prisoner, as hereafter will
elsewhere be touched.

(22) It seems herein that he had forgotten the laws which he had formerly
studied, and wherein he had been a licentiate; for shortly after, as he had
trodden law under foot, so did he also cast off loyalty, burning and destroying
the Lord Grays inheritances, and killing sundry his servants. The King
advertised hereof, passes with an Army into Wales, King Henry enters
North-VVales with an Army.
burns, kills, and takes such revenge as that time would permit. Meanewhile,
Owen (whom pride and folly armed to the farther ruin of his Country) with his
trustiest friends (which were not few) withdrawes into the inexpugnable
fastnesses of Snowdon, where during this tempest, he kept his head safe.
Shortly after the King with such riches and spoils as those Parts had
afforded, returns. His next most noted War (...) by (...) P^e.
action was peaceable. For one of the house of Pa^logus, and Emperor of
Constantinople, came into England to pray some succor against the Turk, and
upon the day of S. Thomas the Apostle, was met at Blackeheath by King Henry,
highly feasted, richly presented, and his charges borne till departure. But as
Tilius ^.
says of his success in France, verbis and promissis tantum adiutus est, so
here his speed was not much better, the point of armed aides, being only
therein assisted with words and promises.

(23) In a Parliament held the next year, (...) S^. ^4. an 2. c. ^5.
by reason of the numbers of Lolards, (so called) increasing, An. D. 1401. An.
Reg. 2
the punishment for them enacted, was burning. And in the same year also, the
Articles of peace being first agreed upon between the two Nations, English
and French (notwithstanding that they had denied to match with the young Prince
of Wales, Polyd. Verg. Hist an (...). 21.
because the former marriage with Richard thriued so badly) the Lady Isabel who
had been crowned Queen of England, as Spouse of the late King, was now sent
back into France after a most princely manner, she being not as yet Tho. Walls.
twelve years old, had Holinsh. Chron. Frossard.
no dowry allowed her in England, for that the marriage was never consummated.
Before she was restored to her friends, the Lord Henry Percie, before the
Ambassadors of both the Nations, where they were met between Caleis and
Boloigne, protested, That the King of England his Master had sent her to be
delivered to her Father clear of all bonds of marriage, The form of
redeliuering Queen I^abel to the French.
or otherwise, and that he would take it upon his soul, that she was sound
and entire, even as she was the same day she was delivered to King Richard,
and if any would say to the contrary he was ready to prove it against him by
combat. But the Earl of Saint Paul saying, he believed it to be true, the
Lord Percie took her by the hand, and delivered her unto the Earl, and then
the Commissioners of France delivered certain letters of receipt and
acquitall. She was afterward married to Charles Duke of Orleance.

(24) Owen Glendowr persisting in his pride and disobedience made incursions
upon the English, doing them great harm, and returning himself without any;
but K. Henry's danger was greater at home; for treason had crept into his most
secret Chamber. In his bed there lay hidden a Galtrop or Engine with The King
in danger to be slain or wounded.
three small iron pikes, long, slender and passing sharp all of them with
their points set upward, but (God so disposing it) the King before he laid
himself down, perceived them, and thereby avoided that hidden mischief, but
who was actor therein it does not appear.

(25) This appears that the splendors of his new regality had drawn up many
thick and poisonous An. 1402.
clouds of envy and practice, to darken if it were possible the farther
brightness thereof. Neither was it long before it grew to some extremity. For
Owen Glendowr upon the causes beforesaid, wasting the Lord Reynald Grayes
lands, was encountered by him, as presuming that Owen and his friends might
easily be overcome, but the contrary happened, for there in fight he lost very
many of his company, and was himself taken Prisoner. This fortune made the
swelling mind of Owen ouerflow in vain hopes, who compelling the said Lord to
marry his daughter, yet obtained he not his liberty the sooner, but died (say
Fab. Chron. ad A. D. 1400.
some) in the power of Owen, if perhaps our Author mistake not the Lord Gray
for Edmund Lord Mortimer Earl of March, who indeed did marry so after he was
also overthrown by the said Owen with the slaughter of above a thousand
principal persons of Herefordshire, assembled under his conduct, to resist the
Welsh invasions, and there also himself was by treachery taken prisoner.

(26) Walsingham does In Hen. 4.
write, that about this time sundry conspiracies were discovered in the yolke
(as it were) or embrion; the whole hopes whereof rested upon calumniations, and
forgery, for by the first they Polyd. Verg^. 21.
traduced (in libels) Henry's actions, so to make him hateful, and by the
second they diuulged that Holinsh. p. 520.
Richard was still alive, thereby to raise an head of separation. Henry thus
galled in his honor, and endangered in the main, resolved to spare The late
king Richard though dead, suffers not K. Henry to rest.
none, upon whom the crime or concealment was found. The first of them that
fell under his justice, was a Priest of Ware, with whom was taken a list, or
roll of names which he had gathered, supposing them such as in regard of
benefits received, would live and die for King Richard, which vanity of his
created trouble to many, till it appeared that he had therein wronged them, as
persons who were utterly ignorant both of the man and matter. Whereupon he
was drawn and hanged. The like fate had Walter Baldocke Prior of Lawnd, who
confessed that he had concealed others counsels against the King, though himself
had acted nothing. A Friar Minor also being taken with some other of his Order
for like intendments, was asked, What he would do if King Richard were alive
and present? he confidently answered, that he would fight for him till death
against any whosoever; which cost him his life, being drawn and hanged in his
Friars weeds. Neither did this hard fortune fall only upon the Clergy, for Sir
Roger Claringdon Knight, (reputed the base son of Edward, late Prince of
Wales) together with an Esquier and servant of his, finished the affection
which they bare to the deceased Richard by hanging. Not long after eight
Franciscan Friars, or Minorites were taken, convicted, hanged, and headed for
the like causes, which made the King an heavy Lord to that whole Order. It is
said that somewhat before this knot was discovered the devil appeared in the
habit of a Minorite at Danbury Church in Essex, to the incredible Tho. Walls.
Ypod! The Devil appears in Essex
astonishment of the parishioners; for, at the same time there was such a
Tempest and thunder with great firebals of lightning, that the vault of the
church brake, and half the Chancell was carried away.

(27) But howsoever these out-branches were pared away, the roots of all the
practice lay deeper out of sight, for the Cambd in Northumb. p. 675.
Percies, Henry Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Earl of Worcester, and Henry
Hotspur Lord Percy, because perhaps they thought they had done wickedly, in
helping to set up Henry, Pol. Verg. lib. 21.
began to imagine that bloody mischief, which afterward was prosecuted. This
malice, the late success of Owen Glendowr against the Lord Mortimer Earl of
March, (taken prisoner, as is said, with no little slaughter of his
Herefordshire men) did perhaps nourish; for that he saw an enemy appear, who
was not unlikely to prove an able member of a greater rebellion. Certainly the
King having in September led an Army into Wales to take revenge upon his
Rebels was in great danger to have perished with sudden storms and raines,
the like whereof none of his people had ever felt or seen, so that after he
had done some wastes upon the Country he returned. The common fame went that
Owen was a Coniurer, and had raised those hideous tempests by hellish arts;
they seemed so excessive, which (whether true or false) did yet impart no
little strength to the Welsh faction.

(28) The Kings fortune was happier in the North, where his Lieutenants had two
fair victories, the one at Hect. Boet. l. 16.
Nisbet, and the other at Halidowne-hill, near to a village called Woller. And
although the first was not a small one, yet the other deserved the name of a
just battle and garland. To the Scots, having with above ten thousand men
(under conduct of Archibald Earl of Douglas, whom the Scots nicknamed
Tyne-man, because he never wanne field, though no sort of true manhood was
wanting in his person) made great spoils in England as far as to Newcastle,
and were now upon return; Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, the noble
Henry Hotspur Lord Percie his son, and George Earl of Dunbar (who fled as
you have heard out of Scotland) with the forces of the Countries there about,
not meaning to let them to pass in so slight a sort, opposed themselves. The
chief fear was wrought by the English Archers, Henry Hotspurs fortunes
against the Scots.
who first with their stiff, close, and cruel storms of arrows made their
enemies footmen break, and when the noble Dowglasse descended to the charge
with his choicest bands, himself being in a most rich, and excellently
tempered armor, and the rest singularly well appointed, the Lord Percies
Archers making a retreat, did withal deliver their deadly arrows, tam viuide,
tam animose, tam grauiter (says our Monk) so lively, so courageously, so
grievously, The incredible force of the old English Archery.
that they ran through the men of Arms, bored the helmets, pierced their
very swords, beat their lances to the earth, and easily shot those who were
more slightly armed through and through. There were taken The sum of the
great victory at Halidown hill.
prisoners the Earl of Douglas himself, (who notwithstanding his armor of
the best proof, had five wounds, and lost an eye,) Murdake Stewart Earl of
Fife (eldest son to Robert Duke of Albanie,) George Earl of Angus, the
Earls of Tho. Walls.
Murrey and Orkney, the Lords Montgomerie, Erskin, and Grane, with about
fourscore Knights, besides Esquiers and Gentlemen. Polyd. Verg. has not a word
in particular of this so great an action
There were slain the Lords Gourdon, and Swyntonn (Belindens Boethius calls them
Knights) with sundry other men of honor and mark, beside store of common
soldiers. The river Tweed, to show it self mere English, did likewise fight
for them by swallowing about five hundredth in his unknown depthes, as they,
who fled from the battle, sought to pass. This victory happened upon Holyrood
in harvest. The troubles which afterward happened, did not only hinder the Lord
Percie from farther prosecution of such a victory, but eclypsed the honor he
had gotten now, and gave his days a bloody and foul Catastrophe.

(29) The Lord Edmund Mortimer Earl of March next general heir in blood to
the Crown of England after the death of Richard the second, having through
fear of Owen (whose prisoner he was) or hope of recovering his right, or for
revenge (because the King did not ransom him, married Owens daughter, The Lord
Mortimer dies a prisoner amongst the VVesh.
by which he must necessarily declare himself an enemy to King Henry,
entertained intelligence with his near kinsmen the Percies, and sundry other
his friends in Cheshire, and elsewhere, to what purpose will shortly appear.
The night in which this Lord Mortimer (though some refer it to Owens birth)
was born, all the horses in his fathers stable, are said to have bin found
standing Belly-deep in blood. A fearful prodigy, as even then it seemed, but
verified afterward in the far more fearful events, when (upon the quarrel
of Mortimers title, by which the house of York claimed,) the horses of war
did not only stand belly-deepe in blood, but also swam therein. The mischief
was already begun: for Henry Earl of Northumberland (when now his own and his
houses strengths were mightily increased by this late victory against the
Scots, which he underhand seems to have converted to his secret private
ends,) closely Cambd. p. 675. in Northumberland.
animated his brother the Earl of Worcester, and his fiery spirited son,
against the King, to both their confusions.

(30) The King took to wife the Lady Jane of Navarre, widow of John de
Montfort Duke of Britain A. D. 1403.
named the Conqueror ( Ioh. Tilius Chr.
who died the year before) by whom she had issue both sons and daughters, but
by the King none. He met, and married her at Winchester, and crowned her Queen
at Westminster. The King was not trusted with the custody of any her three
sons, John, Richard and Arthur, who remained in France.

(31) Events are the best interpreters of prophesies and prodigies. Strange was
that which Ypod. Neust. and in Histor.
Walsingham has written of a fatal Spectrum or Apparitions in the summer time
between Bedford and Bickleswade, where sundry monsters of diverse colors, in
the shapes of armed men were often seen to issue out of the woods at morning
and at noone; A strange presaging apparition of war.
which to such as stood far off seemed to encounter one the other in most
terrible manner, but when they drew near, nothing was to be found. Of another
nature were the fiery attempts of the Percies. The first of them who discovered
in arms his mortal hatred, was the noble Hotspur, who (under He^. Bo^. lib.
16.
color of the Scottish war) made head about Chester and the marches of
Wales. To him (by the priuitie of Hotspurs father,) repaires the naughty old
man the Earl of Worcester, leaving the young Prince of Wales and the Princes
household, over both which (for their better Government) the King had placed
him. Now was the torch of war lighted up, and began to blaze, for though the
chief plot-master the Earl of Northumberland was not joined to them, as he
did intend, yet were their numbers grown mightily, with which they meant to
enter the Town of Shrewsbury, to make thereof a Seat of war.

(32) Colorable causes of their arms were the ordinary paintings of the like
attempts. Care of Causes of the Lord ^rcies dangerous rebellion.
commonwealths reformation, and their own safeties; for having first
protested their intentions not to be the breach of loyalty, they pretend and
by letters sent about, do signify. 1. That Thom. Walsing.
the public money was not employed upon the pretended defense of the kingdom,
but unduly wasted. 2. That by reason of bad tongues about the King they durst
not approach him, to declare their innocence, unless the Prelates and Peers
of the Realm did first intercede for them. 3. That they took arms only to
guard their own heads, and to see the Kingdom better governed. These Articles
had the place of the Husk, but the kernel of the enterprise had principally
these. 1. To thrust King Henry out of his seat, and consequently to deprive him
of life. 2. To advance the title of the Lord Mortimer Earl of Much their
Cambd. in Northumberland.
nearest Allie: for the Earl of Northumberland had married Elizabeth the
daughter of the Lord Edmund Mortimer the elder, Earl of March, by Philip
daughter to Lionel Duke of Clarence. 3. To take revenge of King Henry, for
seeking to draw the chief benefit to himself of the victory at Halidow^
hill, whose principal prisoners he required, and for such other private
grudges. 4. To share the Kingdom between Mortimer, Percy and Owen Glendower.
The Kingdom of England to be shared among the conspirators.
Concerning which partition it is in some found written, that Indentures
tripartite were sealed, showing that South-England should remain to Mortimer,
North-England to Percy, and Wales beyond Seuern to Glendower. But Archembald
Earl of Douglas (who did his Country good service by making one in our
Combustions,) by common consent was allowed for his share to be free from
ransom, and to have Berwicke.

(33 This (in our English Adages) is called to reckon without our host, or to
count our chickens before they are hatched. But though at this time God would
have it so, yet who does not easily see what a wild horse a kingdom (so
gotten) is, and how hard to sit, and not to manage only? Yet it seems, that
if Mortimer, having so just a title to the Crown, had openly professed the
cause of his attempt against King Henry, it might justly have been exempted
from all stain of disabilitie. But this partition is Holinsh. p. 521.
said to have been wisely built upon a sound Welsh prophecy of Merlins: as if
King Henry were the Mowldwarp cursed of Gods own mouth, and Mortimer, Percy
and Glendower, the Dragon, Lion, and Wolf, which should divide this Realm
between them. The late dead King Richard again afflicts Henry.
Surely the Welsh having any hand in such a partition, it is not likely they
could think it had the right feet, if it stood not upon the supposed Merlins
his ridiculous cosenages and riddles. The English (not to be behind in
leasings,) do in the meanetime every where spread that Ypodig. Neust.
Richard was safe alive and in the Castle of Chester. Who can wonder that this
name should be so gracious, as if alone it were enough to have shaken Henry out
of his State? when Nero himself had so many favorites, that twenty years
after his death an obscure fellow faining himself Nero, was so backed and
countenanced by the Parthians, and others, (...). lib. (...).
that not without much difficulty the Romans could get him into their hands.

(34) On the other side King Henry assailed with so unexpected ieopardies,
defends his cause by letters, and strongly puts the blame upon the accusers,
saying, That he marvelled exceedingly, seeing the Earl of Northumberland, and
Henry his Son had the greatest part of the public moneys delivered to them,
for defense of the borders against Scotland, why they should make that a
quarrel, which was a mere calumny. And to take away all pretense of fear
from the Conspirators, he sends to the Earls of Northumberland and Worcester,
and to the hot Lord Percie, a safe conduct under his royal Seal, by which he
secures their access, but unbridled rashness (says Walsingham) despising the
royal clemency, did put on the rigor of rebellion. Mean while the King
arms with all speed against the enemy, the rather at the counsel of George
Earl of Dunbar, who (like a valiant man at Arms, and a wise friend) advised
him so to do, before their adversaries numbers were too mightily augmented.
The King with his son the young Prince of Wales, and a very noble fellowship,
was now advanced within sight of Shrewsbury, as the gallant Percie stood ready
to assault the Town. But so soon as the royal Standard was discovered, that
enterprise was left off, and he drew out his people (being about fourteen
thousand choice and hardy bodies of men) to try the fortune of war against a
well tried warrior.

(35) Peace notwithstanding (by the exceeding tenderness of the King) had
ensued, but that the mischeeuous Thomas Percie Earl of Worce ster cause of the
battle at Shrewsbury.
Earl of Worcester, by misreporting and falsifying his Sovereigns words, did
precipitate his Nephew into sudden battle. If there were any praise or good
example to be drawn out of so detested bloodshed, as that of civil war, we
would willingly describe unto you the order and actions, but we cannot too
soon pass over such mournful objects, which are rather to be celebrated
with tears then triumphs. There is no doubt but Percie, Douglas, and the rest
fought terrible. Why should we admire that in them? So do Lions, Tigers, and
Bears, and yet we admire them not. Where was duty, where conscience, where
the other respects, of which only we are called men? Let none of us honor, or
imitate them, in whose eyes the price of English blood is so vile, as that (for
private fancies) they can be content to confound all regards, and make sport
for common foes, with mutual massacres. Therefore we will content our selves
with the knowledge of Gods part in this days work, who gave the garland to
the King, though the first arrows flew from the Percies Archers.

(36) The Kings courage was not small in the The terrible battle at Shrewsbury.
fight as neither was the danger, the young Prince of Wales also (being then
first to enter himself into the school of blood and battle,) gave no small
hopes of that perfection which afterward shone in him, being wounded with an
arrow in the face. The Lord Percy and Earl Douglas (then Thomas Walsing.
whom the wide world had not two brauer Champions) in steed of spending
themselves upon the multitude, set the point of their Ho^spurre and Douglas
only seek to encounter the Kings person.
hopes upon killing the King, as in whose person they were sure ten thousand
fell. For this cause they most furiously rushed forward with spears and
swords; but the noble Earl of Dunbarre, discovering their purpose, drew the
King from the place which he had chosen to make good, and thereby in likelihood
for that present saved his life, for the Standard royal was overthrown, and
(among other valiant men) the Tho. Walsing.
Earl of Stafford, Sir Walter Blunt, the Kings Knight and the Standard Bearer
himself was slain, such was the fury of these sudden thunderbolts. That day
the Douglas slew with his own hands three in the Kings Coat Armor, (perhaps
some in Heralds Coats) though ^ibr. 16.
Boethius yet saw a fourth. Sure it is, that many of the subjects thought the
King was slain, and not a few Many thousands together ^aith Walsingham.
ran out of the field. Who notwithstanding, like a valiant Prince, did
reenforce the fight, performing maruels in arms with his own hands. The
slaughter could not be small on both sides, the Archers shooting so
continually, and the men of arms doing their utmost for about the space of
three whole hours.

(37) That which gave an end to this woeful work was the death of Hotspur, who
ryding in the head of the battle in defiance of danger and death, was (by an
unknown hand) suddenly killed, with whose fall (as if his whole army had had
but one heart) the courages of all others fell into feet, which now altogether
they trusted to. But the King abhorring to make farther execution of the
misguided The King uses his victory mercifully.
multitude, suffered them to shift for themselves. The Earls of Worcester and
Douglas, Sir Richard Vernon, the Baron of Kindlaton, and diverse others were
taken. Of the Kings side was slain (besides the Earl of Stafford) ten new
Knights, whose names (as dying in an honest cause) deserve immortality, and
were Sir Holinsh. p. 523. John Stow names also Sir Nicholas L^gford, and calls
the two Gausels not Gausels, but Gentels and brothers.
Hugh Shorly, Sir John Clifton, Sir John Cokain, Sir Nicholas Gausel, Sir
Walter Blunt, Sir John Caluerly, Sir John Massy, Sir Hugh Mortimer, Sir Robert
Gausell, and Sir Thomas Wendesley, who dyed of his hurts not long after, as
most of the other did about the Standard; all which fighting for their spurs,
(as being knighted but that morning) bought them with the honorable loss of
their whole bodies; there were also slain many Esquires, and Gentlemen, and
about one thousand and five hundredth common soldiers, besides three thousand
sorely wounded. On the other part, (omitting that second Mars, the Lord Percy
(who drew a ruin after him suitable to his Spirit and greatness) there fell
most of all the Esquires and Gentlemen of Cheshire, to the number of two
hundred, and about five thousand common soldiers. This battle was stricken
near to Shrewsbury The great destruction of Cheshire Gentlemen.
upon a Saturday, the one and twentieth of July, and the Eve of Saint Marie
Magdalen.

(38) The Earl of Worcester (the seducer and destroier of his noble Nephew
Hotspur, and therefore if but for that, very worthy to have dyed) Sir Richard
Vernon Knight, and the Baron of Kinderton had their heads cut off upon the
Monday following. Hotspurres body had been buried by permission, but upon
other advise, the King caused it to be drawn out of the grave, beheaded,
quartered, and the parts sent into diverse Cities of the Kingdom. The Earl of
Northumberland (pretending to come with forces to the Kings aid) was empeached
by the Earl of Westmorland, and Robert Waterton who had raised a great host.
Northumberland taking neither of them for friend, wheels about, and returns
to his Castle of Warkworth. But what can be secure to a subject against the
victorious army of a martial King? The Earl knew as much, manifestly feeling
the irrecouerable maimes of his house in the loss of his son and brother,
and therefore shaped his course accordingly. The King therefore being
altogether as prudent as fortunate, having settled the state ofthings in the
Marches about Shrewsbury, sets forward to the City of York, from thence to
take order for such perils, as he foresaw might happen. He settled himself the
more seriously and entirely to this needful work; for that his Ambassadors
had effected an abstinence from war with France, till the first of March,
which pausing space though it might seem little, was not a little welcome to
the King, the Realm of England being then so full of dangerous perturbations.
While he was at York, he commands the Earl of Northumberland to come thither
in person, which he accordingly did upon the morrow after the day of Saint
August. 10. The Earl of Northumberland pardoned of his life.
Laurence, and that also with a small train in the nature of an humble suitor.
He could not in reason hope for the wonted familiar favor of the King, neither
had he yet, for it was accounted matter of grace, that his life was pardoned,
though his means and liberty was abridged, the King allowing only necessary
maintenances. The life of Princes is like a perpetual motion. The Northern
Countries are now settled, but has the King therefore any the more rest?
Nothing less; for Wales and the troubles thereof call him thither. What should
he do? Money the Cement and soldure of all such actions, (for Armies cannot
otherwise be held together) utterly fails. The Archbishop of Canterbury sees
the needs and uses of his Sovereign, and like a Father supplies him with a
Tenth, which the Clergy at their Metropolitans motion, consent to give: upon
the strength whereof, the King knows how far he may proceed against the
Welsh in his good time.

(39) Toward the relief of these his necessities, the valiant exploits of
William de Wilford an Esquire, VVilford a Seacaptaine takes a thousand tons
of good commodities.
who was in the mean time abroad for the King upon the narrow Seas, brought
some assistance, certainly store of contentation; for he took forty lawful
prizes laden with iron, oil, soap and Rochell wine, to the number in all of a
thousand tun upon the Coasts of Britain, and in his return set forty
sail on fire; and to make the Britains know that he was not only a man of his
hands at Sea, he comes on shore at Penarch, burns Towns and houses about six
leagues into the Country, and afterward did as much for them at the Town of
Saint Mathewes, which he consumed with flames and wasted the land for three
miles about. The French not to seem slow to like mischiefs, land at the
Wight, but were compelled with loss to betake themselves again unto their
Fleet, with far worse success then the Britons under the conduct of the Lord
of Castle had not long before, who landing at Plimmouth invaded, took and
burnt it.

(40) The King having humbled the Earl of A. D. 1404. The Earl of
Northumberland restored.
Northumberland in such sort as you heard, looks again upon him with an eye
of compassion and favor, not without a secret respect to his own safety; and
he had little appetite to augment enmities, but to allay them rather, whereas
by this gracious usage of that Earl, (for he restored him fully to all) he now
thinks those North parts sufficiently secured. This restitution was made to
the Earl in the Parliament holden at London about the midst of January, where
the King obtained an unusual Tax or Subsidy, of which (that it might not be
drawn into example) no record, nor writing was suffered to remain. Some part
of the gold which the king thus drew into the Eschecquor, he had occasion to
bestow at this time. For, there presented themselves The Countrymen about
Dartmouth kill the French General, and present the King with honorable
prisoners.
unto him, a boisterous troop of plain Western-men, who brought to the kings
view three Lords, and twenty knights of note; These were prisoners, whom the
Country people about Dartmouth in Devonshire had gotten in plain fight. The
king was therefore given to understand, that the Lord of Castle the Briton, who
had formerly burnt Plimmouth, thinking to do the like at Dartmouth, came on
shore with his forces, where these and the like people fiercely encountered him;
at which time their Women (like Amazons) by hurling of flints and pebles, and
by such other artillery, did greatly advance their husbands and kinsefolkes
victory. The Lord of Castle himself and many besides were slain, these other
were saved as more of them might have been, but that the ignorance of language
alike confounded the cries of indignation and pity. They therefore in reward
of this hazard and service, do pray they might reap some commodity by their
Captives. It was but reason; wherefore the King, who took pleasure to talk
with the lusty Western-men, himself, causes their purses to be stuffed with
golden Coin, reserving the prisoners to repay himself with advantage out of
their ransomes. The like good fortune against Owen Glendowr and the Welsh would
have gladded him indeed; but they burn Owen Glendwr and the Welshmen waste the
Marches.
and destroy the Marches, they kill and captiuate the people, and partly by
force, partly by fraud, get many Castles, some of which they raze, and fortify
others. Neither came these evils single, for the Flemings and Britons took
certain Merchant ships of England, and either slew or hung the Sailers.

(41) It is more strange that King Richard was not A new false king Richard.
suffered to be dead, after he had so long a time been buried. Serlo, who had
been a Gentleman of his Chamber, having heard that King Richard (his royal
and gracious Master) was secretly abiding in Scotland, left the favor of the
French Court to see him, but it was not worth his so much love and labor; for
he that bare the name, was but an Impostor. Loath yet to let the opinion die,
because it might do King Henry harm; Serlo affirms that Richard was alive.
What cunning madness is so great which has not some great fools or other to
support it? The old Countess of Oxford (mother to the late Duke of Ireland)
will needs persuade her self and others in Essex, that Richard was alive:
certain it is, that she desired it might be true. To make others more firmly
believe the same, she secretly gave silver and gilt Hearts (the badges which
King Richard used to bestow upon his followers) as tokens. Hitherto the devise
held out, for it had no great danger in it; but Serlo seeing the necessity of
greater friends, which appeared not, grew weary, and knowing Serlo a spreader
of that impos^ure delivered to the King.
that Sir William Clifford knight, Captain of Berwicke had received sundry
favors from King Richard, hopes by him to be furnished with money, to bear
his charges out of Scotland into France. Clifford far otherwise minded,
seizes upon Serlo, as a fit means to reconcile himself with the King, in
whose high displeasure he stood, (for that he had continued his charge in
Berwicke contrary to express commandment) and carries him to the King, who
was then come to the Castle of Pomfret, being weakened with these rumors, and
suspecting that the chief nest of danger lay in the North; whither the Earl
of Northumberland brought his grandchildren (as pledges) to assure the King of
his loyalty: thither also Sir William Clifford brings poor Serlo, who both
confesses the practice, as also that he had a guilty hand in the murder of
the Duke of Gloucester, which made him far more odious then the other forgery.
The crimes being manifest, Serlo is drawn from Pontefract beginning his pain,
where he had his doom, and at London knits up the Tragedy in an halter. The
Countess of Oxford for this falsehood lost al her goods being moreover
committed to close prison. To make this imposture the more probable and
passable, Serlo had caused K. Richards signet to be counterfeited, wherewith he
sealed sundry consolatorie and exhortatory letters to his friends, indicted in
K. Richards name; whereupon many in Essex gave credit to the Countess, and
among the rest some Abbots of that County. Into this smokedid all the devise
euaporate.

(42) And no less smokie was both the devise and success of certain in the
Parliament (held this year at Couentry, and called the Parliam^ (...). Tho.
Wels.
lack learning Parliament, either for the vnlearnednesse of the persons, or for
their malice to learned men) where, to supply the Kings wants, a bill was
exhibited against the Temporalties of the Clergy; but by the courage of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, (who told them, it was the enriching of themselves,
not of the King, which they respected in their sacrilegious petitions) and by
the gracious care of the King, (who vowed to leave the Church in better state
then he found it, rather then in worse,) their motion vanished to nothing, but
the infamous memory of the attempters. It is observed that Sir John (...).
Ypodig. Neust. page 563.
a Knight the chief speaker in this bill against the Clergy, had been
himself a Deacon, and so himself first advanced by the Clergy. With great
reason therefore did our forefathers distinguish the people into the learned
and lewd, inferring truly that such commonly were lewd, who were not learned,
and that lewd and wicked were but two words of one signification, as in this
Parliament well appeared, whose Commons might enter Common with their cattle
for any virtue which they had more then brute Creatures.

(43) Twife after this, between Christmas and An. 1405.
Palmesunday, the King assembled the States again, once at London, and then at
Saint Alban, for the cause Mowbray Earl Ma^all and Scrope Archbishop of Y^ke
(...) to red^ (...), and lose their heads.
of money, but with much distaste, the Peers of the land rising from the last
Session thereof meanly contented, as it well appeared not long after, though
to the enterprisers ruin. Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshall, one of the chief men
which disliked the carriage of public matters, draws Richardle Scrope
Archbishop of York into a conspiracy, in full hope that Henry Percie Earl
of Northumberland, the Lord Bardolf, the Citizens of York, and the common
people would assist their cause, which was glosed with the specious pretense of
redressing public abuses, happening through the Kings default. The Earl of
Westmerland hearing of this attempt, wherein the Earl Marshall and the
Archbishop were leaders of the people, gathers a force to encounter them, but
perceiving himself too feeble, he betakes himself to fraud, and by faining to
like the quarrel, got them both into his power, and presented them as an
acceptable oblation to the King, who about Whitsontide comes to York where
(albeit the Earl of Westmerland had promised them their lives) as well the
Archbishop, as the Earl Marshall were beheaded. But the next year the Pope
excommunicated all such as had a hand in putting the Archbishop to death. It
was said of Tiberius Sueton. lib. 3. cap. 59.
Casar in a Satyricall libel, -regnabit sanguine multo, Adregnum quisquis venit
ab exilio.
Who, first Exi^de, is after crowned,
His reign with blood will much abound.


(44) This the King verified in his person, who coming out of banishment,
could not support his The King pursues the Earl of Northumberland.
Title and estate, but by shedding much blood of subjects. For not contented
with those two lives, he pursues the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolf
with an invincible Army of seven and thirty thousand men: but they unable to
make head against so mighty a force, take Berwicke for refuge. Thither the King
marches, at the sound whereof, they both distrustful of their safety, fly
into Scotland, where the Lord Flemming entertaines them. Berwicke upon hope of
succors out of Scotland, (which gladly nourished the English miseries, and the
English theirs) refused to render, whereupon the King plants a battering piece
against a Tower in the wall; which as it threw down the half thereof with one
shot, so did it quite overthrow all the defendants The first time that a gunne
is used in England.
courages, who presently yielded the place upon hard and desperate terms, for
they were partly hanged, and partly emprisoned. After Tho. VValsing. In Hen. 4.
Berwicke was thus recovered, the king takes Alnwicke, and all other Castles
belonging to the Earl, and thinking the like happiness would shine upon him in
Wales, he crosses over thither, where it fell out far otherwise, not by the
manhood of the Welsh, but by the sudden rage of waters which destroyed his
carriages and about fifty wains (as was said) laden with much treasure:
therefore he returns to Worcester. Owen Glendowr the chief captain of the Welsh
nation, expecting and fearing a revenge had before this time confederated
himself with the French, who in 140. ships arrived at Milford haven to the aid
of Owen, having well near first lost all their The French with seuenscore
ships arrive in (...) to aid Owen Glendowr.
horses in the passage for want of fresh water. The Lord Berkley and Henry de
Pay (by what means appears not) burnt fifteen of that number in the harbor.
They made the entrance of their war by laying siege to the Town of Carmarden
in South Wales, which, the Garrison being permitted to depart with bag and
baggage, was yielded.

(45) The King being again in need of money, after long unwillingness and
delay, the Parliament furnished him, rather overcome with weariness in A. D.
1406. An. Reg. 7
contradiction, then for any great good will. Some of his treasure was
employed, as it seems, upon secret practices with the Scots, that the Earl of
Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolfe might be delivered into his hands, in
exchange for some Scots; whereupon they fled into Wales, and the Scots missing
their purpose, slew David Lord Flemming for discovering their intention to his
distressed guests, (as by the laws of honor and hospitality he was obliged)
which filled Scotland with civil discords. To avoid the dangers whereof, and
to better his education, the King of Scots sent his son and heir by sea into
France, whom, together with the Bishop of Orknay certain Mariners of Cley in
Norfolk surprised at sea, and presented to the King, who committed him
prisoner to the Tower of London. Meanewhile the French prosecuting their
affairs in Wales, sent thither eight and thirty ships full of soldiers, of
which number the English took eight (the rest escaping in great fear to
Wales,) and not long after other fifteen sail laden with wax and wine. This
A. D. 1407.
fortune though good, was nothing in regard of the service which Henry Pay,
with certain ships of the Cinque Ports, and about fifteen other, exployted
upon a great Fleet, containing sixscore sail, whose ladings were iron, salt,
oil, and Rochel wine. The same times was a felon put to King' Richard spread to
be alive
death for having in many places of London, dared secretly to set up bills,
containing news that King Richard was alive. The fearful plague of
pestilence slew multitudes of people through the Realm, chiefly in London,
where, within a short space it destroyed thirty thousand. That most renowned
Captain Sir Robert Knolles, who had led so many living Sir Robert Knolls dies.
men to their honorable deaths in battle, was now captiued himself by death
upon the fifteenth day of August. His fame grew principally by martial deeds
in the great wars of France, under Edward the third, but spread and settled it
self by good works, among which the goodly stone bridge at Rochester in Kent
was one.

(46) In the mean space, the wars of Wales were managed by Prince Henry, who
took the Castle of Aberistwith; but Owen Glendowr soon after got it again by
fair fraud, and thrust into it a Garrison of his own. Thus Owen prospered for
a time; but the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolf forsaking Wales, and
seeking to raise a force in the North, were encountered by the Sheriff of
Yorkshire, who after a sharp conflict slew the Earl in the field, and so
wounded the Lord Bardolf, that he died thereof. The Earls head was cut off,
which being first ignominiously carried through London, was fixed upon the
Bridge. The King having thus vanquished his chief enemies, went to York,
where inquiries were made for the Earls adherents, of which he condemned,
ransomed, and emprisoned many. The Abbot of Hales, because he was taken
fighting on the Earls behalf, had sentence to die, which was executed upon
him by hanging. In fortaine and transmarine parts, the Kings affairs had mixed
success; for Edmund Earl of Kent, at the siege of Briant in Britain, was
stricken with a quarrel into the head, whereof he died; but yet after he had
first taken the said Castle, and leueld it with the earth.

(47) The peace of Christendom having been long tempestuously troubled by a
Schism, raised An. D. 1409.
by ambition of opposite Popes, whereof the one was Platina.
chosen at Rome, the other at Auinion, by contrary factions of the Cardinals;
A general Council was summoned to be held at Pisa in Italy, whither the King
of England sent his Ambassadors, and the Clergy elected Robert Alum Ypod.
Neust. p. 566.
Chancellor of Oxford, and Bishop of Sarum, to signify, Antiq. Britan.
ecclesia.
that unless both the Popes would give over their Papacy, neither of them
should thenceforward be acknowledged for Pope. The King in his letter then sent
to Pope Gregory, charge him (as Platina likewise does) with Pertury, and that
this Papal emulation had been the cause of the murder of Walsing. Ypodig. p.
569.
more then two hundredth and thirty thousand Christians slain in wars. There
assembled a great number of Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and mitred
Prelates, who elected a new Pope, Alexander 5. (a man (...) S. Theo. Oxonia.
says Tho. Gascoigne. MS.
trained up at Oxford, where he An. D. 1410
took degree in Theology) rejecting the two others, who long and bitterly had
contended for the place. The King also calls his Parliament to find out means
for more money, to the custody and charge whereof he ordained Sir Henry
Scrope, creating him Treasurer, as Thomas Beaufourt the Kings half brother,
Lord Chancellor. In which Parliament was revived the sacrilegious Petition of
spoiling the Church of England of her goodly patrimonies, which the piety and
wisdom of so many former ages had congested. But the King (who was bound by
oath and reason to preserve the flourishing estate of the Church) detested
their wicked proposition, and for that cause denied all other their requests.
The Duke of Burgundies provisions which he had made to reduce Caleys to the
French dominions, and stored at Saint Omars, were consumed with casual fire to
ashes.

(48) About these times the great and bloody factions between the Dukes of
Burgundy and Orleance An. D. 1411.
brake forth. The cause was for a murder committed upon Lewis (brother to the
French king, and father of the said Duke of Orleance) as he came late one night
from the Queens lodging, who at that time lay in of a child. The murderers
Paul. A^yl. in Carol. 6.
to prevent pursuit, strewed galthrops behind them. The Duke of Burgundy
justified the fact, for that Lewis had (as he said) labored with the Pope to
put the King from his seat, upon pretense that he was as unfit to govern as
ever Childericke was, whom Pope Zachary pronounced against. This prepared the
way for that scourge wherewith God meant to chastise the pride and sins of
France. Each party sought to fortify it self with friends, as well at home as
abroad. The Duke of Burgundy sends for aid to the King.
The Duke of Burgundy had the King and the Dolphin on his side; the other had
the Kings of Nauar and Arragon, the Dukes of Berrie and Britain with many of
the mightiest Earls and Lords. The Duke of Burgundy, (who together with the
King and the face of government, kept in Paris) perceiving his adversaries
strengthes to be more then his own, offers to the King of England, a daughter
of France in marriage with the Prince, and many great promises, so as he would
join in defense of the King, and send over competent forces; whereunto he is
said to have answered: Our advise is, that you should not in this case
adventure battle with your enemy, who seems The Kings wise and Christian
answer to the Dukes request.
to prosecute a tust revenge for the death of his Father; but labor to assuage
the displeasure and anger of the exasperated young man, by all the good means
which are possible. If that cannot be, then stand upon your guard, and draw
into place of most safety, with such force of men as may best serve for your
defense. After all this, if he will not be appeased, you may with the better
conscience encounter him, and in such case we will not fail (more fully) to
assist, according as you request. For the present he sent over the Earls of
Arundel and Kyme, Aides sent by the King to the Duke of Burgundy.
and many men of Arms, with plenty of English Bow-men, who came safe to Paris,
where they in nothing diminished the ancient glory of their nation, but behaved
themselves valiantly.

(49) The Duke of Orleance, and the Peers of his faction, seeing their
success, consult how to draw the An. D. 1412 The Duke of Orleance sends to the
King for succor.
King of England from their enemy, and thereupon send over one Falconet and
others, with solemn letters of credence, whom they made their irreuocable
Procurators, to entreat, agree, and conclude, (on their behalfes) with the most
excellent Prince, Henry * The words of the Dukes letter.
by the grace of God King of England, and his most noble sons, etc. for the
restitution and real redeliuerie of the Duchy of Aquitain, with all the
rights and appurtenances, which (as is affirmed) are the inheritance of the
said most excellent Lord the King of England, by them to be made and done,
etc. The Ambassadors having showed forth this Proxy, exhibited The great
offers of the Orleance faction to the King.
the points of their negotiation in these Articles, by which we may see how
far the desire of revenge will transport great minds. 1 They offer their
bodies to be employed against all men for the service of the King of England,
saving their faith to their own Sovereign, as knowing the King of England
would not otherwise desire them. 2 Their sons, daughters, nephews, Neeces,
and all their Cosens to bestow in marriage at the King of Englands pleasure. 3.
Their Castles, Towns, treasure, and all their goods to be at the service of
the said King. 4. Their friends, the Gentlemen of France, the Clergy and
wealthy Burgers; who are all of their side; as by proof (they said) shall well
appear. 5. They finally offer to him the Duchy of, Aquitaine entire, and in
as full a manner as ever his Predecessors enjoined the same, without excepting
any thing; so as they themselves will hold, and acknowledge to hold their lands
in those parts, directly of the said King, and deliver as much of them as they
can into his possession, and will do their utmost to conquer the rest for him.
Upon condition Their demands.
on the other side. 1. That the King of England and his Successors should
assist the said Lords, against the Duke of Burgundy for the murder committed
upon the person of the late Duke of Orleance. 2. That he should assist against
the said Duke of Burgundy and his favorers, till they had repaired all the
losses which they, their friends and tenants had sustained through that
^ccasion. 3. That he should help to settle the quiet of the realm, etc.

(50) These Offers being put into the balance with the Articles, upon which the
Duke of Burgundy The King forsakes the Duke of Burgundy and aides the Duke of
Orleance.
had obtained succors, ouerweighed them so far, that about the midst of
August, before all those which had been sent with the Earl of Arundel to the
contrary part, were returned into England, aids were decreed to the Duke of
Orleance, to the wonder of all men, who understood not the secret, so that
Thomas Duke of Clarence, Edward Duke of York, the Earl of Dorcet, and very
many other principal men with a competent puissance were sent over to aid the
Duke of Orleance, the Earl of Angolesme remaining hostage in England, for the
sure payment of one hundred and nine thousand Crowns for performance of Pol.
Verg. lib. 21.
the other Articles: They came on shore in Normandy; but, whither the
confederates moved with the peril into which their Country and Nation Job.
Tilius Chr.
should by these means be precipitated, or for some other causes, (though none
indeed so just, as the sorrow and shame for their so disloyal a combination
with the Capital enemies of France,) the Duke of Orleance (contrary to
agreement) came not at the appointed time and place, whereupon the English
burnt, spoiled and took much riches in the Castles, Country and good Towns,
therewith to satisfy themselves, till the Duke of Orleance should see them
paid. At last yet the Dukes of Clarence and Orleance came to a treaty, after
which the English camp The English burn and spoil in Normandy till the Duke
of Orleance came.
rose peaceably and marched into Aquitaine there to winter it self, the Duke of
Orleance returning to his own. While these matters were in hand, the Lord of
Heyle Marshall of France with many other Lords, and about four thousand
homines de (...).
men of arms laid siege to a certain strong place in Gascoigne; which Sir
John Blunt Knight, with three hundred soldiers not only defended, but drove
them also from the siege, taking prisoners twelve of the principal and about
six score other Gentlemen. * The King lived not A. D. 1413. A. reg 14.
to see the carriage, and fortune of these wars, for falling sick at Eltham
in the Christmas time (at which our ancient authors begin to draw the circles
of their years) but recovering himself a little, he repaired to London about
Candlemas, there to hold a Parliament; the end whereof he lived not to see, but
upon the twentieth day of March finished his The King dies having reigned
thirteen years and six months wanting five days, ^ith VValsing.
short, but politic and victorious reign, in peace and honor, had not the
injustice of his first entrance left a dishonorable stayne upon his worthiest
actions.

(51) The vulgar Chronicles tell us a strange Story, the truth whereof must
rest upon the reporters. The King, say they, lying dangerously sick, caused
his Crown to be set on a Pillow at his beds ^ll. ^olinsh
head, when suddenly the pangs of his Apoplexy seizing on him so vehemently
that all supposed him dead, the Prince coming in, took away the Crown; which,
his father reviving, soon missed; and calling for his son, demanded, what
the meant, to bereave him of that, whereto he had yet no right? The Prince
boldly replied; Long may you live Sovereign Father to wear it your self;
but all men deeming you were departed to inherit another Crown, this being my
right, I took as mine own, but now do acknowledge for none of mine; and
thereupon he set the Crown again where he found it. Oh son, (quoth he)
with what right I got it, God only knows, who forgive me the sin;
howsoever it was got, said the Prince, I mean to keep and defend it, (when it
shall be mine) with my sword, as you by sword have obtained it. Which the King
hearing, he entered discourse of advise, showing him that he feared some
discord would arise betwixt him and his brother Thomas Duke of Clarence, who
with better respect had borne forth his youth then Prince Henry had done, and
whose distemper was like to breed great troubles, if it were not in time
stayed. If my brethren (quoth Henry) will be true subjects, I will honor them
as my brethren, but if otherwise, I shall as soon execute justice upon them, as
on the meanest of birth in my Kingdom. The King rejoicing at this unexpected
answer; both prudently and Christianly charged him before God, to minister the
law indifferently, to ease the oppressed, to beware of flatterers, not to
defer justice, nor yet to be sparing of mercy. Punish (quoth he) the
oppressors of thy people, so shall thou obtain favor of God, and love and
fear of thy Subjects, who whiles they have wealth, so long shall thou have
their obedience, but made poor by oppressions, will be ready to make
insurrections. Rejoice not so much in the glory of thy Crown, as meditate on
the burthenous care which accompanies it; mingle love with fear, so thou as
the heart shall be defended in the midst of the body: but know, that neither
the heart without the members, nor a King without his Subjects help is of any
force. Lastly my son love and fear God, ascribe all thy victories, strength,
friends, obedience, riches, honor and all, unto him: and with the Psalmist say
with all thanks, Not unto us Lord, not unto us but to thy holy name be given
the laud and praise.

(52) Upon what soil these most Christian, true and excellent Councels fell,
the following life will show, being nothing else, but a full representation in
act, of such things, as are here in precept only, showing to the world how
divine a beauty Christian goodness has.

His Wives.
(53) The first wife of King Henry the fourth, was Mary one of the daughters
and heirs of Humfrey de Bohum, Earl of Hereford, Essex and Northampton,
Constable of England, etc. She dyed An. D. 1394. before he came to the Crown.

(54) His second wife was Ioane, Queen, daughter to Charles the first, King of
Navarre, she being the widow of John de Montford, Surnamed Streani, Duke of
Britain; and died without any Children by King Henry, at Hauering in the Bower
in the County of Essex 1437. the tenth day of Iulie in the fifteenth year of
Henry the sixth, and was buried by her husband at Canterbury.

His Children.
(55) Henry, the Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and
afterward King of England, whose glorious life and acts next ensue.

(56) Thomas, Duke of Clarence, President of the Council to King Henry the
first (his brother,) and Steward of England. He was slain at Beaufort in Anion
without any issue. He married Margaret daughter to Thomas Holland, Earl of
Kent, the widow of John Beauford, Earl of Somerset.

(57) John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France in the time of King Henry the
sixth, Duke also of Anion and Alanson; Earl of Cenomannia, Harecourt, of
Kendall and Dreux, Viscount Beaumont. He married first with Anne, daughter to
John Duke of Burgundy. Secondly with Iacoba, daughter to Peter de Luxemburgh
Earl of Saint Paul. And died without any issue.

(58) Humfrey, was by his brother King Henry the fifth created Duke of
Gloucester, was Protector of the Kingdom of England for 25. years, in the
time of King Henry the sixth, in whose first year he styled himself in his
Charters thus: Humfrey by the grace of God, son, brother, and uncle to Kings,
Duke of Gloucester, Earl of (...), Holland, Zeland, and Pembroke; Lord of
Friestand, Great Chamberlain of the Kingdom Cambd. Brit. in Glocest.
of England, Protector and Defendor of the same Kingdom, and Church of
England. He was a man, who nobly deserved of the common wealth and of
learning, as being himself very learned, and a magnificent Patron and
benefactor of the University of Oxford, where he had been educated; and was
generally called, the Good Duke. He married first Iacoba, heir to William
Duke of Bauaria Earl of Holland, who (as after was known) had first been
lawfully troth-plighted to John Duke of Brabant, and therefore was afterward
divorced from the said Humfrey. His second wife was Elianor daughter to
Reginald, Baron Cobham de Scarborough. Queen Margaret, wife to King Henry the
sixth, repining at his great power in swaying the King and state, socretly
wrought his ruin, he being murdered in his bed at Bury, dying without any
issue, 1446. His body was buried at Saint Albans, yet the vulgar error is that
he lies buried in Saint Paul's.

(59) Blaunch married to William Duke of Bauaria, and Emperor.

(60) Philip married to John King of Denmark and Norway.

HENRY THE FIFTH, KING OF Monarch 52
Henry V.
ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE TWO AND FIFTIETH MONARCH OF ENGLAND,
HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XV.


AMongst the many Monarchs of this most famous Empire, none is found more
complete with all heroical virtues then is this King, of whose life by order
and success of story we are now to write; which is Henry of that name the
fifth, the renown of England, and glory of Wales. Of whom, what was spoken of
Titus in the flourishing times of the Romans, may for the time of his reign be
truly verified in him: both of them being the-louely darlings, Sutton in vit.
Tit. 1. 6.
and delightful joy of Mankind. But as Titus is taxed by his story-Writers, in
youth to have been riotous, profuse, wastfull and wanton, for which (as he
says) with the dislikes of men he stepped into the throne; so if we will
believe what others have writ, Henry Ti. (...). F^.
was wild whiles he was a Prince, whose youthful prankes as they passed with
his years, let us have leave here to rehearse, and leave them motives to our
own use, as he made them for his.

(2) His birth was at Monmouth in the Marches of Wales, the year of Christ's
assuming our flesh, 1388 Edw. Hal.
and the eleventh of King Richards reign, his father then a Subject, and Earl
of Derbie, Leicester, and Lincoln, Henry borne at Monmouth in Wales.
afterward created Duke of Hereford, in ri^ht of his wife, then of Lancaster,
by the death of his father; and lastly by election made the Sovereign of
England, (that unfortunate Richard) being deposed the Crown. His mother was
Mary, second daughter and coheire of Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford, and
Northampton, high Constable of England, R^cor. of Towe^. 4 Hen. 5.
as we have said.

(3) His young years were spent in literature in the Academie of Oxford, where
in Queens College Ioh. Rosse (...). in lib. (...) regi^.
he was a Student under the tuition of his uncle Henry Beauford, Chancellor of
that University, afterward Bishop of Lincoln and Winchester, and lastly
made Cardinal by the title of Eusebius. But Prince Henry's Educatin.
his Father obtaining the Crown, and himself come to the age of twelve
years, had the succession thereof entailed on him by Parliament, and
accordingly was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester, and presently had Holinsh.
the Title of the Dukedom of Aquitaine conferred upon him, the better to
effect the thing then intended, which was to have obtained in marriage young
Queen Isabel, late wife to the murdered King Richard, daughter of Charles the
sixth, King of Richard Grafton.
France.

(4) From Oxford, Prince Henry was called to Court, and the Lord Thomas Perey
then Earl of Edward Hal.
Worcester made his Governor; but being himself false to the Father, could
give no good example unto the son, whose hostile attempts in the field of
Shrewsburie cost that disloyal Earl his head, and almost had done Prince
Henry his life, who in battle Thom. Walsing.
against him was wounded in the face with an arrow. This mark of his manhood,
with the overthrow of Hotspur in that bloody conflict, were hopeful signs of
his following success, which presently were seconded with as fortunate
proceedings against Owen Glendowr that scourge of his Country, Rich. Grafton.
and Arch-rebell unto Englands peace, whom this Prince so pursued through the
vast mountains of Wales, that from the Dens of those deserts he durst not
show his face, but therein perished by famine, and natures other wants, though
the Prince had then scarcely attained unto sixeteene.

(5) But grown from his tutors command, or control, and come to the years for
dispose of himself, as his youth stood affected, so were his consorts, and
those (many times) whose conditions were none of the best; whether led by an
inclination of youth (which commonly lets the rain loose unto Will) or, to
know that by proof, which other Princes do by report, I will not determine:
yet unto the latter do I rather incline, knowing that Solomon the wisest of
Kings did so himself; and rather Eccles. 2.
by Rosse I am lead, who writes that Prince Henry in Oxford had in great
veneration, such as excelled Ioh. Rosse.
in virtue or learning, and among many, two he names, Thomas Rodban of Merton
College a great Astronomer, by him preferred to the Bishopric of S. David's
in Wales, and John Carpenter of Oriel College, a learned Doctor of Theology,
whom he advanced to the Sea of Worcester. But let us hear how his wild oats
were spent, and with what increase the harvest was got. The translater of
Liuie, who wrote the story of this worthy Prince, and dedicated his pains to
King Henry his son, affirms for truth, that many actions he did, far
unfitting his greatness of birth; and among other, does tax him with no
better then theft, who in the reign of his Father, accompanied with such as
spent their wits upon other men's spoils, laid wait in the way for his Rents
receivers, and robbed them of that which indeed was his own, when sometimes in
shufling he nothing was spared, but bare away many knocks. the lenders whereof
he would frankly reward, when they complained unto him of their losses
received, which ever were abated in the foot of their accounts.

(6) Our learned Knight Eliot setting his pen to Sir Tho. Eliot Governor.
portrait a perfect Governor, records a story, retaining this Princes great
fame, the credit whereof let it lie upon himself. It chanced (says he) a
servant of his to be arraigned for felony at the Kings Bench-Barre, where
standing ready to receive sentence of death, the Prince had intelligence, and
posted thither, where finding his servant made sure for starting, commanded his
fetters to be struck off, and the fellow arraigned to be freed the Court. All
men amassed at this his approach and speech: the Chief Justice stood up, and
showed the Prince that his seat was the Kings, that laws were the sinews of
the Commonwealth, that himself was sworn to do Justice, and must yield an
account for all that he did, that he honored him as the eldest son of his
Sovereign, and Prince, but to set free the prisoner, he could not, having so
apparently endangered his life to the law; and therefore desired the Prince, if
he held him in such esteem, to save him by pardon from the King, and not to
infringe the law, which he told him plainly he should not do.

(7) The Prince enraged to have the denial, assaied himself to set free the
Prisoner, which the Chief Justice forbadde, commanding him upon his allegiance
to cease from such riot, and to keep the Kings peace: whereat Prince Henry in
a fury stepped up to the Bench, and gave the Judge a blow on the face, who
nothing daunted, sat still, and with a bold countenance, spoke thus to the
Prince, Sir I pray you remember your self, this seat of judgment which here I
possess, is not mine, but your Fathers, to whom and to his laws you owe
double obedience. If his Highness be thus contemned, and his laws violated by
you, that should show your self obedient to both, who will obey you when you
are a Sovereign, or minister execution to the laws that you shall make?
Wherefore, for this attempt, in your Fathers name, I commit you prisoner unto
the Kings Bench, there to remain until his Matesties pleasure be further
known. With which words the Prince greatly abashed, stood mute by the Judge,
and fixing his eyes upon his reverend face, presently laid from him his
weapons, and with humble obeisance done, departed to prison. The King
understanding the whole circumstance, greatly rejoiced that he had a Son of
such obedience to his laws, and a Judge so upright to administer them without
either favor or fear of the person; notwithstanding for this, and other like
actions of his youth, he removed him from being President of his Privy
Council, and placed in his stead Thomas Duke of Rich. Grafton.
Clarence his second brother; to Prince Henry's no little grief and discontent.

(8) Howbeit his followers were nothing diminished, but his Court frequented
more then his fathers, which bred some suspicion in the crazie kings head, lest
among his other wild parts, he would attempt to play with his Crown; which
was increased by his domestical flatterers, who daily buzzed new iealousies
into his ears. This made Prince Tho. Otterborne.
Henry (as Otterborne notes) to strengthen himself with his chiefest friends,
and well-willers, and with such a troop repaired to his fathers Court, as a
greater in those days had not been seen. The translator of Liuie reports the
manner of his approach, even from him that was an eye witness, and the same no
less then the Earl of Ormond in Ireland, whose relation is this.

(9) The King somewhat crasie, and keeping his Chamber, hearing news daily of
his sons loose exercises, too mean for a Prince, and their constructions
ever made to aim at his Crown, he both began to withdraw his fatherly
affection, and to fear some violence against his own person: which when
Prince Henry heard of, by some that favored him of the Kings Council, in a
strange disguise he repaired to his Court, accompanied with many Lords and
noble men's sons. His garment was a gown of blew Satin, wrought full of
Eylet-holes, and at every Eylet the Needle left hanging by the silk it was
wrought with: about his arm he ware a dogs-collar set full of S. S. of gold,
the Tirets thereof being most fine gold. Thus coming to Westminster, and the
Court of his Father, having commanded his followers to advance no further then
the fire in the hall, himself accompanied with some of the Kings household,
passed on to his presence, and after his duty and obeisance done, offered to
make known the cause of his coming. The king weak then with sickness, and
supposing the worst, commanded himself to be borne into a withdrawing
Chamber, some of his Lords attending upon him, before whose feet Prince Henry
fell, and with all reverent obseruances, spoke to him as follows.

(10) Most gracious Sovereign and renowned father, the suspicion of
disloyalty, and diuulged reports of my dangerous intendmentes toward your
royal Person and Crown, has enforced at this time, and in this manner, to
present my self and life at your Majesty's dispose. Some faults and misspent
time (with blushes I may speak it) my youth has committed, yet those made
much more by such fleering pickthanks, that blow them stronger into your
unwilling and distastiue ear. The name of Sovereign ties alleagiance to all,
but of a Father, to a further feeling of natures obedience; so that my sins
were double, if such suggestions possessed my heart: for the Law of God
ordayneth, that he which does presumptuously against the Ruler of his people
shall not live, and the child that smites his father shall die the death: so
far therefore am I from any disloyal attempt, against Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Exodus
21. 15.
the person of you my Father, and the Lords anointed; that if I knew any of
whom you stood in the least danger or fear, my hand according to duty shoud
be the first to free your suspicion; yea I will most gladly suffer death to ease
your perplexed heart; and to that end I have this day prepared my self, both by
confession of my offenses past, and receiving the blessed Sacrament. Wherefore
I humbly beseech your Grace to free your suspicion from all fears conceived
against me, with this dagger, the stabbe whereof I will willingly receive here
at your Majesty's hand, and so doing, in the presence of these Lords, and
before God at the day of judgment, I clearly forgive my death. But the King
melting into tears, cast down the naked dagger (which the Prince delivered
him) and raising his prostrate son, embraced and kissed him, confessing his
ears to have been ouer-credulous that way, and promising never to open them
again against him. But the Prince unsatisfied, instantly desired, that at
least his accusers might be produced, and if convicted, to receive punishment,
though not to the full of their demerites; to which request the King replied,
that as the offense was capital, so should it be examined by the Peers, and
therefore Tho. Otterborn.
willed him to rest contented until the next Parliament. Thus by his great
wisdom he satisfied his father from further suspicion, and recovered his love
that nearly was lost. Hitherto of Henry as he was Prince (some other of whose
youthly actions we also touched in his fathers reign) and now to his Acts
after he was King.

(11) Henry ordained successor, and ouerseer of his dying Fathers Testament,
had in his entrance so Ex Record.
fortunate proceedings, as he seems to exceed all his Predecessors; his
Nobles proffering the oath of their Alleagiance, before himsel^e had made his,
for the just government of the Commonweal, which so far was from
acceptance, that he desired God never to admit him to the Crown, unless he
should Ioh. Stow.
to his glory reign, and rule the Scepter to the good of the Subject. The day
of his entrance and of his Fathers death, being the twentieth of March, and
Rich. Grafton.
year of Christ's Incarnation, according to our account, 1412. on the ninth of
April following he was solemnly crowned at Westminster, Thomas Arundel An. D.
1413.
Archbishop of Canterbury performing the royal Ceremonies: which no sooner
was ended, but to begin a good government, he began with himself,
banishing from his presence and Court the vnbridleled youths which had been
his consorts, commanding them either to change their manners, or never to
approach within ten miles where he lay. Then chose he worthy and prudent men
for his Council of Estate, and advanced his Clergy with dignity Ti^. L^. Tho.
Walsing.
and power: being himself as zealous in devotion, as liberal in building, and
indowing of places for devotion of others. His Justice was found of all that
sought it; for every day after dinner for the space of an hour, his custom
was to lean on a cushion set by his cupbord, and there himself received
petitions of the oppressed, which with great equity he did redress. And for a
further testimony of his tender and compassionate heart, the slaughtered body
of K. Richard ouer-meanely enterred at Langley, in great ^state he removed into
Saint Peter's Church at Westminster, and there laid him enshrined by Queen Anne
his first wife (as himself had desired and prepared) founding a weekly
memorial to be celebrated, and six shillings eight pence thereon distributed
unto the poor, and yeerelie twenty pounds given upon his anniuersarie day,
besides four tapers to burn before R^b. Fabian.
his monument day and night for ever. And so nearly did his death touch this
innocent King, that he sent to Rome to be assoyled from that guilt of his
fathers Act, by the Popes holiness, then accounted another God; whose penance
enioined, he willingly performed, and afterward purposed to Polyc^ron.
have made war in Palestina against the enemies of Christ; for which end, he
sent Sir Hugh de Lauoy of Henault to Jerusalem, to discover the state of things
there; but before his return he was departed to the heavenly Jerusalem
himself.

(12) The obsequies of his Father being solemnized Upon Trinity Sunday.
at Canterbury, and the King in person attending the Corpse, fit occasion was
given unto Archbishop Arundell to complain of the Wicklifians, (then Nich
Vig^r. in bist. (...) Eglise.
termed Lollards) great rubs in the ways of the Clergies pride and
proceedings; whereof Sir John Oldcastle was thought a chief, who by his
marriage contracted with a kniswoman of the Lord Cobhams of Cooling in Kent,
obtained the title thereof, a man strong and valourous, and in especial favor
with his Prince. This Knight in their Synod assembled at London, immediately
after the Kings Coronation, was accused by them to have rent Christ's seamelesse
coat, in maintaining VVickliffes doctrine to be taught, especially in the
Diocese of London, Rochester, and Hereford: against whom also some choice Fox
in Acts and Monuments.
Inquisitors at Oxford, appointed for Heresies (though Oper a Ioh. H^ssi To.
(...).
that whole University had formerly vpheld both Wickliffe and his doctrine,)
informed and presented his name with two hundred forty six conclusions, which
they had collected to be heretical.

(13) The King incensed (by the Archbishoppes suggestions) against these
discontented discipliners, Thom. Walsing.
was further made believe that they themselves had set up bills in diverse
places, threatening that an hundred thousand persons were ready for arms,
against all that withstood their reformation, and among these that Oldcastle
his Knight was reputed the chief. The King graciously inclined, heard the
Archbishops complaint, and being at Kennington promised to confer with the
Lord Cohham himself, which accordingly he did, instantly willing him to submit
himself to the censure of the Church and obedience of the Archbishop: but
Cobham, no turne-coate from his profession, humbly told the King he owed his
subjection only unto his Majesty whom God had placed in these his Dominions, as
his only Vicegerent to govern his people and Subjects, and that himself
forced nothing Romes leaden sword, unsheathed by the Pope (that Antichrist)
against the Lords servants, nor would suffer the key of Canterbury to open the
closet of his conscience, where the spirit of God was residing, bearing
witness with his, that he stood in the truth, for whose defense as his
Champion, he was ready to live or die.

(14) This answer received, was so delivered unto the Archbishop, with power
to cite, examine and punish, as their own Canons in such cases had decreed.
The Lion thus laid for, whose paw they still feared, was served by process to
appear in the Archbishops Court, and the same delivered by one Butler a
servant of the Kings Privy (...) and Monuments.
Chamber, for that the bold Sumner durst not do it himself, and the
Archbishop (diligent lest he should forget the day) caused his letters
citatorie to be set upon the gates of the Cathedral Church of Rochester, which
were presently torn down, and others again set up, were again pulled off, to
the great offense of the Clergies eye, and the rather, for that the Actor could
not be known. The Knight not appearing (as knowing their malice and his own
danger) was condemned of contumacie, and afterward Ouldcastle pronounced an
heretic.
in a Synod at Rochester, was by the Archbishop pronounced an Heretic, where
himself then enacted that heretical decree, that the holy scriptures Tho.
Walls. Antiq. Britan.
should not be translated into the English tongue. But mark the judgment
that fell upon his own tongue, whose roots and blade shortly after (as is
recorded) Ex libro Wigorn.
grew so big in his mouth and throat, that he could neither speak nor swallow
down meat, but in horror Archbishop Arundels death.
lay languishing, till lastly he so dyed starued by famine.

(15) In the mean time the Lord Cobham wrote his See it in Foxes Martyrologie
Belief, which was very Christianlike, and presented it himself to the King,
who (being much prepossessed) in no wise would receive it, but suffered him to
be summoned in his presence, and privy Chamber, when the Knight for his
purgation offered an hundred knights and Esquires, which would not The offers
of the Lord Cobham.
be accepted; then, according to his degree of Order, and law of Arms, he
required the single Combat to fight for life or death, with either Christian or
Heathen in the quarrel of his faith, the King and Council only excepted.
This notwithstanding could not be suffered, but needs must he appear before
the Archbishop his Judge: where, after diverse examinations (in all which he
most religiously justified himself and his profession) he was condemned of
Heresy, Rob. Fabian.
and committed Prisoner unto the Tower of London, whence shortly he escaped,
and got into Wales. Upon which escape great fears were conceived, especially
of the Clergy, the causers of his troubles, and mortal Enemies to him and his
welwillers, for the king was confidently (but as it seems maliciously)
informed; Touching Ouldcastles innocence from Treason, see Foxes defense
against Cope in Martyrologie.
that Oldcastle with his adherents laid for his life, and that in S. Giles
Fields near unto Holborne twenty thousand were to assemble in hostile manner,
with an intent to destroy the Monasteries of Westminster, Saint Albans, all the
religious houses in London, and the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul's. The King
therefore in person himself after midnight with a great Army came into these
fields, where (if we will believe their professed enemies) fourscore of that
faction were apprehended, who said they came to John Stow
seek the Lord Cobham. But as the answerer of Copus from more ancient times
has observed, that in days of persecution, such assemblies often had been
made to hear the Gospel preached, which otherwise John Fox in Acts and
Monuments.
they could not enjoy: so in this place then called Thicket fields.
then ouergrowne with bushes and unfit for battle, those few were in
likelihood assembled unto John Beuerly agodly man their Preacher, without any
intent of treason, having for their Chieftaines no greater persons then Sir
Roger Acton a Knight of no great account, a Minister, and a malt man. But their
Apologies we leave to See Fox at large.
others; only the Lord Cobham could not be found, though the King by
Proclamation had promised a thousand marks to his taker, besides many
liberties to the City or Town, that would disclose him; whereby (says
Walsing:) it may be ghessed, that the whole Kingdom, well near, embraced
Ypodig. Neust.
his opinions which that Friar calls his madness: Thirty seven of that
assembly were condemned, whereof seven were consumed with fire and strangled,
Acton, Beuerley and Murly were likewise executed.

(16) As the zeal of this King is much commended for his favors toward his
Clergy, so is his Tho Walls. Bishops of Saint David's.
Princely pity in the commiseration of young Percies distress, whose father
Hotspur slain at Shrewsbury (as we have said) and he by his Grandfather sent
into Scotland for security, was there notwithstanding detained a Prisoner, for
that James their King was forcibly kept in England by Henry, and as they took
it against all Justice. But fit occasion being offered for young Percies
release, and exhcange made between him and Alrede son of Robert Duke of
Albany (who had been taken prisoner at the Battle of Halidon) the king
restored him not only in blood, and to grace in his Court, but also invested
his person with the Title and State of his Grandfather, to his own no little
honor, and faithful service attained of that honorable family.

(17) Upon Archbishop Arundels death, starued by famine as we have said *
Henry Chicheley a Henry Chicheley made Archbishop of Canterbury.
stout Champion also against Wicliffes doctrine, was with the Kings consent, by
the Monks of Canterbury elected their Archbishop, which the politic Elect
neither accepted nor refused, but left it to the will and pleasure of the Pope:
who first took snuff that Thomas Walsing.
it so far proceeded without his direction, yet was soon pacified by
Chicheleys submission, and (as says mine Author) with other Gratulations
besides. The man though not so rich by birth as Arundle was, yet as strong for
the Clergy, and more gracious with his Prince as the sequel proved.

(18) The first assaies of both was made known in a Parliament holden at
Leicester, where in a Bill A complaint against the Clergies excess.
exhibited, complaint was made, that the temporal Lands given to religious
houses and spiritual persons for devotion were either superfluous, or
disorderly spent; whose revenues (if better employed) would suffice for the
defense of the Land, and honor of the king; fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred
knights six thousand two hundred Esquires, and one hundred Almes-houses, for
the relief of impotent and diseased persons, and unto the kings Coffers
twenty thousand pound by year. Which Bill (says Hall) made the fat Abbots to
sweat, the proud Priors to Edw. Hall.
frown, the poor Friars to curse, the silly Nuns to weep, and indeed all
her Merchants to fear, that Babell would down.

(19) To stop the breach of which searching spring, no better means could be
found, then to divert the Parliament with other businesses, and to drive other
proiects into the kings mind; whose head (as this new Archbishop there told
him) had the best right to the Crown of France: for The Archbishop C^ichleys
oration.
not only the Dutchies of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Aniou, the Counties of
Gascoigne, Maine, and the rest, were his lawful) though unlawfully detained)
inheritance; but therewithal the whole Realm of France, as true heir unto
his great Grandfather king Edward the third, and unto Philip the fair, in
right of his mother Queen Isabell, Io. Serres.
the only daughter and Child living of the said French king. As for the law
Salique alleged The Law Salique.
against the English claim, he affirmed, that Text touched only those parts in
Germany, which lay betwixt the rivers Elbe, and Sala conquered by king Charles
the great, who placing his French there to inhabit, for the dishonest lives of
those touched the Germans.
German women made this law. In terram Salicam Mulieres ne succedant, which
the Gloss did falsely expound for the whole kingdom of France. Whose practice
notwithstanding he showed to be the contrary, by many experiences both in king
but not the French.
Pepin which deposed Childericke by the claim of heir General (as descended
of Blithild daughter Their claiming by the same title.
to Clothair the first,) and by Hugh Capet, who, usurping the Crown upon
Charles Duke of Lorraine (the sole heir male of that line from Charles the
great) to make his claim good (which indeed was stark naught) derived
himself as heir to the Lady Lingard, daughter to Charlemaine, son to Lewis
the Emperor, that was son to Charles the great. King Lewis also called the
Saint; (who was the heir to the usurper Hugh Capet) could not be satisfied in
conscience, how he might justly keep and possess the Crown of France, till
he was fully instructed that Isabell his Grandmother was lineally descended of
the Lady Ermengard daughter and heir to the above named Charles Duke of
Lorraine, by the which marriage the blood and line of Charles the great was
again united, and restored to the Crown of France. Whereby (said the
Archbishop) it most manifestly appeared, that the title of Pepine, the Claim
of Capet, the possession of Lewis, yea of the French Kings themselves to this
day, derive their only rights from the heirs female, and that this pretended
Law Salique was but a shifting devise to debar the English Kings from the
claim of the French Crown. Which exclusion howsoever they pretend to be
right, yet the law of God (said he) has made it mere wrong, which with better
regard of the Sex allows the woman to inherit her fathers possession, as we
see in the practice of that state, whereof Christ himself is called king,
where the five daughters of Zelophehad for want of heirs males, were admitted
to succeed in their fathers inheritance, allotted them in the Tribe of
Manasses; and Numb. 27.
a law made by the Lord himself, that if a man died and had no sons, then
his inheritance should be transferred upon his daughters. Neither is it to be
doubted but that the daughter of Shesham was An addition.
the sole heir unto her fathers patrimony, he dying without issue male; though
she married an Egyptian, whose posterity had their possessions among the Tribe
of Judah, even to the Captivity of Babylon: 1. Chro. 2. 34.
so that if such a law were, as in truth there was no such, better were the
breach by the warrant of divine direction, then the continuance by color of
such prescription, seeing God has ordained as well for the daughter as for the
son.

(20) The Archbishops unexpected but not vnpremeditated Oration thus ended, so
stirred the blood of the young Courageous King, that his heart was all on a
flame; and so tickled the ears of his Auditory, as they presently conceived
that France was their own; the Title whereof descending from Isabell, the
mother of the famous third Edward, and she the daughter and suruiuing heir
unto Philip the fair; his right was lineally derived thence as follows,
first Philip by Ioane his first wife entitled Queen of Navarre, had three
sons and one daughter, namely Lewis, Philip and Charles, all three
successively Kings, and this Lady Isabell, by whom the English claim: his
second wife was Constance the daughter of the King of Sicil, who bare him a
son after his own decease which lived not many days after his father. Lewis
his eldest son and Lewis (...).
tenth of that name succeeded Philip in the Kingdom of France, and by Margaret
his wife the daughter of Burgundy had his daughter Jane entitled Queen of
Navarre, who made claim also unto the French Crown, but never attained it; so
that her Title fell with her death. Lewis by his second wife Clemence of Sicil,
had a son named John borne unto him, but presently both father and son
departing this life, left the Scepter to his second brother; who by the name of
Philip the fifth, a while wore the Imperial Crown of France: his wife was Jane
the daughter of Burgoine, who bare unto him only four daughters.

(21) Unto King Philip succeeded his brother Charles the fair, the fourth of
that name, whose first wife was Blanch, detected of incontinency and brought
him no fruit, his second wife was Marie daughter to Henry Luxenbourg the
Emperor, who bare him a son that dyed soon after birth, and the mother
likewise shortly came to her grave. Margaret the daughter to the Earl of
Eureux, was his third and last wife, who at his death he left with Child, and
thus the three sons of Philip were branched, reigned, and died, whom Queen
Isabell their sister suruiued, and in that right her son King Edward the
third, by his royal consanguinity whilst the Crown stood thus at suspense,
till a Prince should be borne, claimed to be Regent in the Interregnum, and in
the nonage of the looked for issue, against which, Philip de Valois son of
Charles the hardy, who was brother to Philip the fair, being a second branch
from Hugh Capet, and first Prince of the blood of France, maintained that the
Regency of the male (if so he were borne) as also of the Realm (if a daughter
or the son dyed) belonged only unto him as the next in blood. The state thus
standing, and a daughter borne, Philip was saluted and proclaimed King, no
other right alleged then this foisted and falsely termed fundamental law
Salique, for no otherwise does Ottoman the French famous Lawyer esteem of that
ungodly and unjust Ordinance, if any such had been ordained.

(22) The Kings right thus apparent, and sufficient possessions to be had in
France: the Bill of complaint against the Clergies excess was quite dashed, and
all minds addicted for the affairs that way; thinking it unreasonable to pull
the Provisions from their natives and brethren, when as the Circuit of their
inheritanee extended more large in compass: and therefore with the Danites
they determined Judge. 18.
no longer to sit so pent with increase, seeing God had given them another
Kingdom, but would free their own straitness by dint of sword, and spread
their Tents wider in the Continent of France: Neither was there any motive more
forceable in conference, then was the success of those intruding Princes, who
assaied the Crown by that unjust claim of law Salique.

(23) For did not the sword of God (rather then Io. Serres.
man) in the hand of King Edward the claimer cut down the flower of France in
the Battle of Crecie, with the slaughter of Lewis King of Bohemia, of Charles
the French Kings brother, of James Dolphin of Viennois, the Dukes of Lorrayne,
and Burbon, the Earls of Aumarle, Sauoy, Montbilliard, Flanders, Niuers and
Harecourt, the Grand Priour of France, the Archbishop, and Zanxinus and Noyone,
of Lords, Barons, and Gentlemen to the number of 1500 with 30. thousand of the
French Soldiers, and Philip not able of himself to defend himself, inciting
David of Scotland to invade and weaken England, therein did but only vex his
own spirit, for in that attempt the Scottish King was taken prisoner and
brought so to London, leaving Philip to struggle with his hard fortunes in
France, which with bad success he did to the day of his death.

(24) John his son by the same title and claim felt the same stroke of
justice from the hand of that thunderbolt in war Edward surnamed the black
Prince, the son of Englands Mars, who far inferior to the French in
number, far exceeded them in marshall power, when at the battle of Poitiers
the French royal Standard was stroke down, an hundred Ensigns won by the
English, the Constable, Marshall and great Chamberlain of France with fifty
two Lords and seuenteen hundred Gentlemen Io. Serres
slain in the field. King John himself, his son Philip, two Bishops,
thirteen Earls, and one and thirty Lords taken prisoners by the Prince, to
his great praise and confirmation of his just cause.

(25) Nor was the punishment of the father any whit lessened in King Charles
the son then reigning, who besides the intestine wars in his own dominions
was by Gods just judgment struck into a Lunacy, being unable to govern
himself much less his Kingdom, upon which advantage (as the French would
have it) King Henry now played; though it be most certain he sought his right
far otherwise, for so it stands upon record dated the ninth of February and
first of Henry the fifth his Ex Record. apud Westminster.
reign, that he sent his Ambassadors unto the French King, who could not be
admitted to his presence, and him whom they employed to procure access was by
the French committed to Prison: whereat King Henry most justly conceived a
grudge. Paulus P. (...).
Aemilius their own Story-writer says, that Henry King of England, sent
honorable Ambassadors to demand in marriage the Lady Katherine daughter unto
the French King: which (as he says) was neglected with this answer, that the
King had no leisure to think on that business: whom Franciscus Rosienius does
further enlarge, saying, the King scornefully smiling answered Fr. Ros^en.
that France was neither destitute of Dukes, nor he at leisure to think of
the Proposition; and being jealous l^st Burgoigne would match his daughter with
Henry, sent him a command to the contrary, and again at their Conclusion of
peace, expressly enjoined the Enguerrant de Monstrel.
said Duke, and all other Princes of the blood, not to make any alliance of
marriage with England, whereby K. Henry was further exasperated against France.
And lastly, by his counsel and conference upon the Nich. Ueg^. Will Parradin.
in Annal. de Burgoin. Ca^ton Chron. (...).
Archbishops Oration sent a Summons and demand of the Dutchies of Normandy,
Aquitaine, Guyen, and Aniou; in derision whereof, as Caxton records, the
Dolphin of France, sent him a Tun of Tennis Bals, as Bullets most fit for his
tender hands, who had spent his youth (as he thought) more among Rackets, then
regard of his person or matters of State: so forward is man to be an Actor in
common miseries, when the Fates have made the Subject of the Scene Tragical,
that he draws the hand of Destiny, sooner to strike, and heavier to fall upon
that project decreed to be east down: for by these disdains and unprincely
dealings the Crown of France was graspt by the English hard hand, and that
fair soil stained with her Natives own blood: for the Present received as it
was sent, had promise to be repayed with balls of more force, whose stroke
should be such as the strongest gates of Paris should not be rackets
sufficient to bandy the rebound.

(26) Grudges thus grown, and wars in preparing, Ex Record. West.
the French thought it fittest to make Scotland their friend, whom they incited
to molest the English Marches, which accordingly was done, and that with such
violence, as it was a question decideable, whether of the Kingdoms was first to
be dealt with Westmerland thought it safest to check the Scots as An. D. 1414.
the nearer and continual backe-friends. But Excester held it better policy to
begin with France the stronger, especially now disquieted through the
factions of Burgundy and Orleance, and unto this the Ypod. Neust.
most voices gave way, whose forwardnes was such, that the Clergy granted a
Tenth, and the temporal Lords their aides to the King, as follows.

The Earls Northumberland, 40 men at Arms and 120 Archers a piece Westmerland.

The Earls Warwick, 20. men at Arms, and 40. Archers a piece. Stafford.

The Earl of Suffolk, a ship, 20. men at Arms, and 40. Archers.

The Earl of Abergaueny 20. men at Arms, and 20. Archers.

The Lords Louell. A ship, 20. men at Arms, and 40. Archers a piece.
Barkley. Powis. Camois. S. John, Ex Record.
Burrell.

The Lords Fitzwater. Half a ship, 20 men at Arms, and 40. Archers a piece.
Darcie. Seymour. Rosse. Willoughbie.

The Lord Morley, 6. men at Arms, and 12. Archers.

The Lords Scales, Proffered to attend the King in their persons without
entertainment. Randolph,

The whole number thus granted and appointed, amounted to of Men at Arms. 346
Archers. 552 Ships. 9

To put back the Scots, Sir Robert Vmfreuile was sent who in a skirmish upon
Mary Magdalens day took 360 of them prisoners, and with great spoil returned
to Rocksborough Castle whereof he had charge; the news whereof K. Charles
understanding, and the John Harding. Roger Walls.
great preparation made against France, being better advised upon the dangerous
event, sent his Ambassadors into England, whereof the Archbishop of Bourges
was principal, who at Winchester made offer of money, and some other
Territories (but none of the best) with the Princess Lady Katherine to be
given in marriage unto King Henry, so that he would dissolve his Army and
conclude a peace. To this Oration the Archbishop of Canterbury made answer,
that his King demanded the Dutchies of Aquitaine and Aniou, with the other
Seigniories anciently appertaining to his Progenitors the Kings of England,
which as they were his most rightful and lawful inheritance, so would he
with all possible diligence endeavor (if not otherwise) by fire and sword to
recover, which his assertion the King himself in presence confirmed.

(27) But Burges the Archbishop presuming Enguerrant de Monstr^l.
more upon his Prelacy, then respective unto whom he spoke, with an irreverent
boldness (liberty obtained) seconded his Embassage with the terms of an
Herald, and with bended brows thus spoke to the King: Think thou o King
wrongfully to put down and destroy the most Christian, the most renowned, and
the most excellent King of all Europe, both in blood and pre-eminence. or
think thou that our mighty Sovereign Charles has offered thee lands,
sums of money and possessions with his most beautiful daughter, either in
fear of thee, of thy English Nation, or of all thy well-willers whomsoever? I
tell thee no, but moved in pity as a lover of peace, and to save the shedding
of christian blood, has made thee these offers: and his cause being supported
by equity and truth, God and his good Subjects he trusts will set a period
soon to thy quarrel. We therefore his Ambassadors demand thy safe conduct to
pass out of thy Realm, and that thou will write thine answer, and send it
under thy seal.

(28) Henry no whit daunted with his big looks and words, answered the
Archbishop with milder Holins^
and better set terms; My Lord (said he) I little esteem of your gallant
brauadoes, and less weigh your imagined power or French bragges. I know my
own right to your Region, and so do your selves, unless you will deny a most
apparent truth: the strength of your Master you daily see, but mine as yet you
have not tasted, he (you say) has many loving subjects and friends, and (God
be thanked) I have both as well affected to me, with which, ere long I hope to
make the highest crown in your Country to stoop, and the proudest Miter to
kneel down: And say to the Usurper your Master, that within this three
months, I will enter France, not as into his land, but as into mine own
lawful patrimony, entending to conquer it not with bragging words, nor
flatte^ing orations, but by power and dint of sword, through Gods assistance in
whom I trust: and I assure you I will not speak the word, the which I will not
write and subscribe, nor will I subscribe to that to which I willingly will not
set my seal. Therefore your safe conduct shall be dispatched, and mine
answer in writing delivered, which once received you may depart into your
Country, when I trust sooner to visit you, then that you shall have cause to
bid me welcome.

(29) The Statute enacted, the first of his reign he now put in execution,
and commanded the French out of his land, according to that made the 13. of
Richard 2. which disabled the Alien Religious to enjoy any Benefices within
England, and now Ex P^l. 1. H. 5.
fearing to nourish a snake in his bosom, King Henry forbad the French from
all preferments Ecclesiastical, and those Priors Aliens conuentual, who had
institution and induction, to put in security, not to disclose, or cause to be
disclosed, the counsel nor secrets of the Realm: and that the French might
hold his dealings honorable, and open, he sent Antilop his purseuant at
Arms, unto King Charles with letters of defiances: next making Queen Joan his
mother in Law the Regent of the land, he drew his forces unto Southampton,
commanding his followers there to attend him in readiness by the feast of
Saint John Baptist ensuing.

(30) Charles the French King expecting present Alain (...). in A^ls of Brit.
invasion, sent his Ambassadors unto John the sixth Duke of Britain, who had
married his daughter with an hundred thousand Crowns, to levy forces for his
aid, and a Jewel worth five thousand Crowns more to himself, which the Duke
promised to come in person to perform. And as it is reported, King Charles
sent to Scrope, Gray and Cambridge (all three in especial favor with the
King) a million of An ancient Manuscript.
gold to betray Henry into his hands, or to murder him before he should
arrive in Normandy. These to make their faction stronger, though Scroope was
Lord Treasurer, Gray a Privy Counselor, and Cambridge Ti^. (...).
the son of Edmund Duke of York, meant to draw in, Edmund Earl of March the
son of Roger Mortimer, and lineally the heir unto Lionell Duke of Clarence,
the next in succession for the house of York, and revealing their intended
purpose, forced him to swear to their secrecy, which if he refused, (...)
St^.
they threatened his death; whereupon he required but an hours respite, which
hardly granted, he went to the King and revealed the conspiracy, even the
night before the day that he meant to put to sea.

(31) The parties apprehended and brought Holinsh.
before him in presence of many nobles, King Henry thus spoke; With what
horror O Lord may any true English heart consider that you for pleasing of a
foreign enemy, should imbrue your hands in our blood, as also in the blood of
our brethren, to the ruin of your own native soil! revenge herein touching
my person though I seek not; yet for the safeguard of you my dear friends, and
for due preservation of the Realm, I am by place and office to minister remedy
against these Offenders; Get you hence therefore you miserable wretches, to
receive the just reward of your deserts, wherein God give you repentance for
your so foul sins.

(32) Notwithstanding this their offense, their indictment as it stands in
the Record, includes matter of other quality: that, Richard Earl of Cambridge
^o. St^. Annal.
of Conesburgh in the County of York, and Thomas Gray of Heton in the County
of Northumberland Knight, for that they in the twentieth of July and third of
King Henry the fifts reign, at Southampton had conspired together with a power
of men, to have lead away the Lord Edmund Earl of March into Wales, and to
have procured him to take the Government of the Realm, in case that King
Richard the second were dead; with a purpose to have put forth a Proclamation
in the name of the said Earl as heir to the Crown, against King Henry by the
name of Lancaster usurper, and further to have conuayed a Banner of the Arms
of England, and a certain Crown of Spain set upon a Pallet (laid in gage to
the said Earl of Cambridge) into Wales; As also that the said conspirators had
appointed certain into Scotland, to bring thence one Trumpington, and another
resembling in shape, favor, and countenance, King Richard. And Henry Scroope
of Masham in the County of York was likewise indicted as consenting to the
Premises. Thus well appeared their purpose, though Richard Earl of Cambridge,
considering the possibility of his own issue had secretly carried that
business: whose sorrowful letter of his own hand writing, as it came to
ours, we think not amiss here to insert.

Most dreadful and Sovereign Liege Lord, I Richard Li^. Original.
York your humble subject, and very Leigeman, beseech you of grace, of all
manner of offenses which I have (...) or assented unto, in any kind by stirring
of other folk, egging me unto, wherein I wot well I have highly offended to
your Highness, beseeching you at the reverence of God, that you like to take
me into the hands of your merciful and piteous grace, thinking ye will of
your (...) goodness my Liege Lord: my full trust is, that you will hau^
consideration (though that my person be of none value,) your high goodness
(where God has set you in s^ high estate) to every Leigeman, that you longs,
plent (...) to ^ue; that you like to accept this my simple request for the love
of our Lady, and the blessed holy Ghost, to whom I pray that they move your
heart ever to all pity and grace for their high goodness. Notwithstanding this
his humble petition upon the sixth of August following, he, with Scroope, and
Gray, were beheaded, and his body with head enterred in the Chapel of
Gods-house in Southhampton; whose apprehensions, arraignements, and deaths,
were so followed each after others, as the French knew not, but that the
treason had success, and their returned Ambassadors told it for certain,
that King Henry had either dismissed his Army, or (which was thought more true)
himself was slain by the Conspirators; so easy an entrance has babbling
report into the wide ears of credulous desire.

(33 But King Henry now ready to embarke Harding 1500. Ioh. Stow. 1600.
Holinsh. 1000. Grafton. 140. Old. Manuscr. 1500. Caxton. 1500.
his men, upon Wednesday the seventh of August with fifteen hundred Sail
took to Seas, attended with six thousand spears, and twenty four thousand
footmen besides Gunners, Enginers, Artificers and Laborers a great number, and
the fifteenth of Nichol. Giles.
the same month cast Anchor in the mouth of Seyne, at a place called Kideaux,
about three miles from Harflew, where he landed his men; and falling devoutly
upon his knees, desired Gods assistance to recover his right, making
Proclamation upon pain of death, that Churches should be spared from all
violence of spoil, that Churchmen, women and Children, should not be hurt,
abused or wronged: then giving the order of Knighthood to many of his followers
Titus Li^l.
he assigned his Standards to men of most strength and courage, which done he
took the hill near adjoining, and thence sent his spiall to the Town of
Harflew, making that the first assay of his fortunes in France. But before we
enter any further discourse in the affairs of that Kingdom, it shall not be
amiss to speak of things commenced in England before that King Henry took to
the Seas.

(34) The Churches throughout Christendom, (...) de yllesc^ Hist. P^tif.
having been disquieted the space of twenty nine years, and now grown
intolerable, through the schismatic ambitions, maintained by three Papal
Monarchs, mounted into Saint Peter's seat, each of them grasping the Chair
with so fast a fist, that the ioints thereof were forced asunder; and the
triple Crown so battered with their thunderbolts of their curses that it was
flatted and made unfit for any of their heads. The persons arreared were John
23. by the Italians elected; the second was Gregory Platina.
12. whom the French had set up; and the 3. was Benedict 13. preferred to the
place by the Spamard. These striving for the helm, the ship was so steered,
that her wrack was apparent upon these raging and unquiet Seas. To prevent
which the Christian Princes put their helping hands, and by a general consent,
ordained a general Council to be held at Constance in Germany, which began
in February 1414 and continued above the space of three years; Nicol. (...) in
Theatr^ ^sal de Pr^.
whereunto were assembled besides the Emperor, the Pope and the Palsgra^e of
Rheine, four Patriarks, twenty seven Cardinals, forty seven Archbishops,
Sebastian Munster.
one hundred and sixty Bishops, Princes, Barons and Gentlemen with their
attendants above thirty thousand.

(35) Unto this Council King Henry sent Richard Francis Goodwin upon the lives
of the Bishop.
Clifford Bishop of London, Robert Halam Bishop of Salisbury, made Cardinal,
and died at the same Council. John Keterich, Bishop of Couentree and
Lichfield, Nicholas Bubwith Bishop of Bath and Wels. John Wakering, Bishop of
Norwich, Robert Mascall, Bishop of Hereford, Stephen Patrington, Bishop of S.
David's; the Abbot of Westminster, and Prior of Worcester, in company of whom,
and for whose greater

indifferent, the French gallant, fresh, and through vain hope of honor,
already mounted above men The French glorious in show but the English
conquerors.
of mean rank, the English weak, weary and sore starued, made no such show,
and yet their courage no less then the other. The one spending the night
before Battle, in Feasts, Triumphs, and other like Caxton. Chron.
sports, distributing their Captives, dividing their spoils, and decreeing
none to be saved but the King, and his nobles; all others must die or be
incurably maimed: the other trimming their arrows, sharpening their spears,
buckling their armours, and refreshing their bodies for the next day; and
besides other obseruances, by the light of the great The English discerned what
was done in the French army. P. Aemil.
fires made in the French Camp, the English decerned what was therein done,
and took the advantage of their order and ground.

(51) The morning approached, the French took the field, thronging forward,
who should be first to this most easy and certain victory (as they took it)
their greatest strength consisting in horse. Against whose violence King Henry
commanded two hundred strong bow-men to lodge in a low meadow, Alain B^chant.
^n les Annals de Bretag^e.
where a deep ditch full of water might secure them from the horse, and the
bushes cover them from sight. These having stakes prepared and shod with Iron
at both ends, were appointed to stick them The stratagem with stakes.
slope-wise in the ground, yet so that they might be removed as occasion was
ministered, to guarde them from the danger of the horse: which policy
accomplished, King Henry (whose hope was in God, and the goodness of his
cause) about ten of the clock raunged Guil. Parradyn.
his English, against the French then in field: he disposed his host into three
battles, placing his bow-men on both sides of the maine.

(52) The vantgard, consisting of Archers, was Tho. Walsing. The chief Leaders
of each part of the English army.
led by Lord Edward, (his cosen) the Duke of York, and with him the Lords
Beaumont, Willoughby, and Fanhope. In the maine Battle all in complete and
bright shining armor, the King rode himself, his shield quartered with the
royal atcheiuements of England and France, upon his helmet he ware a Coronet,
the circle whereof glittered with pearl and stones of an inestimable price:
his horse of a fierce The noble ablliaments of King Henry in the maine Battle.
courage carreird as he went, the bridle and furniture of Gold-smithes work,
and the Caparisons most richly embroidered with the victorious Ensigns of the
English Monarchy: Before him in gold and glorious colors the Royal Standard
was borne, and many other banners in warlike order waued with the wind.

(53) The French had framed their Battles into two sharp fronts, as intending
with their points to Ti^ Liui^.
have run through the English squadrons; altogether relying upon their
horsemen, and shining in bravery with an incredible excess. And surely the
beauty and honorable horror of both the Armies, no heart can judge of, unless
the eye had seen it, the Banners, Ensigns and Penons streaming in the air,
The admirable and glorious sight that both armies made.
the glistering of armours, the variety of colors, the motion of Plumes, the
Forests of Lances, and the thickets of shorter weapons, made so great and
goodly a show; but the silent expectation of the bloody blast was as the
bullet ramd into the Canon, whose roaring voice is not so soon heard, as the
stroke of death felt by the aimed-at mark.

(54) The Battles thus raunged a while stood 10. Serres
still, and faced each other even in the face: The French (whether upon error
like to that of Pompeis at the Battle of Pharsalia, where Caesar was
victorious, or to draw the English farther-from their advantage of ground, is
altogether unknown) but certain it is, that King Henry was resolved to open
his way for Callis over the Enemies bosom, or else to die: and King Henry
seeks to pass Callis.
thereupon with a cheerful countenance and words full of courage, he
comforted his followers and said. My most faithful Companions and worthy
soldiers, we now go into the field of honor, and to the work of manhood,
which your great valors Tho. Walsing.
so long have expected and prayed for; lo the day is now come, and your work
the noblest in the world; pour forth therefore your utmost forces, that ages
may know what the lance, the Axe, the sword and the bow ca^oe in the hand of
the valiant: Whosoever therefore desires riches, honor, and rewards here he
shall find them. Nimirum haec medio posuit Deus omnia Campo. When he had thus
said, his army fell prostrate on the ground, and committed themselves unto God
every man taking into his mouth a piece of earth, in remembrance of his own
mortality, (being thereof made) or of the holy Communion whereof he was
incorporated to be a partaker; and so resolved, arising, Stowes Annal.
the King with cheerful countenance commanded his Standard to advance
forward, saying, because our injurious enemies do attempt to shut up our way,
let us upon them in the name of the most glorious Trinity, Tho. Wall.
and in the best hour of the wholeyeere.

(55) The ranging of the Battle King Henry committed to an old experienced
Knight called Sir Denis Sa^age in Cron. Flan.
Thomas Erpingham: who with a warder in his hand lead the way, which when he
saw time he threw up into the air, whereat the whole army gave a great shout;
which done, he alighted from his horse, and came Enguerrant de Mon^reles.
to the King, who was in his place on foot. The French beholding this Offer,
kept still their own The English proffer Battle.
standing, which the English perceiving, made forward and came on, giving
another shoute, when immediately the Archers, laid in the meadow, darkened the
air with a shower of sharp arrows, most fearful to the sight, but more
deadly to be felt, and withal, Their Archers put the enemy to the greatest
harm.
the English charged their Battle with an admirable Courage; the most of them
for nimblenes being but half clothed, without hat, and bare-legged. And such
was their courage notwithstanding their wants, as he that ere while could
scarcely bend his Bow, is Ypodig. Neust.
able now to draw his yard-long arrow to the very head, whose roauing mark
was the flancke of the French, so rightly aimed at, and so strongely stuck on,
that their sides were altogether larded with arrows, whereby the vantgard was
instantly distressed, and disordered into such a confused press, as they were
not able to use their weapons at any advantage. Their wings likewise assayd to
charge the English; but Mounsieur de Lignie in the one not well seconded
Enguerrant.
by his troops was forced back: and Guilliaum de Surreres The wings of the
French battle discomfited.
charging home, in the other, was slain. The Battalions now broken, for safety
fled to the Main, where they breed both fear and confusion by the unruliness
of their wounded horses, so galled with arrows as they could not be governed.

(56) The first troop of the French horse, were Tho. Walsing.
exquisitely appointed, whereon their riders much presumed, and meant to have
burst through the Archers with a violent course, but they giving back left
their sharp pointed stakes sticking, which till then were unseen; the French
supposing the Archers had fled, came on with their horse upon the spur, and
that in such heat, as the earth seemed to tremble The English Archers giving
back the French horsemen spill themselves upon the sharp pointed stakes.
under their thundering feet, and being forced forward, without foresight of
danger carried their proud Riders into the jaws of destruction: for falling by
troops upon those goaring stakes, they were miserably overthrown, and
paunched to death. The tempests of arrows still whisling in the air sparkled
fire in their falls from the helmets of the French, and with their steeled
heads, rang many thousands their knels that doleful day, who like to corn
cut down with the since, fell by whole plumps in that fatal field; the English
still following the advantage: against whom Anthoine Duke of Brabant, hoping
by his example to encourage others (followed Enguerrant de Monstrel.
with a few) turned head, and brake into the English Battle, wherein manfully
fighting he was slain.

(57) With the like manhood Duke Alenzon Guil. Paradyn. in les Annals. de Burg.
a lusty French Lord, pressed into the Battalion where King Henry fought, and
incountering Humfrey Duke of Gloucester the Kings brother, both wounded and
overthrew him, to whose rescue if Henry had not come, he had died more
honorably then King Henry rescueth his brother the Duke of Gloucester.
afterward he did, for King Henry bestriding him, delivered his said brother
from danger, and wanne himself much honor by the deed. Alenzon then coped
with King Henry in fight, and with his Axe cut a part of his Crown, which blow
was so surely laid on, that therewith his helmet was battered unto Alenzon
encountering King Henry puts him in some danger.
his brow, but the Lion enraged, with redoubled strength, stroke the French
Gallant unto the ground, and slew two of his men that seconded their Master.
The Duke thus down, cried to the King, I am Alenzon, whom Henry sought to have
saved, and so had done, had not the deaf ears of revenge stopped all Rich.
Grafton.
sound of life, against him, that so had endangered their Sovereign Lord.

(58) The French Reregard surprised with fear, at the disaster of the
vantgard, and the maine battle The French maine battle put to flight.
fled, not striking one stroke (except some principal leaders and they not
many) the English horsemen fetched a compass and wheeled about upon their
backs, which no sooner was perceived, but that the tax of fighting was ended,
and the work of killing Pyd. Verg.
began; as by the words of Walsingham does manifestly appear: The way (says
he) is at length made by fine force; the French did not so much give place, as
fall dead to the earth: for when they saw those beaten indeed underfoot, whom
they reputed invincible, their minds forthwith grew amazed, and such an
iciefeare slyd through their marrow, that they stood still like senseless
Images, Walsinghams description of the Frenches overthrow.
while our men wrested weapons out of their hands, and slew them therewith as
beasts. Slaughter then had lost the stay of it self, and fight did follow no
longer, but all the war was made at throats, which (as it were) offered
themselves to be cut, neither can the English kill so many of the enemies, as
may be killed. Thus therefore the whole glory of the French name is almost
perished, by the hands of those few, wh^ immediately before they held in most
extreme contempt. But the sword now made After some sharp execution the English
show mercy to the French.
weary and drunk with blood, all danger past, and humanity retired, prisoners
were taken, and lives spared, which hitherto was neglected, least mercy might
have proved the destruction of themselves.

(59) Whilst the King was thus busied, and the success Enguerrant de
Monstrelet.
of the battle in dispute, his carriages (but sclenderly guarded) by the French
were assailed, and all made spoil of, that was to be had. The Captains of
this cowardly enterprise, were Robinet de Bourneuille, Rifflant de Clumasse,
and Isambert de Agincourt, with six Ypod. Neust.
hundred Peasants, who had turned their faces at the first brunt of Battle, as
men of better practice to pilfer, Certain French rob the Kings carriages.
then to purchase by manhood the spoils of the field. Where among other things
they found a rich Crown and sword, which they bare away in triumph-wise,
fayning that King Henry was taken, and as a prisoner followed their troops,
the sight of certain They steal a Crown and a sword and feign that King
Henry is taken prisoner. History of Normandy.
English prisoners by them taken and led away co^firming the report more
strongly in the beholders conceit. But King Henry breathless, and in heat of
blood, seeing certain new troops of the King of Sicils appear in the field,
and the same strong enough to encounter with his weary men, fearing (as he had
cause) that the Bourbon Battalion upon sight of fresh Pol. Verg.
succors would gather into a body, and again make head, considering withal
how his men were ouer-charged with multitudes of Prisoners, who in number
surmounted their Conquerours: that A new power of French appearing, King Henry
causes all his prisoners to be slain.
the charge would be double at once, to guard and to fight, and that the
prisoners would be ready upon every advantage to take arms and free themselves
from their takers: these and other necessities constrayning, King Henry
contrary to his wonted generous nature, gave present commandment that
Enguerrant.
every man should kill his Prisoner, which was immediately performed, certain
principal men excepted. Which done, and falling again in Order, he sent his
Heralds unto these troops assembled, commanding them forthwith to come unto
Battle, or Ti^ Li^
else to depart the field, either of which if they delaied, he threatened to
revenge with their deaths, without any redemption or mercy; at which severe
sentence their hearts were so daunted, that with shame and dishonor they
departed the field. The base surprisall (...) de (...)*
of the Kings carriages, (the only cause as some allege of the French
prisoners death) was so ill disgested by the French themselves, that the Duke
of Burgundy imprisoned the Actors thereof, and was minded to have put them to
death, had not his son The Duke of Burgundy impri^oneth the robbers of King
Henry's carriages but pardons their lives at Count Charolois request. Ypodig.
Nest.
the Count of Charolois mediated for them, unto whom they presented King
Henry's rich sword, the guards whereof was gold set with stones of great price.

(60) The day almost spent in spending French blood, and evening approaching
near the set of the Sun, the field cleared, and no enemy seen, the retreat
was sounded, and all were assembled to give thanks unto God; which done, while
his soldiers pillaged the dead, King Henry sent for Montioy herault King Henry
acknowledges God the g^uer of victory.
at arms in France, and for other heralds both English and French: unto whom
he said, we have not of our selves made this great slaughter, which the sword
in our weak hands has laid at our feet, but the Arm of God for the offenses
(no doubt) of the French has doneit, God delivers a nation into the hands of
the destroier for their sins.
whose blood let now rest upon their own heads, and we guiltless in
following our right: and then demanding the name of the place, was answered, it
was Azincourt, then said he, to all posterities following, this Battle shall
be called the Battle of Azincourt. Thus dismissing the heralds, he returned
to Maisconcelles, where he lodged the night before. The spoil was Enguer. de
Monstreles.
great, and the pray rich in armours, jewels, and apparel, for which by the
Country Peasants many (left as dead) were stripped stark naked, who afterward
crept from the place, but most of them mortallie wounded without relief, lay
in great dolor and died in the ditches: so certain is the calamity of war,
and uncertain the sword till it be quietly sheathed.

(61) King Henry lost his cosen Edward Duke of York, and the Earl of Suffolk
that day, besides some Nich. Gille. Latiers volume de Cron. Franc.
others, the French writers say three or four hundred, yet Caxton will have
them but twenty and six: and Paulus Aemilius adds to the two slain Lords,
two The small number of English slain. Tho. Walsing.
Knights and only ten private soldiers, without any more; unto whom an
ancient manuscript adds Ex Manuscript.
David Gam an Esquire, and twenty eight private soldiers, affirming
confidently, that no more of the English died that day.

(62) A far larger role is writ of the French, slain at this Battle, yet
diverse and different among their own Authors, the true Catalogue as we cannot
certainly set down, yet as we have many Collections we will deliver the same
in part, and refer the rest to be seen upon the record: Only naming the
Officers and Leaders in the same field either The names of great persons either
slain or taken prisoners.
slain, or taken Prisoners, by this famous King Henry in this his triumphant
and fortunate day.

Charles D'Albert, high Constable of France. Geoffrey Bouciqualt Marshall of
France. Jacques Chastillon Admiral. Guiscard Daulphin of Arragon great Master
of the Kings Horse. Edward Duke of Bar. Anthoine D. of Brabant. Duke Alencon.
Count Neuers. Count de Marle. Count de Vaudemont. Count de Blaumont. Count de
Grandpre. Count de Roussie. Count de Farquembourg. Lewis de Bourbon. Enguerrant
de Monstrelet.
Sig. de Preaux. Robert de Bar. Iehan de Bar.
Great Lords.
Sig. de Croy. Sig. de Helly. Sig. de Auxi. Sig. de Brime^. Engu^.
Sig. de Poix. Sig. de Louroy. Sig. de Raineualt. Sig. de Longue^all. Sig. de
I^che. Sig. de Neuf^ille. Sig. de Dampierre. Sig. de More^ill. Vidame de
Amiens. Mes. Alain. Mes. de Saueses. Mes. de Mocont. Mes. de Poix. Mes. de
Bethune.
To be short, Iehan Tillet says, that there were ten Iehan Tillet. Bertrand
de Argentre. La. Mer: Nichol. Giles. Legend. Fland. Chron. Fran. 3. vol.
thousand slain, and almost as many more taken: and most of their own writers
account the success of this Battle to be with the slaughter of four thousand
Princes, Nobles, Knights, and Esquires: but the history of Normandy accounted
eight thousand to be slain of that rank, whereof an hundred and twenty bare
Banners: among whom died four Dukes, nine Earls, one Of S^. The number of
Dukes, Earls, etc. slain.
Archbishop, and ten thousand common soldiers, as the Heralds relation in
that behalf has reported.

(27) Prisoners of account taken in this field, were Charles the Duke of
Orleance, and John Duke of Denis S^g.
Bourbon, Arthur Earl of Richmond, extremely wounded and left for dead, as he
lay gasping among the slain, was by the English recovered and retained their
Prisoner. Louis de Bourbon Cont de Vendosme was Bertrand de Arg^re in hist:
Bret.
there taken Captive, was Charles Earl of Eu, being carried into England,
where he remained prisoner twenty three years. Others of great account were
likewise Iehan Tillet.
taken and put to ransom, as Edward de Rouen, Oliver de la Field, and Iehan
Giffart, with these and many Alain Bouchart Annal. de Bret.
more the next day King Henry marched to Callais, leaving the French to search
for their wounded, that in ditches and bushes had made their heavy beds. Will.
Parredin. Annal. de Burgoin.
In commiseration whereof, the Count Charrolois extre me pensive for the loss
of his uncles, and other his friends, in charity came to the field; and caused
the dead to be buried, the charge whereof he committed to the Abbot of
Roussiannille and the Bailiffe History of Normandy.
of Air, who enclosed a piece of ground with a deep ditch of two hundred and
fifty yards square, fensing it with an hedge of thorns against the rauenings
of dogs and wolves. Wherein were interred five hundred and eight thousand
Christian carcases, in 5800. slain French buried in one plat of ground.
regard whereof it was sanctified by the Bishop of Esguines, and made a
Churchyard.

(28) The Duke of Britain with his forces was come to Amiens within two days
march of Azincourt Alain Bouchart Annal. de Bret.
to aid King Charles, but the French upon a conceived assurance of victory,
would not stay his coming: who now hearing of the glorious day obtained by the
English, dismissed his troops, and retired to his own Country, not meaning
any more to intermeddle in the war between England and History of Normandy.
France. Now King Henry upon Saturday the 26. of October, being the next day
after Battle, took his march toward Callis, but in passing the field wherein
they had fought, he caused search for all the English, which he caused to be
enterred according to their estates. Stowes Annal.
But the Bodies of his slain cosen the Duke of York, and of Michael de la
Poole Earl of Suffolk, he took away thence, carrying them both into
England, and so passing to Guisnes with his Prisoners he entered Callis,
whither, those left at Harflew resorted, Grafton.
to pay their ransomes to them assigned.

(29) His host now refreshed and courage augmented, it was disputable in
Counsel, whether the King should return again into France, to pursue his
enterprise already begun, or else to imbark for England. But the time of year
spent, the winter wet, and the field Camps very much subject to fluxes,
wherewith many of his soldiers were as yet infected, and more unhealed of
their wounds; it was thought fittest to make for England, and the sooner, for
that victuals became somewhat scarce in Callis. These things premised, King
Henry upon the sixteenth day of November spread sails for England, King Henry
returns into England.
and in the passage was met with such storms, that his French Prisoners were
in as great fear, as they He and his company in danger at S^. Tho. Wall.
had been in danger at the Battle of Azincourt: but arrived at Dover and all
dangers past, upon the three and twenty of November in triumph wise he made
his entrance into London, four hundred Citizens The King is received o^ London
with great state.
riding before him in red and white hoodes, the gates and streets weere
garnished with Pageants, and the Caxton Chron.
Conduits plenteously pouring forth sweet wines. The religious men met him with
procession, and fourteen mitred Bishops attended his approach unto Saint
Paul's, where, out of the Censers the All sorts both Clergy and Laity show
their affection to the King, and he to God.
sweet Odours filled the Church, and the Quier chanted Anthems cunningly set
by note: in all which the honor was ascribed only unto God, the King so
commanding it. And so far was he from the vain ostentation of men, that he
would not admit his broken Crown, nor bruised armor to be borne before him in
show, which are the usual Ensigns of warlike triumphs. The City presented
him a thousand pound in gold, two golden basins worth five hundred Stowes Annal.
pound more, which were received with all Princely thanks.

(30) And now to do the last office of a soldier for those two noblemen
slain at Azincourt, he willed the body of the Duke of York to be interred
The Duke of York interred at Fotheringhay. The Earl of Suffolk at Ewhelme.
in his College at Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire, and the Earl of Suffolk
at Ewhelme in Oxfordshire, commanding most of his Bishops and Abbots to
celebrate the Exequies in London, whereunto likewise resorted his uncle Dorset
the Governor of Harflew, whom for his good service done, he created Duke of
Exceter, and gave him a thousand pound by year out of his own Exchecquer: but
in his absence some attempts were made by the French against the said Town,
whereby he was enforced the sooner to return.

(31) The calamities of these times by the stirred Gonzales de ylles^ in la
Hist. Pontif.
schisms of the Church, and these bloody wars among Christian Princes,
Sigismund the Emperor a man of great wisdom and integrity, much lamented at
the Council of Constance, and as another Constantine solicited the three
stiff stirring Popes unto unity, but failing of that purpose, from those far
parts he traveled into France, and thence into England: seeking to make peace
betwixt these two Western May 7. The Emperor Sigismund comes into England.
Monarchs, the better to withstand the common known enemy of Christendom the
Turk. King Charles he solicited first, finding him in words very forward,
with many fair shows to embrace the motion, whereupon taking with him the
Archbishop of Rheims as Ambassador from the French King, came unto Callis,
where he was most honorably entertained by the Earl of Warwick, Deputy of
the Town, and diverse other Lords sent thither by King Henry to attend him, as
also thirty of his tallest ships to waft him to Dover gallantly rigged and
manned with a noble train. The Duke of Gloucester accompanied with many of the
nobility, was appointed to receive him at Dover, where they attended his
coming.

(32) The Emperor arrived, and ready to take land, Gloucester and the other
Lords with their drawn swords entered the water, and thus spoke to the
Emperor, that if his Imperial Majesty intended to enter as their Kings friend
and a mediator for peace, The stern manner of entertaining the Emperor at his
landing.
they would receive him with all willingness accordingly, but if as an Emperor
to claim any authority in England, which was a free Kingdom, they were there
ready to resist and impeach his entrance. Which rough demand being most mildely
answered by Sigismund, he had present access, and by them was attended toward
London. Well liked of by the Emperor.


(33) This worthy Emperor, King Henry greatly respected, as well for his own
worths, and the amity held ever with the house of Beam; as also for that he
had married Rich. Grafton
Barbara the daughter of the Earl of Zilie the Kings Cosen Germane removed.
His entertainment was Princely, and Paul Aemil.
charges altogether borne by King Henry, who the more to honor him at
Windsore, solemnly enstalled him Knight of the Order of Saint George or Gartar,
with a most sumptuous fest purposely prepared, at which the Emperor sat in
his Collar and Robes; but not foreslowing the cause for which he came, he
instantly urged the peace for France, wherein he was gently heard by the
English King, but upon new displeasures The King willingly hears the
Emperor for a peace.
for some loss of men in the Territories of Roane, the motion at that time was
dashed, and would not proceed, least (as King Henry alleged) the French should
suppose that a small loss had weakened his spirits: yet the Emperor
continuing his intercession Enguerrant de M^let. Upon an unexpected assault by
the French the King st^eth further talk of peace. A. D. 1415. March 14.
for peace, had brought it to that pass by his pithy persuasions, as had not
the French at that very instant besieged Harflew both by Sea and land, it had
been effected.

(34) For not long before Thomas Earl of Dorset, having made a road into the
County of Caux, was set upon by the Earl of Armigrace Constable of France with
other strong men at Arms near unto Vademont, who so distressed the English,
that Dorset took into a Garden for defense, and having had private conference
there with the Constable, early before day, departed with the loss of Nichol.
Gilles Alain Chartier Secretary an Roy Charles 7.
four hundred men. Armigrace puffed up by his got victory, with his French
powers followed the English in a hasty march toward Harflew, and upon the sands
intercepted * Hist. of Normandy says 800.
their passage, where betwixt them a cruel conflict was performed, with the
overthrow of the French, and flight of the Constable, who retired to
Monstreuillier for safety.

(35) This his unlucky attempt he took greatly Rich. Grafton.
to heart, and therefore purposing to repurchase again his honor, he determined
for Harflew, where he set Harflew besieged by the French both by land and sea.
down his land siege, before the English Garrison within, were well aware,
when also the Vicount Narbon Vice Admiral of France, with a Fleet of tall
ships entered the haven, so that the Town was begirt on every side as we have
said. King Henry hearing of these news, called home his Ambassadors, which
Enguerrant de Monstrel.
were the Bishop of Norwich and Sir Thomas Erpingham in commission then at
Beauuois, and in conference for a Peace; and the Emperor well perceiving that
the French played upon advantage, and that King Henry was not of temper to turn
edge at their The Emperor out of hope to make atonement for France enters
league with England.
strokes, saw it vain to prosecute the peace for France further, and therefore
sought to enter league with the English himself, unto the which King Henry was
so willing as he confirmed the same upon these Articles following.

(36) That the said Emperor and King, their heirs and successors Titus Liui.
should be friends each to other as Allies and Confederates against all manner
of persons of what estate or degree soever, the Church of Rome, and the Pope
for the time being only excepted (for he was the Master Be that then lead the
swarm.) The Pope might not be opposed.


(37) That neither themselves, their heirs nor successors should be present
in Counsel or other place, where either of them, their heirs or successors
might sustain damage in lands, goods, honors, states or persons: and that if
any of them should understand of loss or hinderance to be like to fall or
happen to the others, they should impeach the same, or if that lay not in their
powers, they should advertise the others thereof with all convenient speed.
That either of them, their heirs and successors should advance the others
honor and commodity without any fraud or deceit. That neither of them, nor
their heirs or successors should permit their subjects to leauy wars
against the others. That it should be lawful and free for each of their
subjects to pass into the others Country, and there to remain and make
merchandise either by Sea or land, paying the Customs, gables, and duties due
and accustomed according to the Laws, and Ordinances of the places, and
Countries where they should traffic. That neither of the said Princes, nor
their heirs, nor successors should receive any rebel, banished man, or
traitor of the others willingly, but should cause every such person to avoid
out of their Countries, Realms, dominions, and Jurisdictions. That neither of
the said Princes, their heirs nor Successors should begin any other wars
against any other person, other then such as they had wars with at that
present without the consent of the other his Confederate, except in defense of
themselves, their Countries and subjects in case of invasion made upon them.
That it should be lawful for the King of England to prosecute his wars
against France for the recovery of his right, as should seem to him expedient,
and for the Emperor, for the recovery of any part of his right retained by the
French. Lastly, that either of them should assist other in recovery and
Conquest of their rights, lands and dominions, withheld and kept from them, by
him that calls himself King of France, and others, the Princes and Barons of
France. These conclusions and agreements bare date the 19 of October, in Anno
1416. In the mean while the French that had felt the hard hand of the English,
and seeing that Henry had with-drawne his commissioners for peace, King Charles
made a league with the states of Genoua, requiring their aid against this
dangerous enemy, who supplyde him with six hundred Ag^ino Giusti^ano V^scouo.
di. (...).
Crosse-bowes, and eight tall ships of war, and as many galleys with munition
and victuals. These wafting the Seas with many brauadoes, King Henry in person
meant to have met with himself, but the Emperor dissuading his purpose, the
charge of that Enterprise was committed to John Duke of Bedford, accompanyde
with the Earls of March, Marshall, Paul. Aemil^ Alain Char^ey. Secretary.
Oxford, Warwick, Huntington, Arundell, Devonshire, and Salisbury; these
falling upon the County of Narbon, a fierce encounter was begun, and long
fought, till at length the victory fell to the English, so that the French Navy
was most of them battered, French Navy ou^rthrowne.
suncke and taken; amongst others three great Carricks of the Genoaes were sent
to England, with whom the bastard of Burbon was brought away Prisoner; and the
Viscount de Narbon, Le Sire de Montaine, and Le Sire de Berrar chased into
Britain. This victory History of Normandy. La Mer des Histories.
obtained, the Duke past forward to the Town of Harflew, and refreshed it with
victuals without any impeachment; for Armagnac the Constable hearing how his
Consorts had kept tune on the Seas, thought it not best to set to their note,
least his mean would not be heard, the base of this music sounding too
deep, and therefore he put up his pipes, and got him to Paris. This service
performed was so commended by the Emperor, as he openly The Emperor
applaudeth the ^city of England.
said, that Realm was happy that had such a King, but the King more happy
that had such Subjects, and ever after held Bedford in a most special account.

(38) His affairs now finished, and Princely entertainements He prepares for
Germany.
thankefully received, he prepares for his return toward Germany, and King
Henry to do him the more honor would needs accompany him to his Town of
Callis, whither after their arriuals the Duke of Burgogne repaired to do his
homage unto the Emperor, which Burgogne some months Denis Savage Chro. de
Fland.
before, had concluded a peace with the Earl of Warwick in the behalf of King
Henry, for the Counties of Flaunders and Arthois. Henry therefore in hope of a
further friendship with him, sent his brother the Duke of Gloucester, and the
Earl of March unto Saint Omers to lie hostages with the County Charrolois, for
Burgognes passage and safe return, with whom he sent Warwick to conduct him
to Callis.

(39) His entertainment was honorable both by the Emperor and King, which as
acceptably he The Duke of Burgundy does homage to the Emperor and takes a
truce with K. Henry.
received, and unto Sigismund performed his homage, and with Henry renewed the
truce for the time of two years, both which were so distastiue to the French
stomachs, that the Emperor is taxed, he came not with an intent to work the
good of France, but rather Ioh. Serres in (...) Charles 6.
to augment her miseries by animating Burgundy to bandy against Orleance: and
that King Henry was puffed with an humor of pride, his affairs so prosperous
against a weak King. But this business ended, Burgundy returned to Graueling,
Henry into England, and the Emperor toward Germany, being was ted into the low
Countries with the Kings Fleet^

13. That none of the Captains nor Soldiers, nor That no person should
forsake the Town, for being true to K. Henry they should be safe.
any Burgess should forsake the Town, until the second of January next: and
his majesty of his grace and mercy, was pleased that all such as would remain
in Fallais, should remain there in safety both in body and goods, so as they
would be true subjects unto him. 14. That none of the defendants of the
Castle Neither person nor goods of the Castles to be re ceiued into the Town.
During the truce no assault to be made on the Town. 12. Knights and Esquires
to be hostage to King Henry.
should be received into the Town, nor their goods secretly kept by the
Inhabitants under any pretense or Color whatsoever. 15. That during the treaty
no assault or offense should be offered by the kings army, to the Town or to
the Inhabitants, so as they do not aid, assist or relieve the defendants in
the Castells. 1. That for the true perfourmance of the Articles twelve knights
and Squires should be delivered hostage to the King, and to be set at liberty
when the Covenants above mentioned were fulfilled These things concluded and
subscribed with their A. D. 1417.
names and seals, the 20. of December; upon the second of January no succors
appearing, the town of Fallais yielded to the King.
Fallais was acordingly delivered, but the Castle standing obstinate, the king
was as diligent, till the defendants failing in their spirits, the first day of
February demanded a Parley. Whereunto Henry consented making Clarence his
brother his sole Commissioner. The Articles agreed upon.
The Articles acorded for the most part were as the former, whereto were added
these which ensue. That if they were not succored by the French power, to
surrender.


(51) That upon the 16. of the said month of February, if the King in person,
the Dolphin his son, or the Earl of Armagnac Constable of France, That they
should trust to the kings royal promise, Geffrey Chasteaux excepted.
did not with force raise the siege, then Sir Oliver de Mauny Knight, governor
of the said Castle, should render the same unto King Henry. 2 That the said
Governor and all other within the Castle should at the day assigned submit
themselves to the King, and remain his prisoners, trusting to his Majesty's
royal promise not to receive offense either in life or goods: (Geoffrey
Chasteaux only excepted) who was That the governor should repair the walls.
left simply to the Kings mercy. 3. That after the rendering of the said
Castle Sir Oliver de Mauny the Governor, should at his own charges repair
all the breaches and ruins made in the walls during the siege, and leave it in
the same sort as it was before 8. Gentlemen to be hostages. The Castle
repaired, the Governor should* be ^et at liberty.
the same was besieged. 4. That for the perfourmance of these Articles, eight
Gentlemen should remain Hostages with the King. 5. That when the Castle was
prepared, Sir Oliver Mauny, and al his Company should be set at liberty, and
until then to remain the Kings Prisoners, Geoffrey de Chasteaux above
mentioned only excepted. These agreements concluded, the Indenture subscribed,
and king Henry's seal of Arms thereunto fixed, at the Febru. 16.
prefixed day according to these Articles the Castle of Fallais was rendered
unto him: which done, he divided his Army into many parts, vnde^ the several
conducts of the Dukes of Clarence, and Gloucester, and The City of Roane
besieged.
the Earl of Warwick: who wan diverse Castles, himself the while marching to
besiege Rouen, where he set down his siege, and began the assault in a furious
manner: the defendants as obstinately bent to hold him out: so that to win
the Town by force, Henry found it very difficult, as well for the Polyd. Verg.
strength of Bulwarks and Ramparts as for the number of hands within it, to
make resistance, and therefore to reduce them by famine was his only design.
Enguerrant de Monstre^.


(52) For Burgogne from King Charles had sent many worthy Captains with a
thousand selected 15000. Citizens well trained within Roane.
Soldiers to defend the City, and within it besides were fifteen thousand
Citizens well trained and furnished: and the Town stored with victuals for ten
months continuance; notwithstanding K. Henry quartered about the Town, and for
his safety The River Seine blockt up with Iron-Chaines.
cast up a Trench betwixt the walls and his men: the River Seine he blockt up
with three Iron-Chaines, one of them laid two foot above water, another with
the level, and the third two foot under the water, to forbid all relief
unto the City by Boats.

(53) With the English, sixteen hundred Irish Kernes were enrolled, from the
Prior of Kilmainham, Caxton. Chron.
able men, but almost naked, their arms, were targets, darts, and swords,
their horses little, and bare no saddle, yet very nimble, on which upon every
advantage they played with the French, in spoiling the Country, rifeling the
houses, and carrying away children, with their baggage, upon their Cowes
backs. Denis Savage. Roane besieged six months.
Thus from June unto December the siege had continued, and now victuals
failing, and the Town in distress, the Rouennois sent four gentlemen, and as
many Burgesses, unto King Charles, and the Burgogne 50000. quite famished and
12000. almost starued put out of the Town.
(then at Beauuois) to signify their miseries; fifty thousand already famished
with hunger, and twelve thousand staruelings put out of the Town, but not
suffered to pass by the English, died by multitudes in the ditches, whose
unburied Carcases did infect the Town with contagious diseases, so that
without present relief they must be enforced to render.

(54) Aid was promised, and earnestly expected, The Lady Katherines picture
sent to King Henry to move him to pity Roane.
but in steed of supplies, the Bishop of Beauuois accompanied with others, and
the Cardinal or Vrsins sent from Pope Martin, were dispatched to King Henry,
to entreat a peace; for the better accomplishing thereof, they brought with
them the picture of the Lady Catherine, according to life, which King John
Serres
Henry well liked, yea and (as Serres says) fell in love with: but demanding a
hundred thousand Crowns with the Dutchies of Normandy, Aquitain, Aniou, and
other Seignories for her dowry, nothing was concluded Denis Savage.
or done.

(55) And now the Rouennois helpeles of succor, Enguerrant.
and despairing of peace, resolved to make a brave sally upon the kings
quarter: to perform which resolution, 10000. chosen me^ with their leaders
issued out of the Town, the vantgard (which was 2000.) being Ten thousand of
Roane sally forth upon King Henry, and are overthrown.
past and in fight, by misfortune the drawbridge with ouer-weight of men
brake, many were drowned, slain and hurt: neither was there any more passage
that way, to relieve their followers engaged in fight with the English;
whereupon they made have to the other Gates: but before they could come to give
aid, the vantgard was broken, and most of them slain, and taken Prisoners.
Upon this disastre the soldiers within mutined against Guy de Boutellier their
General, murmuring that he had contrived the breaking of the bridge.

(56) In these distastures King Charles returning toward Paris, sent the
besieged word to make what King Charles sends no succor.
shift they could, which unexpected message stroke a sad fear into the
miserable defendants hearts, who weak in men and victuals, knew no way to
subsist, and thereupon in Counsel concluded to send unto Henry, which
presently they did. For whose entertainment, he caused two tents to be set up
at Port S. Hillarie. Their Commissioners were two gentlemen, The Rouennois
desire a parley.
two Clergymen, and two Burgesses of the Town. Commissioners for the King
were the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Warwick: the demands of the
Rouennois were many, but their answers were short; that no conditions would be
accepted, but simply yielding to the kings mercy; whereupon the conference
brake up, and these returned They return unsatisfied.
into the Town, bred sundry distractions, some crying to yield, and other some
crying to die like men, but Henry desirous to be Master of the Town, and
fearing it would be fired by themselves, if he wan it by force, made the
Archbishop of Canterbury his Instrument, whose vocation was fit for it, to call
again The Articles of the composition of Roane. Denis Savage. Chron. de
Flaunders. King Henry requires 356000. Crowns. Enguerrant de Monstrel. Two
principal persons to be left to his mercy. All to swear fealty to King Henry.
the Commissioners, and again fell into treaty of Composition, which lastly
was agreed, upon these Articles as follow. 1. That the Burgesses should give
unto Henry toward his expense in the siege, three hundred fifty six thousand
Crowns of gold. 2. That Robert Li^et vicar general to the Archbishop of
Rouen, Iehan Iourdan who commanded the Canoniers, and Alen Blanchart Captain
of the Common people, should be left to his mercy without condition. 3. That
all the people should swear faith and loyalty to Henry and his Successors. 4
That Henry should protect and defend them against all That their privileges
should be confirmed to them. That who so would, might depart, but their goods
should be forfeit. The soldiers to resign up their arms and de^ part,
promising a twelve months truce.
men, and confirm unto them their privileges, franchises, and liberties,
which they had enjoyed ever since the time of Saint Lewis king of France. 5.
That all such as had desire to leave the Town, might freely depart, with his
garments upon his back only, and his goods to be confiscated unto King Henry.
6. That the soldiers should bring all their Arms to a place assigned, and
should depart out of the Town unarmed with a Cudgel in their hands, first
taking their Oath not to bear Arms against Henry; for a twelve month next
ensuing.

(57) This agreement was concluded the 16 of June Anno 1418. when as the hungry
Citizens in multitudes came to the English Camp to buy victu The hungry
Citizens plentifully relieved from Henry's camp.
als, which so abounded with Provisions, as a fat mutton was sold for six
souses of Paris money. Upon the next day following, Henry triumphantly A fat
mutton sold for 6. souses. King Henry roially enters the City.
made his entry into Rouen; the Ecclesiastics of the Town, in their miters
and vestures, with their relics, singing of Hymns, conducted him to the
Cathedral Church, where before the high Altar, upon his knees, he gave thanks
to God for the Conquest of this Town, which had remained two hundred and
fifteen years in the possession of the Rouen 15. years before the now
winning of it, was won by K. Philip from King John of England.
French, even from the time when Philip King of France wan it from king John of
England. The day following, Alain Blanchart the Captain of the common people
was beheaded, Robert Linet, and Iehan Iourdan, put to their high ransomes, the
French Garrisons pillaged, unarmed, and put out of the Town, but safely were
conducted over Saint Georges-bridge to go whither they would. Guy de
Boutellier, who was Captain general of Rouen, became King Henry's leigeman,
unto whom he gave all his lands, and a charge under the Duke of Gloucester.
Immediately after the rendering of Rouen, sundry other places of Many Towns
yield after the sorrender of Rouen.
note yielded themselves, as Caudebec, Monstreuillier, Diepe, Feschamp, Arques,
Neufchastell, Deincourt, Eu, Moncheaux, Vernon, Mante, Gorney, Harflewr,
Ponteurde-Mer, Mollineaux, le Treict, Tancaruille, Abrechier, Mauleurier,
Valemont, Neufuille, Bellaucombre, Fontaines, Le Boure, Preaux,
Nougonder-uille, Logempree, Saint Germain, Sur Cuylly, Baudemont, Bray,
Villeterre, Charles-Maisnill, Les Boules Guillen court, Fanifontaines, Le
Becque Crepin, Backeuille, and diverse other places wherein Henry placed his
Garrisons. France generally troubled, and trembling at the loss especially of
Rouen, Henry ready to pierce forward, and Charles declining through his
infirmities increasing; the Duke of Burgogne (who bare all the sway under
Burgogne endeuoreth to make a peace between Charles and Henry.
that infirm King, and therefore much hated by the Daulphin, whose revenge he
feared,) much doubting Henry's rising fortunes, held it best to uphold his own
greatness, by mediating a peace betwixt the two Kings. For which end he sent his
Ambassadors to Polyd. Verg.
Henry, praying personal Conference; to which he assented and assigned the
place, which was at Melun, where in a field well trenched, and ramparted with
The place of treaty was at Melun.
strong Gates, two pauillions were arreard, the one for the Kings to repose
themselves in, and the other for their counsel to consult in.

(58) Charles, Isabell, Burgogne, and Katherine, the Count Saint Paul, with a
thousand horse garding them The French states came first.
thither, came first. King Henry with his brothers of Clarence and Gloucester,
attended upon with a thousand horse, held the appointment; and now met, the two
Kings embraced each others; Henry kissed Isabell Henry meets with a thousand
horse.
and Katherine, who indeed became a precious pearl in his eye: Burgogne a
little bending his knee, did his reverence to Henry, who took him in his
Arms: and the two nations though mortal enemies, demeaned themselves so
ciuilly, as no cause of quarrel was offered on either side, much conference
passed, but nothing concluded; Henry's demands Their followers on both parts
though enemies demean themselves ciuilly.
seeming to the French to be so unreasonable. The treaty thus dissolved, and
all ready to depart, King Henry not well pleased, spoke thus unto Burgogne,
Cosen, I may not well digest this refusal, but be you assured, that either I
will have your Kings daughter, and all King Henry dis plea^d at their retu^all.
The Dukes reply.
my demands, or else I will banish both you, and the cut of France. You speak
your pleasure said the Duke, but before you shall thrust the King, them, and
me, out of the Realm, you will be weary of the enterprise.

(59) The treaty thus broke, and danger nothing less, the Burgundian
altogether French; and in heart Burgogne sideth with the ^ulphin who after ward
slew him.
no friend to the English, reconciled himself unto the Daulphin, which deed
was soon after the cause of his own death; and Henry displeased with this
combination, quickened his thoughts (full of revenge) to prosecute the war
more sharply then heretofore: the first enterprise he made, was upon Ponthois,
unto Ponthois besieged.
which Town the last day of Iulie he sent three thousand foot, which before
the break of day, and not discovered by the Sentinels, set their Ladders to
the Walls, mounted up, crying Saint George, and so opening a Port let in their
Companions. The Signeur Enguerrant de Monstrelet.
de L' Isle-Adam Marshall of France and Governor of the Town, affrighted at
the surprise, fled out at another Port toward Paris, after whose exam ple
above ten thousand Inhabitants did the like, so as the English without
resistance were Masters of the Town, where in great riches fell to the
soldiers The soldiers got great riches in the Town.
shares. When King Charles at Paris heard of the loss of Ponthois, in great
fear with his wife, daughter, Burgundy, and many noblemen, to be further from
the fire so near at hand, went unto Troyes in-Champagne, leaving Paris under
the Government of King Charles upon the love o^ Po^ the flies from Paris.
the Count Saint Paul, and Eustach de Lactre Chancellor of France, whilst Henry
went forward with his intended enterprises.

(60) For his brother of Clarence by three weeks siedge wan the Castle Gizors
by composition, the Enguerrant de Monstrelet.
Earl of Huntington sacked Preaux, burnt Bretuiell, Clermont, and the Castle
of ^endueil, and Henry himself besieged the Castle of Guillart, and
Rochguien, two of the strongest holds in Normandy; which upon Guillart and
Rochguien two of the best Forts in Normandy.
compositions were surrendered, and further prevailed more then the French
wished. For the Daulphin, the only man that stood for the public defense of
France, was miserably poor, and for want of pay could make no great show of
followers in the field, whose chief Counselor was the Constable Armagnac an
old crafty fox, that had ever sided with Orleance A cunning plot of the
Constable Armagnac.
against the Burgundian. And now fearing least his own esteem should be
lessened, or that Burgundy should be the Archite to cross him the wise
Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17.
or rather indeed thrust forward by destiny to be the scourge and fall of
France, he counseled the young Daulphin to seize upon his mothers money,
jewels and plate, for his further supply to the public Queen Isabell robbed of
her Jewels and plate.
use, (which immediately he did) to advance the estate: but Queen Isabell
impatient of these wrongs received, in a womanish spleen studies the revenge,
wholly neglecting the common cause, which gave the English surer footing in
France: but the Daulphin to make good what he had done, leads the King in The
Daulphin draws the King to suspect Queen Isabell.
iealousy that the Queens designs were dangerous, and altogether set for the
alienation of the Crown, which he weak man, no sooner heard then believed,
being ever ready to take her at the worst and never ouergone in her love at the
best.

(61) These sparks of sedition thus blown in the Court, suspicions
increasing, and maligners A^ls of Burgundy.
still working, Queen Isabell with her sister in law, the Duchess of Bauier
were sent prisoners to Blois, and from thence to Eours where they were kept
with Queen Isabel and her sister imprisoned.
strait guard, three Gentlemen in Commission to take care of their safeties:
till then her favors had gone with Orleance, and with him had contested ever
against Burgogne, but now to quit her imprisonment, she reconciled her self
unto him, and solicited his She solliciteth Burgogne for her deliverance.
assistance for her deliverance. Burgogne well perceiving how much it would
advance his part, to draw the Queen to be of his faction, brake up his siege
then laid before Corbeill, and with certain choice troops repaired toward
Trours, from whence immediately Burgogne sends to the Queen.
he sent the Queen word of his coming. She faining devotion to the Abbey of
Marmonstier seated somewhat without the Town, made it known to her keepers,
and they not daring to contradict so great a Princess, mistrusting no danger,
attended her thitherward with a competent guard as they supposed, where Fosseux
and Vergie two especial men in the Dukes trust, were laid in the Ambush near
unto The manner of her escape from her keepers.
the Abbey, and having notice the Queen was come to Church, came to salute
her, and to signify that the Burgogne was in person to attend her service. Her
keepers conceiving their seconds were not far off, as men dismayed, told the
Queen of some fear, and that an enemy was near at hand; whereunto she
answered, I am not ignorant who they are, and thereupon commanded to apprehend
those her keepers; her liberty thus got she became wholly for Burgogne, and
She is made Regent of France.
by his means was made the Regent of France, and her picture stamped upon the
Seal of that State.

(42) By birth she was a Germane, and daughter to Stephen Duke of Bauier, of
an imperious spirit, and unreconcilable envy, not overmuch beloved of her
husband, and (as the nature of most women are) not overmuch favoring his
favorites, whose femall authority and hatred against her own son Daulphin
Charles, sore bruised the Crown, which her weak husband ware: his foregone
infirmities and 10. Serres The causes why the French were the easier conquered
by king Henry.
her new sprung Regency, were now as two fludgates set open to let in the
deluge of France, hers is to be spoken of in the intercourse of the English;
his, many times has been, but not made known how it came: therefore a while
in that subject, before we pass forward in this place, let us read what
others have writ.

(43) This Charles the sixth, and sicke-braind King of France was the son of
King Charles surnamed the Eccles. 2. 19.
wise, who with Solomon his wiser might have demanded this question; who can
tell whether his son shall be a wiseman or a fool? for the flower of his youth
and commendable dispositions of his middle age promised great hopes of a
valiant, moderate and most happy Prince, only inclined to choler and revenge,
as by the occasion of his lunacy is easily seen, which chanced on this manner.

(44) Peter Craon a Courtier, his minion, and an inward The occasion of King
Charles distemper.
favorite of the Duke of Orleance the Kings brother, blabbed out some secrecy
of the said Dukes amorous passions upon a wanton Lady, unto his Duchess
Valentine; who but lately married, and so soon deceived of bed, took the wrong
no less then it was, nor let she (as who can let a woman to speak) to
Orleance newly married is in love with another.
tell him his faults on both sides of his head, the Duke could not hide what
she too well knew, and therefore sought to satisfy her with complements of
kind words, but the Curtaine-sermons nightly enlarged upon the same text, made
him many times to lie awake with little devotion (God wot) to hear, and often
to rise when he would feign have slept, which caused him lastly to complain
to the King that Craon had, and would betray their overmuch trust. The cause no
more, but yet too much against a Prince, Craon with all disgrace was discharged
the C^ dismissed the Court for telling the Duchess of the incontinency of her
husband.
Court, who not able to brook such an open indignity, assaulted Cliston the
Constable in a murdering manner, as the only man (as he thought) that wrought
his disgrace, and escaping Paris, fled into Britaigne whose Duke was his
kinseman, and an enemy to the Constable.

(45) King Charles transported with choler of this double offense, minds to
draw Craon by force King Charles pursues Craon into Britain.
out of Britain to justify himself, whom the Council had declared guilty of
high Treason, and enemy to the Crown of France, and resolves in person to
enterinto Britain: forthwith the expedition for men and manner of proceeding
made Charles to loose both meat and sleep, so as the vexation of mind and
distemperature of body, carried apparent shows in his face: in so much that
the Dukes of Berry and Burgogne mistrusting the worst, counseled that his
journey might be staid; his Physicians dissuade him in regard of his health,
the summer extreme hot, and Notwithstanding his sickness he continues his
journey.
his blood as then over subject to dangerous fevers. New devises were wrought
to stay him at home, giving it forth that Craon was fled Britaigne, and in
Arragon was imprisoned by the Queen. All this notwithstanding, needs would he
forward, so forward is man when his fate will so have it.

(46) He departed Meaux in Iulie: the year very hot, his head covered with a
great Cap of scarlet, his body wrapped in a thick velvet Ierkin warm enough
for winter, his mind distempered with choler, grief, and despite, and his
body wearied with watching, distasture, and want of rest. Thus entering the
forest of Meaux about noone-tide, a man bare-headed, Charles in the forest,
at Noonday sees an apparition.
and bare legged attired in a Coat of white rugge, stepped suddenly forth from
betwixt two trees, and caught hold of his bridle, staid his horse, saying; King
ride no further but return back, for thou art betrayed. Charles whose spirits
were otherwise dulled, and his blood greatly distempered, was amazed at the
voice: which seen, his servants ran to this man, and with blows forced him
to leave the reins of the horse: and so without any further search the man
vanished away.

(47) The troops of his nobles divided because of the dust, King Charles was
followed by the Pages of his Chamber, who ouercharged with heat and
distemperature, took no great pains to guide their horse, so that thronging
together, he which bore the Kings Lance, let it fall upon him, who had on his
head His followers thronging confusedly to help do distemper him the more.
the Kings helmet, and in the falling made a clattering noise. The King much
musing upon the words spoken, and now withal hearing this unexpected noise,
was from a pensive melancholy suddenly struck into a raging Lunacy,
supposing himself to be betrayed indeed: and transported with this frenzy he
draws his sword, and made toward his Pages with a maine cry: his brother
Orleance not knowing the cause, hasted among them, whom Charles likewise
pursued, and with the like rage ran at his uncle of Burgogne, thus spending
himself and his horse out of breath, all encompassed the still raging man, He
runs distractiuely at every one with his sword.
took from him his sword, disrobed him for heat, and cheered him with
flatterings and fair spoken words, his brother and uncles saluted him, but he
knows them not, sits mute, sighing and panting, and with troubled amazement
moves both body and head, so that all signs of Frenzy appeared in this poor
Prince, and the eminent misery that was to fall upon France very apparent to
the inseeing Statists: but now to proceed.

(48) John Duke of Burgogne ill disgesting the threats that King Henry had
given, and joined in league with the Daulphin, as we have said: was
notwithstanding John Duke of Burgogne suspected of the State.
suspected to be a great enemy to the State, and as the Giants are feign to
heap mountain upon mountain, for steps of assent to pull Jupiter out of his
throne, so by sinister Counselors Burgogne was accused of some intended
stratageme, as meaning to mount the Chair where the Daulphin should sit:
Charles therefore from Monstrean-Surfault yonne a Town in Brie, sent for the
Duke unto Charles the Daulphin seeks his remouall.
Troyes in Champagne to confer further upon the effecting of their affected
accord, as also to employ their united forces upon the common enemy the
English, a third cause likewise was alleged, and that was to have him his
means for a reconciliation to his mother the Regent, whose wrath, besides him,
no man could pacify.

(49) The Duke mistrusting no snake in the John Serres.
grass, thought all things as sure as they were fair in show. and accompanied
with many noblemen, five hundred horse, and two hundred Archers, he repaired
to Monstreau, at whose Gate the Daulphin had built 2. Barricadoes, and himself
in arms stood there to receive the Duke, Burgogne approached, kneeled down
upon one knee, and with an honorable reverence Burgogne repairing to the
Daulphin, is charged with breach of promise.
saluted him most humbly, the Daulphin neglecting all courtesies to him-ward,
charge^ him with breach of promise, for that the civil wars and his
garrisons were not surceast and withdrawn, the Dukes sword hanging too far
back, and somewhat troubling his kneeling, he put his hand upon the hilt, to
put it more forward, whereat Robert de Loire standing by, said, do you draw
your sword against the Lord Daulphin? at which words Tanneguy He is slain by
Tanneguy de Chastel and others.
de Chastell with a battle-axe stroke him on the face and cut off his Chin, and
others with other wounds made an end of his life, before he could arise from
his knee or get out his sword.

(50) Queen Isabell another cruel Medea and Queen Isabel incites his son,
to revenge it, and moves Charles to disinherite the Daulphin and adopt King
Henry.
unnatural mother, having a double offense done her, redoubled her wrath and
continued her tragic passions against her son the young Daulphin, who not
only incites Philip now the new Duke of Burgogne to revenge his murdered
fathers death, but torments her poor husbands spirits, in persuading him to
disherite Charles their son, and to give in marriage Lady Katherine unto King
Henry, who now had set his foot far into France. Duke Philip for his Guil.
Parradyn.
part ready for revenge, sent the Bishop of Arras with other his Ambassadors
unto Rouen to King Henry to entreat a peace, and again not many days after
their return sent back the said Bishop, whose message was so pleasing, that
Henry sent the Bishop of Rochester, the Earl of Warwick and Guien unto Arras,
who were as welcome unto Duke Philip; so that betwixt Rouen and Arras
messengers continually passed till a peace was concluded; which was proclaimed
to A peace concluded between K. Henry, K. Charles, and the new Duke of
Bu^gogne:
continue from that day (then about the feast of the Epiphany) unto mid-March
ensuing, betwixt King Henry, King Charles, and Philip Duke of Burgogne.

(51) King Henry thus far gone in his affairs for that Crown, sent his
Ambassadors unto the new made Pope Martin the first, such was the fate of Romes
Apostolical fathers in those fair Sunshine and Golden days, that the
greatest Monarch was but a vassal to attend upon their stirrup and their
Crowns subject to be spurned off, with their feet. Henry therefore minding
to stop the violence of these narrow Seas, and to make the stream mild
betwixt his two Realms, had now none to let, but only him that was all in all,
and bare an Oar in every man's boat: and therefore from King Charles, Burgogne,
King Henry sollicites the Pope to confirm him King of France.
and himself, his Ambassadors solicited his fatherly consent, to admit him
his most Christian son of France, and to give his holy blessing for the
confirmation of the marriage, and peace concluded betwixt those two famous
Princes. King Henry's right to the French Crown they plainly laid forth, what
calamities France had felt in their resistance, The Calamities of France for
withstanding the right of the English.
Agincourt, Normandy and Aquitaine (as they showed him) were most lamentable
witnesses, and the hold that the Lion had got (at that day) of the Flower de
Luce, was not to be wrested out of his fast grasped paws. But his dull ear
was deaf hereunto, answering that this peace was prejudicial to La legende
des Flamens.
the right of Charles the Daulphin, and therefore he denied to confirm it.
The Pope stood for the Daulphin.


(52) But with what quill these wines were vented from the settled Lees for the
Daulphin, unless it was the golden vice, (a powerful key indeed to unlock
the Popes silent lips,) I know not; most true it Alain Chartier. Enguerrant de
Monstrel.
is, the conditions went forward, and the place for the confirmation of
covenants was Troyes in Champagne, where King Charles, and his Queen then lay,
and whither Burgogne, Guien, the Lord Rosse, and others attended with five
hundred horse, were sent Ambassadors Ambassadors from King Henry
from Henry. In their way they besieged (and after fifteen days wan) the
Town of Crespie that held for the Daulphin, demolished the Castle, razed the
walls, and departed upon composition.

These coming to Troyes were honorably received, History of Normandy.
and lovingly concluded on a final peace, where Lady Katherine was attended as
the Englsh Queen, Lady Katherine attended as Queen of England. Henry goes
in person to Troyes.
and some left to guard her by King Henry's command. His Ambassadors returned,
and affection enflamed, himself attended with the Dukes of Clarence, and
Gloucester his brethren, the Duke of Excester, the Earls of Warwick,
Huntingdon, Salisbury, Guienne and many other nobles, (his guard consisting of
sixteen hundred Lances and Archers) departed from Rouen to Ponthois, to S.
Denis, and from thence into Prouins, where he was met near unto Troyes by the
Duke of Burgundy and many other French Lords, and with all Princess attendance
was conducted into the Town. The joy was great with which he was received,
especially of the King, the Queen and Lady Katherine, whom he found in S.
^eters Church expepecting History of Normandy.
his coming, where forthwith he and the Lady was affianced; and falling
effsoones into conference of the conditions of amity, these were consented unto
by the French and King Henry.

1. That K. Henry should take Lady Katherine to wife.

2. That Charles and Isabel should retain the name of King and Queen, and
should hold all their dignities, The Articles agreed upon betwixt the two kings.
rents, and possessions belonging to the Crown of France, during their
natural lives.

3. That the Lady Katherine should have her Dowry in England as Queens
heretofore were wont to have, Queen Katherines Dowry.
that is to say, the sum of forty thousand sceutes, that is, two to a noble.

4. That the same sum of forty thousand sceutes yearly, shall be confirmed
unto Queen Katherine by our laws, according to our usual rights, at the time
of our death.

5. That the said Lady Katherine so ouerliuing us, from the time of our death,
shall have for her Dowry in the Kingdom of France, the sum of twenty
thousand francks yearly, out of the lands, places, and Lordships that Blanch
sometime wife to Philip Beauisall held and enioied.

6. That after the death of Charles our said father, The Crown of France
intailed to England.
the Crown and Realm of France shall with all rights and appurtenances remain
unto us, and to our heirs for evermore.

7. And for as much as our said father is infirm by reason of sickness, and
may not entend in his own person to dispose of the affairs of the Realm,
therefore during the life of our said father the faculties and exercise of the
government, and disposition The government of France assigned to King Henry.
of the public utility of the Realm of France shall be, and abide to us, so
that thence forth we may govern the Realm, and admit to our Council and
assistance to the Council of France such of the English Nobility as we shall
think meet.

8. That also we of our own power shall cause the Court of France to be kept
and observed in as full authority, and in all manner of places, that now or in
time coming, is, or shall be subject to our said father.

9. Also that we to our powers shall defend and help all, and every of the
Peers, Nobles, Cities, Towns, Cominalties and singular persons, now or in
time to come, subjects to our father, in their rights, Customs, privileges,
freedoms, franchises, belonging, or due unto them in all manner of places, now
or in time coming subject to our father.

10. Also that we shall to our power travel truly, and diligently, to see that
Justice be administered in the same Realm of France according to their laws,
Customs, and rights of the same Realm without personal acception; and that
we shall keep and hold the Subjects of the said Realm in tranquillity and peace
to our power, and shall defend them against all manner of violence and
oppression.

11. Also that we to our power shall provide that able and profitable persons
shall execute the offices as well of Justices and other offices belonging to the
governance of the demaines of the Realm of France for the good and peaceable
Justice of the same, and for the administration that shall be committed unto
them.

12. Also that we of our power, so soon as it may commodiously be done, shall
travail to put into obedience of our said father, all manner of Cities,
Towns, Castles, places, Countries and persons within the Realm of France,
disobedient and rebels to our said father, syding with them that be called the
Daulphin or Armagnac.

13. And that we may the more commodiously and freely exercise and fulfill
these things aforesaid, it is accorded, that all worthy Nobles and estates of
the same Realm of France as well spirituals as temporals The subjects of France
sworn to King Henry.
and also the Nobles, Citizens, Burgesses and Cominalties of France in
obedience at this day to our said father shall make these Oaths unto us.

14. First to us having the faculty, exercise, disposition, and governance of
the foresaid common profit at our hests and commandments, these shall meekly
and obediently obey in all manner of things concerning the exercise of
Government in the same Realm.

15. Also that the worthy great and noble estates of the said Realm as well
spirituals as temporals, Citizens, Burgesses, and Comminalties of the same
Realm in all manner of things well and truly shall keep and to their power
shall do to be kept in as much as to them belongs, or to any of them, all The
tenor of the oath.
those things that be appointed and accorded between our foresaid father, our
mother, and us.

16. And that continually from the death, and after the death of our said
father Charles, they sha be our true liegemen, and our heirs, and they shall
receive and admit us for their liege, and Sovereign, and very King of France,
and for such to obey us without opposition, Contradiction or difficulty, as
they be to our father during his life. And never after, this Realm of France
shall obey to man as King and Regent of France, but to us, and to our heirs.
Also they shall not be in Counsel, help, or assent, that we loose life or
limme, or be taken with evil taking, or that we suffer harm or diminution in
person, estate, worship, or goods, but if they know any such thing to be
contrived or imagined against us, they shall let it to their powers, and shall
do us to witten thereof, as hastily as they may by themselves, by message, or
by letters.

17. That all manner of Conquests that shall be made by us in France upon the
disobedient in the Dutchies of Normandy, shall be done to the profit of our
said father, and that to our power, all manner of Lands and Lordships, that be
in places to be conquered, belonging to persons, obeying to our forefather,
which shall swear to this present accord, shall be restored to the same
persons, to whom they belonged.

18. That all manner of persons of the holy Church beneficed in the Duchy of
Normandy, or any other places in the Realm of France, subject to our father,
and favoring of the parts of the Dukes of Burgundy, which shall swear to
keep this present accord, shall peaceably enjoy their benefices of holy Church
in the Duchy of Normandy, or in other places next aforesaid.

19. Likewise that all manner of persons of holy Church obedient to us, and
beneficed in the Realm of France, and places subject to our father, that shall
swear to keep this present accord, shall enjoy peaceably their benefices of
holy Church, as is aforesaid.

20. Also that all manner of Churches, Universities and studies general, all
Colleges of Students, and other Colleges of holy Church, being in places
Churches, Universities and Colleges to enjoy their liberties.
now, or in time coming, subject to our father, or in the duchy of Normandy,
or other places in the realm of France subject to us, shall enjoy their
rights, possessions, rents, prerogatives, liberties and franchises, belonging,
or due to them in any manner of wise, in the said Realm of France, saving the
right of the Crown of France, and of every other person.

21. Also by Gods help, when it happens us to come to the Crown of France,
the Duchy of Normandy, and all other places conquered by us in the said
Realm, shall bow under the Commandment, obeisance, and Monarchy of the Crown
of Normandy to be under the Crown of France.
France.

22. Also that we to our power shall see recompense to be made by our said
father, without diminution of the Crown of France to persons obeying him and
favoring the party of Burgundy, to whom Lands, Lordships, Rents and
possessions belongs in the said Duchy of Normandy, or other places in the
Realm of France conquered by us hitherto, given by us in places, Lands,
gotten, or to be gotten in the name of our said father upon rebels and
inobedients to him, and if so be that such manner of recompense be not made to
the said persons in the life time of our said father, we shall make that
recompense in such manner and places of goods, when it happens by Gods grace
to the Crown of France, and if so be that the Lands, Lordships, Rents or
possessions belonging to such manner of persons in the said Duchy and other
places, be not given by us, the same persons shall be referred to them without
any delay.

23. And during the life of our father in all places, now, and in time to come,
subject to him, letters of common justice, grants of offices, gifts, pardons,
remissions and privileges shall be written, and proceed Letter, Grant, gifts,
etc. signed by King Charles.
under the name and seal of our said father. And forasmuch as some singular
case may fall that may not be foreseen by man's wit, in the which it may be
necessary and behouefull, that we write our letters; in such case if any hap
for the good and surety of our father, and for the government that belongs
And by King Henry.
to us, as is aforesaid, and to avoid perils which otherwise might fall to the
prejudice of our said father, to write our letters, by the which we shall
command, charge and defend after the nature and quality of the need in our
fathers behalf, and ours, as Regent of France.

24. Also that during our fathers life, we shall not call, nor write us King of
France, but shall verily abstain from that name, so long as our said father
lives.

25. Also that our said father during his life, shall name, call and write us
in French in this manner. Nostre treschier filz Henry Roy d'Engleterre heretere
de France: and in Latin in this manner; Praclarissimus King Henry's style
du^ing King Charles his life.
filius noster, Henrieus Rex Anglia, and Hares Francia.

26. That we shall put no impositions or exactions to charge the Subjects of
our said father, without cause reasonable and necessary. No otherwise then for
common good of the Realm of France, and according to the Laws and Customs
provided for the same Realm.

27. Also that we shall travel to our power, to effect that by the assent of
the three states of the Realms of England and France, all manner of obstacles
may be done away, and this chiefly, that it be ordained, and provided, that
from the time, that we, or any of our heirs come to the Crown of France, both
the Crowns, that is to say, of France and England, perpetually be together in
one, and in the The union of the Crowns.
same person, that is to say, from our fathers life to us, and from the term
of our life thence forward, in the persons of our heirs, that shall be one
after another, and that both Realms shall be governed from the time, that we,
or our heirs come to the same, not severally under diverse Kings in one time,
but under the same person, which for the time shall be King of both Realms,
and our Sovereign Lord, as is aforesaid, keeping nevertheless in all manner
of things, to either of the said Realms, their rights, liberties, customs,
vsages and laws, not making subject in any manner of wise, one of the same
Realms to the rights, laws or vsages of that other.

28. That thenceforth perpetually shall be still rest, and that in all manner
of wise, dissentions, hates, rancours, enuies, and wars, between the same
The union of the Subjects.
Realms of France and England, and the people of the same Realms drawing to
accord of the same peace may cease and be broken.

29. That from henceforth for evermore, peace and tranquillity, good accord and
affection, and stable friendship shall be betwixt the said Realms and the
Subjects of the same, and shall keep themselves with their Counsels, helps,
and common assistance against all men that enforce them to do, or to imagine
wrongs, harms, displeasures, or greeuances to them or either of them, and that
they shall be conversant in merchandising freely and surely together, paying
the Customs due and accustomed, and that all the confederates and allies of
our said father and the Realm of France, as also our confederates of the
Realm of England shall in eight months space from the time of this accord of
peace, as it is notified to them, declare by their letters, that they will draw
to this accord, and will be comprehended under the treaties and accord of this
peace, saving nevertheless their obedience to either of the same Crowns, and
to all manner of actions, rights, and revenues, that belong to our said father
and his Subjects, and to us, and our Subjects against all manner of such Allies
and Confederates.

30. That our father, neither our brother the Duke of Burgundy, shall begin nor
make with Charles calling himself the Daulphin of Viennes, any treaty, No
peace with the Daulphin.
peace, or accord but by Counsel and assent of each of us three, or of other
the three estates of either the said Realms aboue-named.

31. Also that we with the assent of our brother of Burgundy, and other of the
Nobles of the Realm of France, which ought thereunto to be called, shall
ordeine for the Governance of our said father, surely, lovingly and honestly,
after the degree of his royal estate and dignity in such wise, as shall be to
the worship of God, of our said father, and of the Realm of France.

32. Also that all manner of persons; that shall be, our father, to do him
personal service, not only in office, but in all other attendances, as well
the Nobles and Gentlemen, as others, shall be such as have been borne in the
Realm of France, or in places belonging to France, good, wise, true, and able
to do him service, and our said father shall dwell in places under his
obedience, and no where else, wherefore we charge and command our said liege
subjects, and other being under our obedience, that they keep, and do to be
kept, in all that belongs to them, this accord and peace, after the form and
manner as it is accorded, and that they attempt in no manner The punishment of
the peacebreakers.
wise, any thing that may be prejudicial, or contrary to the same accord, and
peace, upon pain of life and limme, and all that they may forfeit unto us.

33. Also that we for the things aforesaid, and every one of them shall give
our assent by our letters Patents, sealed with our seal unto our said father,
without all approbation, and confirmation of us, and all other of our blood
royal, and of the Cities and Towns to us obedient, sealed with our great
seal, shall make or cause to be made letters approbatory, and confirmed of the
Peers of his Realm, and of the Lords, Citizens, Burgesses of the same under
his obedience, all which Articles we have sworn to keep, upon the holy
Evangelists. Yeuen at Troies the 30. of May, Anno 1420. And the same were
proclaimed in London the 20. of June following; for the Copies of this treaty,
the French King sent to every Town in France, as King Henry did likewise into
England, there to be published by Proclamation. These Articles were concluded
betwixt the two Kings, in the presence of Queen Isabell, the Duke Holinsh. The
testies of these Articles. Will. Parradin. Annals of Burg.
of Burgundy, and the Kings Council, the Prince of Orange, Seigneur
Chastelleux, Marshall of France, with many others the prime Nobility, both of
England and France, both the Kings with the Queen, taking their solemn oath
there, upon the holy Evangelists, as did likewise the Duke of Burgundy, and the
rest, Burgundy Titus (...) sets down his Oath verbatim.
being the first man that laid his hand on the book, and Enguerrant. Nicholas
Vigneur.
swear homage to King Henry; who thereupon was styled and proclaimed Regent of
France.

(53) In whose presence also upon the third of Hollinsh.
June, (being the morrow after Trinity Sunday) the marriage of King Henry and
Lady Katherine, with all King Henry married to Lady Katheri^.
pompous solemnity was celebrated, in Saint Peter's Church at Troyes, the Bishop
of that See, doing the Ceremonies. And after royal feasts and Princely History
of Normandy.
entertainements, before the dissolution of that royal assembly, King Henry,
inuiting the French King and Hollinshed: but Polyd. (...) a^th, this speech was
delivered before at their swearing of fealty.
others his great Peers to a sumptuous banquet, made a pithy and pleasing
Oration unto them, thus testifying his Princely desire to advance their weal,
and demerit their love.

(54) As the chief mark whereunto my cares and endeavors have hitherto
leuelled, has Polyd. Verg.
been, to unite and concorporate these two Kingdoms King Henry's Oration unto
the States of France.
of France and England into one, which now by Gods goodness is most happily
effected; so is it still, and ever shall be, both my desire and care, that unto
posterity we may leave it settled in the same sort, and free from all
empeachments, of factious discords: that beingas (it is) the greatest, it may
be also the happiest Monarchy of Europe. For the clear accomplishment of
which work, there rests now nothing, but the depressing of the Daulphin, who
is by your doom already, not only deprived of that dignity, but of succession
to the Crown, and prosecuted as a Traitor to the State; and of whom this we
must be assured, that while he lives, France cannot but be in a perpetual
combustion. For preventing whereof, I both need and entreat, both your
Counsels and aid, nothing doubting of your readiness in either; for how can we
expect any safety, or you any goodness at his hand, who, in his young years,
did so perfidiously murder the Duke of Burgundy his uncle? I am now, you see,
your Regent in present, and Successor to the Crown in hope; Let it not
therefore stick in your hearts, that I am an Englishman borne, for you know I
have much French blood in my veins, which warmes my affections as well to
French as English; but look on me as the lawful heir to the Diadem, both by
just Title, and your own consents, who therefore am, and ought to be, wholly
yours; and your kindness and just dealing bind me so to be. Yours also am I now
by fresh alliance, as son in Law to your King, unto whom I will perform all
offices of love and honor, as to mine own father; and you his subjects shall I
love and cherish, as mine own children, and will defend France and the French,
so long, as you defend my right with your loving aid, and will deserve my love
with your loiall affection.

(55) These affairs thus accomplished at Troyes, Polyd. Verg.
the Kings, the Queens, and the rest of the Peers in great estate rode unto
Paris, where all fair countenances were showed, and great entertainment given
to the English. But the Daulphin and his followers The Daulphins counterplots
to uphold himself.
neither feared nor fainted, though the present courses pleased not their
palate. Their first Counsel therefore was how to preserve themselves in so
eminent danger; to sit still and do nothing, they knew it was but to increase
and advance the successes of the English; and to rise without strength, was to
fall into further misfortunes, having no means to hold war with so potent an
Enemy. In this distraction their voice was best heard, that spoke most for the
safety of the Daulphin (whose only life gave breath unto the after-hopes of
France) and for the strengthening of those places which might be of most
advantage to themselves, and offense to the Enemy. This then past by decree in
that Counsel of war, that the Daulphin should at no time hazard his person
in field, and that a leuy of Soldiers should be had, to lie in Garrison in
places convenient; for Time, which never stands still, they well hoped might
yet turn the rice for them, fortune being (said they) as subject to fawn, as
to frown; in which resolution each man took to his charge, and all to
withstand the doings of Henry.

(56) As these consulted for the state of the French so in Paris a Parliament
of the three estates was assembled, wherein such as were guilty of the Denis
Savage in Chro. de Fland.
death of Burgundy, were iusticed, the disherizing of the Daulphin confirmed,
and wars prepared against these Towns which held for him. Against Sens the
two Kings with their Queens, Clarence, and Burgundy, marched; which after 12.
days was rendered Enguerrant de Monstrel.
upon composition of life, those excepted as were guilty of the Duke of
Burgundies death. Monstreau Monstreau beseeged and gotten.
was the next, which by force was entered, where the body of the Duke of
Burgundy, indecently buried by the Daulphinois, was taken up, and by his son
Philip sent in great pomp to Diion in his Duchy, and there honorably
interred. The Town being taken, the Castle held out: unto whose Captain
twenty Captive Io. Millet
Gentlemen were sent, whose lives from King Henry's mouth (say the French) were
sentenced to death, unless they could persuade the Castellan to Holinsh.
surrender; but those men (say our English, to mollify that severe doom) were
all especial friends of that Captain and such, as had given opprobrious words
to the Kings Herald, being sent unto them in the siege of Monstreau.
Howsoever, in this extremity they solicited Guiluy upon their knees, urging
their own deaths, and his great danger if he held out; but Guiluy, a true
Frenchman, and friend to the Daulphin, withstood the assault, and thereupon
these Gentlemen Petitioners were presently hanged in the sight of the
defendants: so bloody is Mars to maintain his own Laws, and so eager was
Henry of his full Conquest of France, whose thirsting sword had hereto fore
been some what ouerlauish in blood, but never more (perhaps) then in this
bloody act; which I wish might be obliterated from the number of his other
glorious actions. Yet at length was that Castle enforced to surrender upon
composition of life, excepting the guilties of Burgundies death.

(57) Then was the siege removed to Melun, a Town of great strength, and made
more strong by It Is. Linius Melun beseeged and gotten.
the valors of her commanders, who were Seigneur Barbafon an absolute
soldier, Pierre de Bourbon a Prince of the blood, Preaux, and Bourgeois, whose
Garrison was seven hundred Daulphinois: and indeed no default in defense, could
any wise be imputed, but the Canon opening a breach, the English and
Burgundians made an entry into the Bulwark, and over the River Seine built a
bridge with Boats; so that from either quarter they had passage one to the
other without impediments, and encamped themselves for their best advantage;
upon whom the enemy nevertheless made diverse sallies, with the loss of
either parties. King Henry enforced his siege to the utmost, and made a mine
underneath the walls, which being perceived, the defendants countermined against
him; where the King (too forward) as the Enguerrant. King Henry fights in
single Combat.
very first man entering his mine, and Barbason likewise his within the Town,
met each other at point of sword, where they performed nobly the parts of
private soldiers, (nobly indeed, if private soldiers they had been, but
Princes should remember they are not such) till lastly they agreed to discover
themselves, and first Barbason made known his name, then Translator of Liuie.
King Henry did his, whereupon the French Lord suddenly getting back, caused
the Barriers to be closed, and Henry returned to his Camp.

(58) This enterprise failing, King Charles himself Enguerrant
came into the Camp, to induce the defendants to render, at the presence of
their natural Lord; which nevertheless was little respected; for answer was
made, that if their King were at liberty, and free from King Henry's power,
they would do The French refuse to submit to their own King.
him the duty of natural subjects, and yield him their charge as their Liege
Lord: but being as he was, they desired to be excused, for to the mortal enemy
of France they would not yield.

(59) Whilst King Henry lay at the siege of Melun, the Duke of Bauier (who was
Palsegraue of Rhyne Elector) came to King Henry having married his sister, and
thence sent a defiance unto the Daulphin Nichol. Giles.
his kinseman by Queen Isabell his mother; the Prince of Orange likewise came
thither unto Henry, but because he required an Oath of him, as a subject of
France, he went away displeased, saying, he was a free Prince, and ought
neither obedience to England nor France. At which time the Parisians with more
respect of their own safety committed their City Paris yielded up to King
Henry.
unto K. Henry's devotion who deputed his brother Clarence (though Count Saint
Paul with his French displeased) Governor thereof, and put Garrisons into the
Bastile of S. Anthony, the Lowre, and the Hostill de Nesle. During this siege,
mandatory Dat. 23. July. An 1420. Denis Savage. Picardy swears fealty to King
Henry.
letters were sent by King Charles into Picardy, to put all places that held
for him in those quarters into Henry's possession, and to take the Oath of
their obedience unto him as to the only heir, Successor, Regent, and Governor
of France; the execution whereof was committed to the Count of Saint Paul, the
Bishops of Therouenne and Arras, the Vidame of Amiens, the Lord of Vendueill,
the Governor of Lisle, Pierre Marigny Advocate of the Parliament, and George
Ostend the Kings Secretary, beginning thus; Charles par le Grace de Dieu, etc.

(60) The distress of Melun, was wonderful Enguerrant.
great as well upon the seegers, as defendants; the one afflicted, and their
troops sore weakened with mortality, the other oppressed with famine, and
other defects incident to a long endured siege. In this State eighteen weeks
were spent, and more had been, but that the English were supplied with
soldiers out of Picardie, whose colors displaied a far off, put the Town
in hope of relief, as sent from the Daulphin, but upon their nearer approach,
Melun was rendered by these capitulations. 1. That the Enguerrant de Monstrelet.
Town and Castle should be delivered to the King. 2. That as well the men of
war, as the Burgesses, should submit themselves to King Henry, to be dealt
with as pleased the King. 3. That all such as should be found guilty of the
Duke of Burgundies murder should suffer death. 4. That all the rest of the
soldiers should be received to mercy, but to be prisoners until they put in
good caution for their true obedience in after times. 5. That the Natives of
France should be sent home to their own Countries. 6. That all the moueables
and Arms in the Town should be carried into the Castle. 7. That all the
Prisoners they hadtaken either before or during the siege, should be enlarged
ransomefree, and acquitted of their promises. 8. That for the performance of
these Articles, 12. of the principal Captains, and 6. of the wealthiest
Burgesses should deliver themselves in hostage. 9. That all the English, and
Scots, should be delivered to Henry and left at his disposition.

These things accorded, an English Garrison was put into Melun, commanded by
Pierre Varrolt. Pierre de Burbon, Seigneur de Preaux, and valiant Barbason,
with six hundred Prisoners of quality, were sent with a strong guard unto
Paris. The guilties of Burgundies murder were all of them put to death, amongst
whom were two Monks, and Bertrand de Chartmont a Gascoigne, (a man in great
favor with King Henry) for that he at King Henry's entry into Melun, had
conuaied thence one Amenion de Lau, who was proved guilty of Burgundies death.
The Duke of Burgundy himself, as also Clarence earnestly Enguerrant.
labored with King Henry for Bertrands pardon, but the King, though much
grieved, and protesting that he had rather have lost 50000. Nobles, yet was
resolved he should die for example to all such, as should dare to offend, upon
presumption of their nearenes A noble example of Justice.
and grace with their Princes.

(61) Melun being rendered, and these things thus disposed, the two Kings with
their Queens John Millet.
most honorably attended, returned to Paris, before whose entrance the
Citizens and Students met them in most solemn manner, having beautified the
City John Millet
with flagges, streamers and rich hangings throughout the streets where they
should pass. The two Kings The two Kings entered Paris.
rode together under a rich Canopie, Henry upon the left hand, next unto whom
followed the Dukes of Clarence and Bedford, and upon their left hand the Duke
of Burgundy clad all in black, the Princes and Nobles of either Nation mingled
together in their degrees, the Clergy with processions, and their venerable
reiiques, going before them to Nostre dame Church; and the next day the two
Queens entered The two Queens enter Paris.
the City with as great a show. King Henry's Palace was prepared in the Loure,
which was most rich Denis Savage.
and magnificent, and Charles his Court in the Hostel of Saint Paul, being but
homely and mean; for (says Millet) young Henry commanded all, and his
brethren Millet.
exercised supreme authority, whiles old Charles stood as a Cipher, and the
French Nobility had nothing to do.

(62) During the two Kings abode here, a great Enguerrant de Monstr.
Assembly was called as well of the Spiritualty, as of the secular Nobility,
in whose presence, in the great Hall of the Hostell, a State for Justice was
prepared, where the two Kings sitting, as supreme Judges, under one Cloth of
estate, the Court was furnished The two Kings sit personally in judgment.
with Princes and Officers in most solemn wise. Before whom, Nicolas Rollin
advocate from the Duke of Burgundy, and the Duchess his mother, craved
audience (and had it granted) unto an inuectiue and long Oration against
Charles Visconte Narbone, Tanneguy, Barbason and others, for the cruel murder
of Process against the murderers of the Duke of Burgundy.
John Duke of Burgundy; and not only that the murderers might be accordingly
executed, but withal, that a Church might be founded and furnished with sacred
Ornaments for twelve Channons, six Chaplains, and six Clerks to pray for
his soul for ever, every Chanon to have yearly two hundred pound Paris money,
every Chaplen one hundred, and every Clerk fifty, to be levied upon the Lands
of the Daulphin, and his associates in the murder: that the same foundation
should be engraven upon the Porch thereof, and the like inscription set up
publicly in the Cities of Paris, Rouen, Grant, Diion, Saint James of
Compostella, and Jerusalem. This motion was seconded by a Doctor of Divinity
appointed by the Rector of the University, who concluded with an humble request
to the King and those Princes, that justice might be done. Whereunto the
Chancellor of France, in the behalf of King Charles, promised that no endeavor
on his part should be lacking; and thereupon caused his son to be solemnly
called to the Marble-Table, to answer his accusation, by the name of Charles
Duke of Touraine, and Daulphin de John Serres.
Vienne, which done three several times, and he not The Daulphin cited to
appear, and disinherited.
appearing, by arrest of the same Court of Parliament, he was banished the
Realm, and judged unworthy to succeed in any of the Seignories as well
present, as to come. But the Daulphin appealed from this sentence to God and
his sword, and still was the same, though his fortunes were changeable.
Mounsieur de Barbason was vehemently accused to have his hand in the murder,
and therefore King Henry King Henry himself gives sentence iudicially.
accordingly gave sentence on him to suffer to death; but he in open Court
defended himself, not to be guilty of the crime, although he confessed to be
a true servant to the Daulphin. Notwithstanding, had he not appealed to the
Officers of Arms, King Henry's judgment of death had gone against him: for
the Law Military, as he there alleged, forbids, Holinsh A quirke of Heraldy
to overthrow a Judicial sentence.
that any man, having his brother in Arms within his danger, should afterward
put him to death for any cause or quarrel, and proved himself to be the Kings
brother in Arms, for that he had in the Countermine coaped in combat with the
King. Thus by a quirke of Heraldry acquitted from death, he was nevertheless
retained in prison the space of nine years, and lastly at the winning of
Castle Galliard from the English, was delivered out of most strait
imprisonment, to the great joy of the French.

(63) This execution of Justice on those Murderers, was a great, but not the
only act of K. Henry A Parliament at Paris. Holinsh.
at this great Parliament of three Estates of France in Paris. For therein also
was the final accord betwixt the two Kings, openly acknowledged by the French
King, as made by his free assent, and with advise of all the Council of
France; whereupon it was there also ratified by the general states of France,
and sworn unto particularly upon the holy Evangelists, by all their Nobles and
Magistrates, spiritual and secular, who also set their seals to the
Instruments thereof, which were sent into England to be kept in the Kings Where
they yet remain, says Hollinsh. p 578.
Exchecquer at Westminster. King Henry's glory thus ascended to the highest
vertical in France, his Court was not only honored daily both with Courtly
and military shows and pastimes, but also was still frequented both with
foreign Ambassadors, and domesticke Commissioners, whose directions depended
only upon his voluntary assign, himself redressing all things at his
pleasure, placing and displacing Officers and Governors, causing also a new
Coin to be made, called a Salute, wherein were the Arms of France, and the
Arms of England and France, quarterly stamped. King Charles the while in his
Palace, was but for fashions sake visited, and but by some of his old
servants, his Sun was drawn so near unto the setting. The great affairs of
France thus settled, (as well as that unsettled time would permit,) King Henry
minding to Crown his Queen in England, ordained his brother of Clarence, (a
wise, valiant, and a great Captain) King Henry returns into England.
his Lieutenant general of France, leaving also the Duke of Exeter with 500.
men of wars to keep Paris, and so attended with great state, he came to
Amiens and Callais, where taking to Sea, he arrived at Dover upon the third of
February, and was received of his Enguerrant de Monstrelet.
Subjects as an Angel from heaven, or another victorious Caesar on Earth.

(64) All things in a readiness for his fair Queens Coronation, upon the four
and twentieth of the same month, with all roialty the same was solemnized at
Westminster, and the English rich diadme set on her head. The feast was great,
with all Princely Ex Antiq. M. S. D. Roberti Cotton.
services, and the state such as deserves the report; for the Queen sitting
at Table, at the right side of her Chair, kneeled the Earl of March holding a
Scepter in his hand; the Earl Marshall kneeling on the left side, held
another; and the Countess of Kent sat under the Table at her right foot;
upon her right hand at Table sat the Bishops of Canterbury and Winchester, and
upon the left the King of Scots, the Duchess of York, and the Countess of
Huntington; the Nobles giving their attendance, each man according to his
office and place.

(65) Presently, after Easter, in the month of May, a Parliament was held at
Westminster, whose chiefest intent was to have means to continue the Kings
Conquest in France; but such was the state of those lavish times, that, to stop
the current of this melting mint, some, minding more the heaps of their money,
then the spreading abroad of Englands fair Monarchy, exhibited their Bills unto
the three estates in Parliament, and petitioned unto the King, to commiserate
the poverty of the commons, which Ex. Record. Parl. 9. Hen. 5.
(as they said) were beggered by these wars. For which cause, as it seems,
no subsidy or aid was demanded, but the King again pawning his Crown to his
uncle Beaufort, the rich Cardinal, for twenty thousand pound, before the said
month was expired, The King pawneth his Crown for money. Pontus Herterm.
with four thousand horse and four and twenty thousand foot returned into
France to follow those wars.

(66) Neither was his have more then needed: for John Earl of Bucquhanan, and
Archbald Douglas, two valiant leaders of seven hundred resolute Scots, repaired
into France to aid the Daulphin, and ioining with the French in Aniou, meant
to have surprised the Duke of Clarence before he had been aware: Alain
Chartier.
in which enterprise, four straggling Scots, taken and brought to his presence,
Upon Easter Eve.
as he sat at dinner, revealed the intent and strength of the Enemy, whose
approach was very near at hand. This news no so

nesty and mercy, which shall crown my memory with glory, and free me from
blame and slander, which in long reigns can hardly be avoided: but you have
just cause to mourn at my untimely death, and it cannot be but a general
grief to my people, that in such an Ocean of business yet depending, I shall
leave you and them destitute of a Prince able to govern: but your sorrow ought
to be so much the less, when you call to mind the frailty of worldly things,
and that evermore there will be somewhat wanting which we desire. My first
request unto you shall be this, that with an unanimous affection to advise,
foresee and provide, that the counsel which I name may be followed. I further
ernestly entreat you to love my Infant Henry, to instruct him with your
wisdoms, that by your counsel, care and love, he may be made able and worthy
to weild so great an Empire. Comfort my dear wife, the most afflicted Creature
living, extend your loves unto her in the same proportion as I have ever loved
you. Touching the public I admonish and exhort you to brotherly concord, and
never to break league with Philip Duke of Burgundy; and if you shall think
it good, let my brother Humfrey Duke of Gloucester govern England, and not
depart upon any occasion whatsoever, until my son Henry be of years to sway
Enguerrant de Monstrelet.
the estate; and my brother John Duke of Bedford with the assistance of Philip
Duke of Burgundy, to manage the Realm of France. Concerning Charles (commonly
called the Daulphin) either he must by your swords be made to submit himself,
or else you shall never be in quiet; and it were as good to render him the
possession of what you have: wherefore sleep not, and while you have means
and opportunity be industrious. Lastly, I beseech, charge, and command you,
(howsoever time or occasion may persuade, or inuit you to the contrary) that
Normandy received by my industry, and your swords, being the ancient
inheritance of the Crown of England, be not alienated for any cause
whatsoever. Among other things then enioined, he willed that the Duke of
Orleance, the Earl of Eu, Guacourt, and Guichard de Sisay should not be
ransomed, until young Henry were of years to govern

(82) Thus said, and drawing near to the period of his short but glorious
life; he demanded of his Physicians Enguerrant de Monstr.
how long (in their judgment) he might live? whereunto when one of the^
answered, Sir, think on your soul, for your time is not above 2. hours: he
made his confession, and his Chaplains afterward kneeling in prayer, when one
of them out of the Psalms made mention of Jerusalem, the king no sooner heard
the name, but with a loud voice he said; Lord thou His death.
know, that my purpose was to conquer Jerusalem from the Infidels, if it
had pleased thee to have given me life: and Tho. Walls.
then in a right faith, assured hope, perfect charity and sound memory, he
Augusti 30. Fabian.
rendered his soul to his Creator, after he had reigned nine years, five
months, and Some reckon but 11. days, Stow adds five months more.
fourteen days, leaving none like unto him amongst all the Kings and Princes
of Christendom, for which cause his death was not only bewailed of the
English, whom he gloriously had ruled, but also of the French, whom he had
victoriously conquered. This was the manner of this triumphant Monarchs end,
which moves men justly to wonder at Hector Boethius, who says, he was Boet. l.
16. c. 19.
stricken by God for sacrilege, and died miserably: Hectors friends have
occasion to wish, that his Readers should not make that miserable judgment,
the rule and measure of crediting or discrediting his other writings, yet
lamentable his end was indeed, if he perished by poison, whereof there was a
vehement suspicion, as Polydor Vergill has auerred, and the carriage of the
French affairs afterward makes it more Polydor.
then probable.

(83) His works of pious affection were showed in erecting the Monasteries of
Bethlem and Briget, near Ioh. Stow. A^ls. His works of devotion.
unto his Manor of Richmond, as also his princely gifts unto the works and
furniture of Westminster Church, besides the brotherhood of S. Giles without
Creple gate London. And (which had surpassed all the rest) he intended (such
was his love to learning, and to the place where himself was a learner) to
have founded in the great Castle at Oxford, a magnificent College for
Divines, and Students of the seven liberal Sciences, Ioh. Rossus.
the plot and ordinations of which foundation he had already drawn, and Th.
Gascoign in Dict. Theolog.
resolved to endow it with all the lands in England, belonging to Priors
Aliens; but his untimely death prevented both that, and many other noble
works. To leave a domesticke testimony of his affection to Arms, he first
instituted Gartar principal King at Arms: besides other augmentations to the
Order of Saint George. In a word, never lived English King with more true
glory, nor ever died any in a more unseasonable time, nor more lamented: for he
was godly in heart, sober in speech, sparing of words, Tho. Walls.
resolute in deeds, provident in Counsel, prudent in judgment, modest in
countenance, magnanimous in action, constant in undertaking, a great
Almesgiuer, devout to Godward, a renowned Soldier, fortunate in field, from
whence he never returned without victory. These, with many other (I might
almost say, all other) virtues are attributed to this most renowned amongst
English Kings; the more to be admired in him in so short a reign, and in those
years, he Stow. Annal.
being but of 36. years, when he breathed forth his glorious soul.

(84) His bowels were interred in the Church of Saint Mauro de Fosses, and his
embalmed Corpse was closed in Lead, and attended upon by the Lords of England,
France, Normandy, and Picardy, was brought unto Paris (wherein the Church of
our Lady solemn exequies were performed) and thence to Rouen, where it rested
till all things were ready to set forward for England; though the Cities of
Paris and Rouen strove, and offered great sums of gold to have Henry's royal
remains enterred amongst them. His picture artificially was molded of boiled
hides, and countenance painted according to life, upon whose head an imperial
Diadem of gold and precious The manner of his bringing into England.
stones was set, the body clothed with a purple robe, furred with Ermine, in
his right hand it held a scepter royal, and in the left a ball of gold; in
which manner it was carried in a Chariot of State, covered with red velvet,
embroidered with gold, and over it a rich Canopie, born by men of great place.
Thus accompanied by James King of Scotland, many Princes, Lords and Knights of
England and France, he was conuaied from Rouen to Abbeuile, to Hesdin, to
Menstruill, Bologn, and Calais, the Chariot all the way compassed about with men
all in white garments, bearing burning Torches in their hands; next unto whom
followed his household servants, all in black, and after them the Princes,
Lords, and Estates in vestures of mourning adorned; then two miles distant from
the corpse followed the still lamenting Queen, attended with princely mourners,
her tender and plerced heart more inly mourning, then her outward sad weeds
should in any sort express.

(85) And thus by Sea and Land the dead King was brought unto London, where
through the streets the Chariot was drawn with four horses, whose Caparisons
were richly embroidered, and embossed with the royal Arms; the first with
Englands Arms alone, the second with the Arms of France and England in a
field quartered, the third bare the Arms of France alone, and the fourth three
crowns Or in a field Azure, the ancient Arms of King Arthur, now well
beseeming him who had victoriously united France, England, Ireland.
three Kingdoms in one. The body with all pompous celebrity was enterred in
the Church at Westminster (for so Henry had by his last will commanded) next
beneath King Edward the Confessor, upon whose Tomb Queen Katherine caused a
royal picture to be laid, covered all over with silver plate guilt, but the
head thereof altogether of massysiluer. All which at that Abbeys suppression,
(when the battering hammers of destruction did sound almost in every Church)
were sacrilegiously broken off, and by purloining transferred to far
prophaner uses, where, at this day, the headless monument, (worthy to be
restored by some more Princely and sacred hand) is to be seen, and with these
verses written upon his Tomb. Dux Normanorum, verus Conquestor eorum, Legend
des Flamens.

Hares Francorum, decessit and Hector eorum.
Here Normans Duke, so styled by Conquest just,
True Heir of France, Great Hector, lies in dust.


His Wife.
(86) Katherine, daughter to King Charles the sixth of France, upon an agreement
of peace forementioned, was married unto King Henry at Troyes in Champaine,
Iunij 3. A. D. 1420. and after Febr. 14. was Crowned at Westminster with all
solemnities. She was his Queen two years, and about three months, and
suruiuing him, was remarried unto Owen Theodore of Wales, unto whom she bare
three sons, Edmund, Jasper, and Owen, and a daughter who lived not long. Owen
took the habit of religion at Westminster, the other two by King Henry the
sixth (their half brother,) were honorably preferred; Edmund was created Earl
of Richmond, and marrying Margaret, the sole heir of John Beaufort Duke of
Sommerset, was father by her unto Henry (the only heir of Lancaster,)
afterward King of England. Jasper, the second brother, was created the same
year, Earl of Pembroke, who required his brothers kindness with continual
assistance against the house of (...); and when that faction prevailed, he was
forced to fly into Flanders, but it again waning, he was both restored, and
to his greater honor created Duke of Bedford, dying without any issue
legittimate. This Queen, either for devotion, or her own safety, took into
the Monastery of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where dying Ian. 2. A D. 1436. she
was buried in our Ladies Chapel within S. Peter's Church at Westminster; whose
Corpse taken up in the reign of King Henry the seventh her Grandchild, (when
he laid the foundation of that admirable structure,) and her Coffin placed by
King Henry her husbands Tomb, has ever since so remained, and never reburied:
where it stands (the Cover being loose) to be seen and handled of any that
will; and that by her own appointment, says Report, (which does in this, as
in most things, speak untruth) in regard of her disobedience to King Henry,
for being delivered of her son at the place he forbad.

His Son.
(87) Henry the only child of a royal couple, borne at Windsore, and not nine
months old at his fathers death, succeeded in his dominions, though not holding
his Empire with the like glory. Crowned he was with the Crowns of two
Kingdoms, but unable by much to weild the scepter of one, that of France was
lost by the factions of his Nobles, before it was well won; and Englands
Crown twice plucked from his head before his death. Of whose adventures and
variable reign (the times when England lay goared in the blood of her civil
wars) we shall speak in the ensuing relation of his innocent, but
unfortunate life.

HENRY THE SIXTH, KING OF Monarch 53
Henry VI.
ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE THREE AND FIFTIETH MONARCH OF
ENGLAND, HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XVI.


HAd God almighty (the Dan. cap. 2. v. 21
giver and transferrer of Kingdoms) thought good that the English should have
settled in the Continent of Europe, and not have been shut up within their
Islands, he would not so soon have deprived them of their late incomparable
Captain and Sovereign Henry the fifth. But it seems that God having humbled
the French Nation under Henry's victorious hand, meant now again to restore them
to his wonted favor by taking away their terror and triumpher, substituting
Henry the sixth began his reign the last day of August, being the day of his
Fathers death. Anno 1422.
his son (an Infant) in his place, Henry of that name the 6. born at Windsor,
who was crowned about the eight month of his age. The pretty hands which could
not feed himself, were yet made capable to weeld a scepter, and he that was
beholding to nurses for milk, did nevertheless distribute the sustenance of
law and justice to so great and warlike Nations. Counsel supplies the defect
of age. At his fathers death he had uncles, men of approved valor and
discretion, to whom the principal care of all public affairs by the fathers
last provisions was committed. Humfrey Duke of Gloucester (the younger brother of
two) had the Tit. (...).
government of England entrusted to his fidelity: the regency of France was
assigned for Province to John Duke of Bedford, the eldest living uncle of the
King, as to a Prince of much magnanimity, prowess and felicity in conduct,
with whom was Ioh. Til. Chr.
joined Philip Duke of Burgundy. The guard and custody of the royal Infant
was assigned to Thomas Stowes Annal.
Duke of Excester: the nurture and education to his Polyd. Verg. hist. lib. 23.
mother, the Queen Dowager: upon the two uncles (as between the two Poles of
the English Empire) the whole globe of government moved: whatsoever is done by
the kingly power is said to be done by the King. We shall behold
notwithstanding in the tragical glass of this Henry's reign, how far the
imbecility of the kingly person may affect the body politic with good or
evil. If histories were ordained to stir affections, not to teach and
instruct, never any Princes reign since the Conquest did better deserve to be
described with a tragical style and words of horror and sorrow, although the
beginning (like the fair morning of a most tempestuous day) promised nothing
morethen a continuance of passed felicities.

(2) For the State of the English affairs was great and flourishing, England
without tumult, the natural fierce humors of her people consuming or
exercising themselves in France, and France her self (for the nobler parts
together with the grand City of Paris head of that Monarchy) was at their
devotion. There wanted nothing which might advance the work begun. Most
noble and expert Leaders as those which had bin fashioned in the school of
war, under the best martial master of that age, the late Henry, arms full of
veterant soldiers, most of which were of skill sufficient to be commanders
themselves: their friends firm, no defect nor breach (by which dissipation
might enter to the overthrow of the English greatness) as yet disclosing
themselves. Wisdom, piety, riches, forwardness at home, courage and like
forwardness abroad. It is a fruitful speculation to consider how God carries
his part in the works of men, always justly, sometimes terribly, but never
otherwise, then to bring all worldly greatness and glory into due contempt,
and loathing, that the soul may be erected to her Creator, and aspire to a
Crown celestial. The first disadvantage which happened to the English cause
(after the late Kings decease) was the death of Charles the French King, who
suruiued the other but Paul. Aemyl. in Car. l.
fifty and three days. This we may worthily call the first (as it was a
great, as well as the first) disadvantage, for the imbecilities of that Prince
were a strength to the English; On the other side (God observing a talio and
parilitie) the infancy of young Henry was an advantage to Charles the Daulphin
of France, now by them of his faction called King of France, as the English
used in derision to enstyle him King of Berrie, because little else was left
unto him.

(3) In England (whose condition the order of narure wills us first to describe,
because there was the A Parliament at Westminster.
seat of counsel, by which all the actions of the general state were
directed) a Parliament was assembled to establish the Crown upon the Infant,
and to provide for the public uses and necessities of State. Money The levy
thereof was 5. Nobles on every sack of wool.
(always one of them) was liberally granted. It was a strange sight (and the
first time that ever it was seen in England) which in the next year happened,
an infant sitting in the mothers lap, before it could tell what English meant,
to exercise the place of Sovereign direction in open Parliament. Yet so it
was, for the Queen to illumine that public conuention of States with her
Infants presence, removed from Windsor to London; through which City (her
self roially seated with her young son upon her lap) passed in maiesticke
manner to Westminster, and there took seat among all his Lords, whom (by the
ordinary mouth of that high Court) he saluted and spoke to them at large
concerning the premises; where, as he uttered the mind of his place by
another tongue, so he elsewhere prosecuted all affairs by other men's hands
and Organs.

(4) The Duke of Bedford (as the nature of his place exacted) to settle and
preserve the State of France for his young Nephew the King, together with
Philip Duke of Burgoigne, who as yet continued a steadfast friend to the English
Soueraignety (knowing the Daulphin busy to recover France) strengthened the
confines of their government with Garrisons, assembled their powers, and
labored to retain the hearts of their own party. The Duke of Bedford Regent
of France, had Polyd. Verg. bist. lib. 23. The Regents Oration to the French.
words to them to this effect in open assemble. That they should not violate
their plighted and sworn alleagiance, neither by themselves endeavor nor
endure, that by others their Sovereign Lord young Henry should be defrauded of
his inheritance, or that the hatreds and enmities which now began to die
between the French and English names, should through the practices of most
faithless men be renewed, and reinflamed: That they would remember how (by Gods
special favor and goodness) the two Kingdoms of France and England were
united under one most fair and goodly Monarchy in an eternal league, and
lately so established that no humane force could r^st. That albeit they had
sustained damage by the war, yet the same would be recovered with
advantage, if they honored loved and obeyed their lawful Sovereign Lord King
Henry, and prosecuted his enemies with extremity, according to bounden duty.
This Oration found plausible admission in show: Henry is proclaimed King of
England and of France, and such chiefes as were present did their homages,
taking oath to be true: The like Obligation and Sacrament of alleagiance was
put upon all the French through the English Dominions in France.

(5) Charles (who as son and heir to the late King entitled himself King of
France, by the name of Charles the seventh) being then about the seven and
twentieth year of his age, full of courage and new hopes, gathered what force
he could: his chief Leuies were made in Daulphynois and Italy, from whence
(for money) he drew sundry troops. But the best sinews of his Army moved in
certain thousands of the Scottish Nation, which served under him. The first
step which the Charolines, or forces of Charles made into hostile action was
unfortunate, for coming to raise the siege which the English held about Paul.
Aemyl. in Car. 7.
Crepan they were put to flight, with the loss of about two thousand of their
numbers. This was noble in Charles, and his Charolines, that their minds sunk
not at the horror of such an evil Omen. It * Crauant. says Polyd. who
places this action in the following year. The bounds of the English Regency
in France.
was says Aemylius of them, resolved to encounter adverse fortune with
increase of courage. The Regent on the other side was vigilant upon all
occasions: the power of his Regency extended it self without contradiction
Stows Annal.
through Vimew, Pontieu and Picardie, from Paris to Reins, Chalons and Troyes,
up to the water of Loyr and the Sea: A goodly scope of territory, and
absolutely the best of France. That late loss and foil of the Charolines was
repaired shortly after by an overthrow in skirmish which they gave to the
English party, from whom (with the slaughter of about fifteen hundredth) they
recovered a great booty, specially of Cattle which the English had gotten in
the Countries of Nugion and Main, but thus intercepted upon their return into
Normandy. Charles (which Paul. Aemylius omitteth) doubts that success: for
Polyd. Verg. l. 23
Meulan upon Sein is by him taken where all the English are put to the sword:
but the possession was short, and the revenge speedy: Thomas Montacute Earl of
Salisbury (a man (says Polydor) more like the old Romans then people of that
age, so great was his virtue and cheualrie) having with him John of Luxemburg,
General of the Burgundian horsemen, recouers the place, killing all the French
which were found therein.

(6) At the City of Stows Annals.
Amiens in Picardie the three great Dukes of Bedford (Regent of France)
Burgoign and Britain meet to consult of the whole course and sum of
affairs. There they renewed the League, adding, that each should be others
friend, and that all of them should defend King Henry's right with their best
forces. For the better assurance of this profitable amity, the Regent (then a
Bachelour) took to wife the Lady Anne, sister to Philip Duke of Burgundy:
while the Regent was absent from Paris upon these just occasions, the Parisians
(who not long before had Polyd. Verg. l. 23
sent Ambassadors into England, to acknowledge their obedience to King Henry)
practiced with Charles to deliver their City. The Regent had notice of this
dangerous treason, and with his presence retained them in duty. The chief
Actors paid their lives for satisfaction of the trespass. In good time there
arrived out of England ten thousand fresh Soldiers. Over them he ordained
Captains, The whole fieldforces of the English in France under the Duke of
Bedford.
the famous Earl of Salisbury, William Pole Earl of Suffolk, Robert
Willoughby and others. Himself lead about with him for the general service,
eighteen hundred horsemen, and eight thousand foot. With these field-forces
the maime of the English estate in France was held together, though not without
difficulty, and diverse adventures. In them he took from Charles sundry strong
Towns, and Fortresses as Rob. Fab.
Crotoy, Baside, Riol, Rula, Gyrond, Basile, Mermound, Milham, Femel, Seintace,
and many other.

(7) The Regents chief design was to draw Charles to fight, hoping by his
overthrow to conclude many days works in one. For this cause he drew into
Normandy. Charles was then in Polyd. V^rg. lib. 23.
Tourain, where he mustereth his people. The Regent prospers in the mean time,
and takes by siege a place of good importance, presuming so to dare the French
out to a Battle. John Duke of Alanson is sent with an Army and instructions to
fight, if occasion served, but Charles himself was not suffered to hazard his
person. Not far from the Town Gagwin.
of Vernoil, which the Paul. Aemil.
English had taken before the Hect. (...). l. 16.
Duke of Alanson, and his Charolines could succor it, the two Armies
embattelled themselves. The fight began with shot, which seeming not quick
enough to dispatch the work, the battles came to hand-stroaks, where for some
hours, there was maintained a constant and doubtful battle with great fury
on both sides. The English enured to the French wars, having borne the first
heats of their enemies, (which are in that Nation most ragefull:) by
perseverance The Regent^ victory at Ver^il in Perch.
utterly brake and put them to flight. The Regent Stowes Ann^l.
himself with a battle-axe fought most fiercely, winning immortal honor in
that bloody journey. There were slain of the enemies side: John Hect. Bo^t.
li. 16.
Earl of Boughwhan Constable of France: Archenbald Douglas Duke of Tourain and
Lieutenant of France; Archembald his son Earl of Wigton, with many other of
the Scots. Of the French there were slain the This battle was fought, 7. of
Aug. Anno Domini, 1425. says Stow.
Earl of Vantadowr, and sundry others. In all there died upon that side
certain thousands. None writes of fewer then four or five thousand, nor any
of above fifteen. The great number of the slain, is not the measure of a
victory, but the use and effects which it draws. The Duke of Alanson himself
was taken prisoner, with about two Poly. Verg. li. 23.
hundred others of special worth. The English paid for this noble victory, the
bodies of about two thousand of their soldiers which lost life there, for it
was fought upon fair terms in the open fields, and carried by mere manhood.
That which follows till the siege of Orleance, Paul I^ Carol. 7.
Aemylius comprehends in some few lines. The fierce Conqueror besieges
Mants in Main, and with Ordinance beats down part of the walls. It yields
hereupon. The English Garrison left therein, after the taking not being
sufficient to contain the Town in due subjection, is compelled to fly to a
Tower for their safety, the enemies which were admitted into it by the Burgers
enjoying the rest. The Lord Talbot (the most noble Captain of the English)
presently arriues to the rescue, and puts the malefactors to death. The English
Empire extends it self to the River of Loyr. Charles they call in scorn the
King of Berry. Thus roundly he.

In nine Articles and capitulations drawn and The murderers of John Duke of
Burgoin excepted in capitulations.
concluded at the yielding of M^nts, this was one, as perhaps it was in every
like occasion. That if any persons were found within the City, which had been
consenting to the murder of John Duke of Burgoin, father to Philip Duke of
Burgoin, in full revenge whereof, he had hither to adhered to the English, that
Rob. Fab. Chro^.
they should simply be at the Regents mercy.

(8) The chief things which passed in England, James the first King of Scots
set at liberty out of England.
during these happy proceedings in France, were briefly these.

James Steward the young King of Scots, having been casually taken upon the
Sea, in the reign of King Henry the fourth; and after his fathers death not
sufficiently tendered nor respected by the Scots, remained still a Prisoner.
The rather therefore to hinder the Scots, (that was the hope) from aiding the
French, it was now thought fit by the Council of England to enlarge him. Which
was accordingly done upon pledges. Not long after the which, he married the
Lady Jane, daughter to John Earl of Sommerset, near cosen to King Henry.
Principal setters forward of this marriage (as by likelihood of his liberty
also) to honor their family with a Kingly alliance, were the Earl of
Sommerset and the Bishop of Winchester, both of them Beauforts, who together
with sundry other of the English Nobility, conducted the new married Couple to
the Scottish Borders. Much of his ransom was abated, and his new kinsemen
bestowed upon him Hect. ^oct. l. 17. Grafton.
store of plate, gold, and silver, and among other gorgeous Ornaments suit of
hangings, in which the labors of Hercules were most curiously wrought. But this
wise King (having had the benefit of excellent and Princely education in
England) did not suffer any obligations contracted in the time of his durance,
to preponderate with him the General state of Scotland, whose freedom did
much depend upon the fortune of France, whereby the maine drift of his
enlargers was not much advanced. The reason notwithstanding which lead this
action was probable, and so much the more commendable, for that it was tempered
with humanity. The foreign mischief thus howsoever intended, hereby to be
avoided or qualified, Sir John Mortimer (a dangerous firebrand at home) being
Prisoner in the Tower was arraigned for many treasonable speeches used to a
yeoman, (servant to Sir Robert Scot Rob. Fab. 1. C^.
keeper of the Tower of London) to draw the said yeoman to let him escape:
promising him great matters. The points of his speeches were as that fellow
charged upon him in open Parliament,

1. That the said Mortimer meant to fly into Wales to the Earl of March, and
with an army of forty thousand men to enter England, and strike off the
Protectors head, and the Bishop of Winchesters. 2. That the Earl of March
ought by right to be King of England, and if the Earl would not, that then
The title of Mortimer to the Crown sought to be crushed.
he himself was next heir. 3. That if he could not safely reach to the
Marches, he would sail to the Daulphin of France, and there serve with honor,
which he was assured of.
For these ouertures of escape, and conspiracy the Knight was drawn hanged
and headed: Of whose death no small Hal. Chron.
slander arose. Perhaps he that writes so does mean that the whole was but a
stratageme to rid him out of the way. Edmund Lord Mortimer Earl of March, the
party whom the said knight mentioned, was sent not long after with many other
Lords, and competent numbers of men, into Ireland, where he deceased without
issue, whose great patrimony descended to Richard Plantagenet Earl of
Cambridge, the fatal disturber of the Realm of Camb. (...)
England, upon the pretense of Mortimers title to the Crown.

(9) The amity with the Duke of Burgoin, which the English had hitherto found
so auailable toward their Conquests, having otherwise received some few slight
flawes was now in danger of utter breaking The Duke of Gloucester rashly marieth
another man's wife.
upon this occasion. Humfrey Duke of Gloucester Protector of the Realm,
following council unworthy of his person and place, contracted himself with
the Lady Iaqueline of Ba^aria, Inheretrix of Holland, Zeland, Hena^lt, and many
other fair dominions in the Netherlands, notwithstanding that John Duke of
Brabant, her former husband was then living, and that the suit of divorce
commenced by Iaqueline G^r. Hist^. by Edw. Gri^st.
depended still between them. The Duke of Burgoin held with Brab^t. This bred
bitter humor in the Duke of Gloucester, who being not used to meet with any rubs
or confrontments, and now when in person he came with an army to take seison
of Henault in right of his supposed wife, finding The Duke of Burgoin
challenged by the Duke of Gloucester to fight.
himself hard set unto, by the aids which Burgoin ministered to the Duke of
Brabant, he challenges Combat of the Duke of Burgundy, calling him traitor.
It was accepted and the Stowes Annal.
lie strongly thrust upon Gloucester, who (leaving the light Lady at her Town
of Monts in Henault) returned into England, doing nothing of that for which at
that time he came. Mediation took up the quarrel afterward between the Duke
of Burgundy and him. Not long after the return of the Duke of Gloucester into
England, the first marriage which had been made and consummated between the
Duke of Brabant, and the said Lady Iaqueline, was pronounced lawful by Pope
Martin the fifth. Hereupon the Duke of Gloucester An. D. 1425. A. Reg. 4.
(having sustained many losses as well of friends as treasure in punishment of
that great sin, in taking another wife) forthwith marries Eleanour, daughter
to Reignald Lord Cobham of Sterborough, whereby he made her amends for that
Stowes Annal.
unlawful familiarity which had formerly passed between them.

Meanewhile the Court of England does well show that the King was an infant,
for it was full of dangerous Court-factions in England.
emulations and sidings, the Duke of Gloucester (whose high office it was to
tender the welfare of the King and State) laying sundry grievous accusations
*See Fox his Martyrologe in H. 6.
against the Cardinal Beaufort (son of John Duke of Lancaster) Bishop of
Winchester and Lord Chancellor as being a person very dangerous unto both.

(10) The news of these home-contentions coming to the Duke of Bedford into
France, easily drew him home, though the state of that Realm could not well
want his presence. For John Duke of Britain, (notwithstanding his late
renouation of league with the Regent at Amiens) jealous of the Polyd. Verg.
Lib. 23.
English greatness turned sodeinely to Charles, and with him, Arthur, Earl of
Richmond his brother. This puts fresh spirit into the drooping Prince. Arthur
is by Charles made Constable of his France, in place of the Scottish Earl, who
was slain at the bloody Battle of Vernoil. The Duke of Britain ouerliues
this revolt but a small time. Arthur to declare his forwardnes on the behalf
of Charles, assembleth about twenty thousand men, and with them sodeinely
besieges The new Constable of France miscarrieth in his first enterprise.
S. Iean a Town of Normandy, upon the frontier of Britain; which Edmund Duke
of Sommerset, Governor of Normandy, had lately fortified and stuffed with
soldiers. The unexpected arrival of the French, did greatly at the first
perplex the English, but upon better advise, they valiantly sallied out upon
them, both before and behind, which stroke so great terror into the enemy,
that with loss of their Artillery, and many of their people they forsook the
siege. To redeem this dishonor, he turns his fury upon the Country of
Angio^, which in many parts he depopulates and spoils. The Regent being
resolved to return into England, leaves behind him Bea^champ Ho^.
Earl of Warwick; as lieutenant, who was lately arrived in France, having six
thousand fresh Soldiers in his company.

(11) The presence of the Duke of Bedford Regent The Duke of Bedford returne^
into England to appe^se the Court* factions.
of France, was to the State of England very necessary. For the wisdom and
authority of so great a Prince, being eldest uncle to the King, and one whom
many great deeds made famous, allaied the distemper which he found at his
arriual. It was a work worthy of his labor, and he also found it to be a
work indeed, and not easily effectuable. The differences were debated first at
Saint Albans, then at Northampton, lastly in a Parliament at Leicester, which
continued there till toward the end of June. The Duke of Bedford himself, to
avoid the note of partiality, for that his brother of Gloucester was a party did
not intermeddle otherwise then as in General words to persuade amity, but the
whole cause was referred to arbitrators of greatest Nobility and prudence: by
whose endeavors all those differences and greeuances were equally thrust into
one sack, to be sealed up for ever by oblivion, and without mention of amends
The Protector and the Bishop made ^ends.
on either side, the Duke and Bishop (the one having sworn by his Hol^sh.
Princehood, the other by his Priesthood, truly to observe the award,) shook
hands, and were fully for that time reconciled. After which holy and necessary
work of private attonements, ensued acts of festiuitie and honor. For in The
King receiue^ Knighthood and dubbeth Ri^ard Duke of York.
the same Town of Leicester the young King, not then five years of age, was
at the high feast of Pentecost dubbed Knight by the Regent of France.
Immediately whereupon the King honored Richard Earl of Cambridge, (who by the
fatal error of the Counsel was at this Parliament created Duke of York, the
same who was father to Edward the fourth) with the order of knighthood, and
about forty more with him. This Richard Duke of York was he, who brought upon
this Kingdom and nation most doleful divisions to the utter extirpation of
all the male lines of either house, that is to say, his own, and that of
Lancaster, whereof the young King was head. From Leicester the King was
conueighed to Killingworth, and Thomas Duke of Excester dying, Beauchamp Earl
of Warwick, was constituted Guardian and Tutor to the King.

(12) The Regent having thus worthily provided A. D. 1427. A. reg. 5. The
Regent and the Lord Talbot with fresh forces pass into France.
for the quiet estate of the King and Country, returns to his charge in France.
There went over at the same time a choice and great number of fresh men, under
the conduct of that immortally renowned, the L. Talbot, whose victories (says
Polydor) were so many, that his name was not only most dreadful to the
French, but most famous through the world, even at this present. That ye may
know the man not to have been studious of fine Phrases; upon the one Talbot^
(...).
side of his sword-blade was engraven, Sum Talboti, and upon the other this
boisterous blunt sentence; Pro vincere inimicos meos.
The Duke of Alanzon (taken at the Castle of Vernoil) was set at liberty upon
payment of two ^agwin.
hundredth thousand Scutes of gold. At Mountarges about Orleance the English
received an overthrow with the loss of about fifteen hundredth of their
numbers, and in Britain the French sustained great damages by a Captain of
the Duke of Sommersets. These were petty matters: They of Mantz in Maine had
drawn in the French by night, who massacred the English. William Earl of
Suffolk Captain of the place sends to John Lord Talbot for succor. It came,
and that so unexpectedly, that the French were alike distressed. All but
soldiers were spared, and many also of them, though thrust into prisons. The
Traitors which had caused so much mischief, had their deserts by death. From
hence the Lord Talbot marched to other enterprises. The quality of our task
calls us to the maine.

(13) Thomas Lord Montacute Earl of Salisbury, being with the Regent at Paris,
and considering what forces of men, and all provisions the English then
enioied, bethought himself of some action, which might answer the greatness
of his own name, and of the public means. The siege of Orleance is by him
propounded to the Council. The credit of the Motioner was alone an argument
of power to convince the possibility. His desires were therefore furnished with
all competent provisions. They of Orleance hearing what a storm was coming
(for the name of this Earl was worthily terrible) with great diligence ordain
for their defense. The P^l. A^ll.
Suburbs (answerable in bigness to a good City) they level with the earth,
that the enemy might not from thence annoy them. Men, victuals, The siege of
Orleance.
munition, and constant intentions to fight for their liberty, and safeguard
abounded. The Earl of Sarisburie, the Lord Talbot, and a dreadful puissance
under most expert commanders present themselves before it. Orleance was and is
an Episcopal See, a Parliament Town, and University, richly situate upon the
river of Loir, whose best glory it is, being the chief City which that
renowned stream waters. No enemies appearing abroad, he Polyd. Uerg.
approaches close to the walls. Assaults Paul. Aemyl.
proving vain, he entrencheth about it, and to secure his Camp, casts up
ramparts and other works, one of which (by reason of the hugeness thereof) was
called London, by the name of the chiefe-City of England. The Fort which stood
at the Bridge foot beyond the Loyr, he seiseth upon and closes them up on
every side. Charles of France could minister no sufficient succor. God, when
man's help fails interposeth his hand, which as all of us daily feel, so is
it most conspicuous in the deliverance of Nations. The City is driven to some
misery through the beginning want of all things; for the siege had now endured
about 60. days Polyd. Virg. l. 23
not without much bloodshed on both sides. The Earl of Salisburie impatient of
such delay, purposes to give a general assault. The better to consider upon
the course, he stands to take view at a window barred with Iron which
ouerlookt the City toward the East. Behold how God began to vncutte the knot of
those bands with which the English held France bound, a bullet of a great piece
(which The Earl of Salisbury ^aine with a great shot before Orleance.
lay ready leueld at that window) discharged by the Gunners (...).
son, a lad, stroke the grates, whose splinters so wounded the Earl, and one
Sir Thomas Gargraue, that they both dyed of the incurable hurts within few
days. Hear now the common judgment of Writers concerning this Earls loss:
Polyd. Uerg.
Presently after the death of this man the fortune of the war changed. Paul.
Aemyl.
Now both mortal and immortal powers began to look favorably upon the
State of France. This to the Fabi^.
English was Initium malorum: for after this mishappe they rather lost then
wanne, so that by little and little they lost all their possession in France:
and albeit that somewhat they got after, yet for one that they wan, they lost
three. So that Polydor not without cause (after many other great praises) does
elsewhere call him the man in whom the safety of the English state consisted.
The virtue therefore of a fortunate General is inestimable.

(14) Howbeit the siege did not determine with his life, William Earl of
Suffolk, the Lord Talbot and the rest maintained the same all the winter. The
The siege continued notwithstanding the Earls death.
wants of the Camp were relieved from Paris by a conuoy, under the guard of
Sir John Fastolfe and fifteen hundred soldiers who arrived safe in despite of
all the attempts to distress the^, which the French made. The City would yield
it self, but not to the English. The Duke of Burgundy they were content
should have the honor. A subtle stratagem, rather Orl^ce offers to become
Burgundian, but the English would not admit thereof.
then an offer of yielding, for there was likelihoode in it to break thereby
the amity between the English and him. The Regent and his Counsel being sent
unto, thought it not reasonable (Aemylius erroniously makes the late Earl of
Salisbury the Author of that refusal) neither indeed was it, theirs having
been the cost and labor. The Duke of Burgundy construed this repulse sowerly,
which marred his taste of the English friendship ever after: yet the Regents
answer was just and honest. That the war was made in King Henry's name, and
therefore Orleance ought to be King Henry's. Among these difficulties stood the
French affairs. Charles of France understanding the miserable straites of his
dear City, and ignorant how to remedy so near a mischief; there presented
herself unto him at Chinon a young maid about eighteen years old, called Joan
of Loraine, Serres ^amlet by Edward Grims^. Joan the martial maid miraculously
sent to deliver Orleance and Fr^.
daughter to James of Arck dwelling in Domremy near Va^caleurs, a P^l. Aemyl.
Shepherdess under her father, whose flocks she tended, bids him not faint,
and constantly affirms, that God had sent her to deliver the Realm of France
from the English yoke, and restore him to the fullness of his fortunes. She
was not forthwith credited; but when the wise of both sorts, as well Clerks as
Soldiers had sifted her with manifold questions, she continued in her first
speech so steadfastly, uttering nothing but that which was Serres Inuentar.
modest, chaste and holy, that honor and faith was given unto her sayings. An
Poly. Uerg.
old woman directed her. Joan arms her self like a man, and requires to have
that sword which hung in Serres Inuentar.
S. Katherines church of Fierebois in Touraine. This demand increased their
admiration of her; for such a Polyd. Verg.
sword was found among the old Donaries or Votiue tokens of that Church. Thus
warlikely arrayed she rides to Blois, where forces and fresh victuals lay for
the relief of Orleance. She with the Admiral and Marshall of France enters
safe. This did greatly encourage the fainting French. Joan the maid of God, so
they called her, (though Gerard. Seg de Haillin, and some other French Authors.
some have written that it was a practice or imposture) writes thus to de la
Pole Earl of Suffolk, who succeeded Salisbury in the maine charge of that
siege.

(15) King of England do reason to the King of heaven, for his blood royal;
yield up to the Virgin the Serres out of the Original Copy translated by
Edw. Grimst^.
keys of all the good Cities which you have forced. She is come from heaven to
reclaim the blood royal, and is ready to make a peace, if you be ready to
do reason: yield therefore, and pay what you have taken, King of England: I am
the chief of this war, wheresoever I encounter your men in France, I will
chase them will they or no. If they will obey, I will take them to mercy. The
Virgin comes from heaven to drive you The Virag^ her letter to the English
General before Orleance.
out of France. If you will not obey, she will cause so great a stir as the
like has not been these thousand years in France. And believe certainly,
that the king of heaven will send to her, and her good men of Arms, more force
then you can have. Go in Gods name into your Country: be not obstinate, for
you shall not hold France of the King of Heaven, the son of S. Marie, but
Charles shall enjoy it, the King and lawful heir to whom God has given it.
He shall enter Paris with a goodly train; you William de la Pole Earl of
Suffolk, John Lord Talbot, Thomas L. Scales Licutenants to the Duke of
Bedford, and you Duke of Bedford terming your self ^egent of the Realm of
France, spare innocent blood, and leave Orleance in liberty. If you do not
reason to them whom you have wronged, the French will do the goodliest exploit
that ever was done in Christendom. Understand these news of God, and of the
Virgin. Yet Charles had at this time no whole Countries under his obedience,
Serres.
but Languede^ and Daulphin against which both the Sauoyard and Burgundian
prepared, but miscarried, the Prince of Orange the third confederate being
discomfited.

(16) This letter was entertained by the English with laughter. Joan reputed no
better then a Bedlam or Enchantresse. Though to some it may seem more
honorable to our Nation, that they were not to be expelled by a humane power,
but by a divine, extraordinarily revealing it self. Du Serres describes this
Paragon in these words. She had a modest countenance, sweet, civil, and
resolute, her discourse was The description of Joan la Pucelle de Dieu, or the
maid of God.
temperate, reasonable and retired, her actions cold, showing great chastity
without vanity, affectation, babbling, or courtly lightness. Let us not
dissemble what we find written. By her encouragements and conduct The siege
of Orleance raised.
the English had Orleance plucked out of their hopes, after they had suffered
the Duke of Alanson to enter with new force, and with much loss were driven to
raise the siege. Joan herself was wounded at one sallie in which she led,
being shot through the arm with an arrow. Judge what she esteemed of that
hurt, when she used these admirable and terrible words. This is a favor, let
us go on; they cannot escape the hand of God. In all adventures she was one
and foremost. The English lost at this siege, the Earl of Salisbury, the Lord
Molins, the Lord P^ynings, and many other. But do not rashly believe Serres in
saying, that of all sorts were slain in such Sallies, as the martial Virgin
made eight thousand. Our Writers say but S^wes A^ls.
six^ hundredth. The Lord Talbot marched away with above nine thousand, whom
Joan would not suffer the French to pursue. In memory of this admirable
deliverance, they of that City erected a monument, where Charles the seventh
king of France and Joan the Martial maid were represented, kneeling in
Armor, eleuating their eyes and hands to heaven, in sign of thanks and
acknowledgement.

(17) There was an interchangeable taking and recovering of Towns and places
of importance upon The reflux or ebb of the English greatness in France.
both sides. The Lord Talbot took Lauall, and the Earl of Suffolk puts
himself into Iergeaux. Thither the Duke of Alanson with Joan and other great
Captains come, which they force by assault. Sir Alexander Pool the Earls
brother was slain, with many others in the fight, the Earl himself remained
prisoner. The Duke added some other places to this Conquest: soon after his
numbers are augmented by the repair to him of Arthur Constable of France, the
Earl of Vandome, the Lord Dalbret and others, so that now their whole Army
contained about twenty and three thousand men. With these they encounter the
Lord Talbot (who had scarce the fifth part of their numbers) at a village
called Patay, whom they charged so suddenly, that his Archers had no time to
fortify their battles (after their manner) with a Palizado, or empa^ement of
Polyd. Verg.
stakes, so that the chief fight must be made upon horseback. After three
hours bloody resistance, the English were put to the worst. Stows Annal.
The Lord Scales The L. Talbot taken in battle.
the Lord Hungerford, Sir Thomas Rampstone, and even the Lord Talbot himself
(being first wounded in the back) were taken. The footmen enforced to trust to
their Polyd. Verg.
swords under the shelter of such horsemen as remained, retreated in order, and
came to a place of safety. The English lost above a thousand, the French above
600. This blow shook the whole fabric of the English greatness in France,
at the very foundations, awaking multitudes (even of those who before had vowed
fealty to the English, and now had color of divine warrant for violating that
vow) to join with the victors for the recovery of common liberty. There
followed the present revolt of sundry towns; neither was it long before
Charles crowned King of France at Rheimes.
Charles himself issues out in Arms, recouers the City of Aunerre and Reims;
where according to the Maids direction, he was solemnly crowned King.
Hitherto she might be thought prophetical and fortunate. It should seem now
that the chief part of her employment was accomplished, yet she flourished a
while longer. The Duke of Bedford to buttresse the shrinking state of English
affairs in France, and to encounter evil fortune in the face, upon the
unpleasant news of Orleance rescued, and Talbots taking, musters his whole
present forces which made above ten thousand English, besides certain wings of
Normans: with these he marches out of Paris, and opposes himself to the
Current of Charles his new hopes who meant to attempt that City, some of whose
Citizens held strict and secret correspondence with him. But upon this
affrontment he suspended the execution of that design, having as then no hope
to atchieue it. The Regent returns to Paris, Ioane the Pucell dissuaded
Charles from fight.

(18) Places of special note as Campeigne and Beauuois yielded themselves
voluntarily to Charles. The Regent having settled the Estate, and Garrisons of
the Chief City, passes into Normandy, to provide for a safe retreat there, if
perhaps the English (by the inevitable will of God) should be enforced to quit
their other holds and dominions: which he began to suspect, for that he had
intelligence of a secret purpose, which the French pursued to win the
Burgundians from King Henry's side. While the Regent was absent upon this
occasion, Charles got the Town of Saint Denis, (a neighbor to Paris) though
he held it not long by practice. From thence he sends the Duke of Alanson and
Ioane to try their friends and fortunes at Paris. They found not hoped
success, for the English gave them so rough an encounter, that Joan her self
was P^l. Aemyl. Ioh Til. Chr.
wounded; and the rest with much slaughter driven to fall off. The Regent
hearing of these attempts, entrusteth the Coast-Townes of Normandy, to the care
of Richard Duke of York, and Roan (the Capital City of that Duchy) to Edmund
Duke of Sommerset, himself speedes to Paris, where he commends the soldiers
and Citizens for that they had not imitated the disloyalty of their
Neighbors. New supplies came out of England. The next enterprise was to reduce
Campeigne to obedience. John of Luxemburg with Burgundians and some English
besieges it. Here the glory of Joan unfortunately ended; for coming to the
rescue she entered indeed, but afterward sallying Joan taken prisoner.
forth, her troops were beaten, and her self (being betrayed, say her
favorers) taken prisoner Chron. de Bretaig. apud Holinsh. p. 604.
by the said Burgundian Serres says by the bastard of Vandome.
Knight, who for the value of her ransom (ten thousand pounds Turnoys, and
three hundredth Crowns yearly rent) delivered her unto the English. The siege
was notwithstanding raised; they sent her to Roan, where she (about nine
Holinshed.
or ten months after) was burnt to death. Claelia She is burnt for a witch at
Roan.
was saved by Tit. L^. Pata^. D^cad. 1.
Porsenna; and it is not to be doubted, but that the magnanimity of the English
would have spared her, had they not found it necessary to deface the opinion
which the French even with superstition had conceived of her. Our See Holinsh.
in Hen. 6.
Writers show how the course of her life being legally examined by the Bishop
of Beauois (in whose Diocese she was taken) and she thereupon for sorcerie,
bloodshed, The French got this sentence to be reuersed by the Pope 26. years
after.
and unnatural use of manlike apparel, and habiliments contrary to her sex,
condemned to die, was notwithstanding upon her solemn abiuring of such her
lewd practices, pardoned her life, till again convicted of periurious
relapsing, though acknowledging her self a Stow.
strumpet, and fayning to be with child, she deservedly underwent that
punishment which she sought to delay. The rumor of her end, and the ignominious
cause thereof was somewhat incommodious to the affairs of Charles. It K. Henry
in to come in person into France.
was thought that the coming of King Henry to Paris would be much more.

(19) He had already with great solemnity received the Crown of England at
Westminster, being about nine years old, a most fashionable and waxen age for
all impression either of good or bad. The next year after his Coronation in
England, he passes over into France there also to receive the diadem thereof.
The Constableship of England, was Richard Duke of York made Constable of
England.
before his departure, assigned by Patent for term of life to Richard Duke of
York (which gave him a more feeling of greatness and secretly whetted his
ambitious appetite,) upon this occasion. One John Vpton, of Feuersham in Kent
Notarie, accused John Down of the same place Gentleman, That he and his
accomplices did imagine the Kings death at his Coronation. The combat was
granted, and in Smithfield (the Duke of York exercising the office of high
Constable) they fought in lists. In the end the Kings name was used to part and
forgive them. It is a vice to suspect too far. The Duke of York (a most
subtle man) seems never in heart to have been a true subject to King Henry:
yet no man says, he was any author in this. Henry (the common wealth having
yielded to liber all grants of money) is now ready to enter Paris. England
remained under the government of the Duke of Gloucester.

(20) There is no doubt that the English there A. D. 1431. A. Reg. 10.
at their Kings presence, set forth their greatness to the full show. The young
King attended upon with two English Cardinals, York, and Winchester, and great
Princes of his blood, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Prelates, and the flower of our
nation, with many as well French and Burgonians, as Normans and others,
excellently well appointed, makes a triumphant entry into the head City of
that most noble Monarchy. There Henry crowned King of France in Paris.
was no sign in the People but of joy and welcome; the shows were many and
magnificent. Upon the seventh day of December, he was solemnly Crowned King of
France, by the P^l Aemyl.
Cardinal of Winchester, his great uncle, in the Ioh. Till. Chr.
Chief Church of Paris, called of our Lady. The Duke of Bedford entertained
the minds of the Assembly with a set speech, wherein he declared, King Henry
his Nephews undoubted title to that Crown, and commended the same to their
fidelities, adding ample promises of honor and emolument. Such of the French
Nobility as were present, did their homage. The people had good and gracious
words given unto them, and certain Polyd. Verg.
quantities of money, Corn, and wine, in the nature of a donatiue, liberally
distributed among them. Proclamations were made, that all Frenchmen who came in
by a day there named, should be protected. The Kings Patents and grants
touching French matters, passed under the seal and style of Henry King of the
Ga^orum, to distinguish, (it seems) from the former mere titular, of Galli^
Rex; so also the French King^ usually style themselves.
Frenchmen and of England, which Seal (for variety) we have prefixed, as we
found it annexed, *to a writing directed by the King to his Court of Requests
in his Palace at Paris; but for English affairs he used another Seal, being
in every point like unto that In Custodia Io. Guill^m H^raldi pe^iss. Dat. H.
6. 7.
of King Henry the fourth, and (as some think) the very same stamp, (which
therefore we have here omitted,) as likewise some Inter Chart^ Colleg^ Et^.
Charters of his there are, whereunto he affixed the seal of his father.
Charles of France esteemed not himself the less a King for all this, but
pursues his affair. His people took the City of Chartres by a stratagem, the
Bishop whereof (because a Burgundian) they also put to the sword with others.
Neither were the English idle. John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Arundel,
Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Suffolk, and others, made up
this loss with advantage. Their actions are placed by some as done before the
Coronation which is likely. The King having thus taken possession of France,
not long after took his farewell thereof. His return was by Roan, and so over
land to Callais, from whence The King returns into England.
upon the eleventh day of February, he arrived safe at Dover. His uncle the
Duke of Gloucester was able to give an honest, and good account of the
Government during the kings absence. The suppressio^ of an insurrection,
beginning at Abingdon in Oxfordshire The Protector breaks an insurrection at
Abington in the Shell.
was not the least service. A weauer (the Baliffe of the Town) was the
vlcerous head, to which that corruption gathered; who had changed his own name,
and called himself; Jack Sharp of Wigmores land in Wales. The special
color of his attempt was Stowes Annal.
to have massacred Priests; whose heads (he said) he would make as cheap as
Sheepes-heads; that is, two or three, or ten for a penny. But the mention of
Wigmores lands, the ancient inheritance of Mortimer, (then the possession of
the fatal Duke of York, who afterward in the right of that name, challenged
the Crown of England from King Henry) insinuates somewhat further. The varlet
forfeited his head and four quarters for his attempt. It is to be wondered that
the Council of Estate under King Henry, hearing that title so often glanced
at, provided not better against the mischief. But the eyes and hearts of the
wise are blinded, when God has a purpose to reserve a scourge, or to hide the
fire which shall afterward be used to consume a nation. Unquiet humors were
as well abroad as at home. The soldiers of Callais discontented with their
wages as to little began to be mutinously troublesome. The Regent A mutiny
beginning in Callais appeased.
comes thither in person in Easter week, where he exercises necessary
discipline severely. Four, the most faulty lost their heads, one hundred and
ten are cashered, and banished from the Town, as six score others had formerly
been. Why dwell we upon so petty accidents? The loss of the Kingdom of
France is imminent. Let us diligently note the degrees which God found out to
deprive our Nation of that honor. In this journey of the Regent, King Henry's
interest was not advanced. The Regent (a widdower) road from thence to Turwin,
where The Duke of Bedford marries the Earl of Saint Paul's daughter.
(without the Burgundians priuity) he married the Lady Iaquet, aged about
Holinsh.
seventeen years Serre^.
daughter to Peter of Lutzembourg Earl of S. Paul no friend to the Burgundian.
This was nothing prosperous to the English affairs. For Anne, the Regents
former wife, sister to the Duke of Burgundy, being, while she lived, a strong
reason and assurance of amity, weakened the same by her death; and this second
marriage, not pleasing the Burgundian, did yet more diminish it. These were but
degrees.

In the mean space, the accidents of war between the English and French,
were manifold and perplexed, now we, now they leesing, or gaining, as
opportunity served: which uncertainties brought forth their ordinary progenies,
fearful outrages, and Ioh. Til. Chron.
s^rcitie of all things needful for the use of man. It would be wearisome, and
not much necessary, to recount the particular lesser actions, neitheir indeed
is it easy; for who can readily tell the sieges, surprises, skirmishes and the
like, being so confusedly set down by Authors, wherein diverse of both Nations
wanne to themselves much honor, and served the uses of those times, and their
own. The uttermost effect of those great labors, was, that the English
Regency fell not forthwith into nothing. Permanent leaders in those public
services were the Regent himself; their maine Pillar and Chief life, Thomas
Earl of Arundel, Richard Earl of Warwick, Henry his Son, the Lord
Willoughby, the thrice noble John Lord Talbot, (who was now at liberty,) the
Lord Scales, besides Knights, Esquires, and other valiant Captains a multitude.

(21) The fortune of Renate Duke of Bar, is not to be omitted, for that
afterward; our King vnluckely married into his house. He had to Paul. Aemil.
wife Isabell the daughter, and heir of Charles Duke of Lorraine, by whom he
had issue two sons, and two daughters, the youngest of which was Lady
Margaret, whom King Henry afterward took to wife. Charles Duke of Lorraine
dying, Renate thinks to succeed in that estate. Antony Earl of Vallemont,
brother to Charles presumes he has a nearer right. The matter comes to be
determined by blows. Charles King of France was a steadfast supporter of
Renates claim* in lieu of like offices performed by Renate to him in the times
of most difficulty. The Regent and Philip Duke of Burgundy, stood for the
Earl. Renate Duke of ^rrain and Bar taken prisoner.
Their aides prevailed so much, that Renates forces were beaten with loss of
about Polyd. Verg. l. 23.
three thousand, from the siege of Vallemont, and himself with not fewer then
two hundred others remained prisoner to the Duke of Burgundy, one of whose
subjects commanded in chief at that enterprise. This Paul. Aemil.
Renate was afterward entitled to the Crown of Naples and Sicilia, by the
testament of Ioane Queen of them. The King of France might seem to have
sustained a grievous loss by the enthralment of this Duke: but the English
gained nothing thereby: for his persuasions, and private offices on the behalf
of King Charles, did not a little prepare the Burgundians heart (which now was
knit to the English but with feeble Arteries) to accept in time the holy
impression of reconcilement. The French who lived under the Regency, or in
danger of the English, made choice of the Burgundian to protect them, which
could not be embarred to them, for that he was as yet King Henry's pretended
friend. Indeed this Scene and unstable state of affairs was full of horror,
which Polyd^re Vergill describes well enough. While the English and French
(quoth he) contend for Dominion, Sovereignty and life it self, men's goods in
France were violently taken by the license of war, Churches spoiled, men
every where murdered, or wounded, other, put to death, or tortured; Matrons
ravished, Maids forcibly drawn from out their parents arms to be deflowred,
The miserable face of France by occasion of th^se wars.
Towns daily taken, daily spoiled, daily defaced, the riches of the
Inhabitants carried whither the Conquerors think good; h^sen and villages
round about set on fire: no kind of cruelty is left unpracticed upon the
miserable French; omitting many hundredth kinds of other calamities, which all
at once oppressed them. Add hereunto that the Commonwealth being destitute of
the help of laws, (which for the most part are mute in times of war and
muti^ie) floateth up and down without any anchorage at right or justice.
Neither was England herself void of these mischiefs, who every day heard the
news of her valiant childrens funerals, slain in perpetual skirmishes and
bickerings, her general wealth continually ^d, and wained, so that the evils
seemed almost equal, and the whole Western world ecchoed the groans and
sighs of either Nations quarrels, being the common argument of speech and
compassion throughout Christendom.

(22) The course certainly which the English held, did only faintly keep alive
the General State of the Regency, without giving period to the war, either
by finishing the Conquest, or settling that which was conquered. Some would have
had large supplies of men, and treasure levied, that King Charles might no
where have any rest: Of this opinion were Bedford Poly. Verg.
himself, the Dukes of York and Sommerset. This Counsel was not followed,
but another, in show more frugall, which fed the evils, but redressed none.
Present sparings do oftentimes draw after them infinite wastes, and no
husbandry proves so ill, as unseasonable Parsimony. In the mean time, the
Earl of Arundel and the Lord Talbot, carry about victorious Arms, and
terrify Angiou, Main, and other places with their successes. In Normandy,
nevertheless the common people drew together in huge multitudes. There were
threescore Serres. Invent.
thousand of them rebelliously knotted together in Vexin, Norman, and twenty
thousand in C^ux. Their purpose was (through dislike of the English Government,
or practice of the French) to have reached one hand to King Charles, and to have
thrust King Henry's officers out. What is a multitude without The Commons of
Normandy rise against the English.
advise? To stop their insolency and course which Holinsh.
they held toward Caen, the Earl of Polyd. Uerg.
Arundel, and Robert Lord Willoughby, with about thirteen hundred light horse,
and six thousand Archers, march against them, by direction of the Dukes of
York and ommerset, who had the chief Leiutenancies in Normandy. They divide
their forces to use them with the more advantage. The Earl stays in Ambush
with two parts, the Lord Willoughby draws them into it with the third. A
thousand of the Rebels were cut down before the soldiers hands could be stayed
to spare the rest, who basely (as it became them) threw away their weapons, and
fell to the earth, crying mercy. The multitudes were suffered to return, their
ringleaders lost their lives. All that the world could collect by this popular
insurrection was, that the Normans would be gladly rid of the English. Nothing
else was done. This Earl of Arundell The Earl of Arundel slain.
having done sundry noble deeds during the wars in France, received his deaths
wound shortly after in a skirmish at Gerberoy in Beauuo^sine, where La Hire (a
famous Captain among the enemies) had the day.

(23) The Regency yet held, and the miseries of France (being burnt up by the
fiery reflections of two Counter-Sunnes) were nothing diminished: Who should
give to them a Period? while the Duke of Burgundy continued English, it could
not be. To prepare therefore a separation between them, such of the Nobility
as went over to the Burgundian Duke told him, Paul. Aemyl.
That King Charles upon all occasions (when speech was ministered) spoke of him
honorably, and inwardly wished him well, and that he never heard any mention
of the murder committed upon the Duke his father, (cause of the sons hatred
to France) but he heartily sighed, protesting he was neither party nor privy
thereunto. These and the like mollifying salues applied to the tumors of his
reuengefull affections, did work strongly, the rather for that his mind
heretofore possessed with the English amity, was now vacant in that part, the
same (by the means of sundry iealousies and auersions) lying open to contrary
impressions. There wanted but an outward honorable means to fashion him
entirely to the French party. Let us hear I^ent. of Fr.
Serves in this point: The Deputies of the General Council press both
French, English and Burgundians to end all quarrels by some good composition.
The City of Arras is allowed of them all to treat in. From the E^nius 4.
Pope and Council of Pisa, there came the Cardinals of S. Cross and Cypres,
with twelve Bishops. For the (...) ^ners ^ of ^he English, French and
Burgundians.
King of France, there was the Duke of Bourbon, the Earl of Richmond Constable
of France, the Archbishop of Reims, Chancellor of France, and many others,
great, noble, wise and learned men. For the King of England, the two Cardinals
of York and Winchester, the Earls of Suffolk (* John Holland Earl of
Huntington) the Bishop of Saint David's, John Holinsh.
Ratcliffe Keeper of the great Seal, the Lord Hungerford, Ralfe the wise
Official of Canterbury, and some Doctors of Divinity. For Philip Duke of
burgundy, the Duke of Guelders, the Earl of Nassau, the Bishop of Cambray,
Count Vernamb^urg, the Bishop of Liege; five other great Earls, besides the
Deputies of many his best Towns, sufficient to show, that though he was in
title but a Duke, yet that his greatness was equal to a King. When it came to
communication, the English being also in possession, urged farther for
themselves the right of descent, and the act of Charles the sixth, father to
this Charles, by which act the Crown of France was settled upon Henry the
fifth, and the issue of the Lady Katherine his wife, and therefore they
propounded no other condition of peace, but that Henry their King might have
all, and Polyd. Verg. lib. ^3.
Charles to hold of him. The French offered Normandy and Guien. There ended
the hope of agreement between them, for neither party would accept. King
Charles therefore resolving to maime the English faction upon any terms (how
base soever) sends Duke Philip a blanke, bids him therein to Serres in Char. 7.
prescribe his own conditions and demands: he did so: and his Conditions were
so unreasonable, and so many, even a great volume full, (says a French man) as
it Serres.
is strange, so great a Monarch should stoop so much to his subject and
v^ssall, but that necessity has no law. They Serres.
join hereupon most firmly, and the Duke The French and Burgundian agree. 24
Sept. 1435
(a man wholly transported by profit) declares himself a public enemy to all
the enemies of King Charles, and friend to all his friends. This was the first
parting stroke which severed the French Dominions from the English Sovereignty:
the event declared, that the English had done more wisely, if they had accepted
Normandy and Guyen; but as the case stood, then they could not in honor do
it; and Councels are not to be measured by events; for so the most foolish may
sometimes pass for prudent. King Henry not only lost now hereby a most
needful friend, but was compelled to rely upon his single strengthes, as well
against King Charles his natural enemy, as against the Duke of Burgundy, who
plainly seemed to have betrayed the cause. To set a gloss upon this fact, the
Duke Polyd. Verg.
dispatcheth Ambassadors into England to King Henry (who as In C^l. 7.
Aemylius erroneously says was present at this treaty of Arras) to make known
the reasons of his peace with King Charles, and to persuade the King to
entertain the same. This Embassage was so odious to the English, that they
forbear not to call the Duke a deceitful man, a turn-seruer, a perjured
person, and a Traitor.

(24) The popular hatred also was such against the Dukes Subjects, resiant in
London, that they were beaten and slain many of them, before the fury thereof
could be stayed by Proclamation. The Ambassadors return with honest
admonitions to their Master, against which, his ears and senses were strongly
mured; for King Charles had set about them as it were a Barricado of royalties,
privileges, The incredible rate at which K. Charles purchased the Burgundians
good
honors, money, Cities, Towns and whole Provinces, which he confirmed to the
Duke, only to withdraw him from us. The whole Counties of Paul. Aemyl.
A^, Err, Ponthieu, Bolein, Artois, the town of * Polyd. Uerg.
Abb^lle, and other lands, the Cities and Towns in Picardy, upon the water of
So^e, Amiens, Corbie, Per^n, S. Quintin, but these last as it were in gage till
Paul. Aemyl.
four hundredth thousand Crowns were satisfied: Briefly, what not? the Charity
of King Charles was so fervent to make the Duke of Burgundy a true Frenchman
once again: he paid so dear for it, that we may think him worthy to
obtain his desire; yet was it worth his cost; for Aemylius says most truly,
that the ceasing of that indignation did redeem the French from a foreign
government, as the first assuming thereof had made the English, Lords over
France. But, howsoever the high and just displeasure, which this Prince took
for the wicked murder of his father, (abundantly satisfied-for by this A. D.
1435. A. reg. 14. The Burgundian renounceth to the Regent his friendship with
England.
treaty) moved him first to embrace the English amity, he afterward most
subtilely converted the revenge (by way of taking amends) to the enlargement of
his proper riches, power and amplitude. After his Ambassadors returned, he
sends back all contracts to the Duke of Bedford at Paris, and renounceth the
alliance of England with a watchword, that every one should look to himself.

(25) Each man hereupon (says Invent of Fr.
Serres) sharpens his sword and scoures his Arms, to recover that by force
which they could not obtain by reason; Serres might better have said,
reasoning. All things certainly favored the French designs; for this was the
general estate of the English affairs. King Henry scarce out of his
Childhood; and when he came to man's age, not Man enough to manage so turbulent
occurrents; the Princes of the blood weakly united in love, for the common
good; the Protector vigilant over England, the Regent careful for France, but
both privately envied; Richard Duke of York (whose strenghts daily increased,
which in time he meant nothing less then to use for the benefit of King
Henry,) ambitiously reserving himself for a dear day; most of the great
warriors slain; and in brief a great inability (for want of a Soul, willing
and fit to look so stern and dismal adventures in the face) through the
whole body of the English forces; which though otherwise they might have
lingered out the war, and kept their footing, yet the death of the great Duke
of Bedford Regent of France doubled the difficulty, or rather the
impossibility. The Duke of Bedford Regent of France dies at Paris.
In taking this triumphant Peer away, God made it manifest, that he held the
English unworthy and unfit to continue their Empire among the French any
longer. This Prince not long after this revolt of Duke Philip, died at Cambden
in Bedfordshire: says he was slain in battle before Ve^noyle.
Paris, uncertain to some, whether through grief of the evils he foresaw, or
other malady. But the Analogy and color of his whole former life, does
contradict their conceit, who think that such a grief should determine his
days, because it could not but proceed from a kind of fear and despair, an
humor absolutely opposite to Magnanimity, wherein he abounded. How mighty a
Prince he was this his Master Cambden loc. cit^t.
style shows: Regent of France; Duke of Bedford, Alanson, and Aniou, Earl of
Maine, Richmond, and Kendale; and Constable of England. But (which excels
his greatness) he was one of the best Patriots and Generals, that ever blossomed
out of the royal Rosiar of England. His valor was not more terrible to the
enemy, then his memory honorable. For (doubtful whether with more glory to
him, then to the speaker) Stowes Annals. but Master Cambden says it was
Charles 8. Cambd. ibid.
Lewis the eleventh being afterward counseled by certain envious persons to
demolish and deface his stately Tomb, (wherein, with him, *says one, was
buried all the Englishmens good fortune in France) which was erected over his
body in the Northside of the high Altar, in our Ladies Church at Roan, used
these indeed most Princely words.

(26) What honor shall it be to us, or you, to break this Monument, and to
pull out of the ground the bones of him dead, whom in his lifetime, neither my
father, nor King Lewis his Princely testimony of the late Regents virtues.
your Progenitors with all their puissance, were once able to make fly one
foot backward? who by his strength, policy, and wit kept them all out of the
principal dominions of the Realm of France, and out of this noble Duchy of
Normandy? wherefore I say first, God save his soul; and let his body now lie
in rest: which when he was alive, would have disquieted the proudest of us all:
And as for the toombe, I assure you, it is not so worthy, or convenient as his
honor and acts deserved.

(27) The Regent being now dead, the late peace made at Arras between King
Charles and Philip Duke of Burgundy, presently disclosed, and put forth
effects most dangerous to the English; for many Towns voluntarily yield, and
multitudes of the French (who hitherto through fear contained themselves)
starting away, all the English dominions were full of private conuenticles,
practices, and correspondences with the Enemy. Such English as then were in
France, are not altogether sloathfull, but yet, through a fatal either
security or negligence at home, there was not speedy sufficiencies of
resistance ministered.

(28) Richard Duke of York, (whose services never Richard Duke of York made
Regent of France.
did good to the English commonwealth) is created Regent of France, and Edmund
Duke of Sommerset (his perpetual riual, or perhaps an intelligent censor of
his manners) continues his commands in Normandy. The Duke of Sommerset
Holinsh. Stow Annal.
opposed the advancement of York to that slipperie dignity. He was no babe in
so doing, but more foreseeing then the Protector, and all the Council of
England. Yet his opposition was unseasonable, and fruitless, for the others
carriage had woonne such a party about the King, (whom he meant by embracing to
pull down) that notwithstanding the disadvantage of his silenced title, which
was alone a great cause to have made him everlastingly incapable of so great
trust and means, he prevailed. But before he could arrive, Paris was lost.
Robert Lord Willoughby was Governor there for the English, who had with him
but about two thousand, the faith of the Citizens was presumed upon to make up
the rest at a pinch, for a common resistance. On the contrary, they perceiving
upon what terms the English affairs stood in France, chiefly after the late
Regents death, conspire against them. The treason was carried so cunningly by
some of the principal Magistrates of the Town, who capitulated for a general
pardon from King Charles (which was gladly yielded unto,) that the mischief
sooner took effect, then it could be discovered. Thomas Lord Beaumont began
the loss with his misfortune; for Arthur Earl of Richmond, The Parisians
conspire to dispossess the English.
Constable of France, houering about Paris, in hope to recover the same, the
Lord Beaumont with certain hundredth of English, fell into his danger about
Saint Denis, and were distressed. While as yet the terror of this discomfiture
(not great in regard of the numbers slain, but in regard of the Circumstances)
was freshest, the French advance their Banners up to the City, where a gate was
opened unto them by their partisans. What should the English do in this
general mischief? The townsmen, lately vassals, turn enemies on a sudden:
women and children assail the English from their windows with all sorts of
missill things. Many are beaten down and massacred in the streets. The Lord
Willoughby Governor of Paris, Lewis of Luxemburg Bishop of Ther^an,
Chancellor of France for the English, the Bishops of Lisieux and Meaux, with
other, fly to Paul. Aemyl.
S. Anthonies gate and the Bastile, places which they had reserved for defense
till extreme necessity. Many more had been saved in those places, but that the
perfidious Citizens drew chains thwart the streets, and empeached their
retreat. Hear the rest in a Serres Invent by Edw. Gri^st.
Frenchmans words.

(29) All run to the Bastile. The Tournels are presently seized, and all
approaches unto the Bastile are soon won. Such as were within it, at first
made some show of defense, but all things were prepared to force them: they
demand a Parlea, and agree to depart with The City of Paris yielded up. to the
French.
their lives and baggage. They are conducted about the Town beneath the Loure,
to embark upon the River of Sein, and so pass to Roan. They could not well
have passed through the City. The people hereof advertised run to the walls,
and cry out with great shoutes, Rob. Fabians Chronicle. Gagwin.
baiting the English like Dogs, whom a little before they had feared, and
honored as their masters. Who of the English reads these things without
indignation? but they are the perpetual manners of the base multitude, and the
fortune therein of the English, the same which follows all like accidents.
Some will think that the Lord Willoughby, and his people might have done more
nobly, to have taken up their graves in the place which they pretended to make
good against the French. Fortitude is never separated from Prudence. Succor
was despaired. The Duke of York was not as yet arrived, and in maintaining
their strengthes against the whole City of Paris, and all the present French
forces for the space of about ten days, they sufficiently cleared themselves
both in point of honor and loyalty. Paris 27. Feb. A. D. 1436.
is thus lost in the worst time for an Army to march in. They did wisely to
choose so unseasonable a season, their market might have else been marred; for
the new Regent (not so much hindered from sooner coming by the Duke of
Somersets emulations, which some affirm, The new Regent comes with an Army
into France.
as by the very quality of the winter weather) arrived afterward, accompanied
with the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk, the Lord Falconbridge, and other
worthy persons, with an Army of eight thousand men. But this Regent did never
good in France: He who so writes, might have also safely added, nor *Stows
Annal.
elsewhere. The English affairs were not as yet come to the very breake-necke
point. They held (in the late conquered parts of France) Normandy entire,
though not without much trouble; for the people again rebel in Caux: but that
mischief was destroyed with the greater and more merciless confusion of the
Authors and Actors, then the former. About five thousand of them were trampled
to death by the just fury of the English, under the leading of the Lord Scales,
the Lord Hoo and others. They burnt all their dwellings, made booty of their
goods, drove their whole numbers out of the Country. The Lord Scales not long
after discomfited La Hire, and his Company not far from Roan. The war was
handled on all sides without full or complete armies. Skirmishes were the
ordinary forms of fighting. The French were schooled from settling their rest
upon a pitched field. Thus houered the affairs.

(30) Philip Duke of Burgoigne had as yet in person Calais besieged by the
Burgundian.
given no proof against the English of his affection to King Charles. Now he
addresseth himself to an enterprise worthy of that expectation, the recovery
of Calais. You would suspect that he continued still a friend to the English,
in making choice of a service, wherein he was most likely to waste his time in
vain, and yet make show of much forwardness; but he was real, though the
rather stirred thereunto by the desire of private revenge. The English, upon his
forsaking their alliance, had attempted to kindle the Gauntois, and other of
the Flemish towns (Subjects to the Duke) to rise in rebellion: but the opinion
that K. Henry's fortunes in France were desperately stooping, made their wills
too dank to take fire. The notice notwithstanding of this attempt came to the
Duke, which sharpened him to revenge, whereof (as the former passages
abundantly declare) he was not ordinarily thirsty. He brings his Army before
Calais. Chief commanders there for King Henry were the L. Dudley who had
charge of the Castle, and Sir John Ratcliffe of the Town. The Dukes purpose
was to have cloyed the harbor by sinking ships laden with stones, and such
like choking materials; but upon the ^bbe-water the Calisians delivered the
haven from that peril. The King of England advertised that his precious The
Protector of England rescues Calais with a great Fleet and ho^t.
Fort and Town of Calais were thus emperilled, Humfrey Duke of Gloucester the
Protector comes in person with a very great Fleet (some write five hundredth
sail) to the rescue, and in it a great puissance, with full purpose to give
battle, glad perhaps that he might now revenge old grudges. It is able to
move choler, to consider how Writers torture us with the diversities of
reports; but the general agreement is, that the Duke of Burgundy did raise his
siege before he was fought with. Some Polyd. Verg. l 13
say the very rumor of the Protectors approach drove him away, and that the
Protector came the next day after the Burgundians flight. Others excuse him
(probably enough) in saying that the Flemings grew vnweildie to his
commandments, and would needs home.

(31) The Protector was master of the Dukes Camp, and spent eleven days in his
Dominions, burning He returns with hon^ur into England.
Poppering and Bell, and greatly damnified him about ^Grauelin and Bolognois,
then setleth he the state of Calis, and Serres. Rob. Fab.
returns with great honor to his charge into England. But the English were
thought to have created store of work for this busy Duke at home, where many
great tumults rose, in Serres.
one of which, his own person was endangered at Bruges, Lisle-Adam the
Captain of his guard being there presently slain. Hence it came perhaps that
a mean Polyd. Verg. l. 23.
was found by contracts made with Isabel the Duchess his third wife (a most
witty woman a Portugesse) to hold a league with England, and yet no breach with
France.

(32) These have hith erto been the actions of Men, let us not neglect two
great Ladies, because An. D. 1437
much concerning our history depend on their courses. Queen Katherine, the
widow of King Henry the fifth, and mother by him of this sixth Henry, about
Katherine Queen (...) of England.
this time departed out of the world. This most noble Lady, when her husband
the King was dead, being not of judgment (by reason of her tender years to
understand what became her greatness, or having found perhaps that greatness was
no part of happiness,) secretly marries one Owen ap Theodore or Teder P^l.
Aemyl.
the most noble and most goodly gentleman of all the Welsh nation, and endued
with Polyd. Verg.
admirable virtues, who drew his descent from holy Cadwallader, last King of
the Britains. This husband had by her sundry children, two of which, Edmund
and Gasper do bear a part in the royal history, and King Henry the sixth
(their half brother) created the first of them Earl of Richmond, the other of
Pembroke. This Edmund is he, who by Margaret the daughter of John Duke of
Somerset, (grandechilde King, ^nry the 7. her Grandchild.
to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) had Henry the 7. the most famous and
prudent King of England.

(33) In that year in which this excellent Queen died, the young Duchess
Dowager of Bedford (widow to the late Regent of France) married also (below
her degree) a vigorous English Knight, one Stowes Annals. The Duchess Dowager
marries Wood^le.
Sir Richard Wooduile, of which match yet Serres needed not to have spoken so
contemptibly, calling him an English aduenturer, of small account; she thereby
(says he) giving cause to laugh at her: which censure tastes perhaps of the
French leven and prejudice, because the Lady was sister to the Earl of S.
Paul, who would not make one in the peace of Arras, but held with the English.

(34) But let us see the sequel. Out of this Matrimony also sprung Queens;
for her husband (afterward made Earl of Rivers) had sundry children by her,
whereof Elizabeth being one, had the honor Elizabeth wife to Edward 4. (...)
daughter of that bed.
to marry Edward the fourth King of England, and hereby was both herself a
Queen and a Progenitresse of those glorious Kings and Queens which followed:
for from her and this match sprang another Elizabeth, the renowned wife of King
Henry the seventh, as King Henry himself did of the former: both those
marriages proved most fortunate to England: but another marriage which then
threatened present danger to King Henry, was that which James the first King of
Scots made with France, who gave his daughter the Lady Margaret, to Lewis the
Daulphin for wife, and sent new supplies of men against the English: he meant
also to have attempted some personal hostility, but that he was most The
murder of (...) (...) the first of Scotland.
wickedly murdered by certain bloody Traitors in Perth, suborned thereunto by
Walter Earl of Athol, (his own near kinsman) in hope to attain the Crown;
crowned indeed he was, but not (as his Withces and Sorcerers had ambiguously
insinuated) with the Crown of that Realm, but with a Hect. B^et. l. 17.
Crown of red-hote iron, which was clapped upon his head, being one of the
tortures wherewith he ended at once his wicked days and desires.

(35) Let us now cast our eye to the doings of our new Regent the Duke of
York, that we may be witnesses, how far by his endeavors, the affairs of
The new Regent does nothing.
King Henry were advanced in France. The silence at this time is every where
very great, yet had he opportunity to have achieved somewhat. Two Iauent. of
Fr.
thousand French horsemen were mutined, and roued up and down in great
disorder. Paris was fearfully punished with famine, and the attendants of
famine, pestilentiall maladies. The Countries about lay open: the Courtiers
were discontented and divided: Nothing is yet done by our Regent, which Stow.
p. 616.
some impute to Edmund Duke of Somersets opposition, who out of envy and
disdain hindered his dispatch. We must in the mean time find out them that
did somewhat. The Duke of Sommerset himself accompanied with the Lords Talbot
and Fanconbridge, with other Gallants, and a competent force of the English,
besiege Harflew, which the Normans in the Harflew recovered by the Duk^ of
Sommerset.
late rebellion took from them, and still maintained against them under French
Captains: King Charles sends some of his principal Commanders with four
thousand men to rescue the Town; who did their best, but not able to effect
any thing, Harflew was rendered to the Duke.

(36) In November Richard Earl of Warwick came as Regent into France, being
surrogated in that office The Earl of Warw^cke comes Regent into France, and
York returne^.
to the Duke of York, who returned into England. He carried with him a
thousand fresh Soldiers, and arrived at Harflew, from whence he repaired to
Roan, the chief seat (Paris being now lost) of the English Dominions in North
France, as Bordeaux was in the South; whether now the Earl of Huntingdon, with
certain troops and companies of Soldiers, was sent as Seneschall. This new
Regent busied himself in the general affairs of his place. A. D. 1438.
Under him the Duke of Burgoins forces were driven from Crotoy. Abbeuile freed
from the danger of a Bastile, with which the Duke had pent that Town in; and
the English for twenty days space together took their pleasure in spoiling
the Country of Picardy about Amiens and Artois. These and some other actions
having been worthily carried during this Regents government, himself dies.
The Duke The Duke of York Regent again.
of York again succeedes him. Our interest in France was retained, not so
much by King Henry's ministers and Armies, as by remissness of King Charles,
whom also Lewis the Daulphin (afterward King) did greatly trouble by rebellious
decessions, and absentments of himself. The fear of the English reconciled
the son to the father the sooner. K. Charles was now fallen into dislike with
his people, but to King Charles and his son recon ciled against the English.
redeem his credit, he attempts the recovery of P^ntoyse (a town near to
Paris) which the Lord Clifford had not long before surprised by stratageme and
money (an ordinary means as then for the expugnation The siege of P^ntoyse.
of places) and comes in person to the enterprise. There attended upon him for
that service about ten or twelve thousand men. The L. Clifford is within, and
makes a brave defense.

(37) The Duke of York lately landed in Normandy, as Regent, assembleth his
maine strengthes, being about seven or eight thousand; offers the French King
battle. He keeps himself within his trenches. The Duke (according to the
ancient humor, and discipline of the English, who love to set all upon a push)
desirous to fight, unexpectedly passes the river of oyse, which ran between
the two Camps. King Charles dislodgeth so fearfully, that the French do not
over boldly excuse him of Serres.
flying. The Duke having had the spoil of the French Kings Camp, refortifies
Pontoyse, and assaults a Bastile, where Charles had left three thousand
Soldiers to maintain the face of a siege. It was held better to pursue the
King, who was gotten to Poisie. There King Charles pursued by the Duke of York.
the Duke of York again very nobly prouokes him to a field. It would not be;
King Charles saw the hazards were not equal, and therefore endures his
brauado. What could the Duke do more? he is of necessity to return to the
maine of his charge in Normandy, and does so. King Charles ran into such
obloquie and contempt with his people by this dishonorable retreat, but
chiefly with the Parisians; that if he had not attempted again and prevailed
against Pontoise, it might have ieoparded his whole estate; for there was a
faction which would have made use of his disgrace. He returns in great fury to
Pontoys taken by King Charles.
the siege, and finally enters the town, not without much bloodshed. Serres
says, that five hundred English left their dead bodies at the breach. The King
was one of the first that entered, choosing rather to be thought temerarious
then timorous. This exploit established his opinion among the people. A
satietie of war filled both sides, and the estate of England under King
Henry, whose softness and lenity gave way to sundry dangerous Court-factions,
needed quiet Commissioners meet at Callis: nothing Charles Duke of Orleance set
at liberty by the English.
is concluded but the enlargement of Charles Duke of Orleans for the sum of
three hundred thousand Crowns. He had been Prisoner in England about twenty
and six years, ever since the Battle of Agincourt, where he was taken. The
Duke of Burgundy was a special Actor in his enlargement, with a purpose to
secure his own greatness by benefits: this high borne Prince for the murder
of his father, being naturally the head and chief of that deadly fewde, which
had most mortally raged between the houses of Burgundy and Orleance. Humfrey
Duke of Gloucester prudently foreseeing the dangers like to ensue on Orleance
his enlargement, stoutly opposed himself thereunto, and that upon important
reasons which R^. Pate^. de (...) 6. 18. the copy whereof I had from the
learned M. John Claph^.
he required to have registered, that they might remain on Record for a
testimony and discharge of his duty in that behalf.

1 First, for that the French King wanted discretion and judgment to order his
affairs, which defects might be supplied by the Duke, (being a man of
experience and very subtle) if he should be set at liberty.

2 That the said Duke might procure an union of the factions (now hotely
maintained in France among the Nobility) to the prejudice of the Crown of
England, and hazard of the loss of the Kings territories in France.

3 That the Duchy of Normandy (having sustained a great charge in maintaining
the war) seeing the Duke of Orleance delivered, and no royal Army on the
English part to withstand the common enemy, was likely enough to revolt.

4 That if the Duke should be delivered, it might be probably coniectured, that
he would sooner break his oath, which he should (being prisoner) make to the
King of England, then the oath of his allegiance to the French King his
Sovereign Lord, of whom he holds his lands and dignity.

5 If the Articles concluded between his Majesty and the French on the Dukes
behalf, should not be performed, what remedy might his Majesty have or expect?

6 That considering his cosen of Huntingdon was to leave the Duchy of G^yenne,
and for that the alliance betwixt the said Duke, and the Earls of Arminack and
Foix, and the Lord de la Bret, was to be suspected as dangerous, it was very
necessary that good provision should be made for defense of that Country, being
his Majesty's ancient inheritance.

7 That his Majesty has no alliance with any Christian Prince, but only the
King of Portugal (being but of tender years and far off:) And therefore it
was not safe for his Majesty to deliver him, that was likely to prove his
Capital enemy, and to seek means to deprive him of those lands which his
noble father had left him.

8. That if any of his Majesty's kindred, or other Lords on that side the Sea,
should happen to be taken prisoners, the said Duke of Orleance might ransom 4.
or 5. of them.

9. That it were fit to take advise of the Lords, and other his Majesty's
subjects in the Realm of France, and duchy of Normandy, whether they thought
it expedient that the said Duke should be delivered or not. Otherwise the world
might cry shame thereon, when men should call to mind the loss of his
brethren of Clarence, and Bedford, and other noble Personages, in defending and
keeping those Lands.

10. If he (the said Duke of Gloucester) should consent to the said Dukes
deliverance (the same being also quite-contrary to the last will of his
Majesty's Father) such inconveniences, as would ensue thereupon* should be
imputed to him.

(38) Notwithstanding the weight of so many thousand Crowns ouer*peysed all
these important and ponderous reasons; and the war eats on still in the body
of France, but not with so sharp teeth, nor so full engorgement as before.
Towns and people are taken on both sides. The County of Amiens was spoiled by
the English Lords, Willoughby and Talbot; The Regent and the Duke of Sommerset,
march into Angiou, where they charged their carriages with much spoil and
returned. Then the Duke of Sommerset seuers himself, and does sundry exploits
in and about Britain. Diep in Normandy being besieged, was rescued by the
Dolphin of France to our loss. The contemplation of these mutual violences
touched all Christendom: for the Turk, common enemy thereof, increased.
Ambassadors are sent from all parts, to determine these bloody differences.
William de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, was chief for the English. A truce was
hereupon taken A short truce and a match concluded for King Henry with the
titularie King of Sicils daughter. A. D. 1444. A. Reg. 22.
for eighteen months, between King Henry and King Charles, and an hope of
perpetual amity, weakly grounded upon a match, which the Earl of Suffolk
contracted for King Henry, with Margaret the daughter of Renate, titulary King
of Sicile, Naples, and Jerusalem, Duke of Angiou and Lorrain, Prince of the
blood. To effect this, the Earl couenanted that the English should abandon the
possession of Angiou, and Main to her father. A strange purchase of a wife, who
though she brought youth, beauty and hope of a perpetual peace with France,
(the more profitable opportunity whereof, the English had more bravely then
happily neglected) yet was she otherwise without portion. The Earl
notwithstanding (whose drift herein could not be without manifest ambition, to
make himself one of the greatest of England, by this gratification of the
French, with his Masters charge and dishonor) is not abashed to expect public
thanks for this high service, and an whole fifteen for the charge of her
transportation. Sundry Lords of Council and the King himself thought him
worthy, and according to his devise and ouerture, the whole affair was
carried. Suffolk made Marquess is sent over with many honorable persons, both
men and women, to conduct the fair and goodly (but most unfortunate and
fatal) Bride into England. Hist. Angl. li. 23.
Polydore gives us no unfitting Character of this Lady. She was provident
enough, very desirous of glory, abounding in discourse, counsel, gracious
behavior, and manly courage; but not free from women's humor, which (says he)
is usually vehement and apt to change. In England ye may easily suppose, that
she was most roially entertained; Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, among others,
meeting her with a train of Holinsh. Rob. Fabian.
five hundred horsemen in a livery, that worthy Poet John Lydgate Monk of
Bury, devising the speeches for such gratulatory triumphs as were made at her
entrance into London. The King being married lawfully enioyes her embracements,
from which he was often afterward violently She is married to King Henry and
Crowned.
separated by the miseries of a most crueil war, wherein she had her piteous
portion Suffolk in the mean time having the most assured favor of the Queen
pursues his ambitious purposes. She in the mean time was solemnly Crowned
Queen of England at Westminster upon the A. D. 1445 A. reg. 23.
thirtieth of May.

(39) Would to God it stood now with the quality of this argument, to turn our
eyes from the view of those actions which ensued; for here the mournful
tragedies of our poor Country began. But we cannot but open those old and
most execrable sores, that, in their example, all true English blood may the
rather be tender over their bowels, beholding such effects as the devil and
all the furies of hell were (by Gods severe permission) Actors in. Fabian gives
us the causes and contents of those effects, in these grave and few words.

(40) It appears that God was not pleased with Fabian.
that marriage: For after this day, the fortune of the world began to fall from
the King, so that he lost his friends in England, and his revenues in France:
For shortly after, all was ruled by the Queen and her Counsel, to the great
disprofit of the King and his Realm, and to the great mauger (it is Fabians
word) and obloquie of the Queen, who (as since has been well proved) had
many a wrong, and false report made of her. All which misery fell for BREAKING
OF THE PROMISE, made by the King unto the This contract by proxy is said to
have been made in the twentieth year of King Henry; and that the Earl of
Suffolk was chief, if not sole actor in breaking it.
Earl of Armenacks* daughter, as most writers agree: Which misery in this
Story shall some-deale appear by the loosing of Normandy, (as all things else,
except Callais, which the English held in France) the division of the Lords
within this Realm, the rebellion of the comminalty against their Prince and
Sovereign, and finally the King deposed, and the Queen with the Prince feign
to flee the land, and lost the rule thereof for ever. Thus he: but all this
far short of the evils that were the brood and offspring of the following
times. The Parliament in the mean time grants aides of money, that upon
expiration of the truce there might be present abilities to maintain war.
The Duke of York is revoked, and the Duke of Sommerset (in an evil The Duke
of Sommerset Regent of English France.
hour) is sent in his place, with such provisions as were reputed competent.

(41) Humfrey the renowned Duke of Gloucester, The Duke of Gloucesters
troubles. AD. 1447.
Lord Protector, felt the first stroke of the evil Angel, which was sent to
punish England, and to root out her Nobles. This Duke was much hated of the
Queen, and her faction, as the only man who by his prudence, as also by the
honor and authority of his birth and place, seemed to empeach that sovereign
command, which they pretended to settle in the Kings own person, but meant
indeed (as the manner is under soft Princes) to reign themselus in another
name. Many great Lords were drawn on (at the time of a Parliament then In
February.
holden at Saint Edmunds Bury,) to concur for his ruin, not perceiving, that
thereby they plucked up the floodgate, at which the Duke of York entered,
ouerwhelming all of them in a deluge of blood. Whether they had any true or
just fear of Gloucester himself, least perhaps he should take revenge upon
some particular persons among them, is doubtful, though it be probable enough,
that they had. Hear some things that forewent this Parliament. About five or
six years before, Stowes Annal. The Duchess of Gloucester arraigned of
sorcerie and treason.
the Duchess of Gloucester Eleanor, was conuented for witchcraft and
sorcerie, and afterward endited of treason in the Guild Hall in London, before
the Earls of Huntington, Stafford, Suffolk, and Northumberland, and certain
Lords, as Fa^hope, and Hungerford, with others, and Judges of both benches; of
which crimes she was appealed by one B^lingbrook an Astronomer, and Thomas
Southwell a Chanon, which Southwell was charged to have said Masses over
certain instruments, by which the Astronomer should practice Necromancy
against the life of the King. These being taken, accused her as accessarie,
she having desired the help of their Art, to know what would befall her. Some
part hereof she confessed, for which she was put to public and solemn
penance in London upon three several days, with wonderful shame to her
person, and after she was committed to perpetual prison under the ward of Sir
Thomas Stanley in the Castle of Chester, but from thence removed to Kenelworth.
Her pride, falsehood, avarice, and lechery were causes of her confusion, says
Stow; who has set forth that business very diligently, though not seeming to
attribute much credit to that accusation of treason. The Duke of Gloucester her
unhappy Lord and husband (whom she by loue-cups and enchantments was said to
have enucigled, using therein one Margerie Gurdmain a witch of Ey in Suffolk,
who was burnt in Smithfield) stung with this reproach, might reasonably be
thought not unwilling to do somewhat. Howsoever that was, his destruction
borrowed countenance from that opinion. The Duke therefore being come to attend
in this Parliament at Bury, was arrested of high treason by John Lord Beaumont
high Constable of England, the Dukes of Buckingham and Sommerset with others.
Certain of the Kings household were appointed to guard him. Not long after he
was found dead. His body was The Duke of Gloucester dead.
showed to the Lords and Commons, as if he had died of a palsy or an aposteme.
Of thirty and two of his servants which were attached, Sir Roger Chamberlain
Knight, Richard Middleton, Thomas Herbert, Arthur Tursey, Esquires, and Richard
Nedham Gentleman, were condemned of high treason, and had this unexampled
punishment. They were drawn from the Tower to Tiburn, hanged, let down quick,
A strange sparing of life forfeited for treason.
stripped naked, marked with a knife to be quartered, and then a Charter of
pardon showed for their lives by the Marquess of Suffolk. But the yeoman
Record. apud Stowes Annals.
of the Crown had their liuelihood, the executioner their clothes. Their
pardons were thus obtained by the earnest diligence of Doctor Gilbert
Worthington, a famous preacher, parson of S. Andrews in Holborne. Thomas Wild
Esquire, the Dukes servant also, being condemned and pardoned among other, had
for a preamble in his letters patents words importing, Record. ibid.
that he had been one among many other traitors against the King, with
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, who went about, and practiced to deliver Eleanour,
late wife to the Duke, from out of prison, for which purpose he had gathered a
great power, and number of men, to come to the Parliament at Berie, there to
have contrived the Kings destruction.

(42) Such was the end of this great Prince, who, notwithstanding this open
showing of his body, and these pretended crimes, was by the people of England
thought to be doubly murdered, by detraction, and deadly practice. He was not
only a true lover of learned men, but himself also Polyd. Verg. lib. 83.
learned, and (says our Author) a father of his Country. His maine opinion
concerning the government of King Henry's French dominions, was as mainely
opposed by the Cardinal of Winchester and others, who altogether persuaded
Peace, to which the noble Duke (standing precisely upon the honor and Majesty
of the English name,) was Hall in the Dukes Articles against the Cardinal.
an absolute enemy. From this troubled fountain of divided Council many
following black adventures did flow. The Duke thus brought to his end, goodmen
(says Polydore) fearful of their own safeties, did of their own accord
forsake the Court, into whose rooms many succeeded, who for the more part
looking how to rise in dignity made open an easy way for new factions. The
Cardinal of Winchester (the other halfe-arch of the Kingdom) ouerliued not
the Duke above fifteen or sixteen days. The The Cardinal of ^chester
deceaseth.
whole frame of government was thus drawn to repose it self upon the Queen,
and such favorites, as the King by her commendation the rather liked.

(43) The Marquess A. D. 1448. A. reg. 26. Suffolk made a Duke.
of Suffolk, prime man in grace, was created Duke, which made him a more
conspicuous mark of envy, then that any shadow of the King or Queen could
shelter or protect. After the Cardinals Stows Annal.
death, the affairs in France (where Sommerset was now Regent) wereneither
duel^e looked unto, nor the governors of the Country well advised. But the
King and Realm of England lay, much more then France, open to the inevitable,
deep, and pernicious conspiracies of Richard Duke of York. He (by the error
of King Henry, and the evil stars of our Country) being of himself a great
Prince, and grown stronger by affected popularitie, perceiving the King to be
a Ruler, and not to Rule, began secretly to Richard Duke of York practices
to attain the Crown.
allure his friends of the Nobility, and privily declared to them his title to
the Crown, as likewise he did to certain Governors of Cities and towns,
which attempt was so politickly and closely carried, that his provision was
Stowes Annals.
ready, before his purpose was opened. The very state of things invited this
fatal conspiracy: a milder King then England was worthy of; a Council out of
favor with the people; manifold losses and dishonours abroad; a turbulent and
jealous condition of things at home. Of all which and much more, the Duke of
York, having King Henry the fourth (the enemy of his house) for a perilous
example, made his precious use, cherishing the popular auersions, without
seeking to redress any evils, but representing them worse then they were,
thereby to ripen that breach of loialty in the hearts of men, which his
ambition wrought upon. His displacement from the Regency of France, did not a
little (perhaps) offend him at first, because the Duke of Sommerset got it over
his head; but it will not be long, before Sommersets evil carriage of that
trust, and the declining fortune of England, will give him occasion to rejoice
The loss of Normandy occasioned by breach of truce.
at the foil of his dreaded enemy. Let us not be long in the rehearsal of the
public shame and damage of our nation.

(44) During the truce between England and France, one Sir Francis Surien an
Arragonois (Knight Serres.
of the Garter) serving under the Regent, unlawfully surprised Fougers, a
town of Britain upon the confines of Normandy. Restitution is demanded. The
Duke of Sommerset (a proud man (says Serres) who thinking to d^e better then
the rest, did absolutely ruin the English affairs) contrary to good
discipline, cherishing his soldiers in their riots and disorders, neglected
the justice of nations in that point. The French make this their example, and
surprise Port del' Arch, and town after town, so many and so fast, that King
Charles (who, that he might have God on his side, and wrong on his enemies,
contained himself with great modesty, till Serres Normandy lost.
he saw all quiet restitution desperate,) recovered Roan, Caen and all
Normandy within a short space after.

(45) Thus Sommerset, and the English, are compelled to quit Normandy, not only
inglorious, but also A. D. 1449. A. D. 1450. Secundum. Io. Tili.
in England it self vncommiserated. The next maine parcel of the English
inheritance, beyond our Ocean, was Gascoigne. King Charles and his people
desirous (against plain right) to make all that theirs, whatsoever was
comprehended within the French language, invaded that Duchy also, and within
very A. D. 1452. says Polyd: and Til.
few years after (the fortune of war, and disloialty of the people every
where favoring them) extorted the same out of the English-mens possession,
after it had continued theirs about two hundredth fourscore and nine years, to
the immortal dishonor Gascoigne lost.
and damage of our nation. The Duke of York in the mean time, who thirsted
for the Crown of England, has occasion ministered to impe more feathers into
his aspiring wings. Ireland is in tumult. Thither the Duke passes, and not
only appeaseth the disorder of that Nation, but Stews Annal.
wan such favor among them, as could never be separated from him, and his
lineage. Thus diligently the Pioner makes his mines into the quiet and felicity
of his Country, calling his cause the quarrel of right and justice, as
pretending that the Crown of England appertained to his name and family.

(46) But the odor of this vile success in France, coming into England,
filled men's hearts and senses with great perturbation. The Queen and Suffolk
suffer obloquie for these effects in the general judgment. The common wealth
is not silent. A Parliament is called to be holde^ at Westminster, which from
thence was assigned to be kept at Leicester. The place likes not; few appear.
It is brought back to Westminster. There the whole body of public counsel
meets. Many Hall Chron.
Articles are exhibited by the lower house against the Duke of Suffolk;
wherein he is charged with evil demeanor, misprision and The Duke of Suffolk
committed prisoner to the Tower and enlarged.
treason: who thereupon is committed prisoner to the Tower: from thence, within
four or five weeks he is discharged, which more augmented the general
indignation then his commitment had ministered satisfaction. The perilous Duke
of York warms himself at these blazes, and underhand cherishes them as
opportunity will permit, having his cunning factors and instruments fit for
such occasions secretly spread over the Realm, to instill the poisons of
coffeehouse, and desire of change into the giddie multitude. When we read
in our vulgar Chronicles, that about this time Adam Molins The Duke of York
procures the murder of the Lord Privy Seal.
Bishop of Chichester, Ke^per of the Kings Privy Seal (through the
procurement of Richard Duke of York) was by shipmen slain at Portsmouth, and
yet no cause of so foul and wicked a murder expressed, it cannot but offend
any curious Reader, who would receive satisfaction rather by the reason
ofactions then by the events. His guiltiness in the fact was so apparent, that
K. Henry in his answer made a year or two after to the Dukes dissembling, and
deceitful letter, confidently mentions the same, where thus he speaks.
Sooth it is that long time among the people has been upon you many strange
language, and in special anon after your disordinate and unlawful slaying of
the Bishop of Chichester, diverse, and many of the untrue shipmen and other,
said (in their manner) words against our state, making menace to our own
person by your sayings, that ye should be fetched with many thousands, and
you should take upon you The Crown of England.
that which you neither ought, nor as we doubt not will attempt, etc. What
cause led the Duke to commit this so impious a deed, may easily now be
coniectured, being none other but the common hatred he bare to all such wise
or valiant persons, as might in any sort uphold the most just and gracious
Henry, and this sincerity in the Bishop could not be but a grievous crime in
the Dukes ambitious eyes, whose greatness was even then too intolerable; for
where was the Kings justice when such a fact might hope of impunity? The Duke
did effect it by his bloody accomplices as he did many other most seditious and
perfidious things, while he was absent in Ireland. Thomas Thanie
notwithstanding calling himself Blew-beard A fuller executed for treason.
being a Fuller of Canterbury, and attempting to gather the people,
miscarrieth in his treason, and for that was hanged and quartered: this was a
preamble to the following tumults. The Duke of Yorkes whole and only hopes
were reposed in the general perturbations of his Country.

(47) The Duke of Suffolk (a principal pillar of K. The Duke of Suffolk King
Henry's chief stay, accused by the Commons at the Parliament.
Henry's safety) being set at liberty, attends the King and Queen in their
Parliament at Leicester. Behold the humor of the Commons which were sowred
with the pestilent leaven of Yorkes conspiracy. They cannot endure the sight of
this Prince, because his readuancement seems done in despite of them.
Calumniations and odious surmises are exhibited against him: he must down to
make way for K. Henry's most unworthy ruin. The most vile part of this
Parliamental accusation was, that they should charge that for a crime upon
Suffolk which themselves had universally in another former Parliament assented
unto and ratified. Which was the delivery of Aniou and Main upon the marriage,
concluded (for the good of England, if others had not inuerted or interrupted
the success by their temerity) with Renate, father of Queen Margaret. Neither
did the envy only of the secret York^s ouerlade this noble Gentleman, but the
impotency of the Duke of Sommersets faction, whose rashness and vanity having
lost all Normandy, would gladly find any others shoulder, upon which to cast
the imputation, either in part or whole. In that former Parliament assembled
immediately upon Suffolkes return from that treaty with Renate out of France,
this was the sum of the whole proceedings. Suffolk (as he was very
eloquent) made known to both housen, his counsels and services, and the effect
of his Embassy, praying they might be approved, and enrolled for his
discharge. Whereupon This was in A. D. 1446.
the next morrow, Burley Speaker of the lower house, and the body thereof
repaired to the Kings presence, then sitting among the Lords, and there Stowes
Anna^.
humbly required, that the request of the Marquess (afterward created Duke of
Suffolk) might be granted: and the Lords made the like petition, kneeling on
their knees. The King condiscended to their desires, and so the whole matter
was recorded for his acquitall.

(48) What can be more evident? or who can enough admire the vanity of popular
mutabilitie? The Duke the (principal mark, though the Bishop of Salisbury,
the Lord Say, and others were also accused) unable to stand the push of so
general an opposition, must be banished. The King unwillingly gives this
sentence against the Duke, or rather against his own life and safety: five
years are limited to his exile. Being upon the sea, he is taken by his
enemies, who at Douer-road stroke off his head The Duke of Suffolk going into
ban^ment is wickedly murdered.
upon the side of a Cocke-boat. This devilish murder (for it was none other,
the Kings authority being not used therein) committed upon so great a Prince,
was the less pitied, for that he was noised among the people to have been a
privy actor in the Noble Duke of Glocesters death, who perished (says a Ca^bd.
in Glocest.
learned Author) by the fraud and practice of a woman (belike) Queen
Margarite. The Bishop of Salisburie before said more impiously, and irregularly
lost his life in the following tumults, being murdered (after he had finished
divine service) by his own Tenants, who dragged him from the Altar The bloody
effects of the Duke of Yorkes popularitie.
to an hill-top, and there (while he was making his last prayers) cleft his
sacred head: The Lord Say Treasurer of England fell likewise into the peoples
fury, and had his head cut off by the commandment of that execrable rebel
Jack Cade, at the Standerd in Cheap, as ye shall hereafter learn.

(49) This William Duke of Suffolk Cambden in Sulfolke.
was indeed a great and worthy person, for when his Father, and three Brothers
had valiantly powered forth their lives for their Country in the war of
France, he served in them four The noble and great deserts of he Duke of
Suffolk.
and thirty years, in seventeen of the which he never returned home, he was
once taken prisoner, being then but a Knight, and paid for his ransom twenty
thousand pounds sterling, he was fifteen years privy Counselor, and thirty
years Knight of the Garter. Notwithstanding all which, the same Author truly
adds: That as for these causes he was in highest grace with the King, so he
was the more disgratious or hated of the people, and for I (...) de c^s qu^
part liquebant.
certain very slight matters, and those not very apparent, he was driven
into banishment, and (as you have already heard) was intercepted upon the sea
in his passage to France, and by his adversaries killed. What honest heart does
not melt at the relation of these violent contempts of all religion, honor,
reason and justice? yet are they but the drops which do forego those many
bloody showers, which the cloud of Yorkes faction rainde upon our miserable
Nation. They who murdered this great triumphant Gentleman, were certain
persons who wafted upon the Seas in a Bark called the Nicholas of the Tower,
which belonged to John Stowes Annal.
Holland Duke of Excester, Constable of the Tower of London, whom Gods
revenging hand shall not leave unpunished.

(50) The Yorkists having thus rid Suffolk out of the way, thought it now a
fit season to spring their practice. Hereupon the Commons of Kent, (who have
seldom refrained in such turbulent times) The Kentish rebels under Jack Cade
give out the name of Mortimer.
while the Duke of York was as yet in Ireland, take Arms. One Jack Cade is
their Captain: he had been the servant of a Sussex Knight, Sir Thomas Dagre;
kills a woman with Child; abiureth the land; turns French; swearing service to
them, and now returning, is the instrument to hang out Mortimers name, like a
flagge to draw a party, faining himself to be a Cosen to the Duke of York. A
pestilent devise, to sound the affections of the multitude, and to proclaim
the Title to the Crown, which the Duke (as heir of that family) afterward
challenged; for who would not ask, what should move him to use the name of
Mortimer? This Cade whom some (by contraries) call John Amend-all (that is,
John Marre-all) having drawn great numbers to follow him, encampes at
Blacke-Heath by Greenewich, and in his writings calls himself the Captain of
Kent. His pretenses (as of al like disloial actions) were the common good and
such other. The King at the report of these stirs is stirred. The Captain of
Kent demands.

1 That Richard Duke of York be called out of Ireland, Cades demands.
and (with certain others named for stales and color) be principally used in
Counsel.

2 That as the Duke of Gloucester was falsely proclaimed a Traitor, so the
Authors of his death might be punished.

4 (For the third Article contained no demand, but only seandalous matter to
aggrauate hatred against the dead Duke of Suffolk, and his living adherents:)
That all the extortions (so the Rebels phrased them) daily used among the
common people, might be laid down: that is to say, the green wax, which is
falsely used to the perpetual destruction of the Kings true Commons of Kent.
Also the Kings Bench, the which is too grievous to the Shire of Kent, without
provision of our Sovereign Lord, and his true Council. And also in taking
Stowes Annal^.
wheat and other grains, beef, mutton, and all other victual, the which is
importable to the said Commons, without the brief provision of our said
Soueraign Lord, and his true Council, they may no longer bear it. And also
unto the Statute of Laborers, and the great extortioners, the which is to say,
the false Traitors, Sleg, Cromere, Isley, and Robert East.

(51) Thus traitorously to the Kings welfare, and scandalously to his most
gentle government, writes this arrogant Captain of Rebels. The King upon view
of these braues, begins to feel the indignity and danger. An Army is
raised, Cade retires to Seuenoke in Kent. The King supposing he had fled,
sends after him Pygot.
Sir Humfrey Stafford Knight, and other Gentlemen with some forces. We read
none of these things without a suspicion, that the King was always betrayed by
such hypocrites about him, as would not have him prosper. Mark the event. At
Seuenoke Cade abides, probably not without encouragement from secret Traitors,
and after long fight slew Sir Humfrey with many others. The first civil
conflict under this King, where Cade has the victory.
He armed himself in the dead Knights abillements with guilt spurs. The
King and Queen hearing of this mishappe, leave the Tower of London to the
custody of the Lord Scales, and of that renowned Esquire Matthew Gowgh; and
London it self to the Lord Majors fidelity, themselves departing to
Kenilworth. The headlong crewes of London favor the Rebel, and give entrance.
Robert Horn Alderman, like an honest wise man, would have Horn a worthy
Alderman of London persuading the resistance of Cad^ is in canger of his life.
had them resisted. This free necessary speech endangered his life; honorable
in his memory for the hazard only, what should he have been if he had
gloriously lost it? but money buys out his peril with the Tyrant, who fined
him at Rob. Fab.
five hundred Marks. The time was very slippery and loose; for the Essex men
also were encamped upon Mileend by London: All men are afraid of their own
estates; such secret well-wishings attended upon the Arch-Rebels pretenses. The
King before he had left London was enforced (by such hollow friends as were
about him) to commit the Lord Say Treasurer of England to the Tower, after that
the valiant and loyal Sir Humfrey Stafford was slain, and the A. D. 1450.
news of his unlucky defeat were confirmed.

(52) Cade therefore being admitted into London upon the second of July with
his forces, (where for a short while to delude the people with a show of Cades
behauiors in London.
conscience, they abstained from robberies) strikes with his sword upon
London-stone, saying; Now is Mortimer Lord of this City. At night he returns
into Southwarke: One Stowes Annal. ad A. D. 1458.
Robert Poinings of Southwarke Esquire was his Sword Bearer and Caruer. It is
needless to be particular in this Rebels behavior: The next day he returns,
and the Lord Say is beheaded in Cheapside (as is before said) at Cades
commandment, and his body cut into quarters. The King being by the loss of so
trusty and grave a servant, not a little weakened.

(53) The next tragedy was Cromeres an Esquire, and high Sheriff of Kent (the
Lord Says son in law) who is drawn out of the Fleet (and to appease the
Essex Rebels) sacrificed by beheading without any trial at Mile-End. The City
stirs not for all this. Malpas and Gerstie, two rich Citizens, at whose
houses Cade had severally dined, being spoiled and robbed by him (left
perhaps it might appear, that he who durst commit treasons, had not also the
heart to commit felonies) teach what others are to expect. The Mayor, Thomas
Chalton and the wiser wealthy ones, ouerruled by faction till then, see their
danger now, and secretly send to the Lord Scales for aid. Matthew Gowgh at
night is come among them as sent by him. The Kentish-men, Cades second civil
conflict upon London bridg^.
hearing their entry was barred, run furiously to arms. Cade endeavors to
open his way by force; but in despite of all his power, the Citizens made good
and defended London Bridge against him, though with the loss of many valiant
and honest men, for the conflict endured all night till nine in the morning.
Among such as were slain on the Kings side, were John Sutton Alderman, Matthew
Gowgh Alderman Sutton and Matthew Gowg^ slain in the conflict. Polyd. Verg. l.
13.
himself, and Robert Heysand Citizen. This Gowgh (an Esquire of Wales) was a
man of excellent virtue, manhood, and zeal to his Country, and of great renown
in the war of France, where he had served with special commendations
faithfully, for the space of above twenty years. His deserts at this time
deserved a Statue in the City, for whose safety he spent his last blood. To
give a quick end to these miseries, impunity is proclaimed for all offenders,
and sent to them in the Kings name by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, under the great Seal of England: the rebels are scattred with
this assurance of their safeties, and every man retires in peace from following
so pestilent an Impostor. A The Kings proclamation. Cade proscribed and killed.
thousand Marks (when Cade afterward attempted new troubles) are promised to
him, who kills or takes this counterfeit Mortimer. Alexander Eden, a Gentleman
of Kent, had the happiness to discover and kill him at Hothfield in that
County: his wretched carkase was brought to London, where his false head was
set sentinel upon London Bridge, and his quarters were advanced for terror in
several parts of Kent. There died also by the stroke of justice twenty and
six more, whereof eight were executed at Canterbury, and the rest elsewhere in
Kent and Sussex. The multitude it self Feb. 23.
came naked in their shirts to the King on Blacke-heath, humbly praying mercy
which they obtained.

(54) The Kentish rebellion thus pacified, far greater and far more
dangerous troubles ensued, as it Polyd. Uerg. l. 23
fares in humane bodies, which relapsing into sickenesses, are shaken so much
the more terribly. These troubles had their fountain and mediate Original,
from Richard Duke of York, no degenerous son of that Richard, whom King
Henry the fifth had created Earl of Cambridge, and enriched with much wealth,
honoring him above others in regard of his blood and parentage; but T^. Wall. in
H. 5.
no bounty, nor benefits could change a treacherous disposition, for (as you
have heard before) he conspired to murder his benefactor King Henry the fifth,
as the Duke of York (his true progeny) labored to depose this King Henry his
aduancer. The humors of the popular body, were, in the last commotion, not
obscurely discovered. The Common weal had perhaps some few enormities, through
the abuse of Magistrates and men in place, but yet such, as the malady was
infinitely less pernicious then The Duke of York comes out of Ireland.
the remedy. Upon this intelligence the Duke comes sodeinely out of Ireland,
and to begin his usurped censureship and dictature, apprehends S^wes Annal.
John Sutton Lord Dudley, Reignald Abbot of Saint Peter's, at Glastenbury, and
another, whom he imprisoneth within his Castle of Ludlow. Intolerable
beginnings of more intolerable sequel. Edmund Duke of Sommerset was the man,
who (after Suffolks death) most supported the Kings side by Poly. Uerg. li. 23.
his vigilancie, caresdangers, and good Counsels, endeavoring by all means to
clear the Realm from factions, and to preserve the King and state in quiet.

(55) York seeing this, does find that Suffolk perished in vain, if
Sommerset held like grace; against whose person he had a particular pretense of
quarrel, for that the City of Caen in Normandy, which was the Duke of Yorkes
charge, was rendered up to the French by him, when the English affairs grew
desperate in those parts; Sir David Hall Knight, being at that time Captain
there for his Lord and Master the Duke of York, and not allowing it, although
the renowned Talbot himself was present at the render, and became an hostage
for performance of the Capitulations. York hereupon consults with his special
friends, Richard Earl of Salisbury, and Richard his son, (who was afterward
that most seditious and great fighting Earl of Warwick,) Thomas Courtney
Earl of Devonshire, Edmund Brook Lord Cobham, and others, how York might get
the Crown of England, and for that cause how to ruin or fret out the Duke of
Sommerset, who standing, they were to look for strong opposition. In the end,
they conclude to take arms, The Duke of York arms upon pretense to reform
the state.
but yet to smother the mention of the Duke of Yorkes title, giving out to the
world for the reason of their doings, that they meant all honor and obedience
to King Henry, and only to remove certain bad men from about his person, who
afflicted the people, and made a pray of the Commonwealth: which, to gain the
more credit, and to blind the good King, the subtle Duke declares by A. D.
1452.
Proclamation; Dat. 9. Ia^. 30. H. 6. at the Dukes Castle of Ludlow.
wherein, thus speaks that Ambitious Hypocrite. God knows from whom no
thing is hid, I am, have been, and ever will be his true liege man; etc. And
to the very proof it is so, I offer my self to He publishes a declaratory
schedule in his iusti fication.
swear that on the blessed Sacrament, and receive it, the which I hope shall
be my salvation, at the day of doom. etc. In that it was the evil hap of the
Duke of Sommerset, that Normandy was lost during his Regencie, his enemies had
the more commodity to incommodate him with the people, who forbear not at his
return to offer to him sundry dishonours and injuries, till upon pain of
death they were restrained, for breach of which Proclamation, one had his head
cut off in West Cheap London.

(56) The King (notwithstanding all his Cosens The King marches against the
Duke of York.
arts and dissimulations) seeing the hook through the bait, and the snake
through the grass, by the advice of his trusty friends, chiefly of Edmund Duke
of Sommerset, thinks not fit to rely upon his enemies good nature, but having
a strong power, and store of honorable men to conduct them, he marches toward
Wales against the Duke. The King did herein wisely, but not so much as the
cause required. York having notice of the Kings approach turns aside, and
with all speed marches toward London. That City, (the vain hope of all
Rebellions,) would not harken; Thereupon he slides with his people into Kent,
the nest of his hopes, and at Brent-heath near Dertford (a town about twelve
miles from London) encampeth, meaning to fight. The King is not slow, but
leaving his march toward Wales, pitcheth up his royal pauilion upon
Black Heath, with a purpose to teach his cosen of York more duty. Behold the
fortune of England. God The Kings army ^eing greater ^hen the Dukes, ^eace i^
unhappily made.
puts an excellent opportunity into the Kings hands of tearing up the danger of
his house by the roots, for the Duke was far inferior in numbers. Such
therefore as secretly favored him, fearing his overthrow, were willing to
advise a reconcilement. Messengers go between the hosts. The Duke, in his
wonted manner, pretends loialtie and particular injuries, as that the Kings
servants, Sir John I albot at Holt Castle, Sir Thomas Stanley in Cheshire, and
others in other places, were set to harken upon him. That by ^literis Regi^ and
Duc^.
two of the Norrices, Bulkeley, Grust, Bold (and other Gentlemen) he was
forbidden to land at Bewmaris, or to have any refreshment, affirming that he
(the Duke of York) was against the Kings intent and as a Traitor. The King
stoupes so much as to answer the letter, letting him to know: That the
suspicion universally conceived of his behauiours moved those effects: never
thelesse, in regard of the humble obedience which was now protested, he, for
the easing of the Dukes heart, does declare, repute and admit him as a true,
and faithful subject, and as his well-beloved Cosen. The Duke then aduanceth his
practice one step further, and writes to the King, that Justice might be done
upon all persons of what degree soever, which were guilty, or noised to be
guilty of treason: aiming at the Duke of Sommerset, whom he doubted not to
ouerwhelme with sleights and calumnics, as he and his had done the Duke of
Suffolk.

(57 The King is contented (such weak or treacherous counsels he relied upon)
that Sommerset (for his satisfaction) should be commanded Prisoner to his Poly.
Verg. li. 23.
own house, and York (having first dissolved his army) should come in
person, and put himself into the Kings hand. When he was come, he exhibites a
great complaint against the pride and avarice of the Duke of Sommerset, and
cunningly accusing none but him, he seeks the good will of all others. A
cunning drift as any, considering that hereby he derived upon his enemy all
the envy of the people, and left him single to withstand the effects.
Sommerset (a Prince of great spirit and wit) not thinking it reasonable, as
well in regard of his own honor as the Commonwealthes interest, to endure
such indignity, presents himself to the King against his accuser, and
resolving not to be tender-mouthed in the so apparent peril of the King and
Realm, whose quiet was undermined, answers York face to face, and, in plain
terms accuses him of highest treason, as having conspired to depose the King,
and take upon himself the Sovereignty: vehemently urging: That The Duke of
Sommerset confidently accuses the Duke of York^ of treason.
the Duke of York might be committed and arraigned, to the intent that by his
deserved death, and the disenablement of his sons, Civil war might be
extinguished, praying finally that God would not suffer the enemy of the
Kingdom to escape the hand of justice.

(58) This had in likelihood been done, but that the public faith seemed to
stand engaged for the Dukes indemnitie, he having come in upon the Kings word,
and also for that the hearts of men were not well assured to the King, which by
executing York would perhaps have been more unsettled, because (not looking
into the depth of the Kings peril) it would have been thought that he had
been destroyed to gratify Sommerset, and not to secure the Realm. There was
hope likewise to recover Aquitain, for that Bordeaux had offered to return:
Lastly, the Dukes son and heir, Edward Earl of March (afterward King) was
reported to be ready with a great force of Welshmen to succor his father. Upon
these and other reasons, the Duke is no longer restrained, as upon Sommersets
most weighty accusations he had been, and to assure the gentle and indulgent
King, of his allegiance, he makes his submission, The Duke of York tak^ h^
Oath to be^ true to King Henry.
and solemnly TAKES HIS OATH to be true, faithful and obedient subject. This
was done upon the tenth of March in the Church of S. Paul in London, the King
himself, and most of the chief nobility being present, as the Dukes of
Buckingham, Norfolk, and Sommerset, nine Earls, the Vicounts, Beaumont and
Wels, many great Barons: Of the Clergy, the Cardinal of York the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester Elie and London.

(59) Let us view the form and words of this Caution upon which King Henry
(measuring other men's hearts by his own) adventured to repose his life and
Kingdom, which are these.

I Richard, Duke of York, confess and beknown The Dukes Oath and submission.
that I am and ought to be humble subject, and liegeman to you my Sovereign
Lord, King Henry the sixth, and owe therefore, to bear you says and truth, as
to my Sovereign liege Lord, and shall do all days to my lives end: and shall
not at any time will or assent that any thing be attempted or done against your
most noble person, but wheresoever I shall have knowledge of any such thing *Ex
vetust. Cod.
imagined or purposed, I shall with all speed and diligence possible to me,
make, that your highness shall have knowledge thereof, and, over that, do all
that shall possible be to me to the withstanding, and let thereof to the
uttermost of my life: I shall not any thing take upon me against your royal
estate or obeisance that is due thereto, nor suffer any other man to do, as
far forth as shall be in my power to let it. And also shall come at your
commandment, whenever I shall be called by the same, in humble and obeisant
wise, but if I be let by any sickness or impotencie of my person, or by
such other cause as shall be thought by you my Sovereign Lord reasonable. I
shall never hereafter take upon me to gather any rowt or to make any assembly
of your people without your commandment, or license, or in my lawful defense,
in interpretation or declaration of the which my lawful defense I shall report
me at all times to your highness, and, if the case require to my Peers; nor
any thing attempt against any of your Subjects, of what estate, degree or
condition that they be. But whenever I find my self wronged and agrieued, I
shall sue humbly for remedy to your highness, and proceed after the course of
your laws, and none otherwise, saving in mine own lawful defense in manner
abouesaid, and otherwise have to your highness as an humble and true subject
ought to have him to his Sovereign Lord. All these things abouesaid I promise
you truly to obs^rue and keep by the holy Evangelists contained in the book
that I lay my hand here upon, and by the holy Cross I here touch, and by the
blessed Sacrament of our Lords body, that I shall now with his mercy receive.
And over I agree me, and will that if at any time hereafter, as by the grace of
our Lord God I never shall, any thing attempt by way of feate, or otherwise
against your royal Majesty and obeisance, that I owe thereto, or any thing
take upon me otherwise then is above expressed, I from that time forth be
unabled, held, and taken as an untrue and openly forsworn man, and unable to
all manner of worship, estate or degree, he it such as I now occupy, or any
other that might in any wise grow to me hereafter. And this I have here
promised and sworn, proceeds of mine own desire and free volunt, and by no
constraining nor Coaction. In witness of all which things above written, I
Richard Duke of York above write subscribe with mine own hand and seal.

This Oath he also took at Westminster and Couentree at sundry times. Who now
can consider the effects of this so public and solemn Oath, and does not
tremble in every part? Let us hasten to their view, least God perhaps may
quietly seem to have been mocked to his face by a vain ambitious man.

(60) To divert these home-breeding rancors Hope conceived to recover Gascoigne.
and practices, by employing the wits and bodies of men in other more honest
things, the Earl of Candal (son Serres.
to Captal de Budie who had upon necessity submitted his Seignouries to
Charles the French King, but reserved his person out of that obedience) and the
Lord L'Esparre, come secretly from Bordeaux and pray an Army, for that
Bordeaux and the Gascoigns would return to the English, if they might be
supported. An Army is decreed for their reduction. John Lord Talbot the first
Earl of Shrewsburie of his name as General in that enterprise, lands in
Gascoigne, where he does sundry exploits, and the fame of his former cheualrie
flying before with terror, makes many places the rather to yield. Bordeaux her
self secretly opens a gate unto him, which the French Garrison perceiving fled
out at a Postern, but many being overtaken were slain by the Lord L'Esparre
and the English. New supplies and victuals arrive, whereof the Earl of
Shrewsburies younger son, (Vicount Lile by his wife,) was a principal
conducter. Bordeaux thus thoroughly mand and fortified, the Earl is advertised
that the French lay at siege before Castillion, a place of importance upon the
river of Dardonne. Thither the Earl marches, and with too great a confidence
charging the enemy The Earl of Shrewsburie and his younger son slain in
battle.
upon unequal terms, was there slain, together with his son the Vicount
Lile and others. Bordeaux received such as fled. The English fortunes and hopes
which began to quicken, made this unhappy Catastrophe in * Iulie, to the
infinite loss of our nation and grief of the Gascoigns, who generally
misliked the An. D. 1453 A. reg. 31.
French, and inclined to the English, having so honorably, and for so long a
time governed those dominions. This was the end of that great Earl, after he
had for the space of twenty and four years served his Prince and Country in
the French wars, with highest commendation; a Cambden in Sh^o^shire. Polyd.
Verg. in Hen. 6.
most noble and most valiant man, by whose virtue the English name did chiefly
become terrible in France. Bordeaux it felfe, and all other places after this,
were by siege brought again under the French King, who prosecuted those
affairs in person. From that time forward the English never obtained there any
hold or further footing, the felicity The English quite expelled out of all
Aquitain.
of this attempt breaking all combinations of the Gascoignes. This Duchy of
Aquitaine Stowes Annal.
contained four Archbishopriks, four and twenty Bishopriks, fifteen
Earledomes, two hundred and two Barons, and above a thousand Captainships and
Bailywickes. The loss of so goodly an inheritance which had continued English
for almost three hundred years, the world may easily conjecture how justly it
was grieved and lamented for. In this fallen estate of the English, the Queen
upon the thirteenth day of October was delivered of her first son who was
named Edward, proving the child of sorrow and infelicity. Prince Edward is
borne.


(61) It were to be wished we might now rather number the following evils of
England, then describe them; for what can we learn out of such unnatural and
savage destructions, but matter of horror and detestation? but since they must
be handled, (the law and necessity of our task exacting it,) the sooner to be
quit of so unpleasing objects, it will be best abruptly to thrust into the
narration. The Duke of York (wickedlie careless of an Oath so religiously
and publicly taken,) to make his way to the A. D. 1454.
Crown more easy, has now procured his chiofe and most fearful enemy the
Duke of Sommerset to be sodeinely arrested of high treason, (doubtful whether
by any authority but his own) in the Queens great Chamber, and sent to the
Tower of London, upon pretense that he had capital matter to charge him with.
Yorkes principal friends (upon confidence of whom he dared so high things)
were Richard Neuil Earl of Salisburie second son of Ralfe Neuil Earl of
Westmorland, whose daughter the Duke of York had married. This Richard was
Earl of Salisbury in right of Alice his wife, sole heir to Thomas Montacute,
the famous Earl, slain at the siege of Orleance. The Dukes other maine hope
was Richard Neuil (son of the former Richard Neuill,) who in right of his
wife, the Lady Anne (sole sister, and heir of the whole blood to Henry
Beauchamp, Duke of Warwick) was by this King Henry the sixth created Earl of
Warwick in a most unhappy hour both for the King and kingdom, being Cambd.
in Warw.
inuicto animo etc: a man of an undaunted mind, but flitting faith.

(63) The King in the mean space, while the Duke of Sommerset was thus
endangered, lay sick; and York (as Regent) swayed and ouerswayed in Court;
but when the king (perceiving malice and practice to be the chief bases of
Yorkes accusations) had recovered his health, and resumed the government,
Sommerset is set at liberty and made Captain of Calleis; York and his
adherents repair to open force: They leuy their army about the Marches of
Wales, with which they repair toward London, the maine object of Pretendents.
The King hearing The King marches to Saint Albans against the Duke of York.
of his enemies approach, is accompanied with Humfrey Duke of Buckingham,
Edmund Duke of Sommerset, Humfrey Earl of Stafford, Henry Percie Earl of
Northumberland, James Butler Earl of Wiltshire, and Ormond, Beaufort Earl of
Dorcet, Jasper Theder Earl of Pembroke the Kings halfe-brother, Thomas
Courtney Earl of Devonshire, the Lords Clifford, Sudley, Berners, Rosse and
others, and with them enters into Saint Albans in warlike manner, having
certain thousands of common soldiers. Thither also the Duke of York and his
adherents came. This was toward the end of May: The Dukes request to the King
was, that he would deliver such persons to be deservedly punished as he would
name. The King (to let them know who he was) returns this confident answer.
That he and the rest were Traitors, and that rather then they should have any
Lord from him who was with him at that time, he himself would for their sake
in the quarrel upon that day live and die.

(64) The Yorkists hereupon assail the Kings people The Duke of Sommerset
slain and the King taken in battle.
within the Town, and Warwick breaking in through a Garden, a sharp battle
is begun. The loss fell lamentably upon King Henry's side; for besides the
Duke of Sommerset, there were slain the Earls of Northumberland and Stafford,
the L. Clifford, with sundry worthy Knights and Esquiers, of which forty and
eight were buried in Saint Albans, there being slain above five thousand of K.
Henry's party, and of the Yorkists about six hundredth. The King himself was
shot into the neck with an arrow; and other of his chief friends were likewise
sore wounded and taken. The Earl of Wiltshire, and Thomas Thorpe, Lord chief
Baron of the Exchequer, with others saved themselves by flight. The Duke of
York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick with the King, (whom they in show
did use most reverently, and as if they had meant nothing unto him but good
faith) upon the morrow ride to London, where in July immediately following, a
Parliament is holden in King Henry's name. The forerunner whereof was a Comet,
or blazing star, which appeared in the month of June, the beams whereof
extended themselves into the south. The first popular act of this assembly, was
to restore the memory of Humfrey Duke Humfrey Duke^. Gloucester declared to have
been a true subject.
of Gloucester to honor, declaring him to have been a true subject to the King
and Realm.

(65) The next provisions which the Yorkists made, were for themselves, and
their own security, willing and commanding that the Duke of York and his
partakers should incur no blame by reason of the journey at Saint Albans: the
whole fault whereof was laid upon the dead Duke of Sommerset, the Lord Chief
Baron, and one William Joseph Esquier, who (say they) kept from the King a
pacificatory letter which the Duke of York had sent. It is a wonder and a
shame to read how officiously these violent Lords (meaning nothing less)
behaved themselves to the King, of whose majesty they will needs seem to be
the only Champions and conseruators. The Duke of York in the same Parliament
creates himself Protector of England, the Earl of Salisbury is made The Duke
of York protector of the Realm.
Lord Chancellor, and the Earl of Warwick (his son) Captain of Caleis:
they spared as yet to touch King Henry's life, because the people did
wonderfully honor, esteem, and reverence him for his singular holiness, and
for that he had great friends left alive, and Poly. Verg. in H. 6.
a son. In the mean space, that they might without trouble, and at their
pleasure, vncrowne or kill him, they by little and little displaced the ancient
Counselors, and substituted their ass^ed favorites. Another Act of that
absolute force and fraud, which they exercised in this dreadful perturbation
of all things, was the drawing of Ionn Holland Duke of Excester out of
Sanctuary at Westminster, conuaying him to Pomfret Castle in the North.

(66) Henry Beauford Duke of Sommerset, (son of the former) the Duke of
Buckingham, (whose A. reg. 34.
son and heir the Earl of Stafford was slain at S. Albans) and other the
Kings friends, perceiving whereunto this fair show tended, consult with the
Queen at Greenewich concerning her husbands danger, The Duke of York i^
discharged of the ^ped Protectorship.
and how to prevent it. Hereupon the Duke of York is displaced from the
Protectorship, a ridiculous title to be assumed, where the king was aged about
five and thirty, and had no other fault or unfitness, but that he was too good
to live among them. The Earl of Salisbury was also deprived of his Lord
Chancellorship.

(67) The King having thus recovered his dignity and authority, but not
sufficient means to suppress The French take Sandwi^ in Kent and For in
Devonshire.
his dangers, the French take courage at our intestine divisions, and landing
at Sandwich with fifteen thousand men (part of their forces) they kill the
Mayor, Bailifs, and other Officers of that Town, with sundry Gentlemen of the
Country, spoil all they could lay hand upon, and among all they rob two great
vessels laden with merchandise, which lay there bound for London and departed.
Another part of them, burns Foway and certain other towns in Devonshire. On
the other side the Scots hostillie entered into Northumberland, but upon notice
that the Duke of York approached with a power, they returned, having not as
yet done any great harm.

(68) These indignities and losses might have united the disioined affections
of true English hearts, which was greatly desired by such as loved their
Country: For which purpose the King, Queen, and their chief friends, being
at Couentrie, the Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick are The
King at Couentrie, from whence the Duke of York and the York^sts depart
sodeinely.
sent for by the Kings letters under his privy Seal, to give their
attendance, whither they come, but they (either warned of some plot contrived
against them, or fearing it, or faining to fear) sodeinely leave the Court,
without leave, the Duke departing to Wigmore in the Welsh marches, the Earl of
Salisburie to his Castle of Midleham in the North-Countrey, and the Earl of
Warwick to Calleis, whose bodies though thus divided, their minds continued
most firmly factionated. But the King (a pattern of Camb. in Suthrey. page
114.
Christian goodness) being tender over the general estate of his Country, and
wonderfully desirous to reconcile differences among his subjects, that they
might the better withstand their imminent foreign enemies, returns to London
there to consult how to effect his holy wishes. The great Lords are persuaded
to In Ianuar. A. D. 1458. A. reg. 36.
mere there; which they did; but yet not without store of followers, for the
Duke brought with him four hundred men, the Earl of Salisburie five hundredth,
the Earl of Warwick six hundredth: The Dukes of Excester and Sommerset eight
hundredth, The Lords meet the King at London to compose all quartels.
the Earl of Northumberland, the Lords Egremond and Clifford fifteen
hundredth. This was the fashion of that swording age.

(69) In March the king and Queen with a very royal company alight at
Westminster, to accomplish, if it were possible this charitable and necessary
work of atonement and reconciliation. Godfrey Bolein was at that time Lord
Mayor of London, (being the ancestor of two renowned and virtuous Queens
Godfrey Bolein at this time Mayor of London the ancestor of two Queens.
of England, Anne second wife to King Henry the eight, and Elizabeth their
daughter,) through whose great vigilancie and providence, the City stood so
well guarded, that the Kings peace was dutifullie kept, notwithstanding the
great Lords of both the factions (Yorkists and Lancastrians,) were with so
great troops of followers lodged within, and about the same: for during the
whole time of their abode he had Rob. Fab. Chro.
five thousand Citizens in Harness, himself riding daily about the City and
suburbs, to see the public quiet preserved: and for the night watch there were
assigned to three Aldermen two thousand corslet-men.

(69) During this watch, a great Council was holden by the King and Lords,
where at length by the diligent travail, good exhortation, and prudent advise
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and of other learned and godly Prelates, the
parties offended were induced to a communication, and afterward to a final
accord: the points whereof, considering they held so short a while, (for as
Rob. Fab.
one says truly, the dissimuled love day hung but by a small thread) it were
frivolous to dwell in their rehearsal. The King himself (a singular
testimony of the opinion which all parties had of his integrity) was whole
arbitrator of The quarrels ended by the Kings award with show of common liking.
their differences. Certain satisfactions were awarded to be made by the Duke
of York, with the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, for the death of Edmund
Duke of Sommerset, and others slain at S. Albans. And the same Duke of
Sommerset, the Earl of Northumberland, and Lord Clifford (slain in that
battle by the Yorkists) are declared for true liegemen to the King at the day
of their deaths, as well as the Duke of York, the Earls of Warwick and
Salisburie. So both parts stand iustifide and recti in curia. Many other
articles and awards were made, to solder and glue together their alienated
hearts and affections. The reioicement caused by this seeming peace (which on
the behalf of the kings person was undoubtedly sincere and true) was
wonderfully great among all good Englishmen, who flocked to the public
celebration thereof. For upon our Martii. 25.
Ladies day in Lent, a solemn procession was made within the Cathedral Church
of Saint Paul in London, where the King (adorned with Crown and robes of
majesty) went in person, before whom went hand in hand the Duke of Sommerset,
and the Earl of Salisburie, the Duke of Excester, and the Earl of Warwick,
and so of either faction one and one, and behind the King himself, came the
Queen and Duke of York with great familiarity in all men's sights. O religion,
o honor, o sincerity, that your divine virtue should not have contained these
spirits in the harmony of sweet obedience; but if you could not, what alas
should? England must be more severely scourged, then that so goodly a blessing
of public reconciliation should continue, whereby the proud tops of her nation
(offensive to God and men) being taken off, the way might be opened to other
names or races, which as yet were nothing thought on.

(70) There is no reason to doubt, but that the Duke of York (a man of deep
retirement in himself) The probable condition of things after the
reconcilement.
secretly continued his purpose for the Crown, notwithstanding all these his
vernished pretenses, and did only therefore not as then put for it, because he
presumed the time was incommodious. Again the Queen (true head and life of
the contrary part) as well in regard of her self, her husband, and young son,
may in likelihood be thought to have laid down any thing, rather then the
wakefulnesse and jealousy, which former perils and the enemies present
strength might worthily keep alive in her. The thin ashes therefore, which
covered these glowing coals, were thus again first vnraked and set to blaze.

(71) The King and many of the Lords, still being at Westminster, there happened
(or perhaps Polid. Uerg. l. 23 makes it doubtful, (...).
was plotted) a fray between one of the Kings servants and a follower of the
Earl of Warwick, who hurt the Kings servant. Hereupon his fellows of all
sorts (as Cooks with their spits etc:) in great disorder assail the Earl
himself, as he was coming from the Council, and had there slain him, but
that the evil fate of England and his own, reserved him to do and suffer
greater mischiefs. The Earl hardly The Earl of Warwick assaulted, and
escaping speedes to (...).
gets to his Barge, and reputing all things unsure about the King, gets over to
his place at Calleis. The Yorkists directly charge the Queen with this, as
with a plot drawn for the Earls destruction. Not long after this, the young
Duke of Sommerset is sent Captain to Calleis. Warwick will resign no room,
notwithstanding the Kings command, alleging he was made by Parliament:
Sommerset is rejected with danger to his person. Warwick partly maintains
himself, and such as stuck to him in that charge, with spoils which he got
at Sea; How lawfully it appears not; though Warwick is said to have been
Admiral by Patent, though now revoked. The Ordinary books have, that he,
with fourteen fail of men of war, set upon three Caricks of Gene or Genoa,
and two of Spain, greater then the Caricks: three of which Merchant-fleete
(which how they should be lawful prize, we see not) he vanquished after two
days fight, with the loss of about an Rob. Fabian, who also reports a much
greater number of Mer^ chants ships.
hundredth men of his own, and a thousand of theirs: The booty was worth, at
mean rates ten thousand pounds; such also as followed the Duke of Sommerset
coming into his hands, he beheaded at Calleis. These were strange darings in
the Earl of Warwick; whom yet the unskillful, and drunken multitude so highly
praise: but what are these in regard of them which will presently follow?

(72) The Duke of York in the mean time, and Warwick with his father, the
Earl of Salisbury (the Triumuirs of England) consult of their affairs:
Salisburie The civil war begins again.
is resolved with sword in hand to expostulate the danger and injury offered to
his son at Westminster. The Queen (a Lady of incomparable magnanimity and
foresight) confident in this, that now King Henry, or the Duke of York must
perish, and that one Kingdom was not wide enough for both their Families,
bestirres her self to maintain the possession of a Crown, and to advance to
the same her own flesh and blood Prince Edward, by ruining his house, whose
whole building consisted of Lancastrian beneficence. She consults, she sends,
she speaks, she gives, and strengthens her self with friends on all sides,
chiefly in Cheshire, causing her son to distribute silver swannes (his badge
or devise) to all the Gentlemen of that County, and to many other Battle at
Blore-heath where K. Henry's side has the worst.
through England. Salisbury sets forward from his Castle at Middleham with
four or five thousand men. James Touchet, Lord Audeley encounters him
unadvisedly upon Blore-heath near Muckelstone. The fight was long and bloody,
but in the end K. Henry's evil fortune gave the better of the day to the Earl
of Salisbury, where, besides the valiant Lord Audeley himself, were slain not
fewer then two thousand and four hundredth, but the chief loss fell upon the
Cheshire men, who ware the Princes Liuerie.

(73) The Earl of Salisbury in this sort opened to himself a way to Ludlow,
where the head of their combination, Richard Duke of York, busied himself to
gather forces: being met, they conclude, that seeing the matter was now become
deadly, they would deal in clouds no longer, but fight it out to the
extremity. Men are drawn out of all parts with large hopes and promises of
sharing in their fortunes, and the Earl of Warwick bringing with him from The
Duke of York and his friends take Arms.
Caleis (which he left with his friends) that valiant Captain Andrew Trolop,
and a band of stout and choice Soldiers, comes to the general Rendeuo^ of the
Yorkists, the Castle of Ludlow. The King in the mean space, (and not before
it was need and time) has assembled a great puissance of faithful Subjects,
and being (...).
attended with the Dukes of Sommerset and Excester, and other of his chief
friends marches against his enemies. His first work was, to offer them
general pardon. It is refused, and called by them a staff of reed, or glass
Buckler. The sword must decide the quarrels; whereupon the king commands his
Standards to advance: while he was in his March, D^ed at Ludlow 10. October.
a letter fraught with the wonted hypocrisies) is delivered to the King. There
A. D. 1459.
are in it among many other insinuations these also: Most Christian King, right
high and Mighty Prince, and our most dread Sovereign Lord, etc. We sent unto
your good grace by the Prior of the (Cathedral) Church (of Worcester) and
diverse other Doctors, and among other by M. William Linwood doctor of Divinity,
which ministered unto us severally the blessed Sacrament of the body of Jesus,
The horrible abuse of Christian Sacraments to beguile the King.
whereupon we and every of us deposed of our said truth and duty.

(74) Thus these profane and ambitious men play with God, who in the end will
severely be avenged on them for their impiety: but the letter made no
ouerture of any course, upon which they would yield to lay down Arms,
alleging, they would but make their way to the king for redress of abuses,
and that they were enforced to stand together for their own defense, against
such great Courtiers and Favorites, as (say they) intended their destruction;
meaning indeed such persons whose vigilance and manhood might protect and guard
him from their practice and violence. The King is now in sight, whom the
Triumuirs York, Warwick and Salisbury being strongly entrenched before.
Ludlow, Graston Chron.
mean to assail. Andrew Trollop (who had in the Kings pay done great service
upon the French) was acquainted with all their counsel, and finding himself
extremely deceived, (for he thought and so by the Earl of Warwick Captain
Andrew Trollop forsakes the Triumuirs or Yorkists Camp.
was made to believe, that the preservation of the King was intended, and not
destruction) abandons the Yorkists Camp at midnight, and with a choice number
of trusty men presents himself and services to the King, who graciously
received him and his. The truth of the Triumuirates plot, and bottom of their
conspiracies was thus made clearly known: The Yorkists upon notice of
Trollops act, despairing of success, at that present fly. The Duke of York
The Yorkists are scattered without Battle.
with the Earl of Rutland his younger son into Ireland, the Earl of March his
eldest son and heir, Warwick and Salisbury, with much difficulty escape to
Caleis, which place (as Poly. Verg. l. 23.
one says probably) if Henry had in time taken from his enemies, they had
without question been forthwith irrecouerably ruined.

(75) The multitude which served under York found mercy, but their Tenants
were many of them executed, maimed, or generally ransackt. The town of Ludlow
it self was spoiled to the bare walls, and Duchess of York deprived of all
her goods. What less could be the effects against the friends of such
adversaries, upon so public an act and advantage? The point is followed more
sharply upon the great Offenders in the next Parliament which was The Duke of
York and others attainted of hie treason by Parliament,
holden at Couentree: there Richard Duke of York, Edward Earl of March,
Richard Earl of Warwick, Edmund Earl of Rutland, Richard Earl of Salisbury,
Alice Countess of Salisbury (in whose right her husband was Earl) two or
three Lords, 9. Knights, and certain other, were openly of high Treason
attainted, and their whole estates confiscated.

(76) Caleis, a most important piece, being in the mean space violently
possessed by Warwick, the Duke of Sommerset, the Lords Rosse and Audley, are
sent with forces to take it; their success was evil, for the Duke was glad to
fly, his Soldiers were robbed by Warwicks men of their harness, the Lord
Audley is taken into the Town, and the Lord Rees hardly escaped. Letters are
hereupon written into foreign parts, entreating In Articul. ad Archiep. Cant^.
(...) Duce Ebor. miss. Articul. 8.
that no relief be ministered to the Traitors who kept Caleis against the
King, and all men are at home forbidden to transport any victual or
refreshment thither. Evident it is, that the Council of England rather wished
that the Town and Castle had been French again, then as it was; neither
therein erred they, for it could not be so mischievous to the maine of their
cause, as now it was. The Duke of Sommerset being in Guines, a neighour Castle,
does daily by his Soldiers skirmish with the Caliseans: Warwick meditates
other things. He must speak with the Duke of York, at whose commandment all
Ireland (where he abode) seemed to be ready; but is advertised that the King
had certain ships, which lay at Sandwich to transport supplies and succors
to the Duke of Sommerset. He means not The Earl of Warwick (...) take the
Lord Rivers and some of the Kings Name at Sandwich.
to leave such a peril behind him unremoved; having therefore espied his time,
he wills his people to slip over in the night to Sandwich, which they
accordingly did, took the Lord Rivers, and his son Anthony Wooduile prisoners,
and brought away all the ships, except one called Grace de Dieu: one Sir
Baldwine Fulford Knight, having (after this) assumed to do service upon the
Earl of Warwick, and to take him, returns empty. Warwick sails now to
Ireland. The King makes the Duke of Excester The King arms to Sea, but cannot
take the Earl, who ret^ns from Ireland to Ca^is.
Admiral, and gives him commission to apprehend the Earl of Warwick. The
Duke with a great navy puts forth to Sea from Sandwich. Behold the ill
carriage of things. At Dertmouth many of his Soldiers, pretending want of
money and victuals, forsake him. Meanewhile the Earl of Warwick passes by
the Duke, not daring to assail him, nor he willing to assail the Duke, for
that he was Admiral and of the Kings blood. Such was the act and cunning of
the Yorkists to pretend reverence unto that, which most of all they thirsted to
shed: Five hundredth fresh soldiers attend at Sandwich to be shipped over to the
Duke of Sommerset for safe-conducting him into England. Warwickes men suddenly
come upon them, slew Montfort their Captain, and many other, and disarmed the
rest. Such was the distracted estate of our poor Country at this time, through
the pride and restless ambition of one or two unhappy men. But though nothing
was more plain then that the Duke of York sought the crown of England; yet
nothing is truer, then that they as yet pretended nothing less for the
veneration of King Henry's purity of life, would have prevailed with the people
greatly to their prejudice.

(77) The King failing thus to obtain the person of Warwick, or his Town of
Caleis, the Yorkists send over certain Articles into Kent, in which (as if
they were the only Patriots and best Subjects of the world) they complain of
certain general enormities concerning injuries done to the Church, and the
ill The Yorkists send over Articles to seduce the people.
ministration of justice, abuse of purueyers and takers, the Kings poverty by
the corruption of his officers, and the like plausible stuff: where they
speak of the King, they sequester him from all exception, as being of so
noble, so virtuous, so righteous, and so blessed disposition: (these are their
words and the truth) as any Prince earthly. Where they speak of their enemies,
(that is, the Kings principal friends and faithful subjects) they name the
Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Wiltshire, and the Lord Beaumont which must
ever be an honor to their memories, and put the blame (if it were
blameworthy) of such attaindors which were enacted against the Yorkists at
Couentree, upon these three Lords specially. Where they speak of themselus and
their intentions, they profess al sincerity and loyalty to King Henry, and
that they only meant to come upon their guard to speak with him concerning
the commonwealth, and their own safeties, and that now they would attempt the
same again, in the name of the Land, and not to suffer such mischiefs to
reign upon them. The conclusion of their cunning and painted pretenses has
these fained holy words: Requiring you (the people) on Gods behalf, and
praying you in your own, therein to assist us, doing always the duty of
Liegemen in our persons to our said Sovereign Lord, to his estate, prerogative
and pre-eminence, and to the surety of his most noble person, whereunto we
have ever been, and will be as true as any of his Subjects alive: whereof we
call God, our Lady Saint Marie, and all the Saints in heaven, to witness, and
record. But of the thing it self (that is to Crown the Duke of Yorkey they
make not the least mention: what wanted in these men to the height and depth of
humane malice? They prevail with the multitudes; a shallow braind, but a great
and many headed beast. The Lord Fawconbridge is sent to sound their affections,
and to draw the purulent matter to an head: he finds great forwardness. The
Earls of March, Warwick and Salisburie advertised of all things, land in
Kent. But the people only were not deluded; for Thomas Bourchier Archbishop
of Canterbury, and other The Earl of Warwick lends his side an Oath.
grave men, believed they meant sooth; which that they might the rather do,
the Earl of Warwick made open oath upon the Cross of Canterbury, that they
had ever borne true faith and alleagiance to King Henry. A strange humor in the
English, that could neither brook bad nor benign Princes. The King had before
their coming quit the City of London, as not greatly trusting the affections
which the people thereof bare toward such as the Yorkish faction had made
odious about him, and appointed the Rendeuow of his forces at Northampton where
he abode. The enemy (showing friend) aduanceth thither. It is a shame to read
that some of the great Prelates would simply be drawn to countenance such an
enterprise: but their intentions were different; they hoped to reconcile
enmities, the Earls, to make York King. Meanewhile their accomplices labor to
take the Tower of London, within which there were for King Henry these loyal
Nobles. The Lord Scales, Hungerford, Vescie, Louel, Delaware, and Candal a
Gascoigne with sundry others.

(78) At Northampton things were carried thus: The King meaning there to abide
his adversaries, when it was not thought meet to admit the Earl of Warwick
to his presence, (which thing was coulourably sued for to raise a ground of
justification for battle) they prepare on both parts. The Earls of March and
Warwick (with like or greater cunning, then they had desired admission to the
Kings speech) let cry through the field, that no man should lay hand upon the
King, nor common people, but upon the Lords, Knights and Esquiers.

(79) The hoasts joy ne. No stroke they gave but seems to wound us also. Let
us swiftly turn our eyes from so unnatural slaughters. The The Battle (...)
Northampton where the King is taken.
L. Gray of Ruthen began the discomfiture of the Kings side, for he (let the
world judge with what commendation,) having the point, did quit his place and
fled to the Earls. The kings army is defeated, and utterly broken. Many were
slain and drowned. Polydor and Grafton say ten thousand: The chief of the
Nobles who there lost their lives, were the Duke of Buckingham, John Earl of
Shrewsburie (a Stowes Annals. who varieth in many circumstances of this battle
from some other writers
most hopeful young Gentleman, and in all points like his heroicke Ancestors)
John Vicount Beaumont, Thomas Lord Egremond, and among sundry other prime men,
Polyd. Verg. Graft. Ghron.
Sir William Lucie, who making have to the fight, was upon his first approach
chopped down with an axe. The Kings Ordinance could not play, there fell so
great a rain.

(80) This woeful battle was fought upon the Rob. Fab. Graft. Chron. An. D.
1460 A. reg. 38.
ninth of July. The King (as a man borne to all calamities and miseries, though
he not therefore the less, but the more happy through that excellent fortitude
of mind, with which he inuincibly sustained them) comes into his enemies
hands; but the Queen and the Prince, and the remains of their scattered
fortunes fly into the North, there to reenforce their powers, and to Rob. Fab.
Chron.
subdue (as she caused them to be proclaimed) the Kings Rebels and enemies. The
Tower of London after this misfortune renders it self. The Lord Scales is
wickedly murdered upon the Thames by Wherrimen, belonging to the Earl of
Warwick, as he intended to pass to Stowes Annal.
Sanctuary at Westminster. The Earls when they were possessed of the King,
continued their admirable hypocrisies (which God will terribly plague them for)
thereby to lead the people on, and had to him these words.

(81) Most noble Prince, displease you not, though it has pleased God of his
grace to grant us the victory The Earl words to the King.
of our mortal enemies, who by their venomous malice have untruly stirred and
moved your Highness to exile us out of the land, and would have put us to
final ^me, and confusion: we come not to unquiet or grieve your said
Highness, but to please your noble person, desiring tenderly the high welfare
and prosperity thereof, and of all your Realm, and to be your true Liegemen
while our lives shall endure. Our souls are amazed at these arts, and men
blush to publish to the world things so unworthy.

(82) The (...).
Florentine Secretary was scarce borne at this time, but the Devil was as
great a Master then as afterward. The King and Earls in the mean time go to
London, where a Parliament was summoned in his name to be holden in October
following. The Duke of York (advertised of his victory) speedes from Dublin,
the chief City of Ireland, to be at that Parliament, where we shall at last
see the true face of his purpose, his own self taking away the mask which
hitherto concealed it.

(83) Scotland, by reason of late affinity with the house of Beaufort, whose
chief and top was the Duke of Sommerset, (descended from John Duke The
humanity of Scotland to K. Henry's friends distressed.
of Lancaster by the Lady Katherine) was a special back, and Second to King
Henry in all his tempestuous adversities; but now that refuge was also
hazarded: for King James the second, partly in favor of King Henry, and partly
as making use of the troubles in England, lays siege to Rocksbrough
(Bellenden the Scot calls the same Castle He^. Boet. transl lib. 17. c. 5.
Marchmont) being in the custody of King Henry's enemies, where while himself
(whose (...). in Ia^. 2.
skill and delight in shooting of Ordinance was great) coming down the
trenches to see the Graftons Chron.
Lion (a new great piece which had lately been cast in Flanders) and the other
Artillery discharged, one of them brake, and with a shiuer thereof James the
second King of Scotland slain with the shiuer of a great piece. A. D. 1460.
slew the king, and dangerously wounded the Earl of Angus. This unhappy
accident happened upon a Sunday, the Le^e in Iac. 2.
third day of August. The Queen of Scotland nevertheless maintains the
siege, and as well obtaines that place, as the Castle of Warke, both which she
(in revenge) threw to the earth, James the third, a child of seven years old
succeeded to his father, as well to the cherishment of the distressed English,
as to the Crown.

(84) The Parliament being begun, about the * eight of October at Westminster
in King Henry's An. reg. 39. The Duke of York returns out of Ireland to
claim the Crown of England.
name, thither comes with flying speed, Richard Duke of York, who brake open
the Kings lodging Chamber, and placed himself therein, suffering the King to
provide elsewhere. Then makes he his claim to the Crown of England, and
publishes it in open Parliament together with his pedigree. The whole house
(such among them excepted as were privy to the Dukes intention) was Rob. Fab.
greatly dismayed both for that he did set himself in the Kings seat, and
for this his unexpected challenge: But the Duke though at first he greatly
meant to have deposed King Henry, and with speed to be crowned himself at
Alhallontide next, yet finding such amasement and silence, he sends them his
pedigree and his claim in writing, that they might the better consider,
yielding (as it seems) to be ordered therein, according to their general
agreement during the treaty whereof he would not visit King Henry, alleging
himself was peerless in England. The maine points of his Title were as
follows. King Edward the third had issue, Edward Prince of Wales, William
The main point^ in the Duke of Yorks Pedigree.
of Hatfield, Lionell Duke of Clarence, John of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, Edmund
D. of York, Thomas D. of Gloucester, and William of Windsor. Edward Prince of
Wales dyed, living his Father, and left issue Richard the second King of
England, who died without Issue: as did also William King Edwards second son.

(85) Lionel the third son had issue Philip his daughter and heir, married
to Edmund ^ortimer Earl of March, who had Issue Roger Earl of March, who had
Issue Edmund Earl of March, Roger, Anne, and Eleanor, which Edmund, Roger, and
Eleanor died without Issue. Anne (the heir of that house) marries Richard
Earl of Cambridge, the son of Edmund Duke of York, fifth son to King
Edward the third, which Earl of Cambridge had Richard commonly (says the
Book,) called Duke of York.

(86) John of Gaunt the fourth son and younger brother to Lionel, had Issue
Henry, who immediately after King Richards resignation, unrighteously (says
the Book) entered upon the same, for that Edmund Earl of March, son of Roger
Earl of March, and of Philip daughter and heir of the before said Lionel Duke
of Clarence, elder brother to John Duke of Lancaster was then alive, and that
as well the said Henry, eldest son to John Duke of Lancaster, as his descendents
have hitherto holden the Crown of England, etc. unjustly, for that himself
the said Richard Plantagenet Duke of York was the lawful heir, being the
son of Richard Plantagenet Earl of Cambridge, and of Anne before said.

(87) This was the effect of the Duke of Yorks title, which for the points of
the Pedigree was very true, though in bar thereof the friends of King Henry
(without denying any part of the premises, being all of them more evident then
that they could be honestly denied) had not a little to say for him:
Allegations for K Henry the 6. and the Lancastrian title.
for they could among other things allege, that Richard the second resigned
up his Crown and Regality at large; and that none else making claim but Henry
Duke of Lancaster, he was thereunto by the consent of all the three Estates
admitted; that Richard Earl of Cambridge was for high Treason attainted and
executed, and his Issue made incapable of any inheritance, that this Richard
his son now challenging the Crown of England, being restored by the mere
clemency and goodness of this King Henry the sixth, had voluntarily
acknowledged him for his lawful Sovereign, and sworn the same, and that the
said Richard was finally for treason attainted, and adjudged vninheritable:
they could hereunto have added sundry Acts of Parliament, made to establish the
right of the Lancastrian line, the succession of three Kings, all Henry's, that
is to say, the fourth, fifth and sixth; the politic addresses of the first of
those Kings, the noble victories of the second, and the holy life of the third;
which three Kings lives contained of reign about threescore years, in which
number this was the nine and thirtiethof King Henry the sixth, who was
descended of the male line, and the Duke of York but of a female: of which
female line none had ever been in possession of the Crown. Great and weighty
points, (if any) and the rather to be considered, for that King Henry's person
being (in very truth) Prisoner, no act of his to establish Yorkes title could
bind in law or conscience, and the less, for that he had a wife, and by her a
son, who was at liberty, and ready with Arms to free his father, or hazard
to destroy the whole English name. But they who (on Yorks behalf)
abstractiuelie disputed these highest questions, knew a rule of law, which
says, Iura sanguinis nullo iure civilly dirimi possunt'; and the Lancastrians
were not without their speculatiue and remote considerations, to countenance
the particulars of their cause. Thus we see that in Monarchies (though the
noblest form of Regiment) where lineall succession is the rule of inheritance,
there sometimes fall out as great and as indeterminable difficulties, as where
Election designeth the Successor: whereof the French tragedies which our Nation
made among them, and now these in England, are without all exception, the most
fearful instances. For France had heretofore her time of affliction, but now
(O dearest England) it was thine.

(88) While this weighty controversy was debated, a Crown which hung for
garnishment in the middle of the roof, where the Knights and Burgesses Signs
foregoing the end of King Henry's reign.
of the Parliament met to consult, and the crown which for like cause stood
upon the highest Tower of Dover Castle, Caxton. Chron.
fell suddenly down, which were vulgarly construed Grafton.
to portend That the reign of K. Henry was at an end, and that the Crown
should be transferred from one royal line to another. But the Queen, her
son Prince Edward, and her fast friends in the North (the seat of their
hopes) being nothing discouraged at their late ill fortunes, prepare all the
forces they can to recover K. Henry and the Kingdom; which thing whiles they
are pursuing, the conclusion of the Parliament concerning the crown, was, That
Henry the sixth should reign, and be King Henry to be king for (...) of
(...), and the Duke of York^ after his death.
during his life, the remainder to rest in Richard Duke of York, and the
lawful heirs of his body in general tail, King Henry's heirs to be
excluded. The Duke in the mean time is proclaimed heir apparent, and called
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and Protector of England.
The agreement was engrossed, sealed and sworn unto. The Queen will have
nothing to do in this bargain, being so dangerous and preiudicious to her
self; her husband, and her son; and therefore when the King (at the Duke of
Yorkes instigation) sent for her to repair unto him, she relying upon the
Dukes of Sommerset and Excester, and other the Kings friends, utterly refuses:
Henry continues king. The Arms therefore, which she takes for his
deliverance, have the more justice. The Duke of York missing the prey he
expected, leaves the king with the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Warwick
at London; himself with the Earls of Salisbury and Rutland, and certain
forces, Mense December. The Duke of York pu^ueth the Queen in the North.
sets forward to Wakefield to pursue the Queen and her son, sending
direction to the Earl of March that he should follow with all his power. The
Castle of Sandall stands pleasantly upon a small hill, in view of the fair
town of Wakefield; there the Duke of York (coming thither upon Christmas
Eve) reposeth himself, and expects the increase of his numbers. The Queen
advertised, thinks it wisdom to fight before the Duke grow too strong; and
thereupon marches forward, having an Army of eighteen thousand men, led by
the Dukes of Sommerset and Excester, the Earls of Stows Annal.
Devonshire and Graft. Chron.
Wiltshire, the Lords Neuill, Clifford, Rosse, and in effect all the Northern
Nobility. The host (or so much thereof as they thought necessary to show)
presents it self before Sandall, to provoke and dare the Duke The Queens Army
comes to Wakefield.
to battle. His blood impatient of these braues, and ignorant perhaps that the
enemy had so great a multitude, will needs fight, though the Earl of
Salisbury, and Sir David Hall (an ancient servant of his, and a great Soldier)
gave him advise to stay, till his son (the Earl of March) approached with
such Welshmen and Marchers, as he had in great numbers assembled. But God
would forbear him no longer, but like a severe Master means to take a present
account: at which he found whether all the kingdoms of the earth are worth the
least sin, much less a wilful perjury.

(89) The Queen therefore adds stratageme, and wit to her force, to the
intent he might not escape her hands; whereupon the Earl of Wiltshire upon
one side of the hill, and the Lord Clifford upon the other, lie in ambush to
thrust between him and the Castle; the Dukes of Sommerset and Exceter, stand
embattelled in the open field. Their policy had the wished success; for the
Duke being not fully five thousand strong, issues out of the Castle down the
hill. The battles which stood in front, join furiously, when suddenly the Duke
of York sees himself enclosed, and although he expressed great manhood, yet
within one half hour, his whole Army was discomfited, himself and diverse
They overthrow the Duke of York and kill him.
his dear friends beaten down and slain. There lay dead about him the Lord
Harington, Sir Thomas Neuill son to the Earl of Salisburie, Sir David Hal,
with sundry Knights and others about two thousand, and two hundred; among which
were the heirs of many Southern gentlemen of great account, whose Graft. Chron.
blood was shortly after revenged. Let us not linger upon the particular
accidents of this battle, but consider what it wrought for King Henry's
advancement; yet these few things are not to be unremembered. The Earl of
Rutland (a younger son to the Duke of York) being about twelve years old,
was also slain by the Lord Clifford, (who ouertooke him flying) in part of
revenge for that the Grast. Chron.
Earls father had slain his. A deed which worthily blemished the Author; but
who can promise any thing temperate of himself in the heat of martial fury?
chiefly, where it was resolved, not to leave any branch of York line
standing, for so does Grastons Chron.
one make the Lord Clifford to speak.

(90) That merciless proposition was common (as the event will show) to either
faction. The Duke of Yorkes head, crowned with paper, is presented to the
Queen. Cruel joy is seldom fortunate. Caesar wept over Pompeis head, but the
Queen (ignorant how manifold causes of tears were reserved for her own share)
makes herself merry with that ghastly and bloody spectacle. The Earl of
Salisburie, after wounds received, being in this battle taken prisoner, is
conueighed to Ponfract Castle; from whence the common people (who loved him
not) Stowes Annals.
violently haled him, and cut off his head; which perhaps was not done without
the good liking of others. The Dukes head, together with his, were fixed on
poles, and set upon a gate of York, and with them (if Grafton say true) the
heads of all the other prisoners which had been conducted to Pomfret.

(91) This battle (called of Wakefield) was fought upon the last day of
December; of whose weathers complexion if their courages had participated,
mischief might have made her stop here, which now is in her swiftest course.

(92) For the Earl of March, son, and heir to this late valiant Duke of
York, hearing of this tragical A. D. 1461. A. reg. 39. The Earl of March
pursues his fathers designs.
adventure, gives not over: but, having gathered an army of about twenty
thousand to march against the Queen, he finds emploiment nearer hand: being
certified, that Jasper Theder Earl of Pembrooke (half brother to King Henry)
and James Butler Earl of Ormond and Wiltshire, had with them a great force of
Welsh and Irish to take him. The youthful and valiant Earl of March, whose
amiable presence and carriage made him gracious with the people, (and the
rather for that he had the general good word of Phil. Comin.
women,) means to try his fortune against the said Earls. He sodeinely
therefore turns back from Shrewsbury, and at a place called Mortimers Cross
near Ludlow, where the enemy abode, he sets upon them; It was Candlemas day
in the morning, at The battle at Mortimers Cross where Edward is victorious.
which time there appeared (as some write) three Suns, which sodeinely joined
in one. This luckie prognosticon, and ominous Meteor exceedingly fired the
Earl of March, and was (some say) the reason, why he used for his Badge, or
royal devise, the Sun in his full brightness. The Battles maintain their
fight with great fury; but, in the end, the Earl of March obtaines the
victory, killing of his enemies three thousand, and eight hundredth men; the
Earls saved themselves by flight. The son of honor and fortune did thus
begin to shine through Clouds of blood and misery, upon Edward, whom shortly
we are to behold King of England. There were taken Graft. Chron. Stowes Annal.
Sir Owen Theder (father to Jasper Earl of Pembrooke,) who was beheaded by
Edwards commandment, as also Sir John Skudamor knight with his two sons, and
other.

(93) The Queen on the other side (having ordered her affairs in the North,
settled the estate thereof, and refreshed her people,) within a while after
draws near with her Northern army to S. Albans. There came before them an
evil fame of their behavior to London, whose wealth looked pale knowing it
self in danger; for the Northern army, (in which were Scots, Welsh, and Irish
as well as English,) made bold by the way with what they liked, making small
distinction of sacred or profane, after they were once past the river of
Trent, Captain Andrew Trolop being their Coronell. King Henry himself in
person, with the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, the Earls of Warwick and
Arundel, the Lord Bonuile, and other, with a great puissance encampe at S.
Albans, to give the Queen battle, and stop her farther passage toward London.
But the Lords of her faction being ready to attempt on her behalf, assail the
Kings forces within the Town, and after some sharp affronts, break through,
and drive their adversaries out with much bloodshed, till they fell upon a
squadron or battalion of the Kings, wherein there were about four or five
thousand men, which made good The second battle at S. A^bans where the Queen
is victorious and recouers the King.
their ground for a while with great courage, but in the end the Queens side
clearly wanne the day. There perished in this conflict about two thousand.

This happened upon Shroue-tuesday, the seventeenth of February. The King,
Queen and Prince meet ioifully, where he knights his son, (being eight
years old,) and thirty others. The Lord Bonuile and Sir Thomas Tirel says
Rob. Fab.
Kiriel of Ken^ being taken in the fight, were beheaded, but all the other
great men elcape. The common people of London do notwithstanding stand wholly
for the beautiful Earl of March, and stand the more confidentlie, because
they had sure intelligence, that he had vanquished the Earl of Pembrooke in
the Marches of Wales, and that the Earl of Warwick, escaping from S. Albans,
had met with the Earl of March near Costwold, and that both with joint forces
were marching toward London. These news made the King and Queen retire into
the North, and leave that City and the The King and Queen return into the
North.
Southern Countries to their Enemy, till they might recover a fairer
opportunity or more sufficiencies. Edward upon notice of the Kings departure,
enters London, and gives period to Henry's reign, which is accounted to take
end after he had successively ruled this Land the space of thirty eight
years, six months, and four days.

His Wife.
(94) Margaret the wife of King Henry, was the daughter of Reyner King of
Jerusalem, Sicilie, and Arragon, Duke of Andegauia, Lorraine, Bar, and
Calabria, Earl of Province, Cenomania, and Guize. She by proxy was espoused
unto King Henry, at the City Towers in Touraine in the Church of Saint
Martin; William de-la-Poole being Procurator to the king in the presence of the
French king and his Queen, which king was uncle to the Brides Father, and the
Queen Aunt unto her mother. She with great pomp was conveyed to
South-hampton, and thence to the Abbey of Tichfield, where the year of grace
1445. and twenty two of April, she was solemnly married to king Henry; and
honorably attended by the greatest Estates of the Land, was crowned at
Westminster the thirtieth of May following. She was exceedingly beautified in
face, and of goodly feature, of a great wit and deep policy, but of stomach
far above her sex, as in the managing of those trouble some times did too
well appear. She was his wife twenty six years, and twenty nine days:
and (after her husbands depulsion from his regal throne) her forces being
vanquished at the battle of Tewksburie, in a poor religious house, whether
she had fled for the safety of her life, was taken prisoner, and so carried
Captive to London, where she remained in durance, till Duke Reiner her father
did purchase her liberty with great sums of money, unto whom she returned,
and lastly died in her native Country.

His Issue.
(95) Edward the only Child of king Henry and Queen Margaret his wife was
borne at Westminster the thirteenth day of October, the year of Christ 1453.
and the 31. of his fathers Reign, and the next year following upon the
fifteenth of March, by authority of Parliament, was created Prince of Wales
and Earl of Chester: For the title of Duke of Cornwall (as it is noted by
warrant of record) is reputed Orig. 35. Hen. 6.
unto the Kings eldest son, the very day of his nativity, and by virtue of a
special Act is presumed and taken to be of full and perfect age, so as he may
^ue that day for his liuerie of the said Dukedom, and ought by right to
obtain the same; having his roialties in the Stannary, wrackes at Sea,
Customs etc: the first Duke thereof was Edward commonly called the Black
Prince, whom his Father, King Edward the third created in great Estate Duke of
Cornwall by a wreath on his head, a ring on his finger and a silver verge. He
proved a Prince of great hope and forwardnes, being skillful in martial
knowledge, matters of government, and Laws of the Realm. At the age of
seventeen, the better to bandie against his Fathers Competitor, King Edward,
(the Maul of the Lancastrians claim) a^ianced in France, Anne the second
daughter of Richard the Make-king, Earl of Warwick; whose other daughter was
married to George Duke of Clarence. This Prince when the day was lost at
Tewkesburie, sought to escape thence by flight, but being taken, was brought
into the presence of king Edward, whose resolute answers enraged the Conqueror
so much, as he dashed him (an unprincely part) on the mouth with his gauntlet,
and Richard the crook back ran him into the heart with his dagger. His Body
was buried without all solemnity among the poor and mean persons slain, in
the Monastical Church of the black Friars in Tewkesburie. Anno Domini 1471.

EDWARD THE FOVRTH, FIRST Monarch 54
Edward IIII
KING OF THE HOUSE OF YORK, KING OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE
FIFTY FOVRTH MONARCH OF THIS LAND, HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XVII.


EDward, borne at Roan in Normandy, and bearing the title of March in England,
having ^unne the battle at Mortimers Cross (though the Lords his Confederates
had lost that of Saint Albans) from Ludlow hasted toward London, and on his
way was Edward Duke of York and Rich. Earl of Warwick come unto London.
seconded by Richard Neuill, the stout Earl of Warwick, to the great increase
of his number and power, which so terrified Queen Margaret, now ^dy to po^se
the South (...) hus^ (...) so^, i^ (...), (...) to the (...) upon which (...)
now (...) York, pre^ly p^ed (...) pr^ (...) ^ry powerful, and the other in
poss^ consulted for their safest estate; when on the sudden Edward with
Warwick entered their gates, The City of London doubtf^ unto whether part to
yield.
whose warlike visages so daunted the adverse affected, that they began with
the (...) to make him way to the throne, and the Noblemen likewise made him
offers of their service, to establi^ (...) claim, neither were the Clergy to
learn the observance of time, or to sway with the man upon whom the world
smiled. All these se^n Counsel to confer of the (...), Duke Edward made known
his title to the Crown, and i^ well s^ (...) ^red, how the body of the who^
Par^ment formerly (...), ^d H^ry ^selfe sub^ ^ith hi^ (...) h^d; whose (...),
though Pri^ Edward (...) his right to the Crown.
now (...) through (...) des^ y^ what right L^er had, they all (...), and how
(...) di^our did wi^ (...) ^gh his neglect, who^ si^ity ever (...) his private
devotions, then the potent managing of a Sovereigns command.

(2) These things urged (and most of them true) their voices went current, that
Edward was the undoubted King, whereunto the Londoners the sooner yielded, for
that his dreaded Northern Army was then encamped in Saint John's field: neither
was any reservation made (as before) of Henry's natural King Henry deprived of
his Crown.
life, but he is now absolutely neglected as unworthy of his Crown, how
acceptable soever he had reigned till then, whose following miseries were not
so much lamented, as his constant patience was admired in undergoing the same.
Edward thus mounted, before his foot had well touched the first step, was
upon Sunday the second of March, among his Northern Soldiers proclaimed King;
William L. Edward Duke of York proclaimed King of England.
Fan onbridge Earl of Kent declaring his claim, and disabling K. Henry of
style or Government, whose weak head (as he alleged) had over long
blemished the English Crown.

(3) Upon the next day, with all pomp he was conveyed to Westminster, and set
upon the Kings seat March 3.
in the Hall, where holding the scepter of Saint Edward in his hand, the voice
of the people was again demanded, and again granted; such was the hap of
unfortunate Henry, and condition of the multitude ever to dislike the present,
and to affect the new: but no interim left to dissuade or attempt, the next day
his style and title was again proclaimed by the name of King Edward the fourth,
being the fourth of March and He was borne A D. 1^41. April 29.
about the 20. year of his age.

(4) These sudden alterations made the richer sort somewhat fearful,
especially, those whose heart stood firm for K. Henry, (who was now in the
North The fears of the Londoners.
new mustering of men) and among those, London afforded many, as King Edwards
jealousy suspected, whereof one Walker a substantial Citizen and Grocer
Walker a Citizen beheaded for word^.
was a sufficient proof, who for words spoken concerning his own son, that
he would make him heir of the Crown (meaning his house having that Sign)
was the eighth day of this Kings reign apprehended, and beheaded in
Smithfield. And albeit his words intended no treason, (the ^rocer not once
dreaming to touch King Edwards title) yet Dangerous to meddle with a Crown.
the time being when the Crown lay at stake, the tenture of the Law made them
his death. This rough beginning moved many to doubt, that they Grost.
had wronged themselves in wronging King Henry, which opinion was more
confirmed in that he retained 18000. pounds.
a great sum of money borrowed of the Staplers-Merchants, and disbursed in
his affairs, whose restitution he utterly denied with an austere King Edwards
beginnings somewhat disliked.
commandment to surcease the demand. But hearing how Henry was beloved in the
North, and what followers were gathered to recover him the Crown; upon the
twelfth of March with a complete Army K. Edwards expedition into the North.
he sets forth of London, accompanied with his brethren, and many other
Nobles: with whom marching toward P^freit, he there appoints the Lord
Fitzwater to keep the passage of Ferribrig, omitting no directions of a worthy
commander.

(5) King Henry for his part though nothing so warlike, yet thought it best
policy to employ such leaders as desired (...) against the house of York; such
were the Duke of ^set, the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford,
whose (...) had been s^ine in the first battle of S. Albans, which last,
though in degree the least m^n, yet sought to (...) his same with the first,
and therefore to (...) no attempt unassayed, he ^dainely ch^ged upon the
Troop appointed for (...), the the (...). (...). vn^ed (only with a po^ in his
(...)) (...) to the Brigge, thin^ (...) The Lord Fitz^er and (...).
(...) his own Soldiers, where, with the (...) of^ (...)* (...) ^d many of
hi^ (...) were (...) the (...)*

(6) The brute of which* ^ust blown, i^one (...)* he mounted his Co^, and po^
i^ (...), p^ing, blowing and (...) of breath, said, Sir I pray God have mercy
on their souls Earl Warwicks approach and speech to King Edward.
which in the beginning of your enterprise have lost their lives; I see no
succor in the world, but in God, to whom I remit the vengeance. And so
alighting, forthwith slew his horse with his sword saying, Let him fly; that
fly will, I will tarry with him that will tarry with me: which he confirmed
by kissing the cross of his sword, the usual complement of covenants made by
martial men. The valiant Lord Fanconbridge fearing left this beginning would
give an edge to the sequel, got over the river at Castleford, three miles from
the bridge, meaning to enclose the takers upon their backs, which Clifford
perceiving, sought to avoid, and whether for haste, heat, or The L. Clifford
s^ine with an headless arrow.
pain, put off the gorget he wore, when suddenly an arrow without an head,
shot from the Bow of some laid in ambush, pierced through his throat, and
stuck in his neck, which set a period unto his life.

(7) The next day more fatal for Englands blood, was celebrated with spears
in stead of palms, usually A. D. 14^ Difference of Authors has here bred some
confusion of years.
borne on March 29.
that Saboth of Lent, in whose dawning, the Lord Fanconbridge, who commanded
the foreward (the Duke of Norfolk being sick) took the field on a plain,
betwixt the towns of Towton and Saxton, where King Edward joining his whole
forces (being forty eight thousand, and six hundredth sixty persons, as King
Henry's were also threescore thousand) caused proclamation to be made, that K.
Edwards proclamation much forwarded his service.
he who feared to sight, might forthwith depart, but if any Soldier abiding,
should seek to fly or turn back, he should be slain by his next fellow,
and the slayer to receive a great reward, besides the stipend of a double pay.

(8) Both Armies ready to join, a small sleet of The battle a^ Touton.
snow happened to fall, which with the wind was carried into the face of the
Lancastrian host, whereby their sight was much empeached, which advantage
Fanconbridge soon espying, forth with commanded his Archers to shoot each man
a ^light, and then to stand without further proffer. The Northern men A
politic practice in (...).
feeling the arrows, but not seeing the Archers, made haste to acquit them
with the like, and shot their whole sheaues of arrows without intermission,
but short of the mark^ threescore yeards at the least; which storm being past,
and all their store spent, the worthy Fanconbridge advanced forward, and within
reach of his Archers sore galled the enemy, making a double advantage of what
they had done: for their own quiuers being full, when the others were empty,
they gathered up and shot theirs, against their own shooters, yet left some of
them sticking to gall the legs of their pursuers: by which only stratagem,
as was constantly auerred, the battle and day was lost and won.

(9) The sight was bloody and continued tenus hours, for all being English,
acquit themselves English-like, no taking of prisoners, nor looking for
ransom, but all to retain, and to get honor that day; wherein died the Lords
(...), Neuill, Willoughby, Well^, (...), Gray, D^, (...) Be^kingham, and
Clifford, (who died the day before) the two b^ds of Exce^r, Knig^ (...) and
Gentlemen (...).
a great number, and in all (...) thirty five thousand ninety and one, so that
(...) only the (...) stained with English blood, b^ the rivers r^ red for a
great distance, (...) is this battle of Englands ch^ wars.

(10) Henry, who never was victor when he came, hearing (...) loss which
seemed (...) K Henry (...)
(...), with hi^ Queen and (...) (...) where, of (...) ally ^tained, (...)
(...).
^ ^
^ indeed the better warrier) passed thence into France, where, of King Lewis
and her father Reiner she obtained Queen Margaret passes into France.
more men, then her coffers were able to relieve with pay; the bane of all
courage in adventures of war.

(11) Victorious Edward, after those his prosperous successes in the North, in
triumph returned to London, and the eight and twentieth of June with great
solemnity was Crowned at Westminster, where in S. Peter's Church, the next day
it was again most solemnly A. D. 1461. King Edward crowned.
set on his head, and the third day so Crowned he came to Saint Paul's in
London, and therein was censed with great applause of the People. In November
following a Parliament began, wherein King Henry, Queen Margaret, and Prince
Edward their King Henry and Prince Edward disherited by Parliament.
son, were disherited of their right to the Crown; the Dukes of Excester and
Sommerset, and the Earl of Devonshire, with an hundred and forty more, were
attainted also and disherited; so fortune dallieth in setting the dice of her
favors, or frowns.

(12) Queen Margaret stored with men, but in want of money, with her French
powers made into A. D. 1462. Queen Margaret returned into Scotland.
Scotland; whose coming was most welcome to the two Kings there, and thence,
with great show of enterprise, hoised her sails for England, but having
touched the ^y of Tinmouth (whether upon better advise, or feared with their
own shadows,) she with her French put back to the Sea, where such a sore
tempest took them, as had not Queen Margaret in a small Caruell got unto
Barwicke, she had not lived to vex the new King, nor seen the unfortunate
loss of her husband, her son, and Realm, nor the miserable calamities of her
Bastard Ogle overcomes the French.
own old age; her French by Bastard Ogle were hea^e into Holy Island, many
slain, and four hundred of them put to their ransomes.

(13) This ^inting French enterprise, though it dulled the edge of some
spirits, yet did it nothing An. D. 1463.
daunt the courage of the Queen, her better hopes being fixed upon the Scots
valor; so, (leaving Prince Edward for safety in Barwicks,) with her husband
and Scots she entered Northumberland, took the Castle Queen Margaret enters
Northumberland in hostile manner.
of Bamburgh, and so passed forward unto the Bishopric, their forces daily
increasing through the confluence of such English, (...) favored King Henry.

(14) King Edward hearing these stirs in the North, made his preparation both
by Sea and King Edward comes to T^rks.
Land, and with his brethren and Nobles came to Y^rke, from whence he sent John
Neuil Lord (...), with a power of men, as some what mistrusting the loialties
of the Northumbrians, who passing forward, upon H^gely-Moore was sodeinely
encountered by the Lords Hungerf^rd and Ro^s, with whom was The skirmish upon
^egely More.
Sir Ralph Ferci^, a most valiant Knight, but Monta^, accompanied with such as
would neither look back, nor stand ga^ing on, ^hode the encounter, and at the
first push put back the two ^ords, and (...) slew the said (...), who no waie^
would depart out of the field; but in dying said, I have saved the (...) in my
^rest, meaning this oath m^e to King The saying of Sir Ralph Percie at his
death.
(...).

(15) ^ (...) victory at (...).
^ valiantly (...) their Camp, as after great slaghter, May. 15.
^ Lord (...) and (...).
^ The disgrading of Sir Ralph (...).
^ (...)* (...). King Henry (...) to flight.
^ (says Grafton) he fled into Scotland which is more Rich. Grafton.
likely.

(16) Edward thus cleared of the Cloud threatening storm, thought best ere
others did light, to provide for himself, and therefore he raised Bulwarks,
King Edwards care and provisions.
built new Fortresses in places of danger, put forth his espials upon the
Marches of Scotland, and commanded that none should keep Henry or Margaret in
secret, whose sight, he feared, would draw the affections of many, which
otherwise stood in case of obedience. But ouer-borne Henry (whether past al
fear, or enforced by destiny) in disguised apparel King Henry disguised
comes into England, and is apprehended.
past into England, where he was soon apprehended by one Ca^tlow; but Stow
says by Thomas Talbot in Cletherwood besides Bungerley Hipping stones in
Lancashire, being betrayed in Waddington Hall as he sat at dinner, and thence
brought to London with his legs bound to the stirrups, arrested by Warwick,
his guilt King Henry hardly used, arrested and committed prisoner to the Tower.
spurs taken off, and committed Prisoner to the Tower of London.

(17) The Lion thus pent, his paws cut or pared, and Queen Margaret in France
with her father Rei^er; King Edward now quiet set his mind upon Government for
the good of his Realm. In his Court of Kings Bench he used to sit in person
certain days together, to see how his laws proceeded with Justice; ordained
penal Statutes against excessive King Edwards care of Justice.
pride in Apparel, especialle against long picked shoes then usually worn,
which grew to such an extreme, that the pikes in the Toes were turned upward,
and with silver chains, or silk laces tied to the The pride and abuse in
shoo^.
knee. But among many good provisions, one proved very bad, as the sequel
shows; for concluding a league with King Henry of Castile, and John King of
Arragon, he granted a license to transport certain numbers of C^teswold
Sheep, which are since grown Sheep transpore ted into Sp^e, very hurtful
unto England.
to such an exceeding increase, as the Clothes made of their woolles is a great
hindrance to our Merchants, which adventure in the Leuant Seas.

(18) His next care was to find a fit Queen, both King Edwards care for
choice of his Queen.
for the hope of issue to succeed, and for alliance and power to assist^ed
were) against Henry's claim. Fist therefore minding to send into Scotland, to
desire in marriage the Lady Margaret, (sister to king James the third) thereby
to frustrate H^tes further hope; was made to believe that the said Lady was,
by reason of sickness, not capable of conception, which altogether declined
his affection from that way. Next, as some say, a motion was made for Lady
Elizabeth sister and heir apparent unto Henry king of His second project for
a (...) Rich. Grafton.
Castile, as a much most convenient; considering king Edward had thereunto a
Claim, whose great Grandmother was one of the heirs of Castile, being the
daughter of Don Peter the king, besides which high match, and combination of
Alliances, ^hope was Cambden. Rich. Grafton.
conceived that the Dutchies of Guien and Aquitaine, might be recovered by the
assistance of these Castilians, without great charge or travel to the English.
But the tender spring of the one, and the lusty growth of the other, would not
be grafted into one stock to (...) fruit^, she little above (...), and he
about twenty three, (...) unfit to ^taine till she could give him content.

(19) A third Princess (...), against whom ^ His third a^y for a wife.
^; ^ The allegations (...) the (...) of (...).
^ feared. This match being most approved in counsel, Lady Bona fit st
Queen for Edward. Neuil the great Earl of Warwick.
none was held more fit to solicit the business then Lord Richard Neuil the
great Earl of Warwick, a man esteemed for power a Demy-King, and for
magnificence and hospitality matchless: in whose house at London (as some have
verified) six oxen were spent every day, and most Tauernes in the City full of
his meat. Rob. Fab.


(20) Warwick in great state arrived at Tours, and his message known, was
accordingly entertained in the French Court, where he wrought the Queen her
Warwicks wooing and entertainements in France.
self to be the chiefest Agent; who drew on her sister Bona, with recommending
the state and style of a magnificent Queen (a sound very tunable in a Ladies
ear,) and her husband Lewis, with assurance of a potent and wise Allie, a
pleasing theme to soft natured Princes, as the French King was. And indeed to
all she undertook all good contentments; so as on that side all things were
clear, and Warwick dismissed with Courtly French complements; the Earl
Damp-martin was to pass into England for the final confirmation.

(21) But whilst Warwick had been industriously wooing in France, King
Edwards affection in K. Edwards last and sudden choice of his wife.
England was working another way; for being on hunting in the Forest of
Wychwood beside Stony-Stratford, he there found other game, that made game in
his eye, which was the Lady Elizabeth Gray attending the Duchess of Bedford
her mother, who then soiorned at his Manor of Grafton, whither he repaired
for his recreation. She had been attendant upon Queen Margaret the Ioh.
Hardings (...).
wife of King Henry the sixth, and had been married unto John Gray Esquier,
knighted, and slain at the battle of S. Albans upon King Henry's part, who
now was a suitor unto the King, for something The Lady Elizabeth Gray a
supplicator to king Edward.
taken away in the extremity of that time, to be restored toward the
maintenance of her (...). But howsoever her suit pierced his ear, her sweetly
composed feature strangely affected his heart; more formal she was, and
lovely in countenance, then either tall or exceedingly fair, yet both
sufficient to meet in one person, of an excellent wit, a sober demeanor, a
modest look, a (...) smile, and her speech uttered in such a ^turall eloquence
as The beauty and feature of the Lady Elizabeth Gray.
her answers ever set on edge King Edwards desires, which howsoever di^full to
the appetite of his wanton bed, (aff^ming with (...), (...) ^ee accounted
herself most unworthy of the name of his Queen, so she held her self of
mort worth, and her chaste honor dearer then to be his C^bine) yet held they
him in chase till she had (...) ^im in the snares of her love.

(22) Their many meetings and (...) complements, made the old Duchess of
York (the Kings mother) much to suspect it would be a match; to K. Edwards
mother seeks to (...), his love.
hinder which, with a part authority she entered discourse, alleging it
honorable, (...), and of much profit to link with some great Princess in
The counsel and conference of the old Duchess of York with her (...) K.
Edward.
^raine (...), both for the (...) of po^ions abroad, and (as the ^se stood) to
(...) at home: that (...) had gone (...) suite in Fr^, as if in himself n^w
(...), (...) their displ^res would (...). To marry his Subject (...) held
(...), ^cially one without (...), alliance, or (...), (...) other thing moving,
but a wanton do^ge (...); and although that in Lady (...) be (...), yet was
there nothing so (...); (...) the (...) incorp^ (...), mo^ (...) as (...)
tought of a (...). A (...) (quoth she) is most (...) side; whose (...), (...)
unto (...) it was ex^ (...) a (...) to marry.
^.

(23) ^ K. Edwards reason for his (...) free choice.
^ own desires, and knew himself to be out of his mothers rule, partly in
earnest, and partly in pleasance, made her this reply: That marriage being a
spiritual type, ought rather to be conjoined where God had framed the parties
to consent (as this of his was) then in regard of any temporal respect
whatsoever. That his choice was pleasing to himself, and would be to his
subjects he certainly knew, whose amity before all other Nations he most
preferred and desired; neither could he give them better occasion of love then
in this, that being their Sovereign, he disdained not to marry into their
Tribes; and so likewise for his Issue, there could not any Prince be better
beloved then he that was their natural Prince so borne of both parents. That
if foreign alliances were so needful, he had many of his kin, to contract
them, and that with content of all parties: but for himself, to marry for
possessions, or to please others with displeasing his own affections, he saw
it no wisdom, having already sufficient of the one; and the other offended,
even sweet pleasure would seem sour pills; especially, the choice that is made
by another man's eye. That there are many comparable to her, said he, I make no
question, and am the more glad, let them have them that like them, I will not
repine, neither I hope will any abridge me of that which I allow unto others:
the Proverb is (Mother) that marriage goes by Destiny, but to be wiued against
a man's own liking is an earthly Purgat^ry. And therefore my Cosen Warwick I am
sure, neither loves me so little, to grudge at that I love, nor is so
unreasonable to look that I should in choice of a wife, rather be ruled by his
eye, then by mine own: as though I were a W^rd, that were bound to marry by
the appointment of a Guardian: I would not be a King with that condition, to
forbear mine own liberty, in choice of mine own marriage. As for po^ty of
more inheritance by new affinity in (...) land, it proves oftener the occasion
of more trouble then profit, and we have already title by that means, to so
much as suffices to get, and keep well in one man's days. That she is a
widow, and has already children, by Gods blessed Lady I am a Bachelour, yet
have some too, and so each of us has a proof, that neither of us is like to
be barren. And therefore (Madam) I pray you be content, I trust in God, she
shall bring a young Prince that shall play on your lap to your ^eat pleasure,
and your self shall bless the womb that bare such a ^be: and as for your
objection of (...), let the Bishop hardly lay it in my way, when I come to take
Orders; for I understand it is forbidden a Pri^, but I never wist, that it was
forbidden a Prince.

(24) The Duchess seeing the King so set on his own choice, that she could
not pull hi^ (...), (...) such (...), that under (...) o^ her ^ His others
devise (...) cr^ his pur^ (...).
^ for which act, under (...) of a contract with (...), ^ own co^ce, which was
the (...) o^ (...) stacle, as either the Bishops (...), or the (...) proceed to
the solemniz^ of this wedding, (...) were clearly purged, (...) ^ Lady (...)
to (...) of King Edward.
^ King took to wife this later beloved Lady Elizabeth K. Edward married Lady
Elizabeth Gray.
Gray, who had been formerly married unto his enemy, and many times prayed
full heartily for his loss, in which God loved her better then to grant her
her boon, reserving greater honor for her self and her posterity.

(25) She was honorably descended, especially by the surer side, whose mother
was Iaquellin daughter The descent and parentage of the Lady Elizabeth Gray.
to Peter of Lucemburg, Earl of S. Paul, and Duchess to John Duke of Bedford
Regent of France; after whose death she married Sir Richard Wooduile knight,
and among others bare unto him this Elizabeth, Englands fair Queen, who being
privately married at the Manor of Grafton, was afterward crowned Queen at
Westminster with all due celebrations, upon the six and twentieth of May,
Anno, Queen Elizabeth crowned.
1465. Her father then by this new made son in law, and Sovereign Lord, was
created Lord Rivers, and made high Constable of England, her brother Lord
Anthony, married to the sole heir of the Lord The Queens kindred highly
preferred.
Scales, and her son Thomas Gray borne to her first husband, was created
Marquess Dorset, and married to the heir of the Lord Bonuile.

(26) But when Warwick had knowledge the wanton King had got a new wife, and
his courting of Lady Bona, to be but a ball to make Edwards play; he stormed
not a little, whose credit he took to be cracked in the French Court, and
himself rather Earl Warwick sore offended against K. Edward.
thought to have dallyed in this motion, then to deal by commission from his
King, for which cause he conceived so inward an indignation, that his
affection was withdrawn from King Edward,, and thenceforth ran upon Henry
retained in prison, to which end he temporized with the present king, applauded
the Queen, and bare countenance in Court with no discontented show: The King
as wary Temporizing betwixt the king and Earl of Warwick.
as Warwick was, cast no eye of dislike, or of any suspicion, gave him
countenance in Court, and in familiar conference heard him before others; yet
lest the stem of his greatness should ouertop his crown and his brethren the
spreading branches shadow his designs, he took the Chancellorshippe from
George Neuill, the one of them, then Bishop of Excester, afterward
Archbishop of York, and from the other John Neuill Baron Montacute, the
Earldom Francis Goodwin Catal. of English. Bishope.
of Northumberland, bestowing the same (at the suite of the Northumbrians, set
on by himself) upon Henry Percy, whose father was slain at Touton, and
himself at that present fled into Scotland for safety. Whereupon Montacute was
removed, and to avoid suspicion was created Marquess, a greater John, Neuil
created Marquess Montacute.
name, but far less in power. And to have a stake in store howsoever the
dice chanced to turn, he sought to join friendship with foreign Princes,
having offended France for the refusing of his Queens sister: so as he
sought, and obtained the amity of Henry King of Castle, and of John King of
Arragon, and took a truce with his neighbor the Scottish King for fifteen
years following.

(27) But these confederates for the more part too far to be called for by
whistle, fortune beyond Rich. Grafton. A. D 1468.
expectation set him another even at his elbow, which was Philip Duke of
Burgundy, Prince of Flanders, Brabant, and Zealand, whose only son
legitimate, (Charles Earl of Charoloys a widdower, and without A marriage
moved betwixt Earl Charles and Lady Margaret.
any son) he sought to conioine to King Edwards fair sister, not so much
for any love he bare to the house of York, himself being a Lancastrian by
his mothers side, as to bandy against Lewis King of Philip. Com. l. 3. cap. 4.
France, whom he had lately overcome in a battle at Montleherry, and as then
stood upon his defense, as he was sure King Edward did. This motion king
Edward and his Council well liked, only Warwick withstoode it, in favor of
the French: but the Lady Margaret sent over according to her estate, and
Warwick left fuming with a discontented mind, after The marriage celebrated.
some complements of mirth with his brethren the Archbishop and Montacute at
his Town of Warwick, brast forth into warlike consultations for the deposing
of Edward, and restoration of Henry, whose wrongs (as he alleged) did cry
for right Earl Warwick plotieth K. Edwards deposition.
at their hands. The Bishop lightly consented to side for King Henry; but the
Marquess would hardly be drawn from King Edward, which Warwick perceiving,
laid his lime twigges yet another way.

(28) For being a man of a deep reach and wit, he well saw that George Duke
of Clarence the Kings second brother, bare not the best liking to the sway of
the times: him therefore he sought to allure to his fist, which once mand,
Edward should loose the best Faulcon for his game; him therefore by Problemes
he meant first to prove and according to their digest, purposed to proceed. So
falling in familiar conference with Clarence, began to complain Warwick
draws Clarence into action against the King his brother.
of some unkindness in the King, both in breach of some promises, and stain of
his honor in the French Court. The Duke as discontented as Warwick,
interrupted his tale before it was told, why my Lord (quoth Clarence) do you
look that a Leopard should have no spots in his skin, or a Camelion no
colors, but one, in faith you are deceived, and loose but your labor to wash
the natural Blackamore: for will you have him kind that is by nature unkind,
and to be respected of him, that respects not his own blood: or think you (a
Cosen and Allie) to be raised by him, that sees (if not seeks) his own
brethrens falls. For the heir of the Lord Scales (you see) he has married to
his wives brother, the heir of the Lord Bonuill and Harington to his wives
son, and affianced the heir of the Lord Hungerford to the Lord Hastings,
marriages indeed more meet for his two brethren and kin, then for such new
fondlings as he has bestowed them upon. But by my George I swear, if my
brother of Gloucester would join with me, we would make him know that we are
all three one man's sons, and of one and the same mother.

(29) Earl Warwick having that which he greedily sought after, seconded the
resolution with his own assistance, imparting now boldly what confederates he
had made, and to join more faithfully in this his design, he proffered
Clarence his eldest daughter Lady Isabel in marriage, fair and well qualified
Warwick and Clarence make affinity.
with the one half of his wives inheritance, she being sole heir unto Henry
Beauchampe Earl of Warwick her brother, and nothing inferior to any of those
whom Edward had bestowed upon others, which no sooner was spoken, but was as
presently embraced, and the plotte conferred how to proceed, which was
concluded, forthwith to sail unto Calleis (whereof the Earl was Captain, and
where the virgin Lady lay) as well to confirm the contract betwixt them, as to
be absent when the commotion A. D. 1469.
should begin, as the safer from suspicion and the surer to strike when the
Ball came to hand, to stir which, the Archbishop and Montacute were appointed
for the North.

(30) The occasion picked to make Malcontents, was the abuse of Charity unto an
hospital dedicated The occasions found for a commotion.
to Saint Leonard in the City of York, whose reuenew stood most upon corn
yearly received from Farmers in the Country, as an oblation of their first
grain. This, the factious made their only ground under a holy pretext
(forsooth) that the poor were defrauded, and the Master and Priests only fed
and waxen fat. To redress which one Robert Hulderne entered in action, and with
fifteen thousand strong Hulderne Captain of the Commotion.
enterprised for York, in which City the Lord Marquess Montacute was
President for King Edward, who with a small number, but well chosen, issued out
against the enemy, put them back, and stroke off the head of their Captain
before the gates of York: but whether he did it in policy to grow more in
trust with the King, or else of duty of oblige, not molded thoroughly to the
commotion, is uncertain. But certain it is, the Rebels were nothing daunted at
Huldernes death, but rather made resolute to continue what they had begun.

(31) To which end they choose them two Chieftaines, of greater account, and
eminent calling, which were Henry son and heir to the Lord Fitzhugh, and
Sir Henry Neuill, son and heir to Two Captains made by the rebels.
the Lord Latimer, the one of them being Nephew, and the other Cosen-germane
unto the Earl of Warwick; these but young, and not altogether experienced in
Arms, choose for their Tutor Sir John Conyers a Knight of such courage, skill
and valiantnes, as Sir John Coniers chosen general of the rebels.
in the North-parts few were his like: who meaning to strike at the head,
determined to march forthwith to London proclaiming in his way, that Edward was
neither a just Prince unto God, nor a profitable King unto the Commonweal.

(32) King Edward hearing of these Northern proceedings, and that his brother
and Warwick The Lord Herbert Earl of Pembrooke made Lord general.
were preparing against him, sent for the Lord Herbert whom he had created
Earl of Pembrooke, to be his General in the North (who partly to deserve the
Kings liberality in advancing him to such honor, and partly in emulation he
bare toward Warwick, Discontents betwixt Pembrooke and Warwick.
being the sole obstacle (as he took it) why he obtained not the wardship of
the Lord Bonuils daughter and heir for his eldest son) did not a little
rejoice of that his imploiment. And therefore accompanied with Sir Richard
Herbert his brother and eighteen thousand well furnished Welshmen, marched
toward the enemy, and after him was sent Humfrey Lord Stafford with six
thousand Archers to second him in his wars. These Lords meeting together, ^ad
notice by espials that the Northern made forwards toward Northampton: to
intercept whom, the Lord Stafford lately made Earl of Devonshire was employed
and Sir Richard Herbert, who with two thousand horse laid themselves covertly
by the side The Lord Stafford repulsed.
of a wood, and sodeinely set upon the rereward; the rest having passed: but
the Northern very nimbly turned about, and bad the Welshmen such welcome as
few of them returned to tell of their entertainment.

(33) The King understanding of this hard beginning, mustred his subeicts on
every side, intending K. Edward prepares against the Earl of Warwick.
to cope with the Northern himself. And Earl Warwick as forward to forward
his fortunes, gathered his friends, with purpose to encounter with Pembrooke
and his Welsh. But before any supplies came to either of both; it chanced the
Armies to meet at unawares, upon a fair plain called Danes more near to the
Town Hedgecot, three miles from Banburie and presently fell to a bickering,
wherein Sir Henry Neuill Knight, son of the Lord Latimer, upon a lusty
courage, venturing somewhat too far was taken prisoner, and notwithstanding
he yielded himself to his Takers, was cruelly slain, which vnmartiall act
rested not long vnrepaied with the loss of most of the Welsh the next day. For
the field withdrawn the Lord Stafford repaired to Banberie and there took his
lodging, where his affections were much enamoured upon a fair damsel in the
Pembrooke and Stafford fall out for their Inn.
Inn. But the Earl of Pembrooke coming to the same Town, took into the
same Inn, and commanded the Lord Stafford to provide him elsewhere, contrary
to their agreements made before, whereat Stafford was displeased, and departing
thence with his whole Band, left the Earl naked of men in the Town, and
disabled the field of the Archers, whereby the day was lost upon the kings
part, for which he shortly lost his own head.

(34) The Northern enflamed for the death of young Neuill, the next morning
most valiantly set upon the Welshmen, and by the force of Archers, drove them
from their ground of advantage, which Pembrooke wanting, supplied with his own
prowess, and Richard his brother with his Pollaxe twice made way through the
battle of the Northern, without any mortal or deadly wound* so that by their
The valor of Pembrooke and of Sir Richard Herbert.
valors it was verily supposed the field had been won, had not John Clappam
an Esquire and servant to Warwick displaied his Lords Colors with his
white-beare, and from an eminent place cried a A. D. (...).
Warwick, a Warwick, whereat the Welsh were so terrified, as they turned and
fied, leaving their General and his brother alone in the field, who valiantly
figh ting were encompassed and taken with the (...) of five thousand of their
men. The Earl with h^ The Earl of (...) with others beheaded.
brother Sir Richard Herbert were brought to Banbery, where with ten other
Gentlemen they lost their heads, Conyers and Clappam being their Judges.

(35) This second victory thus got, and the Northern now fleshed; under the
leading of Robbin of Robert of Riddisdale captain of the (...).
Riddisdale, hasted to the Kings manor of Grafton, where the Earl Rivers
father to the Queen then lay, whom with his son John, they sodeinely
surprised, and in Northampton struck off their heads The Earl Rivers with his
son John surprised and beheaded.
without any judgment. The deaths of these Lords the King greatly lamented,
and sought to revenge: first therefore writing his Commissions for the
apprehension of Lord Humfrey Stafford of Southwicke (who by diligent search was
found at Brentmarch and beheaded at Bridgewater, as he worthily Lord Stafford
beheaded.
deserved) next he prepared a mighty Army, and with the same marched toward
Warwick, his company increasing ever as he went.

(36) King Edward set down his tents at Wolney Io. St^. Annal.
four miles from Warwick, where the Duke and the Earl of Warwickes host lay
ready for Battle, but by the mediation of friends a peace was entreated, and
letters written from either parties, expressing the griefs and wrongs
sustained, with proffers of redress, in amending all, and in show so far it
proceeded, as the King conceiving a certain hope of peace, rested secure, not
fearing any foule-play, which politic Warwick (by his spiall perceiving)
thought it not wisdom to loose the advantage, and thereupon in the dead of the
night with a selected Company he entered the Kings Camp, killing them that kept
the King Edawrd taken at Wolney.
watch, took the king in his bed, and brought him his prisoner to his Castle
of Warwick, and thence by easy iourneys in the night had him conveyed to
Midelham Castle in Yorkshire not far from Richmond, where under the custody
of his brother Is imprisoned in Middleham Castle.
George Neuill Archishop of York he was retained.

(37) His usage was Princely, and according to his estate, which he often
acknowledged to the Archbishop with all kind thanks, and complements of
words, whereby he wrought himself into such trust and favor, as he had the
Forests to hunt in, and the parkes for his pleasure, whose pales are well
known, insufficient walls to pen the lion in, as appeared by this King, who
being abroad and on hunting, King Edward escaped out of prison.
Sir William Stanly, with Sir Thomas Burgh brought him fresh horse, and such a
crew of followers that his keepers more feared their own lives, then were
forward to force him back again to prison, and so let the game go without
further chase. King Edward thus escaped, Warwick like a wild man furiously
raged, but seeing no remedy made use of necessity, and gave forth that himself
so caused it, having power to make Kings and to unmake them again. Warwick
sayings to make and unmake kings.


(38) The King forthwith repaired to York, where with great honor he was
ioifully received, and abode certain days, which made him well hope of a
further supply of friends and men, but failing thereof, and fearing the
Archbishops pursuit with a small train he posted to Lancaster, where he found
the Lord Hastings his Chamberlain well accompanied Wars prepared upon but
(...) part^.
for his Convey: his spirits then revived, and train daily increasing, with
speedy iourneyes he came unto London: where all his studies and consultations
were, how to be revenged upon these disloiall Lords, his brother, and Earl
Warwick, and they again fretting at the Archbishoppes folly sought to make
stronger their factions against the King.

(39) The Land thus rent by these unnatural divisions, and no estate sure to
enjoy what was theirs, the Nobles anew began to solicit the parties unto The
miseries of civil wars.
a Peace, having first obtained liberty to post to and fro without their
impeachments, and so effectually laid down the state of the Land whose ruins
now were so eminent by these intestine wars, that the Natives lamented, the
Foreign reioiced, and God they saw highly displeased, whose sword thus given
into their hands, was to be feared would be the destruction of the English, as
Nabucaednezzars of Babell was of Judea, and indeed so effectually wrought, that
the Duke and Earl upon perfect confidence came to London, accompanied with a
small number in respect of their great danger: where falling into conference
with the King, he tasked them with disloialtie, The King and the Lords meet at
London.
and they him with ingratitude, so that their splenes were nothing appeased,
but much more increased and with high words departed, the King unto
Canterbury, and they again to Warwick.

(39) The stout Earl whose stomach must have vent, otherwise the Caske must
needs break, A. D. 1470 A commotion in Lincolnshire.
caused new stirs to be raised in Lincolnshire, under the leading of Sir
Robert Wels, an expert soldier, and son of the Lord Wels, who with thirty
thousand Commons, disturbed the Country, and in every place proclaimed King
Henry; setting down his battle not far from Stamford, meaning to abide the
encounter of his opposers; which when the King heard of, he sent for the Lord
Wels his father, commanding him to write to his son to surcease the wars,
and so marching toward Stamford took Wels in his company, with a good hope
that the son would not bear arms against his own father in field; but
howsoever he had writ, or the King conceived, Sir Robert went on in his former
designs, which so sore moved Edward, that he beheaded Lord Wels with Sir
Thomas Dimocke that had married The Lord Wels and Sir Thomas Dimocke beheaded.
his daughter, although he had given them promise of safety and life.

(40) Young Wels then hearing of his fathers death, sought the revenge upon
this untrusty Prince, and not staying for Warwick who was in preparing to
come, set manfully upon the King and his power, where betwixt them was
performed a most bloody fight, till at last Sir Robert was taken, with Sir The
battle at Stanford. Sir Robert Wels taken.
Thomas Deland and others, whereat the Lincolnshire men were so terrified, that
casting off their Coats, they all ran away, in regard whereof this battle
to this day is called, the battle of Loscoat field, wherein Loscoat field.
were slain ten thousand men at the least: after which victory the King
commanded Wels with many other of note to be put to death, as the chief
causers of these dangerous Commotions. Sir Robert Wels put to death.


(41) This untimely conflict and unfortunate overthrow, made Clarence, and
Warwick, at their wits end, who unprovided to field against Edward, gave way
to necessity, and from Dartmouth in Devonshire embarked themselves and wives
for France, both to instigate king Lewis no friend unto Edward, and to secure
themselves in Callis (whereof Warwick was captain) till fortune had changed
the hand of her play. These crossing the Seas cast Anchor before the Town of
Callis, and gave notice they were Warwick and Clarence flee into France.
ready to land, but the Lord Vawclere a Gascoigne, whom Warwick had
substituted his deputy, discharged diverse pieces of Ordinance against them,
and sent word flatly they should not come there: mean while the Duchess of
Clarence fell in travel, Phil. Comines lib. 3. cap 4.
and was there on Shippe-board delivered of a fair son, which Child the
Earls deputy would scarcely suffer to be baptized in the Town, nor without
The Duchess of Clarence delivered of a son upon shipboard.
great entreaty permit two flagons of wine to be conveyed aboard to the Ladies
lying in the haven. For which his good service King Edward by his letters
Patents made Vawclere chief Captain of Callis, and discharged the Earl as a
Traitor or Rebel against him. The Duke of Burgundy bends himself against
Earl Warwick.


(42) Charles Duke of Burgundy, being then at S. Omers, owing Earl Warwick
an old grudge for gainestanding his marriage, thought now a fit time to requite
the discourtesie; and therefore sent many thanks unto Vawcler, with promise of
a thousand Crowns pension by year, if he stood firm for his wives brother
King Edward, himself laying the Coast to impeach his arriuage. But how
Mounsieur Vawclere stood affected, whatsoever show he made, The double dealings
of Vawcler.
Comines the French Kings Historian does tell, who sent Warwick word the
danger he stood in, of the said Duke, and of Duras the Kings Admiral, so as to
land, would be his final confusion: His Counsel therefore was that he should
make into France, unto whose King he should be most welcome; and as for the
town of Callis, he willed him to take no thought, but promised to make him a
good reckoning thereof, when time should best serve. Whereupon the Earl waied
anchor for Normandy, and in his way Earl Warwick saileth into Normandy.
took many rich Ships of the Duke of Burgundies subjects, which netled him not
a little, but yet found no docke to rub out the smart.

(43) King Lewis hearing of the arriuage of Warwick, and knowing his troubles
to arise for his Embassage to Bona, and faith unto France, sent certain
Princes to conduct him to the Castle of Amboys, King Lewis relieueth Warwick.
where a supply was made against all necessities, and himself and train most
honorably entertained, whereat the Duke of Burgundy sore repined, and sent
Lewis word that he disliked his doings with threats of revenge, if he aided him
against his wives brother. This, notwithstanding the French King gave all
comforts to these fugitues, and prepared Burgundy offended with Lew^ for
relieuing his enemy.
his assistance for their restorations, and the raising again of godly King
Henry.

(44) Queen Margaret having fled England and soiourning in France with her
Father Reiner (a Reiner of great style and small power.
King in name, but scarcely able to bear the State of an Earl) saw now the
Iron hot, and ready to be struck, therefore with her son Prince Edward, John
Earl of Oxford, and Jasper Earl of Pembrooke (who lately had escaped out of
prison in England) came unto Amboyse, where by means of the French King a
combination of Alliance was confirmed betwixt the Prince of Wales, young
Edward, and Anne A marriage concluded betwixt Prince Edward and Anne daughter
of Earl Warwick.
the second daughter to the Earl of Warwick, then present with her mother and
sister in France. That King Henry should be again restored, the Duke of
Clarence, and the Earl took a solemn Oath never to desist whiles they had
power, and in the nonage of the Prince they jointly were to be deputed his
Protectors, and the Lands sole Governors.

(45) Edward in England hearing what Queen Margaret, his brother Clarence, and
stout Warwick in the French Court had done, was struck into a sudden King
Edward driven into his dumps.
dumpe, being as doubtful of friends, as fearful of foes, and therefore such
as were alied to the Lancastrians, or fauourits of the down-cast K. Henry, he
began somewhat roughly to deal with: many therefore that were guilty daily
took Sanctuary, or yielded themselves to his mercy, among whom John Marquis
Montacute brother to Warwick was one, who with fairest words of promises, was
received Marquis Montacute is taken into King Edwards favor.
into favor, and upon whose example many others came in, which notwithstanding
meant to stand out if occasion should serve. But no busier was Edward to keep
the Crown on his head, then these Lords in France were resolute to strike it
off: in midst of whose consultations behold how it happened.

(46) There came from England to Calleis a damsel belonging (as she said) to
the Duchess of Clarence, A maid Ambassador unto the Duke of Clarence.
who signified unto Monsieur Vawclere that she came from King Edward with a
declaration of peace, which he fearing to impart the conditions to other, had
made her the instrument, the better to pass without any suspect, and he glad
to hear for the Earls sake (whom he entirely affected) gave her his safe
conduct unto the Duke of Clarence then at The conference of the damsel with
the Duke of Clarence.
Amboys; where having private access unto him, she told, that it was neither
natural nor honorable for him to take part against the house of York; that
the house of Lancaster, was not only by the whole Court of Parliament debarred
to be the indubitate Heir of the Kingdom, but that K. Henry himself had
discharged his Issue from claim, as it stands (said she) upon Record to be
seen, contrary to which, as he might well perceive this marriage of Prince
Edward with the Earls daughter, did only aim and intend to the utter extinct
of the house of York, whereof himself was one, and in near possibility of
the Crown, Edwards Issue young, and not many, and the King very wanton, a
sin commonly punished with want of posterity, which if it so chanced, then
he, or his were the next. These reasons wayed, so ouer-wayed the Dukes further
designs, that he promised thereafter a more brotherlike affection, as (said
he) Edward should The Duke of Clarence inclines to his brother.
find; with which good news she returned into England, Warwick utterly
ignorant what was said or done.

(47) All now in a readiness for the return, ships, money and men supplied by
the French King, the Warwick and Clarence return into England.
Admiral of France was sent to secure them from the Duke of Burgundies Fleet,
which with an extraordinary number and power lay in the mouth of Seyne to fight
with Warwick when he should loose out of Harborow: but see how the heavens
favored, and frowned upon the parties, for the night before they should hoise
sail, such a stormy tempest took the Dukes Fleet, lying more remote from the
Lee, that they were scattered asunder, some into Scotland, some into Denmark,
and many of them drowned. But the Seas calmed, and the wind serving fair, the
English set sail and landed at Dartmouth, whence they had shipped into France
almost six months September. 13. A. reg. 10.
before.

(48) King Edward relying upon Burgundy abroad, and thinking all friends who
fawned at home, gave King Edwards security.
himself daily to follow the hound and the hawke, and nightly to his court
pleasures in dancings and daliances with damsels, little minding their approach
that meant to mar his mirth; for Warwick now landed, proclaimed King Henry,
commanding all Earl Warwick in the West proclaims king Henry.
from sixteen to sixty, upon a great penalty to take Arms against Edward Duke
of York, the most unjust usurper of Henry's rightful Crown, and incredible
it was, to see the confluence of them which came armed to him, who ere-while
applauded and approved none but King Edward. Thus making toward London, his
company daily increased; which the youthful King seemed little to regard, but
verily supposing he had now Warwick in his trappe, K. Edwards opinion
touching Warwickes approach.
wrote to Burgundy to secure the seas, lest he should escape again into
France, and to his Lords of England, to attend him in his wars; but very many
neglected his command, and few or none made their repair. Which when Edward
perceived he was struck into a great fear, and with his brother of
Gloucester, the L. Hastings his Chamberlain, and the Lord Scales the Queens
brother, he hasted toward Nottingham there to determine what was to be done.

(49) In the mean while the bastard Faulconbridge in the west, and the Earl of
Pembroke in Wales, every where proclaimed King Henry; and to forward the
matter, D. Godard preaching at Paul's Cross declared Sunday after Michaelmas.
Stowel Annal. Doctor Godards sermon. Marquess Montacute reuolteth from K.
Edward.
by reading of Bills, and diverse other proofs, that King Henry was the
undoubted and true heir unto the English Crown. Neither is the L. Montacute
now the man that he was, who having mustered six thousand in the name of King
Edward, and brought them forward almost to Nottingham, on the sudden drew
back his forces, alleging that Edward was ungrateful, and regardlesse of
his friends as himself said, himself was the example, who having served him
in many bloody battles, was rewarded with a verbal word Marquess, without any
maintenance at al, no not so much as Pyes poor nest: and therefore he had just
cause never to draw his sword in his quarrel any more, and them that did, he
assured them should receive the like reward in the end.

(50) These with the like distastures, diuulged among the rude multitude, it
was a world to see the How uncertain it is to stat on the (...).
face of this new World, for in every street Bonfires were made; in every
Church bells rung, Ditties were sung at every meeting, and every man cried K.
Henry, King Henry, whose Echo likewise redoubled, a Warwick, a Warwick, and
indeed all so applauded the passage now on foot, as King Edward hearing the
rumor, thought it not safe any longer to stay, and K Edward is forced to flee
England. October. 3.
therefore with those trusty Lords and some others, he fled from his host
besides Nottingham, passing the Washes toward Lynne with greater difficulties
then was befitting a Prince to adventure; and thus without any order taken for
his Realm, in two Hulkes of Holland, and one English ship destitute of all
necessary provisions, set sail toward Burgundy and in the way was encountered
by the Easterlings, Englands great Enemies, having much ado to clear Edward
in danger of taking on seas.
himself from their surprise.

(51) In these times of misery the Queen (whose marriage was the only cause
of all these stirs) upon Queen Elizabeth took Sanctuary in Westminster.
the first of October had stolen out of the Tower, and taken Sanctuary at
Westminster, where like a woman forsaken she solitarily remained, and on the
fourth of November following was delivered of a son, which without all pomp
more like a private man's Prince Edward bo^e in the Sanctuary.
child then a Prince, was there also baptized by the name of Edward, who after
his fathers death, a while was King of England, as shall be said; other
Sanctuaries were full of King Edwards friends, that prayed devoutly for his
prosperous health, and well hoped the world would again turn, as shortly it
did. One King thus fled, and the other in prison, the Kentish, The Kentish
Commotioners do much hurt about London.
whose conditions are mutable at the change of Princes, came to seek prey in
London, where they knew it was to be had: Ratcliffe, S. Katherins, and
Southwarke they robbed, and within the City did some hurt besides, yea and
surely more had done, had not Earl Warwick in good time come to the rescue
which increased his name, that was great enough before.

(52) Earl Warwick accompanied with his brother the Archbishop of York,
the Prior of Saint John Fortescue.
John's, the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of Shrewsburie, Bastard Faulconbridge,
Lord Stanley, and other The States take K. Henry out of the Tower.
Gentlemen, some for love, some for fear, and some to gaze at this wavering
world, upon the sixth of October entered the Tower of London, wherein King Henry
had been retained prisoner almost the space of nine years, and there again
elected him for their lawful King, and forthwith conuaied him robed in a long
blew velvet gown through London unto the Bishops palace, where a pompous Court
was kept until the thirteenth of the same K. Henry again restored goes
crowned to P^
month, upon which day he went in procession crowned to the Cathedral Church
of S. Paul, the Earl of Warwick bearing his train, and the Earl of Oxford
the sword, the people on every side crying, God save K. Henry.

(53) Thus far proceeded, and Henry reestablished, a Parliament was begun
at Westminster the six and twentieth of November following, wherein King Edward
was declared a Traitor to his country, an usurper of the Crown, and all his
goods K. Edward debarred from government by Parliament. The Parliament Roll.
John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester beheaded.
confiscated; the like judgment passed against all his partakers; wherein also
it was enacted, that all such persons as had taken Arms in his quarrel,
should be severely punished; among whom, John Typtoft Earl of Worcester, and
King Edwards Lieutenant in Ireland was attainted, who being found hid in the
top of a tree, in the Forest of Waybridge, not far from Huntington was
brought to London, and upon Tower Hill beheaded. Moreover, all Statutes made by
King Edward were clearly revoked, abrogated, and made frustrate: the Crowns of
England The Crowns of England and France entailed to K. Henry.
and France entayled to King Henry, and the Heyres-male lawfully begot of his
body, and for the want of such heirs unto George Duke of Clarence, and his
heir males lawfully produced, and the said Duke to be the next heir to his
father Richard Duke of York, disabling his elder brother Edward, by the George
Duke of Clarence entailed to the Crown.
virtue of his Atteindor; and Jasper Earl of Pembroke, John Earl of Oxford
with other attainted by the usurper Edward, to be restored in blood, dignities,
Earls restored.
and ancient possessions; and finally, Earl Warwick the good commonwealths
man, made Governor of the Realm in these turbulent times, unto whom was
associated George Duke of Clarence this great Earls son in Law, and
Warwickes brother Montacute upon his submission obtained his pardon, Earl
Warwick made governor of the Realm.
which was the easilier gotten for his service at Nottingham.

(54) Queen Margaret appointed to follow into England, if fortune did favor
these great Lords success, now hearing of the fair Sunshine, wherein Queen
Margaret hindered by tempest to come into England.
her husband King Henry was set, amidst the stormy winter blasts which the
season afforded, with Prince Edward her son, set sail from France, toward
that wished and temperate climat, where the spring of new Regality began to
bud forth, but was met with such tempests and storming seas, as she was forced
to return and defer her journey until another time, to her great grief and
sore discontent. In like perplexity was the Burgundian Duke, who The Duke of
Burgundy perplexed.
neither durst give Edward his outward assistance (the French and Warwick
being so mighty opposites) nor leave him in distress, lest the sparks of
discontent should fly from the eyes of his fair wife, and therefore to know
whether Vawelere the Governor of Calleis stood resolute for him according to
Covenants, he secretly sent Philip Comines the hony-mouth Historian, to drop
some of his sweet eloquence into Phil. Com. lib. 3.
his gold-thirsting ear.

(55) Comines coming to Calleis, and observing the sequence for which he was
sent, saw every man wear the Earl of Warwicks badge, for no head could Earl of
Warwicks esteem in Callis.
be gallant that was not adorned with his ragged staff, nor no door
frequented that was not painted with his white Cross. Insomuch that Vawelere
himself had a Jewel in his hatte, wherein was a white ragged staff,
embrodered with gold, and others his followers the like wrought in silk, gold,
and silver; and to stamp the print deeper, a liking report was brought to the
town, that Warwick had prepared four thousand valiant men to war upon the
frontiers of Burgundy. But Comine in conference so wrought with the Council,
and they again with Earl Warwick as he was contented to leave off the
enterprise, Duke Charles promising to side with K. Henry.

(56) King Edward hearing what his brother of Burgundy had done, and being
daily solicited from King Edward coueteth aid of his brother the Duke of
Burgundy.
his friends in England, thought it no policy long to delay, lest Henry should
take growth to a bigger steame; and therefore repairing to his brother in the
town of Saint Paul, required his aid, as the only man on whom he relied,
as well for the bond of alliance in the marriage of his sister, as also in
regard of the orders which they both ware, the King that of his which was the
golden Fleece; and the Duke the Gartar and Robe of Saint George. In the Court
of Burgundy at that time lay Edmund Duke of Sommerset, The Duke of Sommerset
disswadeth Burgundy to aid K. Edward.
cosen-germane removed unto Duke Charles, a great enemy against the house of
York, and now set himself to thwart King Edwards suite, alleging, that it
was more honorable for the Duke of Burgundy to side with the Lancastrians,
from whom he was descended by his Grandmother the daughter of John of Gaunt: as
also in the vprightnes of King Henry's title, held good in her brother, and his
Grandfather, and in her Nephew his father without all exceptions.

(57) The Duke perplexed between these great supplicants did then, as many do
now, speak much and mean nothing less, or else say little, and Burgundy
temporizeth with his suites.
mean to do much. To Sommerset for Henry he outwardly promised all help and
assistance, but never gave the least, and to Edward no comfortable words of
supply, and yet underhand he hired him ships, furnished him with munition,
and lent him fifty thousand Florences in money. And now the season serving for
war, K. Edward with two thousand strong besides his Mariners made over for
England, K. Edward passes into England, pretending no more then to be Duke of
York.
attempting to take land in Norfolk; but those coasts guarded, he waffed more
Northward, and entering Humber, landed at Rauenspur in Yorkshire, when laying
aside al claim to the Crown, and pretending nothing but his Duchy of York, he
showed the rude multitude the letters, and seal of the Earl of
Northumberland, which as he affirmed, and made them believe was sent for his
safe conduct to enjoy the same, and in every place where he came proclaimed A.
D 1471. March 14.
King Henry himself, wearing an Estrich feather, which was Prince Edwards
Livery, and passing to York in no other show then a Subject, his oath first
taken to be true to King Henry, entered the City, K. Edward strains his oath to
win the City of York.
which presently he surprised and assumed to himself.

(58) Earl Warwick now hearing that Edward was landed before he had marched
very far in the main, sent strait charge to his brother the Marquess
Montacute then residing at Pomfret (with a sufficient Earl Warwick writes to
his brother Marquess to impeach King Edwards passage.
Army to secure those parts) that he should not suffer his access unto York,
lest he grew more potent, then was to be wished; himself making ready with
all possible speed, to repair into those parts; but whether the Marquess
purposely winked, or else (and that rather) would not see at all, he made no
great have to forelay his way to York, neither sought to empeach the passage:
when Edward from thence marched in a more hostile manner toward Nottingham;
taking his way not far from Pomfret, and as it were through the midst of
his enemies; which encouraged many to favor his designs, holding that
Montacute was either a friend, or afraid to deal against so powerful an
enemy.

(59) The White Rose thus bloomed, and the red falling his leaf, all took the
time of this pleasant K Edwards Army increased.
spring, and flocked to Edward as to their April Sun, who now more able, and
therefore more bold made forward toward Leicester, where the Earls of
Warwick and Oxford with a great power were, but because Clarence was absent,
they let Edward hold on John Stow.
without any encounter, whose train as he passed was like to a river that in
the running is ever increased with new springs, which Warwick perceiving,
thought it more then time to give battle, well knowing that his brothers
forbearance had given him that head. And to that end sent unto Clarence then
about London in leuying of men, but he Warwick takes into the City
Couentrie. March. 29.
somewhat too backward, and Warwick too forward, took into the City
Couentry, meaning from thence to set on the enemy. But Edward whose star had
now past the dark threatening cloud, pitched his tents near unto that City in
a plain field, and valiantly bad the Earl come to battle. But he then
mistrusting (as in truth he had cause) that the boldness K. Edward
challenges Earl Warwick to fight.
of Edward was backed by a Clarence, kept close within the walls, with a purpose
to see how the world would go.

(60) Edward loath to loose time about one Cities siege, raised his Camp, and
hasted forward toward K. Edward draws toward London.
Warwick, unto which Town likewise his brother Clarence, with four thousand
strong was on march: these meeting upon a plain, three miles from the Town,
set their Battles in Array, as if they meant to have fought, but the King, his
brother Gloucester, Lord Rivers, Hastings, and others, without any guard made
toward Clarence, which when he beheld, himself accompanied with some of
estate encountered his brother with a loving countenance and friendly cheer, so
as no spark of hatred was perceived betwixt them, but with all brotherly
affections entered K Edward and his brother Clarence meet and are reconciled.
into amity and peace, which afterward proved the confusion of the Duke.
Clarence thus got sought to draw Warwick into the same train, to which end he
sent certain messengers unto him; first to excuse his own fact, as too
unnatural for him to vnsheath his sword against his own brother, as also he
Clarence seeks to draw Warwick unto K. Edward.
sought to stay the effusion of English blood, which in these quarrels lay
ready to be shed: His peace with Edward he promised to work, and that with
such honor as Warwick should know himself not only a father to Clarence, but
likewise unto Edward great Englands King. Unto all which motion Warwick gave
ear only with this reply, Go tell your Duke (said he) that I had rather be
an Earl, and always like my The words of Warwick in answer to Clarence.
self, then a false and perjured Duke, and that ere my oath shall be
falsified (as his apparently is) I will lay down my life at my enemies foot,
which I doubt not but shall be bought very dear.

(61) This stout resolution made Edward more wary, and therefore to obtain
London, the only key K. Edward marches forward.
that opened the door to the Crown, he hasted thitherward, whose Citizens
hearing of the increase of his host, and waying that Henry was but a milkesop
to him, thought it most safety to sail with the fairest wind, and therefore
set open their Gates, and with public applaud cried, King Edward. Which when
the Duke of Sommerset with others left to attend London receives King Edward.
the innocent King Henry, heard, they fled for their lives; and left him in the
Bishops Palace at London, where his Competitor King Edward took him, and sent
him again prisoner to the Tower. With so many winds are the sails of their
ships filled, which seek the Port of their safety by the affections K. Henry
again taken and sent to the Tower of London.
of the people: for even the same day had Henry been carried through the
City (as it were) in triumph, and had heard the shoutes of the Commons in
every street crying; God save King Henry.

(62) But Earl Warwick hearing how things went in London, and now fully
conceiving that the Ed. Hall.
hazard of Battle must determine either with, or against him, being come to
Saint Albans, fell into a deep consideration what was to be done: His
assistants Earl Warwick comes to S. Albans.
were John Duke of Excester, the Earls of Oxford and Sommerset, and Marquess
Montacute his brother, whom notwithstanding he did not greatly trust, being
always too favorable to the contrary faction. These in Counsel held it best
policy to follow the Enemy, and before the body grew too great, to lop off
the branches, least they should shadow their Sunshine too far. In which
resolution, they hasted forward, and came unto Barnet, with a full purpose to
recover London: but Edward well knowing the state of the City unfurnished for
siege, and ready to take stamp of any impresse, meant not to be pent within
those weak walls; and therefore taking with him unfortunate Henry, least any
confederacy should be made in his absence, he marched K. Edward carries K
Henry with him to battle.
with all possible have, to encounter his opposites, before they came too
far, and upon Gladmore near unto Barnet set down his Tents close to the
enemy, the eve of Christ's resurrection, so careless is Mars of divine
celebrations, that the holiest feast is profaned, when his sword is drawn.

(63) The next day being the Paschall whereon Christ rose from death, which
with due reverence is Apr. 14.
celebrated in all the Christian world, these English contenders for a
terrestrial Crown, with Irefull hearts and hands as ready, made ready to
dig each others graves: for at break of day Warwick began Barnet field
fought upon Easter day.
to Marshall his Army, which he divided into three battalions: The right wing
was led by the Marquess his brother, with the Earl of Oxford, consisting
chiefly of horsemen, himself with the Duke of Excester led the left; and the
maine battle was commanded by Edward Earl of Sommerset, which was supplied
for the most part with Archers. K. Edward The orderings of the battles.
likewise ordered his men. The foreward was led by Richard Duke of Gloucester
his brother, a good soldier and sufficient for advise, the middle by himself,
and his brother Clarence, having King Henry in their company; And the rereward
was commanded by the Lord Hastings, ever most firm for the house of York,
reserving a fresh supply, when occasion should serve.

(64) The Battles joined, were manfully maintained by the prowess of Oxford,
upon that part of the Kings, against which he fought, which with great violence
he forced back, so that many of them fled to London, bringing news that with
Warwick went the day: and surely in great forwardnes it was, had not fortune
thwarted it by an unexpected chance: for the day being foggy, and ouercast with
mists, I^ Stow. A mistaking of the soul^ieis which was the loss of the field.
hindered their eyes of any far sight, so as the star embroidered upon the
Earl of Oxfords men's Coats, were mistaken for the Sun, which King Edwards
men wore, in which error Warwickes Battle let fl^e at their own fellows,
who were in great forwardnes to have won the day, and they not knowing the
cause of the error cried, treason, treason, we are all betrayed. Whereupon the
Earl of Oxford with eight hundred fled the field, leaving the chance to be
cast for the Crown; which when Warwick perceived with words like a soldier,
he encouraged his men, and seeing the fresh supply of his enemy draw now unto
fight, he furiously rushed into the midst of their Battle, wherein he
adventured so far as he Great Warwick^ slain in fight.
could not be reseued, but valiantly fighting was struck down, and among them
slain, having repaid his danger with many a wound. The Marquess Montacute
made forward to second his brother, Marquis Montacute slain in battle.
(who till then had been the Mars and Make-King of England) but was so
ouerlaid by his Opposites, that they sent his soul likewise from his body
whereby was ended that bloody days task.

(65) In this Battle upon King Edwards part, died, the Lord Cromwell, the Lord
Bourcher, the Lord Nobles and others slain at Barnet field.
Barnes, son and heir to the Lord Say, and Sir John Lisle Knight: In the
quarrel of Henry died Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick, and John Neuill
Marquess Montacute his brother, and upon both sides of common soldiers says
Hall ten thousand, Stow says Edw. Have. Ioh. Stow. Rob. Fabian. says 1500.
four thousand, as Fabian far less: all which were buried upon the same
Plain; where afterward a Chapel was built: the Duke of Excester being left
for dead in the field, recovered, and took Sanctuary at Westminster. Edmund
Duke of Sommerset, and John Earl of Oxford escaped the field, and fled into
Wales, The Duke of Sommerset and the Fail of Oxford fled into Wales.
where with Jasper Earl of Pembrooke they still plotted to set up King Henry,
whom God and destiny would have to be cast down.

(66) The same King Edward upon the same day as an absolute Conqueror, lead
the unfortunate Rich. Grast.
Henry his Captive to London, and entering the City in triumph wise, offered his
royal Standerd in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, whither the slain
bodies of Warwick and Montacute in two Coffins Edward triumphs and o^eth his
banner in S. Paul's.
were brought, and lay there bare faced, and unburied the space of three days,
least a false Brute should be made that they were not dead. After which they
were conveyed to Bilsam Abbey, and interred in that Priorie among their
Ancestors.

(67) Edwards affairs thus far prospered at London, the winds that had
crossed Queen Margaret Queen Margaret with Prince Edward landed at Wey^.
before, came favorably about to fill her Sails for England, and indeed to
accomplish the decree, which heaven had appointed: she with her son Prince
Edward and their French followers, landed upon Easter Eve at Weymouth, and the
Countess of Warwick at Portesmouth, who hearing the sorrowful news of her
husbands death, took Sanctuary within the Abbey of Beaulieu. And Queen
Margaret understanding of the loss of Barnet-field, withdrew as^de to the
Abbey of Ceerne, unto whom presently resorted Edmund Duke of Sommerset, with
Lord John his brother; The Lords comfort Queen Margaret.
John Courtney Earl of Devonshire, Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, John Lord
Wenlock, and John Longstrother Prior of Saint John's.

(68) These with many words of hope, comforted the sorrowful Queen, and
proffered her their assistance to erect Prince Edward her son, though it were
done with the loss of their own lives, requiring her only to undertake the
authority of the war, and themselves would undergo the charge and burden
thereof, by whose valor and power, they doubted not to daunt the pride of the
usurping Edward; who now held himself sure, and began to grow careless. To
these their resolutions the warlike Queen most gladly consented, and gave all
encouragements unto them she could; when falling in counsel how to proceed,
her care (according to the natural affection of a mother) was most upon the
Queen^ Margarets care for Prince Edward her son.
safety and life of her son: and theresore as well for their own parts (if
fortune should fail in this their first attempt) as for the fear which the
Yorkist would possess (who whiles Prince Edward his corriuall hued could not
account the Diadem his Bride) she thought it best to send him back again
into France, till God had set the Crown where it should stand: whence he
might supply them with new forces, or at least wise ouer-awe Edward for
tyrannizing too far. But the Lords contrariwise alleged, The opinions of
the Lords.
that Prince Edward being the morning Sun of the Lancastrians hopes, and the
rays very splendent to most English eyes, was to be present in field himself,
whose sight would both heat the courage of his own Soldiers, and attract the
glance of his adversaries hearts, either to fight faintly, or else, and that
rather, to come to his side. Thus their counsel at that time prevailed; and
thus resolved, every man departed to make ready his power, the Queen with her
French repairing to Bath.

(69) But Edward in London had not sat two days in rest, before he heard of
Queen Margarets arriuage, King Edward prepares against Queen^ Margaret.
and the confluence of people out of Cornwall, Devonshire, and of the Western
parts, which hourly flew to give her assistance; wherefore committing to the
Tower King Henry, and George Archbishop of York with a selected company, he
marched King Henry committed to the Tower of London
to meet them, intending to cut off many springs before they should join to
the body of a river, whose stream without danger could not be passed:
therefore from Windsor, Abington, Chichester, and Malmesbury he proceeded,
seeking and urging his enemies to battle: but the Queen and her forces
fearing to abide in Bath, removed to Bristow, Berkeley, and Gloucester, and
lastly at Tewkesbury, Duke Sommerset her General pitched down his Tents not
staying the coming of the Earl of Pembroke: his battle he marshalled into
three fights, whereof himself and his brother John Lord Sommerset lead the
foreward; the middle Battalion was commanded by Edward the young Prince, under
the conduct of The ordering of Queen Margarets battles.
the Lords Saint John and Wenlocke, and the Rereward governed by John Courtney
Earl of Devonshire, a mortal enemy against the house of York.

(70) King Edward who was come now within sight of his enemies, divided
likewise his Army into 3. Battalions, committing the Foreward unto the guidance
of his brother Richard D. of Gloucester a good Soldier, and of a deep reach
and policy: the Main The ordering of K. Edwards battles.
he undertook to govern himself, and the Rereward was commanded by the Lord
Hastings his Chamberlain. The field thus marshalled, and the sign of battle
being given, a most bloody fight began, the King had planted his Ordinance at
most The battle at Tewkesbury.
advantage, which Gloucester frankly bestowed among the Dukes men, and they
lodged betwixt ditches, bushes and hedges, with their showers of arrows galled
Glocesters followers, so as by his command his battle gave back, as though
they would shrink, which Sommerset no sooner perceived, but that he came on,
and overcome with courage, came out of his strength, when by a certain passage
before hand provided, he came unto the place where King Edward was embattelled,
thinking verily that Wenlocke had followed at his back, who as it seemed meant
Edw. Hall.
nothing less.

(71) The advantage espied, Duke Richard made good his retreat, and with fresh
supplies of two hundred This battle was fought upon Saturday the 4. of May,
the 11. of K. Edwards reign, and year of Christ, 1471.
spears so charged Sommerset, as his battle was disordered, and put to
fearful flight, himself recovering the Midle-ward, found there the L.
Wenlock idle, whilst others were thus working for their lives, whom he most
opprobriously reviled in the terms of a Traitor, and with his Battell-axe
stroke his brains L. Wenlocke slain for not following Sommerset.
out of his head; when presently Gloucester, and after him the King entered the
Trench, wherein all of the Queens part went to wrack; for there were slain
in this battle on her side John L. Sommerset, John Courtney Earl of
Devonshire, the Lord Wenlocke in Lords slain at Tewkesbury.
manner as we have said, Sir John Delues, Sir Edward Hampden, Sir Robert
Whittingham, and Sir John Lewkener, with three thousand others besides.

(72) Among them that fled, Prince Edward was one, whom Sir Richard Crofts
apprehended before Prince Edward apprehended.
he got to Tewkesbury, but Edmund Duke of Sommerset, John Longstrother, Prior
of Saint John's, many Knights and Esquiers took Sanctuary in the Abbey, and
other places of the Town, notwithstanding they were taken forth and arraigned
before Richard Duke of Gloucester, who that day sat Constable of England, where
they were condemned and The Duke of Sommerset and others executed.
had judgment of death, which they immediately suffered upon a Scaffold set
up in the Town. With these two Lords died twelve worthy Knights, besides others
of inferior degrees.

(73) Then was Proclamation made for the apprehension of Prince Edward,
promising to his taker an annuitie of an hundred pounds during his life, and if
the Prince were living, his life to be spared, upon which promises Sir Richard
Crofts presented young Prince Edward apprehended and (...) answers.
Edward unto the King, whom with a stern countenance he a while beheld, and
as sternely demanded, how he durst so presumptuously with Banner displayed
enter into his Realm; whereunto the Prince made this reply; to recover (said
he) my fathers Kingdoms and his most rightful inheritance possessed by his
Father and Grandfather, and from him immediately belonging unto me; how dare
thou then which art his Subject display thy color against him thy Liege-Lord?
which answer moved King Edward so much, as with his Gantlet he dashed the
Prince on his mouth, whom Richard Duke of Gloucester with others of the kings
seruans most shamefully Prince Edward most shamefully slain.
murdered, even in his presence, and at his feet: whose body was buried
without all solemnity among other poor and mean persons, in the church of the
Monastery of the Blacke-Fryers in Tewkesburie.

(74) Queen Margaret in this fatal day of battle fled toward Worcester, and
by the way took into a poor religious house in that her present distress:
Queen Margaret taken out of her Sanctuary.
but three days after she was apprehended and brought unto Worcester to King
Edward, who committed her to sure and strait keeping, in which City she a
while remained. But sudden news brought him, that the Northern men were in
Arms, and meant to adventure for her liberty the Conqueror marched to
Couentrie, and there made preparation further to proceed: which when these hot
spirits pefectly understood, their courages grew colder, and their weapons cast
away, they came thronging to Edward to offer him subjection; yet the
Lancastrians were not so minded, but rather in^ended once The Northern men
submit unto K. Edward.
more to try whether fortune would afford them her smile.

(75) A fit instrument they had to forward the enterprise, namely Thomas
Neuill bastard Fanconbridge son of Lord Fanconbridge Earl of Kent, a great
supporter of King Edwards Crown: howbeit this Bastard being a man of a
turbulent spirit, Bastard Fanconbridge Captain of the Lancastri.
and forward for action, Earl Warwick had made him his Admiral to keep the
narrow seas, that none should have way to strengthen King Edward, which his
office he executed beyond his Commission, and became a taker of all Merchants
goods, being aided with 300. Malcontents from Calleis.

(76) His enterprise desperate, and his name grown fearful at sea, he meant
to make it no less on the land; for putting in at Dover, many misgouerned and
loose persons daily drew to him, so as his power grew to be seventeen
thousand strong: with these through Kent he made his way toward London,
meaning to do much, the land so molested Fauonbridge assaileth London.
with intestine wars; and lodging his host on the Southside of London,
commanded the Citizens to give him access, that with King Henry (whom he
meant to release from the Tower) he might pass through their streets, to meet
and encounter the usurping Edward. But the Londoners knowing the rudeness of
these Rakehels kept their gates shut and guarded the same with sufficient
strengthes: whence The Citizens withstood his ^ance.
some Lords of the royal blood therein residing, sent unto Edward of their
present danger, who presently sent them fifteen hundred of his best Soldiers,
after whom in person he warily marched, leading with him his prisoner Queen
Margaret, whose bounds he well knew, gave him the full scope of liberty.

(77) Fauconbridge in the mean while thirsting after spoil with his ships
secured the Thamesis above S. Katherines, purposing with his land Forces to
pass the River at Kingston: but hearing that Edward was on his March, and
fearing to be cut off from the benefit of his ships, he altered his mind;
when to open his way into London, he caused the Bridge to be fiered, and
three thousand of his men being set over Thamesis by his ships, divided
themselves into two Companies, the one assaying to enter at Algate, and the
other at Bishopsgate, both Fauconbridge forced back to his ship^.
which they likewise set on fire, so that the City was in three places fired
and assaulted at once, but with such evil success to the assailants, that
seven hundred were slain, and the bold Bastard driven to his ships.

(78) Upon the twentieth of May the Conqueror Edward with his Captive Queen
Margaret entered London, and so into the Tower, the one in pomp commanding the
place at his pleasure, the other in tears to remain a most pensive prisoner,
where her K. Edward with his Captive Queen Margaret enter London.
husband, the downcast King Henry was kept in hard durance. The place being
thus charged with the presence of two Kings and their Queens: the Crokebacke of
Gloucester intended to clear by taking him away, that stood in his brothers
way, whose successor as is thought he then meant to be; and making his inward
mind more deformed then were his outward lineaments, without regard of
bloud-defiled hands, stabbed the most innocent Henry to the heart with King
Henry ^urthered in the Tower by Richard Duke of Gloucester.
his dagger, in which act at once began the ones happy rest, and the others
foul guilt, which accompanied his conscience to the day of his death.

(79) The body of this murdered King was upon the Ascension Eve laid in an
open Coffin, and from the Tower guarded with many bills and glaues, K. Henry
carried barefaced through the streets of London.
was so carried through the streets vnt^ (...) Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul, where it rested uncovered one day, and began to bleed again afresh, a
sorrowful spectacle to most of the beholders, and thence was it carried to the
Blacke-Fryers Church, where it likewise lay bare faced, and bled as before, all
men being amazed at the sorrowful sight, and lastly, it was put in a boat
without Priest, Clerk, Stowes Annals.
Torch or Taper, singing or saying, and was ferried unto the Abbey of Chertsey
in Surrey, and there without pomp enterred. But afterward King Henry K. Henry
b^ied (...) Chertsey, and (...), to Windsor
the seventh translated his body unto his Castle of Windsor, where in a new
Tomb at the entrance into the Chancell of the Chapel, and south door of the
Quier, it was princely bestowed, but since the Tomb is removed, and where the
Corpse is now laid is not vulgarly known.

(80) Thus lived and thus dyed this innocent and just King, who had been
proclaimed in his Cradle, The (...) of K. (...) (...).
crowned in his Infancy, and again at more age had the Imperial Diadem of
France set on his head, living uprightly, loving his Subjects, and reigning
thirty eight years, was in that time tossed with variable success, for twice
he was imprisoned, and deprived of his Crown, betrayed, smitten, and wounded,
and in all things became a worthy example of fortunes inconstancy: he was of
stature very seemly, of body slender, of face beautiful, and by a natural
inclination abhorred all vice, far from pride, given to prayer, well read in
the Scriptures, using The virtues of K. Henry.
works of Charity, and so chaste, as no suspicion of incontinency could be
conceived in him: nay, so far to the contrary, that when certain Ladies
presented themselves before him in a mask, with their hair loose, and their
breasts uncovered (he then a Holinshed.
Bachelour, and able of marriage) he immediately rose up, and departed the
presence, saying, fie, fie, forsooth ye are to blame. Oath he used none, but
in weighty matters, his affirmation was forsooth, and forsooth, very merciful
to the poor, and so pitiful to Malefactors, as he commanded the quarters of
Traitors to be taken down from the Gates, and buried, and so far from
revenge, that he willingly pardoned the greatest offenses against him; for a
Ruffian intending his death, wounded him in the side with his sword, what time
he lay prisoner in the Tower, and being restored to his kingly estate, he
freely forgave the fact; and another like Ruffian striking him on the face, he
punished with this only reprehension, forsooth you are to blame to strike me
your anointed King: for these and his other patient virtues, King Henry the 7.
assayed to have Camb. Brit. in descript. of Surrey
him canonized a Saint. but Pope Julius the 2. demanding too great a sum, the
King went no further in the suite: notwithstanding, in the repute of the vulgar
he was taken for no less, so as his red hat which he had worn, healed the
headache, when it was put on, as the simple believed.

(81) The monument of his zeal to true piety, and care for posterities, are
his famous Colleges of Eaton and Cambridge, the Chapel of which last, shows
the magnificence that the whole should have been of, had their Founder reigned
to have finished them himself: for the performance whereof he enfeo^ed
certain Bishops with other noble personages by his letters Patents with lands
and possessions, to the yearly value of thirty four hundred pounds very
near: but as his life ended, before that nature had thereunto set her own
seal; so these remain unperfected of the excellent beauties intended, which
their zealous Founder meant to have adorned them withal.

(82) And his sorrowful Queen Margaret, who Kings College in Cambridge and
Eaton in Barkshire, found (...) by K. Henry.
twenty six years before this his death, with all pomp and royalty had
been crowned Queen of England, and had ruled all in all, now a poor Prisoner
in distress and wants, wears out her time in tears and laments, and wishes
for nothing more then the day of her death; which Duke Reiner her Father well
understanding, made suite to King Edward to have her released by ransom; and
lastly, Queen Margaret ranso^ (...).
bought her liberty at so dear a rate, as he first pawned, and afterward
sold to Lewis the French King, the Kingdoms of Naples, and of both the
Siciles to pay and repay the price of her redemption, unto which poor father,
this sorrowful daughter returned and ended her aged days, where she had
begun the days of her life.

(83) Victorious Edward thus leading Mars chained to his Chariot, and now
himself led by Fortune to the high chair of Estate, sits an absolute Monarch
sure, and without opposite, unto whose rays all eyes turn a submissiue
aspect: only bastard Fauconbridge depatted, from London (as we have said) and
withdrew unto Sandwich with his disquiet crew, made show to do much, and did
somewhat more then befitting, by rape, and robbing, where those rude Mariners
came, which Edward hearing of, hasted to Canterbury in person himself, fully
resolved to weed up by the roots those new sprowted blades of rebellion, and
made great preparation to accomplish the same, which the Bastard hearing
Bastard Fauconbridge with his unruly crew yield to King Edward.
(though strong in his Seamen) durst not bandy against, but sent his
submission with proffer of service and loiall obedience, and indeed so
temporized with the king, as besides his pardon obtained, the sword Bastard
Fauconbridge pardoned of life, and rewarded with Knighthood.
of knighthood was laid upon his shoulder, and he was presently made the Kings
Vice Admiral for the Seas. In which his office he so bare himself (either by
his own deserts, or the Kings Conceit) as he not long enioied the same, but
was at Southampton beheaded, Rob. Fabian.
and other of King Henry's old favorites likewise Bastard Fauconbridge
beheaded.
sought after and daily endangered.

(84) In which times of fear, Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, with his Nephew young
Henry Earl of Richmond, A. D. 1472.
fled into Britain, where, of that Duke they were most courteously
entertained, with assurance made, that no wrong should be offered them, during
their stay in his dominions. And so these two Earls Henry of Richmond fled
into Britain.
the uncle and nephew, there attended the day of their wished success.

(85) But John Earl of Oxford, who had withdrawn himself from Barnet field
first into Wales, and thence into France, was far more impatient of The
story of John Earl of Oxford.
those rough times, for having gotten store of provision by strong hand at Sea,
with seauentie seven men only surprised Saint Michaels Mount in Cornwall, and
made that piece good against the King, which he kept and reuictualled, but
whether by force or favor King Edward much suspected, and therefore the more
willingly came to a composition with his Subject, who upon the pardon of his
life delivered the Mount to the King: and as some say the rather, for that his
mind was then troubled with many ominous signs. For certain Bo^nes about
this Waters brake out of the Earth.
time burst out of the Earth, as VVoe-mere at Market in the County of Bedford,
whose name carried the quality of his nature. In Kent, at Canterbury,
Leuisham, and Langley Park, at Croyden in Surrey, and at John Stow. Annals.
Hungeruill near Dudley Castle one running very foul: all of them
predictions, as that credulous age believed, of great troubles to come: and
therefore not trusting a new reconciled enemy, King Henry The Earl of Oxford
sent prisoner into France.
sent the said Earl Prisoner unto the Castle of Hames in Normandy, where he
remained the space of twelve years, unto the last of K. Richard the 3. most
securely guarded, and so straightly kept, as Lady Margaret his Countess could
not be suffered to have access unto The hard and inhumane usage of the
Countess of Oxford.
him, in all that time. Neither was she allowed any thing out of his
revenues, or from the king, to maintain her estate, but was forced to live
upon the Charity of others, and by the works that she made with her Needle;
both of them very short to supply her great wants. This unmerciful and almost
unhuman usage, was the more extremely followed, for that Oxford himself, his
father and brother, had ever sided with the Lancastrians. And her self being
sister unto Richard Duke of Warwick, the Capital obstacle against king
Edwards proceedings, was held either dangerous, if her wealth balanced her
birth and estate, or else unworthy of his favor, whose good fortunes as was
suggested, she ever maligned.

(86) But much more miserable was the estate of The story of Lord Henry
Holland Duke of Excester.
Lord Henry Holland, Duke of Excester, and Earl of Huntington, who flourished
so long, as king Henry's pillar stood crowned on his base, and the Lancastrians
(of whose house himself was) ouerswaid the times; he being the son of Lady
Elizabeth the second daughter of John of Gaunt, and having married the sister
of Edward the then reigning King, was notwithstanding driven to such want, as
he may serve an example to all, how uncertain Adams sons are of any continuing
greatness. For (says Philip Comines) I once saw the Duke of Excester run on
foot Phil. Comines. lib. 3. cap. 4.
bare legged, after the Duke of Eurgundies train, begging his bread for Gods
sake, but he uttered not his name, he being the nearest of the house of
Lancaster, and brother in law unto King Edward, and being known what he was,
Burgundy gave him a small pension to maintain his estate.

(87) But when King Henry was again restored, and the Title of the Crown
laid upon the success of Barnet-field, this man Lord Henry bare himself most
Ed. Hall.
bravely against king Edward, and in fight was struck down, and left for
dead, where, in his bleeding wounds he lay most part of the day, but yet
recovering, and got to Westminster, he there took Sanctuary to save his life,
for which, he became Suitor unto the king, but his wife Lady Anne sister unto
king The unloving parts of an unloving wi^e. Ioh. S^w.
Edward, sued as earnestly for a divorce, which with great instancy she lastly
obtained against him. How he released himself from the wrath of the king, is
uncertain, and how he came by his death no man can tell, for his body was
found cast upon the shore of Kent, as though he had perished by shipwreck The
Lord Henry supposed to have been drowned.
upon the Sea.

(88) Now Edward to finish all factions, thought best to lop off both bough and
branch, that gave any shadow to the Lancastrians designs, to which end he
rather picked, then found occasion of treason, in The Archbishop of Yorkes
goods, seized upon.
George Neuill Archbishop of York, whose goods, lands, and Lordships, he
seized upon, got possession of his rich plate and Jewels, whereof one in his
Miter was of such value, as the King caused it to be set in his Imperial
Crown, and the Archbishop to be sent over Sea to the Castle of Hames, where he
remained a Prisoner a long time after, with no such courteous intertainement, as
himself had used to Edward when he was Prisoner.

(89) But the escape of Pembrooke and Earl Richmond troubled the King not a
little, the only men now left to bandy against them, and therefore were most
followed with a suspicious eye. In so much as Edward wrote unto the Duke of
Britain their receiver, K. Edward sends into Britain to recover Richmond and
Pembrooke.
with promises of heaps of gold to have them sent back and delivered unto his
hands: but the Duke that had given them his safety before, answered the
English Ambassadors, that it stood not with honor, so to betray these
distressed Princes, fled to him for relief, yet, he faithfully undertook, that
they should be so followed, as King Edward should sleep quiet from their
molestations, which being no better, Edward notwithstanding made the best of it.

(90) All now in quiet, and Edward reigning without any Competitor, or
malignant disturber, caused a high Court of Parliament to be assembled at
Westminster, wherein he reestablished those Acts, which Henry had abrogated,
and abrogated those that K. Edward abrogates King Henry's laws.
were made against his favorites; at which season the Duke of Burgundy sent
his Ambassadors unto Edward, craving his aid against the French King, which
was the more willingly heard and granted, as well for his favors received of
the Duke, in time of his necessity, as for spleen against Lewis, who had
aided Burgundy sends for aid into England against France.
Warwick (...) dispossess him of his Crown. And indeed this ^s a spark,
that was likely to set the hearts of the English on fire, to recover France
lost by Henry the last King.

(91) All things in a readiness King Edward repaired to Dover, and there
embarked himself for A. D. 1474. K. Edwards expedition into France.
Callis, ^with the greatest Army that ever from England set sails into France:
for he had in his Company fifteen hundred Noblemen, and men at Arms, all of
them mounted, and most of them barbed, who Phil. Comines. lib. 4. cap. 5.
with the Archers on horseback also made up the number of fifteen thousand,
besides a great number of footmen and others to pitch Tents, to attend The
great preparation of King Edward.
the Artillery, and enclose their Camps. Before the Kings departure from
England, he had sent Gartar King at Arms unto King Lewis with a letter of
defiance: whose contents demanded no less, then the whole Realm of France,
which if he refused, ^ee threatened to invade his dominions with (...) and King
Edwards (...).
sword.

(92) The letter received, and read in secret by Lewis his conference with the
English Herald. Lewis his conference with the English Herald.
Lewis himself, he privately sent for, and conferred with the Herald, telling
him that it was not Edward, but Burgundy that raked abroad these dying sinders,
who as a man discomfited and unfurnished for war, would draw in the English,
by his sly dealings, to their inestimable Charges, to supply his defects; that
Burgundy being of the house of Lancaster hated most deadly the family of York;
and more for fear then love married Edwards sister. As touching the Constable
he told him, though Edward had married his Niece, yet he would deceive him, as
he had done his own Master of France, who had heaped many and extraordinary
benefits upon him. And lastly with the gift of three hundred Crowns, and the
promise of a thousand more, he instigated the Herald to work a peace. Gartar
very thankefullie K. Lewis month Gartar to be a means for peace.
took the French gold, and counseled Lewis to send a Herault unto his Master
King Edward to demand a safe conduct for conference: and so openly rewarded
with thirty Else of Crimson-veluet he departed.

(93) King Lewis nothing so pompous as other Princes are, nor attended with
Heralds continually in his Court, was therefore enforced unto this present
shift: he caused a servant of the Lord Hales to Phil. Com. lib. 4. cap. 7.
be arraied like an herald in a trumpets banner, and sent him in have into
King Edwards Camp; where A counterfeit Herald sent to K. Edward.
having audience, he showed the great desire the King his Master had of peace,
whose amity with England he had ever held, excusing his receipt of Warwick with
the necessity of time, whom he aided not against Edward, but against Burgundy,
who as he instantly alleged, had now drawn the English to this excessive The
Heralds persuasions.
charges, that he might thereby conclude a better composition for himself, and
to amend the broken state of his own affairs; lastly he desired that the King
of England would grant a safe conduct unto the Ambassadors of the French King
his Master, who should more fully inform his Majesty, and give his
safe conduct for a further conference in these affairs: and so wisely this
counterfeit worded his message, that the King and Nobles liked well the
ouerture, and thereupon granting a safe conduct sent An English Herald sent to
King Lewis.
with him an English Herald, to receive the like and other assignements from
the French King.

(94) But when the Duke of Burgundy understood that a peace was trauersed
betwixt Edward and Lewis, he stormed not a little, and with no small have from
The Duke of Burgundy comes to the King.
Lutzenburgh accompanied with sixteen horse only, came to his brother King
Edward, and in a great rage reproved him of breach of promise, and discourteous
requital of his former kindness, that thus would enter amity with his great
foe, and in outward semblance more ready to bite then to bark, burst into
these reproves.

Have you (quoth he) brother, passed the Edw. Hall. ^ol. 231.
Seas, entered France, and without killing of a poor fly, or burning of a
silly Sheepecote taken a shameful truce?. Oh S. George! did Edward your noble
Burgundies hot speech unto K. Edward.
Ancestor ever make Army into France, and returned without battle or
Conquest? That victorious Prince King Henry the fifth (as near of kin unto
you as me) whose blood you have either rightfullie or wrongfully (God knows)
extinguished and destroyed, with a small puissance conquered Normandy, kept it,
and never would come to composition, till he had the whole kingdom of France
offr^d him, and was made heir apparent unto that Crown. Contrariwise you
without any thing done, proffer of battle, or gain of honor have now
condiscended unto a p^ce as profitable for Engl^ ^s is a poor peascod: have I
(think you) for my particular use drawn the English forces into France (which
am able of my self to defend mine own cause?) I tell you plainly no, but
rather to aid you, to recover your ancient Territories wrongfully withholden:
and that you shall well know I need not your aid, I will hear of no truce with
the French, till (...) months after your arri^ge in England at the least; And
^reupon furiously arising, he threw down the Chair, wherein he had sare and
offered to depart.

(95) Nay stay brother Charles (quoth K. Edward) since I with patience have
heard you speak what K Edwards reply to his brother of Burgundy.
you would, you shall now perforce hear from me what you would not: First
therefore for my thus entrance into France, no man knows the occasion better
then your self: for, mauger your own great power you speak of; you do
remember I know, how the French King took from you the fair Town Amiens, and
the strong Pile Saint Quintins, with diverse other pieces which you neither
durst, nor were able either to rescue or defend, since which time he has
gotten from you, your best bosom friends and secret Counselors, so as your
self stood in doubt (determining to besiege Nusse) whether the loss would be
greater in your absence (the French King waiting as a fox for his pray) or
gain more in Germany by your power and presence: and to keep this wolf from
your fold, was the principal cause why you so earnestly prayed me, and
continually solicited me to pass over the Seas, promising mountains, but
performing not a Molehill, bragging a supply both of horse and foot, but
never sent me a hoof, nor a lackie. Think you (brother) if we had entered
this enterprise in our own quarrel, we would have expected your aid? I
assure you nothing less, for if we had intended any such Conquest, we would
with Soldiers fire and sword, have so infected the air with the flames and
slain of France, as should have annoied your Countries of Flaunders and
Brabant, and given you leisure to sit still and tell of our ever achieved
great victories, nothing doubting but to have gotten and kept with like
manhood, and in as great glory, as any of our Ancestors before us had done.
But the occasion of war being yours, and you wilfully (I will not say
cowardly) neglecting the same, I mean not to prosecute, for ^e French King
never offended me nor my Subjects, except in favoring Warwick against me, nay
I may say against you, and now offreth such honorable ouertures of peace, which
I by Gods grace mean not to forsake, but will observe Burgundy departs
displeased from King Edward.
and keep. God send you joy thereof, quoth the Duke, and so abruptly departed
from the King.

(96) The peace thus resolved upon, betwixt the two kings of England and
France, the place appointed The conference for peace (...) Amiens.
for conference was near unto Amiens, and the parties assigned for the French,
were the Bastard of Bourbon Admiral of France, the Lord S. Pierre, and the
Bishop of Eureux. For the English, were the Lord Howard, Sir Thomas St. Ledger,
and Doctor M^ton Co^ioners for peace.
Lord Chancellor of England. These meeting, presently fell to a conclusion of
peace: the conditions whereof were: That the French King should forthwith pay
to the King of England seventy two thousand Crowns. That the Daulphin should
marry Conditions of the peace.
Lady Elizabeth, King Edwards eldest daughter, and that she should have for
her maintenance the Duchy of Guien^; or else fifty thousand Crowns yearly to
be paid in the Tower of London, for nine years space. This peace was so
acceptable to Lewis his liberality for ^oy of the peace.
King Lewis, as he sent sixteen thousand Crowns to be distributed amongst
the English Soldiers, with plate and great presents to men of any sort: and
indeed gave them such entertainment in Amiens as was most bounteous, whereof if
any desire further to know, let him read Comines upon the same text. Ph. Com.
l. 4. c. 9.


(97) To graft which peace with a loving beginning, the two Kings were desirous
to see each others, The kings of England and France d^ to see each others.
for which end Commissioners were sent to a^gne the place: and lastly agreed,
that the Tow ne (...) about three leagues from Amiens, seated in a bottom,
through which the Ri^ Some ran, was the fittest: over which a strong bridge
was built, and (...) the (...) place of the kings.
in the (...) thereof, a grate made ouer-thwart with bars, no wider asunder
then a man might well thrust in his Arm, covered with boords over head to
avoid the rain, and the bridge so broad that twelve might stand in a rank on
both sides.

(98) The day approached, and the two Kings come to the place, he of France
came first to the A. D. 1475. Aug. 29.
Grate, accompanied with twelve personages, as was the appointment; whereof John
Duke of Bourbon and the Cardinal his brother were the chiefest: King Edward
entering the bridge on the other end, with his brother the Duke of Clarence, the
Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Hastings his Chamberlain, and the Lord
Chancellor, himself apparelled all in cloth of gold, with a rich Jewel of
precious stones, in form of a Flower de Luce: advanced forward, and within
five foot of the Grate, put off his cap, and bowed his knee within half a
foot to the The (...) of the two kings.
ground. King Lewis as readily doing his likely reverence unto Edward. Where,
after imbracements through (...) Grate, the Chancellor of England who was
Prelate and Bishop of Ely, made an eloquent and learned Oration, which done, he
read the Articles of peace and demanded the Kings whether these were done with
their full consents. Which granted by both: either of them laying their one
hand upon the Missall, and the other upon the Holy-Crosse, took The Kings
swear the league.
their solemn Oaths to observe the same. And then falling into a more
familiar and Courtly Complementall conference, King Lewis told K. Edward that
he would one day inuit him to Paris, there to Court his fair French Ladies,
with whom if he committed any sin, he merrily told him, that Cardinal
Bourbon, should be his Confessor, whose penance would be the easier, for that
Bourbon used to busse fair Ladies himself; which no sooner was spoken, or
howsoever meant, but Edward was as forward of thanks and acceptance, and
indeed so ready, that King Lewis rounding Commines his bosom servant in his
^are, told him flatly he liked not Edwards K. Lewis loath that Edward should
visit Paris.
forwardnes to Paris, too many English Princes having been there before: and
^s the conference ended, and king Edwards business in France, he returned into
England, and into the City of London was received little less then in
triumphwise. A. D. 1475. Sept. 2^.


(99) But though Edwards fortunes thus outwardly flourished, yet inward fears
nipped his still troubled mind, one branch having sap, whose growth he much
feared would shadow his Crown, which was Henry Earl of Richmond, alive and at
liberty in the Duke of Britains Court. To bring therefore his purpose to
pass, he sent D. Stillington and others, Henry Earl of Richmond ^ught after
by K. Edward.
Ambassadors unto Frances Duke of Britain, with store of gold and good words,
as that he meant to match his eldest daughter Lady Elizabeth unto the young
Earl of Richmond, whereby all cause of An intent pretended, which as^r came to
pass.
dissentions might at once be cut off: the Duke thinking no danger where the
water went smooth, easily consented to ship him thereon; but ere the prey was
embarked, he had knowledge that the voyage should cost young Henry his life;
wherefore in all have he sent his Treasurer Peter L^doys to prevent it, who
secretly told Richmond what marriage^d Ralph Holinsh. page 701.
Edward intended; whereat the distressed Earl amazed, was put to his shifts,
and for want of better, took Sanctuary at S. Mal^s, where the English his
Henry ^arle of Richmond takes Sanctuary.
conductors lay for a wind.

(100) The Earl thus escaped, the Ambassadors complained to the Duke, imputing
the fault as far The English Ambassador complains to the Duke of Britain.
as they durst unto him, who had not dealt li^ a good Merchant to take their
money, and to retain the war^; his answer was, the delivery was good, but
themselves negligent Factors, that made not the commodity to their best
advantage. And yet His Answer.
for the love he bare to their King, he undertook that Rich^nd should be
sure kept either in Sanctuary, or else in prison, whence as he promised he
should not escape: And so with a (...) in their ^re, they returned, having
cleared Edward of (...) ^ney, and care for sure keeping of Henry, who though
he weresore displeased with Stillingtons simplicity; yet the promises that the
Duke of Britain had made, much mitigated and eased his mind.

(101) And now the Realm quiet, no war in hand, nor none toward (but such
as no man looked Sir Tho. Moore.
should happen;) he framed himself so to the peoples affections, and held
their hearts not in a King Edward beloved of his subjects and loves his
subjects.
constrained fear, but with as loving and ready obedience as any King
attaining the Crown by his sword ever had. Nor was ever any Prince more
familiar with his Subjects then this King Edward was, who now having his
tribute truly paid from France, and all things prospering as was desired, he
set heart upon pleasure, which hitherto had been afflicted with continual
turmoile: yea and often laid from him the state of a Prince, and would
accompany and converse with his mean subjects: a loadstone that does naturally
attract the English hearts; among many others we of London remember this to our
grace. Unto Windsore he sent for the Lord Mayor of London, the Aldermen and
others, upon no other Io. Stow. K. Edward sent for the Mayor and Aldermen of
London to his huntings.
occasion, then to hunt in his company, and himself to be merry with them: As
also at another time he did the like in Waltham, where he gave them most
familiar intertainment, and sent to the Lady Mairesse and her sisters two
hearts, six Buckes, and a Tun of wine, which wanne more love then manifold
their worthes.

(102) Somewhat he was given to Court and converse K. Edward somewhat licention.
sly given.
with fair Ladies, which fault was well noted and prevented by King Lewis, for
his French dames: but in England he had liberty with very large scope, for
besides the Lady Lucy and others, by whom he had issue, three concubines he
kept, and those of K. Edwards three Concubines.
three diverse, and several dispositions, as himself would often confess, one
the merriest, another the wiliest, and the third the holiest harlot in his
realm, as one whom no man could get out of the Church unless it were to his
Bed, the merriest was Shores wife, of whom hereafter we shall speak, the other
two were greater Personages, but in their humility are content to be
namelesse, and to forbear the praise of those properties.

(103) This fault of the King did not greatly offend the people: for one man's
pleasure could not extend to the displeasures of many, it being done without
violence, and in his latter days lessened and well left. But a far more
greater sin and reproach he fell into, among his other Princely disports: For
being on progress in Warwickeshire, and hunting in Arrow Park^, belonging to
Thomas Burdet Esquire, with the death of much Game he slew Thomas Burdet
accused of treason.
a White Bucke greatly esteemed of the said Burdet, who understanding thereof,
wished his horns in his Belly, that moved the King to kill the same Bucke,
Eng^.
whereof he was accused and condemned of treason, his words being drawn, to
wish the ^ornes in the Kings belly: for which beheaded h^ was at Tiburne,
Register of Gray-Friers L^don.
and buried in the Gray-Fryers Church at London.

(104) But a more lamentable tragedy happened unto the land, by the death of
George Duke of Clarence The story of George Duke of Clarence.
the Kings second brother, who being accused of high Treason, was committed to
the Tower, where he soone-after ended his life. His attainder was, that the
said Duke had caused diverse of his servants to inform the people, that Thomas
Burdet his servant T^ attainder of the Duke of Clarence. John Stow.
likewise, was wrongfully put to death: and further labored (through their
reports) to make the world believe, t^ K. Edward wrought by Nigr^cie, and used
to poison such (...): And al^o tha^ (...) s^id Duke upon pur^ to exalt himself
and his heirs to the (...) dig^, (...) ^sely (...) untruly pub^d that the
(...) was a ^ard, and therefore not capable of reign. Moreover the he induced
di^e of the Ki^aturall subjects to be sworn vp^ the (...) S^ent, unto him and
his heirs, with any other rese^ations of their all^e: for which intent (as
there was alleged) he had gotten an exemplification under the great Seal of
King Henry the sixth, that if the said king and his son Prince Edward died
without issue male, the said Duke and his heirs should enjoy the Crown: For
these in a Parliament begun at Westminster the fifteenth of January he was
attainted of high treason: but whether guilty or guiltles, to men (says
Grafton) that have made large inquisition, yea and A. D. 1478. Rich. Graft.
of such as were of no small authority in those days, the certainty thereof
was hid, and could not truly be disclosed, but by conjectures, which as often
deceive the imaginations of fantastical folk, as declare truth to them in
their conclusions.

(105) I am not ignorant that some have alleged the cause of this Noble man's
death to arise from a A false prophecy of G. E.
foolish prophecy (whereof says Comines) the Englishmen are never
unfurnished, and this as the Cab^sts, who used to make an art of their letters,
gave forth forsooth Phil. Comin. lib. 4. cap. 10.
that a G. should reign after an E. which must needs be George Duke of
Clarence, though Gloucester more crafty lay in wind for the game. This indeed
troubled the King not a little, but the Queen and her blood much more, and
therefore of both King and Queen Duke George was mistrusted, and greatly
maligned in all that he did. Who now a widower (for Warwicks daughter was dead)
sent unto his sister Margaret the Duchess of Burgundy, to work a marriage
for him with her husbands daughter the Lady Marie. Against which the The Duke
of Clarence is suitor unto Marie the daughter of Burgundy.
Queen most earnestly interposed her self, and solicited the Lady in the
behalf of Lord Anthony Earl Rivers her brother, whereby great discontent was
ministered to the Duke, and new iealousies daily bred in the Kings breast.

(106) John Serres the French Historian interlacing the life of King Lewis with
the Acts of K. Edward and his brethren, says confidently, that the English
King Io. Serres.
so much affected the league and alliance with France, as that he caused his
brother Clarence to be put in prison, because he intended to have past the Seas
to Clarnce imprisoned by his brother King Edward.
succor the Dowager of Burgundy Lady Margaret his sister, upon whose
Territories King Lewis encroached, after the death of Duke Charles her husband
slain at the battle of Man^y.

(107) But howsoever Clarence had offended, certain it is, that he was found
guilty by the foresaid Parliament, and the eleventh of March following, after
he had offered his Masse-penny in the Tower of London, was drowned in a But of
Malmesey, whose body was buried at Tewkesburie in Glocestershire, by George
Duke of Cla^ce condemned by Parliament. And drowned in a But of malmesay.
the body of his Duchess Lady Isabell Countess of Warwick, who being with
Child, died of poison a little before. And although the King had consented to
his death, yet no sooner was it done, but that he wished it again undone, and
was so grieved at the remembrance, as when any made suite for the life of a
condemned, he would openly say: Oh ^fortunate brother; for whose life no (...)
would make ^ite. This K. Edwards ^pentance for his brothers death.
good Duke (for so was he called) left issue behind him, Edward Earl of
Warwick and Margaret afterward Countess of Salisbury, both of them infants,
The Duke of Clarence his issue.
and followers of their fathers fortunes: he a continual Prisoner, at four
and twenty years of Edward and Margaret the children of Clarence beheaded.
age under Henry the seventh, was beheaded upon the Tower Hill; and she at
sixty two, lost hers within the Tower, and time of King Henry the eight.

(108) But how dainty soever King Edward. was of the breach of amity, betwixt
him and the French King Edward deceived in King Lewis.
King, in regard whereof he suffered Mary the young Duchess of Burgundy the
daughter of his own sisters husband to be molested by (...) of the French,
and all in favor of the contract commenced between the (...) and Lady (...)
(...) daughter, yet did (...) for (...) ou^ (...): For Ambassadors ^ploied
(...) accomplishing ^of, they of (...) (...) without (...) o^ (...) ^he new
were sent without (...), while indeed Lewis (...) (...) Serres.
working for his son another way: First to match him with Mary Duchess of
Burgundy, but that refused, with Margaret of Flaunders daughter to Duke
Maximilian son to Frederick the Emperor: and to hold the world from
suspicion, in the mean while Lady Elizabeth the Infanta of England was in the
French Court usually called Madame the Daulphin, and all Lady Elizabeth called
(...) the Daulphin.
things in France so soundly carried, as Edward suspected no leake in the
Caske: for now grown fat and unable for pains, he both gloried in his nine
famous victories at home achieved, and seemed sufficiently satisfied, that
his yearly tribute from France was so truly paid.

(109) At the same time James the third of that A. D. 1480. Io. Les^, Lady
Cicely motioned in matriage unto (...) Prince of Scotland.
name King of Scotland, sent his Ambassadors unto Edward to obtain the Lady
Cicelie the Kings second daughter to be joined in marriage with his son James
the young Prince, which was well listened unto, by Edward and his Counsel, and
least the motion should go back, a great sum of money lent to the Scottish
King with this condition, that at a certain time appointed, it should be at K.
Edwards choice, whether his daughter should match with that Prince, or else to
have the said sum again repaid. Against which alliance and league (as Lesly
reports,) Lewis King of France interposeth the contract betwixt Prince James
and Lady Margaret.
Lewis of France much repined, and to annihilate the same sent Dr. Ireland, a
certain knight, and another religious man, to move King James to make war
against England.

(110) These no Peacemakers for Christ, but firebrands of Belial, blew the
smothered sparks of dissension into a flame of bloody war, which fell the
more heavy upon. Scotland, for that K. James much James King of Scotland much
^dded to his (...) will.
wedded unto his own will, and altogether ruled by men of mean worth, whom
himself had advanced from nothing, had not only neglected by their
instigations the love of his Nobles, but also banished the Realm of Scotland,
Alexander Duke of Albany his Alexander Duke of Albanie banished Scotland. John
Earl of Mar bled to death.
second brother; and had caused the veins of John Earl of Mar his other
brother, to be opened, whereby he bled to death; these and other discontents
alienated his Subjects hearts from him, which laid the land more open unto the
English Inuaders; and yet to draw them more deadly against him, relying upon
his ownevalor, and the assistance of France, he sent word unto Edward, that he
should not aid his own sister of Burgundy against K. Lewis, being the Scots
Allie; as also with threats of war commanded K. James threatens war
against England.
him to deliver to his Ambassadors, the Duke of Albanie (then residing in the
English Court) and lastly to make good and repay damages done upon the
Scottish Borders.

(111) King Edward not a little enraged at these double dealings, even in the
winter season mustered his men, prep^ed his artillery, and rigged his ships,
that nothing should be unready at the next Spring; which no sooner was come,
but that he ordained for his Lieutenant his brother Richard Duke of Gloucester,
Richard Duke of Gloucester made the Kings Lieutenant against Scotland.
who with Henry Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Lord Stanley, the Lord Louell,
G^stock and others, (the Duke of Albany marching unto Gloucesters banner) with
twenty thousand strong repaired into the North: and first ^sieged the strong
Town Berwick, then en^ing the chief City Edenborough, urged K. The Duke of
(...) (...) Scotland.
James to perform his covenants, concerning the marriage betwixt Prince James
his son, with Lady Cicely before agreed upon, threatening destruction if the
match went not forward. The Scottish Nobility considering the eminent danger,
put to death the wicked Counselors of their King, (...) the Duke of Albany the
Vicegerent of Scotland, and promised to repay the money (...) according to
Covenants; after which (...) of the strong Town (...), (...) of the (...) to
the (...).
English possession the (...), a general (...) was (...) two ^ (...) (...),
with an (...) ^ Ed^burgh (who had undertaken to disburse the money) to signify
King Edwards mind touching the marriage Holinsh. p. 707.
intended, and to demand the said sum by a day assigned, which accordingly
was repaide.

(112) The marriage with Scotland thus broken off, for the Lady Cicely, by K.
Edward himself; that with France for the Princess Elizabeth, both he and his
Queen greatly desired, and daily sought after. But Lewis the French King,
finding the daughter of Austrich more fit for his son, dallied out Edward
with shows of firm faith, till he had effected the thing he went about: which
music sounded so harshly in the English Kings ear, as in no wise he would
suffer that string to be touched, but ever believed that the French meant him
fair play, and although the years of the parties themselves might beget some
suspicion, she being much elder then the Phil. Comines. lib. 6. chap. 2. and 9.
Daulphin, and the truth thereof confirmed by the Duke of Austriches
Leger-Ambassadours residing in England, yet Edward would not so much as suppose
King Lewis dall^th with King Edward.
a suspect against the French King, and therefore suffered Lewis to incroach
upon those parts of Picardie that joined to Callis, and to gain time till it
King Edward would not believe what was confidently told him.
was past recall: for then the Lord Howard returning from France, confidently
told him that he was present, and saw the Lady Margaret of Austrich, daughter
to Duke Maximilian, son to the Emperor Frederick, received unto France with
great pomp and royalty: and at Ambois contracted and espoused to the Daulphin.

(113) Edward mightily chafed to be thus worked by Lewis, made great
preparation for France, but whether with anger, grief, or melancholy, he fell
A (...) pret^ ded against France.
into a dangerous and deadly sickness; some say, of a superfluous surfeit,
whereunto he was much given: Commines says, of a Catarrhe, which weak estate
King Edward falls ^ke.
turned his mind another way: for calling his Lords into his sick presence,
and raising his faint body upon his Bed-Pillowes, these words unto them he
lastly spoke:

(114) My Lords, my dear Kinsmen, and Allies; in what plight I lie, you see,
and I feel; by which the less while I look to live with you, the more Thom.
More. King Edwards speeches at his death.
deeply am I moved to care in what case I leave you; for such as I leave you,
such be my children like to find you. Which if they should (that God forbid)
find you at variance, might hap to fall themselves at war, ere their
discretion would serve to set you at peace. Ye see their youth, of which I
reckon the only surety to rest in your concord. For it suffices not that all
you love them, if each of you hate other. If they were men, your faithfulness
happily would suffice: but childhood must be maintained by men's authority,
and slippery youth underpropped with elder counsel; which neither they can
have, unless you give it, nor you give it, if you agree not. For where each
labors to break that which the The perils of discord.
other makes, and through hatred of each others person impugneth each others
counsel, there must it needs be long, or any good conclusion go forward: And
while either party strives to be chief, flattery shall have more play then
plain and faithful advise, of which must needs ensue the evil bringing up of
the Prince; whose mind in tender youth infected, shall readily fall to riot
and mischief, and draw down with him his noble Tender youth is (...) infected.
Realm unto ruin: but if grace turn him to wisdom: which if God send, then
they that by evil means before pleased him best, shall after fall furthest
out of favor, so that ever at length evil drifts draw to naught, and good
plain ways prosper. Great variance has there long time been between you,
not always for great causes. Sometime Great variance for small causes.
a thing right well intended, our misconstructions turns unto worse, or a
small displeasure done us, either our own affections or evil tongues
agreeueth. But this wo^ I well, ye never had so great cause of hatred, as you
have of love. That we be all men, that we be Christian men, this shall I leave
for Preachers to tell you (and yet I wot nere King Edwards good counsel.
whether any Preachers words ought more to move you, then his, that is by and
by, going to the place that they all preach of.) But this I shall desire you to
remember, that the one part of you is of my blood, the other of my Allies; and
each of you with other, either of kindred or affinity; which spiritual kindred
of affinity, if the Sacraments of Christ's Church bear that weight with us,
that would to God they did, should no less move us to charity, then the
respect of fleshly consanguinitie. Our Lord forbid, that you love together the
worse for the self cause, that you ought to love the better. And yet that
happens, and no where find we so deadly debate, as among them, which by
nature and law ought most to agree together. Such a pestilent serpent is
ambition, and desire of vain glory and soueraintie which among states What the
nature of ambition is.
where it once enters, creeps forth so far, till with division and
variance he turns all to mischief, first longing to be next the best,
afterward equal with the best, and at last chief and above the best. Of which
immoderate appetite of worship, and thereby of debate and dissension, what
loss, what sorrow, what trouble, has within these few years grown in this
Realm, I pray God as well forget as we remember. Which things, if I could
as well have foreseen, as I have with my more pain then pleasure proved, By
Gods blessed Lady (that was ever his oath) I would never have King Edwards
usual oath.
won the courtesy of men's knees, with the loss of so many heads. But since
things passed cannot be gaine-called, much ought we the more beware, by what
occasion we have taken so great hurt before, that we eft soones fall not into
the like again. Now be those griefs pa^ed, and all is (God be thanked)
quiet, and likely right well to prosper in wealthful peace under your Cosins,
my children, if God send them life, and you love. Of which two things the less
loss were they, by whom though God did his pleasure, yet should the Realm
always find Kings, and peradventure as good Kings. But if you among your selves
in a child's reign fall at debate, many a good man shall perish, and happily he
too, and ye too, ere this Land find peace again. Wherefore in these last
words that ever I look to speak with you, I exhort, and require you al, for
the love that you have ever borne King Edwards last request.
unto me: for the love that I have ever borne unto you, for the love that our
Lord bears to us all, from this time forward all griefs forgotten, each of
you love others, which I verily trust you will, if you any thing regard, either
God, or your King, affinity or kindred, this Realm, your own country, or
your own surety.

(115) And therewithal the King no longer enduring to sit up, laid him down
on his right side, his face toward them, who with weeping eyes and words as
fitted the time, recomfited the sick dying King, joining their hands, and
outwardly forgiving that, which inwardly they meant not to forget. The King
ouer-ioyed to see their willing reconcilements spoke not many words after, but
commending his soul unto God, in their presence departed this life at his
Palace of Westminster, upon the 9. day of April, and year of Christ's
appearance 1483. at the age The reign and death of King Edward.
of forty one, when he had worn the royal Diadem, two and twenty years, one
month and five days: and was buried at Windsor, in the new Chapel, whose
foundation himself had laid.

(116) Of personage he was the goodliest Gentleman Phil. Com. lib. 4, cap. 10.
(says Commines) that ever ^ine eyes beheld; fair of complexion, and of most
princely presence; King Edward described.
courageous of heart, pol^ke in counsel; in adversity nothing abashed; in
prosperity rather joyous then proud: in peace just and merciful; in war
sharp and fierce, and in field bold and venturous: yet no further then
wisdom would, and is no less commended where he avoided, then is his manhood
when he vanquished: eight or nine battles he won, wherein to his greater
renown he fought on foot, and was ever victor over his enemies: much given
Ph. Com. l. 6. c. 2.
he was to the lusts of youth, and in his latter time, grown somewhat
corpulent, which rather adorned his grauer years, then any ways disliked the
eyes of his beholders.

His Wife.
(117) Elizabeth the daughter of Richard Wooduill Earl Rivers by his wife
^aquelana Duchess of Bedford, who was the daughter of Peter Earl of S. Paul,
and he the son of Peter de Luxembourg, was first married unto Sir John Gray
slain at S. Albans, where he was knighted the day before his death by King
Henry the sixth, unto whom she bare two sons and a daughter, after whose
death she was privately remarried unto K. Edward the fourth, the first day of
May, at his manor of Grafton in Northamptonshire Anno 1464. and in the next
year following upon the six and twentieth of May, was crowned Queen at
Westminster with all due solemnities. She was his wife eighteen years, eleven
months, and nine days, no more fortunate in attaining to the height of all
worldly dignity, then unfortunate in the murder of her sons, and loss of
her own liberty: For in the beginning of K. Edwards reign, she was forced to
take Sanctuary at Westminster, wherein her first son Prince Edward was borne;
and at his death did the like in fear of the Protector, and lastly having all
her lands and possessions seized upon by K. Henry the seventh, lived in mean
estate in the Monastery of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where not long after she
left the troubles of her life, and inioied (...).
a quiet portion or burying place by her last husband King Edward at Windsore.

(118) Elianor Butler, as we find it recorded upon the Parliament Role, was
contracted unto King Edward: but how true considering the occasion, and time of
the Act, we leave for others to judge, only this is most certain that this
Lady Elianor was the daughter of John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and the wife
of Sir Thomas Butler Knight, son and heir to Ralph Butler Baron of Sudley,
which Elianor died the thirtieth of June, the year of Christ Jesus 1466. and
the eight of King Edward the fourth his reign.

His Issue.
(119) Edward the eldest son of K. Edward the fourth by Queen Elizabeth his
wife, was borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster the fourth of November, and
year of grace 1471. being the tenth of his fathers reign, at that time
expulsed the Realm by the powerful Earl Warwick; but fortune changed, and
the father restored; the son, the first of July and year of Christ was
^eated Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester; and had not the
ambitious hand of his uncle been defiled in his innocent blood, he might have
worn the Diadem many years, whereas he bare the Title of King not many
days. A. D. 1478. Stow.


(120) Richard the second son of K. Edward the fourth by Elizabeth his Queen,
was borne at Shrewsbury, and in his infancy was created Duke of York, he was
affianced unto Anne daughter and heir to John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, by
which he was entitled Duke of Norfolk, Earle-Marshall, Warren, and
Nottingham, but inioying neither Title, wife, or his own life long, was with
his brother murdered in the Tower of London, and in the prison of that Tower,
which upon that most sinful deed is ever since called the bloody Tower, their
bodies as yet unknown where to have burial.

(121) George the third son of K. Edward the fourth, by Queen Elizabeth his
wife, was also borne in Shrewsburie, and being a young Child was created Duke of
Bedford, but lived not long after, and lies buried at Windsore.

(122) Elizabeth the first daughter of K. Edward the fourth, by Elizabeth his
Queen, was borne at Westminster the eleventh of February, and fifth of her
fathers reign, being the year of Salvation 14^6. She was promised in marriage
to Charles Daulphin of France, woed and Courted by her uncle Crouchbacke, when
he had murdered her brothers, and usurped the Crown, but better destiny
attending her, she was reserved to join the union and marriage with the only
heir of Lancaster, which was Henry of Richmond, afterward King of England,
from whom is branched the royal stem that spreads his beauty in this
North-West world, even James our dread Sovereign, and great Britains Monarch.

(123) Cicely, the second daughter of K. Edward the fourth by Queen Elizabeth
his wife, was sought unto, by James the third of that name, to be joined in
marriage with James his son Prince of Scotland, and Duke of Rothsay, which
match was promised upon conditions and choice of K. Edward, who lastly brake
off from further proceeding, and the Lady married unto John Vicount Wels, whom
she outliued, and was again remarried, but by neither husband had any issue,
and therefore less noted; her body lies buried at Quarrena in the Isle of
Wight.

(124) Anne the third daughter of K. Edward the fourth, by Queen Elizabeth his
wife, was married unto Lord Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall,
and high Treasurer of England: unto whom she bare two sons both dying
without issue, and her self without more fruit of womb, left her life, and
lies buried at Fra^ingham in Norfolk.

125) Bridget the fourth daughter of K. Edward the fourth by his wife Queen
Elizabeth, was borne at Eltham in Kent, the tenth of November and year of
Grace 1480. being the twentieth of her fathers Reign. She took the habit of
Religion, and became a Nun in the Nunnery of Dartford, in the same County,
founded by K. Edward the third, where she spent her life in contemplations
unto the day of her death.

(126) Marie the fifth daughter of K. Edward the fourth by Queen Elizabeth his
wife, was promised in marriage unto the King of Denmark, but died (before it
could be solemnized) in the Tower of Greenewich, the Sunday before Pentecost
the twentieth two of her fathers reign, and year of Grace 1482. and was
buried at Windsore.

(127) Margaret the sixth daughter of K. Edward the fourth, by his wife Queen
Elizabeth, died an Infant without other mention in our Authors.

(128) Katherine the seventh daughter of King Edward the fourth, by Queen
Elizabeth his wife, and the last of them both, was married unto William
Courtney Earl of Devonshire; and Lord of Ocha^pton, unto whom she bare Lord
Henry after the death of his father Earl of Devonshire, who by King Henry
the eight was created Marquess of Excester in Anno 1525.

His Concubines.
(129) Elizabeth Lucie is certainly known to have been King Edwards Concubine,
though nothing so certainly mentioned, whose Lady, or of what Parentage she
was; that she was conceived by him with child is before declared, but who that
child was, is as obscurely laid down; therefore in these things we must be
silent, and leave the doubts to be resolved by others. Three other concubines
this king had, whereof Shores wife was not the least beloved, whose life
falls further to be spoken of in the Reign of the usurper Richard, where her
story shall be showed more at large. His natural Issue.


(150) Arthur, surnamed Plantagenet, the natural son of K. Edward the
fourth, (whose mother as is supposed, was the Lady Elizabeth Lucie) was created
Viscount Lisle by King Henry the eight at Bridewell in London, the twenty
sixth of April, and year of Salvation 1533. which title was conf^red upon him
in right of his wife Lady Elizabeth, sister and heir unto John Gray Viscount
Lisle, and the late wife and then widow of Edmund Dudley: who bare unto this
Viscount three daughters, which were Bridget, Frances, and Elizabeth, all of
them afterward married. This Arthur Lord Lisle was made Lieutenant of Callis by
the said K. Henry, which Town some of his servants intended to have betrayed
to the French, for which their fact himself was sent to the Tower of London:
but his truth appearing after much search, the King sent him a rich ring from
his own finger, with such comfortable words, as at the hearing thereof a
sudden joy ouercharged his heart, and was so immoderately received, that the
same night it made an end of his life, whose body was honorably buried in the
same Tower.

(151) Elizabeth the natural daughter of K. Edward the fourth, was married to
Sir Thomas Lumley Knight, the son of George, Lord Lumley, who died before his
father: she bare unto the said Sir Thomas, Richard, afterward Lord Lumley,
from whom the late Lord Lumley did descend.

EDWARD THE FIFTH, KING Edward 5.
OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, AND LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTY FIFTH MONARCH Monarch 55
OF THIS LAND, HIS REIGN, AND DEATH. For the most part written by Sir Thomas
Moore. CHAPTER XVIII.


THe father thus dying in the strength of his years, and the son left to
rule before he was ripe, the Synders of dissensions which the sick King had
lately raked up, presently brake forth into a more raging flame; for the king
and Queens blood that should have supported young Edwards estate, the one side
being suspicious, and ^e other provoked by the execrable desire of sovereignty,
left the tender king (a Prince of such towardnes as his age could King Edwards
reign unfortunate and (...).
contain) destitute and unarmed, which if either kind or kindred had holden
place, must needs have been the surest pillars of his defense. The reign of
this King (if we may so call the shorttime of his Sovereignty) began the same
day that his father died, April 19. A. D. 1483.
though he was never Crowned, nor yet commanded the affairs of the Kingdom as
an absolute Monarch, his young brothers fortunes being balanced Richard Duke
of York.
with his.

(2) For Richard Duke of Gloucester, by nature their uncle, by office their
Protector, to their Father Richard Duke of Gloucester an unnatural uncle unto
the young King and his brother.
beholden, to themselves by Oath and Alleagiance bounden, all bands broken that
holds man and man together, without any respect of God or the World,
unnaturally contrived to bereave them, not only of their dignity, but also
theirlines. But for so much as the Dukes demeanor ^reth in effect all the whole
matter whereof the reign of this young and fifth Edward must entreat, it^
therefore convenient, somewhat to show you ere we go further, what man this
was, and from whom he descended that could find in his heart so much mischief
to conceive.

(3) Know first then that Richard Duke of York, a noble man and a mighty,
began not Richard Duke of York was the father of Richard Duke of Gloucester.
by war, but by law to challenge the Crown; putting his claim into the
Parliament; where his cause was (either for right or favor) so far forth
advanced that King Henry's blood (albeit he had a goodly Prince) was utterly
rejected, the Crown by the authority of that high Court intailed to the Duke
of York, and his issue male in remainder, immediately after the death of King
Henry. But the Duke not enduring so long to tarry, intending under pretext of
dissension and debate arising in the Realm, to prevent his time, and to take
upon him the rule in King Henry's life, was with many other Nobles slain at
Wakefield, leaving three sons, Edward, George, and Richard; all of them as
they were great states of birth, so were they great and stately of stomach,
greedy and ambitious of authority, and impatient of partners.

(4) For Edward revenging his fathers death deprived king Henry, and attained
the Crown; The second, George Duke of Clarence, was a goodly Noble Prince, and
in all things fortunate, if either his own ambition had not set him against
his brother, or the envy of his enemies, his brother against him. For were it
by the Queen and Lords of her blood which highly maligned the Kings kindred (as
women commonly, not of malice but of nature hate them whom their husbands love)
or were it a proud appetite Women commonly malign their husbands (...).
of the Duke himself, intending to be King: at leastwise heinous treason was
laid to his charge, and finally were he faulty, were he faultlesse, attainted
he was by Parliament, and judged to death, as we have said.

(5) Richard the third son, of whom we now The description of Richard Duke of
Gloucester.
entreat was in wit and courage equal with either of them, in body and
prowess far under them both, little of stature, ill-limmed, and
crook-backed, his left shoulder much higher then his right, very hard favored
of visage, and such as in States is called warly, in other men otherwise: he
was malicious, wrathful, and envious, yea and from before his birth ever
froward. For it is for truth reported, that the Duchess his mother had so
much ado in her travail, that she could not be delivered of him uncut, and
that he came into the world with his feet forward, as men be borne outward,
and (as the fame runs) also not vn^oothed; Whether men of hatred report
above the truth, or else that nature changed her Course in his beginning, which
in the course of his life many things unnaturally committed.

(6) No evil Captain was he in the war, as to which his disposition was
more inclined then for Richard Crookebacke a good soldier.
peace; sundry victories he had, and sometimes ouer-throwes, but never in
default as for his own person, either of hardines, or politic order; free was
he of his dispense, and somewhat above his power liberal: with large gifts he
gate him unsteadfast friendship, for which he was forced to pill and pole in
other places, which gate him steadfast hatred. He was close and secret, a deep
dissembler, lowly o^countenance, arrogant of heart, outwardly familiar, where
even now he hated, and not letting to kiss whom he thought to kill:
despi^efull and cruel he was, not for euill-will always, but oftener for
ambition, and either for the surety, or increase of his estate. Friend and foe
was much what indifferent; where his advantage grew, he spared no man's death,
whose life withstood his purpose. He slew with his own hands, King Henry the
sixth, being Prisoner in the Tower, as men constantly said, and that without
commandment or knowledge of the King, who undoubtedly if he had intended his
death, would have appointed that butcherly office to some other then his own
brother.

(7) Some wise ^en also judge, that his drift covertly He was the cause of
Clorence his death.
conveyed, lacked not in helping forth his brother Clarence to his death; which
he resisted openly, howbeit somewhat (as men deemed) more faintly, then he that
was heartily minded to his wealth. And they that thus judge, think that long
time in K. Edwards life, he forcast to be king, in case that his brother (whose
life he looked that evil diet should shorten) should happen to decease (as
indeed he did) while his Richard of Gloucester intended to be King even whiles
K. Edward lived.
children were young. And they deem that for this intent he was glad of the
Duke of Clarence death, whose life must needs have hindered him so intending,
(being his elder brother) whether the same Duke had kept him true to his Nephew
the young king, or enterprized to be king himself. But of all this point,
there is no certainty, and who so diuineth upon conjectures, may as well shoot
too far, as too short. Howbeit this have I by credible information learned,
that the same night, in which king Edward died, one Mistlebroke long ere
morning, came in great haste to the house of one Pottier dwelling in Red Cross
street without Creeple-gate in London: and when he with hasty rapping, quickly
was let in, he showed unto Pottier that K. Edward was departed. By my troth man
quoth Pottier, then will my Master the Duke of Gloucester be king: what cause
The speech of Pottier at King Edwards death.
he had so to think, hard it is to say, whether being toward him knew any such
thing intended, or otherwise had any inkling thereof, for it was not likely
that he spoke it of no ground.

(8) But now to return to the course of this History; were it that the Duke of
Gloucester had of old foreminded this conclusion, and was now thereunto moved,
and put in hope by the occasion of the tender age of the young Princes his
Nephews (as opportunity and likelihood of speed, puts a man in courage of
that he never intended) certain it is, that he contrived The uncle contriueth
the destruction of his Nephews.
their destruction, with the usurpation of the regal dignity upon himself,
and forasmuch as he well wist, and holp to maintain a long continued grudge
and hartburning between the Queens kindred, and the Kings blood, either part
envying others authority; he now thought their divisions should be (as it was
indeed) a forward beginning to the pursuit of his intent, and a sure ground
for the foundation of all his building, if he might first, under the pretext of
revenging old displeasure, abuse the anger and ignorance of the one party, to
the destruction of the other and then win to his purpose as many Richards
deep policy.
as he could, and those that could not be won, might be lost before they were
aware; for of one thing was he certain, that if his intent were perceived he
should soon have made peace between both the parties with his own blood.

(9) King Edward in his life, albeit that this dissension between his friends
somewhat grieved him, yet in his good health he somewhat less regarded it,
because he thought whatsoever business should fall between them, himself
should always be able to rule both the parties. But in his last sickness, when
he perceived his natural strength so sore infeebled, King Edwards care to set
peace betwixt the Queens kindred and his.
that he dispaired all recovery; then considering the youth of his Children,
albeit he nothing less mistrusted then that that happened, yet well
foreseeing how many harms might grow by their debate, while the youth of his
children should lack discretion of themselves, and good Counsel of their
friends, of which either party should counsel for their own commodity, and
the rather by pleasant advise to win themselves favor, then by profitable
aduertisements to do his children good, he called some of them before him
that were at variance, and in special the Lord Marquess Dorset, the Queens
son by her first husband, and William Lord Hastings a nobleman, then Lord
Chamberlain, against whom the Queen especially grudged, for The Queens
jealousy against the Lord C^berlaine.
the great favor the King bare him: and also for that she thought him secretly
familiar with the King in wanton company. Her kindred also bare him sore,
as well for that the King had made him Captain of Callis, which office the Lord
Rivers, brother to the Queen claimed of the Kings former promise, as for
diverse other great gifts which he received, that they looked for. These were
the grudges which the king on his death bed sought to remove, and they in show
seemed to cancel, as we have said, though the sparks of these displeasures
burst afterward into a dangerous flame, which consumed most of them, as
afterward shall appear.

(10) For as soon as the King was departed this life, his son Prince Edward
drew toward London from Ludlow in Wales, which Country being King Edward
repaireth toward London.
far off from the law, and recourse to justice, was become to be far out of
Order, and grown wild Robbers, Rouers walking at liberty uncorrected: for
which cause this Prince in the life time of his father was sent thither, to the
end that the authority of his presence should refrain evil disposed persons,
from the boldenes of their former outrages. To the governance and ordering of
this young Prince at his sending thither, was there appointed Sir Anthony
Wooduill Lord Rivers, and brother unto the Queen, a right honorable man, as
valiant of hand as politic The Queens kindred only about the Prince.
in Counsel; adioined were there unto him others of the same party, and in
effect every one as he was nearest of kin unto the Queen, so was he planted
next about the Prince.

(11) That drift of the Queen not unwisely devised, whereby her blood might of
youth be rooted in the Princes favor, the Duke of Gloucester turned unto their
destruction, and upon that ground set the foundation of all his unhappy
building. For whomsoever he perceived either at variance with them, or bearing
himself their favor, he brake unto them; some by mouth, some by writing and
secret messengers, that it was neither reason, nor in any wise to be suffered,
that the young King their Master and kinseman, should be in the hands and
Custody of his mothers kindred, sequestered in manner from their Company and
attendance, of which every one ought him as faithful service as they, and many
of them far more honorable part of kin then his mothers side: whose blood
(quoth he) saving the Kings The Duke seeks to displace the Prince.
pleasure was far unmeet to be matched with his, which now to be as who say
removed from the king, and the less noble to be left about him, is (quoth he)
neither honorable to his Majesty nor unto us, and also to his Grace no
surety, to have the mightiest of his friends from him, and unto us no little
ieopardy, to suffer our well proved euill-willers to grow in over great
authority with the Prince in youth, who is light of belief and soon
persuaded. Ye remember I trow K. Edward himself, albeit he was a man of age
and discretion, yet was he in many things ruled by the bend, more then stood
either with his honor, or our profit, or with the commodity of any man else,
except only the immoderate advancement of themselves. Which whether they sorer
thirsted after their own weal, or our woe, it were hard I ween to guess, and
if some folks friendship had not held better place with the King, then any
respect of kindred, they might perhaps easily have intrapped and brought some
of us to confusion ere this; why not as easily as they have done some other
already, as near of his royal blood as we? But our Lord has The crafty
complaints of Richard Duke of Gloucester.
wrought his will, and thanks be to his grace, that peril is past: howbeit as
great is growing, if we suffer this young King in our enemies hand; which
without his knowledge might abuse the name of his commandment, to any of our
undoing, which thing God and good provision forbid.

(12) Of which good provision none of us has any thing the less need, for
the late made atonement, in which the Kings pleasure had more place then the
parties wills: nor none of us, I believe, is so unwise over soon to trust a new
friend made of an old foe, or to think that an howerly kindness, sodeinly
contracted in one hour continued yet scarce a fortnight, should be deeper
settled in their stomachs, then a long accustomed malice many years rooted.
With these words and writings and such other, the Duke of Gloucester soon set
afire them that were of themselves apt enough to kindle, especially two, Edward
Duke of Buckingham, and William Lord Hastings The effect that his policy took.
Chamberlain, both men of honor and of great power. The one by long succession
from his Auncestry: the other by his office, and the Kings favor. These two
not bearing each to other so much love, as both of them hatred unto the Queens
part, in this point accorded together, with the Duke of Gloucester, that they
would utterly remove from the The conclusion of his designs.
Kings Company all his mothers friends under the name of their enemies.

(13) Upon this conclusion the Duke of Gloucester understanding, that the Lords
which at that time were about the King, intended to bring him to London to his
Coronation, accompanied with such power of their friends, that it should be
hard for him to bring his purpose to pass, without the gathering a great
assembly of people, and in manner of open war, whereof the end he wiste well
was doubtful, and in which the King being on their side, his part should have
the face and name of a Rebellion; he secretly therefore by diverse means,
caused the Queen to be persuaded and brought in mind, Another crafty policy
of Duke Richard.
that it neither were need, and also should be ieopardous, the King to come up
strong.

(14) For whereas now every Lord loved other, and no other thing studied upon,
but about the Coronation and honor of the King: if the Lords of her kindred
should assemble in the Kings name much people, they should give the Lords of
the contrary faction cause to fear and suspect, least they should gather this
people not for the Kings safeguard, whom no man impugned, but for their
destruction, having more regard to their old variance, then their new
atonement: for which cause they should assemble on the other party much people
again for their defense, whose power she wist well stretched far: and thus
should all the Realm fall on an vproare: and of all the hurt that thereof
should ensue, which was likely not to be a little, and the most harm like to
fall where she least would, all the world would put her and her kindred in the
blame, and say that they had unwisely and untruly also broken the amity and
peace, which the King her husband so prudently made betwixt his kin and hers on
his death bed, and which the other party faithfully observed.

(15) The Queen in this wise persuaded, sent such word unto her son; and
unto her brother being The Queen yeldeth to the Dukes persuasion.
about the King: besides, the Duke of Gloucester, him self and other Lords the
chief of his bend, wrote unto the King so reverently, and to the Queens
friends there so lovingly, that they nothing earthly mistrusting, brought up
the King in great have, but not in good speed, with a sober company. Now was
the King in his way to London, gone from Northampton, when the Dukes of
Gloucester and Buckingham The Lords meet at Northampton.
came thither, where remained behind the Lord Rivers the Kings uncle, intending
on the morrow to follow the King, and be with him at Stony-Stratford, twelve
miles thence, early ere he departed. So was there made that night much
friendly cheer betwixt these two Dukes and the Lord Rivers a great while: but
incontinent after that, they were openly with great courtesy departed, and the
Lord Rivers lodged, the Dukes secretly with a few of their most privy friends,
set them down in Council, wherein they spent a great part of the night: and at
their rising in the dawning of the day, they sent out privily to their servants
in their Innes and lodgings about, giving command to make themselves shortly
ready, for their Lords were to horse-ward: upon which messages, many of their
folk were attendant, when many of the L. Rivers servants were unready. The
Keys of the Inn kept by Richard Duke of Glaucester.


(16) Now had these Dukes taken into their custodies the keys of the Inn,
that none should pass forth without their license: and besides this, in the
highway toward Stony-Stratford, where the King lay, they had bestowed
certain of their men, that should send back again, and compel to return
any man that were gotten out of Northampton toward Stony-Stratford, till they
had further order: forasmuch as the Dukes themselves intended for the show of
their diligence, to be the first that should that day attend upon the Kings
Highness out of that Town. Thus bare they folk in hand: but when the Lord
Rivers understood the gates closed, The L. Rivers much troubled at the sudden
action.
the ways beset, neither his servants, or himself suffered to go out,
considering well so great a thing without his knowledge, could not be done.
for naught; and comparing this present manner, with his last nights cheer, in
so few hours to have so great a change, marueilously misliked it. How beit
since he could not get away, nor keep himself close he would not, lest he
should seem to hide himself for some secret fear of his own fault, whereof he
saw no such cause in himself: he determined upon the surety of his own
conscience, to go boldly unto them, and to enquire what this matter might
mean; whom as soon as they saw, they began to quarrel with, saying, that
he intended to set distance between the King and them, and to bring them to
confusion, but it should not lie in his power. And when he began (as he was
a very The L. Rivers imprisoned in Northampton.
well spoken man) in seemly wise to excuse himself, they carried not the end
of his answer, but shortly took him, and put him in ward: and that done,
forthwith went to horseback, and took the way to Stony-Stratford, where they
found the King with his Company, ready to leap on horseback, and depart
forward to leave that lodging for them, because it was too strait for both
companies.

(17) And as soon as they came in his presence, they alighted down with all
their company about them; to whom the Duke of Buckingham said, Go The Dukes
come to the King.
before Gentlemen, and Yeomen keep your rooms. In which goodly array they came
to the King, and on their knees in very humble manner saluted his Grace, who
received them in very joyous and amiable manner, nothing knowing, nor
mistrusting as yet what was done. But even by and by in his presence, they
picked a quarrel to the Lord Gray, the Kings A quarrel picked in the kings
presence.
other brother by his mother, saying, that he with the Lord Marquess his
brother, and the Lord Rivers his uncle, had compassed to rule the King and the
realm, and to set variance among the States, and to subdue and destroy the
noble blood of the Realm: toward the accomplishing whereof, they said that
the Lord Marquess had entered into the Tower of London, and Accusations against
the Queens kindred
thence taken out the Kings treasure, and had sent men to the sea. All which
things these Dukes well knew were done for necessary and good purposes, by the
whole Council at London, saving that somewhat they must say.

(18) Unto which words the King answered, what The King excuses his uncle.
my brother Marquess had done I cannot say: but in good sooth I dare well
answer for mine uncle Rivers, and my brother here, that they are inocent of
any such matter: yea my liege, quoth the Duke of Buckingham, they have kept
their dealings in these matters far from the knowledge of your good Grace.
And forth with they arrested the Lord Richard, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and Sir
Richard Hawt Knights in the Kings presence, and brought the king and all his
company back unto Northampton, where The King is brought back to Northampton.
they took again further counsel. And there they sent away from the King
whom it pleased them, and set new servants about him, such as better liked
them then him: At which dealing the king wept, and was nothing content; but it
booted not: and at dinner, the Duke of Gloucester sent a dish from his own
Table to the Lord Rivers, bidding him be of good cheer for all should be
well. But the Lord The Duke of Gloucester sends a dish of meat unto the Lord
Rivers.
Rivers thanking the Duke, prayed the Messenger to bear it to the Lord
Richard, with the same message for his comfort, as one to whom such adversity
was strange, but himself had been all his days inured therewith, and
therefore could bear it the better: but for all this comfortable courtesy of
the Duke of Gloucester, he sent the Lord Rivers, and the Lord Richard, with Sir
Thomas Vaughan into the North Country, into diverse places to prison, and
afterward all to Pomfret, where they were in conclusion beheaded. The L. Rivers
and others beheaded


(19) In this wise the Duke of Gloucester took upon himself the Order and
Governance of the young King, whom with much honor and humble reverence he
conuaied toward London. But anon the tidings of this matter came hastily to
the Queen, a little before the midnight following, and that in the sorest
wise, that the King her son was taken, her brother, her son, and other
friends arrested, and sent no man wist whither, to be done with God wot what.
With which tidings, the Queen in great fright and heaviness, bewailed her
childs reign, her friends mischance, and her own misfortune, damning the
time that ever she dissuaded the gathering of power about the King, got her
self in all have possible with her young son, and her daughters, out of the
Palace of Westminster, in which she then lay, into the Sanctuary, lodging her
self, and Queen Elizabeth takes Sanctuary.
company there in the Abbots place.

(20) Now came there one likewise, not long after night from the Lord
Chamberlain, unto the Archbishop of York then Chancellor of England, to his
place no ^re from Westminster; and for that The L. Chamberlain sends the
news to the L. Chancellor.
he showed his servants, that he had tidings of great importance, that his M.
gave him in charge, not to forbear his rest, they let not to awake him; nor
he to admit the Messenger unto his bed side. Of whom he heard that these
Dukes were gone back with the Kings Grace from Stony-Stratford unto
Northampton: notwithstanding Sir (quoth he) my Lord sends your Lordshippe
word, that there is no fear: for he assures you that all shall be well. I
assure him (quoth the Archbishop) be it as well as it will, it will never
be so well as we have seen it. And thereupon by and by after the messengers
departure, he caused in all have all his servants to be called up, and so
with his own household about him, every man weaponed, he took the Great Seal
with him, and came yet before day unto the Queen. About whom he found much The
great heaviness and confusion of the Queen and her servants.
heaviness, rumble, have and business, carriage and conueiance of her stuff
into Sanctuary, chests, coffers, packes and fardels, trussed all on men's backs,
no man unoccupied, some lading, some going, some discharging, some coming for
more, some breaking down the walls, to bring in the next way, and some drew to
them to help to carry a wrong way. The Queen her self sat alone allow on the
rushes, all desolate and dismayed, whom the Archbishop comforted The
Archbishops comforts to the Queen.
in the best manner he could, showing her that he trusted the matter was
nothing so sore as she took it for, and that he was put in good hope and out
of fear, by a message sent him from the L. Chamberlain: Ah woe worth him
(quoth the Queen) he is one of them that labors to destroy me and my
blood.

(21) Madam (quoth he) be of good cheer; for I assure you, if they crown
any other King then your son, whom they have now with them, we shall on the
morrow crown his brother, whom you have The L. Chancellor gives the great
Seal to the Queen.
here with you: and here is the great Seal, which in like sort as that noble
Prince your husband delivered it unto me, so here I deliver it unto you, to the
use and behoof of your son, and therewith he betook her the Great Seal,
and departed home again, even in the dawning of the day: by which time he
might in his Chamber window see all the Thames full of boats of the Duke of
Glocesters servants, watching that no man should go to Sanctuary, nor none
should pass unsearched. Then was there great commotion and murmur, as well in
other places about, as especially in the City, the people diversely divining
upon this dealing. And some Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, either for favor of
the Queen, or for fear of themselves, assembled in sundry Companies, and went
flocke-meale in harness: Great fear conceived of the overmuch murmuring made.
and many also, for that they accounted this demeanor attempted, not so
specially against the other Lords, as against the King himself in the
disturbance of his Coronation.

(22) But then, by and by the Lords assembled together, toward which meeting,
the Archbishop of York fearing that it would be ascribed (as it was indeed)
to his overmuch lightness, that he so suddenly had yielded up the great
Seal to the Queen (to whom the custody thereof nothing appertained) without
special commandment of the King, secretly sent for the Seal again, and
brought The L. Chancellor sends for the great Seal to the Queen.
it with him after the accustomed manner. And at this meeting, the Lord
Hastings, whose truth toward the King no man doubted, nor needed to doubt,
persuaded the Lords to believe, that the Duke of Gloucester, was sure and fastly
faithful to his Prince, and that the Lord Rivers and Lord Richard, with the
other knight, were for matters attempted by them against the Dukes of Gloucester
and Buckingham put under arrest for their surety, not for the Kings Persuasions
of the L. Hastings that nothing was extremely meant
ieopardy; and that they were also in safeguard, and there no longer should
remain, then till the matter were, not by the Dukes only, but also by all the
other Lords of the kings Council indifferently examined, and by other
discretions ordered, either judged or appeased. But one thing he advised them
beware, that they judged not the matter too far forth ere they knew the
truth, nor turning their private grudges into the common hurt, irking and
provoking men unto anger; and disturbing the kings Coronation; toward which
the Dukes were coming up, that they might peradventure bring the matter so
far out of joint, that it should never be brought in frame again. Which
strife if it should happen (as it were likely) to come to a field, though both
parties were in all things equal, yet should the authority be on that side
where the King is himself.

(23) With these persuasions of the Lord Hastings, whereof part himself
believed, of part he wist L. Hastings somewhat dissembleth.
the contrary, these commotions were somewhat appeased, but especially by that,
that the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham were so near, and came so shortly
on with the King, in none other manner, with none other voice, or any other
semblance then to his Coronation; causing the fame to be blown about, that
these Lords and Knights which were taken, had contrived the destruction of the
Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham, and of other the Noble False imputation
cast upon the Lords of the Queens blood.
blood of the Realm, to the end that themselves would alone demean and
govern the King at their pleasure. And for the Colorable proof thereof, such
of the Dukes servants as rode with the Carts of their stuff that were taken
(amongst which stuff no marvel though some were harness, which at the
breaking up of the household, must needs either be brought away, or cast away)
they showed unto the people all the way as they went; saying, lo here be the
barrels of harness, that these Traitors have privily conveyed in their
Carriages to destroy the Noble Lords withal. This devise, albeit it made the
matter to wisemen more unlikely, well perceiving that the intenders of such a
purpose, would rather have had their harness on their backs, then to be bound
up in barrels: yet much part of the common people were therewith very well
satisfied, and said it How soon the Commons are brought into fools Paradise.
were alms to hang them.

(24) When the King approached near to the City, Edmund Shan Goldsmith then
Mayor, with William White and John Matthew Sheriffs, and all the other King
Edward met by the Citizens, and accompanied by them into London.
Aldermen in scarlet, with five hundred horse of the Citizens in violet,
received him reverently at Haruesey, and ryding from thence, accompanied him
into the City, which he entered the fourth day of May, the first and last year
of his Reign. The King was lodged in the Bishops Palace, where was kept a
great Council, and there was sworn to the king, the Duke of Gloucester, the
Duke of Buckingham, and all the Lords. But the Duke of Gloucester, bare him in
open sight so reverently to the Prince, with all semblance of fowlines, that
from the great obloquie Richard Duke of Gloucester made Protector of the King
and Realm.
in which he was so late before, he was sodeinely fallen in so great trust, that
at the Council next assembled, he was made the only man, chose and thought
most meet to be Protector of the king and his realm, so that (were it destiny,
or were it folly) the lamb was betaken to the wolf to keep. At which
Council also, the Archbishop of York Chancellor of England, which had
delivered up the great Seal to the Queen, was thereof greatly reproved, and
the Seal taken from him, and delivered to Doctor Russell Bishop of Lincoln, a
wise man, and of much experience, The great Seal is taken from the Archbishop
of York.
and undoubtedly one of the best learned men that England had in his time:
diverse Lords and Knights were appointed unto diverse Rooms, the Lord
Chamberlain, and some others, keeping still their offices they had before.

(25) Now although that the Protector, so sore thirsted for the finishing of
those designs which he had begun, and thought every day a year till they were
achieved, yet durst he no further attempt, so long as he had but half his
pray in his hand: well witting, that if he deposed the one brother, all the
Realm would fall to the other, if he either remained in Sanctuary, or should
be conveyed to his further liberty: wherefore, incontinent at the next meeting
of The Protectors persuasion to take out of Sanctuary the young Duke of York.
the Lords in Council, he proposed unto them, that it was a heinous deed of
the Queen, and proceeded of great malice toward the Kings Counselors, that
she should keep in Sanctuary the Kings brother from him, whose special
pleasure and comfort were to have his brother with him: and that by her done,
was to none other intent, but to bring all the Lords in obloquie, and murmur of
the people, as though they were not to be trusted with the Kings brother, who
by assent of the Nobles of the land, were appointed as the Kings nearest
friends, to the tuition of his own royal person. The prosperity whereof
stands (quoth he) not all in keeping from enemies or ill viand, but partly
also in recreation, and moderate pleasure, which he in his tender youth cannot
take in the company of ancient persons, but in the familiar conversation of
those that be neither far under, nor far above his age, and nevertheless
of estate convenient to accompany his noble Majesty; wherefore with whom
rather, then with his own brother? And if any man think this consideration
(which I think no A ^e ^ch to fetch out the Duke.
man thinks that loves the King) let him consider that sometimes without
small things, greater cannot stand. And verily, it redoundeth greatly to the
dishonor both of the Kings Highness, and of us all that are about his Grace,
to have it run in every man's mouth, not in this Realm only, but also in
other lands, (as evil words walk far) that the Kings brother shall be
feign to keep Sanctuary; for every man I deem, will suppose, that there is
occasion given, why it should so be: and such evil opinions once fastened in
men's hearts, hardly can be screwed out again, and may grow to more grief
then any man here can divine. Wherefore The Protector would have the Queen
sent unto.
I think it were not the worst to send unto the Queen for the redress of
this matter, some honorable trusty man, such as both tendreth the kings weal,
and the honor of this Council, and is also in favor and credence with her.
For all which considerations, none seems to me more mere, then is our
reverend Father here present, my Lord Cardinal, who may in this matter do
most good of any man, if it please him to take the pains, which I doubt not of
his goodness he will not refuse, for the Kings sake and ours, and weal of
the young Duke himself, the Kings most honorable brother, and after my
Sovereign himself, my most dear Nephew, Considering that thereby shall be
ceased the slanderous rumor and obloquie now going, and the hurts avoided that
thereof might ensue, and much rest and quiet grow to all the Realm. And if she
be percase so obstinate, and so precisely set upon her own will, that neither
his wise and faithful advertisement If the Queen refuse to deliver the Duke
what is to be done.
cannot move her; nor any man's reason content her: then shall we by mine
advise, and by the Kings authority, fetch him out of that Prison; and bring him
to his noble presence, in whose continual company he shall be so well
cherished, and so honorably entreated, that all the world shall to our honor,
and her reproach perceive, that it was only malice, frowardnes, or folly, that
caused her to keep him there: this is my mind in this matter for this time,
except any of your Lordships any thing perceive to the contrary, for never
shall I by Gods Grace, so wed my self to my own will, but that I shall be
ready to change it upon your better aduises.

(26) When the Protector had said, all the Council affirmed that the motion
was good and reasonable, All the Counsel allow of the Protectors speech.
and to the King and the Duke his brother honorable, and the thing that should
cease great murmur in the Realm, if the mother might be by good means induced
to deliver him. Which thing the Archbishop of York, whom they all agreed also
to be thereto most convenient, took upon him to move her, and therein to do
his uttermost endeavor: how beit if she could by no means be entreated with
her good will to deliver him, then thought he, and such other of the Clergy
then present, that it were not in any wise to be attempted, to take him out
against her will. For it would be a thing that should turn to the great
grudge of all men, and high displeasure of God, if the privilege of that holy
place should now be broken, which had so many years been kept, which both
Kings and Popes so A great offense to break the Sanctuary.
good had granted, so many had confirmed, and which holy ground was more then
five hundred years ago, by S. Peter in his own person, in spirit
accompanied with great multitude of Angels, by night so specially hallowed and
dedicated to God, (for the proof whereof, they have yet in the Abbey, S.
Peter's Cope to show) that from that time hitherward, S. Peter's own Cope was to
be seen in Westminster.
was there never so undevout a King, that durst violate that sacred place, or
so holy a Bishop, that durst presume to consecrate it; and therefore (quoth the
Archbishop of York) God forbid that any man should for any thing earthly,
enterprise to break the immunity and liberty of that sacred Sanctuary, that
has been the safeguard of many a good man's life: and I trust (quoth he) with
Gods grace we shall not need it. But for what need soever, I would not we
should do it; I trust that she shall be with reason contented, and all things
in good manner obtained, but if it happen, that I bring it not so to pass, yet
shall I toward it with my best, and you shall all well perceive, that there
shall be of my endeavor no lack, if the mothers dread, and womanish fear be
not the let.

(27) Womanish fear, nay womanish frowardnes (quoth the Duke of Buckingham)
for I dare take The Duke of Buckinghams speech.
it upon my soul, she well knows, there is no need of any fear, either for
her son or for her self. For as for her, here is no man that will be at
war with a woman. Would God some of the men of her kin were women too, and
then should al be soon in rest: Howbeit, there is none of her kin the less
loved, for that they be of her kin, but for their own evil deserving. And nay
the less, if we loved neither her, nor her kin, yet were there no cause to
think, that we should hate the Kings noble brother, to whose Grace we our
selves be of kin: whose honor, if she as much desired, as our dishonor, and as
much regard took to his wealth, as to her own will, she would be as loath to
suffer him from the King, as any of us be. For, if she have wit, (as would
God she Queen Elizabeth held to have a shrewd wit.
had as good will as she has shrewd wit) she reckneth her self no wiser,
then she thinks some that be here, of whose faithful mind she nothing
doubts, but verily believes and knows, that they would be as sorry of his
harm, as her self, and yet would have him from her, if she bide there: and
we all (I think) content, that both be with her, if she come thence, and bide
in such place; where they may be with their honor. Now then, if she refuse in
Not fear but frowardnes kept the young Duke in Sanctuary.
the deliverance of him, to follow the Counsel of them, whose wisdom she
knows, whose truth she well trusts: it is easy to perceive, that
frowardnes lets her, and not fear. But go to, suppose that she fear, (as
who may let her to fear her own shadow) the more she fears to deliver him,
the more ought we to fear to leave him in her hands. For, if she cast such
fond doubts, that she fear his hurt; then will she fear, that he shall be
fetched thence. For she will soon think, that if men were set (which God
forbid) upon so great a mischief, the Sanctuary would little let them: which
good men might (as I think) without sin, somewhat less regard then they do.
Then, if she A great fear without any great cause.
doubt, lest he might be fetched from her, is it not likely that she shall
send him somewhere out of the Realm? Verily, I look for none other. And I
doubt not, but she now as sore minds it, as we the let thereof. And if she
might happen to bring that to pass (as it were no great masterie, we letting
her alone) all the world would say, that we were a wise sort of Counselors
about a King, that suffer his brother to be cast away under our noses. And
therefore I assure you faithfully for my mind, I will rather maugre her mind,
fetch him away, then leave him there, till her frowardnes and fond fear convey
him away. And yet will I break no Sanctuary therefore: for verily, since the
privileges of that place, and other like have been of long continued, I am
not he that will go about to break them. And in good faith, if they were now
to begin, I would not be he that should be about to make them. Yet will I not
say nay, but that it is a deed of pity, that Buckinghams opinion of the
Sanctuaries.
such men, as the sea, or their evil debtors have brought in poverty, should
have some place of liberty, to keep their bodies out of the danger of their
cruel Creditors. And also, if the Crown happen (as it has done) to come in
question, while either part takes other as Traitors, I like well there be some
places of refuge for both. But as for Much abuses suffered in Sanctuaries.
thieves, of which these places be full, and which never fall from the craft
after they once fall thereunto; it is pity the Sanctuary should serve them,
and much more manquellers, whom God bad to take from the Altar and kill them,
if their murder were wilful. And where it is otherwise, there need we not
the Sanctuaries, that God appointed in the old Law: for if either necessity,
his own defense, or misfortune draws him to that deed, a pardon serves,
which either the law grants of course, or the King of pity may. Then look we
now how few sanctuary men there be, whom any favorable necessity compelled to
go thither; and then see on the other side, what a sort there be commonly
therein of them, whom wilful unthriftiness has brought to naught: what
rabble of thieves, murderers, and malicious heinous Traitors, and that in two
places especially? the one Westminster. S. Martins.
at the elbow of the City, the other in the very bowels. I dare well auow it,
weigh the good that they do, with the hurt that comes of them, and ye shall
find it much better to lack both, then to have both. And this I say, although
they were not abused as they now be, and so long have been, that I fear me
ever they will be, while men be afraid to set the hands to amend the, as
though God and S. Peter were the patrons of ungracious living. Now unthrifts
riot, and run in debt, upon the boldness of these places; yea, and rich men
run thither with poor men's goods, there they build, there they spend, and
bid their Creditors go whistle. Men's wives run thither with their husbands
plate, and say, they dare not abide with their husbands for beating. Thieves
bring thither their stolen goods, and live thereon rio tously: there they devise
new robberies, nightly they steal out, they rob and riue, kill and come in
again, as though those places gave them not only a safeguard for the harm
they have done, but a license also to do more; howbeit much of this mischief,
if Wisemen would set their hands to it, might be amended, with great thanks
of God, and no breach of the Privilege. The residue, since so long ago, I wot
near what Pope, and what Prince more pitteous then politic has granted it,
and other men since, of a certain religious fear, have not broken it; let us
therefore take pain therewith, and let it a Gods name stand in force, as far
forth as reason will, which is not fully so far forth, as may serve to let us
of the fetching forth of this Nobleman, to his honor and wealth, out of that
place, in which he neither is, nor can be a Sanctuary man. A Sanctuary The
true use of the Sanctuary.
serves always to defend the body of that man that stands in danger abroad,
not of great hurt only, but also of lawful hurt; for against unlawful
harms, never Pope nor King intended to privilege any one place, for that
privilege has every place: knows any man any place, wherein it is lawful
for one man to do another wrong? that no man unlawfully take hurt, that
liberty, the King, the Law, and very nature forbids in every place, and
makes to that regard, for every man; every place a Sanctuary: but where a man
is by lawful means in peril, there needs he the tuition of some special
privilege, which is the only ground and cause of all Sanctuaries: from which
necessity this noble Prince is far, whose love to the King, nature and
kindred proves, whose innocence The Duke of York incapable of Sanctuary.
to all the world, his tender youth proves, and so Sanctuary, as for him,
neither none he needs, nor none can he have. Men come not to Sanctuary, as
they come to Baptism, to require it by their Godfathers; he must ask it
himself, that must have it; and reason, since no man has cause to have it, but
whose conscience of his own fault makes him feign need to require it: what
will then has yonder babe? which and if he had discretion to require it, if
need were, I dare say would now be right angry with them that keep him
there: and I would think without any scruple of conscience, without any breach
of Privilege, to be somewhat more homely with them, that be there Sanctuary
Neither Pope nor King can allow Sanctuary men to consume other men's substance.
men indeed: for if one go to Sanctuary with another man's goods, why should
not the King, leaving his body at liberty, satisfy the party of his goods,
even within the Sanctuary? for neither King nor Pope can give any place such a
privilege, that it shall discharge a man of his debtes, being able to pay. And
with that diverse of the Clergy that were present, whether they said it for his
pleasure, or as they thought, agreede plainly, that by the law of God, and of
the Church, the ^oods of a Sanctuary man, should be deliuere^ (...) payment
of his debts, and stolen goods to the owner, and only liberty reserved him, to
get his living with the labor of his hands. Verily (quoth the Duke) I think
you say very truth; and what if a man's wife would take Sanctuary, because she
lift to run from her husband? I would ween if she could allege none other
cause, he may lawfully without any displeasure to Saint Peter, take her out of
Saint Peter's Church by the arm. And if no body may be A man may take his wife
out of Sanctuary without any offense to S. Peter.
taken out of ^nctuary, that says he will bi^e there, then if a child will
take Sanctuary, because he fears to go to school, his Master must let him
alone. And as simple as the sample is, yet i^ there less reason in our case
then in that; for therein, though it be a childish fear; yet is there at the
least wise some fear, and herein is there ^one at all. And verily, I have
often heard of Sanctuary (...), but I never he^ (...) of Sanctuary Children. A^
therefore, as for the Conclusion of my mind, who so may have deserved to need
it, if they think it Buckinghams conclusion.
for their surety, let them keep it; but he can be no Sanctuary man that had
neither wisdom to desire it, nor malice to deserve it, whose life or liberty,
can by no lawful process stand in ieopardie: and he that takes one out of
the Sanctuary to do him good, I say plainly that he breaks no Sanctuary.

(28) When the Duke had done, the temporal men wholly, and most part of the
spiritual also, thinking no hurt earthly meant toward the young babe,
condiscended in effect, that if he were not delivered, he should be fetched;
how beit they The general consent of them all.
all thought it best, in the avoiding of all manner of rumor, that the Lord
Cardinal should first assay to get him with her good will. And thereupon, all
the Council came unto the Star Chamber at Westminster, and the Lord
Cardinal leaving the Protector with the Council in the Star Chamber,
departed into the Sanctuary to the Queen with diverse other Lords with him, were
it for the respect of his honor, or that she should by presence of so many,
perceive that this errand was not one man's mind: or were it, for that the
Protector intended not in this matter, to trust any one man alone, or else,
that if she finally were determined to keep him, some of that Company had
happily secret instructions incontinent, maugre her mind to take him, and to
leave her no respite to convey him, which she was likely to mind, after this
matter broken to her, if the time would in any wise serve her.

(29) When the Queen and those Lords were come together in presence, the Lord
Cardinal showed her, that it was thought unto the Protector, The Cardinal
does his errand to the Queen.
and unto the whole Council, that her keeping of the Kings brother in that
place, was the thing which highly sounded, not only to the great rumor of the
people, and their obloquie, but also to the importable grief and displeasure
of the kings royal Majesty, to whose Grace it were a singular comfort, to have
his natural brother in Company, as it was both his dishonor, all theirs, and
hers also, to suffer him in Sanctuary, as though the one brother stood in
danger and peril of the other. And he showed her, that the Counsel therefore
had sent him to require her the delivery of the young Duke, that he might be
brought unto the Kings presence at his liberty, out of that place, which they
reckoned as a prison, and there he should be demeaned, according to his
estate: and she in this doing should both do great good to the Realm,
pleasure to the Council, and profit to her self, succor to her friends that
were in distress, and besides that (which he w^ well she specially tendered)
not only great comfort and honor to the King, but also to the young Duke
himself, whose great wealth it were to be together; as well for many greater
causes, as also for both their disports and recreations; which thing the Lords
esteemed not slight, though it seemed light; well pondering, that their youth
without recreation and play, cannot endure, nor any stranger, for the con^e of
both their ages and estates, so meet in that point for any of them, as either
of them for other.

(30) My Lord (quoth the Queen) I say not (...), but that it were very
convenient, that this Gentleman whom ye require, were in company of the The
Queens answer to the Cardinal.
King his Brother; and in good faith; I think it were as great commodity to
them both, for yet it while to be in the custody of their mother, the tender
age considered of the elder of them both, but speci^ the younger, which besides
his infancy, that also needs good looking to, has a while been ^o fore
diseased, ^ed with (...), and i^ so newly rather a little amended, (...)
recovered, that I (...) put no (...) his ^ng b^my (...) ^ly, ^ing that there is
((...) Physicians say) and as we also find, double the peril in the
recidiuation, that was in the first sickness, with which disease, nature being
sore labored, forewearied and weakened, waxes the less able to bear out and
sustain a new surfeit. And albeit there might be found other that would
happily do their best unto him, yet is there none that either knows better
how to order him, then I that so long have kept him, or is more like tenderly
to cherish him then his own mother that bare him.

(31) No man denies good Madam (quoth the Cardinal) but that your Grace were
of all others most necessary about your children, and so would all the Council
not only be content, but glad that you were, if it might stand with your
pleasure, to be in such place as might stand with their honor: but if you do
appoint your self to tarry here, then they think it were more convenient that
the Duke of York were with the King, honorably at his liberty, to the comfort
of them both, rather then here as a Sanctuary man, to both their dishonor and
obloquie, since there is not always so great a necessity to have the child with
his mother, but that occasion may sometimes be such, that it should be more
expedient to keep him elsewhere, which well appears in this, that at such
time as your dearest son then Prince, and now King, should for his honor, and
good order of the Country, keep his residence in Wales, far out of your
Company, your Grace was well contented therewith your self.

(32) Not very well contented (quoth the Queen) and yet the case is not like,
for the one was then in health, and the other is now sick: in which case I
marvel greatly, that my Lord Protector is so desirous to have him in his
keeping, where if the Child in his sickness miscarrie by nature, yet might he
run into slander and suspicion of fraud. And where they call it a thing so
sore against my Childs honor, and theirs also, that he abides in this
place: it is all their honors there to suffer him abide, where no man doubts
he shall be best kept, and that is here, while I am here, which as yet intend
not to come forth, and ieopard my self after other of my friends, which would
God were rather here in surety with me, then I there in ieopardy with them.

(33) Why Madame (quoth another Lord) know you any thing why they should be in
ieopardy? Nay verily (quoth she) nor why they should be in prison, as now
they be. But it is I trow no great marvel though I fear, left those that
have not let to put them in durance without color, will let as little to
procure their destruction without cause: The Cardinal made a countenance to
the other Lord, that he should harp no more upon that string, and then said
he to the Queen, that he nothing doubted, but that those Lords of her
honorable kin, which as yet remained under arrest, should upon the matter
examined do well enough, and as toward her noble person, neither was, neither
could be any ieopardy.

(34) Whereby should I trust that (quoth the Queen?) in that I am guiltless?
as though they were guilty: in that I am with their enemies better loved then
they? when they hate them for my sake; in that I am so near a kin to the King?
and how far they be off, if that would help, as God grant it hurt not, and
therefore as for me, I purpose not as yet, to depart hence. And as for this
gentleman my son, I mind that he shall be where I am, till I see further:
for I assure you, for that I see some men so greedy, without any substantial
cause to have him, makes me much more fearful to deliver him. Truly Madame
(quoth he) the more unwilling that you be to deliver him, the more unwilling
other men be to suffer you to keep him, least your causeless fear might
cause you farther to convey him: and many there be that think he can have no
privilege in this place, which neither can have will to ask it, nor malice to
deserve it, and therefore, they reckon no privilege broken, though they fetch
him out, which if you finally refuse to deliver him, I verily think they will:
so much dreadhath my Lord his uncle, for the tender love he bears him, lest
your grace should hope to send him away.

(35) Ah sir (quoth the Queen) has the Protector so tender zeal that he
fears nothing, but least he should escape him? thinks he that I would send
him hence, which is not in plight to send out, and in what place could I
account him sure, if he be not sure in the Sanctuary? which there was never
Tyrant yet so devilish, that durst presume to break. And I trust God is as
strong now to withstand his adversaries, as ever he was. But my son can
deserve no Sanctuary, and therefore he cannot have it. Forsooth he has found
out a goodly gloss, by which that place that may defend a thief, may not save
an innocent: but he is in no ieopardy, nor has no need thereof: would God he
had not. Thinks the Protector, (I pray God he may prove a Protector)
thinks he, that I perceive not whereunto his painted Process draws? It is
not honorable that the Duke abide here: It were comfortable for them both, that
he were with his brother, because the King lacks a play fellow forsooth. I
pray God send them both better playfellows then him, that makes so high a
matter, upon so trifling pretext, as though there could none be found to play
with the King, but his brother, (that has no list to play for sickness) come
out of Sanctuary, out of his safeguard to play with him. As though Princes, as
young as they be, could not play but with their Peers, or Children could not
play but with their kindred, with whom for the most part they agree much worse
then with strangers. But the Child cannot require the privilege, who told
him so? he shall hear him ask it, if he will. Howbeit, this is a gay matter,
suppose he could not ask it, suppose he would not ask it, suppose he
would ask to go out, if I say he shall not: if I ask the privilege but
for my self, I say he that takes him out against my will, breaks the
Sanctuary. Serves this liberty for my person only, or for my goods also? you
may not take hence my horse from me: and may you take my child from me? He also
is my ward: for as my learned Council shows me, since he has nothing by
descent holden by Knights service, the law makes his mother his Guardian. Then
may no man I suppose, take my ward from me out of Sanctuary, without the breach
of Sanctuary. And if my privilege could not serve him, nor he ask it for
himself, yet since the law commits to me the custody of him, I may require
it for him, except the law give a child a Guardian only for his goods and lands,
discharging him of the cure and safe-keeping of his body, for which only both
lands and goods serve. And if examples be sufficient, to obtain privilege for
my child, I need not far to seek them, for in this place in which now we be
(and which is now in question, whether my child may take benefit of it) mine
other son now King, was borne, kept in his Cradle, and preserved to a more
prosperous fortune, which I pray God long to continue. And as you all know,
this is not the first time that I have taken Sanctuary. For when my Lord my
husband was banished, and thrust out of his Kingdom, I fled hither, being
great with Child: and here I bare the Prince: and when my Lord my husband
returned safe again, and had the victory, then went I hence, to welcome him
home, and from hence I brought my babe the Prince unto his father, when he
first took him in his arms. And I pray God that my sons Palace may be as
great a safeguard unto him now reigning, as this place was sometime to the Kings
enemy. In which place I intend to keep his brother, since man's law serves
the Guardian to keep the Infant. The law of nature wills the mother to keep her
child, Gods law priuiledgeth the Sanctuary, and the Sanctuary my son, since I
fear to put him in the Protectors hands, who has his brother already, and
were (if both failed) inheritour to the Crown: and the cause of my fear, has
no man to do to examine. But yet I fear no further then the law fears,
which as learned men tell me, forbids every man, the custody of them by
whose death he may inherit less land then a Kingdom. I can no more: but
whosoever he be that breaks this holy Sanctuary, I pray God shortly send him
need of a Sanctuary when he may not come to it, for taken out of Sanctuary I
would not that my mortal enemy were.

(36) The Lord Cardinal perceiving that the Queen waxed ever the longer the
further off, and also that she began to kindle and chafe, and speak more
biting words against the Protector, and such as he never believed, and was also
loath to hear, he said to her for a final conclusion, that he no longer
would dspute the matter, but if she were content to deliver the Duke to him,
and to the other Lords present, he durst lay his body and soul both in pledge,
not only for his surety, but also for his estate; And if she would give a
resolute answer to the contrary, he would forthwith depart therewithal, and
shift who so would with this business afterward, for he never intended more to
move her in that matter, in which she thought that he and all others also
save herself, lacked either wit or truth; wit, if they were so dull that
they could perceive nothing what the Protector intended: truth, if they should
procure her son to be delivered into his hands, in whom they should perceive
toward the Child any evil intended.

(37) The Queen with these words stood a good while in a deep study. And for
as much as her seemed the Cardinal ready to depart, and the Protector himself
ready at hand, so as she verily thought she could not keep him there, but
that he should incontinent be taken thence, and to convey him elsewhere,
neither had she time to serve her, nor place determined, nor persons
appointed, all things unready, this message came on her so suddenly, nothing
less looked for, then to have him fetched out of Santuarie, which she thought
to be now beset in such places about, that he could not be conveyed out
untaken, and partly (as she thought) it might fortune her fear to be false,
so well she wift it was either needless or bootlesse: Wherefore, if she must
needs go from him, she deemed it best to deliver him, and besides the Cardinals
faith, she nothing doubted, neither some other Lords, whom she saw there
present, which as she feared lest they might be deceived, so was she well
assured they would not be corrupted: and thought it would make the^ the more
warily to look to him, and the more circumspectly to see to his surety, if
with her own hands she betook him to them of trust. And lastly taking the
young Duke by the hand said unto the Lords.

(38) My Lords, and all my Lords; I neither am Queen Elizabeth yields to
deliver the young Duke.
so unwise to mistrust your wits, nor so suspicious to mistrust your truths: of
which thing I purpose to make you such a proof, as if either of both lacked in
you, might both turn me to great sorrow, the Realm to much harm, and you
all to great reproach. For lo, here is (quoth she) this Gentleman, whom I doubt
not, but I could here keep safe if I would, whatsoever any man say: and I
doubt not also, but there be some abroad so deadly enemies unto my blood, that
if they wist where any of it lay in their own bodies, they would let it out.
We have also experience, that the desire of a kingdom knows no kindred: the
brother has been the brothers bane: and may the Nephews be sure of their
Uncle? Each of these children is the others defense, The ambitious desire for a
crown.
whilst they are asunder, and each of their lives lies in the others body:
keep one safe and both be sure, and nothing for them both more perilous then
to be in one place. For what wise Merchant aduentureth all his goods in one
ship? All this notwithstanding, I deliver him, and his brother in him, to keep,
into your hands, of whom I shall ask both, before God and the world. Faithful
ye be, that wot I well, and I know well you be wise, power and strength to
Richard Duke of York delivered to the Cardinal.
keep him, if ye list, neither lack ye of your self, nor lack help in this
case. And if you cannot elsewhere, then may you leave him here: but only one
thing, I beseech you, for the trust that his father ever put in you, and for
the trust I now put you in, that as far as you think I fear too much, be
you well wary that you fear not too little: and therewithal she said unto
the child, Farewell mine own sweet son, God send you good keeping: let me
kiss you yet once, ere you go; for God knows when we shall kiss together
again. And therwithal she kissed him, and blessed him, turned her back and
wept, and went her way, leaving the child weeping as fast. When the Lord
Cardinal, and those other Lords with him, had received the young Duke, they
brought him into the Star Chamber, where the protector took him in his arms,
and kissed him with these words: Now welcome my Lord, even with all my heart:
In which saying, A Iud^ kiss.
it is like he spoke as he thought. Thereupon forth with they brought him
unto the King his brother, into the Bishops Palace at Paul's; and from thence
both of them through the City of London honorably attended into the Tower,
out of which after that day they never came again.

(39) The protector having both the children now in his hands, opened himself
more boldly, both to certain other men, and also chiefly to the Duke of
Buckingham. Although I know that many thought that this Duke was privy to all
the protectors counsel, even from the beginning, and some of the protectors
friends said, that the Duke was the first Buckingham privy to the Protectors
plo^.
mouer of the protector to this matter, sending a privy messenger unto him
straight after King Edwards death. But others again, which knew better the
subtle wit of the protector, deny that he ever opened his enterprise to the
Duke, until he had brought to pass the things before rehearsed. But when he
had imprisoned the Queens kindred, and gotten both her sons into his own
hands; then he opened the rest of his purpose with less fear to them whom he
thought meet for the matter, and especially to the Duke, who being won to his
designs, he held his strength more then half increased. The matter was broken
unto the Duke by subtle persons, and such as were their crafts masters in the
handling of such wicked devises* who declared unto him that the young King was
offended with him, for his kinsfolks sakes, and if he were ever able he would
revenge them: who would prick him forward thereunto if they escaped (for they
would remember Suspicion without cause.
their imprisonment) or else if they were put to death, without doubt the young
King would be careful for their deaths, whose imprisonments was grievous unto
him. And that with repenting the Duke should nothing avail, for there was no
way left to redeem his offense by benefits, but he should sooner destroy
himself then save the King, who with his brother, and his kinsfolks he saw
in such places imprisoned, as the protect or might with a beck destroy them
all: and without all doubt would do it indeed, if there were any new
enterprise attempted. And that it was likely as the Protector had provided
privy guard for himself, so had he spials for the Duke and trains to have
caught him, if he should be against him, and that peradventure from them, whom
he least suspected. For the state of things, and the dispositions of men were
then such, that a man could not well tell whom he might trust, or whom he
might fear. These things and such like, being beaten into the Dukes mind,
brought him to that point, that where he had repented the way that he had
entered, yet would he go forward in the same, and since he had once begun,
he would stoutly go through. And therefore to this wicked enterprise which
he believed could not be avoided, he bent himself, determining, since the
common mischief could not be amended, he would turn it as much as he might to
his own commodity.

(40) Then was it agreed, that the Protector should have the Dukes aid to make
him King, and The covenants betwixt the Protector and the Duke of Buckingham.
that the Protectors only lawful son should marry the Dukes daughter; and
that the Protector should grant him the quiet possession of the Earldome of
Hertford, which he claimed at his inheritance, and could never obtain it in
King Edwards time. Besides these requests of the Duke, the Protector of his
own accord, promised him a great quantity of the Kings treasury, and of his
household stuff. And when they were thus at a point betwixt themselves, they
went about to prepare for the Coronation of the young king as they would have it
seem. And that they might turn both the eyes and minds of men from perceiving
of their drifts otherwhere, the Lords were sent for from all parts of the
Realm, and came flocking unto the solemnity. But the Protector and Duke after
they had sent the Lord Cardinal Archbishop of York, then L. Chancellor, the
Bishop of Two counsels to diverse ends.
Ely, the Lords Stanley and Hastings, then Lord Chamberlain, with many other
Noblemen, to confer and devise about the Coronation in one place, as fast
they were in another place contriuing the contrary, to make the Protector king:
to which counsel, albeit there were adhibited very few, and they very secret;
yet began here and there, some muttering among the people, as though all should
not long be well, though they neither knew what they feared, nor wherefore: were
it that before such great things, men's hearts of a secret instinct of nature
misgiue them, as the Sea without wind swells of himself sometime before a
tempest; or were it that some one man happily The mistrust of the times.
somewhat perceiving, filled many men with suspicion, though he showed few
men what he knew. Howbeit somewhat the dealing it self made men to muse on
the matter, though the counsel were close. For by little and little, all men
withdrewe from the Tower, and repaired to Crosbies in Bishopsgate street,
where the Protector kept his house in great state. So that the Protector had
the resort, and the King left in a manner desolate. And whilst some for their
business made suite to such as were in All flock to the Protector.
office for the King, some were secretly by their friends warned, that it might
happily do them no good, to be too much attendant about the king without the
Protectors appointment, who then began to remove many of the Princes old
servants, and in their stead to place about him new.

(41) Thus many things meeting together, partly by purpose, and partly by
chance, caused at length not only the common people that move with the wind,
but wisemen also, and some Lords likewise, to mark and muse at the matter;
insomuch, that the Lord Stanley, who was after Earl of Darby, said to Lord
Stanleyes speech to the Lord Chamberlain.
the Lord Hastings, that he much misliked these two several counsels. For
while we (quoth he) talk of one matter in the one place, little wot we,
whereof they talk in the other place. My Lord (quoth the Lord Hastings) of my
life never doubt you: for while Catesby.
one man is there, which is never thence, never can things be moved that should
sound amiss against me, but it shall be in mine ears ere it be well out of
their mouths: this meant he by Catesby, which was of his near counsel, and
whom he very familiarly used, and in his most weighty matters put no man in so
special trust, nor no man so much beholden unto him as Catesby was. A man
indeed well learned in the Laws of this Land, and by special favor of the
Lord Chamberlain, in good authority, and bare much rule in Leicestershire,
where the Lord Hastings power chiefly lay. But surely great pity it was, that
he had not had either more truth, or less wit. For his dissimulation only
kept all that mischief Catesby the cause of much mischief.
up: in whom if the Lord Hastings had not put so special trust, the Lord
Stanley and he had departed with diverse other Lords, and had broken all the
dance, for many ill signs that he saw, which he now construes all to the best.
So surely thought he that there could be no harm toward him intended, in
that counsel where Catesby was. And of truth, the Protector and Duke of
Buckingham, made very good semblance unto the Lord Hastings, whom undoubtedly
the Protector loved well, and loath was tohaue lost him, but for fear, least
his life should have quailed their purpose; for which cause he moved Catesby
to prove with some words, cast out a far off, whether he could think it
possible to win the L. Chamberlain to their part. But Catesby whether he
assayed him, or assayed him not, reported unto Catesby set to sound the Lord
Hastings.
them, as he found him so fast, and heard him speak so terrible words, that
he durst no further break. True it is, that the Lord Chamberlain, of very
trust showed unto Catesby, the distrust that others began to have in the
matter: and therefore Catesby fearing as Lord Haestinge speeches concerning the
plot.
he affirmed, least their motion might with the Lord Hastings diminish his
credence, whereunto only all the matter leaned; he counseled and procured the
Protector hastily to rid him. And much the rather, Catesby false to his founder.
for that he trusted by his death, to obtain much of the rule that the Lord
Hastings bare in his Country: the only desire whereof, was the allectiue that
induced him to be partner, and one special contriuer of all this horrible
treason.

(42) Soon after this, upon Friday the thirteenth The counsel sat in the
Tower for the ordering of the young Kings Coronation.
day of June, many Lords assembled in the Tower, and there sat in counsel,
devising the honorable solemnity of the Kings Coronation; of the which the
time appointed was so near, that the Pageants and subtilties were in making
day and night at Westminster, and much victual killed, that afterward was cast
away. These Lords sitting together communing of this matter, the Protector came
in amongst them about nine of the clock, saluting them courteously, and
excusing himself, that he had been from them so long, saying merrily, I have
bin The Protectors dissimulation.
a sleeper this day. And after a little talk with them, he said to the Bishop
of Ely, My Lord, you have very good Strawburies at your Garden in Holborne, I
pray you let us have a mess of them: Gladly my Lord, said the Bishop, would
God I had some better thing as ready to pleasure you as that: and therewith in
all haste he sent his servant for a mess of Strawburies. Whereupon the
Protector setting the Lords fast in conference, prayed them to spare him for a
little while, and departed thence. But soon after, betwixt ten and eleven, he
returned into the counsel Chamber amongst them, with a wonderful sour and
angry countenance, knitting the brows, frowning and fretting, and g^awing on
his lips, sat him down in his place, all the Lords much dismayed, sore
maruelling of this his sudden The Protector now another man.
change, and what thing should him aile: He sitting thus a while, began thus to
speak, What are they worthy to have, that compass and imagine the destruction
of me, being so near of blood unto the King, and Protector of his royal
person and his Realm? At which question, all the Lords sat sore astonished,
musing much by whom this question should be meant, of which every man knew
himself clear.

(43) Then the Lord Chamberlain, as he that Lord Hastings speech to the
Protectors question.
for the love betwixt them, thought he might be bouldest with him, answered
and said, That they were worthy to be punished as heinous traitors whatsoever
they were: and the same all the other Lords affirmed. That is (quoth the
Protector) yonder sorceresse my brothers wife, meaning the Queen, and others
with her: at these words many of the Lords that favored her, were greatly
abashed: but the L. Hastings was in his mind better content, that it was moved
by her, then by any other whom he loved better: howbeit, his heart somewhat
grudged, that he was not before made of counsel in this matter, as he was of
the taking of her kindred, and of their putting to death, which were by his
assent before devised to be beheaded at Pomfret the self same day, in which
he was not aware, how it was by other devised, that himself should be
beheaded the same day at London. Then said the Protector, ye shall all see in
what wise that Sorceresse, and that other witch The Queen accused of Sorcery*
of her counsel, Shores wife, with their affinity, have by their sorcerie and
witchcraft wasted my body. And therewith he plucked up his doublet sleeue to
the elbow upon his left arm, where he showed a wearish withered arm, and
small, as it was never other.

(44) And thereupon every man's mind sore misgaue them, well perceiving that
this matter was but a quarrel. For they well knew, that the Queen was too wise
to go about any such folly; and if she would, yet would she of all others, not
make Shores wife of counsel, whom of all women she most hated, as that
Concubine whom the King her husband had most loved. And also no man there
present, but knew well enough, that his arm was over such since The withered
a^ne of the Protector by nature, and not by (...).
his birth. Nevertheless the Lord Chamberlain, (which from the death of King
Edward kept Shores wife, on whom he somewhat doated in the Kings life, saving
a^ it is said, that he forbear her for reverence toward the King, or else of
a certain kind of fidelity to his friend) answered and said: Certainly my
Lord, if they have so heinously done, they be worthy of heinous punishment.
What (quoth the Protector) thou seruest me I ween with ifs and with ands, I
tell thee they have so done, and that I will make good on thy body Traitor.
And therewith as in a great anger, he clapped his fist upon the board a great
rap: at which token given, one without the Chamber cried, treason, wherewith a
door clapped, and in came rushing men in harness, as many as the Chamber might
hold, and anon the Protector said to the Lord Hastings, I arrest thee Traitor:
What me my Lord quoth he? yea thee Traitor quoth the Protector; and another
The L. Chamberlain arrested.
let fly at the Lord Stanley, who shrunk at the stroke under the Table, or
else his head had been cleft to the teeth: for as swiftly as he shrunk, yet
came the blood about his ears. Then were they all quickly bestowed in diverse
Chambers, excepting The L. Staley wounded at Council Table.
only the Lord Chamberlain, whom the Protector bad speed and shriue him
apace, for by S. Paul said he, I will not to dinner till I see thy head off.
It booted him not to ask why, but heavily took a Priest at adventure, and
made a short shrift, for a longer would not be suffered: The Protector made so
much haste to dinner, which he might not go to, till this was done for saving
of his oath. So was he brought forth unto the green, before the Chapel
within the Tower, and his head laid down upon a long logge of timber, and there
struck off, and afterward his body with the head, was enterred at Windsor,
beside the body of K. Edward. The L. Chamberlain beheaded.


(45) A maruailous case it is to hear, either of the warnings that he should
have voided, or the tokens of that he could not avoid: for the self night
before his death, the Lord Stanley sent a trusty secret Messenger unto him at
Midnight in all the have, requiring him to rise, and ride away with him, for he
was utterly disposed no longer to abide, he had so The L. Stanleys dream.
fearful a dream: in which he thought, that a Bore with his tuskes, so razed
them both by the heads, that the blood ran about both their shoulders. And
forasmuch as the Protector gave the Bore for his cognizance, this dream made
so fearful an impression in his heart, that he was thoroughly determined no
longer to tarry, but had his horse ready, if the Lord Hastings would go with
him, to ride yet so far the same night, that they would be out of danger
before it was day. Ah good Lord (quoth the Lord Hastings to the Messenger)
leans my Lord thy Master so much to such trifles, and has faith in dreams,
which either his own fear fantasieth, or do rise in the nights rest, by
reason of the days thoughts? Tell him it is plain Witchcraft, to believe in
such dreams, which if they The L. Hastings answer to the L. Stanleye. me^age.
were tokens of things to come, why thinks he not, that we might be as
likely to make them true, by our going, if we were caught and brought back (as
friends fail flyers) for then had the Bore a cause likely to raze us with his
tuskes, as men that fled for some falsehood: wherefore, either there is no
peril, nor none there is indeed, or if any be, it is rather in going then
abiding. And if we must needs fall in peril; one way or other, yet had I
rather, that men should see, it were by other men's falsehood, then think it our
fault or faint-heart. And therefore go to thy Master man, and commend me to
him; and pray him to be merry and have no fear; for I assure him, I am as
sure of the man that he wotteth of, as I am of mine own hand. God send Grace
Sir (said the Messenger) and went his way.

(46) Certain it is also, that in riding toward Predictions toward the Lord
Hastings.
the Tower the same morning in which he was beheaded, his horse twice or
thrice stumbled with him, almost to the falling; which thing, albeit each man
knows daily happens, to them to whom no such mischance is toward, yet has it
been of an old fite and custom observed, as a token oftentimes, notably
foregoing some great misfortune: Now this that follows was no warning, but an
envious scorn. The same morning before he was up, came a Knight unto him, as
it were of courtesy, to accompany him to the Counsel; but of truth sent by the
Protector, to haste him thitherwards, with whom he was of secret confederacy in
that purpose, a mean man at that time, but now of great authority. This
Knight, when it happened the Lord Chamberlain by the way to stay his horse, and
commune a while with a Priest whom he met in Towerstreet, brake his tale, and
said merrily to him; what my Lord, I pray you come on, whereto talk you so long
with a Priest, you have no need of a Priest yet, and therewith laughed upon
him, as though he would say, ye shall have soon. But so little wist the
other what he meant, and so little mistrusted his present peril, as he never
was merrier, nor never so full of good hope in his life, which self thing is
often seen a sign of change; but I shall rather let any thing pass me, then
the vain surety of man's mind so near his death. Upon the very Tower-wharfe,
so near the place where his head was struck off soon after, there met he
with one Hastings, a Purseuant of his own name. And The Lord Hastings speech
to a Purseuant.
of their meeting in that place, he was put in remembrance of another time, in
which it had happened them before, to meet in the like manner together in the
same place. At which other time the L. Chamberlain had been accused unto King
Edward by the Lord Rivers the Queens brother, in such wise as he was for the
while, (but it lasted not long) far fallen into the Kings indignation, and
stood in great fear of himself. And forasmuch as he now met this Purseuant
in the same place, that ieopardy so well passed, it gave him great pleasure to
talk with him thereof; with whom he had before talked thereof in the same
place, while he was therein. And therefore he said, ah Hastings, art thou
remembered that I met thee once here with a heavy heart? yea my Lord (quoth he)
that remember I well, and thanked be God, they got no good, nor you no great
harm. Thou would say so (quoth he) if thou knew so much as I know, which
few know else as yet, and more shall shortly. That meant he by the Lords of the
Queens kindred, which were taken before, and should that same day be beheaded
at Pomfret: which he well wist, but was nothing aware, that the axe hung over
his own head; In faith man (quoth he) I was never so sorry, nor never stood in
so great dread of my life, as I did when thou and I met here. And lo, how the
world is changed, now stand my enemies in the danger (as thou may hap to
hear more hereafter) and I never in mylife so merry, nor never in so great
surety. The vain and sudden state of man.
Oh good God, the blindness of our mortal nature, when he most feared he was in
good surety, when he reckened himself surest, he lost his life, and that
within two, hours after. Thus ended this honorable man, a good Knight and a
gentle, of great authority with his Prince, of living somewhat dissolute,
plain and open to his enemies, and secret to The description of the Lord
Hastings.
his friends, easy to be beguiled, as he that of good heart and courage
forestudied no perils; a loving man, a passing well beloved: very faithful, and
trusty enough, trusting indeed too much. Now flew the fame of this Lords death
swiftly through the City, and from thence further, like a wind in every man's
ear.

(47) But the Protector immediately after dinner, intending to set some color
upon the matter, Citizens sent for into the Tower to the Protector.
sent in all have for many substantial men, out of the City into the Tower, at
whose coming thither, himself with the Duke of Buckingham, stood harnessed in
old rusty briganders, such as no more, man should ween, that they would
vouchsafe to have put on their backs, except that some sudden neces sity, had
constrained them thereto. And then the Protector showed them, that the Lord
Chamberlain, and others of his conspiracy, had contrived to have suddenly
destroyed him and the Duke there the same day in Counsel. And what they
intended further, was not yet well known. Of which their treason he never had
knowledge, before ten of the clock, the same forenoone, which sudden fear
drove them to put on for their defense, such harness as came next to hand: and
so had God helped The fained fear of the Lord Protector.
them, that the mischief returned upon them that would have done it: and this
he required them to report.

(48) Every man answered him fair, as though no man mistrusted the matter,
which oftruth no man believed; yet for the further appeasing of the peoples
mind, he sent immediately after dinner, in all haste, an Herald of Arms,
with a Proclamation to be made through the City in the Kings name, containing
that the Lord Hastings with diverse others of his traitorous purpose, had before
conspired the A Proclamation made to publish the Lord Hastings treasons.
same day, to have slain the Lord Protector, and Duke of Buckingham, sitting
in the Council, and after to have taken upon them, to rule the King and the
Realm, at their own pleasures; thereby to pill and spoil, whom they listed
uncontrolled. And much matter there was in that Proclamation, devised to the
slander of the Lord Chamberlain, as that he was an evil Counselor to the
Kings father, entising him to many things, highly redounding to his great
dishonor, and to the universal hurt of his Realm, by his evil company,
sinister procuring, and ungracious example as well in many other things, as in
the vicious living, and inordinate abusion of his body, both with many others,
and especially with Shores wife, who was one also of his most secret Counsel,
in this heinous treason, with whom he lay nightly, and namely, the night last
past, before his death, so that it was the less marvel, if ungracious living
brought him to an unhappy ending, which he was now put unto, by the most dread
commandment of the Kings highness, and of his honorable and faithful
Counsel, both for his demerits, being so openly taken in his falsely conceived
treason, as also least the delaying of his execution, might have encouraged
other mischievous persons partners of his conspiracy, to gather and assemble
themselves together in making some great commotion for his deliverance, whose
hope being now by his wel-deserued death politickely repressed, all the Realm
should by Gods grace, rest in good quiet and peace.

(49) Now was this Proclamation made within The Protectors subtilty further
known by his Proclamation.
two hours, after that he was beheaded, and was so curiously indicted, and so
fair written in parchment, in so well a set hand, and therewith of it self so
long a process, as every child might perceive, that it was prepared before.
For all the time between his death, and the proclaiming, could scant have
suffised unto the bare writing alone; had it been but in paper, and scribled
forth in have at adventure. So that upon the proclaiming thereof, one that was
Schoolmasters of Paul's; of chance standing by, and comparing the shortness of
the time, with the length of the matter, said unto them that stood about him;
Here is a gay goodly cast, foul cast away for have: and a Merchant The
Schoolmasters opinion.
answered him, that it was written by Prophecy. Now then by and by, as it were
for anger, not for covetousness, the Protector sent the Sheriffs of London,
into the house of Shores wife (for her husband dwelled not with her) and
spoiled her of all The Sheriffs of London carry Shores wife to prison.
that she had, above the value of three thousand marks, carrying her through
London unto the Tower, and there left her Prisoner, where (for fashion sake) he
laid to her charge, that she went about to bewitch him, and that she was of
Counsel with the Lord Chamberlain to destroy him: in conclusion, when no
color could fasten upon these matters, then laid he hainously unto her
charge, the thing that her self could not deny, that all the world wist was
true, and that neithlesse every (...) laughed at, to hear it then so
suddenly, so highly taken, that she was naught of her body. And for that
cause (as a good continent Prince; clear and faultlesse himself, sent out of
heaven into this vicious world for the amendment of men's manners) after she
had lain Prisoner in Ludgate, he caused the Bishop of London to put her to
open penance, going before the Cross in procession upon a sunday, with a taper
Shores wife did penance.
in her hand. In which she went in countenance and pace demure so womanly, and
albeit she were out of all array save her kirtle only, yet went she so fair
and lovely, namely while the wondering of the people cast a comely rud in her
cheeks (of which before she had most mist) that her great shame, wan her All
commend and pity Shores wife.
much praise, among those that were more amorous of her body, then curious of
her soul. And many good folk also that hated her living, and glad to see
sin so corrected, yet pitied the more her penance, then reioiced therein,
when they considered that the Protector procured it more of a corrupt intent,
then any virtuous affection.

(50) This woman was borne in London, worshipfully The description of Jane
Shore.
friended, honestly brought up, and very well married, saving somewhat too
soon; her husband an honest Citizen, young, and goodly, and of good substance.
But for as much as they were coupled ere she were well ripe, she not very
fervently loved, for whom she never longed; which was happily the thing that the
more made her incline unto the Kings appetite, when he required her. Howbeit
the respect of his roialty, the hope of gay apparel, ease, pleasure, and other
wanton wealth, was able soon to pierce a soft tender heart. But when the King
had abused her, anon her husband (as he was an honest man, and one that could
his good, not presuming to touch a Kings concubine) left her up to him
altogether. When the King died, the Lord Chamberlain took her, which in the
Kings days, albeit he was sore enamoured upon her, yet he forbear her, either
for reverence, or for a certain friendly faithfulness: proper she was, and
fair; nothing in her body that you could have changed, unless you would have
wished her somewhat higher. Thus they say that knew her in her youth. Albeit
some that now see her (for as yet she lives) deem her never to She died the
eighteen year of King Henry the eight says John Harding.
have been well visaged, whose judgment seems to me somewhat like, as
though we could guess the beauty of one long before departed, by her scalpe
taken out of the Charnell house: for now she is old, lean, withered, and
dried up, nothing left but riueled skin, and hard bone; and yet being even
such, who so well advise her visage, might guess and devise, which parts how
filled, would make it a fair face. Yet delighted not men, so much in her
beauty, as in her pleasant behavior, for a proper wit she had, and could both
read well and write, merry in company, ready and quick of answer, neither
mute nor full of babble, sometime taunting without displeasure, and not without
disport: in whom King Edward took special pleasure, whose favor to say the
truth (for sin it were to belie the Devil) Shores wife did much good, but no
man hurt.
she never abused to any man's hurt, but to many a man's comfort and relief,
when the King took displeasure, she would mitigate and appease his mind; where
men were out of favor, she would bring them in his grace, for many that
highly offended she obtained pardon. Of great forfeytures she gate them
remission. And finally, in many weighty suites she stood many men in great
stead, either for none, or very small rewards, and those rather gay then rich,
either for that she was content with the deed it self well done, or for that
she delighted to be sued unto, and to show what she was able to do with the
King, or for that wanton women and wealthy, be not always covetous. I doubt
not some shall think this woman too slight a thing to be written of, and set
among the remembrances of The Subject not unworthy to be written.
great matters: which they shall specially think, that happily shall esteem
her only by that they now see her. But to my seeming, the chance is so much
the more worthy to be remembered, in how much she is now in the more beggarly
condition, vnfriended, and worn out of acquaintance, after good substance,
after so great favor with a Prince, after so great suit, and seeking to, of
all those, that in those days had business to speed, as many other men were
in their times, which be now famous only by the infamy of their ill deeds:
her doings were not much less, albeit they be much less remembered, because
they were not so evil: for men use, if they receive an evil turn, to write
it in marble: and who so does us a good turn, we write it in the dust; which
is not worst proved by her: for at this The state of the world.
day she beggeth of many, at this day living, that at this day had begged if
she had not been.

(51) Now it was so devised by the Protector and his Council, that the self
same day in which the L. Chamberlain was beheaded in the Tower of London, and
about the self same hour was then (not without his assent) beheaded at
Pomfrait, the foreremembred The Lords of the Queens blood beheaded at Pomfrait.
Lords and Knights, that were taken from the King at Northampton and
Stony-Stratford; which thing was done in the presence, and by the order of Sir
Richard Ratcliffe Knight, whose service the Protector specially used in that
counsel, and in the execution of such lawless enterprises, as a man that had
been long secret with him, having experience of the world, and a shrewd wit,
short and rude in speech, rough and boisterous of behavior, bold in
mischief, as far from pity, as from all fear of God. This Knight bringing
them out of prison to the Scaffold, and showing to the people present, that
they were Traitors, not suffering them to speak, or declare their innocence,
lest their words might have inclined men to pity them, and to hate the
Protector and his part; caused them hastily without Judgment, process or
manner of order to be beheaded, and without all guilt, but only that they
were good men, too true to the King, and too nigh to the Queen.

(52) Now when the Lord Chamberlain, and those other Lords and Knights were
thus beheaded The Protector sought to strike whiles the iron was hot.
and rid out of the way: then thought the Protector, that while men mused
what the matter meant, while the Lords of the Realm were about him out of
their own strengthes, while no man wist what to think, nor whom to trust,
before they should have space to dispute, and digest the matter, and make
parties, it were best hastily to pursue his purpose, and put himself in
possession of the Crown, ere men could have time to devise how to resist. But
now was all the study, by what means the matter being of it self so heinous,
might be first broken to the people in such wife as it might be well taken. To
this counsel they took diverse, such as they thought meet to be trusted,
likely to be induced to that part, and able to stand them in stead, either by
power or policy: Among whom they made of counsel Edmond Shaa Knight, then
Mayor of London, The Mayor of London made of the Protectors counsel.
who upon trust of his own advancement, whereof he was of a proud heart, highly
desirous, should frame the City to their appetite. Of Spiritual men they took
such as had wit, and were in authority among the people, for opinion of their
learning, and had no scrupulous conscience. Among these had they John Shaa
Clerk brother to the Mayor, and Friar Pinker Provincial of the Augustine
Friars, both of them Doctors in Divinity, both great Preachers, both of more
learning then virtue, and of Shaa and Pinker two flattring Preachers.
more fame then learning: for they were before greatly esteemed of the common
people; but after that never. Of these two, the one made a Sermon in praise of
the Protector before the Coronation; the other after, both so full of tedious
flattery, as no man's ear could abide them.

(53) Pinker in his Sermon so lost his voice, that he was forced to leave off,
and came down in the Pinker preached at S Marie Hospital, and Dotor Shaa at
Paul's Cross.
midst. Doctor Shaa by his sermon lost his honesty, and soon after his life,
for very shame of the world, into which he durst never after come abroad. But
the Friar forced for no shame, and so it harmed him the less. Howbeit some
doubt, and many think, that Pinker was not of counsel in the matter before
the Coronation, but after the common manner, fell to flattery after: namely,
since his sermon was not incontinent upon it, but at S. Mary's Hospital in the
Easter week following. But certain it is, that Doctor Shaa was of counsel in
the beginning, so far forth as they determined that he should first break
the matter in a Sermon at Paul's Cross, in which he should by the authority
of his preaching, incline the people to the Protectors ghostly purpose. But now
was all the labor and study, in the devise of some convenient pretext; for
which the people should be content to depose The plot and device how to
entitle the Protector to the Crown.
the Prince, and accept the Protector for King. In which diverse things they
devised: but the chief thing and the weightiest of all, the invention rested
in this, that they should allege bastardy, either in K. Edward himself, or in
his children, or both. So that he should seem disabled to inherit the
Crown, by the Duke of York, and the Prince by him. To lay bastardie in King
Edward, sounded openly to the rebuke of the Protectors own mother, who was
mother to them both: for in that point could be none other color, but to
pretend that his own mother was an adultresse, which notwithstanding to further
the purpose he let not: but yet, he The son makes the mother an
adultresse.
would that point should be less, and more favorably handled, not fully
plain and directly, but that the matter should be touched aslope, and
craftily, as though men spared in that point to speak all the truth for fear
of his displeasure. But the other point, concerning the bastardie that they
devised K Edward and his children made bastards.
to surmise in K. Edwards children, that would he should be openly declared,
and enforced to the uttermost. The color and pretext whereof, was a contract
pretended to be made by King Edward unto the Lady Lucy, whereof we have spoken
in the reign of the said King: which invention how simple soever, yet it liked
them, to whom it sufficed to have somewhat to say, while they were sure to be
compelled to no larger proof then themselves list to make.

(54) Now then it was by the Protector and his Council concluded, that Doctor
Shaa should signify in his sermon aforesaid, that neither King Edward
himself, nor the Duke of Clarence were lawfully begot, nor were the very
Children of the Duke of York, but begot unlawfully by other persons, by
adultery of the Duchess their mother. And also that dame Elizabeth Lucy was
verily the wife of K. Edward, and so the Prince and all his other children
begot by the Queen, were all of them bastards. And according to this devise
Doctor Shaa upon Sunday the nineteenth of June at Paul's Cross in a frequent
assembly, took for the theme of his sermon this saying, Spuria vitulamina non
agent radices altas: Bastard slips shall never take deep root. Whereupon, when
he had The text and contents of Doctor Shaas sermon.
showed the great grace that God gives, and secretly infundeth in right
generation after the laws of Matrimony, then declared he, that commonly those
children lacked that grace, and for the punishment of their parents, were for
the more part unhappy, which were begot in base, but specially in adultery. Of
which though some by the ignorance of the world, and the truth hid from
knowledge inherit for the time other men's lands, yet God always so provides,
that it continues not in their blood long, but the truth coming to light, the
rightful inheritors be restored, and the bastards slip pulled up ere it can
take any deep root. And when he had laid for the proof and confirmation of
this sentence certain examples taken out of the old testament, and other
ancient histories, then he began to descend into the praise of the Lord
Richard, late Duke of York, calling him the father to the Lord Protector, and
declared the title of his heirs unto the Crown, to whom it was after the
death of King Henry the sixth, entailed by authority of Parliament. Then showed
he, that the very right heir of his body lawfully begotten, was only the Lord
Protector. For he declared then that King Edward was never lawfully married
unto the Queen, but was before God, husband unto Dame Elizabeth Lucy, and so
his children bastards. And besides that, neither King Edward himself, nor the
Duke of Clarence, among those that Shaas shamlesse assertions.
were secret in the household, were reckoned very certainly for the children of
the Noble Duke, as those that by their features, resembled other known men,
more then him from whose virtuous conditions, he said also, that King Edward
was far off. But the Lord Protector he said, the very Noble Prince, the
special pattern of Knightly prowess, as well in all Princely behavior, as in
the lineaments and favor of his visage, representing the very face of the
noble Duke his father: This is he (quoth he) the fathers own figure, this is
his own countenance, the very print of his visage, the very undoubted Image,
and plain express likeness of that noble Duke.

(55) Now it was before devised, that in the speaking of these words, the
Protector sold have come in among the people to the sermon ward, to the end
that those words meeting with his presence, might have been taken among the
hearers, as though the holy Ghost had put them in the Preachers mouth, The^
Preachers intention prevented.
and should have moved the people even then to cry, King Richard, King
Richard, that it might have been after said, that he was specially chosen by
God, and in manner by miracle. But this devise quailed, either by the
Protectors negligence, or by the Preachers over much diligence, for while the
Protector found by the way tarrying, lest he should prevent those words, and
the Doctor fearing least he should come ere his sermon could come to these
words, hasted his matter thereto, who was come to them and past them, and had
entered into other matter ere the Protector came. Whom when he beheld coming,
he suddenly left the matter with which he was in hand, and without any
deduction thereunto, out of all order, and out of all frame, began to repeat
those words again: This is the very Noble Prince, the special pattern of
Knightly prowess, which as well in all Princely behavior, as in the lineaments
and favor of his visage, represents the very face of the Noble Duke of York
his father: this is the fathers own figure, this is his own countenance, the
very print of his visage, the sure undoubted Image, the plain express
likeness of the noble Duke, whose remembrance can never die while he lives.
While these words were in speaking, the Protector accompanied with the Duke of
Buckingham, went through the people, into the place where the Doctors commonly
stand in an upper story, where he stood to hear the sermon. But the people
were so far from crying King Richard, that they stood as if they had been
turned into stones, for wonder of this shameful sermon. After which once
ended, the Preacher got him home, and never after durst look out for shame,
but kept himself out of Gods heavy punishment upon the false flattering
Preacher.
sight like an Owl. And when he once asked one, that had been his old friend,
what the people talked of him, albeit that his own conscience well showed him
that they talked no good, yet when the other answered him, that there was in
every man's mouth spoken of him much shame, it so struck him to the heart, that
within few days after, he withered and consumed away.

(56) On the tuesday following this sermon, there came into the Guild Hall in
London the Duke of Buckingham, The Duke of Buckingham comes to the Guildhall.
accompanied with diverse Lords and Knights, more perchance then knew the
message which they brought. And there in the East end of the Hall, where the
Mayor keeps the hustings, the Mayor, and Aldermen being assembled about him,
and all the commons of the City gathered before him: after silence commanded in
the Protectors name upon great pain, the Duke stood up, and (as he was neither
unlearned, and of nature maruellously well spoken) he said unto the people
with a clear and loud voice in this manner. Friends, for the zeal and hearty
favor that we bear you, we be come to Buckinghams oration to the commons of
London.
break unto you, a matter of great weight, and no less weighty, then pleasing
to God, and profitable to all the Realm: nor to no part of the Realm more
profitable then to you the Citizens of this noble City. For why, the thing that
we wot well you have long time lacked, and so longed for, that you would have
given great good for, that you would have gone far to fetch, that thing we be
come hither to bring you, without your labor, The fine glosings of the Duke of
Buckingham.
pain, cost, adventure or ieopardie. What thing is that? Certes, the surety of
your own bodies, the quiet of your wives, and your daughters, the safeguard of
your goods: of all which things in times past you stood evermore in doubt. For
who was there of you all, that could account himself Lord of his own goods,
among so many snares and traps as were set therefore, among so much pilling and
polling; among so many taxes and tallages, of which there was never end, and
often times no need: or if any were, it rather grew of riot, and unreasonable
wast, then any necessary or honorable charge: So that there was daily pilling
from good men and honest, great substance of goods to be lashed out among
unthrifts, so far forth that fifteens sufficed not, nor any usual manner of
known taxes: but under an easy name of benevolence and good will, the
Commissioners so much of every man took, as no man could with his good will
have given. As though that name of benevolence, had signified that every man
should pay not King Edwards exactions made more then they were.
what himself of his own good will list to grant, but what the King of his
good will list to take. Who never asked little, but every thing was haunsed
above the measure, amercements turned into fines, fines into ransomes; small
trespasses into misprision; misprision into treason. Whereof I think no man
looks that we should remember you of examples by name, as though Burdet were
forgotten, who was for a word in haste spoken, cruely beheaded, by the
misconstruing of the Laws of this Realm for the Princes pleasure: with no
less honor to Markham then chief Justice, that left his office rather then
he His tyranny toward his subjects exemplified by Burdet and Others.
would assent to that judgment, then to the dishonesty of those, that either
for fear or flattery gave that judgment. What Cook your own worshipful
neighbor, Alderman and Mayor of this noble City; who is of you either so
negligent that he knows not, or so forgetful that he remembers not, or so
hard hearted that he pittieth not that worshipful man's loss? What speak we
of loss? His utter spoil and undeserved destruction, only for that it
happened those to favor him whom the Prince favored not. We need not (I
suppose) to rehearse of these any mo by name, since there be (I doubt not) many
here present, that either in themselves, or in their nigh friends, have known
as well their goods, as their persons greatly endangered, either by fained
quarrels, or small matters agrieued with heinous names. And also there was no
crime so great, of which there could lack a pretext. For since the King
preventing the time of his inheritance, attained the Crown by battle; it
sufficed in a rich man for a pretext of treason, to have been of kindred or
aliance, near familiarity, or longer acquaintance, with any of those that were
at any time the Kings enemies, which was at one time or other more then half
the Realm. Thus were your goods never in surety, and yet No safety of goods
or life as he falsely alleged.
they brought your bodies in ieopardie, beside the common adventure of open
war, which albeit, that it is ever the will and occasion of much mischief,
yet it is never so mischievous, as where any people fall at distance among
themselves, not in no earthly nation so deadly and so pestilent, as when it
happens among us: and among us never so long continued distention, nor so
many battles in that season, not so cruel and so deadly fought as was in that
Kings days that dead is, God forgive it his soul. In whose time, and by whose
occasion, what about the getting of the Garland, keeping it, loosing it, and
winning again, it has cost more English blood, then has twice the winning of
The rage of civil wars cost England more blood then twice the winning of France
had done.
France: In which inward war among our selves, has been so great effusion
of the ancient noble blood of this Realm, that scarcely the half remains,
to the great infeebling of this noble Land, beside many a good Town ransacked,
and spoiled by them that have been going to the held, or coming from thence.
And peace long after not much surer then war. So that no time there was, in
which rich men for their money, and great men for their Lands, or some or other
for some fear or some displeasure, were not out of peril; for whom trusted he
that mistrusted his own brother? whom spared he, that killed his own brother?
Great dangers alleged and slenderly proved.
or who could perfectly love him, if his own brother could not? what manner of
folk he most favored, we shall for his honor spare to speak of; howbeit,
this wot you well all, that who so was best, bare always least rule; and more
suite was in those days unto Shores wife, a vile and abominable strumpet,
then to all the Lords in England; except unto those that made her their
Protector: which simple woman was well named, and honest, till the King for his
wanton lust, and sinful affection, bereft her from her husband, a right
honest substantial young man among you. And in that point, which in good faith
I am sorry to speak of, saving that it is in vain to keep in counsel that
thing which every man knows; the Kings greedy appetite was insatiable, and
every where over all the Realm intolerable, for no woman there was any where,
young or old, rich or King Edwards wantonness set out to the full.
poor, whom he set his eye upon, in whom he liked any thing, either person,
or favor, speech, pace, or countenance; but without all fear of God or any
respect of his own honor, murmur, or grudge of the world, he would
importunately pursue his appetite, and have her, to the great destruction of
many a good woman, and great dolor to their husbands and other their friends,
which being honest people of themselves, so much regard the cleanness of their
ho^e, the chastity of their wives, and their daughters, that they had rather
loose all they had besides, then to have such a villainy done against them. And
albeit, that with this and his other importable dealings, the Realm was in
every part annoyed: yet specially, you here the Citizens of this noble City,
as well for that amongst you is most plenty of all such things, as minister
matters to such injuries, as for that you were nearest at hand, seeing that
near heereabout was commonly his most abieing. And yet you be the people whom
he had a singular cause well and kindly to entreat, as any part of the Realm,
not only, for that the Prince by this noble City, as his special Chamber,
and the special well renowned City of his Realm, much honorable London the
kings especial Chamber.
fame receives amongst all other nations: but also for that ye, not without
your great cost, and sundry perils and ieopardies in all his wars, bare even
your special favor to his part; which your kind minds borne unto the house
of York, since he has nothing worthily acquitted, there is one of that house,
that now by Gods grace, better shall: which thing to show you is the whole
sum and effect of this our present errand. It shall not, I The end of the
Dukes errand.
not well, need that I rehearse you again, that ye have already heard of him
that can better tell it, and of whom I am sure you will better believe it, and
reason is it so to be. I am not so proud to look therefore, that you should
reckon my words The great modesty that the Duke pretends.
of as great authority, as the Preachers of the word of God; namely, a man so
learned and so wi^e, that no man better wotteth what he should say, and thereto
so good and virtuous, as he would not say the thing which he wist he should
not say in the Pulpit; namely, into the which no honest man comes to lie:
which honorable Preacher, you An author like the subject.
well remember, substantially declared at Paul's Cross, on Sunday last past,
the right and title that the most excellent Prince, Richard Duke of Gloucester,
now Protector of this Realm, has unto the Crown and Kingdom of the same.
For as the Worshipful Doctor substantially made known unto you, the children
of King Edward the fourth were never lawfully begotten, forasmuch as the King
(leaving his very wife Dame Elizabeth Lucy) was never lawfully married unto the
Queen their mother, whose blood, saving that he set his voluptuous pleasure
before his honor, was full unmeet to be matched with his; and the mingling of
those bloods together has bin the effusion of great part of the noble blood of
this Realm. Whereby it The marriage o^ King Edward imputed a great mischief.
may well seem, the marriage was not well made, of which there is so much
mischief grown. For lack of which lawful coupling, as also other things,
which the said worshipful D. rather signified, then fully explaned; and which
things shall not be spoken for me, as the thing wherein every man forbeareth
to say what he knows, in avoiding displeasure of my noble Lord Protector;
bearing, as nature requires, a filial reverence to the Duchess his mother:
For these causes I say, before remembered, that is, for lack of other Issue
lawfully coming of that late noble Prince Richard Duke of York, to whose
royal blood, the crown of England and France, is by the high authority of
The Protector must be the only true heir to his father, and so to the Crown.
Parliament entailed; the right and title of the same, is by the just course of
inheritance, according to the common law of this Land, deuolued and come unto
the most excellent Prince the Lord Protector, as to the very lawfully begotten
son, of the fore-remembred noble Duke of York. Which thing well considered,
and the great knightly prowess pondered, with manifodle virtues, which in his
noble person singularly abound, the nobles and commons also of this Realm, and
specially of the North part, not willing any bastard blood to have the rule of
the Land, nor the abusions before the same used, any longer to continue, have
condiscended, and fully determined, to make humble petition to the most
puissant Prince the Lord Protector, that it may like his Grace at our humble
request, to take upon him the guiding and governance of this Realm, to the
wealth and increase of the same, according to his very right and just title.
Which thing I know well he will be loath to take upon him, as he whose wisdom
well perceives, the labor and study both of mind and body, that shall come
therewith, to whomsoever so will occupy the room, as I dare say he will, if
he take it. Which room, I warn you well, is no child's office: and that the
great wiseman well perceived, when he said, Vaeregno cuius Rex Scriptures
abused.
puer est: Woe is that Realm that has a child to their King. Wherefore so
much the more cause we have to thank God, that this noble Personage, which so
righteously is entitled thereunto, is of so sad age, and so great wisdom,
joined with so great experience: which albeit he will be loath (as I have said)
to take it upon him, yet shall he to our petition in that behalf, the more
graciously incline, if you the Worshipful Citizens of this the chief City of
this Realm, join with us the Nobles in this our said request. Which for your
own weal we doubt not but you will, and naythelesse, I heartily pray you so
to do, whereby ye shall do great profit to all the Realm beside, in The
Dukes pithy persuasions unto the Citizens.
choosing them so good a King, and unto your selves special commodity, to
whom his Majesty shall ever after bear so much the more tender favor, in how
much he shall perceive you the more prone and beneuolently minded toward his
election. Wherein dear friends, what mind you have, we require you plainly
to show us.

(57) When the Duke had said, and looked that the The Londoners are mute and
astonished at Buckinghams Oration.
people who^ he hoped the Mayor had framed before, should after this
proposition made, have cried, King Richard, King Richard; all was hushed and
mute, and not a word answered thereunto: wherewith the Duke was maruailously
abashed, and taking the Mayor nearer to him, with other that were about him
privy to that matter, said unto him softly, What means this, that the people
be so silent? Sir (quoth the Mayor) perchance they perceive you not well; that
shall we mend (quoth he) if that will help. And Buckingham goes over his
lesson again.
by and by somewhat louder, he rehearsed them the same matter again, in other
order and other words, so well and ornately, so evidently and plain, with
voice, gesture, and countenance so comely, that every man much maruailed that
heard him, and thought they never had in their hearing, so evil a tale so well
The reward of flattery.
told. But were it for wonder or fear, or that each man looked that other
speak first; not a word was there answered of all the people that stood
before, but was as still as the midnight, not so much as rowning among
themselves, by which they might seem to commune what was best to do. When the
Lord Mayor saw this, he with the other partners of that counsel drew about
the Duke, and said, That the people had not been accustomed there to be
spoken unto, but by the Recorder; who is the mouth of The Recorder commanded to
speak to the people^
the City, and happily to him they will answer. With that the Recorder called
Fitz-William, a sad man and an honest, who was so newly come into that office,
that he never had spoken to the people before, and loath was with that matter
to begin; notwithstanding, thereunto commanded by the Mayor, he made
rehearsal to the commons, of that the Duke had twice rehearsed to them
himself. But the Recorder so tempered his tale, that he showed every The
great silence of the people.
thing as the Dukes words, and no part of his own. But all this noting, no
change made in the people, which stood gazing at the bench as men altogether
amassed. Whereupon the Duke rowned unto the Mayor, and said, This is maruailous
obstinate silence, and therewith he turned unto the people again with these
words: Dear friends, we come to move you to that thing which peradventure we
not The Duke speaks once more.
so greatly needed, but that the Lords of this Realm and the Commons of other
parts might have sufficed, saving that we bear you such love, and so much set
by your friendship, that we would not willingly do without you the thing which
is for our honor and your wealth, which as it seems, either you see not, or
wey not; wherefore we require you, give us answer, whether ye be minded as all
the nobles of the Realm be, to have this noble Prince now Protector, to be
your King or not.

(58) At which words the people began to whisper among themselves secretly,
that the voice was neithe loud nor distinct, but as it were the sound of a
swarm of Bees, till at the last, in the nether end of the hall, a bushment of
the Dukes servants, and Nashfields, and of others belonging to the Protector,
with some prentises and laddes that thrust into the hall among the press,
began suddenly Prentices and Seruingmen the first proclamets of K. Richard.
at men's backs to cry out as loud as their throats would give, King Richard,
King Richard, and threw up their caps in token of joy. But they that stood
before, cast back their heads, maruelling thereat, yet nothing they said. And
when the Duke and Mayor saw this manner, they wisely turned it to their
purpose, and said it was a goodly cry, and a joyful, to hear every man with
one voice, no man saying nay: wherefore friends (quoth the Duke) since that we
well perceive that it is all your whole minds to have this noble man for your
King, whereof we shall make to his Grace so effectual report, that we doubt
not, but it shall redound unto your great wealth, and commodity: we require
that to morrow you go with us, and we with you unto his Noble Grace, to make
our humble request unto him in manner before, remembered. And therewith the Lords
came down, and the assembly dissolved for the most part sad, some with glad
semblances, and yet not very merry, yea and some that came with the Duke, not
able to dissemble their sorrow, The affection of the election seen by the
faces of the Assembly.
were feign at his back to turn their face to the wall, while the dolor of
their heart burst out of their eyes.

(59) On the next morrow, the Mayor with all the Aldermen, and chief Commoners
of the City The Nobles and Citizens assemble at Baynards Castle.
in their best array, assembling themselves together, resorted unto Baynards
Castle in Thames street, where the Protector lay. To which place repaired also
according to their appointment, the Duke of Buckingham, with diverse noble men
with him, beside many Knights and other Gentlemen. And thereupon the Duke sent
word unto the Lord Protector, of the being there of a great and honorable
company, to move a great matter unto his Grace: whereupon The Protector made it
strange to speak with such a multitude
the Protector made difficulty to come out unto them, but if he first knew
some part of their errand, as though he doubted, and partly distrusted the
coming of such a number unto him so suddenly, without any warning, or
knowledge whether they came for good or harm; then the Duke when he had
showed this unto the Mayor and other, that they might thereby see, how little
the Protector looked for this matter; they then sent unto him by the Messenger
such loving message again, and therewith so humbly besought him to vouchsafe,
that they might resort to his presence, to propose their intent, which they
would not impart to any other person; that at the last he came out of his
chamber, and yet not down unto them, but stood above in a gallery over them,
where they might see him and speak to him, as though he would not yet come
too near them, till he understood what they meant. And thereupon the Duke of
Buckingham first made humble petition unto him on the behalf of them all, that
his Grace would pardon them, and license them to propose unto his Grace, the
intent of their coming without his displeasure, without which Palpable
dissembling betwixt the Protector and Buckingham
pardon obtained, they durst not be so bold to move him in their suite. In
which albeit they meant as much honor to his Grace, as wealth to all the Realm
beside; yet were they not sure how his Grace would take it, whom they would in
no wise offend. Then the Protector (as he was very gentle of himself, and also
longed sore to know what they meant) gave him leave to propose what him liked,
verily trusting for the good mind that he bare them all, none of them would
intend any thing to himward, wherewith he ought to be grieved.

(60) When the Duke had this leave and pardon to speak, then waxed he bold to
show him their intent and purpose, with all the causes moving them thereunto,
as you have heard before: and finally, to beseech his Grace, that it would like
him of his accustomed goodness and zeal unto the realm now with his, eye of
pity, to behold the long continued distress, and decay of the same, and to
set his gracious hands to redress an amendment thereof, by taking upon him the
Crown and government The Protector entreated to accept of the Crown.
of the land; according to his right and title lawfully descended unto him, and
to the law of God, profit of the Realm, and unto his grace so much the more
honor, and less pain, in that, that never Prince reigned over any people
that were so glad to live under his obeisance, as the people of this land under
his.

(61) When the Protector had heard the proposition, he looked very strangely
thereat, and answered: That albeit it were, he partly knew the things by them
alleged to be true, yet such entire love he bare unto King Edward and his
children, that so much more he regarded his honor in other Realms about, then
the Crown of any one, of which he was never desirous, that he could not find
in his heart in this point to incline to their desire. For in all other Nations
where the truth was not well known, it would peradventure be thought, that it
was his own ambitious mind and devise, to depose the Prince, The Protector
says nay and would have it:
and to take himself the Crown, with which infamy he would not have his
honor stained for any Crown, in which he had ever perceived much more labor
and pain, then pleasure to him that would so use it, as he that would not,
were not worthy to have it. Notwithstanding he not only pardoned them the
motion that they made him, but also thanked them for the love and hearty favor
they bare him, praying them for his sake to give and bear the same to the
Prince, under whom he was, and would be content to live, and with his labor
and counsel, as far as should like the King to use him, he would do his
uttermost endeavor to set the Realm in good state, which was already in this
little time of his Protectorship (the praise be given to God) well begun, in
that the malice of such as were before, occasion of the contrary, and of new
intended to be, were now partly by good policy, partly more by Gods special
providence, then man's provision repressed.

(62) Upon this answer given, the Duke by the Protectors license, a little
rowned, as well with other noble men about him, as with the Mayor and Recorder
of London. And after that, upon like pardon desired Buckingham urges and
threatens the refusal.
and obtained, he showed aloude unto the Protector for a final conclusion,
that the Realm was at a point, King Edwards line should not any longer reign
over them, both for that they had so far gone, as it was now no surety to
retreat, as for that they thought it was for the weal universal to take that
way, although they had not yet begun it. Wherefore if it would like his grace
to take the Crown upon him, they would humbly beseech him thereunto; if he
would give them a resolute answer to the contrary, which they would be loath to
hear, then must they needs seek, and would not fail to find some other
noble man that would. These words much moved the Protector, which else as every
man may know, would never of likelihood have inclined thereunto But when he saw
there was none other way, but that either he must take it, or else he, and his
both go from it, he said unto the Lords and commons.

(63) Since we well perceive that all the Realm is so set, whereof we be very
sorry, that they will not Th Protor favorably accepts the Crown.
suffer in any wise King Edwards line to govern them, whom no earthly man can
govern against their wills, and well we also perceive, that no man there is to
whom the Crown can by just title appertain, as to our self, as very right
heir lawfully begotten of the body of our most dear father Richard late Duke
of York, to which title is now joined your election, the Nobles and Commons of
this Realm, which we of all title possible take for the most effectual: we be
content, and agree favorably to incline to your petition and request, and
according to the same, we here take upon us the royal estate, pre-eminence,
and kingdom of the two noble realms, England and France, the one from this
day forward, by us and our heirs, to rule, govern, and defend; the other by
Gods grace, and your good help, to get again and subdue, and establish for
ever in due obedience unto this Realm of England, the advancement whereof we
never ask of God longer to live, then we intend to procure. With this there
was a great shout, crying King Richard, King Richard. And then the Lords went
up to the King (for so was he from that time called) and the people departed,
talking diuersely of the matter, every man as his fantasy gave him.

(64) Much was talked, and marvelled at the manner of this dealing, that the
matter was made so strange unto both parties, as though they never had communed
either with others before, when Diverse opinions of the people.
as themselves wist there was no man so dull that heard them, but perceived
well enough, that all the matter was so made between them. How beit, some
excused that again, and said all must be done in good order: And men must
sometimes for manners sake, not be acknown what they know: for at the
consecration of a Bishop, every man wotteth well, by the paying for his bulls,
that he purposes to be one, and though he pay for nothing else, and yet must
he twice be asked, whether he will be a Bishop or no, and he must twice say
nay, and at the third time take it, as compelled thereunto by his own will.
And in a Stage Play the people know right well, that he who plaieth the
Sowdaine, is percase a sowter, yet if one should know so little good, to show
out of season what acquaintance he has with him, and call him by his own
name, while he stands in his majesty, one of his tormentors might hap to
break his head worthily for marring of the play.

(65) The reign of this young King may well be accounted an interregnum without
King, as well for his minority being under the rule of a Protector The Reign
and age of King Edward.
himself, as for the short time wherein he continued the name of a King; which
only was two months and sixteen days, and in them also he sat uncrowned
without Scepter or ball, all which Richard aimed at, and perfidiously got,
before they could come to his head; or into his hands. His age at the death of
his father and entrance into his throne was eleven years five months and five
days, and within three months after, was with his brother sin othered to
death in the Tower of London, as shall be showed in his Reign, of whom we are
now by order of succes sion to write.

RICHARD THE THIRD, KING Monarch 56
Richard III.
OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, AND LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTY SIXTH MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISH, HIS REIGN, ACTS, ISSVE AND DEATH. For the most part written by Sir
Thomas Moore. CHAPTER XIX.


RIchard, the third son of Richard Duke of York, born at Fotheringhay Castle
in the County of Northampton, was first honored All the Richards and Dukes of
Gloucester came to untimely deaths. Richard 1. flaine with an arrow. Richard a
murdered at Pomfrait. Tho. Woodstocke (...) her^d to death. Humfrey murdered
a^ S. Edmondsbury. Richard* slain at Bosworth held
with the title of Gloucester, being the third Duke of that number, and
consequently by usurpation crowned King of England, the third of that name, a
name indeed noted to the Kings so called, to be ever ominous; and the title of
Gloucester to those Dukes ever fatal, all of them both, dying violent and
untimely deaths, which ought to have been the more fearful unto Richard,
now having possession and interest in them both. But that not regarded, or
destiny enforcing, his aspiring mind gave him no rest, till his restless body
found it lastly in the grave. For his brother deceased when his life was most
desired, no man in show took his death so heavily as himself, or tendered
Duke Richard subtilely complotteth for the Crown.
the young King with a more honorable respect, when as (God knows) his mind
ran upon deep reaches, how to compass the wreath for his own head; which
the better to fashion, he withdrew a while into the North, and at York in
most sad and solemn manner observed the Funerals of the dead King: but
howsoever the Mask covered this subtle Dukes face from the eye of the
multitude; yet Buckingham well knew the ambitious desire of The Duke of
Buckingham the only raiser of the Protector.
his aspiring heart, and indeed was the Dedalus that made him the wings,
wherewith he mounted so near unto the Sun, as that the wax melting (like the
highminded young Icarus) he caught his last fall.

(2) What intendments they had before the Kings death, is uncertain, though it
may be suspected: but sure it is; he now gone, the Duke of Buckingham twice
solicited Gloucester by his messengers By Persal, Buckinghams secret servant.
in the North, met him at Northampton himself, accompanied him to London,
forwarded him in Counsel, and was the first Actor in this following tragedy.
For, first making him Protector, procuring his young Nephew forth of Sanctuary,
disabling The degrees by which the Protector ascended into the throne.
the young King, bastardizing them both, persuading the Citizens, working the
Nobility: and all this done, to set the Crown upon crookt Richards head, and
so molded their minds unto the man, as they all became humble petitioners unto
him for to accept of the same, who in the mean while had well conned his own
part, by profuse liberality, The Protector fitted himself to the peoples
affections.
by passing great gravity, by singular affability, by ministering of justice,
and by deep and close devises, whereby he won to himself the hearts of
all, but the Lawyers especially, to serve best his turn, which was so affected,
that in the name of all the States of the Realm, a Petition was drawn and
presented him to accept the wearing of the Crown: the true copy whereof as we
find it recorded in the A Petition exhibited to the Protector to accept of the
Crown.
Parliament Roll, we have inserted, and is as follows.

In Rotulo Parliamenti tenti apud Westminster. die Veneris Vicesimo tertio die
Ianuarii, An. Regni Regis Richardi 5. primo inter alia continetur vt sequitur.
Memorandum quod quaedam billa exhibita fuit coram Domino Rege in Parliamento
praedicto in haec verba:
Where late heretofore, that is to say, before the consecration, coronation,
and inthronization of our sovereign Lord the King, Richard the third, a roll
of parchment containing in writing certain Articles An Act of Parliment passed
to establish K. Richards election.
of the Tenor underwritten on the behalf, and in the name of the three Estates
of this Realm of England, that is to wit, of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and of the Commons by name, and diverse Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and other Nobles and notable persons of the Commons in great
multitude was presented and actually delivered unto our said Sovereign Lord,
the intent and effect expressed at large in the same roll: to the which Roll,
and to the considerations, and instant petition comprised in the same, our said
Sovereign Lord for the public weal and tranquillity of this land benignely
assented. Now forasmuch as neither the said three Estates, neither the said
persons which in their name presented, and delivered as it is aforesaid, the
said Roll unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, were assembled in form of
Parliament: All doubts taken away of King Richards election
by reason whereof diverse doubts, questions, and ambiguities been moved, and
engendered in the minds of diverse persons, as it is said: Therefore to the
perpetual memory of the truth, and declaration of the same, be it ordained,
provided, and established in this present Parliament, that the Tenor of the
said roll, with all the contents of the same, presented as is abouesaid, and
delivered to our foresaid Sovereign Lord the King, in the name and in the
behalf of the said three Estates out of Parliament, now by the same three
Estates assembled in this present Parliament, and by authority of the same be
ratified, enrolled, recorded, approved, and authorized into removing the
occasions of doubts and ambiguities, and to all other lawful effects that
shall now thereof ensue: So that all things said, affirmed, specified, desired
and remembered The petition of the kings election made lawful, and authorized
by Parliament.
in the said roll, and in the tenor of the same vnderwritte^ in the name of the
said 3. Estates, to the effect expressed in the same roll be of the like
effect, virtue and force, as if all the same things had bin so said, affirmed,
specified, desired and remembered in a full Parliament, and by authority of the
same accepted and approved. The Tenor of the said Roll of parchment, whereof
above is made mention, follows, and is such.

To the high and Mighty Prince Richard Duke of Gloucester.
Please it your noble Grace to understand the considerations, election and
petition underwritten of us, the Lords Spiritual and temporalll, and Commons
The form of he (...) exhibi^d unto the Protector.
of this Realm of England, and thereunto agreably to give your assent to the
common and public weal of this land, to the comfort and gladnese of all the
people of the same. First, we consider how that heretofore in time passed, this
land many years stood in great prosperity, honor, and tranquillity, which was
caused, for so much as the King then reigning, used and followed the advice and
counsel of certain Lords spiritual and temporal, and other Fair gloses
upon soul prete^ses.
persons of approved sadness, prudence, policy, and experience, dreading God,
and having tender zeal and affection to indifferent ministration of justice,
and to the common and public weal of the land: Then our Lord God was dread,
loved and honored, then within the land was peace and tranquillity, and among
neighbors concord and charity, then the malice of outward enemies was
mightily resisted and repressed, and the land honorably defended with many
great and glorious victories, then the intercourse of Merchants was largely
used and exercised: by which things above remembered, the land was greatly
enriched, so that as well the Merchants and Artificers, as other poor people
laboring for their livings in diverse occupations, had competent gain to the
sustentation of them and their households, living without miserable and
intolerable poverty: but afterward, when that such as had the rule and
governance of this land; delighting O time how do thou turn and art turned.
in adulation and flattery, and led by sensuality and concupiscence, followed
the counsel of persons insolent, vicious, and of inordinate avarice, despising
the counsel of good, virtuous, and prudent persons, such as above be
remembered; The prosperity of this land daily decreased, so that felicity was
turned into misery, and prosperity into adversity, and the order of policy, and
of the law of God and Man confounded, whereby it is likely this Realm to fall
into extreme misery and desolation (which God defend) without due provision of
couenable remedy be had in this behalf, in all goodly have.

(3) Over this, among other things more special we consider, how that the
time of the reign of K. Edward the fourth late deceased, after the ungracious
Flattery fears not how to report.
pretensed marriage (as all England has cause so to say) made betwixt the said
King Edward, and Elizabeth sometimes wife to Sir John Gray knight, late naming
her self, and many years heretofore Queen of England, the order of all
politic rule was perverted, the laws of God, and of Gods Church, and also
the laws of nature, and of England, and also of the laudable customs and
liberties of the same, wherein every English man is inheritor, broken,
subverted and contemned, against all reason and justice, so that the land was
ruled by selfewill and pleasure, fear and dread, all manner of equity and law
laid apart and despised, whereof ensued many inconveniences and mischiefs, as
murders, How can Princes rule to shu^ reproach when they are dead.
extortions, and oppressions, namely of poor and impotent people, so that no
man sure of his life, land or liuelyhood, ne of his wife, daughter nor servant,
every good maiden and woman standing in dread to be ravished and defloured:
and besides this, what discords, inward battles, effusion of Christian men's
blood, and namely, by the destruction of the Nobles blood of this land, was had
and committed within the same, it is evident and notarie through all this
Realm, unto the great sorrow and heaviness of all true Englishmen. And here
also we consider, how that the said pretended marriage betwixt the above named
King Edward and Elizabeth Gray was made of great presumption without the
knowing and assent of the Lords of this land, The Queen and her mother falsely
standered.
and also by sorcery and witchcraft committed by the said Elizabeth and her
mother Iaquet Duchess of Bedford, as the common opinion of the people, and
the public voice and fame is through all this land: and hereafter if the cause
shall require, shall be proved sufficiently in time and place convenient. And
here also we consider how that the said pretensed marriage was made privily
and secretly without edition of banes in a private Chamber, a profane place,
and not openly in the face of the Church after the law of Gods Church, but
contrary thereunto, and the laudable custom of the Church of England. And how
also that at the time of contract of the same pretended marriage, and before
and long time after the said King Edward was and stood married, and
troth-plight to one Dame Elienor K. Edward accused to haste been contracted to
the Lady Elienor Butler.
Butler daughter of the old Earl of Shrewsbury with whom the same Edward had
made a precontract of Matrimony long time before he made the said pretenced
marriage with the said Elizabeth Gray, in manner and form aforesaid: which
Premises being true, as in very truth they been true: it appears, and
follows evidently, that the said King Edward during his life, and the said
Elizabeth lived together sinfully and damnably in adultery against the law of
God and of his Church: And therefore The tongue of slander is a sharp arrow.
no marvel that the Sovereign Lord, and the head of this land being of such
ungodly disposition, and provoking the ire and indignation of our Lord God;
such heinous mischief and inconveniences as are above remembered, were used and
committed in the Realm among the Subjects. Also it appears They have taught
their to^gs to speak lies, Ier. 9. 5.
evidently and follows, that all the Issue and children of the ^id King
Edward, been bastard and unable to inherit, or to claim any thing by
inheritance, by the law and custom of England.

(4) Moreover, we consider how that afterward by the three Estates of this
Realm assembled in Parliament, holden at Westminster the 17. year of the
reign of the said King Edward the fourth, he then being in possession of the
Crown and royal estate, by Act made in the same Parliament, George Duke of
Clarence brother to the said King Edward now George Duke of Clarence and his
heirs made incapable of the crown.
deceased, was convicted and attainted of high treason, as in the same Act is
contained more at large, by cause and reason whereof, all the Issue of the
said George, was and is disabled and barred of all right and claim that in
any case they might have or challenge by inheritance to the Crown and dignity
royal of this Realm, by the ancient law and custom of this same Realm.

Over this we consider that ye be the undoubted son and heir of Richard
late Duke of York, very inheritor of the said Crown and dignity royal; and
as in right King of England by way of inheritance: and that at this time the
premises duly considered there is none other person living, but ye only that
by right may claim the said Crown and dignity As bad his claim as his per on
deformed, but both made good by flatterers in Parliament.
royal by way of inheritance, and how that ye be borne within this land; by
reason whereof, as we deem in our minds, ye be more naturally inclined to
the prosperity and common weal of the same: and all the three estates of the
Land have and may have more certain knowledge of your birth and filiation
aforesaid. We consider also the great wit, prudence, justice, princely courage,
and the memorable and laudable acts in diverse battles, which as we by
experience know you heretofore have done, for the salvation and defense of this
same Realm; and also the great nobleness and excellency of your birth and
blood, as of him that is descended of the three most royal houses in
Christendom: that is to say, England, France and Spain. Wherefore these Great
pity that so fair stemmes, should being forth so bad a branch.
premises by us diligently considered, we desiring effectually the peace,
traquilitie and weale-publique of this Land, and the reduction of the same to
the ancient honorable estate and prosperity, and having in your great
prudence, justice, princely courage, and excellent virtue, singular confidence,
have chosen in all that in vt is, and by this our writing choose you High and
Mighty Prince our King and Sovereign Lord, etc. To whom we know for certain
it appertains of enheritance so to be chosen. And hereupon we humbly
desire, pray, and require your most noble Grace, that according to this
election of us the three estates of this Land, as by your true inheritance, you
will accept and take upon you the said Crown and royal dignity, with all
things thereunto annexed and appertaining, as to you of right belonging as well
by inheritance as by lawful election: and in case ye so do, we promise to
serve and assist your Highness, as true and faithful subjects, and liege men;
and to live and die with you All promises were not kept, as afterward it proved.
in this matter, and in every other just quarrel. For certainly, we be
determined rather to adventure and commit us to the peril of our lives, and
ieopardie of death, then to live in such thraldom and bondage as we have lived
long time heretofore oppressed and injured by extortions and new impositions
against the Law of God and man, and the liberty, old policy and Laws of this
Realm, wherein every Englishman is inherited. Our LORD GOD, The Lord our God
is a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
KING of all KINGS, by whose infinite goodness and eternal providence all
things been principally governed in this world; lighten your soul, and grant
you grace to do as well in this matter as in all other, that may be according
to his will and pleasure, and to the common and public weal of this Land: so
that after great clouds, trouble, storms, and tempests, the Sun of Justice and
of Grace may shine upon us, to the comfort and gladness of all true-hearted
Englishmen. Albeit, that the right, title, and estate, which our Sovereign
Lord the King, Richard the third has to, and in the Crown, and royal
dignity of this Realm of England; with all things thereunto within the same
Realm, and without it united, annexed and appertaining, bin just and lawful
as grounded upon the laws of God and of nature: and also upon the ancient
laws and laudable customs of this said Realm; and so taken and reputed by
all such persons as been learned in the abouesaid laws and customs: Yet
nevertheless, for as much as it is considered, that the most part of A
charitable mind in show, but in truth a crafty intent.
the people is not sufficiently learned in the abouesaid Laws and customs,
whereby the truth and right in this behalf of likelihood may be hid and not
clearly known to all the people, and thereupon put in doubt and question. And
over this, how that the Court of Parliament is of such authority, and the
people of this Land of such a nature and disposition, as experience teaches
that manifestation and declaration of any truth or right made by the three
estates of this Realm assembled in Parliament, and by the authority of the
same makes before all other things The effect of our English Parliaments.
most feith and certain, and quieting of men's minds, remoueth the occasion of
all doubts, and seditious language. Therefore at the request, and by the assent
of the three estates of this Realm; that is to say, the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and Commons of this Land assembled in this present Parliament, by
authority of the same be it pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said
Soueraign Lord the King was, and is the very undoubted King of this Realm of
England, with all things thereunto within the same Realm, and without it
united, annexed, and appertaining as well by right of Consanguinity, and
inheritance, as by lawful election, consecration, and coronation. And over
this, that at the request, and by the assent and authority abouesaide, be it
ordained, enacted and established, that the said Crown and royal dignity of
this Realm, and the inheritance of the same, and all other things thereunto
within the Realm or without, is united, annexed, The Crown entailed to king
Richard and his heirs.
and now appertaining, rest and abide in the person of our said Sovereign Lord
the King during his life, and after his decease, in his heirs of his body
begotten; and in especial at the request, and by assent and authority
abouesaid, be it ordained, enacted, established, pronounced, decreed, and
declared, that the high and excellent Prince Edward, son of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, be heir apparent Prince Edward made heir apparent by
Parliament.
of the same our Sovereign Lord the King to succeed to him in the abouesaid
Crown and royal dignity, with all things as is aforesaid thereunto united,
annexed, and appertaining, to have them after the decease of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, to him, and to his heirs of his body lawfully
begotten.

Quae quidem Billa Communibus Regni Angl. in dicto Parliamento existent.
transportata fuit. Cui quidem billae ijdem Communes assensum suum praebuerunt
sub hijs verbis. A Ceste bille les Communes sont assentus. Quibus quidem billa,
and assensis coram Domino Rege in Parliamento praedicto lectis, auditis, and
before intellectis, de assensu Dominorum spiritualium, and temporal* ^min
dicto Parliamento similiter existent ac Co^munitatis praedictae, nec non
authoritate einsdem Parliamenti pronunciatum, decretum, and declaratum existit,
omnia and singula in billa praedicta contenta forever a and indubia. Ac idem
Dominus Rex de assensu dictorum trium Statuum Regni, and authoritate praedicta,
omnia and singula praemissa in billa praedicta, contenta concedit, ac ea pro
vero and indubio pronunciat, decernit and declarat.

(5) These things I have laid forth more at large out of the Parliament Roll,
that ye may understand What cannot the Parliament effect, where all give way to
the sway of time.
both what and how great matters, the power of a Prince, the outward show of
virtue, the wily fetches of Lawyers, fawning hope, pensive fear, desire of
change, and goodly pretenses are able to effect, in that most wise assembly of
all the States of a Kingdom, even against all law and right, so that the
saying of Solomon in this State seemed most true that a living dog is better
then a dead Lion. But this Eccles. 9. 4.
Richard is not to be accounted worthy to have been a Sovereign, had he not
been a Soueraign as Galba was reputed; who, when he was a Sovereign, deceived
King Richard like unto Galba, a had Subject, but a good Prince.
all men's expectation; but most worthy indeed of Sovereignty, had he not
been transported with ambition (which blasted all his good parts) by lewd
practices, and by mischievous means, made foul way thereunto: for that by the
common consent of all that are wise, he was reckoned in the rank of bad men,
but of good Princes; as indeed King Richard through his short time of reign is
accounted to have been.

(6) The Crown and Scepter accepted as is said, King Richard upon the twenty
fifth of June, went in great pomp unto Westminster hall, and there in the King
Richard accepts the Crown and begins his reign with great applause.
Kings Bench Court took his Seat, saying, that he would take upon him the
Crown in that place, where the King himself ought to sit, whose chiefest
duty was to administer Justice to his people, and with a pleasing Oration so
tickled the ears of his Auditors, that he lulled the rural to think that
his like had never reigned in England; and to begin himself with a pretenced
clemency, he pronounced pardon of all offenses committed against him; for
confirmation whereof, he sent for one The new Kings clemency and affability.
Fogge whom he deadly hated, who for fear of him had lately taken Sanctuary at
Westminster, and there in sight of the people with semblance accordingly, took
him by the hand saying, that he would be thence forth his assured in
affection; whereat the Commons greatly rejoiced, and with applauses extolled,
though others wiser among them took it to be but fained to serve his own
turn. And K. Richards dealings double construed.
in his way homeward, whomsoever he met, he saluted: for a mind that knows
it self to be guilty, is in a manner dejected to a servile flattery.

(7) King Richard whose guilty heart was full of suspicion, had sent for five
thousand Soldiers The Northern sent for to the Kings Coronation.
out of the North to be present in London at his Coronation; these under the
leading of Robin of Ridsdale, came up both evil apparrelled, and worse
harnessed, in rusty Armor, neither defencible for John Harding, Cont^er.
proof, nor scowred for show: who mustering in Finesburie Fields, were with
disdain gazed upon by the beholders. But all things now ready for his
Coronation (and much the sooner in that young Edwards provision was conferred
upon his) upon the fourth of July, he with his wife by water came to the Tower,
where he created Estates, ordained A. D. 1485. States (...) by K Richard.
the Knights of the Bathe, set at liberty the Archbishop of York, and the
Lord Stanley, more for fear then for love; whose son the Lord Strange was
then said to be gathering of men in Lancashire, where those Lords have great
command.

(8) But Morton Bishop of Ely a firm man unto King Edward, and impossible to
be drawn unto the disinheriting of his children, as was well perceived by the
Protector, among others, at the Council held in the Tower, was left there
prisoner, and accused of many great, but unlikely treasons. This man borne in
Dorsetshire, and brought up in the University At Beer or Berry
of Oxford, was from a Doctor of the Arches made a privy Counselor unto King
Henry, and after his death allured by King Edward to serve him, was sworn
likewise of his Council, and made one of the Executors of his will: whose
insight into the intended designs, the Protector much feared, and therefore
having him fast, minded so to keep him, when he released others laid in the
Tower for the like fear. But the reverence of the man, or vndeseruednesse of
his wrongs, moved so the affection of the Oxford Academians, that they directed
to the King (who professed much love to that University) a petitory latin
Epistle, no less eloquent and pithy, Ex Regist. Oxon. MS.
then circumspect and wary, wherein they thus pleaded for his liberty.

(9) Though many important motives we have most Christian King, earnestly to
recommend A letter written for the University o^ O ^ra in the behalf of D.
Morton.
to your princely clemency, the Reverend Father in Christ, the Lord Bishop of
Ely, as being not only one of the most eminent Sons of our University, but
also a singular Patron and indulgent Father to us all; yet could not these
inducements (howsoever very ponderous with all grateful minds) persuade us to
become intercessors for his pardon, but ever with due regard both to your own
honor and safety; the greatness of your princely favors having more obliged
us, then of any your royal Predecessors: whiles therefore we stood in some
doubt, how he stood affected toward your Highness, we held it an high
offense, if by tendering his safety, we should any way hazard yours: but now
understanding, that his offense proceeded, not of pertinacy, but humane
frailety; and that he has always humbly sued for pardon thereof, the bowels
of our mother University, like Rachel weeping over her Children were moved with
compassion over the deplored distress of this her dearest son; wherein yet
(as we hope) her affection deserves no just reprehension. For if a pious
affection be prayseworthie, even in an enemy, much more is it in this our
Academy, full of due observance toward your Majesty, and professing the study
of all virtues. These things so being, we thought fit, (without longer
delays) to fly unto your clemency, as humble Suppliants, that your Highness
already having in part inflicted (though mildly) some chasticeme^t on his fault
would turn your roial aspect toward him, and impart to him the bounty of your
gracious clemency; wherein, you shall not only perform an act most acceptable
to him, to us, and the whole Church, but very honorable and aduantagious also
(as we hope) to your own person. For, upon notice of the readmittance of so
great a Prelate into your grace, who is there, that will not extol with
praises unto the skies your so great, and even divine clemency? Thus gloried
the Romans, to have it marshalled amongst their praises, that Virgil. Pa^e
Subiect^, etc. Salust.
Submissiue wights they spared, but crushed the proud; and this also they
challenged as their peculiar honor, that they were readier to remit, then to
revenge wrongs. Now if you will aspire to this high honor, (as easily you may,
by being gracious to this man) you shall surmount the Romans themselves by so
glorious a deed. As for the great benefit which may hereby accrue to your
highness, albeit (as we suppose) we can sufficiently conceive thereof,
especially if we call to mind his singular virtues; yet had we rather leave
that point wholly to your secret considerations, then pursue it with a
discourse tedious to you, and enuie-breeding to him: least happily by insisting
in his praises, it may be thought, that we seek rather by violence to extort,
then by submissiuenes to beg his pardon, and or else to rely more on the
greatness of his virtues, then of your Clemency, or lastly to appeal rather
to your Justice, then to your mercy. Wherefore (most puissant Prince) thus
persuade your self of us, that whatsoever we have spoken in the Bishops
behalf, we do it rather out of a sense of our dutifulnes then any diffidency
of your Gratiousnes: and therefore omitting all things which might be alleged,
either to lessen his offense or augment his virtues: it is your sole mercy
wherein we repose all our hopes; vowing, how soever other means of gratitude
may be wanting to us, yet we shall never suffer the remembrance of so great a
favor conferred on us to be Dat. Ox^ij in Eccles. S. Mariae Vi^g. 4. Sex^.
extinguished amongst us.

(10) King Richard, after this, intending some easier restraint, though not
liberty unto the Bishop, was content to release him out of the Tower, and
committed him to the custody of Henry Duke of Buckingham, who sent him to his
Castle of Brecknocke Bishop Morton committed to the custody of the Duke of
Buckinghom.
in Wales, there safely to be kept, until himself should come thither.

(11) The next day with great pomp, state and attendance of the Nobility, the
King rode through The great estate of King Richards coronation.
London, so as a more royal had not been seen at any Kings Coronation, for
there attended him, three Dukes, nine Earls, two Vicounts, twenty Lords,
seauenty eight Knights, all of them most richly furnished, whereof the Duke of
Buckingham so far exceeded, that the caparison of his horse was so charged
Buckingham most richly attired at the kings coronation.
with embroydered work of gold, as it was born up from the ground by certain
his footmen thereto appointed. And contrary to my own affections, or manner
of my former proceedings, I will yet continue the most honorable offices
performed at his royal enthroning with no little Admiration, how these Lords
assembled to set the Crown upon the young Princes head, were so suddenly
carried to Crown his Protector, and that upon such false and slanderous
pretenses, as every one of them saw his title to be merely an unjust
usurpation, but in them may be seen, that we are all the sons of Adam, and
in times of extremities, foreslow all public regard, as overmuch fearing our
private and present estate.

(12) Upon the sixth of July, King Richard with The order of the Kings
proceedings to be crowned.
Queen Anne his wife set forth from White Hall toward Westminster, roially
attended, and went into the Kings bench in the great hall, from whence himself
and Queen upon ray Cloth, both of them barefooted, Rich. Groston.
went unto King Edwards shrine in Saint Peter's Church, all the Nobility going
with him in their degree, the trumpets and Heralds marshalling the way, the
Cross with a solemn procession followed, the Priests in fine surplesses and
gray Amysses upon them, the Bishops and Abbots in rich Copes all of them
mytred, and carrying their Crosses in their hands; next came the Earl of
Huntington bearing a pair of gilt spurs, signifying Knighthood; after whom
came the Earl of Bedford, who bare Saint Edwards staff for a Relic, then
followed the Earl of Northumberland with a naked pointles sword in his hand
betokening mercy, next whom the Lord Stanley bare the Mace of the
Constableship, upon whose right hand the Earl of Kent bare a naked pointed
swod, and on his left hand the Lord Louell the like naked pointed sword, the
former signifying Justice toward the temporalty, and the other Justice to the
Clergy; the Duke of Suffolk then followed with the Scepter, which signified
Peace: the Earl of Lincoln bare the Ball and Cross which signified a
Monarchy: Then came the Earl of Surrey bearing the fourth sword sheathed in a
rich scaberd, and is called the sword of Estate, next whom followed Garter King
at Arms, upon whose right hand went the Gentleman Usher of the Kings privy
Chamber, and on his left the Lord Mayor of London, with a Mace in his hand;
Next unto whom went the Duke of Norfolk bearing the Kings Grown betwixt his
hands, and then King Richard himself came, in a Surcote and Robe of purple
velvet; having over his head a Canapie borne by the four Barons of the five
Ports, the Bishop of Bath on his right hand, and of Durham on his left. The
Duke of Buckingham bare the Kings train, and to signify the office of high
Steward of England, he bare a White Staff in his hand.

(13) Then followed the Queens train: before whom was borne the Scepter, the
Iuorie Rod with the The order of the Queens proceedings to receive the crown:
Dove, and the Crown; her self apparelled in Robes like the Kings under a
rich Canapie, at every corner thereof a bell of gold. On her head she ware a
circlet set full of precious stones, the Countess of Richmond bearing her
train; the Duchess of Norfolk and Suffolk in their Coronets attendants,
with twenty Ladies of estate most richly attired. In this order they passed the
Palace into the Abbey, and ascending to the high Altar there shifted their
Robes, and having other Robes open in diverse places from the middle upward,
were both of them anointed The King and Queen solemnly anointed and crowned.
and Crowned, he with Saint Edwards Crown, having the Scepter delivered into
his left hand, and the Ball with the Cross a token of Monarchy in his right,
the Queen had a Scepter given into her right hand, and the Iuory Dove in her
left; then after the Sacrament received (having the host divided betwixt them)
they both offered at Saint Edwards shrine, where the King left his Crown and
put on his own; and thus done, in the same Order and State as they came,
returned to Westminster hall, and there held a most Princely feast. Whereof let
Hall and Grafton tell you for me.

(14) But this his fair Sun was soon ouercast with many dark Clouds and
mischiefs, which fell thick upon the neck of each other, for as the Sir The
Mooe.
thing evil gotten, is never well kept: through all the time of his reign
there never ceased death and The time of King Richards reign full of
calamities.
slaughter, till his own destruction ended it. Yet as he finished his days
with the best death, and the most righteous, that is to say, his own: so began
he with the most piteous and wicked, I mean the lamentable murder of his
innocent Nephews, the young King and his tender brother; whose deaths and
final misfortunes have nevertheless come so far in question, that some
remain yet in doubt, whether they were in his days destroyed or no. Not for
that only, that Perkin Warbecke by the malice of many, and the folly of more,
so long a time abusing (...) made of the two Princes deaths.
the world, was as well with Princes, as the other poor people, reputed and
taken for the younger of these two: but for that also as all things were in
late days so covertly demeaned, one thing pretended and another done, that
there was nothing so plain and openly proved, but for the common custom and
close covert dealing, men had it ever inwardly in suspect, as many well
counterfeit Jewels make the true mistrusted. Howbeit concerning the opinion
with the occasions moving either party, we shall have place more at large
hereafter to entreat of: in the mean time for this present master shall be
rehearsed the dolorous end of these young Babes, not after every report I have
heard, but by such men, and by such means, as to my seeming it were hard but
it should be true says Sir Thomas Moore.

(15) K. Richard presently after his mockish Election King Richards progress
toward Gloucester.
and glorious Coronation, made his progress toward Gloucester, to show (as
was thought) in that City his new Kingly estate, which first had vouchsafed him
his old honor in bearing her Title; or else, and that rather, to besequestred
from other business, the better to attend that, upon which his thoughts most
busily ran. For albeit the Bark of his begun adventures, had without
peril well passed the straightes, and now got sea room to spread sail at
will; yet being under gale, and at fortunes dispose, he feared the gust of
every wind: at leastwise suspected that his young Nephews living would stay
the course of his deep reaches, as does the little fish Remora, who holds
(as at Anchor) the biggest ship under Remora a little fish, i^ reported to
have such strength, as it will stay the course of any ship under sail.
sail. His inward study therefore still forged, howsoever his outward
countenance was carried to clear his passage by taking those dangerous lets
away, well knowing, that his little Nephews enjoying their lives, men would be
meddling with their down cast cause, and account him an usurper without The
fears of K. Richard.
all rihgt to the Realm. To stop which stream, no other course could he
find, but to cut off the current by which it ran, as though the killing of
his Kinsmen could better his bad claim, or unkindly King Richard complotteth
the death of his Nephews.
murder make him a kindly King. But being resolved, he forth with sent one
John Green, a servant in especial trust unto Sir Robert Brakenbury Constable
of the Tower, with a letter of credence, King Richard his letter to Sir Robert
Brakenbury.
that the same Sir Robert should in any wise put the two children to death.

(16) This Green thus posted to London, delivered his errand unto Brakenbury,
whom he found kneeling at his Orizons before the Image of our Lady in the
Tower, the business being of such weight as the King must be served before
he had ended with his Saint The Constable reading the letter, and perceiving
the bloody intent of the King, answered Sir Robert Brakenburies answer unto
John Green
plainly, he would never put those innocent babes unto death, to die therefore
himself. With which answer John Green returning, recounted the same to King
Richard being at Warwick, yet in his way to Gloucester, wherewith he was
maruellously perplexed, and thereat took such displeasure, that the same night
he said to a secret Page of his: Ah whom shall a man trust? those that I have
brought up my self, King Richards complaint of Ingratitude.
those that I had weened would most surely serve me, even those fail me, and
at my commandment will do nothing. Sir quoth the Page, there lies one on your
Pallet without, that I dare well say, to do your Grace pleasure, the thing
were right hard that he would refuse; meaning this by Sir James Tirrell, who
was a man of a goodly personage, and for Natures gifts worthy to have served a
much better Prince, if he had well served God, and by grace obtained as James
Tirrell made the Instrument of murder
much truth and good will, as he had strength and wit.

(17) The man had an high heart, and sore longed The parts of Sir James Tirrel.
upward, not rising yet so fast as he hoped, being hindered and kept under by
the means of Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and Sir William Catesby, who longing for
no more partners of the Princes favor, and namely, not for him, whose pride
they knew would bear no Peer, kept him by secret drifts out of all secret
trust, which thing this Page had well marked and known: wherefore this
occasion offered of very special friendship, he took his time to put him
forward, and by such wise to do him good, that all the enemies he had, except
the Devil himself could never have done him so much hurt. For upon this Pages
words, K. Richard arose (for thiscommunication King Richard consu^red upon his
Nephews murders, sitting on a homely seat.
had he sitting at the draught, a convenient Corpet for such a Counsel) and
came out into a Pallet-Chamber, where he found in bed, Sir James and Sir
Thomas Tirrels, of persons much like, and brethren in blood, but nothing of kin
in conditions: Then said the King merrily to them, what Sirs, be ye in bed so
soon? and calling up Sir James, brake to him secretly his mind in this
mischievous matter, in which he found him nothing strange. Wherefore on the
morrow he sent him to Brakenbury with a letter, by which he was commanded Sir
James ready to fulfill the kings mind in the murder of the Princes.
to deliver Sir James all the keys of the Tower for one night, to the end he
might accomplish there the Kings pleasure in such things as he had given him
in commandment. After which letter delivered, and the keys received, Sir
James appointed the night next ensuing to destroy them, devising before and
preparing the means.

(18) The Prince in the Tower slenderly attended; and altogether neglected by
the Nobility, lastly, had news that his uncle had left the name of Protector,
and taken upon him the Title of King, who with full consent of the Lords was to
be crowned within a few days following, with the same Crown, and in the like
estate as had been provided for his solemnity, whereat the dejected Innocent
sighed and said; Alas, I would my uncle would let The words of Prince Edward
when he heard that his ^ncle should be King.
me enjoy my life yet, though I loose both my Kingdom and Crown. Which words
he pronounced with such a feeling fear, as much moved the Relater to pity,
and to persuade him with the best comforts he could: but forthwith the Prince
and his brother were both shut up, and all attendants removed from them, only
one called Black-will, or William The faithful servants of the Prince removed
from him.
Slaughter excepted, who was set to serve them, and see them sure. After which
time the Prince never tied his points, nor cared for himself, but with that
young Babe his brother lingered with thought and heaviness, till their
traitorous deaths delivered them out of that wretchedness: for the execution
whereof, Tirrell appointed Miles Forest, one of the four that kept them, a
fellow fleshed in murder before Sir Th. Moore.
time. To whom he joined one John Dighton his horsekeeper, a big, broad,
square knave.

(19) About midnight (al others being removed from them,) this Miles Forest,
and John Dighton, Prince Edward and his brother murdered in a featherbed.
came into the Chamber, and suddenly wrapped up the seely children in the
Bed-clothes, where they lay keeping by force the feather-bed and pillowes hard
upon their mouths that they were therein smothered to death, and gave up to
God their innocent souls into the ioies of heaven, leaving their bodies unto
the Tormentors dead in the bed: which after these monstrous wretches perceived,
first by the struggling with the pains of death, and after long lying still to
be thoroughly dispatched, they laid their bodies naked out upon the bed, and then
fetched Sir James Their bodies were buried under a pair of stairs.
their instigator to see them, who caused these murderers to bury them at the
stairs foot, somewhat deep in the ground, under a great heap of stones. Then
rode Sir James in haste to the King, unto whom he showed the manner of their
death, and place of burial, which news was so welcome to his wicked heart, as
he greatly reioiced, and with great thanks dubbed (as some hold) this his
merciles Instrument, knight. But the place of their burial he liked not,
saying, that vile corner should not contain the bodies of those Princes, his
Nephews, and commanded them a better place for burial, because they were the
The body of the two Princes removed, and buried no man knows where.
sons of a King. Whereupon the Priest of the Tower took up the bodies; and
secretly interred them in such place, which by the occasion of his death could
never since come to light.

(20) The continuer of John Harding tells us from the report of others, that
King Richard caused Sir Hardings continuer.
Robert Brakenburies Priest to close their dead corpse in lead, and so to put
them in a coffin full of holes, and hooked at the ends with two hooks of iron,
and so to cast them into a place called the Blacke-deepes at the Thames mouth,
whereby they should never rise up, or be any more seen. Wheresoever they were
buried, thus they died, and by these murderers. For very certain it is, and
well known, that at such time, as Sir James Tirrell was in the Tower, for
Treason committed against King Henry the seventh, both The murderers confess
the deed, and manner of their ^th.
Dighton and he were examined, and confessed the murder in manner as is said,
but whether their bodies were removed they could not say. And thus as The
report of Sir Tho. Moore.
I have learned of them that knew much, and little cause had to lie, were these
two noble Princes, these innocent tender children, borne of most roial blood,
brought up in great wealth, likely to have lived, to have reigned, and ruled in
the Realm, by traitorous tyranny taken, deprived of their estates, shortly
shut up in prison, and impiously murdered, and the body cast out God wot where,
by the cruel ambition of their unnatural uncle, and his hellish Tormentors.
Which things on every part well pondered; God never gave this world a more
notable example, neither The unconstant state ofmans life.
in what vnsurety stands this worldly weal, or what mischief works the
proud enterprise of an high heart, or finally, what wretched end ensues such
barbarous cruelty.

(20) For first to begin with the Ministers, Gods justice and revenge upon
the murderers.
Miles Forest at S. Martins, peece-meale rotted away; Sir James Tyrrell died
at Tower hill for treason. Dighton indeed walks on alive in good possibility
to be hanged ere he die, living at Callis no less distained and hated then
pointed at of all. King Richard himself Io. Harding.
as ye shall hereafter hear, was slain in the field, hacked and hewed of his
enemies hands, carried on Ruenge of murder repaid.
horseback dead, his hair in despite torn and tugged like a Curre dog: and
the mischief that he took was within less then three years of the mischief
that he did, and yet all the mean time spent in much pain and trouble
outward, and much fear, anguish, and sorrow within. For I have heard by
credible report of such as were secret with his The guilty conscience of King
Richard.
Chamberlain, that after this abominable deed done, he never had quiet in his
mind: he never thought himself sure: but where he went abroad, his eyes
euer-whirled about, his body privily fenced, his hand ever on his dagger, his
countenance and manner like one always ready to strike again, he took il
rest a nights, lay long waking and musing, sore wearied with care and watch,
rather slumbred then slept, troubled with fearful dreams, suddenly
sometimes start up, leapt out of his Bed, and ran about the chamber, so was
his restless heart continually tossed and tumbled with the tedious impression
and stormy remembrance of his abominable deed. Neither had he in his best, any
time of quiet, for Outward enemies arise against King Richard.
immediately began the conspiracy (or rather good consideration) between the
Duke of Buckingham, and diverse other Gentlemen against him.

(21) Which Duke as soon as Gloucester upon the The forward affection of the
Duke of Bckingham toward the Duke of Gloucester.
death of King Edward came to York, sent thither in secret wise a trusty
servant of his, named Persall, to assure him, that he would take his part in
this his new world, and if need were, would wait upon him with a thousand
good-fellowes: and again sent offers of the like unto Nottingham, whither the
Protector from York, with many Gentlemen of the North Country was come, and
on his way to London-ward in secret manner met him himself, but at Northampton
openly with three hundred horse: and from thence still continued with him,
being a partner of all his devises, till that after his coronation they
departed (as it seemed) very great friends at Gloucester: from The Duke of
Buckingham falls in dislike of king Richard.
whence as soon as the Duke came home, he so lightly turned from him, and so
highly conspired against him, that a man would marvel whereof the change grew.
And surely the occasion of their variance is of diverse men, diuersely reported;
Some have said, that the Duke a little before the Coronation, among other
things, required of the Protector, the Duke of Hertfords Lands, to the which he
pretended himself just inheritor. And forasmuch as the Title The occasions of
the Kings and Dukes falling asunder.
which he claimed by inheritance, was somewhat interlaced with the title of the
Crown, by the line of King Henry before deprived, the Protector conceived such
indignation, that he rejected the Dukes request, with many spightfull and
minatory words, which so wounded his heart with hatred and mistrust, that he
never after could endure to look aright on King Richard, but ever feared his
own life, so far forth, that when the Protector rode through London toward
his Coronation, he fained himself Buckingham fained himself sick not to
attend K. Henry.
sick, because he would not ride with him: And the other taking it in evil
part, sent him word to rise; and come ride, or he would make him to be carried.
Whereupon he rode on with an evil will, and that notwithstanding on the
morrow rose from the Feast, faining himself sick, whereat King Richard said,
it was done in hatred and despite of him. And they say, that ever after
continually each of them lived in such hatred and distrust of other, as the
Duke verily looked to have been murdered at Gloucester: from which
nevertheless he in fair manner departed. But surely some right secret at this
day deny The fears of the Duke of Buckingham.
this: and many right wise men think it unlikely (the deep dissembling nature
of both those men considered, and what need in that green world the Protector
had of the Duke, and in what peril the Duke stood, if he fell once in
suspicion of the Tyrant) that either the Protector would give the Duke occasion
of displeasure, or the Duke the Protector No such suspicion betwixt the King
and the Duke as was said to be.
occasion of mistrust. And verily men think, that if King Richard had any such
conceived opinion, he would never have suffered the Duke to have escaped his
hands.

(22) The very truth is, Buckingham was an high minded man, and could evil
bear the glory of another; so that I have heard of some that saw it, that Sir
Thomas Mores opinion of Buckingham.
the Duke at such time as the Crown was first set upon the Protectors head,
his eye could not abide the sight thereof, but wried his face another way. But
men say, that he was of truth not well at ease which The diverse opinions of
the King and Dukes falling out.
to King Richard was well known, and nothing ill taken, not any demand of the
Dukes discourteously rejected, but he both with great gifts and high behests in
most loving and trusty manner, departed at Gloucester. But soon after his
coming home to Brecknock, having there in custody by the commandment of King
Richard, Doctor Morton Bishop of Ely, who (ye before heard) was taken in the
counsel at the Tower, waxed with him familiar: whose wisdom abused his pride
to his own deliverance, and the Dukes destruction.

(23) This Bishop was a man of great natural wit; very well learned, and
honorable in behavior, lacking no wise ways to win favor: he had been The
story of Bishop Morton.
fast upon the part of King Henry, while that part was in wealth; and
naythelesse left it not, nor forsook it in woe, but fled the Realm with the
Queen and the Prince, while King Edward had Henry in prison, and never came
home but to the field. After which lost, and that side utterly subdued, the
other for his fast faith and wisdom not only was content to receive him, but
also wooed him to come, and had him from Morton w^d unto King Edwards side.
thence forth both in great secret trust, and very special favor, which he
nothing deceived. For he being (as you have heard) after King Edwards death,
first taken by the Tyrant for his truth to the King, found the means to set
this Duke in his top, joined Gentlemen together in aid of King Henry, devising
first the marriage between him and King Edwards daughter: by which his faith,
he declared the good The union of Lancaster and York first set (...) by Bishop
Morton.
service to both his masters at once, with infinite benefit to the Realm, by
the conjunction of those two bloods in one; whose several titles had long time
disquieted the Land; he fled the Realm, went to Rome, never minding more to
meddle with the world, till the noble Prince King Henry the seventh got him
home again, made him Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England,
whereunto the Pope joined the honor of a Cardinal. Thus Morton made
Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, and Cardinal.
living many days in as much honor, as one man might well wish, ended them so
godly, that his death with Gods mercy, well changed his life.

(24) This man therefore, as I was about to tell you, by the long and often
alternate proof, as well of prosperity as adverse fortunes, had gotten by
great His wisdom and experience.
experience (the very mother or mistress of Wisdom) a deep insight in
politic worldly drifts. Whereby perceiving now this Duke glad to commune with
him, sed him with fair words, and many pleasant praises. And perceiving by the
process of their communication, the Dukes pride now and then balke out a little
bread of envy, toward the glory of the King, and thereby feeling him easy to
fall The deep polllicy of B. Morton.
out, if the matter were well handled: he craftily sought the ways to prick
him forward, taking always the occasion of his coming, and keeping himself
so close within his bounds, that he rather seemed to follow then to lead him.
For when the Duke first began to praise and boast of the King, and show how
much profit the Realm should take by his reign; Morton answered thus: Surely
my Lord, folly it were for me to lie, for if I would swear the The
communication of the Duke and D. Morton.
contrary, your Lordship would not ween I beseeue, but that if the world would
have gone, as I could have wished, King Henry's son had had the Crown, and not
King Edward. But after that God had ordered him to lose it, and King Edward to
reign, I was never so mad, that I would with a dead man strive against a
quick. So was I to King Edward a faithful Chapplaine, and glad would have
been, that his child should have succeeded him. Howbeit, if the secret
judgment of God have otherwise provided, I purpose not to spurn against the
prick, nor labor to set up, that God puts down. And as for the late
protector and now King, and even there he left: saying, that he had already
meddled too much with the world, and would from that day meddle with his Book
and his Beads, and no further.

(25) Then longed the Duke sore to hear what he would have said, because he
ended with the king, and there so suddenly stopped, and exhorted him so
familiarly between them twain, to be bold to say whatsoever he thought,
whereof he faithfully promised there should never come hurt, and peradventure
Buckingham exciteth the Bishop to reveal his deepest secret.
more good then he would ween, and that himself intended to use his faithful
secret advise and counsel, which he said was the only cause for which he
procured of the King to have him in his custody, where he might account
himself at home, and else had he been put in the hands of them with whom he
should not have found the like favor. The Bishop right humbly thanked him and
said: In good faith my Lord, I love not to talk much of Princes, as a thing
not all out of peril, though the word be without fault. Forasmuch as it shall
not be taken as the party meant it, but as it It is dangerous to deal in
Princes affairs.
pleases the Prince to construe it. And ever I think on Aesops tale, that when
the Lion had proclaimed upon pain of death there should no horned beast abide
in the wood, one that had in his forehead a bunch of flesh, fled away a great
pace. The fox A pretry tale p^hily applied.
who saw him run so fast, asked him whether he made all that haste? and he
answered, In faith, I neither wot, nor recke, so I were once hence, because of
this Proclamation made against, horned beasts. What fool (quoth the Fox) thou
may abide well enough, the Lion meant not thee, for it is no horn that is in
thy head. No mary (quoth he) that wot I wellynough, but what if he call it a
horn, where am I then? The Duke laughed merrily at the tale, and said, my Lord
I warrant you, neither the Lion nor the Boar shall pick any matter at any
thing here spoken, for it shall never come to their ears. In good faith Sir,
said the Bishop, if it did, the thing that I was about to say, (taken as well as
before God I meant it) could deserve but thanks; and yet taken as I ween it
would, might happily turn me to little good, and you to less. Then longed the
Duke yet more to wit what it was; whereupon the Bishop The desire of the Duke
to know his meaning,
said, in good faith my Lord, as for the late Protector, since he is now King in
possession, I purpose not to dispute his title, but for the weal of this
Realm, whereof his Grace has now the governance, and my self am a poor
member, I was about to wish, that to those good abilities, whereof he has
already right many, little needing my praise, it might yet have pleased God for
the better store, to have given him some of such other excellent virtues meet
for the rule of a Realm as our Lord has planted in the person of your Grace:
and there left again.

(26) The Duke somewhat mariailing at his sudden Edward ^ll.
pauses, said: My Lord, I note your often breathings and sudden stopping in
your communication; so that to my intelligence, your words neither come to any
direct or perfect sentence in conclusion, whereby either I might have knowledge
what your intent is now toward the King, or what affection you bear toward
me. For the comparison of good qualities ascribed to us both, makes me not a
little to muse, thinking that you have some other privy imagination imprinted
in your heart, which you be abashed to disclose, and specially to me, which on
my honor do assure you to be as secret in this case as the deaf and dumb
person to The Dukes protestation of secrecy.
the singer, or the Tree to the Hunter. The Bishop being somewhat bolder,
considering the Dukes promise, but most of all animated, because he knew the
Duke desirous to be magnified, and also he perceived the inward hatred which
he bare toward King Richard, he opened his stomach to the bottom, and
said: My singular good Lord, since the time of my captivity, which being in
your graces custody, The Bishop deals plainly with the Duke.
I may rather call it a liberty, then a strait imprisonment, in avoiding of
idleness mother of all vices, in reading books and ancient pamphlets, I have
found this sentence written, that no man is borne fie and at liberty of
himself only: for one part of duty he owes to his parents, another part to
his friends and kindred; but the native Country The duty of all men toward
their native countries.
in the which he first tasted this pleasant and flattering world, demands a
debt not to be forgotten. Which saying, causes me to consider in what case
the Realm, my native Country, now stands; and in what estate and assurance
before this time it has continued; what governor we now have, and what ruler
we might have; for I plainly perceive (the Realm being in this case) must
needs decay, and be brought to confusion: but one hope I have, that is, when I
consider your noble personage, your justice and indifferency, your seruent
zeal and ardent love toward your natural Country; and in like manner, the
love of your country toward you, the great learning, pregnant wit, and
eloquence, which so much does abound in your person; I must needs think this
Realm fortunate, which has such a Prince in store, meet and apt to be
Governor. But on the other side, when I call to memory the good qualities of
the late Protector, and now called King, so violated by-tyranny, so altered by
usurped authority, and so clouded by blind ambition, I must The change of
state under the tyranny of the usurper.
needs say, that he is neither meet to be King of so noble a Realm, nor so
famous a Realm meet to be governed by such a tyrant. Was not his first
enterprise to obtain the Crown, begun by the murder of diverse personages?
did he not secondarily proceed against his own natural mother; declaring her
openly to be a woman given to carnal affection and dissolute living? declaring
furthermore, his two brethren and two Nephews to be bastards, and to be
borne in adultery? yet not contented, after he had obtained the Garland, he
caused the two poor innocents his Nephews, committed to him, to be most
shamefully murdered: the blood of which little babes daily cry to God from the
earth for vengeance. Blood cries for bloody vengeance.
What surety can be in this Land to any person, either for life or goods, under
such a cruel Prince, which regards not the destruction of his own blood,
and much less the loss of others. But now to conclude, what I mean toward
your noble person, I say and affirm, if you love God, your lineage, or your
native country, you must your self take upon you the Crown of this Realm,
both for the maintenance of the honor of the same, as also The Bishop
persuades the Duke to take the Crown unto himself.
for the deliverance of your natural countrymen from the bondage of such a
tyrant. And if your self will refuse to take upon you the Crown of this
Realm, then I adjure you by the faith you owe unto God, to devise some ways
how this Realm may be brought to some convenient regiment, under some good
Governor. When the Bishop hap ended his saying, the Duke sighed, and spoke not
of a great while, so that night they communed no more.

(26) The next day the Duke sent for the Bishop, The next days conference.
to whom he said, My Lord of Ely, I must needs in heart think, and with mouth
confess, that you be a sure friend, a trusty counselor, and a very lover of
your country. And since that at our last communication, you have disclosed the
secrets of your heart touching the now usurper of the crown, and also have
alittle touched the advancement of the two noble families of York and
Lancaster, I shall likewise declare The Duke discloseth himself unto the
Bishop.
unto you my privy intents and secret cogitations. And to begin, when King
Edward was deceased, I then began to study, and with deliberation to ponder in
what manner this Realm should be governed: I persuaded with my self to take
part with the Duke of Gloucester, whom I thought to be as clean without
dissimulation, as tractable without injury, and so by my means he was made
Protector both of the King and Realm; which authority being once gotten, he
never ceased privily to require me and other Lords as well spiritual as
temporal, that he might take upon him the Crown, till the Prince came to the
age of four and twenty years, and were The Protector desired the crown till
the Prince came to the age of 24. years.
able to govern the Realm as a sufficient King: which thing, when he saw me
somewhat stick at, he then brought in instruments, authenticke Doctors,
Proctors, and Notaries of the Law, with depositions of diverse witnesses,
testifying King Edwards children to be bastards: which depositions then I
thought to be as true, as now I know them to be fained. When the said
depositions were before us read, and diligently heard, he stood up bare headed,
saying: Well my Lords, even as I and you would that my Nephews should have no
wrong: so I pray you do me The Protectors words to the Council.
nothing but right, for these witnesses and sayings of famous Doctors be true:
For I am only the vndubitate heir to Richard Plantagenet Duke of York,
adjudged to be the very heir to the Crown of this Realm by authority of
Parliament. Which things so by learned men for verity to us declared, caused
me and others to take him for our lawful and undoubted Prince and Sovereign
Lord. So again by my aid, he of a Protector was made a King: but when he was
once crowned King, and in full possession of the Realm, Change of State change
of manners.
he cast away his old conditions. For, when I my self sued to him for my part
of the Earl of Hertfords Lands, which his brother Edward wrongfully detained
from me, and also required to have the office of the high Constableship of
England, as diverse of my noble ancestors before this time have had, and in long
descent continued; in this my first suite, he did not only first delay me,
and afterward deny me, but gave me such unkind words, as though I had never
furthered him: all which I suffered patiently. But when I was informed of the
death of the two young Innocents, O Lord, my heart inwardly Why Buckingham fell
from the Usurper.
grudged, insomuch as I abhorred the sight of him; I took my leave of the
Court, and returned to Brecknocke to you, but in my journey as I came, I had
diverse imaginations how to deprive this unnatural uncle. First, I fantasied,
that if I list to take upon me the Crown, now was the way made plain, and
occasion given. For I well saw he was disdained of the Lords Temporal, and
accursed of the Lords Spiritual. After diverse cogitations of this matter, as
I rode between Worcester and Bridgenorth, I encountered with the Lady Margaret
Countess of Margaret Countess of Richmund.
Richmund, now wife to the Lord Stanley, who is the very daughter, and sole
heir to John Duke of Sommerset my Grandfathers elder brother, so that she and
her son Henry Earl of Richmund be both between me and the gate, to enter
into the Majesty royal, and getting of the Crown; and when we had a little
communed concerning her son, and were departed, I then began to dispute
with my self, whether I were best to take it upon me, by the election of The
doubts of the Duke of Buckingham.
the Nobility and Communalty, or to take it by power. Thus standing in a
wavering ambiguity, I considered first, the office, duty, and pain of a King,
which surely I think that no mortal man can justly The great and weighty
charge of a King.
and truly observe, except he be elected of God, as K. David was.

(27) But further I remembered, that if I once took upon me the Governance of
the Realm, the daughters of King Edward and their Allies, being both for his
sake much beloved, and also for the great injury done to them much pitied,
would never cease to bark at the one side of me. Semblably my cousin the Earl
of Richmond, his aides and kinsfolks will surely attempt either to bite, or to
pierce me on the other side, so that my life and rule should ever hang unquiet
in doubt of death or deposition: And if the said two linages of York and
Lancaster should join in one against me, then were I surely matched. Wherefore
I have clecrelie determined, utterly to relinquish all imaginations concerning
the obtaining of the Buckinghams resolution concerning the Crown.
Crown. For as I told you, the Countess of Richmond in my return from the new
named King, meeting me in the high way, prayed me first for kindreds sake,
secondly for the love I bare to my Grandfather The communication of the
Countess of Richmond with the Duke of Buckingham.
Duke Humfrey, who was sworn brother to her father, to move the King to be
good to her son Henry Earl of Richmond, and to license him with his favor
to return again into England, and if it were his pleasure so to do, she
promised that the Earl her son should marry one of the Kings daughters at
the appointment of the King, without any thing demanded for the said espousals,
but only the Kings favor, which request I soon ouerpassed and departed. But
after in my lodging I called to memory more of that matter, and now am bent,
that the Earl of Richmond heir of the house of Lancaster, shall take to wife
Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to Henry Earl of Richmond and Lady Elizabeth
must make the union.
King Edward, by the which marriage both the houses of York and Lancaster may
be united in one.

(28) When the Duke had said, Bishop Morton who ever favored the house of
Lancaster, was wondrous joyful, for all his imagination tended to this effect;
and lest the Dukes courage should assuage, or his mind alter, he said to the
Duke: My Lord of Buckingham, since by Gods provision, and your incomparable
wisdom, this noble conjunction is first moved, it is necessary to consider
what persons we shall first make privy of this politic conclusion. By my
troth (quoth the Duke) we will begin with my Lady of Richmond the Earls
mother, which knows where he is in Britain: since you will begin that way
(said the Bishop) I have an old friend with With whom and how to begin the
intended desigues.
the Countess, called Reinald Bray, for whom I shall send, if it be your
pleasure: so the Bishop wrote for him to come to Brechnock, who strait came
back with the messenger, where the Duke and Bishop declared what they had
devised for the preferment of the Earl of Richmond, son to his Lady and
Mistress: willing her first to compass how to obtain the goodwill of Queen
Elizabeth, and also of her eldest daughter: and after secretly to send to her
son in Britain, to declare what high honor was prepared for him, if he
would swear to marry the Lady Elizabeth as soon as he was King of the
Realm. With which conclusion, Reinold Bray with a glad heart returned to the
Countess his Lady. Bray thus Reinold Bray, the Instrument.
departed, the Bishop told the Duke, that if he were in his Isle of Ely, he
could make many friends to further their enterprise. The Duke knew this to be
true, but yet loath to loose the society of such a Counselor, gave him fair
words, saying, he should shortly depart well accompanied for fear of enemies,
but the Bishop ere the Dukes company were assembled, secretly disguised, in a
night departed and came to Ely, Bishop Morton escapes from Brecknocke
disguised.
where he found money and friends, and then sailed into Flaunders, where he did
the Earl of Ricchmond good service.

(29) When Reinold Bray had declared his message to the Countess, no marvel
if she were glad; wherefore she devised a means how to break this matter to
Queen Elizabeth; being then in Sanctuary at Westminster, and having in her
family a certain Welshman called Lewis learned in Physic, now Lewis a
Phi^tian another Instrument.
having opportunity to break her mind unto him, declared that the time was
come, that her son should be joined in marriage with Lady Elizabeth, daughter
and heir to King Edward: and that King Richard should out of all honor and
estate be dejected, and required him to go to Queen Elizabeth not as a
messenger, but as one that came friendly to visit her, and as time and place
should serve to make her privy of this devise. This Physician with good
diligence repaired to the Queen, and when he saw time convenient said unto
her: Madame although my imagination be very simple, yet for the entire
affection I bear to you and to your children, I am so Lewis breaks the
intent unto Queen Elizabeth.
bold to utter unto you a secret conceit, which I have compassed in my brain.
When I remember the great loss which you have sustained by the death of your
loving husband, and the great sorrow that you have suffered by the cruel
murder of your innocent children, I can no less do, then daily study how to
bring your heart to comfort, and also to revenge the quarrel of you and your
children, on that cruel tyrant King Richard. And first consider what battle,
and what mischief have risen by the dissension between the two houses of
York and Lancaster, which two families if they may be joined in one, I doubt
not but that your line shall be again restored to your great joy and comfort:
you know Madam, that of the house of Lancaster, the Earl of Richmond is The
means to raise the Queens daughter to her right.
next of blood, and to the house of York your daughters now are heirs. If you
could devise the means how to couple your eldest daughter with the Earl of
Richmund in matrimony, no doubt, but that the usurper should shortly be
deposed, and your heir again to her right restored.

(30) When the Queen had heard this friendly Motion, she instantly besought
him, that as he had been the first inuentor of so good an enterprise, Queen
Elizabeth readily receives the motion.
that now he would not desist to follow the same, requiring him further, that
he would resort to the Countess of Richmund, mother to the Earl Henry, and
to declare to her on the Queens behalf, that all the friends of King Edward
her husband, The Queen sends to the Countess.
should assist and take part with the Earl of Richmund her son, so that he
would take an oath, that after the Kingdom obtained, to espouse the Lady
Elizabeth her daughter, etc. M. Lewis so sped his business, that he made a
final end of this business, between the two mothers: so the Lady Margaret
Countess of Richmund, brought to a good hope of the preferment of her son,
made Reinold Bray chief soliciter of this conspiracy, giving him in charge
secretly The two mothers agreede Upon the union.
to inueagle such persons of Nobility to join with her, and take her part, as
he knew to be faithful.

(31) This Reinold Bray within few days brought to his luer Sir Giles Daubeny,
Sir John Cheinie Knights, Richard Guilford, and Thomas Ramney Many drawn into
faction against K. Richard
Esquiers, and others. In the mean while the Countess of Richmund sent one
Christopher Vrsewicke, a Priest into Britain, to the Earl of Richmund her
Vrswicke sent into Britain.
son, to declare to him all the agreements between her and the Queen
agreede: and with all to show him that the Duke of Buckingham was one of the
first Inuenters of this enterprise: she likewise sent Hugh Conway an Esquire
into Britain with a great sum of money, giving him in charge to declare to
the Hugh Conway sent into Britain.
Earl, the great love that the most part of the Nobility of the Realm bare
toward him, willing him not to neglect so good an occasion offered, but with
all speed to setle his mind how to return into England, and therewithal
aduising him to take land in Wales. When the Earl had received this joyful
message, he brake to the Duke of Britain all his secrets, aduertising him
thathe was entered into a sure and steadfast Earl Richmund breaks with the
Duke of D^ine.
hope to obtain the Crown of England, desiring him of help toward the
atchieuing of his enterprise, which the Duke promised, and afterward
performed: whereupon the Earl sent back again Hugh Conway; and Th. Ramney to
declare his coming shortly into England.

(32) In the mean season the chief of the conspiracy in England began many
enterprises, which being never so privily handled, yet knowledge thereof came to
King Richard, and because he knew the Duke of Buckingham to be the chief
head, and aid of this combination; he thought it most necessary to pluck him
from that part, and thereupon addressed his loving letters unto the Duke,
requesting him most earnestly to come to the Court, whose The Duke of
Buckingham it sent for by the King.
grave advise for counsel he then stood much in need of; with many words of
kind complements to be uttered from the mouth of the messenger: but the Duke
mistrusting those sweet promises proceeded out of a bitter intent, and knowing
K. Richard to speak most fairest when he meant foulest play; desired the king
of pardon, excusing himself that he was sickly and not well able to travel:
which excuse the king would not admit, but sent other letters with checking
words, commanding him without delay to repair to his presence: unto which the
Duke made The Duke of Buckingham refuses to come to the Court.
a determinate answer that he would not come to his mortal enemy: and
immediately prepared war against him. Whereupon Thomas Marquess Dorset came
out of Sanctuary, and gathered a great band of men in the County of York, Sir
Edward Courtney Commotions begun.
and Peter his brother, Bishop of Excester, raised another Army in
Devonshire and Cornwall, and in Kent, Sir Richard Guilford, and other Gentlemen
raised a Company, and all this was done even in one moment.

(33) King Richard rouzed from his pleasures in progress, sent forth
commission to muster his King Richards expedition toward (...)*
men, and with a great preparation from London marched toward Salisbury;
thinking it not best to disparkle his power into small parts in pursuing his
enemies every way at once, and therefore omitting all others with a great
puissance went to set upon the Duke of Buckingham, the head of the spring. The
Duke hearing of the Kings approach, made out to meet him before he came too
far, accompanied The Duke prepares against the King.
with a great power of wild Welshmen, whom he had enforced to follow him, more
by his Lordly commandment then by liberal wages, which thing indeed was the
cause that they fell off, and forsook him. His march was through the forest
of Deane, intending for Gloucester, where he meant to pass Seuerne, and so
have joined his Army with the Courtneys, and other Western men, which had he
done, no doubt K. Richard had been in great ieopardie. But before he could
attain the Seuerne side, by force of continual rain the river rose so high,
that it ouerflowed Great matters le^ed that the accomplices could not (...).
all the country adjoining, and was not again bounded within his own banks
for the space of ten days, so that the Duke could not get over, nor his
accomplices any wise come unto him, during which time the Welshmen lingering idle,
without wages, or victual, suddenly brake up Camp and departed; whereupon
the Duke was wonderously perplexed, not knowing how to recover this unfortunate
chance, and destitute of power; to show himself in field, sought to secure
himself in secret, till destiny assigned him a better day.

(34) A servant he had in especial favor and trust brought up tenderly by
him, and risen to great wealth and esteem, his name was Humfrey Ba^ister, The
Duke of Buckingham ^peth in s^cres.
and place of residence near unto Shrewsburie, whither the distressed Duke in
disguise repaired, intending there to remain secret, until he might either
raise a new power, or else by some means convey himself unto Britain to
Henry Earl of Richmund: but as soon as the others which had attempted the
same enterprise against the King, had knowledge that Buckingham was forsaken of
his Company, and could not be found, as men struck in sudden fear The (...)
dispersed.
shifted every one for himself, many of them taking Sanctuary, but the most of
the chiefest took into Britain, among whom were Peter Courtney, Bishop of
Excester with his brother Edward Earl of Devonshire, Many fled into Br^taine
to Earl Henry.
Thomas Marquess Dorset the Queens son, and his young son Thomas being a
Child, Edward Wooduile Knight, brother to the Queen, John Lord Wells, Sir
Robert Willoughby, Sir John Bourchier, Sir Giles Daubeney, Sir Thomas Arundell,
Sir John Cheinie with his two brethren, Sir William Barkley, Sir Richard
Edgecombe, and Sir William Brandon, Edward Poinings an excellent Captain, and
others.

(35) Richard thus far proceeded, and no enemy seen, his hopes were
increased, and fears daily A proclamation for the apprehension of the Duke of
Bu^kingham.
less; yet being a Prince politic and vigilant, he commanded the Ports to be
securely kept, and knowing that Buckingham was not fled with the rest, made
proclamation for the apprehending of that Duke, promising a thousand pound to
the man that could bring him forth, with pardon of his faults, to enjoy the
Kings favor, and if he were a bondsman, presently to be made free. Banister
minding the present, and forgetting what was past, spread his lap first to
receive this golden shower, and in hope of this gain, made no conscience to
betray his own Lord, who had now laid his life upon trust in his hands: he
therefore repayring to the Shiriffe of Shrewsbury, revealed the Duke, who
disguised like a poor Countriman, and digging in a grove near Banister
betrayed his Lord the Duke of Buckingham.
unto Banisters house, was apprehended, and with a great guard of men was
brought unto Salisbury, where King Richard then lay, and where without
arraignement or judgment, upon the second of November he lost his head: whose
death was the Buckingham beheaded.
less lamented, for that himself had been the chief Instrument to set the
Crown wrongfully upon Richards head: and yet the treachery of Banister was
most severely punished, as many have observed, not only in the loss of his
reward promised, which he never had, and infamy received, never after shaken
off; but also in himself and children, as Banister loses his reward, but
finds punishments.
are thus reported; his eldest son and heir fell mad, and dyed so distracted
in a Boares Stye: his second son became deformed in his limbs, and fell
lame; his third son was drowned in a small puddle of water; his eldest
daughter was suddenly struck with a foul leprosy, and himself being of
extreme age, was arraigned and found guilty of murder, and by his Clergy saved
his life.

(36) An other Commotion at the same time was in Kent, where George Brown and
John Gilford A Commotion in Kent.
Knights, Foge, Scot, Clifford, and Bonting, with five thousand men attempted
great matters at Grauesend, but hearing of the Duke of Buckinghams surprise,
dispersed themselves for that time. But when King Richard perceived how he was
every where beset, he sent one Thomas Hutton unto Francis Duke King Richard
sends to the Duke of Britain.
of Britain, with proffers of gold to circumuent and imprison Earl Henry, who
as he feared was too well friended in those foreign parts, which thing indeed
this Hutton well perceived, and so to the King reported, that the Duke was
nothing forward to bite at this bait, whereupon, those that lately fled
England, were indicted of treason, and other of Henry's factions beheaded,
whereof Sir George Brown, and Sir Roger Clifford Knights with four others
were beheaded at London, and at Exceter for the like cause dyed Sir Thomas
Sentleger, who had married The Kings brother in law beheaded.
Lady Anne Duchess of Excester, King Richards own sister, with others; so
icalous was the King of his usurped Crown; and that nothing should be laid to
improvident foresight, the coasts he stored with Armies of men, furnished the
Ports with store of Provision, and made all things ready to withstand Earl
Henry's arrival. Who now having gotten aid of five thousand Britains, with
forty vessels well Earl Henry shipped for England.
furnished, set sail from thence the twelfth of October, but was taken with so
terrible a tempest, that his Fleet was disparkled, some into Normandy, and some
compelled to return into Britain, only the Earls ship with one other hept
the Seas, being sore tossed all night, and in the morning arrived in the mouth
of Poole in the County of Dorset, where he might behold the Shore full of men
shining in armor, to his great amasement, whereupon he sent out his
shippe-boat to know whether they were friends or enemies; their answer was,
that they were thither A subtle train laid for the Earl.
appointed by the Duke of Buckinghm, to attend the coming of the Earl of
Richmund, to conduct him in safety to the Duke, who lay encamped not far off,
that so joining their forces, they might prosecute Richard the usurper, who
being in a manner destitute of men, was sore distracted, and desperate in his
own designs. These smooth untruths notwithstanding Earl Henry avoided, and
with a forward gale returned to Normandy, whence he sent Messengers Earl Henry
returns into Britain.
unto young Charles King of France, whose father King Lewis was lately departed
this life, to have his safe conduct to return into Britain, which easily was
granted with favorable complements returned to the Earl. Lord Henry thus
crossed by sea, had present news of Buckinghams surprise and death, with the
flight of the Nobles escaped from Richard: who meeting with Richmund in
Britain, fell forthwith The Lords meet in Britain.
into Counsel: where first it was determined that Earl Henry should take his
oath to espouse the Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter unto King Edward, and the
immediate heir to the Crown, which he solemnly did in the Church at Rhedon;
and they The Lords svvear fealty unto Henry
for their parts swear unto him fealty, doing him homage with no less respect
then unto their sole and crowned King.

(37) Of these proceedings King Richard soon heard, which indeed greatly
appaled his though^, and all pensive and sad he returned out of the West
toward London, where to cut off the hopes of Richmunds further claim, he
caused a Parliament to be Henry and others attainted by Parliament.
assembled at Westminster, and therein attainted the said Earl Henry himself,
and all such as had fled the land in his behalf, enacting them enemies to
their natural Country, their goods to be confiscated, and all their lands and
possessions to be seized upon to the Kings use, which was so forwarded by his
lewd Counselors, and so executed by his fawning followers, that some better
affected, set forth the present and oppressed estate in these scoffing rimes,
to their further disgrace, diuulging their names in manner as follows; The
cat, the rat, and Louell the dog,
Rule all England under a hog.
Alluding to the names of Ratcliffe the Kings mischievous Minion, and of
Catesby his secret traducer, and to the Kings cognizance, which was the Boar:
for which William Collingborne Esquier, who had William Collingborne executed
for the time.
been Shiriffe of Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, was condemned, and upon the Tower
hill executed with all extremity.

(38) King Richards state standing in dangers abroad, and not altogether free
from conspiracies at ho^e, he thought it best policy to enter amity with
Scotland, which he did for the term of three years, and the more firm to
assure himself of K Richard makes peace with Scotland.
that King, he entreated a marriage betwixt the Duke of Rothsay the kings
eldest son, and the Lady de la Pole daughter to John Duke of Suffolk, and to
the Duchess Elizabeth king Richards own sister, whom he so much favored,
as that after the death of his own son, he proclaimed John Earl of
Lincoln, her son and his Nephew, heir apparent to the Crown of England,
disinheriting King Edwards daughters, whose brothers he had before Job de la
Pole Earl of Lincoln proclaimed heir apparent.
murdered.

(39) His fears nothing lessened, but rather daily increased, he attempted
once more to stop the Currunt which led to the spring, to which end he sent his
Ambassadors laden with gold, and many gay Offers made to the Duke of Britain.
promises unto Francis Duke of Britain, offering to give him all Richm^nds
lands, and yearly revenues if he would either send the said Earl into England
or commit him there unto prison. These coming to the Dukes Court, could have
no communication with him, he lying extremely sick, and his wits too weak to
entertain discourse. Whereupon Peter Landose his Treasurer, a man pregnant in
wit, and of great authority, took the motion into hand, unto Peter Landose.
whom the English Ambassadors promised all the Earls Reuenews if he could
bring King Richards request to pass. He greedy of gain, and being in place to
do what he would, promised to effect it, Landose promised to deliver the Earl.
conditionally that King Richard would make good his offer. Thus whilst
messengers posted betwixt Peter and Richard, John Bishop of Elie being then in
Flaunders, was certified by Christopher Vrswicke of all the circumstances of
this purpose, whereupon the Bishop Morton gives Henry notice of his danger.
Bishop with all possible have, sent the same intelligence the same day, and by
the same man unto Earl Henry in Britain, willing him to shift himself and
followers into France: who forthwith sent Vrswick unto King Charles to have his
license that he might with King Charles grants his safe conduct to Henry.
his good liking come into his dominions which being obtained he caused the
other Lords under pretense to visit the sick Duke to escape into Aniou, and
two days after changing his Apparel with his servant, waited upon him as
upon his Master, and posted thence into France: whose escape when the Earl
Henry hardly escaped.
Treasurer heard of, he sent after to apprehend him, and that in such have as
at his entrance into the French dominions they were hard at his heels.

(40) This sudden flight of the Earl and of the other English Lords, the
Duke of Britain (being somewhat recovered of his dangerous sickness) took very
grievously, imputing it a great dishonor unto himself, to suffer the least
suspect of breach betwixt him and the Earl, and therefore sore offended at
Landose The Duke of Bri taine displeased at Landose.
whom he suspected to be deep in the deed, he sent for Edward Wooduile and
Edward Pownings two English Esquires, unto whom he delivered a sum of The
honorable dealings of the Duke of Britain.
money which he had promised to Earl Henry, with a convey unto all the rest
of the English, to depart Vannes, bearing all their charges till they came to
their Earl in France. Neither was King Charles backward to forward Earl
Richmond against the Tyrant and Usurper of the English Crown. And the more to
joy Henry, John Earl of Oxford imprisoned by King Edward the fourth in the
Castle of John Earl of Oxford comes to Earl Henry.
Hammes; with Captain Blunt his keeper, and Sir John Fortescue Porter of
Callis, came unto Earl Henry to take their fortunes in following of his. This
Earl of Oxford, as we have seen, was a continual aider of King Henry the
sixth, against his opposite K. Edward, and had done many services in the
Lancastrians cause, till destiny had cast down the hopes of their side. Him
therefore Earl Henry made his John Earl of Oxford in great favor with Henry.
chief Counselor for war, as for experience, policy, valor, and faith in
that business, no man was more meet. Whose prowess further appeared when Earl
Henry wan the wreath at Bosworth field, where, in the Front of that Battle he
lead the band of Archers, and ever after lived in great favor with this King
Henry the seventh, and in great honor died the fourth year of King Henry the
eight. In the Bishop Fox in great favor with King Henry.
like trust for Counsel and favor with these Kings, was Richard Fox Doctor of
Divinity, who being then a student in Paris, was found by Earl Richmond to be
the chiefest man for imploiment in his French business, which he so prudently
and faithfully effected, as the Earl being King, acknowledging him one of his
principal aduancers, made him of his Privy Council, Lord Privy Scale, and
raised him to very great places in Church and Commonwealth, and lastly to
testify in what dear esteem he held him, made him Godfather to his son
Prince Henry, The preferments of Bishop Fox.
who was after King of England with whom in great reverence he lived a long
time, even till his eyesight failed through age, and did many works of piety,
whereof Copus Christi College in Oxford, is Corpus Christi College in Oxford
founded by Bishop Fox.
and shall be for ever a noble witness; and his honorable care of reverend
antiquity, in preserving the bones of many Saxon Kings, and by him bestowed in
fair Monuments in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, shall never want due
celebration amongst all that honor antiquity and glorious studies. But from
these worthy Subjects, we return again to their sovereign King Henry.

(41) Whose beginnings thus forwarded by the Duke of Britain and the French
King, drew many English into France, and filled the heart of the Usurper with
an extreme fear; therefore to accomplish by policy, what was doubtful by
arms, he sought to bait his hook yet another way. The title he knew stood
with the daughters of King Edward (his King Richard intends to match with his
Niece.
sons being murdered) and among them to Lady Elizabeth the eldest, whose
marriage he well saw must bring Henry the Crown. But that once diuerted, his
stream of it self could bear no great floate, nor bring any inundation into
the Land, and therefore Queen Elizabeth in Sanctuary must be Courted, that her
daughters might come to Court, and there be regarded according to their
degrees. This so cunningly was carried, by men that could carry A subtle
device.
themselves to fit women's affections, that the King was purged of the murder of
her sons; she made to believe that her self was respected a Dowager Queen,
and sister in law to the present King, and that himself had a Prince and many
Princely Peers most fit matches for those Princes her daughters; Many fair
promises intending foul end.
that her son Thomas Marquess Dorset, whilst he followed the Runaway Henry,
left his honorable preferments intended to himward; and lastly requiring a
reconciliation with the Queen, forgave all injuries uttered against him out of
her womanish passions, with a most willing heart: and indeed these messengers
were such Crafts-masters as they brought Queen Elizabeth into a fools
Paradise, and made her believe that their words were his heart. Whereupon
Queen Elizabeth brought into (...).
forgetting all things passed before, as the murder of her sons, the
dishonor of her husband, the bastardy of their Children, and her own scandal
for Sorcery: nor remembering the faithful promise she made to Lady Margaret
Earl Henry's mother, King Edwards five daughters delivered to the Tyrant their
uncle.
she delivered her five daughters as lambs committed to the ravening wolf,
in which act of hers is seen the weakness of that Sex, and the ambition
whereunto by nature they are inclined, for presently upon the delivery of her
daughters, she sent privily for the Lord Marquess Doset her son, then
residing in Paris, willing him to desist from the Queen Elizabeth sends for
the Marquess her son.
Earls Faction, and come unto King Richard, who promised him preferment, and
that her self and daughters were in high favor, all injuries on both parts
forgiven and forgotten.

(42) This entrance made unto the Tragedy intended, to furnish the stage and
finish the Scene of her own life, the next Actor must be Queen Anne, Queen
Anne hinders the purpose of the King.
who only now stood in the Tyrants way, her death he meant should give life to
his intruded regencie, and add a further Claim and strength to the possession
which he already had, by matching with his Niece the next heir unto the Crown
the Lady Elizabeth, the let only resting that himself had a wife, her death
therefore must immediately be sought, yet so as the honorable repute of his
name should no ways be impeached, ever carrying himself in outward semblance
for a good religious honest man, and much desirous that his people should
account him so. First therefore he began to lament the barrennes of his wives
womb, and the great King Richards fained sorrow.
dangers that the Realm was like to sustain, if himself should die
Issulesse, complaining often thereof unto his Nobility, but most especially
unto Of Canterbury.
Archbishop Rotherham lately released out of prison, whereby the Prelate
coniectured Queen Anne had not long to live. Then refrained he her bed under
pretext of Penancy, taking her defect as a scourge King Richard refraineth his
Queens bed.
for his own sins, which day and night he sought to expiate by prayers: His
next policy was, how her death might be wrought with the least suspect of
wrong, and how taken when she was gone: Therefore as an assay to the Peoples
taste, he caused it to be given forth that Queen Anne was dead, which was A
report given forth that Queen Anne was dead.
so commonly divulged, that the rumor thereof came to her own ear, and she
having had sufficient experience of her husbands proceedings, feared this to be
one of his plots, mistrusting (and not without cause) that her life was in
danger, whereupon all dismayed with a lamentable countenance, she came to the
King, and with weeping tears demanded, what offense she had done, that the
sentence of Queen Anne fears her own death.
death was given against her already. Richard made it strange to see her so
perplexed, and with loving words and smiling semblance, bad her live to
scandalize report, and to think that many years were yet added to her life,
but whether in conceit for sorrow, or of poison, I cannot say, she died
shortly after, and was solemnly buried in the Abbey of Westminster. Her death
and burial place.


(43) The King thus delivered from the bands of Matrimony, and now a widower at
liberty to choose where he would, cast glances of love toward the Lady
Elizabeth his own brothers daughter, and King Richard courteth Lady Elizabeth.
began to court her for his second Queen, but the thing was so offensive to
the law of nature, and so directly against the Law of God, as all men abhorred
the motion, and most of all the maiden her self, Leuit. 18. 14.
which Richard perceiving, he forbear over earnest pursuit to gain his time
and all fit occasions; but most especially, having no leisure to woo, his
subjects on al sides daily reuolting, and his Nobles more and more had in
suspect; among whom one was Lord Thomas Stanley Earl of Darby who had married
Thomas Earl of Darby much suspected of the King.
Lady Margaret Countess of Rich^nd, Earl Henry's own mother: him therefore
he most mistrusted, and before he would admit his departure from Court, he
commanded him to leave his son and heir George Stanley the Lord Strange for
his hostage, which he did, though it little auailed to bind George Lord
Strange delivered in pledge to King (...).
Darbies affection unto his side.

(44) In this while King Richard hearing that Oxford had escaped out of the
Castle of Hammes, and that he, with the Captain thereof James Blunt, were fled
into France and joined with Richmund; thought it high time to quench the
sparks in those parts, before they should rise to a higher flame; and
therefore he appointed (which was presently accomplished) the Garrison at
Callis to strait the said Ha^es be^ged by the Garrison of Callis.
Castle with a hard siege, being well assured that many welwillers to the
Earls proceedings lay there harbored, who upon the least advantage would be
ready to play. But Henry not unmindful of his distressed friends, nor Oxford
forgetting his kind Hostess Captain Blunts wife, made unto the Piece, The
Earl of Oxford freeth his old friends from Ha^es.
and on the sudden put Thomas Brandon, with thirty approved Soldiers into the
Castle, who from the walls played upon the beseigers, whiles Oxford annoied
them upon their backs, so that presently they offered, and came to a
composition, which was, that they within should safely depart, but the Castle
to remain in Subjection to the King.

(45) Hammes thus restored in danger to be lost, and nothing had thence besides
a woman and a few suspected persons, King Richard thought himself now sure of
all, and fearing no invasion at home, King Richards conceit.
imagined that much harm could not be done abroad: for Henry in France (as he
thought) found very few friends, and was fully persuaded that the French Kings
assistance stood more of words then in deeds. And indeed some occasion of such
suspicion was ministered, for King Charles but young, and the Princes at
variance, Earl Henry was enforced to make suite unto them man by man. Besides
Thomas Henry solici^h the French, man by man. Marquess Dorset seeks to
escape from Henry.
Marquess Dorset sent for by his mother the Queen, suddenly in the night made
an escape from Paris, with purpose for England, which stroke great fear among
Earl Henry's part, chiefly for that all their Counsels were known unto the
Marquess, which if he should reveal, their designs were made desperate. To
prevent which, he was posted after, and brought back again, though much
against his will. These things considered, King Richard to lessen his great
charges, discharged his Navy at seas, commanding the Welsh to watch the shore;
Beacons King Richard discharges his Navy.
to be built, and armor to be ready at every call; then giving his affections
leave to entertain more security, saw not the sword that hung over his head.

(46) But Earl Henry delivered from the fear of the Marquess, thought it
not best to prolong time, lest others upon like purposes should bewray his
intents; and thereupon obtaining a small aid of the French with a certain
sum of money, for which the Lord Marquess (whom he much mistrusted) and Sir
John Bourchier were left in pledge, he set forward to Ro^n, and prepared his
shipping in the mouth of Seyn: whither tidings was brought him of Earl Henry
sets forward his journey.
Queen Annes death, and that King Richard purposed to marry Lady Elizabeth: a
fear indeed far exceeding the former, she being the Princess by whom he
must claim, whereupon much distemperature arose, every man's brain working
upon the news. A sudden fear.
But after much consultation, it was held the best to make over into England,
to interpose the proceedings ere the match was fully made, whereupon Earl
Richmund with two thousand men only, and a small number of ships, set sail
from Harflent the fifteenth of August, and the seventh day following Henry of
Richmund ariueth at Milford haven.
arrived at Milford haven in Wales, where taking land he came unto Dale, and
thence the next day marched to Hereford west, ten miles into the Maine, from
thence he marched to Cardigan, where he had news that the Country was
forelaid against him, but finding that untrue, he made still forward, beating
down such Houlds as held against him: then sending secretly to Lady Margaret
his mother, to Henry sent word of ariuage to his Mother and others.
the Lord Stanley, Talbot, and others, signified unto them, he meant to pass
Seuerne, at Shrewesbury, and thence to march directly toward London. In his
way to Shrewesbury, there met him Sir Rice ap Thomas Sir Rice ap Thomas
ioineth with Henry.
a man of great command in Wales, with a number of men to side in his quarrel,
which Henry afterward requited in making this his first aider the Governor of
Wales.

(47) The Earl more boldly from Shrewsburie, held on his march to the Town of
Newport, whither Sir Gilbert Talbot with two thousand strong Sir Gilbert Talbot
ioineth with Earl Henry.
from the young Earl of Shrewsbury gave him his aid. Then passed he forward
to Stafford, and had conference there with Sir William Stanley, and proceeding
forward was honorably received into the City Lichfield, where Thomas Earl of
Darby with five thousand armed men had been some few days Henry comes to
Lichfield.
before, but hearing of Earl Henry's approach removed to Anderson to avoid
suspicion of the jealous King that kept his son Hostage for his further truth.

(48) King Richard at this time held his Court at Notingham, where being
informed that Earl King Richard at Notingham.
Henry with a small company was landed in Wales, made small account of what he
could do, altogether relying upon the Lord Walter Herbert, and Sir Rice ap
Thomas two principal men, in whom he conceived no little trust: yet lest this
new risen spring might gather in more heads, he sent to John Duke of Norfolk,
Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas John Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earl of
Northumberland, The. Earl of Surrey sent for to the King. Brakenbury. (...).
Hungerford.
Earl of Surrey willing them with a selected power to repress the insolency
of this headstrong Earl: moreover he sent for Sir Robert Brakenburie
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Thomas Bourchier, and Sir Walter Hungerford
Knights, all of them in great jealousy and mistrust, commanding them with
their forces to come and attend upon his person which accordingly they set
forward to do, mean while sending his Spials to know the way Henry went, had
intelligence that he was past Shrewsbury without any impeachment; whereat
storming in King Richard put incholler.
choler and cursing their untruths whom he had put in trust, craved
vengeance from heaven, and instantly intended to revenge it himself; then
having notice the Earl was at Lichfield, and his party increased by daily
repair, incontinently he marshalled his followers; and like a valiant
Captain and politic leader set forward his Battles five and King Richard
sets forward to meet his enemy.
five in a rank. In the midst of his troops he bestowed the Carriages
belonging to his Army: and himself mounted upon a white Courser, environed
with his Guard, followed by his footmen, and the wings of Horsemen ranged on
every side, with a frowning stern countenance, but yet in great Pompee, ntred
the town of Leicester after the Sun was set, being full of indignation and
swelling in King Richard comes to Leicester.
anger, which somewhat he assuaged with threats of revenge.

(49) Earl Richmund from Lichfield departed for Tamworth, and in the way met
Sir Thomas Bourchier and Sir Walter Hungerford going toward the King, Sir
Thomas and Sir Walter Hungerford, turn to Earl Henry.
who upon this unlooked for occasion, and knowing themselves in what suspicion
they stood, secretly left the company of their Captain Brakenbury the night
following, and wandering in ways unknown, with much ado got safely unto the
Earls Companies.

(50) In the like danger through darkness of night, Henry himself chanced to
come; for albeit he was a man both valiant and forwad, and by his Henry Earl
of Richmund loses his way.
own wisdom could manage his weightiest affairs; Yet now having notice that
King Richard with a strong army was near, and that his father in law, the Lord
Stanley stood as a Neuter, he was struck deep in his dumps, and with twenty
light Horsemen lingering behind, so seriously musing what was to be done, as
lastly, he lost the sight of his Host, and by the darkness of night missed
his way; neither durst he for the Kings Scout-watch demand direction to
Tamworth, but lay in a small village about three miles distant, to his no
little grief, and his whole Armies great amasement, the one prognosticating it
to be a presage of an ill beginning, and the other doubting some detriment of
their Lord, but in the dawning of the next morning co^ducted by good fortune he
came to his Host, excusing that his absence Henry's excuse.
was to have conference with his secret friends; and then privily departing to
the Lord Stanley, had conference with him, and was put in good comfort.

(51) But contrariwise, King Richard was wrapped and perplexed with fear, not
only with the departure of Sir John Savage, Sir Brian Sanford, and Sir Simond
Digby, in whom he had reposed great trust, but also in the dreadful dreams
which nightly he suffered, King Richard ter rified with dreadful dreams.
wherein to his seeming, terrible devils so pulled and haled him, as by
nomeanes he could take any rest, which fearful imaginations struck so deep
an impression unto his heart, that the signs thereof appeared in his
countenance, howsoever he sought to put them off in show.

(52) But being determined to put himself to the trial of battle, or else,
(and that rather) enforced by divine Justice to pull the revenging hand of
heaven against him, in the morning he marched toward the enemy, and upon a
fair plain called Redmore near unto Bosworth about seven miles Richard set
down his battle upon (...)
west from Leicester he pitched down his Tents, and thence sent a Purseuant to
the Lord Stanley, commanding him to advance ^orward with his company, and to
come to his presence, which if he refused to do, he swear by Christ's passion,
his sons head should off before that he dined. The Lord Stanley answered the
Purseuant, that if the King did so, he Lord Stanleis answer unto the Kings
message.
had more sons alive; but to come to the King he was not at that time
determined. This answer declared, King Richard commanded the Lord Strange The
Lord Str^ commanded to be beheaded.
incontinent to be beheaded, at the very season, when the two Armies came in
sight each of others, but his counselors told him, that the time was now to
fight, and not to execute, which might better be done when the field was
fought: whereupon the Lord Strange was delivered prisoner to the keepers of the
Kings Tents, and the Kings holy vow thus broke, the Lord Strange escaped with
life, by this bad tyrants too good a death.

(53) But now the time and hour of Battle being come, he drew out his Army
upon the plain, whose order for fight he thus placed, the foreward he The
order of R. Richards battle.
ordered of a marvelous length, to strike the more terror in the Beholders
hearts, in whose forefront he placed his Archers, as a Bulwark to defend the
rest, the leading whereof was committed to John Duke of Norfolk, with whom was
Thomas Earl of Surrey, his son, his own Battaillion was furnished with his
best approved men of war, having Horsemen for wings on both sides of his
battle: and being thus ordered for their further encouragement King Richard
mounted in place to be heard, thus said to his Soldiers.

(54) My faithful followers, friends, and selected King Richard^ Oration unto
his Soldiers.
Chiefetaines, I confess by your puissant valors I first aspired to the top
of this royal estate, in obtaining and wearing this Diadem of Imperial
Majesty, and maugre the seditious attempts of all cankered adversaries, by your
prudent and politic counsels I have so governed the Realm, People and
Subjects, as I have omitted nothing I hope appertaining to the office of a just
Prince, nor you pretermitted any thing belonging to the parts and duties of
most prudent Counselors. And albeit, that in the getting of the Garla^d I was
provoked by sinister King Richard confefleth his fault.
Counsel, and seduced by a diabolical temptation to commit a most wicked and
detestable Act, yet with salt tears and strait penance I have, I trust,
expiated that heinous offense: which abominable crime, I desire you as clearly
to forget, as I daily remember to deplore and lament. If you will now vouchsafe
to call to mind in what case we al stand, and in what doubtful peril we are
intrapped, I doubt not but that you will with me confess, that if ever amity
prevailed betwixt the raised, and the raisers, betwixt the Prince and his
Subjects, this day requires as much in us both. For if wise men say true, that
there is not so much power in getting, as there is policy in keeping; the one,
mere fortunes chance, the other wisdoms deep insight, then I with you, and
you with me this day must needs take labor and pains, to keep that
pre-eminence and possession by force, which by your prudent labor I have
obtained. The devil, you know, a continual enemy to humane society, a
disturber of Concord, and a sower of sedition has entered into the heart of an
unknown Welshman (whose father I never knew, nor him ever personally saw)
exciting him to aspire and covet our Realm and Crown, to the disheriting of
us and of our posterity: you see further how a company of Traitors, Thieves,
Out-lawes, and runnagtes of our own Nation, besides a number of beggarly
Britains, and faint hearted Frenchmen, are ayder^ and partakers of this his
wicked enterprise, ready at hand to oppress and spoil us, our lands, our
wives and children; which eminent mischiefs, if we then will withstand and
resist, we must live and die together as brethren, fight together as Lions,
and fear not to die together like men; thus resolved, believe me, the
fearful Heart never fled faster before the greedy Grayhound, the silly Lark
before the spar-hauke, or the simple sheep before the Wolf, then these proud
bragging enemies will run out of the Field at the sight of your manly visages.
For have we not already manifest tokens of victory and triumphs? Is not the
Captain of the Rebellion Richmund a Welsh milke-sop, of no courage and less
experience in Marshall feats of war, brought up by my brothers means, and
mine, like a bird in a cage, in the Court of the Duke of Britain, never saw
Army, never wore Armor, without practice, and therefore without knowledge, how
to govern a field. What are his followers but a sort of fainting runagates,
whose fearful eyes, as they could not behold our rays in peace, can worse
abide to see our royal banner displaied against them in fight; for their own
consciences shall bewray their guilt; their oaths, their perjury; their
promise, infidelity; and the sight of us their anointed Soueraign shall either
cause them shamefully to fly, or submissiuely to yield themselves to our mercy.
As touching his French and Britain aiders, their valors have been well
known to our Noble Progenitors, often vanquished but never vanquishers, only
braggers without any great deeds, drunkards without discretion, Ribaulds
without reason, Cowards without resistance, and (in a word) effeminate,
lascivious, and never seen in the Front of a Battle, seeking ten times more
means to fly and ^scape, then once to assault the face of their enemies.
Therefore like valiant Captains advance forth your Standards, and make known
your manhood by dint of sword, and be ye sure that if every one of you give
but one sure stroke, the day will be ours; for how can a handful withstand a
whole Realm? Advance therefore forward, my Captains; in whom I well know is
wanting neither courage, policy, wisdom, nor puissance. I therefore desire
you, for your love to meward, the zeal of your native Country, and the safety
of your Prince and selves, to show this day your true English valor, and for
my self I assure you I will this day either triumph in a glorious victory, or
die in this quarrel with immortal Fame; in whose Palace all our names shall
be enrolled, if we prefer the renown of our Country, before our own lives.
Now S. George for us, and us for victory; have therefore forward, and remember
this, that I am he who with high advancement will prefer the valiant and
hardy, and with severe torture will punish the dastard and cowardly Runaway.
The Oration ended, as it gave courage to some, so gave it distaste unto others*
The diverse opinious of King Richards host.
whose hearts carried gall though their mouths dropped honey; some intended to
turn to Earl Henry; some determined to take part with the strongest; and some
meant to stand still and do nothing; so unsure was he of his Subjects
loyalty, that had been so traiterous to his own Nephews.

(55) Earl Richmond then seeing King Richard thus embattelled, sent to the
Lord Stanley who stood houering aloof off, to come help him to order his Lord
Stanley sent for to Earl Henry.
fight, whose answer was, that Henry should do it himself, and that he would
come to him when he saw time convenient, which struck the Earl into a great
dumpe, but now having no time for delay, necessity compelled him to order his
men. The Foreward he made single according to his small number The Earl
marshaleth his bat^alions.
of soldiers, and in the Front placed his Archers, over whom John Earl of
Oxford was Captain, the right wing was led by Sir Gilbert Talbot; and the The
Earl of Oxford Captain of the Archers.
left assigned to Sir John Savage: Earl Henry himself with his uncle Jasper
Earl of Pembrooke governed the Main-Battell, better replenished with horse,
then foot, whose whole number consisted hardly of five thousand, the kings
doubling the number and more. The Battles thus ordered, Earl Henry armed at
all pieces saving his helmet, rode from rank to rank, and from wing to wing,
encouraging his men, and the more to increase their hot spirits, mounted upon a
little bank, the better to be seen and heard, these words he uttered in all
their hearing.

(56) If ever God gave victory to a just quarrel, if ever he aided war for
the tuition of a kingdom Henry Earl of Richmonds oration.
or Country, or ever succored them that fought for the relief of poor
innocents, oppressed by tyranny, then no doubt my friends and fellow soldiers,
but that this day he will give us a triumphant victory. For if we consider for
what, and against whom we fight, we may not doubt but that God himself will
fight for us. The thing which we are here ready to try by sword, is the liberty
of the Land from under the usurpation and yoke of a Tyrant, and he, against
whom we draw sword, is the Monster (for I may not call him man) which fears
neither God, Laws, Justice, nor Humanity, an homicide, a murderer of his own
kindred, a destroier of the Nobility, a Mawle to his subjects, and a firebrand
to the whole Kingdom, whom just vengeance craves to have quenched: and
consider I pray you, who be of his band, even such as by murder and untruth to
their kin and Country, have got wrongful possession of our rightful
inheritance, letting your wives weep, and Orphans wander, to seek their
liuelihood where they can get it, whose tears I doubt not cry in the ears of
the Lord* who will punish these Malefactors either with prick of conscience
cowardly to fly; or deliver themselves into our hands without Battle.
Consider further, I pray you, that in yonder great Battle are men brought more
for fear then for love, by force compelled and not willingly assembled;
persons that desire more the destruction, then the life of their Captain, and
finally a multitude, whereof the most part be our friends and the least part
his that leads them; and surely it stands in suspense, whether the malice of
the soldiers toward their General, or his fear conceived against them, be
the greater, for this is a rule infallible, that as ill men daily covet to
destroy the good, so God appoints the good men to confound the ill, and if it
be true that Clerks preach that the one is to be hated, and the other beloved,
who then can spare yonder tyrant Richard Duke of Gloucester untruly calling
himself king, that has broken both the Laws of God and man, in the blood of
his brother, the murder of his Nephews, the death of his wife, the slander of
his own mother, and the bastardizing of his brethren. If you have not heard,
yet I have read that Tarquin the proud, for the rape of Lucretia, lost the
Kingdom of Rome: yet was not his fact so detestable as Neroes, who slew his
own mother, to behold the place of his conception: but yonder usurper is both
these persons in one; a Nero in murder of his young Nephews, and in defaming
the womb of his own conception: and a Tarquine intending to defile, and
carnally to know his own Niece under pretext of holy Matrimony, which Lady you
are witness, I have sworn shall be my wife. This is the quarrel for which we are
here this day assembled, and for whose equity we crave God to be judge: a good
beginning of his Protection we have already seen, in escaping the treasons
laid for us in Britain, the dangers of Seas, and our safe arriuage unto this
place, not hunted by any, but rather our selves hunting after that furious
Bore; who this day, and in this place, is so entangled in his own toil, as
his crooked tuskes shall not be able to gnaw the cords of his snare asunder,
nor himself have power, to free himself from his pursuers, whose Iauelines (I
doubt not) shall be died in the blood of this filthy swine, and shall well rid
the world of an ugly hogdbacked Monster: which thing to accomplish ^et us
remember, that victory is not gotten by multitude but by manhood, but the
smaller number we be, the greater is our glory if we vanquish, if vanquished
fretting time shall never consume our memory, that died to free our selves, and
Nation from the oppression of an usurping Tyrant; and thus I assure you, that
for so just a cause you shall find me this day rather a dead Carrion upon the
cold ground, then a Carpet prisoner kept alive for reproach. Advance therefore
forward like true hearted Englishmen, display your Banner in defense of your
Country, get the day and be Conquerors, loose the Battle, and be villains;
God and Saint George give us a happy success. Which no sooner was said The
readi^ of Earl Henry's soldiers.
but that the Soldiers buckled their Helmes, the Archers stripped up their
sleeves, bent their bows and frushed their feathers attentively listening when
the Trumpet should give the sound of Battle.

(57) Betwixt both the Armies there lay a great marish, which Earl Henry left
upon his right hand, with purpose to have that for a defense, as also the Sun
at his back, and face of the enemy, which The purpose of Earl Henry.
when King Richard perceived, with found of trumpet and shout of his Army, he
passed the Marish, when the bow-men on both sides let freely fly their
arrows: the rest coming to encounter with strokes: but the Earl of Oxford
fearing to be encompassed The fight begun
by the enemy, commanded every of his ranks to keep within ten foot of his
Standard, which being accomplished, and their fight a while stayed, their
opposites mistrusting some fraud or deceit, ceased likewise from theirs, many
of them willing enough so to do; notwithstanding, the L. Stanley at the same
time joining with the Earl, a cruel battle was again begun, and manfully
continued upon either part. Till lastly, King Richard having intelligence that
the Earl of Richmund was but slenderly accompanied with men of Arms, and them
also busied in their own guardes, meant by his encounter to finish the day, as
the only man, upon whom stood all the hope of his enemies success* and
therefore having the marks of Earl Henry, made from the range of his own
battle, and upon The strength and courage of King Richard.
the spur with his Spear in his Rest, ran violently toward him in a furious
spleen; in which rage, at the first brunt, he bare down and overthrew the
Earls Standard, and slew Sir William Brandon the bearer thereof; next matching
with Sir John Che^ney a man of great might, manfully threw him to the ground,
thereby making an open passage by dint of sword unto the Earl himself:
Richmund beholding the high valor of Richard, most lionlike The two
Chieftaines cope together.
coped with this cruel Bore, and held him maugre his tuskes at his sword
point, betwixt whom the fight was so desperate, that Henrses company were
struck in great despair; at which very instant Sir William Stanley came in
with three thousand tal fresh Soldiers, who entered the battle with such
courage and valor, as they bare down all before them where they went, whereat
the Kings side began to Sir William Stanley comes in with new supplies.
faint, and to give over fight, but the more resolute a while maintaining their
ground, and now mistrusting treason among themselves, turned their backs and
ran away, whereby King Richard presently perceived the downfall of his ill
raised glory, and the The Kings side give over fight.
full period of his short reign: and all hope of resistance now past, a swift
horse was brought to escape the field, with comforts that another day might set
the victory on his side: but with a mind unmatchable The valiant courage of
King Richard.
in hatred against Henry, or rather to have his death registered in fames
honorable role, whose life had been blotted with the pen of diuulged
infamy, he hastily closed his helmet, saying, that that day should make an
end of all battles, or else in this now in trying he would finish his life,
which last was presently performed; for thrusting into the midst of his
enemies, and there valiantly fighting among the thickest* he obtained more
honor King Richard slain.
in this his two hours fight, then he had gained by all the actions of his
whole life.

(58) There died that day with him John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers
of Chartley, Sir Men slain in the battle.
Richard Ratcliffe Knight, Sir Robert Brakenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, and
not many Gentlemen more: Sir William Catesby one of King Richards chief
Counselors with two others, were taken and two days after beheaded at
Leicester, among them C^tesby h^headed.
that escaped were Frances Vicount Louell, Humfrey, and Thomas Stafford
brethren, which three took Sanctuary at S. John's in Gloucester. Thomas Howard
Earl of Surrey though he submitted himself unto Henry, yet was he committed
to the Tower and therein a long time remained. Upon Earl He^es part only ten
men were slain, as Sir Gilbert Talbot wrote the news from the field, whereof
for note Sir William Brandon was the best, in all to the number of four
thousand men. This battle was fought the two and twentieth of August, and year
of Christ Jesus 1485. in the field Redmore, near unto The number slain at
(...) field.
Bosworth, in the County of Leicester; after which Earl Henry gave thanks
unto God, and commending his Soldiers, with sufferance for them to take
Harding says (...).
the spoils of the field, dubbed many of the^ knights; which his doings was so
acceptable to the whole Army, as with great applause they all cried King Henry,
King Henry; whose forwardness to him-ward, when the Lord Stanley perceived,
he took K. Richards Henry proclaimed king in the ^eld.
Crown, found among the spoil of the field, and set it upon the Earl of
Richmunds head, thereby confirming the election of the people, at which instant
began the reign of this new King.

(59) The slain body of the usurping Tyrant, all tugged, and torn, naked, and
not so much as a clout Dead Richards body stark naked, was trussed up to (...).
left to cover his shame, was trussed behind Blanch Seint Ledger (or White Bore,
a Purseuant at Arms,) like a hog or Calfe, his head and Arms hanging on the
one side of the horse, and his legs on the other, and all besprinckled with
mire and blood, was so brought into Leicester, and there for a miserable (...).
spectacle the space of two days lay naked and unburied, his remembrance being
as odious to all, as his King Richard laid naked to be seen of all.
person deformed, and loathsome to be looked upon: for whose further despite,
the white Bore his cognizance was torn down from every Sign, that his His
badge defaced and torn down.
monument might perish, as did the moneys of Caligula, which were all melted by
the decree of the Senate: Lastly, his body without all funeral solemnity was
buried in the Gray-Friers Church of that City. But King Henry his Successor, of
a princely K Richards monument.
disposition, caused afterward his Tomb to be made with a picture of
Alablaster, representing his person, and to be set up in the same Church, which
at the suppression of that Monastery was pulled down, and utterly defaced;
since when his grave ouergrowne with nettles and weeds, is very obscure and
not to be found. Only the stone chest wherein K. Richards co^ ^n ade a drinking
trough.
his corpse lay, is now made a drinking trough for horses at a common Inn, and
retains the only memory of this Monarchs greatness. His body also (as
tradition has delivered) was borne out of the City, and contemptuously
bestowed under the end of Bow-Bridge, which gives passage over a branch of
Stowre upon the west side of the Town. Upon this Bridge (the like report
runs) stood a stone A flying prophecy of King Richard.
of some height, against which King Richard, as he passed toward Bosworth, by
chance struck his spur, and against the same stone as he was brought back,
hanging by the horse side, his head was dashed and broken, as a wise woman
(forsooth) had foretold, who, before Richards going to battle, being asked of
his success, said, that where his spur struck, his head should be broken;
but of these things, as is the report, so let be the credit. Dead he is, and
with his death ended the factions a long time continued betwixt the Families of
Lancaster and York; With Richards death dies the quarrel of York and
Lancaster.
in whose bandings, to bring, set and keep the Crown on their heads, eight or
nine bloody set battles had been fought, and no less then fourscore persons
of the bloud-royall slain, as Philip C^ines Phil. C^. l. 1. 6. 7.
the French Writer says; many of them being well known to himself: after
which storms, and this Tirants death, a blessed union ensued, by ioining those
houses in Henry of Lancaster, and Elizabeth of York.

(60) He was of Stature but little, and of shape The description of K.
Richard. Ioh. Hardings (...).
deformed, the left shoulder bunching out like a Molehill on his back, his
hair thin, and face short, a cruel countenance, in whose aspect might be
perceived both malice and deceit. When he stood musing (as he would do often)
his use was, to bite and chaw the nether lip, his hand ever on his dagger,
which ever he would chop up and down in the sheath, but never draw it fully
out. Pregnant in wit he was, wily to feign, apt to dissemble, and haughty of
Stomach, an expert Soldier, and a better King then a man. He founded a
College at Middleham beyond York, and a Collegiat Chauntery John Stow.
in London, near unto the Tower, called Our Lady of Barking; he endowed the
Queens College in Cambridge John Rows.
with five hundred Marks of yearly reuenew; and disforrested the great Field
of Wichwood, which King Edward his brother had enclosed for his game: he
reigned two years, two months, and one day, and was buried, as we have said.

His Wife.
(61) Anne the second daughter and Coheire to Richard Neuil, the stout Earl of
Warwick and Salesbury, was first married to Edward Prince of Wales, the son
to King Henry the sixth, and after his death was remarried to Richard Duke of
Gloucester, Anno 1472. afterward by usurpation King of England, with whom in
great State and solemnity she was Crowned Queen the sixth of July, and year
of Salvation, 1483. She was his wife to the last year of his Reign, and then
leaving her husband to choose another Queen, was laid at rest in the Abbey of
Westminster, in this thing happy, that she saw not the death of the Tyrant.

His Issue.
(62) Edward the son of King Richard, and of Queen Anne his Wife, and the
only child of them both, was borne in the Castle of Middleham, near
Richmund, in the County of York Anno 1473. and Job. Ross. Warwic.
being under four years of age was created Earl of Salisbury by his Uncle
King Edward the fourth, the Camb. Brit.
seventeenth of his Reign; but his father King Richard in the first of his
usurpation created him Prince of Wales, the four and twentieth of August, and
year of Christ, 1483. he then being about ten years of age, unto whom also
the Crown was intailed by Parliament; but this Prince dying before his father,
and much upon the time of his mothers decease, saw not the revenge that
followed the Tyrants Reign, whose bad life no doubt has made doubtful the
place of this Princes burial, and other Princely offices done him in his life,
and at his death.

HENRY THE SEVENTH, KING Monarch 57
Henry VII.
OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, AND LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTY SEVENTH MONARCH OF THE
ENGLISH, HIS REIGN, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XX.


HENRY of that name the seventh, having by such mixed means of valor A. D.
1485. 22. August. The date of his raig^ commencement.
and practice as are already described, obtained the possession of Englands
Crown, we must now present unto you his actions in the person and state of a
King, maintained by him with like mixture of courage and skill as it was
achieved; to the verification of that rule, That things are kept by the same
Arts whereby they were gained. In describing whereof, we mean nothing less,
then for humoring the vain admirers of phrase and conceit, to mount up into
Panegyricall flourishes, in honor of the man, though his excellent virtues
would worthily bear, if not duly also exact them: yet may we not omi^to
observe, that as in his attaining to G^ (...) this Pr^ whole (...).
the Crown, there was (through divine providence) a concurring disposition of
all important Circumstances, without which his attempt might have proved
disasterous; so he, having now possessed the Sovereign power, and mastered
the State in the maine points, easily made circumstances wait upon his
wisdom, and to take their form from his directions: Of the first kind, wherein
his felicity deserves to be celebrated, were these. That he by the Male-line a
mere stranger to both the royal houses, as descended from the Welsh and
French, and by the female springing out of such a family of Lancaster (the
Beanfords) as by the same law which enabled it to inherit in ordinary estates,
was made Con^ (...) K. H^ (...).
incapable of succe^n in the Regalitie, should so safely be conuaied away into
foreign parts, there to continue an head of expectation and revolt, during the
intestine troubles and dangers, to him inevitable here at home. Secondly, that
the Realm of England should be so auerted from Richard, (though a very
honorable, wise, just and necessary Prince, after he was somewhat settled) as
for his sake, to neglect (in a sort) so many natural heirs of the house of
York, some of them in right preceding Richard, such were the children of
Edward the fourth, and George Duke of Clarence, Richards elder brethren, and
all of them just bars to the Earl of Richmund, who scarce had any thing of a
legal title, or of a warrantable intention; but his purpose to remove an
Usurper, and marry the Lady Elizabeth, the rightful inheritrice. Thirdly, a
long and fatal slacknesse of Richard in his warlike preparations, * Fabian
says, Richard fearing little, provided ^ttle defense.
through the mere contempt of his enemy the Earl, which was the cause, that
both he landed securely, and Richard was driven to fight in a manner with
tumultuary, rather then trained forces. And finally, that a principal, potent,
noble, and yet a deeply suspected Conspirator, (as being Father in law to the
Earl) should have charge, under Richard, over a chief portion of his Army at
the very instant of joining battle.

(2) These considerations (among many other) had in them such an aptitude to
his design, as no humane wit could fashion, and without the which a man of
equal stars and parts to Henry, or Henry himself, might in vain have been
wise, in vain, industrious and valiant. Circumstances of the other sort shall
plentifully occur in the whole carriage of his ensuing actions. In both
which, are verified two contrary rules; for the state of the first observations
teaches us with Plautus, that (...) doctorum hominum consili^ haec vna vincit
De^, This one Goddess Pl^.
can effect more, then the wits of an hundred learned men; speaking as an
Heathen man of that famous Idol Fortune; and in the second, that which I^enall
excellently notes; Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia, sed te
Nos facimus Fortuna Deam, coeloque locamus. I^.

No Goddess wants, where Prudence guids, though Chance
A Goddess deemd, fond Men to Heaven advance.


(3) Now for the Character of this famous wise Prince (which with reason ought
to be set in The description of K. Henry's mind and qualities.
front to his actions, as certain lights of the mind, by which to discern the
fountain of counsels and causes) a Sir Fr. Bacon. f^g. MS.
learned, eloquent Knight, and principal Lawyer of our time, gives us many
things, of which these selected, are very regardable. This King (says he)
attained unto the Crown, not only from a private fortune, which might endew
him with a moderation, but also from the fortune of an exiled man, which had
quickened in him all the seeds of observation and industry. His wisdom
(speaking thereof, as it was in his reign) seemed rather a dexterity to
deliver himself from dangers when they pressed him, then any deep foresight
to prevent them a far off. Jealous he was over the Greatness of his
Nobility, as remembering how himself was set up. Great and devout reverence he
bare unto religion, as he that employed Ecclesiastical men in most of his
affairs. In his government he was led by none, scarsely by his laws, and yet
he was a great obseruer of formality in all his proceedings, which
notwithstanding was no impediment to the working of his will. In his wars
(meaning domesticke) he was rather confident then enterprising, by which also
he was commonly not the poorer. Generally, he seemed inclinable to live in
peace, and in the quenching of the Commotions of his subjects, he was ever
ready to atchieue those wars in person, sometimes reserving himself, but never
retiring himself. Of nature he c^eted to accumulate treasure: in expending
whereof he never spared charge that his affairs required, and in his
foundations was magnificent enough. He chose commonly to employ cunning
persons, as he that knew himself sufficiently to make use of their uttermost
reaches, without danger of being abused with them himself.

(4) Ioh. Da* of Heart. MS.
Another having a purpose to write in English the history of this Henry (an
argument which for the worthy doing thereof, requires as wise a man as Henry
himself,) has among many extraordinary praises (most what framed out of his
strong affection) truly noted concerning his atchieuement of the Crown: That
the Almighty hand of God brought him over the top of the highest and most
dangerous obstacles, to sway this Scepter, when neither Title, Power, nor
(great) Probability could give him so much as one sound push to set him
forward. And of the man himself, That he entertained that, as sudden, as
Sovereign change of fortune, with such moderation, and vntransported
discretion, as it well appeared he had thoroughly conquered himself, before
he subdued the Usurper his enemy. What could be added greater to so true a
praise? nothing certainly; for that he (as elsewhere that Writer says) was
the Solomon, who brought peace to this Kingdom, long before oppressed by war
and tyranny: it was only an excellent effect of that excellent moderation.
Other Authors of our times concur in the same judgment of him, whom they
praise Act. and (...). p. 909.
for singular wisdom, excellent temperance, and moderate frugality; for Io.
Stow. i^ Hen. 7.
policy, justice, and ^rauity: which princely virtues caused him to be highly
reverenced of foreign Princes. These honorable Eulogies after so many years
from his death, justly countenance their relations, who Ber. Andr. MS. Fabian
Polyd. Verg. etc.
writing, in or about his own days auerre no less; among whom, Bernard
Andreas of Tholouz is most flowing and abundant. This Andreas (as himself
writes) was afterward entrusted with the instruction of Prince Arthur (eldest
son to King Henry) in good letters, though he was blind; and having as well
the title of Poet Laureat, as of the Kings Historiographer, (how hardly soever
those two faculties meet with honor in the same person) meant to have
historified and poetized the Acts of this king, but (for want of competent and
attended instructions in many places of chief importance) left his labor full
of wild breaches, and unfinished; yet in such points as he has professed to
know, not unworthy to be vouched: for there is in him a great deal of clear
elocution, and defaecated conceit above the ordinary of that age. He, among
other verses in honor of this our Henry (whom he enstyleth the most sapient
King) has these not hyperbolicall, but proper, wherein he salutes him.
Princeps ingenio nitente praestans,
(...), relligione, comitate,
Sensu, sanguine, gratia, decore.
A peerless Prince for wisdom rare,
Fame, piety, courtesy, debonaire,
Knowledge, birth, grace, and feature fair.
Whereby also, after these pourtracts of his inward faculties, and gifts, may
be guessed that a body they had for their mortal mansion, no way unsuitable;
and it seems by that Majesty (so they call the Images of our Kings, which are
carried for representation in their funeral Chariots) which at this day is
Mo^. at ^st.
extant, that he was of stature tall and slender, somewhat round visaged, and
though in Bernard. (...).
his childhood sickly, yet of aspect in all his outward lineaments, so noble
and gracious, as well presaged, and afterward fitted the most fortunate height
to which he was now ascended. But notwithstanding these great praises, there
want not some who think him to have been an heavy Father to the common wealth,
which by sundry courses he greatly labored to bring under, as a seeming
groundwork of his own, and his posterities security. And in his last days
Avarice, (the natural malady of age) took him strongly, the envy whereof he
partly diuerted from himself by the splendour of some few publik buildings,
which as they gave the people cause to talk of their bravery, so they also
insensibly wrought in their light minds a mittigation of their burden.

(5) Let us now behold his virtues as they are shiningly deduced into action.
After the Battle he having Henry's first actions after his victory.
truly first ascribed the whole good of his success to God, commanded, that to
the body of Bern. Andr.
his enemy King Richard, an honorable interrement should be given in the
Friars at Leicester, where notwithstanding Fabian.
he was with little reverence buried. From thence the King made speed to
London, as to the chief seat and Epitome of the English Monarchy, whithout
which no Prince found himself here secure enough * he entered the City upon a
Bern. Andr. MS. and upon the 28. of Aug. says Fabian.
Saturday, as upon a Saturday he obtained his triumphall and Crowning victory.
The Mayor of London and his fellowship, Fab.
received him in violet at Harnsey Park, but his entrance (which was at Stow.
Shordich) was honored with a very great troop of the Peers, and Nobles in
his train, at which our Poetical His entrance into London.
Historian Andreas was present, and saluted the victorious Prince with certain
Latin Sapphicks, which he sung unto him as himself writes. But Henry stayed
not in Ceremonious greetings and popular acclamations, which (it seems) he
did purposely eschew, for that (Andreas says) he entered Latenter.
covertly, meaning belike, in an Horse-litter of close Chariot. His lodging was
in the Bishop of Londons Palace, where (after public offertories and
solemn thanks given to God in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul) the business
of his Coronation was seriously consulted of; which was afterward (upon his
remove to the Tower, where he See Camb. Mills. etc.
created his uncle Jasper Earl of Pembroke, Duke of Bedford, and other
Estates) with due pomp and rituall magnificence 30. October Mr. Stow. His
Coronation.
accomplished at Westminster.

(6) But the natural solder and indissoluble cement, which must make this
Kingdom stand, was His Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth debated.
his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter of the late Edward the
fourth. This as a point of most importance was with great maturity and
judgment again thought upon, when Henry was now already crowned. The remoter
danger, supposed to reside in the person of Edward Earl of Warwick (only son
and heir, even in his infelicities, to that unfortunate Prince George Duke of
Clarence) was prevented; for he had been, by King Henry's direction, brought
up prisoner from the Manor of Holinsh. Edward Earl of Warwick imprisoned.
Sherif-hutton in Yorkshire, (where as well he, as the Lady Elizabeth were kept
by King Richard under guard) and immediately shut up within the Tower of London.

(7) Frances Bern. Andr. MS.
Duke of Britain had offered Henry before his departure to match him with the
Lady Anne his eldest daughter and sole heir, but he was otherwise affected,
as placing his love where it might afford him greatest and presentest
strengths. Andreas adds, that King Edward himself destinated his eldest
daughter unto Henry then Earl of Richmund, and sought in his life time to have
effected it; but his meaning being (belike) suspected, as but a drift to get
Henry into his hands, the motion took no hold as reserved till God had cleared
the way of all such impediments, as might hinder the consolidationof both the
Royal families, York and Lancaster, (after their so mortal and confustue
massacres) in the person of one Sovereign.

(8) The Lady her self, besides youth and beauty (precious Ornaments of that
Sex) had in her Lady Elizabeth described.
from her Bern. Andr. MS.
infancy a wonderful fear, and care to please God, and a like dutieous and
humble carriage toward her parents: her brothers and sisters she did
exceedingly love, and as well toward the poor, as all the Servants of Christ,
she bare a singular affection. Sir Tho. Moore.
Her Uncle (the late usurper) in contempt of God and man (whose Laws he was so
long accustomed to violate, till the just reward thereof did at the length
overtake him) incestuously meant to have defiled her, under the abused name of
Matrimony. When therefore the news of his death came to her ear, the joy of
her heart brake forth into these words. Bern. Andr. MS. Het. Christian S^
chaste meditation about marriage.
So yet at the last thou have, o God, regarded the humble, and not despised
their prayers. I well remember, neither shall I at any time be weary to
remember, that my most noble Father of famous memory meant to have bestowed me
in marriage upon this most comely Prince. O that I were now worthy of him; but
my Father being dead, I want such good friends as should motion so great a
matter: and perhaps he will take a wife from foreign parts, whose beauty,
age, fortune, and dignity shall be more then mine. What shall I say? I am all
alone, and dare not open my mind to How then did Andreas know i^? either he
does poetize here, or else had it from her after-relati^.
any. What if I acquainted my mother therewith? Bashfulnesse forbids: What if
some of the Lords? Audacity wants. O then that I might but confer with him!
perhaps in discourse I might let slip such a word as might discover my
intention. What will be I know not: this I know, that Almighty God cannot tell
how to absent himself from them who trust in him. Therefore I make an end of
thinking, and repose my whole hope upon thee, o my God, do with me according
to thy mercy. Sh^e secretly thus reuoluing all matters, and resolving of them
in her mind, was heard from above; for King Henry having understood the
honor, chastity, and singular virtues of the maiden Princess, the rather
inclined to make her the Sovereign of his affections: assigning therefore John
D^ of Hereford MS. Holinshed.
a day, wherein (for the utter abolishment of all Hostilities between the two
Royal houses of York and Lancaster) to establish an union of Families by
conjunction of their two persons in marriage.

(9) The mean while he wisely goes on to secure the maine, which consisting in
settling the general state, and securing his own person, he, for the one, P.
Nouemb.
holds a Parliament at Westminster, and for the other, institutes a certain
number of choice Hollinsh.
Archers, with allotment of fees and maintenance, * The Kings Guard first
instituted.
which under a peculiar Captain, and the name of Yeoman of the Guard, he
assigned to that service, for him and his successors, Kings and Queens of
England. In the Parliament was attainted Richard late Duke of Gloucester,
stiling himself by usurpation, King King Richard and others ^ed.
Richard the third; and with him by name many other of the Nobility and Gentry.
And yet withal to lay a foundation for his green Government in love and
clemency, he, during the Parliament proclaimed free pardon and entire
restitution of their fortunes, to all such as submitted themselves to his
mercy, and made oath of Fidelity. A seasonbale and necessary Act; Whereby he
greatly weakened malicious humors, and wanne to himself no small accession of
friendship and services; for many forsook Sanctuaries, and took up their
refuges in his goodness and most gracious favor. And to remove all scandal
and danger from his friends, he reuersed and revoked all former Acts, hurtful
either to himself, or to them for his cause, the whole house of Parliament,
Holinshed. The Crown entailed upon King Henry and his heirs.
concurring finally in establishing by a solemn Act, the Crown upon him, and
his heirs for ever.

(10) After dissolution of which Parliament, the King redeemes such pledges, as
he had left in France for money borrowed, and assumes into his Council those
two renowned agents in advancing his fortunes, John Morton and Richard Fox, as
the most necessary parts and supports of his State; the former of which, not
long after (Thomas Bourchier dying) was elected and enthronized Archbishop of
Canterbury; the latter, was forthwith advanced to be Lord Keeper of his Privy
Seal, and successively preferred to the Bishoprics of Exeter, Bath and
Wells, Durham, and Winchester.

(11) The most wished and most welcome 18. January. 1486.
day The King marieth the Lady Elizabeth.
of marriage between King Henry and the Princess Elizabeth being now come,
was celebrated by them with all religious and glorious magnificence, and by the
people, with Bern. Andr. MS.
fires of joy, dancings songs and bankets through London, all sorts and sexes
beseeching Almighty God to send the King and Queen most prosperous success,
and an infinite increase of the common joy, by bestowing upon them a young
Prince, and other Issue at his good pleasure: Which prayers (says Andreas) our
Lord Jesus Christ vouchsafed to hear; the Queen within a while after, proving
with Child, of whom she was happily delivered in the month of September
following at Winchester, which to the most fortunate King was a new happiness,
to the Prince Arthur borne.
Queen a great reioycement, to the Church a sovereign delight: to the Court
an exceeding pleasure; and in brief to the whole kingdom an incredible
contentment. Nor that without reason, as it afterward appeared; for (if God had
been pleased to have granted longer life) not England only, but the whole
world should in such a pledge have had cause of eternal reioycement. * Ber.
Andr. M. S.
But God who gouernes all things, and in whose hand are as well the Scepters of
Princes, as dates of their lives, disposed otherwise.

(12) Meanewhile there were not a few who did envy to King Henry this
unexpected height of felicity; The attempts of the Kings malignats.
but they who first discovered themselves, were certain remains of the late
overthrow at Bosworth, whose diffidence, or evil will, was greater then to
rely upon King Henry's clemency, o^ to behold the dazeling brightness of his
new achieved glory; and for that cause refused to forsake the Sanctuary,
which they had taken at Colchester. These were the Lord Louell, Sir Humfrey
Stafford, and Thomas Stafford his brother. Who, while the King, secure of
dangers behind him, was in his Progress at York, meaning by affability,
bounty and other his wisest courses, to gain the good wills of the Northern
people, (with whom the memory of King Richard was very dear) and so to weaken
the strengths and hopes of all future conspiracies, forsook their refuge, and
secretly in several places gathered forces, therewith to surprise and dethrone
the King. The Lord Louell raised his forces with such speed, that the King who
at Lincoln first heard of his escape, and lightly regarded the same, was no
sooner settled in York, but certain intelligence came that he approached fast
with an Army; and withal, that the Staffords had assembled forces in
Worcestershire, meaning to The Lord Louell, and the Staffords rebel. Hardings
continuer says they had taken Gloucester.
assault the City of * Worcester. The extremity of the King (who never dreamt
of such a darling) was not small, for neither had he any sufficient numbers
about him of his sure friends, nor could justly repose confidence in the
Northern men, whose love to King Richard their late slain Lord, made them
still suspected. But danger quickens noble courages, and therefore upon due
recollection of himself, he arms about three thousand men, (if tanned
leather, whereof the most of their breast-pieces, for want of Polyd. Verg. in
Henry 7. Holinsh.
other stuff, were framed, may be called armor) and sends them under the
leading of Jasper Duke of Bedford, with commission to pardon, or to fight. The
Duke offering pardon, the Lord Louell fled by night to Polyd. Verg.
Sir Thomas Broughton into Lancashire, where he lurked certain months; the
headless multitude yield without stroke, and the felicity of King Henry
preuailes in every place; for the Staffords hearing what had happened to their
Confederates, disperse their Cloud of rebels, and speedily take refuge at
Colnham a village about two miles from Abingdon in Oxfordshire. But the
privileges of that place Yeere-booke of Henry 7. Anno 2.
* being iuridically scand in the Kings Bench, they were found unable to afford
protection to open traitors, Traitors taken from Sanctuary and punished.
whereupon they were forceably taken thence, and conueighed to the Tower of
London, from whence Sir Humfrey Stafford was drawn and executed at Tiburne,
but his brother Thomas by the Kings He is called Lord Stafford by Hardings
conti^er.
mercy had his pardon. These short dangers and troubles, by reason of their
suddainty did worthily make the King wakefull even over smaller accidents; this
blaze being kindled from so neglected sparkles. But there followed devises,
which in their own nature were so strangely impudent, and in their vent so
strongly Bolstered, that if Louels enterprise made him suspicious, these other
might justly fill him with innumerable iealousies.

(13) The records are immortal, which testify, that the erection of Idols and
Counterfeits, to dethrone Corn. Tacit. Histor. Suet. in Ner. cap. 57. Counter
feit Princes erected to defeat the true.
them who are in possession, is a very old Stratagem. What troubles a
Pseudo-Nero wrought, by support of the Parthians (who wonderfully favored Nero
living,) the Roman writers teach us. Neither has the Devil (Father of
Impostures) any so solemn practice, as Personation and Resemblances of true,
whether men or things. Insomuch that some Divines have thought, that as he can,
and often does trans-shape himself into the form of a Celestial Angel, so
that he also deceived our first mother under that resplendent but assumed
habit. And what mischiefs he wrought, in this very kind of thrusting out into
the world false pretenders, the speech of wise Act 5.
Gamaliel testifies, who rehearses the names of Theudas and Judas Galilaus;
but the world has since had more woeful experience hereof, in that execrable
Impostor Mahomet, pretending to be the Messiah. In England it self (before
the time of this Henry) what strange practices and conspiracies Mantell
executed in Queen Elizabeth's days for assuming the person of King Edward 6.
were set on foot under the title of a Pseudo-Richard in the reign of Henry
the fourth, the former Histories have sufficiently opened, so that this Prince
encountered nothing new in the General, howsoever pestilent and extraordinary
in the particular. Indeed his reign (more perhaps then any other of his
predecessors) afforded plentiful matter for such devises to work upon, there
being many then, who having been Io. D^. M. (...).
conceaned (as it were) in the bowels of Sedition, and nourished with the
bitter and pernicious milk of dissension, were not only apt to embrace, but
also, where they were not offered, even there to beget occasions of confounding
all. Men, Polyd. Verg. i^ Henry 7.
who could neither endure war, nor peace long, nor any lowes in either, as
desirous to enjoy the licentious violences of civil war; a Io. D^. M. S.
misery, which all words (how wide soever) want compass to express. The
strange attempts of which kind of men (or rather Monsters) we shall see
exemplified in the subsequent tragedies. Richard Simon, an ambitious and
imposterous wretch, and The first Idol erected against King Henry.
withal a Priest, neither unlearned, (the sacred shadow of which name the
rather countenanced his practices) in hope to make himself the principal
Bishop of England, plotted the advancement of Lambert Symnell (being his pupil
in the University of Oxford) to the Crown of England; instigated thereto *
Polyd. Verg. i^ Henry. 7.
by the devil, and suborned by such as favored the White-rose faction, upon
this occasion. There went a rumor, that Edward Earl of Warwick, son and
heir to George the late unfortunate Duke of Clarence, A false Edward in the
forge.
second brother of King Edward, Polyd. Verg. l. 26.
was either already murdered, or should shortly be. This Architect of guile,
Simon having this Symnel in tuition, (the * son of a Baker, or Shoemaker, but
a wel-faced and Princely-shaped youth, of no * very evil nature, Bern. Andr.
M. S. Polyd. Verg. H. 7.
but as it was corrupted by his Tutor,) means out of this rumors aerie
substance, to produce an apparition and prodigy, which in Title, behavior,
and artificial answers (infused by his Tutors practices) should resemble
Polyd. Ver. ibid.
one of King Edwards children. Here we must confess that our authors lead us
into a perplexity: Some * affirming, that this counterfeit Holinsh. John Stow.
was exhibited to the world under the name of Edward Earl of Warwick, son of
the Duke of Clarence, by the most turbulent and fatal Earl of Warwick slain
at Barnet-field. But hereunto reason Lambert Sim^ls History rectified and
vindicated.
seems repugnant. For what ground of claim could that Gentleman have, not
only for that his Father was attainted, but much more for that the Queen of
England then in being, was the indubitate eldest daughter and heir of King
Edward the fourth, and sister and next heir to Edward the fifth? Neither wants
there ancienter authority then any of the others, affirming, that this Idol
did usurp the name Bern. Andr. MS.
of one of King Edwards sons; many arguments concurring to buttresse this
affirmation. For, if at the same time (as Polydor writes) it was bruted, that
the sons of King Edward the fourth had not Job. Stow was often heard to
maintain this opinion in seeming earnest.
been murdered under their usurping Uncle Richard, but were escaped, and lived
in obscurity beyond the Sea; how can that be true, which Stow and the rest (who
follow Polydore therein) affirm, that Lambert was crowned King of England at
Dublin in Ireland, as heir to George Duke of Clarence? For with what injury
to the royal brethren (fained to be alive) was that? Verily there seems no
coherence in the circumstances, nor appearance of truth in the substance. And
how much stronger to the purpose of the Conspirators was the fiction of an
Edward, the Kings son, and himself once proclaimed King, then of an Edward,
who was but an Earl, and a Duke of Clarences heir? But you will ask, what
was the poor Earls part in this tragedy? what other? then that by rumoring
his murder, they might bring the person of King Henry into common detestation
for his cruelty; for clearing whereof the King publikelie afterward showed the
Earl to the view of all. And albeit the vulgar fame is, that Lambert was
called Edward, yet Ber. Andr. M. S.
one who then lived, says directly, that this Cipher was dubbed and mounted
from his own mean rank to the title of a King, under the name of the second
brother, who for certain was called Richard: but what Record there is to the
contrary, is to us as yet unknown; for our vulgar Books extant can hardly
pass with a Jury of ordinary Critics, and Censors for vnchallengeable
evidence.

(14) This aerie Typhon (which grasped at the embracement of the two Kingdoms
of England and Ireland) thus thoroughly schooled and instructed, is secretly
conueighed by his Sinonian Tutor to Dublin, the chief City of the Irish, where
he was confident Lambert conuaied into Ireland and received.
of partakers, as amongst the hereditary Clients, and adherents of the house of
York; which affection was first breathed into them by the cunning popularities
of the Lord Richard Duke of York, the first of that line, who publicly
claimed the English Crown. His hopes deceived him not, for the Lord Polyd.
Verg. Stow calls him Earl of Kildare, and Lord Deputy of Ireland.
Chancellor of Ireland, Thomas Fitzgerald (of the noble Family of the
Geraldi^s) presently professed himself for the plot, and by his authority and
persuasions drew the generality of the Irish after him into it. Messengers are
hereupon dispatched, upon all hands both into England, to such as they had hope
of, and into low Germany to the Lady Margaret, sister of King Edward the
fourth, Duchess Dowager of Burgundy, a most mortal enemy of the Lancastrian
family. In both places the lighted matches of sedition found powdry spirits,
and wonderful correspondence. There is flocking from all parts to support the
quarrel, and the Irish (to have the glory of giving England a King) proclaim
and reverence this painted puff, and flying bubble with Lambert proclaimed King
of England.
royal Style and honors.

(15) Henry seeing the fire so strangely kindled round about the walls of his
best hopes and strengths, falls seriously to counsel at the Monastery of
Carthusian Monks near Richmond, where after exact deliberation it was
decreed, 1. That general pardon (to stay the minds of as many as it was
possible) should without Conclusions in the Council of England upon the fame
of this conspiracy.
any exception be proclaimed to such as from thenceforth should continue
dutiful. Which was principally done to temper, and assure some private
persons, as Sir Thomas Broughton and others, whose forces, wills, and wealth
were held most in suspicion. 2. That Elizabeth late wife to Edward the fourth,
and mother in law to Henry now King of England, should forfeit all her lands
and goods, for that (contrary to her faith given to them, who were in the plot
for bringing in King Henry) she had yielded up her daughters to the hands of
the Tyrant Richard. 3. That Edward Earl of Warwick then Prisoner in the
Tower, should be openly showed aline in London. All which was accordingly
executed, but without any great fruit, for still ^he plot went on.

(16) The condemnation of Elizabeth Queen Dowager, rather moved envy toward
Henry, then relieved his cause; for to many the justice of that sentence was
doubtful, the circumstance of a mother in law inferred a breach of piety, and
the judgment it self did also want example. The justice was doubtful both in
regard of the cause, and of the proceeding. Of the cause, for how could she
have defended her daughters by the privilege of sanctuary from such a Wolf
and Tiger, as would have infringed it for her sons, had they not been quietly
delivered to his bloody hands? The same Tyrant does now demand her daughters
as to honor, not to slaughter; but if it had been to slaughter, what help?
she, terrified with the motion, after much deliberation yields them to him,
when she neither could, nor durst detain them. But you say she violated her
faith, and hazarded thereby the lives and hopes of all that were in the plot
for her cause. A great crime certainly. But Richard was in title; and power a
King, and hung over her head with inevitable terrors; when Henry of Richmund
was but an Earl, and he far off, and in banishment, and without any
appearance of prevailing, and her self a friendlesse widow. The manner or
proceeding was no less strange; for by what law or trial was she condemned
in a Praemunire? She nevertheless is put out of all, and confined to the
Monastery Queen Elizabeth deprived of her estate, and condemned to a Monastery.
of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where finally she ended her days, borne to be
an example of both fortunes, having from a forlorn widows estate been
raised to the bed of a Bachelour Monarcke; and in his life time been reduced
to the seeming of a private fortune, when her Lord was driven to fly the land;
and afterward saw those turns and varieties as few Queens ever felt, or saw
so many, or more contrary; whether we regard the height of worldly felicity,
when she did behold her son a King, or the depth of misery, when the Tyrant
invaded his Crown and life, or now her daughter being Queen, and her self a
miserable prisoner. The con^ideration whereof, as it may worthily mortify
ambitious affections; so the strangeness of the sentence verifies that
collection among others, which Sir Fr. Bacon. frog. MS.
that learned Gentleman makes of this Kings reign in these words. He had
(says he) a very strange kind of interchanging very large and unexpected
pardons with severe executions. Nevertheless, (his wisdom considered) it
could not be imputed to any inequality, but to a discretion, or at least to a
principle, that he had apprehended, that it was not good, obstinately to
pursue one course, but to try both ways. Howsoever that was; certainly, she
being so just an object of his commiseration, who had married that daughter, by
which he enjoyed a Kingdom, and gotten that very power, wherewith he ruined
her; it cannot be reasonably thought, but that there were other most important
motives, persuading such a sharp course, or otherwise, that it must be
reckoned among the chief of his errors. But as in the times of her flourishing
estate, she founded and endowed a fair College for Students in Cambridge,
which of her is called the Queens; so we will leave to those her Beneficiaries
the farther search of this Argument, and deploration of her fortune, which
seems such to us, as if King Henry affected to leave somewhat in this example,
wherewith to oppose and amase the world Unless perhaps it were, that having
proclaimed a general pardon for all offenses without exception to such as in
future should remain A probable cause why King Henry dealt so rigorously with
his ^ther in law.
Ioyall, and foreseeing that some, who might be willing to lay hold of that
benefit, might also be cunningly practiced with to fall away, upon distrust
of his word, when once he had served his present uses, he therefore meant (by
so clear a demonstration, as the utter undoing, and perpetual emprisonment of
his wives own mother,) to give them assurance, that he, who upon her person
had been so severe a punisher of faith-breach, would never violate it in his
own, and thereby secure them in that point, and secure himself of them.

(17) Yet neither could this devise take so good effect, but that John Earl of
Lincoln (son of John John de la Pole Earl of Lincoln and others, fly to
the Duchess of Burgundy.
de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, and Elizabeth King Edward the fourths sister)
secretly fled into Flanders to the Duchess of Burgundy, whither Francis Lord
Louell was likewise not long before escaped. Sir Thomas Broughton (another
principal Confederate) temporized in England, there to remain* a stay to the
business, as well for mutual intelligence, as receipt of an Army when it should
arrive. This Earl of Lincoln, besides that he could not with any patience
behold a Lancastrian weilding the English Scepter; was also of a Polyd. Verg.
sharp wit, and high reach, and therefore not without an ambitious
sensibility, that in countenancing King Henry, he wronged that expectancie,
and relation to the Crown, which he had in right of his mother, sister to
King Edward the fourth* and to King Richard the third, who had Cambd. in
Notting.
designed him for heir apparent, and contracted his sister the (...). Los^e.
Lady Anne de la Pole, to James Prince of Scotland: was also the rather
animated by Ber. Andr.
letters received from his aunt the Duchess of Burgundy, earnestly calling
upon him for his presence. This Duchess was the second wife of Charles Duke
of Burgundy, Phil. de Com.
slain by the Switz at the battle of Nan^e; by whom though he had no issue,
yet by reason of her great dower, and wise behavior among the Dutch, she was
strong in money and friends; all which she was willing to convert to the utter
subversion howsoever of the Lancastrian line. Though therefore, she well knew
that this Lambert was but an Idol, John Da. MS.
hammered out of the hot brain of that Bo^tefew Richard Simon, yet she
embraces the occasion, countenanceth the Imposture, and leaves nothing unsaid
or undone, which might give life and success to the enterprise. The Earl, the
L. Louell, and others she furnished abundantly, and joins unto them a
renowned Coronell Martin Swart, a Gentleman of Polyd. Vergil says he was (...).
honorable birth, exemplary valor, and singular experience, and certain
selected companies, to the number of about two thousand Almaines, which soon
after arrive at Dublin. Lambert, who before was but proclaimed, is now in
Christ's Church there solemnly by them crowned King of England, * feasting and
triumphing, rearing mighty showtes and cries, carrying him thence to the kings
Lambert crowned King of England (...) Dublin. (...) Stow.
Castle upon tall men's shoulders, that he might be seen and noted; as he was
surely (says Stow) an honorable boy to look upon; though nothing less was
meant, then that he should enjoy that honor if they prevailed; as meaning
then to erect Edward Earl of Warwick. Posterity might worthily doubt of the
truth of these so desperate impudencies, and ridiculous Pageants, practiced in
the highest affairs of mankind, but that the thing is so universally
testified, and also that the highest affairs of the world (when once they are
passed) are little better then such like Pageants.

(18) K. Henry (on the other side) though he had by most diligent espials
endeavored to know the truth of Lamberts quality, to divert the stream of
affections, which he saw inclined that way, for that the practice was carried
with such wonderful art, as that very many (otherwise discreet and sober Bern.
Andr.
men) were induced to believe that he was indeed King Edwards son; and
although the general pardon proclaimed by King Henry, did undoubtedly stay
very many from open revolt, but much more the careful watch which was kept at
the Ports, to hinder the escape of Malcontents or factious Fugitives: yet he
manifestly saw, that it would in the end come to a field: for which cause he
takes order for the levy of an Army, resolving to give King Henry prouides
for battle.
his enemies battle with the first opportunity, it being the ancient and
manfull fashion of the English, (who are naturally most impatient of lingering
mischiefs) to put their public quarrels to the trial of the sword. Lambert
attended with John Earl of Lincoln, Francis Lord Camb. in Oxf.
Vicount Louell, Thomas Fitzgerald, or rather Maurice Fitz-Thomas (belike his
son) and Coronel Swart, with an Army of desperate Lambert lands in Lancashire.
and picked soldiers, as well English, Dutch, as Irish (all fired with infinite
hopes and promises to be enjoyed upon the overthrow of King Henry) come on
shore in Lancashire at a place called the pile of Fowdray, where they Join
with their assured confederate Sir Thomas Broughton, and his sequel; and after
some short refreshment in those parts, march with erected courages against
King Henry, taking their way through Yorkshire (the hoped nursery of their
surest friendshippes) and gloriously* publishing their new King every where,
though without any increase of force by concourse, (for King Henry's wisdom
had marred their errand,) their journey was directed toward Newarke upon Trent.

(19) The King then at Couentree, being by such scowtes as he had appointed
for that service, presently advertised of Lamberts arrival, and having his
forces ready under the conduct of Jasper Duke of Bedford, and the Earl of
Oxford, because delay Nottingham the Rendeuow of K. Henry's ar^y.
in this case was on all hands reputed mischievous, sets forward to Nottingham,
and by a wood side called Bowrs, encampeth his people; in whom there appeared a
gallant forwardness to revenge themselves by the sword of that indignity,
which was offered to the English name by strangers and rebels, who durst hope
to give them a ruler. Thither repaired George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury,
George L. Strange his son, Sir John Cheinie, and other noble and valiant
Gentlemen with their numbers, which added no small sinews to K. Henry's
musters. Polydor has diligently set down the names of such principal * Hist.
Ang. l. 26.
men in those parts as repaired thither, partly voluntary, partly sent for to
the common defense of the King and Kingdom; but without due additions of each
man's degree and place of precedence; Great repair of the noble and people to
his (...).
yet their names do well deserve to be remembered, both for the honor of their
Families, and examples of loyalty. He recounteth sixty five Captains which
assembled from places thereabout, under whom Polyd. Uerg.
there cannot probably be thought fewer Soldiers then eight or ten thousand,
the English usually, till of late, having commonly an hundredth and fifty in a
Company. Their surnames (besides Edward Lord Polydor eals him Regulus, m^ning a
Baron.
Hastings) are in him as follows; Longford, Montgomerie, Vernon of the Peke,
Shurley, Folgehan, Grisley, Sutton, Stanley, and Stanley, Houghton, Meryng,
Stanhop, Clifton, Stapleton, Willoughby, Perpoinct, Babington, Bedyll, *
Brudenel, Markham, Merbury, Borough, Tyrwit, Husey, Shefeild, Newport,
Ormeston, (...), (...) Polydor erroneously Calls him.
Tempest, Knyuett, Willoughby, Dygby, and Dygby, Harrington, Sache^erel,
Vyllers, pylding, Poult^ey, Vau^, Gryne, Gryfin, Lucy, Belknap, Throgmorton,
Gray of Ruthin, Wolston, Fynder, Philips, Cheney, Cotton, S. John, Mordant,
Terell, Rainsford, Paynton, Daniel, Marney, Armidel. From the uttermost bounds
of the North, there repaired also other chief persons and leaders (says he)
as These three seem Barons as them whom he means by principes viri.
Ogle, * Ne^yle, * Latimer, Bulmer, Langford, Norres, Ne^yle of Thortinbrig and
Williams. The Earl of Lincoln nevertheless comes forward with his
Counter-king, nothing perhaps adding greater courage to that side, then the
example of Henry himself, who with less numbers (but much more secret Art)
prevailed in a pight field at Bosworth: his meaning was to get into Newarke.
The King wakefull upon all advantages, and perfectly instructed of his enemies
courses (whom desperation did thrust forward to a daring hope) dislodgeth with
his Army, and passes through Newarke, leaving it behind him about 3. miles, to
intercept the Lambertines; and there sits down again. The Earl of Lincoln
encamps with great bravery and show of courage in the face of the Kings forces.

(20) The next day both the Armies are brought forth to fight, near to a
little village called Stoke. The Earl of Lincoln marshalled his people by the advice of Coronell Swart and others, to the best advantage, upon the Bern. Andr.
Brow or hanging of an hill expecting the charge. The Almaines were all of them
hardy and approved men, and thoroughly well-appointed, and so in likelihood
were such English as stood for that side; but the Irish, besides multitudes and
fierceness, had small provision, save (after the rude manner of their Nation)
darts, skeins, or the like. The maine of the Battle rested wholly upon the
English and Almains. King Henry on the other side, (as he that thirsted for an
end of this bloody days work,) speedily disposed his whole numbers into three
Battailions: the Voward whereof was best replenished with store of choice and
picked men, well armed and appointed, and fortified with wings. The army being
thus ordered, Andreas says that King Henry uses this speech.

(21) Most faithful Lords, and you most valiant Companions in Arms, who have
(together with King Henry's Oration before the battle at Stoke.
us) endured so great perils by Land and Sea; lo, we are again against our
wills, drawn to try our fortunes in another Field. For the Earl of Lincoln (a
perjured man) without any occasion ministered by us, defends an unjust quarrel
against us: neither does he it dissemblingly, but most openly impudent, without
any fear of God; not so much only to endammage us, as to fulfill the humor of
a giddie, and intemperate-tongued woman, who is not ignorant that her blood was
extinguished by her brother Richard; but because that line did always
maintain a most deadly fewd against ours, she (without any great regard to
her Niece, my dearest Consort) assaies to destroy as well us as our posterity.
Ye see therefore how often we are provoked by them, but they shall not carry
it away unrevenged. God therefore and his holy Angels we first call to witness,
that we are provident both night and day for your safety, and for the Common
quiet; though thus the ancient enemy repugneth. But God, a just, strong, and
patient Judge, will also bring a remedy to this evil. In the mean time we
exhort and admonish you, that the consideration of our just inheritance be at
this present more forceable with you, then their wickedness; neither doubt, but
that the same God, who in the former war made us victorious, will enable us
to triumph now also over these enemies. Let us therefore set upon them
courageously; for God is upon our side to assist us.

(22) The Earl of Oxford (on the behalf of the whole Army) was prepared to
make answer, but the Bernard. Andr.
King hastening to the proof, brake off all Ceremonies; and the sign of
Battle given, they thunder forward The battle of Stoke or Stoke. field.
with showts of people, and sound of martial music, and like a black
tempest, power themselves upon the Front of the Enemies Battles; who rushed
forward with equal violence and fury, as men that at once encountered against
fear and fortune. The fight continued doubtful above Polyd. Verg. l. 26.
three hours. A long space for men of courage to be employed in killing one
the other, and fit to glut the hunger of fury. The Earls English wanted
nothing but a good cause, and the Almains gave not place to the Kings people in
any point worthy of gallant Soldiers, but sold their lives dearly, and their
Coronell Swart had scarce any before him in personal performance. Neither were
the Irish behind for their parts, if their skins had been sword-proofe, for
the contempt of death was alike in them as the rest. Briefly, the wonder of
that days work was, that Christian men, in no sounder a quarrel, could dare
to die so boldly, such chiefly, as the Earl of Lincoln and some others, who
knew the secret of that desperate enterprise. But God, the Lord of reuenges;
punishing their unjust malice, with a sudden whirlewinderising in the heat of
the Battle, ((...) as when Constantine Bern. Andr.
fought against the enemies of the Church) our soldiers, who seemed
vanquished, became victorious For the Kings vantgard Io. Str^.
reenforced it self, and gave so furious a recharge, (in likelihood upon this
encouragement sent as it were from Heau^ that it The King pr^^.
utterly brake the Enemies squadrons, and giving in among them with full
randon, slew Polyd. V^.
first such Captains as resisted, and put the residue which yielded not,
either to the sword flight. Herewith the whole Army Bern. Andr.
shouted, the trumpets sound victory, and the general cry runs King Henry,
King Henry. When the battle and chase were ended, so that there was time and
leisure to view the field, it then appeared what minds the slain bodies
carried; for all the chief Captains, the Earl of Lincoln himself (though
the King would gladly have had him saved, The Earl of Lincoln and all the
chief leaders of that side slain in the field.
to come thereby to a greater light of his dangers) the Lord Louell, Sir Thomas
Broughton, Coronell Swart and Polyd. Verg.
Maurice Fitz-Thomas, General of the Irish, were (like Ed^. Compian Hist. of
Ireland.
Catiline and his Accomplices) found to cover those places dead, which they
defended living, * Cr. Salust. is (...). Catil.
among four thousand other soldiers which were slain upon that side. The
King at this battle lost Polyd. Verg. But Bernard Andr. says that very fe^
were flaine.
almost half the People in his Vantgard, and Surgeons had store of work among
the Suruiuers, so that the Garland gained at this journey was not vndipt in
blood; Howbeit there is no mention that any man of honor or special note, fell
upon the Kings side.

(23) Among the Prisoners was the Counterfelt himself, and the lewd contriuer
of this wicked Stratagem, Richard Sinon, who with little change may most truly
be called another Sinon. The King (who reserved himself in this battle, (as
in others, but Fr^. MS.
never retired) made both their persons examples of his clemency. For Lambert
being questioned, how such a Vapul^. Bern. Andr. MS.
breec^ing-boy as he was, durst attempt so great a wickedness, dinied not, that
he was compelled thereunto, by certain bad persons, who were of the
conspiracy; and as for his parents quality, he confessed them to be such as
indeed they were; altogether of base and despicable calling. Io. Da. MS.
Si^ subtle, or Sir Richard Sinon the Priest, whether for discovery of some
great secrets, or the extraordinary reverence borne to his function
(extraordinary say we, for otherwise Thomas (...). in H. 4 and (...).
Priests had been openly put to death) was not executed, but Polyd. Verg.
(...). who also follows Polydor.
condemned to a dungeon, and perpetual shackles. Lambert (whom the glittering
periwig of regal style did but lately so adorn) was condemned to Polyd. Verg.
the Kings kitchen, there to manage spits at the fire; who Io. Da. of Her. MS.
if his wit and spirit had answered his late Titles, would have chosen much
rather to have been turned from the Ladder by an hangman. But Polyd. Verg.
Lamberts fortunes.
having in this abject condition given sufficient proof that he was but a
Puppet, or a property in the late tragical motion, Io. Da. MS.
he was at length (promoted we cannot say) made one of the Kings Falconers, in
which estate it seems he lived and died inglorious. This battle was fought
upon a 16. (...). A. D. 1487. A. Reg. (...).
Satterday, a day of the week which is Bern. And. Ms.
observed to have been favorable and luckie to this Henry. His first care
after the victory settled, was that which most became a religious Prince, the
humble and joyous acknowledgement of thanks to God, in the very place. From
thence (...) passes to Polyd. Verg.
Lincoln, where he spent three days in (...) supplications, processions, and
thanksgiuings, and (...) his Standard to our Ladies Church at Walsingham in
Norfolk, there to remain as a Monument of (...) ^orie and gratitude. Such as
were taken in (...) ^ell or chase, are then executed. From Lincoln (...)
progresse^ into Yorkshire, where he took (...) as well by execution, as
ransom, for purging (...) from such as were culpable, or pro^ (...) ^t
Newcastle about A. Reg. (...). Ambassadors into Scatland.
the middle of (...); h^ (...) his experienced and (...) Agent (...) Bishop of
Excester, and Sir Richard (...) (...) into Scotland, there to (...) peacee
(...) King (...) the third, to emppeach the (...) and protection, which his
enemias and (...) found therein. Himself having spent a great part of (...) in
this progress, or rather itinerary I^cing, returns by Leicester toward
London. Those prudent Ambassadors in the mean time negociating with the
Scottish King, wrought L^st (...) Iocob. 3.
him to be more inclinable to a per^uall peace; then it stood with his safety
to let his Subjects understand, who favored him not. Seven years truce is
consented unto, with a secret promise of King James to renew that term, as it
began to expire; with which assurance the Ambassadors returning, gladded their
wise Sovereigns heart; who thereby found that the Bishop of Excester, Bishop
F^xe, first a great furtherer, and now a chief preserver of King Henry's
Regality.
was no less industrious in preserving his Regal state, then he had been
prudent in furthering Him unto it. The firebrands and readiest fuel of
Rebellion thus seemed to be quenched, and the King beholds himself in the
Grace and favor of his people, nor less of foreign Princes; Margaret
Dulchesse of Burgundy (his implacable Bern. Andr. MS. The Dulchesse of
Burgundies immortal malice.
Juno) excepted; whom the news of her Nephews the Earl of Lincolnes death,
and the bloody blowing up of all her late hopeful and costly contriuements,
did gall and wound extremely; but added fresh appetites of revenge to her
former immortal malice, which Polydor. Uirg.
never gave over working, till she had vented another no less prodigy then
Lambert was. But the King being honored and sought unto, as well by a Nuncio
Bern. Andr.
from the Roman See, who obtained leave to publish a Croisado here against
the Turks, as also from the French; after his many labors, as well Martial as
Civil, sustained on behalf of himself and the Commonweal, makes a
triumphall 3. ^mber. Anno D. 1^87.
entry into London, which was adorned in the best manner. And in the same
month upon Add. to Fab. Elizabeth Crowned Queen of England.
Saint Katherines day, his wife Elizabeth was Crowned Queen of England, as if
that then first he had held himself assured of Royal estate: for he saw not
what dangerous lifts would yet be given by that unquiet Ladies practices, to
heave him out of authority.

(24) The next maine action which sifted the judgment, and tried the sinnewes
of King Henry, A difficult case, whether King Henry should aid the Britains
or no.
was a foreign case of more difficulty and Ar^, then of intestine danger, as
in which the high and paramount respects of Commonweal were entangled, or
encountered with offices most nearly concerning the honor of a Princes mind,
which never is more blemished then with the note of ingratitude. A dispute and
combat between wisdom and blood, public and private, (if any quality, or
action of a King may be said to be private) which seemed worthy of so
excellent, clear, and considerate a discourse, as that of Henry's. You heard
what notable favors and humanities, when he lived a banished Earl in the
Continent, he had received, first of the Duke of Britain, then of Charles K.
of France; so that he stood equally (as it were) obliged to them both, and
could acknowledge no less. Charles (more ambititiously then justly) desired
exceedingly to annex Britain to the Crown of France, taking occasion Charles
King of France practices to (...) Britain to his Empire.
of the time, and other circumstances, which all seemed to conspire with his
affections. The Duke old, and the father of one only daughter suruiuing till
marriage; Maximilian King of Romans, and rival of King Charles in the same
desires, (as well for the Duchy, as the daughter,) feeble in means; and King
Henry as well obnoxious to the French for benefits, as busied in his particular
at home: and the Duke of Britane, by succouring Lewis Duke of Orleance, and
other French Lords, whom King Charles reputed his adversaries, ministered to the
French an occasion (or color at least) of warring upon Britain, and so by the
apt concurrence of circumstances, to annexe it by conquest, if by treaty he
could not. Henry of England, now known to be victoriously settled, seems
worth the Courting. Ambassadors come from the French, who lay open the wrong
offered by the Britains, in succouring the enemies Ambassadors out of France
to King Henry.
of France, put Henry in mind of passed benefits; and pray his assistance, or
at the least a neutrality; but altogether concealing the mystery of this war,
which was to annexe Britain to the Crown of France. Howsoever, Henry, though
he well enough knew, that a King must ever be the best part of his Council,
(for what are others opinions, if himself want the happiness, or judgment,
to choose the best?) propounds the points to his privy Council, whereupon he
Christianly offers himself a Mediator between the French and Britain; an
office, in which it was apparent he might best satisfy all obligations and
duties both to God and them. The French pretend liking, but in the mean time
follow their design hard. Henry sends his Chaplen, Master Christopher Vrswicke
a man * whom he very often employed. The John Norde^s Middlsex. lit. H.
French mask on. Things come to some extremities. It becomes manifest that
King Charles abused the King of Englands credulity; for the City of Nant's in
Britain was brought by siedge to point of yielding, while messengers, and
packets, outwardly osled with the name of peace, slide to and fro, and the
French doubt nothing so much, as lest the English should stir, before their
victory had made Britain irrecouerable. The Lord Wooduile (as without the
Kings will, or priuity) slips over into Britain with three or four hundred
choice men to assist the Duke, The Lord Wooduile slain in Britain.
and came time enough to be slain with almost all his Soldiers, at the
battle of Saint Albin, where the French wanne the day; notwithstanding that the
Britains, the rather to appall their enemies, had apparelled Paulus Ac^yl. in
Carol. 8.
seventeen hundred of their own Soldiers in white Coats with read Crosses,
after the English manner, and made thereby a show of two Regiments of English.
The Britains had a great loss The Battle of S. Albine, wherein the French
prevail.
in that battle, wherein they were made fewer by six thousand. The Duke of
Orleance and Prince of Orange, who then were British in faction, were taken
Prisoners in the same fight. The French lost about twelve hundredth, and their
General an Italian. So that the state of Britain seemed ripe for a fall.

(25) But King Henry, having long since suspected, and foreseen, what the
uttermost mark of King Henry opens the cause in Parliament.
the French might be, and seeming to have enough suffered the interest, which
they might expect in him as a man, to be abused by their practices to the
prejudice of his other friend, the Duke of Britain, (who forgate not to
solicit and urge that point,) had made the quality of this affair known to
the body of State in open Parliament, for that purpose assembleb; as meaning by
authority thereof to purge himself from all imputation, if, as a King, he did
that which the reason of Government required, which would not assent, that
Britain should be made French, lest by that accession their Neighborhood
might grow intolerable, Britain having so many Sea-townes and Outlets to
mischief the English traffic. Himself was otherwise also sufficiently
resolved, that the general good ought to predominate the particular, and that
his private obligations ought not to entangle, or prejudice the public
service. The Parliament therefore, considering that which stood for the
Commonweal, decrees aid The Parliament grants aid of money to support the
war of Britain.
of men and money, on behalf of the Duke of Britain; it being (besides all
other respects) a perilous example, to suffer the great to devour the lesser
Neighbor States, upon pretenses of justice, or revenge. Forces are levied; but
(for respect of King Charles, and in hope that the show of preparations would
stoop him to equal conditions,) not yet so roundly, as the Britons
necessities expected. Mean while that no formality or Princely Ceremony should
be unaccomplished, King Henry by his Ambassadors certifies King Charles of his
Parliaments decree; prays him to desist from farther Hostility; Polyd. Uirg.
otherwise that he must assist the Duke, but yet (for the French Kings sake)
with this reservation, of pursuing his subjects no where but in Britain.
Charles made small account of these ouertures, because he truly persuaded
himself that the English aides would not arrive in season; which fell out
accordingly; for before that time, the French had gotten that victory,
(whereof even now we spoke) at the Battle of Saint Albin. Upon news whereof,
the English Regiments were immediately sent over under Robert Lord Broke
General, Sir John Cheiney, Sir John Midleton, Sir Ralfe Hilton, Sir Richard
Corbet, Sir Thomas Leighton, Eight thousand English sent tardie into Britain.
Job. Stow Annal.
Sir Richard Lacon, and Sir Edmund Cornwall Knights, and Coronels. The whole
Army contained eight thousand men. These march toward the enemy; who,
acquainted with the temper of the English, whiles they are fresh, as Polyd.
Verg. l. 26.
being then almost invincible, contain themselves within their Camp; but yet
Polyd. Verg.
molest the English with continual skirmishes on horseback in several places
at once; smally to the profit of the French, who Hollinsh. Job. Da^ MS.
were always put to the worse, the Archers received them with such perpetual
storms. In the mean space, Francis Duke of Britain dies, leaving in effect,
one only daughter, the Lady Anne, (for the other, Polyd. Verg.
being the younger) deceased not long after. This altered the whole state of
the case. The British Nobility The Duke of Britain^ dies, and the English
return.
(under their young Mistress) immediately fall at variance among themselves,
and the English thereby were on every hand in danger: so that God (as it
appeared by the sequel) had destined Britain^ to be annexed to the Crown of
France; for the English (after five months stay) were in wisdom compelled to
return; the rather, for that Winter now was come upon them, and Britain,
destitute of competent defense, (her Rulers disagreeing among themselves) was
finally by the marriage of King Charles with the Lady Anne, made a parcel of
the French Monarchy, as hereafter will appear.

(26) King Henry the while was again in danger The beginning of new stirs in
Yorkshire.
to have had present use of Soldiers at home. We showed, what care was
heretofore taken by him to weed the North, and free it from lurking enemies.
That notwithstanding, when the Earl of Northumberland, (Lieutenant of the
North) signified at an assembly (according as the truth was) that the King
Job. Stow ex Job. Skeleton.
(though the Northern people had besought it) would not remitte one penny of
such Subsidy, as was granted in Parliament for supportation of the wars in
Britain Polyd. Verg l. 26 Job. Stow. Annal.
left the Acts of State should be reuersed at the rude peoples pleasure; but
that on the contrary Commission and warrant was sent down for him to see the
same levied by distress, or otherwise: the desperate multitude, falsely The
Earl of Northumberland slain by the people in a tumult.
supposing that the Earl was the occasion of such an answer, did suddenly set
upon him at the incitement of one John a Chamber, and furiously murdered him,
with certain of his servants in a place called Cocklegge by Thrusk, eighteen
miles from York. They to carry their wicked attempt through, make head under
Sir John Egremond, a discontented Knight of those parts, openly declaring where
they came, that their meaning was to fight with the King in defense of their
liberties, as if the causeless killing of a most noble Lord had been one of
them. Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey sent from Court with some forces to
repress their increase, skirmisheth with a route of these Rebels, beats them
away, and takes John a Chamber prisoner. The whole swarm flocks to York,
where they roosted about three or four The King in person in Yorkshire.
days, when hearing of the Kings approach (who was ever one of the first in
the neck of such occasions) they scattered themselves, but the ringleaders
were hanged and quartered, and John a Chamber, with Job. Stow Annal.
some others, were executed at York after an extraordinary manner. Sir John
Egremond escaping, fled to the common Center of all King Henry's dangers Sir
Job. Egremond Captain of the Rebels escapes to the Duchess of Burgundy.
and enmities, Margaret Duchess of Burgundy; so that though the color of
rising was about money, yet Egremond at lest had reference, it seems, to the
general perturbation of the Kingdom, upon the old ground of quarrel (hatred
of the Lancastrian Family) and this to be but a spark or flash of that great
and troubleous fire, which afterward brake forth and blased so prodigiously.
The Earl of Surrey is left by the King (having Bern. Andr. MS.
severely punished the murderers) Lieutenant of the North, and Sir Robert
Tonstall Knight, as chief Commissioner for leuying the tax or subsidy.

(27) The unworthy death of the Earl of Nerthumberland was seconded by a more
unworthy, of James the third King of Scotland, so as King Henry lost at home a
most honorable stay of his Northern affairs, and a sure Ally abroad. This
unfortunate Prince, having (...). in (...). (...).
by some irregularity of life, and partialities, and errors of government
(amplified perhaps by the constructions and reports of his malignant Subjects)
incurred extreme hatred with many of the Nobility and people, labored with
Polydor. Uirg.
King Henry, as also with the Pope, and King of France, to make an accord
between him and his Mutinadoes, for that they had compelled Prince James, his
son, to be the titular and unnatural Head of those arms, which traitorously
(as pretending to King Henry ^n vain seeks to reconcile the Scot^ to their
King.
have a right on behalf of the Commonweal to depose an evil King) they
assumed against him. The Kings accordingly interposed their mediations by
earnest Ambassadors, but could obtain no other then this outrageous answer:
That there was no talking of peace unless he would resign his Crown. King
Henry and King Charles vehemently protested against these their whole
proceedings, declaring by their Ambassador, that they thought the same to be as
a common injury done unto themselves; and the example to be Io. Lest. Bish. of
Rosse.
very wicked and pernicious, and not sufferable by Princes, that Subjects
should be permitted to put hands unto their Sovereign. Hereupon it came to a
Battle at Banocksborn by Striuelin, whereat K. James (rashly fighting before
his whole numbers were come) was (notwithstanding the contrary commandment of
the Prince his son) slain in the Mill of that Field, James the third King of
Scotland slain in battle by his Subjects.
whither he fled after the battle ended. By reason of this unfortunate
precipitation of the Scottish King, Hadrian de Castello an Italian Legate, whom
Pope Innocentius the eight had sent to take up the cruel quarrel, came too
late, (for he arrived not in England till the battle at Banocksborne was
passed,) but not too late to receive honor at the hands of King Henry, who
respecting his wisdom and excellent learning, (upon the special commendations
first Io. Stow. Annal.
of John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, but afterward upon his own
experience of the man in sundry emploiments to the Roman Sea,) bestowed upon
him the Bishoprike of Hereford, and (after resignation K. Henry's bounty to a
stranger for Learnings cause.
thereof) the Bishopric of Bath and Wells; who was also at the length
created Cardinal by Pope Alexander the sixth. Polyd. Verg. l. 26
But who is he among many thousands (says Polyd.) that uses not to admire
these outward honors which may alike be given to the unworthy as well as to the
wel-deseruing, and may alike be taken away from either? But the praise of this
Hadrian is of another The first reuiuer in this age of pure La^ne and choice
learning.
far more noble kind and eternal: for he was the man who first revived the
glory of the ancient Latin eloquence, and of all other sorts of abstruse and
exquisit learnings, as in which himself excelled. Thus does Polydor (himself
an Italian,) celebrate the learning of his Countryman, of whose other
qualities, yet others write more harshly; as that out of mere ambition to be
Pope (without any other grudge) he conspired, with Alphonso Petruccio, and
other sacred Cardinals, Godwins Caral. of P. (...). in Bath, etc. page 309.
Paul. (...).
to murder Pope Leo the tenth: induced thereto by suggestion of a Witch, who
foretold him that one Hadrian, an old man, of mean parentage, of great
Learning and wisdom, should succeed in the Papacy. The man thought it must
needs be himself, as being, though of very base Parentage, yet of some noble
qualities: but another Hadri^. 6.
Hadrian, the son of a Dutch Brewer, and instructor of Charles the fifth the
Emperor, proved to be the man; and this our Hadrian lost by deprivation all
his promotions whatsoever, for his nesarious attempt. Into quch extreme folly
is learning and wisdom metamorphosed, where it is tainted with Ambition, or
wants a Religious discretion to manage it aright.

(28) And albeit the King himself could very gladly have spent his time in
the studies of peace, as those which were far more apt for the service of
God, and for attaining of knowledge, then in martial War with France and the
causes.
tumults; yet the quality of his supereminent place envied unto him that
felicity; for he was necessarily drawn into a war with France upon less
occasions. Anne the young Duchess of Britain, (by their advise, who affected
to preserve the liberty of that Dukedom, which by union with France, would be
absorpt and extinguished,) had so far entangled and engaged her self with
the Procurators of Maximilian King of Romans, that she was not only publicly
co^tracted, but contented (for uttermost performance of those rites whereof
marriage by proxy was honorably capable) to take upon her the Bride, and being
solemnly bedded, to permit Maximilians Deputy, in The young Duchess married
by proxy.
the presence of sundry Noble witnesses as well men as women, to put in his
leg, stripped naked to the knee, between the spousall sheets, that ceremony
seeming to amount to a Consummation. Charles King of France, notwithstanding
these solemnities, and his own particular engagement with the Lady Margaret
daughter of Maximilian, (whom for the purpose of marriage he had already
entertained into France,) did so ambitiously and vehemently covet to gain
Britain, that upon confidence of his force, he resolved to break through all
respects, and not only to offend all his foreign friends, but to make them his
just enemies, rather then to fail in effectuation. Instruments are therefore
very secretly set on work, and battery is placed with bags of gold at all the
opportunities which might let in his purpose. Ambassadors also (the Stowes
Annal.
Lord Frances of Lutzenburg, Charles Marinian, and Robert Gagwine Bern. And. MS.
General of the Order of the holy Trinity, are dispatched to Henry, praying
that with his good will he might dispose of the body of the Lady Anne in
marriage according to the right which he had thereunto, as the chief Lord of
whom she held the Dukedom Henry denied the request, but yielded
notwithstanding to send Ambassadors into France there to Capitulate about a
peace. The French carried this affair with The French carried the practice of
marriage with the inheretirex of Brita^ most artificially.
notable Art, for to divert the world for looking into the depth of their
drift, King Charles still detained the young Lady Margaret, Maximilians
daughter; so as at most it could be but suspected, that Charles meant to match
her with some of his blood, and all the intercourse of Orators and Ambassadors
used in the mean time, tended but to hold the English busied upon other
objects, till they had wrought their feate in the Court of Britain. For
Maximilian, (to let the world see what injuries shall be offered even to Kings,
that are not strong) him they altogether neglected; King Henry they played
with, and Ferdinando King of Castile (who was ready to join with Maximilian
and Henry Polyd. Uerg.
against the French) they resolve to appease, with rendering up unto him the
Counties of Ruscinoon, and Perpinian; as accordingly they Job. T^l. C^n.
did, without Lu Marin. lib. 20. de reb. Hispan.
reembursement of one penny of those 300000. Crowns, for which John King of
Arragon (father to Ferdinando) had morgaged them. The young Ladies doubts,
rising either out of religion, or point of honor, his cunning Agents, and
Emissaries wipe away with these solutions. That Maximilian^ daughter was not of
years to consent, and therefore the contract between King Charles and her,
did not bind either in law, or conscience: That her own contract with
Maximilian was void, for that it was done without the consent of her Sovereign
Lord, King Charles, whose ward or Client she was. The Lady vanquished in her
judgment with these reasons, attracted with the present greatness of King
Charles, and loath by refusal to make her Country the seat of a long and
miserable war, secretly yielded to accept of another husband. Thomas
Goldstone Abbot of S. Augustines in Canterbury, and Thomas Earl of Ormond in
Ireland, King Henry's Ambassadors into France, having been dandled by the
French during these illusiue practices, returned without other fruit of their
labors.

(29) What could now the most patient do less then take sword in hand upon so
palpable and unworthy illusion? But Maximilians wrongs were too impudent and
intolerable; for Charles sent home the Lady Margaret, and married the
Inheretrix of Britain, annexing it to his own Realm: whereas King Henry
found himself rather mocked, then otherwise empaired. James Contibald hereupon
Britain annexed to France.
comes Ambassador from Maximilian, and obtained his request, which was, that
they with joint forces should by a certain day prefixed, invade the French, in
full revenge of these their bold prouocations; Maximilian for his part,
promising to support that war with at least ten thousand men for two years.
King Henry having formerly in abundant manner provided himself of treasure,
was ready before the day with a royal army: but Maximilian (whose will to
work the uttermost mischief to France was not Maximilian unprovided to (...)
with Henry.
doubted,) being sent unto by King Henry, signifying his forwardnes, was found
utterly unfurnished. Causes of Maximilians weakness in state, were the
rebellions and dislikes of his Flemish Subjects cherished by the French, the
Jealousy of Princes neighborhood making them unjustly glad either of others
molestations. For subduing whereof though King Henry had heretofore given him
good and successful assistance under the conduct of Giles Lord Dawbeney
Governor of Callis, the Lord Morley and others, whereby he the rather
overcame; yet was he the feebler, as then, by reason of so fresh exhaustures.
King Henry with good cause was not a little troubled at these news, secretly
signified by his trusty Almner Mr. Christopher Vrswick, and Sir Richard Risley
knight, his Ambassadors to Maximilian; For he was very loath to undergo so
great an Action upon his particular strengths, though he doubted not to find a
potent party among the Britains, (whose affections were as yet but loosely
settled toward King Charles,) and yet far more loath to deceive the
expectation of his own people, who had so largely contributed; Chiefly the
City of London, out of which, even in those days he received for his furniture
in that voyage almost Addit: to
ten thousand pounds from the Commoners, and (as it seems by our Author) Fab.
Chron. The Londoners large contributions to the king.
two hundredth pounds besides from every Alderman, where the same King could
not, but with some difficulty, levy in the third year of his Reign a loan of
four thousand pounds, whereof three of the best Companies are noted (as for
having done and deserved extraordinarily) to have lent above nine hundred. And
verily this wise King (knowing how great a strength that rich City was unto
him) humored that people with all forces of popularities, for himself did not
only come among them, King Henry's popularities in London.
and cause himself to be entered a brother, in The Merchant Tailors.
one of their Companies, but ware the habit at a public feast, and sat as
Master, as is very credibly reported out of the Records of their Hall. His
wisdom therefore saw, that in giving over the invasion of France; he should
sloathfully abandon a goodly occasion of making himself universally acceptable
to his people. His resolutions therefore are by him at leastwise pretended to
continue, and for that cause he sufficiently increases his numbers, that he
might seem able to go through with that enterprise alone; and though the time
of year were too far spent (for he landed not at Caleis, till the sixth day
of October) yet marches he with his whole forces toward A. D. 1492. An. reg. 8.
Boloigne, being well assured that with this trowell he should at once plaster
two walls, that is, humor his English subjects, and for a peace draw to himself
store of Crowns from the French.

(30) He had with him besides the flower of his Nobility, and Captains,
answerable numbers of The chief Lords names who served in thi^ voyage.
People fit for the service. The most named persons were these, Jasper Duke of
Bedford Lieutenant General of the Army, Tho^as Marquess Dorset, the Earls of
Arundell, Oxford, Suffolk, Shrewsburie, Derby, Kent, Devonshire, and Ormond,
sundry Barons, as Dawbeney, Abergenny, Delaware, South, Hastings, Cobham, etc.
But it is needless to weary our selves with Boloigne besieged by K. Henry.
long relations of a short voyage; for King Henry, before he set forth out of
England, was secretly dealt with by the Lord Cords Governor of Henault,
according to instructions on the French Kings behalf, to accept of conditions,
which till Boloigne was besieged (as now by him it was) was not known. The
ignorance of this mystery made many forward Gentlemen to morgage their lands,
and run into much debt for their fuller and brauer furniture, in hope to get
great matters in this war, whereof to their grief they found themselves
deceived. In the mean time the L. Polydor calls him Desquerdo.
Cords having met at Caleis with Richard Fox Lord Bishop of Excester, and
Bern. Andr. MS.
Giles Lord Dawbeney, the Kings Commissioners; after just and long debatement,
concluded upon Articles of peace between the two Kings.

(31) Boloigne was brought to some distress, when by interuention of this
agreement it remained safe and quiet: King Charles was chiefly moved to buy his
peace at a dear rate, both for that the state of Britain was as yet unsettled,
and for that he meant Reasons moving the Kings to a peace.
forth with to march into Italy for the Phil. de Com.
conquest of the Kingdom of Naples; and K. Henry on the other side was not
unwilling, because Maximilian had failed, and Britain seemed clearly past
possibility of euiction. To which may be added, a natural, noble, and
religious inclination in King Henry, to live in amity with his neighbors; the
inckling of new Arnol. Ferron. Hist. ad A. D. 1492. Polyd. Vergil in Hen 7.
dangers, then in brewing against him by the turbulent, and unappeasable
Duchess of Burgundy, and Stow. Annal.
cherished by King Charles; and lastly, the enrichment of himself by
reembursing the charges both of this, and the British war out of the French
elsewhere, whereby he should far the better be able to withstand all foreign
practices, or domesticke outrages. As for the preserving of himself, and his
honor with his Subjects, he wanted not both true and honorable glosses: Such
as were the care to avoid unnecessary effusion of Christian blood: the uses of
his presence at home, besides many other: but his wisdom in the carriage of
this right weighty action was chiefly eminent in this, That he would not enter
into Treaty, till he was in the field; and that with such a puissance, as The
high points of wisdom practiced by King Henry in atchieuing his ends.
was likely enough to force his own conditions; nor suffer the least sign of
his secret willingness to peace, or inward doubt of troubles at home, to
creep out at any crany or chinke of his discourse or carriage, whereby he as
far outwent the French fairly, as they formerly seemed to have ouerwrought
him subtlely. Had they truly been informed in those points, it is probable
they might have gone a cheaper way to work: for, besides what other Articles
soever, it was concluded, That Henry should Bern. Andr. MS.
not quit his claim to France; but that for a Peace, which by the contract was
only to continue during the two Kings lives, Charles of France should pay in
present to Henry for his charges in that war, One hundredth eighty six
thousand, two hundredth and fifty pounds English. I. Da. of Her. MS
seven hundred, forty and five Holinshed.
thousand Polyd. Verg.
Ducats, and twenty five thousand Crowns yearly toward the expenses, which
he had heretofore been at in aiding the Britons. Which (by the English called
Tribute) was duly paid during all this Kings reign, and also to Henry his son,
till the whole debt was run out, thereby to preserve amity with England. There
were moreover (by Henry's consent, who was thus content to gratify his Peers
at another cost) not only present rewards, but also certain annual pensions
allotted to the Foreign pensions of what use or hazard.
chief Lords of his privy Council. A course of bounty which might otherwise
have proved preiudicious to the service of the King of England, by engaging his
Counselors affections to the French: The siege of Boleine lasted till the
eighth day of November, and Henry (whom his Queens most Ber. Andr. Henry
returns.
tender, frequent and loving lines, did the rather inuit to speediest
return,) having settled all his transmarine affairs, 17. December.
arrived at Dover, from whence he iournied I. Sto Annal.
to Westminster, there to celebrate the Feast of Christmas. This voyage into
France, affording no (...). Henry returned.
greater exploites then we have heard, was celebrated by blind Andr. Thol. MS
Bernard with hyperbolicall and wellborne verses not ordinary, in which
directing his speech in honor of Henry, to the Hours he concludes. Effugite
igniuomos celeres coniungere Solis,
Quadrupedes: Horae protinus ecce parant;
Non opus est vobis; quia si priuatus Apollo,
Pauerit Admeti rursus and ipse boues,
Principis hic nostri vultus Iouialis, abunde
Lumina, creed mihi, Phoebe recede, dabit.


(32) The famous counterfeisance of Perkin Warbecke, with which the brain of
the Lady Margaret Duchess Dowager of Burgundy had long traveled, does now
begin to disclose it self, and make new businesses for King Henry. The
inglorious glory of the first invention in his reign of this kind of
vexation, Lambert Simnels person had given to his Master the wily Simon, so
that our Duchess was but an imitatrix, and yet perhaps she gave not place in
any point to the first example, or Archtype, nevertheless the fortune of the
first devise, being no more successful then it was, might reasonably have
deterred her from the edition of a second: but whether it were an immortal
envy toward the Lancastrian race, or a burning zeal of advancing one that
might at leastwise bear the name of a Plantagenet, though by any sinister
practices; as if it had been lawful to attain her ends (admit them just) by
any injurious courses, she resolves to erect another Idol, as perceiving by
the first, how notable an engine imposture was, to trouble Henry; being well
assured, that England was full of corrupt humors, and ill-affections to work
upon, not so much through the desert of her present King, as for that the
dregs which naturally reside in the bottom of men's hearts, where most bloody
and barbarous factions have for a long time weltered, and wurried one the other
with various event, were not cleansed and avoided. The Devil therefore ready to
furnish all attempts which may raise troub^ and mischief, easily fitted her.
There was come therefore to her hands a youth The Duchess of Burgundy
addresseth a Pseudo Rochard against Henry.
adorned with such a shape, as might easily persuade the beholders was worthy
of a noble fortune: he had thereunto a natural fine wit, and (by reason of his
abode in England in K. Edwards days) could speak our language, as also some
other, which he had by a kind of wandering travel obtained. This youth was
borne (they say) in the City of Torney, and called Polyd. Verg.
Peter Warbecke, the Bern. Andr. MS.
son of a converted Jew, whose Godfather at Baptism King Edward himself was.
The English in Polyd. Verg.
contempt (and for a note perhaps of his foreign birth) did afterward call him
by a diminutiue of his name, Peterkin or Perkin. Him the Duchess (as a fit
piece of timber, out of which to carue a new Idol) moulds by degrees, and
makes him take shape according to that Idaa, which she had prefigured in her
working imagination, before the which the late honors of her house conspicuous
in three Princes (which altogether made not twenty and five years of reign)
did so perpetually houer, as her soul could never take contentment, but in the
hope that the house of York should again be the dwelling place of Majesty.

(33) Her offense against Henry wanted not many seeming reasons, but none so
great, as that he Causes moving the Duchess to bear K. Henry so mortal
hatred.
had slain her own brother King Richard, who albeit he was there reputed
murderer of her Nephews, yet were they a degree more removed from her, and so
less dear in likelihood then a brother; and howsoever she might secretly
detest, or believe the commitme^t of that parricide, yet could she never brook
(seeing they were gone) that the reward of her brothers death, and that even to
him who slew him, should be the Crown of England, whereby not only her
brother, but the whole male-line of her family was for ever to be excluded;
much less could she (a Plantagenet) abide that Henry, who brought to the
Crown the surname of a newly raised Family. These and other considerations in
the breast of a Lady, bred up in a dominating Family, her self a Dowager, in
such a fortune, as in which she was Paramount for the time, and absolute
without controlment, being careless withal of saving for posterity, because
she was without a child, and in that regard the more abundantly stored with
treasure; all which made her spirits ouer-boile with impatience and virulency;
so far forth, that having infused al her principles into Peter her creature
under the Title of Richard Plantagenet, second son of King Edward the fourth;
she most covertly sends him into Portugal, from thence to take his Icarean
flight, as Infra. (...) prox. and sequent.
elsewhere is related. Nevertheless, there will not (perhaps) want some, who
in defense of the Duchess, had rather refer it to Magnanimity, and
Nobleness of Spirit, in seeking the honor of her house; which, if it might
pass for such among the heathen, yet can it not among Christians; much the
less, for that her duty to England, and the royal flourishing estate of her
own Niece, the right heir, exacted at her hands a greater tenderness.

(34) That Peter Warbecke should be inflamed by her favors, and
encouragements, to dare in earnest the personation of a Kings son, seems not
a thing to be admired; for there is in humane nature (which ties not her self
to Pedigrees, nor Parentages) a kind of light matter, which will easily kindle,
being touched with the blazing hopes of ambitious propositions. He therefore
upon the first disclose of Videinfia prox.
himself, did put on so excellent a seeming as might justly move King Henry to
be jealous, Perkin Warbecke fits the Dutchchesses turn, by exact
representation of a Richard Plantagenet
whereunto the pernicious practice might come at last; for there wanted nothing
in the whole form of the young vpstart, but only the conscience of a truth,
and truth it self: which makes me call to mind Pancerollus.
what one has written of a goodly white Saphyr in Venice, made by art so
nearly to resemble a true Diamond, that with much difficulty, and but by one
only lapidary, it was discovered; which if it had been graced with some great
Princes, wearing, what could want to have made it passable for a very Diamond
of greatest value? Perkin came such from out of the Burgundian forge; and (if
his parentage be respected) assumed the image and resemblance of a king, being
otherwise not so much as a mean Gentleman. Neither can it be marvelled at, if
such a Phantasme as this, did abuse, and trouble the common people of that
time; for even to such as do write thereof, it begets a kind of doubt (which
without some little collection of their spirits does not easily vanish,) it
seeming almost incredible, that such a bloody play should merely be disguised
and fained; the discovery therefore was worthy such a wit as King Henry's, and
the push it gave to his sovereignty did thoroughly try his sitting, being of
force enough to have cast an ordinary rider out of sadle.

(35) Therefore, it was the Dutchesses misfortune, that her inventions (if they
were hers) had to encounter so politic and constant a man as King Henry;
whose prudence searched into the abstrusest secrets, and whose diligence
overcame all difficulties. Yet the Lady Margarets course to vent her Creature
at the first was exquisite; for she (as in a Magic practice) having kept him
secret till she saw her time, causes him to be closely conuayed into
Holinsh. 10. Da. MS.
Portugal; from whence (attended with fit associates and Priuadoes) he
sails into Ireland (the Foster-place and nursery of immortal good will to the
house of York) where (notwithstanding their late calamities,) he so strongly
enchanted that rude people with the charms of false hopes, and mists of
seemings, as he was sure of partakers in great plenty. Charles the eight, King
of France, hearing (and perhaps believing) that the Duke of York was alive, A
summarie relation of Perkins first fortune after he was published.
and glad to have so probable an occasion of doing mischief to Henry of
England, in regard of these flagra^t enmities which as then remained vnquencht
between them, inuites Duke Richard most officiously to Paris, and besides all
other honors, assigned him (at his coming) a guard for his person, whereof
the Lord Congreshall was Captain. Afterward there repaired to this new Duke,
Sir George Neuill Knight, (a Stow Annal.
bastard of the noble house of the Neuils,) Sir John Tailor, Rowland Robinson,
and about an hundredth English, to whom (as a principal) we may add Ber. Andr.
M. S.
Stephen Frion, French Secretary to King Henry himself; all which, together
with the whole Strategeme, was smoakt out of France with the first grain of
incense sacrificed upon the Altars of Peace at Boloign, after the same was once
made and ratified (as you have heard) between the French and us. The Duchess
then seeing her artificial creature thus turned again upon her hands,
pretends an extreme ignorance that ever she had seen him before that
present, and an excessive joy for his miraculous escape, and preservation,
which seemed such to her (as she pretended) as if he had been revived from
death to life, and that the fable might want no quickening, which her personal
countenancing, or her Court could afford, she openly salutes him by the
delicate Perkin in Flanders with the Duchess.
Title of the Stow Annal.
White Rose of England, and questions him of the manner of his escape, with
such like, to beget a firm belief in the hearers, that she never had seen
him before that time, and that he was indeed her Nephew Richard Duke of York.
The Nobility of Flanders accordingly, do unto him all honor, and she
enuirons his person with a guard of thirty men in murrey and blew. Neither was
he in any point wanting to his part; but fitted such likely answers to all
questions, and such princely behauiours to all occasions, as made fame bold to
publish him with the fullest blast of her Trumpet, for no other then a true
Richard Plantagenet; and as it is so observed of some, that by long using to
report an untruth, at last forgetting themselves to be the Authors thereof,
believe it in earnest; so these honors making our Peter to bury in utter
oblivion his birthes obscurity, he seemed to be persuaded; that he was indeed
the self party, whom he did so exactly personate. Nouelty, and impudency
were scarce ever known to have found more applause, or belief, even among
many very wise, and (otherwise) worthy men; who moved in conscience, and not
only upon discontent, inclined to partake with this new Plantagenet, as the
only right heir of the English Diadem, as if, whether he had been the true
one, it was past dispute. This intoxication, and abusion of the world, was
wonderfully increased by the secret revolt of Sir Robert Clifford Knight, whom
(as one that had seen, and known the true Richard) the cunning conspirators
in England had sent over, to inform himself, and them, whether he was indeed
as he seemed. Sir Robert (whose presence and errand were to the Duchess most
welcome,) Sir Rob. Clifford signifies to his friends in England that Perkin was
the true* Duke.
being brought to his sight, did forthwith give credit, and constantly
signify, that this was indeed Richard Plantagenet, the true Duke of York, and
that he well knew him for such. Money and encouragements, were hereupon sent
out of England, from such as favored him; among whom was Bern. Andr. MS.
Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlain to King Henry (by whose punctual revolt
from K. Richard, he had principally achieved the Crown of England) Stow Annal.
John Ratcliffe, L. Fitzwalter, Polyd. Verg.
Sir Simon Montfort, Sir Thomas Thwates Knights, and others; but the maine
countenance of the cause in foreign parts was Sir Robert Clifford (a knight of
an honorable fame and family) which moved the secret friends of the new Duke
to set the rumor so cunningly on foot among the English, that John Da. of Her.
M. S.
sooner might a cloud, which causes thunder, be caught or known, then the
Author thereof; and multitudes being weakened therewith, store of humor,
dangerously prepared to mutation, did every where discover it self.

(36) For prevention therefore of all those effects, which might issue out of
these causes, (being in their King Henry's countermines and courses against
this Pseudo Richard.
proper nature most generatiue of sedition, and of all sorts of civil furies)
King Henry diligently causes the coasts of England to be well and strongly
watched, as well to empeach the landing of enemies, as the escape of fugitives:
but above all, he writes letters to his best friends in foreign parts; and
also emploies nimble wits with several instructions; some to assail the
constancy of Sir Robert Clifford, (the maine stay and credit of Perkins cause)
with promise of immunity and favor if he would return into England in quiet;
others, to find out the truth of Perkins quality, being furnished with treasure
to draw and requite intelsigences; and all of them (as occasion should serve)
to pretend themselves vehement favorers of the new Duke. These necessary
hypocrites and double faced Ambidexters, called Spies, (whose services,
howsoever conducible to such as sets the^ on work, yet their perfidious
quality commonly partakes with that of Judas Iscariot, and often meets with
like reward,) do plie their charge so roundly that S. Robert Clifford wun away
from the Duchess.
Sir Robert Clifford is secretly drawn off, the new Duke is discovered as well
by them, as by Proclam. of Perkin, as a King Rich. MS. penes Sir Rob. Cotton.
sundry letters from friends abroad, to be but Perkin Warbecke, and many other
mysteries are revealed. This gave to the wise King great satisfaction, who to
weaken the enemies practice the more, not only * Polyd. Uirgin Hen. 7.
diuulgeth the fraud, but sends over sea Sir William Poinings Knight, and Sir
William Warham his Ambassadors to the Archduke Philip, Duke of Burgundy (then
governed by others by reason of his tender age) who promised not to assist the
said Perkin, but if the Duchess Dowager would do any such thing to the
prejudice of King Henry, it was not in him to hinder her, for that she might
dispose of her own. A maine argument used by these Ambassadors before the
Archdukes Counsel to convince, that Richard the very Duke of York was
murdered as well as King Edward his brother German, as Polydor (who seems to
have had good means to understand these times) rehearses it, was, That their
uncle Richard should in vain have made away the elder brother, if the younger
had been suffered to survive, for The maine argument proving that King Edwards
sons were both of them murdered.
that the right of the elder, was immediately upon his death in the younger,
and that consequently during his life, King Richard could have no more
assurance, then if the elder were still alive: which Argument notwithstanding
does at most prove nothing but this: That their uncle the Usurper might intend,
that both his Nephews should be murdered, and that he knew nothing perhaps
to the contrary. Whereas facts are to be proved by confessions of parties, by
witnesses, or vehement presumptions, (though vehement presumptions are said to
constitute but an half proof) al which are Sir Tho. More.
otherwhere so supplied, as leaus small cause to doubt of both their deaths.
But Warham (a learned Priest and Doctor in the laws) the mouth of that
Embassage sent to the Archduke, in the end of his oration used this bitter
scoff, and Sarcasme against the Lady Margaret: That she in her old age
brought forth two Monsters within the space of a few years, and The Duchess
of Burgundies two monstrous birthes.
both of them not in the eight, or ninth month after their conception, as
natural mothers, but in the one Lambert and Perkin were about fifteen years
old (says Polydor) at the time of their appearance.
hundred and eightieth month; and whereas other women brought forth Infants
utterly unable to help themselves, these birthes of hers were tall striplings,
and as soon as they were borne, offered battle unto mighty Kings. And albeit
the Archdukes answer seemed reasonable, yet was not King Henry so satisfied,
but that within a while after, for Bern. Andr. MS.
that the Archduke had secretly furnished Perkin with leaders, he took
occasion to banish all Flemings, and Flemish wares out of his Dominions, and
inhibited his Subjects to trade in any Countries within the obedience of
Maximilian King of Romans, or of the Archduke Philip his son, who by way of
talio and requital did the like against the English.

(37) Let us come now from the addresses of things, to their doing. The high
prudence and industry of Henry having thus discovered the foundations of
Perkins hopes in England, and the humors which were most unsound, made it his
first work to raze those groundworks, and purge the veins of his Realm from
that corruption by needful Phlebotomie. The Stow Annal. Po^ydor calls him but a
knight.
Lord Fitzwalter, a principal conspirator, being condemned, and sent to
Caleis, lived there in hope of pardon; but for practicing with his Keepers to
escape, he finally paid his head for satisfaction. Sir Simon Montfort, Robert
Ratcliffe, and William Dawbeney (Gentlemen of noble houses) as Captains and
Authors of the conspiracy were beheaded, but all the rest as well Clerks as
Laymen had their pardons. Not long K. Henry expects Sir Rob. (...) in the
Tower of London.
after these executions and pardons, the King upon sure intelligence, that Sir
Robert Clifford (in whose bosom the secret of all Perkins plot lay) was
arrived, entered the Tower of London, and there continued; that so, if Clifford
should accuse any of the great, (and whom he then would accuse, it is probable
King Henry knew) they might without suspicion, or tumult be attached; the
Court, and public prison for crimes of highest nature, being then within the
cincture of one, and the same wall. Sir Robert Clifford at his coming into the
Kings presence, (though he was secretly before assured of his life) most
humbly praying and obtaining pardon, appeached (among many others) Sir William
Stanley Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlain accused.
Lord Chamberlain. The King would not at first give credit (or at leastwise
pretended, not to give credit) to the accusation of a Peer so great, and so
near unto him: but upon farther search, finding the same confirmed with
circumstances, and particularly, for that he said to Clifford, Polydor. Uirg. l
He would never bear Arms against the young man, if he knew him for certain
to be the son of King Edward, he resolves to use severity against the
delinquent.

(38) But Bernard Andreas directly says, That (besides bare words and
purposes) Sir William had supported Perkins cause with treasure, wherein he is
recorded so to have abounded, as that in his Castle of Ioh. Stow. Annal.
Holt he had in coin and plate to the value of forty thousand Marks, besides
lands of inheritance in sundry places about, to the yearly value of three
thousand pounds (a pretty stock in treasure at those times, to uphold the first
brunt of a war, and a large extent of land to furnish the wing of a powerful
battle with able soldiers out of Tenancies) with all which the same Author in
plain words says, That he promised to defend the said Pretender, * Illum
tutari and in regnum addu^ cere premiseras.
and bring him into the Kingdom. And if we have any insight into King Henry's
disposition, it seems to us, that before he entered into the Tower, he not only
knew the Lord Chamberlain unsound, but also that for his quiet apprehension
he chiefly repaired thither. Stanley being hereupon attached and referred to
farther examination, is said Polyd. Verg.
To have denied nothing of all that wherewith he was charged, which he perhaps
the more confidently did, in hope that king Henry would pardon him in respect
of passed services, they (in their effects considered) being the greatest
whereof mortality is capable, preservation of life, and gaining of a Kingdom.
But the poor gentleman found himself far deceived in his politic Lord and
Master, who (to teach mankind thereby, how dangerous it is to make a King) was
not vnwiling to cut him off, as persuading himself, that those services
proceeded of ambition, not of affection, or if of affection, the cause now
ceasing, the contrary effects might prove as pernicious, as the other had been
aduantageous and available. The King was unwilling to displease his Father in
Law, Thomas Earl of Derby (brother german to Sir William Stanley) and did
therefore for a while suspend his judgment; but rigor finally prevailed, and
he was at Westminster openly arraigned, convicted, and afterward at the block
on Tower-hil beheaded. In whose Stanley Lord Chamberlain beheaded.
office Giles Lord Dawbeney a most faithful and moderate man succeeded. This
sharp justice exercised upon so eminent a person, was of great use in the stay
of peoples minds through the Realm of England. But in Ireland they were not so
settled, or reduced, but that for the better and fuller purging thereof, Henry
Deney (a Monk of Langton Abbey) was sent Lord Chancellor thither, with orders
and directions, and Sir Edward Poinings Knight, with soldiers; whose greatest
diligence and cares were not wanting, to punish such as heretofore had aided
Perkin, or might hereafter. The Earl of Kildare Lord Deputy, falling into
suspicion with Poynings, was by him apprehended, and sent prisoner into
England; where the King did not only graciously hear and admit his defenses,
but also returned him with honor, and continuation of authority. In the
meanetime (the error, or weakness of the Burgundian Duchess and her Perkin,
suffering their enemy in this sort, to puruey for his own security, and their
depulsion) he yet for farther assurance of himself makes a progress into
Lancashire, there to recreate with his Father in law the Earl, and the
Countess his mother, where among all other his secret purposes, he thoroughly
satisfied the Earl, both for the justice and necessity of Sir William
Stanleyes death.

(39) These certainly, were perilous times to live in, and undoubtedly full
of infinite iealousies, and hypocrisies, nor unlike to those lately passed, Sir
Tho. Moore in Rich. 3.
wherein there was nothing so plain, and openly proved, but that yet for the
common custom of close and covert dealing, men had it ever inwardly suspect,
as many wellcounterfeited jewels make the true suspected: these general
distrusts being among the strange gradations, by which the incomprehensible
providence does use to chastise insolent Nations and to make regular Princes,
mere and absolute. But the Duchess and her Perkin knowing al things as they
passed in England, Perkin upon the Kentish Seas.
resolve notwithstanding to proceed; and therefore taking advantage of the
Kings absence in the North, he with a force of broken and discontented persons,
sets sail for England, and approaches the coasts of Kent about Sandwich and
Deal, there to begin his enterprise for obtaining the Crown of England,
under the borrowed name and title of Richard Duke of York, if he found the
Commons forward. Polyd. Verg. Stowes Annal.
But they, though doubtful at first what to do, yet at the last considering
that his Soldiers were for the most part of desperate fortunes, and felonious
quality, (though hardy otherwise, and approved men of war,) remembering
withal the mischiefs of part-takings, would not adhere, but training them
within danger upon promise of succor, assail, and drive them to their
ships, take five of the Captains, Mountford, Corbet, Whitebolt, Quintin, and
Genin, and Bernard. Andr. says about 400.
one hundredth, sixty and four others, which were all of them afterward
executed. Perkin himself who would not trust his person on shore, being
worthily troubled at the inauspicious fortune of his followers, presently
hoised sails, and returned to his Lady Patroness and Creatrix, into Flanders.

(40) These news being brought to the King, where he was then in the North, he
is Bern. Andr. MS.
said to have given God thanks, and declared his joy in these words. I am not
ignorant (most merciful Jesus) how great victories thou have given me, upon
the Saturday The Kings prayer and speech to God.
at the prayers of thy most gracious Mother, all which I ascribe not to my
deserts, but to the bounty of thy celestial grace. Thou see, o most benign
Jesus, how many snares, how many deceits, how many weapons, that terrible Juno
has prepared, notwithstanding that after my marriage she faining herself
joyful., has faithfully promised to bear toward us all favor and good will,
but she, more changeable then the wind perverting all things as well divine as
humane, fears not God, but in her fury seeks the utter ruin of her own
blood. Thou, o God, who know all, deliver us also (if we seem worthy) from
these evils, but if our sins have deserved to suffer, do thou, o Lord, thy
good pleasure. Nevertheless we owe to thy Grace immortal thanks, which though
with our tongue we cannot utter worthily enough, yet must they be rendered. We
are always of good courage, and so minded for certain, that no prosperity, no
adversity, no chance, no distance of places, or times, shall once make us of
thee unmindful. The most modest King having ended his speech, does forthwith
(says our Author) seriously deliberate with his Council what was to be done
hereafter. It may probably seem, that he had withdrawn into the North, to
inuit Perkin (by occasion of his absence) the rather to take Land, that so he
might draw all his dangers into one place, and decide them in a Battle, if his
Subjects should revolt to Perkin in any numbers, or if they did not, then might
he fall into his hands, by landing unwarily upon trust of the peoples favor,
and so by a more compendious, and easy way settle his Estate; of which he
failed but little, by the said counterpolicy of the Kentishmen. In regard
whereof, in the first Act of Council, praise and thanks were decreed to them,
with which Sir Richard Gylford Knight was presently Io. Stow Annal.
sent away, and order taken for the erection and watching of Beacons upon the
Coasts.

(41) The Duchess on the other side, seeing the South of England prove so
dry, and barren to her driftes, conueighes again her Idol into Ireland,
Perkin sails into Ireland.
where she well knew there could not want partakers; and Perkin himself
daring to entertain the hope of a Crown, (for by so long personation of a
Kings son, and heir, ambition had thoroughly kindled his youthful blood)
was now no little cause of bringing things to an issue by his own
forwardness. Bern. And. MS.
Maximilian King of Romans, whither as one willing to keep the English busied
( Stowes Annal. His great foreign friends.
Henry having forbidden his Subjects all traffike with the Flemmings, and all
other of his son the Archdukes Subjects,) or as crediting the fiction, and
therefore led thereunto in honor and conscience; Io. Lesl. Epis. Ross.
Charles also King of France, but specially the Duchess of Burgundy, (by whom
this bubble was first blown up, and put abroad) did concur to the
molestation of King Henry; Maximilian, and the French King, more secretly, but
the Duchess with all her Oars and Sails plied it in open view. Borne up by
these supporters he the rather easily drew the Irish to assent to his pretext;
but his counsel weighing with themselves that the Irish-mens friendship, how
firm so ever, was insufficient in respect of their nakedness and poverty to
work their wishes, he according to such aduises as were taken before his
departure from his Creatrix, crosses into Scotland, for fear of punishment,
says Bern. Andr.
Andreas; if perhaps Perkin sails into Scotland.
by the Kings true Subjects within Ireland he should chance to be
apprehended; but the event shows, that it was not only for his more security,
but principally to strengthen his enterprise with the Scottish aid, whereof in
those days he had small reason to be doubtful; and his case was such, that
no third course was left unto him, but either to fight and conquer, or live
branded with immortal infamy both of Cowardice and imposture. Henry hearing
these things was not slack to provide for his just defense, greatly careful
upon what coast this wandering clowd would at length dissolve it self, in what
effects soever; and therefore observed all his ways with as much curiosity as
was possible.

(42) James the fourth, a young Prince of great hope was at that time King of
Scots, to whom this bold counterfeit (being specially recommended, for the true
Richard Duke of York, by the Bern. Andr.
King of France, and undoubtedly much more by the Duchess of Burgundy,)
repaires; and had most courteous entertainment, and audience, the effect
whereof Andreas thus coucheth: That the King was finally deceived Perkins
success in Scotland.
by error, as most of other, though most prudent Princes, had been before.
But the rare impudency of the Lad, and that connection which his darings had
with so many great Princes, deserve not to be so slenderly ouerpassed. He
therefore being in honorable manner accompanied, and brought to the presence
1. L^a. Epis. Ross.
of King James, had words to this effect. That Edward the fourth late King of
England, leaving two sons The effect of Perkins speech to James the fourth King
of Scotland.
Edward and Richard Duke of York, both very young, Edward the eldest succeeded
their Father in the Crown by the name of King Edward the fifth: that their
uncle Richard Duke of Gloucester to obtain the Kingdom, purposed to murder
both, but the instrument employed by him to execute the execrable Tragedy,
having cruelly slain King Edward the eldest of the two, was moved to save
Richard his brother, whom nevertheless the world supposed to have been alike
barbarously made away; though falsely supposed; for that himself there
present, was that very Richard Duke of York, brother of that unfortunate
Prince, King Edward the fifth, now the most rightful, and lineall suruiuing
heir Male to that victorious and most noble Edward of that name the fourth,
late King of England. * That he in his tender age thus escaping MS. Perkini
proclam. penes D. R. C. Baronet.
by Gods mercy out of the County of London, was secretly conveyed over the Sea,
Polyd. Verg. l. 26.
whither when he was brought, the party who had the conueiance of him in
charge, suddenly forsook him, and thereby forced him to wander into MS.
Perkini Proclamati.
diverse Countries, where he remained certain years as unknown, Polydor lib.
26.
til at length he came to the true understanding of himself. MS. Per. Procl.
In which seasonit happened one Henry, son to Edmund Tydder Earl of Richmund, to
come from France, and enter into the Realm, and by subtle and foul means,
to obtain the Crown of the same, which to him the said Richard rightfullie
appertained. That Henry as his extreme and mortal enemy, so soon as he had
knowledge of his being alive, imagined, and wrought all the subtle ways, and
means he could, to devise his final destruction. That the said mortal enemy
has not only falsely surmised him to be a fained person, giving him nicknames,
so abusing the world, but that also, to defer, and put him from entry into
England, he has offered large sums of money to corrupt the Princes, with
whom he had been retained, and made importune labor to certain servants
about his (the said Kichards) person, to murder or poison him, and others, to
forsake and leave his righteous quarrel, and to depart from his service, as
Sir Robert Clifford, and others. That every man of reason may well understand,
that the said Henry needed not to have moved the foresaid Costs, and importune
labor, if he had been such a fained person. That the truth of his cause so
manifest Epis. Ross.
moved the most Christian King Charles, and the Lady, Duchess Dowager of
Burgundy, his most dear Aunt not only to acknowledge the said truth, but
lovingly also to assist him. That now because the Kings of Scotland
(Predecessors of the said King James) had oftentimes supported them, who were
reft and spoiled of the said Kingdom of England, (as in freshest memory King
Henry the sixth,) and for that he (the said King James) had given clear
signs, that he was in no noble quality, unlike to his royal Ancestors, he so
distressed a Prince was therefore moved to come, and put himself into his
hands, desiring his assistance to recover the Realm of England, promising
faithfully, to bear himself toward the said Scottish King, no otherwise
then as if he had been his own natural brother, and would (upon recovery of
his inheritance) gratefully do to him all the pleasure which lay in his utmost
power.

(43) Perkins speech ended, and his amiable person being fitted with so many
countenancing circumstances of state, and seemings, (by the recommendations of
great Princes, aid from the Irish, assured hope of aid in England, and his
own wel-appointed company,) made so strong an impression in the young Kings
conceit, that, albeit there wanted not some, who with Polyd. Verg. l. 26.
many arguments advised the King to repute all but for a mere dream and
illusion, his person was honorably received, as it became the person of Richard
Duke of York, and his quarrel entertained; which the more to grace in the
Worlds eye, Perkin credited and aided matrics into the blood royal of
Scotland.
he gave his consent, that the said Duke of York should take to wife the Lady
Katherine Gorden, daughter to the Earl of Hantley, being near cosen to the
King himself, a young maid of excellent beauty and virtue. By which marriage
as the gentle King abundantly declared that he took him for the very Duke of
York, so Perkin, Pern. (...).
(distrustful of the Scots, (...). (...).
and desirous to gain the love and favor of the Nobles of the Realm)
cunningly served his own ends for the present, passing current for a Prince of
high blood, and royal hope. Upon this ground a war was presently undertaken
against Henry, and entered The Scots inua^ Northumberland in Perkins quarrel
and retain.
into; the King of Scots in person, and Perkin, followed with great numbers,
specially of Borderers, fell upon sundry parts of Northumberland, which they
most grievously afflicted, burnt and spoiled, publishing nevertheless by
Proclamation made in the name of Richard Duke of York much favor and
immunitie to all such as would adhere to his rust quarrel, and a Procl. Per. MS
thousand pounds in money, and one hundredth marks by year, of land of
inheritance to the meanest person, that could either take or distress his
great enemy, who (he said) was flying the land. But King Henry by his
diligence, and wisdom had so settled the minds of his people in those parts,
that there is no mention made of any one person which offered his service. This
unexpected auersion so blankt and dampt the Scottish enterprise on Perkins
behalf, that the King offended therewith, retired with his army (laden with
booty) into his Realm, and from thenceforth esteemed of his new Cosen the
less. But King Henry not minding to forgive so unjust and causeless outrages,
calls a Parliament, opens King Henry prepares for revenge.
his griefs, and prays aid for an inuasiue war against Scotland, which was
generally assented unto, there being scarce any more grateful propolitions to
the English in those swording times, then war with French or Scots: an
humor, upon which this King did practice to enrich himself. For the public
moneys by these occasions came into his Exchecquer, with a small part whereof
he flourished out a show of hostile provisions, and the Remainder thereupon (if
peace ensued, which he always knew how to bring about with honor) was
clearly his own without account. The sum assented to be gathered was Add.
to Fab.
sixescore thousand pounds, and for collection thereof were granted two dismes,
and an half, and two fifteenes. But the levy of this money so granted in this
Parliament, kindled a dangerous blaze in England; in so much, that the Lord
Dawbney being sent General of the Forces against the Scots, and upon his way
thither, was recalled by occasion of intestine troubles.

(44) Which troubles had their Original from the levy of such payments among
the Cornish, as The Cornish rebellion.
were assessed for the Scottish wars. When therefore the Collectors came
among them, the People (being a stout, big, and hardy race of men,)
tumultuously assembled; whom one Thomas Polyd. Verg. (...). Stowes Annal.
Holinshed.
Flammock a lawyer, and Michaell Joseph, a blacke-smith or horse-farrier of
Boduim, like firebrands of rebellion inflamed, and were followed as Captains,
not without secret and silent relation (as it may be suspected) to Perkins
pretenses, and that hope of redress (if he were King,) which, by his
Proclamations he had colourably given to the people, at the time of the
Scottish Invasion; where, among many other things, (tending to humor such as
were maleuolent, by making the person and government of King Henry odious,)
this we find.

(45) Our great enemy (says the Proclamation) to fortify his false quarrel,
has caused diverse Nobles of Perkins Proclamation.
this our Realm, whom he held suspect, and stood in dread of, to be cruelly
murdered: as our cosen Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlain, Sir Simond
Montford, Sir Robert Ratliffe, William Dawbeney, Humfrey Stafford, and many
other, besides such as have dearly bought their lives, some of which Nobles
are now in the Sanctuary. Also he has long kept, and yet keeps in The Earl
of Warwicks emprisonment objected.
prison our right entirely wel-beloued Cosen, Edward, Saint and heir to our
Uncle Duke of Clarence, and other, withholding from them their rightful
inheritance, to the intent they should never be of might and power, to aid and
assist us at our need after the duty of their leageances. He has also married
by compulsion certain of our Sisters, and also the Sister of our foresaid
Cosen the Earl of Warwick, and diverse other Ladies of the blood royal, unto
certain his kinsemen and friends of simple and low degree; and putting apart
all wel-disposed Nobles, he has none in favor, and trust about his person,
but Bishop Fox, Smith, Bray, Louel, Oliver King, Sir Charles Sommerset, Dauie
Owen, Rysley, Sir John Trobutuile, Tyler, Chamley, James Hobert, John Cut,
Garth, Henry Wyot, and such other Caitiues, and villains of birth: which by
subtle inventions, and pilling of the people, have been the principal
finders, occasioners, and counsailers of the misrule, and mischief now
reigning in England, etc. We remembering these premises, with the great, and
execrable offenses daily committed and done by our foresaid great enemy, and
his Adherents, in breaking the liberties, and franchises of our mother, the
holy Church; to the high displeasure of Almighty God: besides the manifold
treasons, abominable murders, manslaughters, robberies, extortions, the daily
pilling of the Popular insinuations by Perkin.
people by dismes, taskes, tallages, beneuolences, and other unlawful
impositions, and grievous exactions, with many other heinous effects, to the
likely destruction and desolation of the whole Realm, etc. shall by Gods
grace, and the help, and assistance of the great Lords of our blood, with the
Counsel of other sad persons, etc. see that the commodities of our Realm be
employed to the most advantage of the same, the intercourse of Merchandise
betwixt Realm and Realm, to be ministered and handled, as shall more be to the
Common weal, and prosperity of our subjects: and all such dismes, taskes,
tallages, benenolences, unlawful impositions, and grecuous exactions as be
above rehearsed, to be foredone, and laid apart, and never from henceforth to
be called upon, but in such causes as our Noble Progenitors, Kings of England
have of old time been accustomed to have the aid, succor, and help of their
subjects, and true liegemen.

(46) The tide of people being thus up: Flammock and the black Smyth (having
firm promise of the Lord Audleys personal help) lead them forth toward Kent,
where they doubted not greatly to increase their numbers; and had in likelihood
so done, but that the singular diligence and wisdom of the King, frustrated
their hopes by sundry Princely Arts. Yet they flow on; and to show what they
durst do, they slew in their way at Tauntford the Provost of Perin, one of the
Commissioners for the Subsidy; and marching forward without offering other
violence, James Tuichet Lord Audley ioines himself at the City of Wels unto
them, according to secret agreement, and becomes their General. From Wels they
proceed to Salisburie, thence to Winchester, and so toward Kent, where the
Country was settled and provided. But the King farther doubting that the Scots
would take fresh occasion, by these seditious vproares, to invade the borders
of his Realm, dispatched Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey ( Polyd. Verg.
Principe^ (...) virtute preditum.
a Peer of excellent virtue) to defend those parts, with the help of the
Bishopric of Durham, and the Marches, till these homecommotions were
appeased; that then the Lord Dawbeney might with a just and full Army prosecute
the war against the Scots. But James their King, perceiving the end of the
English intestine wars, would be the beginning of his troubles, thought it
best by way of anticipation to weaken his enemy before hand as much as he
could, and thereupon fiercely invaded Northumberland again, and Episc. Rosse.
Polyd. Verg.
besieged Norham Castle belonging to Richard Fox, whom the King for his noble
services and deserts, The Scots invade and retire.
had now advanced from Exceter, and Bath and Wels, unto the Bishopric of
Durham. But the Scottish King, hopeless to win the Castle, though having
done much hurt both to it and to the country, withdrew his people before the
Earl of Surrey could approach with his Army, wherein was the Earl of
Westmorland, the Lords Dacres, Strange, Neuill, Latimer, Lumley, Scrope,
Clifford, Conyers, Darcy, the Baron of Hilton, and many Knights, as Percie,
Bulmer, Gascoigne, Penington, Bigot, Bows, Elarker, Parr, Wharton, Strangwith,
Constable, Ratcliffe, Sauile, Gower, Musgraue, Mallerie, Loder, Eueringham,
Stapleton, Wortley, Pickering, Heron, Gray, Ridley, Griffith, Fenwicke, Ward,
Strycland, Bellingham, Curwen, Warcop, Tempest, Metcalfe, and others; who
missing the enemy, marched after into Scotland, and took such revenge as the
shortness of their so daine provisions would enable.

(47) The Rebels on the other side, (whom king Henry thought not good to
encounter in their first heates; but suffered them to tire their fury, and
surbate themselves with a long march, the countries as they past being
forelaide from joining with them) coming near to Kent, found few, or no
partakers there; but the Country strongly defended against them by the Earl
thereof, the Lords Aburgenie and Cobham, with other principal men and their
followers; which made diverse of the Rebels secretly shrink and abandon the
enterprise. But the Lord Audley, Flammocke, Michael Joseph, and the rest, kept
on their way, and encamped upon Blackeheath, between Greenewich and Eltham,
from the top whereof they might behold the City of London, and the whole
bravery of that Horizon. Here they resolve to abide the King, or to assail
London. The King on the other side, by the diligence of the Lord Mayor, and
other the Magistrates, secured the City, which was full of fear and business;
himself environed with his Nobles, and the choice of the South, hearing where
the Rebel was encamped, resolved by dint of sword to deliver his people from
tiring expectations, and for that purpose marches out of London, and encamps
in S. Georges field, where he I. Stow Annal. A. D. 1497. Iun. An. Reg. 12.
lay that night. The next day when he understood that the Enemy had drawn
forth his People, and The King moved against the Rebels.
set them in Battell-ray, he sends out Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, Edmond
de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Sir Rice ap Thomas, and others, with certain
Cornets of horse, and Companies of Archers, to beset the hill, and the descents
thereof, while Giles Lord Dawbeney with the strength of his Army, charge the
Enemy in Front, whom with some slaughter they drove from the Bridge at Deepford
strand; and then mounting the hill, he and the Earls charge the maine
Blackeheath field.
squadrons on all sides, and without much labor break and defeat them. The
number of the Rebels slain is uncertainly reported, the ods being between
Polyd. Verg. Hall.
two thousand and Io. Stow. Annal.
three hundredth. The Kings army returned fewer by three hundredth. Fifteen
hundred rebels were taken Prisoners, and the takers had their Prisoners goods
granted them. James Lord Audley, Flammocke, and the Smith were taken and
executed. To all the rest mercy was seasonably extended. The Lord Audley led
from Newgate to Towerhill in a coat of his own Armories painted on a paper,
reuerst and torn, there paid his head, for being a Head to that heady Route:
Flammocke and the Smith were quartered. Memorably Polyd. Verg.
strange was the comfort, with which this Blacksmith is said to have cheered up
himself at his being drawn to execution, saying, That yet he hoped thereby,
that his name and memory should be everlasting. Who The Blackesmithes comfort
at his death.
could believe, that the desire of a long-lasting name howsoever should take
the affections of so mean a person? Such therefore was the end of this
insurrection; but the times being queasy, the King wisely forbear to take any
severe revenge upon more then only upon the chief Leaders, for he was truly
informed that this calamity had not broken the wills of the Cornishmen, who
remained ready for any desperate sudden occasion, and therefore he abstained
from needless exasperations, insomuch as that the quarters of Flammocke, and
the Smith being once appointed to have been set up in Cornwall for terror,
were only fixed about London, the King thinking good to temper his justice
even in such a circumstance.

(48) His next care was so to order the war against Scotland, that the Peace
whose foundations he had laid a far off, might be made to his more honor: and
because the injuries sustained by the youthful error of King James, were too
public to be altogether forgotten; he sent the Earl of Surrey, the Lord
Neuill, and others, to invade the Scottish borders Holinsse. Stowes Annal.
with an Army, who pursued the revenge with great vehemence. Meane-while there
arriueth in Scotland Peter Hyalus an Ambassador from Ferdinando and Elizabeth,
King and Queen of Spain, as from friends equally well affected to both
parties, to mediate a peace between the two Kings of England and Scotland,
which perhaps in their own persons would not easily have been brought about,
the point of honor might thereunto have given such empeachment. But this was
the way to a peace which King Henry foresaw, there being not only a strict
bond of love between him and Ferdinando, but an ouerture, if not a Addit. to
Fab. A Spanish Ambassador procures a truce between England and Scotland.
secret conclusion, to match his eldest son Prince Arthur with the young Lady
Katherine daughter of Spain, who for her excellent virtues was well worthy to
be the happy wife of any Prince then breathing. Hyalus so handled the point of
his emploiment, that an honorable truce followed. This Ambassador was a
practicke man of much experience, and knew the better how to deal on the
behalf of King Henry against Perkin Warbecke, ( Cambd. in Devonshire,
Imaginarius and Scenicus princeps. The Queen of Spain troubled by a
counterfeit.
an imaginary and Stage Play Prince) for that his Sovereign Queen had also
been exceedingly molested by a Counterfeit. For Henry the fourth, King of
Castile, and brother to Elizabeth, being unable to begette children, Joan
(daughter of Edward king of Portugal) his wife found means notwithstanding to
bear one, by occasion whereof, after King Henry's death, for that it was borne
in marriage, a dangerous war was undertaken by Franc. Tarapha. in Hen. 4.
Luc. Merinaus Sicul.
Alfonso King of Portugal, on behalf of Isabel the supposed inheretrix; but
Truth, partly by force, and partly by mediation, was in the end victorious; and
Elizabeth, or Isabella sister of Henry succeeded to her brother, and brought
the inheritance of the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon, with her to Ferdinando
King of Arragon. The chief point of this truce with Scotland was, That Perkin
Warbecke should leave that Kingdom, seeing king James, standing upon his
honor, would not deliver him up to King Henry. Perkin having now no remedy,
did accordingly, taking with him his wife, the Lady Katherine Gordon; and with
such Perkin Warbecke practiced out of Scotland.
few as remained to him, past into Ireland, where he had not continued long;
but the Cornish-men offer to rise at his arrival, and to adventure their The
Cornish call in Perkin Warbeck
fortunes, and lives in his quarrel: Which motion Perkin gladly entertained,
as perceiving yet some little hope left to maintain himself, by the troubles,
and hazards of others: but the policy and fortune of King Henry were grown so
venerable with the Princes his Neighbors, that Ambassadors came from France,
and from the Archduke of Burgundy; the one to ratify amity, the other to
request the restitution thereof; both which K. Henrle (who reposed his whole
trust next under God, upon King Henry setleth peace with neighbor Princes.
the amity of his neighbors) granted, and the English Merchants (who had been
somewhat long forbidden by their Sovereign to trade in the Archdukes
dominions) Id^. M^l.
returning to Antwerpe were received into the same with Procession: so that
Perkin could scarce cast his eye upon any place, not only where to raise
aides, but not where to rest his head, unless perhaps in the Court of the
Duchess of Burgundy; neither in all his fortunes did any thing seem
miserable or unworthy, but the great infelicity of his wife, whose beauty,
birth, and honorable qualities ought not to have been so betrayed by her
friends temerity. Perkin hereupon landing at Whitsand Bay in Cornwall in
September, Perkin stirs the Cornishmen.
found means afterward at Bodmin to raise some thousands of people, whom with
most lavish promises, inuectiue proclamations, and strong impudency, he held
together under the Title of Richard the fourth King of England, whose fate was
none of the happiest, while the majesty of her name might so be played with by
impostors. Perkin thus accompanied, marches toward the City of Exceter,
purposing if he could win it by force, to enrich his Soldiers with the
spoils thereof, and to inuit all other loose or lost people to his service by
the hope of like booties, and by taking into his possession such places of
strength as lay in his way to secure his retreat, if (according to the ordinary
fortune of war) any thing should happen to him unluckily.

(50) But the King (hearing that the varlet was landed, and again made head
against him in Arms upon trust of the Cornishmens assistance) is said to have
smiled, using these words; Bern. Andr. MS.
Lo, we are again provoked by this Prince of Rakehelles, but lest my people
should through ignorance be drawn into destruction, let us seek to take this
Perkin by the easiest ways we can. Reason he had to smile, for now he seemed
to see the bottom of his peril, and as it were to hold his enemy empounded
within the English Ocean, it being a perpetual and noble with of his, that he
might look his dangers in the face, and deal with them hand to hand, as the
nearest cut over to a full conclusion. He therefore prouides accordingly,
assembling his forces, and his wits (no less to be dreaded then his forces)
sending forth his espials into all parts to observe the tracke, and hopes of
this empty cloud, which is now seen before Excester, a principal strength and
ornament of the Western parts of the Kingdom. Parlea, and the allurements of
words under the guilt title of King Edwards son, proving unavailable with
those resolute and faithful Citizens; Perkin forth with betakes The City of
Excester assaulted by Perkin.
himself to violence, sets fire on the gates, mounts his scaling ladders
against the walls, and with his utmost fury labors to force a sudden
entrance, for that as he suspected, succors could not long be wanting. The
Citizens on the other side, and such of the Country, as came^, prepare and make
a very valiant defense against the Rebel, and in stead of quenching the fires
kindled by the enemy at the gates, to open a passage (for they had not Canon or
any other Ordinance) the Citizens threw on great store of fagots and fuel, and
so with The Exce^rians policy, in defenting fire by site.
flame did shut up the way, when the gates themselves were now consumed; and in
the mean while they cast up trenches, and man their walls, from whence, with
the slaughter of about two hundred Rebels at this assault they valiantly drove
them. Such messengers as by cords slipped down the walls, to signify their
peril, sped toward the King; but the loyal diligence of Polyd. Verg.
Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire, the Lord William his son, with many
principal Gentlemen of those parts, as Trencherd, Carew, Fulford, Halewell,
Croker, Edgecomb, Semar, followed with great store of Soldiers, saved him the
labor of a personal rescue by timely approach.

(51) Perkin hearing thereof; rises from before Excester, and marches to
Taunton (a goodly town not far off) there to take the musters of his Army,
Perkin at Taunton.
and to provide for encounter, where he found very many blanks in the list of
his numbers, for that they had secretly shrunk away, as misdoubting the
sequel, the Earl of Devonshire being so near at hand with the power of the
Country, and the King upon his way against them, with the majesty and terror
of a royal name and Army, none of the Nobility (which was chiefly hoped)
coming to their aid. Perkin nevertheless makes show of standing, with such
as were left unto him. The Earl of Devonshire marching toward Taunton, in the
way there came unto him Edward Duke of Buckingham, a Polyd. Virg.
young Lord full of great honor and courage, followed by a goodly troop of
Knights, and others excellently well appointed, both for their own persons,
and their peoples. These we find named as principal; Bridges, Bainham,
Barkley, Tame, Wise, Poyntz, Vernon, Mortimer, Tremail, Sutton, Paulet,
Bricknell, Sapcott, The King and his people match toward him.
Lutterell, Wadham, Speck, Beauchamp, Cheney, Tokett, Long, Latimer,
Turberuile, Stourton, Newbrough, Martin, Lynde, Rogers, Hungerford, Semar,
Darrell, Barow, Norres, Langford, Corbet, Blunt, Lacon, Cornwall; and many other
prime and valiant men of Arms. The King last of all (to permit as little to
fortune as was possible) sent Robert Lord Brook, Giles Lord Dawbeney, and that
renowned and trusty Welshman Sir Rice ap Thomas, with the marrow and strength
of his Army before, himself following in person with such as hec thought good.
Neither was his care causeless, for the Cornishmen were come to that height of
desperate obstinacy and malice, Polyd. Verg.
as not one of them but resolved to conquer, or to leave his carcass in the
place. But God loved him and them better then to suffer it to come so far;
for Perkin, whether fearing Perkin flies from his host.
treason in his own Army, or otherwise touched with the conscience of his
quality, and damnable estate of the quarrel, wherein it was horrible to die,
having in his troop but threescore horse, secretly fled from the seduced
Commons. Which when the King heard, he presently sets out five hundredth horse
to pursue and apprehend him, before he should get to the sea, and so escape.
Perkin and his remains thus straightened, took Sanctuary at Beaulieu, a
religious house within New Forest, (not far from Hampton) where the Kings
Cornets of horse found them already registered; but according to instructions
they beset the place, and maintain a strong watch about it day and night. The
other Rebels the while without stroke stricken, humbled themselves to their
Sovereigns mercy, and found it in undeserved measure. Other strong troops of
horse are at the same instant dispatched to S. Michaels Mount in Cornwall,
where the beautiful Lady Perkins wile take and honorably used by the king.
Katherine Gorden had been left by her lewd husband. Her without resistance
they brought safely to the King, whose beauty the whole Court praised, and
pitied; but the King most graciously comfotting (...) sent her away well
attended to the Queen his wife, and for her birthes sake allowed her Epis.
Ross.
maintenance, which in honorable manner supported her during the Kings life
and many years after. Her fairness was such, and her presence so amiable,
that she deserved to be commonly called The White Rose; whose fortunes (being
so far unworthy either of her birth, her singular modesty, or wiuely faith,
notwithstanding the so abject condition of her husband) as they moved just
commiseration toward her, so they doubled the luster of her praises.

(52) In the mean while the King makes a reioicefull entrance into Excester,
to testify his princely love The King at excester.
to the Citizens, whom he highly commended and graced, both for their courage
and loyalty; commanding some of the Cornish Rebels to be executed there, which
did the better set-off the others contrary condition. There also he gave
directions, to offer life, and oblivion of all crimes to Perkin, if he would
voluntarily quit the Sanctuary, and submit himself. Perkin. being now without
hope, without abode, without estate, most gladly came forth, Polyd Verg. sine
sp^, (...) sede, sine fortune.
and did put himself into the Kings hands. Reasons leading that wise Prince to
extend this favor, were drawn out of the depth of true judgment, cleared
Perkin yealde himself to the King.
from vulgar perturbations: first; it was not altogether impossible, but that
Perkin might escape him, (though by offering selfe-violence) and so the world
should leese the light of satisfaction in so profound and perhaps a matchless
imposture; then again his youth might merit some compassion; but the infinite
desire which Henry had, from the mouth of the party himself, to learn all the
secrets of the plot; and who they were that lay undiscovered, and yet had
finger in the mystical practice, moved him to affect the possession of his
person allue; which now he had. Thus was this so dreaded a blaze of rebellion
suddenly and finally quenched; but not without the tears of many in Deuon and
Somersetshire, whose estates the Kings officers scruzed and drained, in revenge
of their partaking, and supporting the Cornish Rebels, either in the field, or
flight. Henry having Perkin in his power, gave way to all such scorns and
scoffs, which his Courtiers or others were pleased to pass upon him, the more
to make his person contemptible, who well watched followed the King to London,
whither as he progressed, multitudes flockt about to behold the Caitife, Polyd.
Verg.
who being a stranger, nor any way (whatsoever he The king return to London
with Perkin.
boasted to the contrary) descended of Nobles, had dared to trouble so great a
Kingdom, and by his crafty conueiances had induced so many Princes and Nations
(not without mischief and ruin unto diverse) to believe of him, that which he
never was. And that he might in no part be unknown, he is leasurely conveyed
on horseback from the furthest part of Ioh.. Stow Annal. 28. Nouemb.
London, through Cheapside and Cornhill to the Tower, and back from thence
through Canwicke-streete to Westminster, as the subject of wonderment, and of
all reproach and infamies. The King having in this sort taken revenge of his so
strange an enemy, and by curious and often examination coming to the full
knowledge of that his soul desired, did set such to attend, as never went an
inch from Perkins fight, (though he seemed to go at liberty) left through the
slipperie Arts of his tempting speech and behavior, he might vanish into
foreign parts, and raise fresh storms in England, and bring new comfort to the
Lady Margaret Duchess of Burgundy, the sinful countenance of all this
cursed Stratageme, whose heart was now almost riuen in sunder with the news of
her Perkins most hideous shame and misery; the whole blushing tenor whereof
might easily come to her hands at once; for Henry caused so much of the
principal matter, as Perkin had confessed, to be Bern. And. MS.
committed to the Printing Press; (an Art then first appearing among us,) and
published. None can justly wonder, that we have dwelt so long in this
wonderful Story, but rather perhaps wish that more particularities (though
with more prolixity) had bin used. And though some other Actions as English
voyage by Ricb. Hackl.
Sebastian Cabots discovery, and ouertures of marriages with Spain and
Scotland, came between this apprehension, and the execution of Perkin, yet
have we thought it best, (the sooner and at once to rid our hands of a Bern.
And. MS.
knave, as K. Henry justly called him) to couch all that which concerns him,
here together, not fearing to incur among the learned, the taxation of
committing therein contradiction, and confusion of times.

(53) Perkin being thus guarded, does notwithstanding attempt to escape. And,
if it were lawful to insert particular conjectures, drawn out of the
considerations of circumstances, we should perhaps not spare to say, that his
attempt for escape, was not without the Kings priuity; using such instruments
to persuade, or furnish his flight, as might withal betray him, that so by
degrees (occasion taken to cut him off) the Realm might be rid from such
perpetual matter of trouble. For the depraved wit and will of man might find
or feign reasons to abuse the world still, if Perkin were at liberty; as that
the confessions were extorted by fear, or forged by Henry to serve his turn,
and the like. Therefore Perkins intention and escape (for he was escaped) being
discovered to the King, all the ways were beset, and he so close pursued,
that in the end betaking himself to a religious house of Carthusian Monks,
he declared who he was, and besought their Prior in the humblest manner he
could, for Gods sake to beg his life, which at the Priors suite was granted;
but the Kings wrath being kindled, or the passage of his suppressed wrath
opened thereby, he banished all former respects, commanding him to be settered,
and set (for an whole day) in a pair of Stocks, mounted on a Scaffold before
the Gate of Westminster Hall; and the next day to be alike exposed in Engl.
Heroic. Epist.
Golden Cheap, to the basest of all contempt and scorn, so fettered, stockt;
and Scaffolded as before, to the great wonderment (says Io. Stows Annal.
Stow) of many, as either insinuating that all were not persuaded of the
imposture, or that it seemed strange that one lately of so great Prowess,
should undergo so despicable a punishment. But for a seal and total sum of
all ignominy and shame (such as no face did ever bear greater) he read his
own confession, Perkin set openly in the Stocks, etc
written with his own hand Hollinsh.
as follows.

(54) It is first to be known, that I was borne in the Town of Turney in
Flanders, and my fathers Perkin makes an anatom^e of his descent or lineage.
name is John Osbecke, which said John Osbecke was controller of the said Town
of Turney, and my mothers name is Katherine de Faro. And one of my Grandsires
upon my fathers side was named Diricke Osbecke which died. After whose death my
grandmother was married unto Peter Flamin, that was receiver of the forenamed
Town of Turney, and Dean of the Botemen, that row upon the water, or river
called Le Scheld. And my Grandsire upon my mothers side was Peter de Faro,
which had in his keeping the keys of the gate of Saint John's within the same
Town of Turney. Also I had an uncle called M. John Stalin, dwelling in the
Parish of S. Pias, within the same Town, which had married my fathers sister,
whose name was Ione or Jane, with whom I dwelt a certain season.

(55) And after I was led by my mother to Antwerpe for to learn Flemish, in a
house of a cousin of Perkins education o^ bringing up.
mine, an officer of the said town, called John Stienbecke, with whom I was
the space of half a year; and after that I returned again to Turney, by
reason of wars that were in Flanders: and within a year following, I was
sent with a Merchant of the said Town of Turney named Berlo, to the Mart of
Antwerpe, where I fell sick, which sickness continued upon me five months.
And the said Berlo set me to board in a Skinners house, that dwelled beside
the house of the English Nation. And by him I was from thence carried to Barow
Mart, and I lodged at the figne of the old man, where I abode for the space of
two months.

(56) After this, the said Berlo set me with a Merchant of Middleborow to
service, for to learn the language, whose name was John Strew, with whom I
dwelt from Christmas to Easter, and then I went into Portingall in company of
Sir Edward Bramptons wife, in a ship was called the Queens ship. And when
I was come thither, then was I put in service to a Knight that dwelled in
Lushborne, which was called Peter Vacz de Cogna, with whom I dwelled an whole
year, which said Knight had but one eye. And because I desired to see other
countries, I took license of him, and then I put my self Perkin a notable
land-loper.
in service with a Britain, called Pregent Men^, which brought me with him
into Ireland. Now when we were there arrived in the town of Cork, they of the
Town (because I was arrayed with some clothes of silk of my said Masters)
came unto me, and threatened upon me, that I should be the Duke of Clarences
son, that was before time at Dublin.

(57) But for so much as I denied it, there was The Irish would have Perkin take
upon him to be the Duke of Clarences son.
brought unto me the holy Evangelists, and the Cross, by the Mayor of the
town, which was called John Lewelin, and there in the presence of him and
others, I took mine oath (as the truth was) that I was not the foresaid Dukes
son, nor none of his blood. And after this came unto me an Englishman, whose
name was Stephen Poitron; and one John They bear Perkin down with oaths,
that he is King Richards bastard.
Water, and laid to me in swearing great oaths, that they knew well that I was
King* Richards bastard son; to whom I answered with like oaths, that I was
not. Then they advised me not to be afeard, but that I should take it upon me
boldly; and if I would so do, they would aid and affist me with all their
power against the King of England; and not only they, but they were well
assured, that the Earl of Desmond and Kildare should do the same.

(58) For they forced not what part they took, so that they might be revenged
on the King of England: and so against my will made me to learn English, and
taught me what I should do and say: And after this they called me Duke of
York, second They call him Duke of York.
son to King Edward the fourth, because King Richards bastard son was in
the hands of the King of England. And upon this the said Water, Stephen
Poitron, John Tiler, Hughbert Burgh, with many others, as the foresaid Earls,
entered into this false quarrel, and within short time others. The French King
sent an Ambassador into Ireland, whose name was Let Lucas, and M. Stephen
Friham, to advertise me to come into France: and thence I went into France, and
from thence into Flanders, and from Flanders into Ireland, and from Ireland
into Scotland, and so into England.

(59) From having thus been made a public spectacle, till all eyes were
wearied with the view, and imaginations tired with thinking; he is conuaied A.
D. 1498. An. Reg. 14. Perkin in the Tower, and the Tragical effects.
to the Tower of London: where it had been happy, if he had only wrought his
own destruction; but the bloody fate (so to speak of his disasterous birth)
would not suffer him to perish single. In the same Tower was prisoner Edward
the young Earl of Warwick, having so been from the first year of Henry to
this present, for no fault of his, but for that, as a near Titler to the
Crown, he carried in his living person inseparable matter of danger and
sedition. Of his simplicity, by reason of his education in prison from his in
fancy, there is a report, that as one who lived out of the view of the world,
he knew not an Polyd. Verg.
hen from a goose, or one foul or Creature from an other. To hasten the
ruin of so innocent a danger, behold there breaks forth a counterfeit Earl
of Warwick, as if all that which the world saw horrible in Perkins darings,
had been but a document to instruct others in the like, and that nothing were
to be taxed therein, but want only of success, which whosoever could propound
to himself A counterfeit Earl of Warwick executed.
all things else, were full of encouragement and reason. This counterfeit was a
Addit. to Fab.
Cordwainers son of London, aged about twenty years, and called Holinshed.
Ralfe Wilford, who for falsely assuming the name and title of the said Earl,
being thereunto taught and suborned (a practice which well declared that the
malicious Duchess of Burgundy did still live) was hanged at S. Thomas
Waterings by Southwarke upon Shrouetuesday.

(60) This new devise to vncrowne King Henry, so wakened his own fears, and
the eyes of the Castilians, (who had secretly agreed to marry their Princess
Katherine to our Prince Arthur) that there seemed The true Earl of Warwick
designed to die.
no sure ground of succession, if that the Earl of Warwick were not made
away. A fearful case, where the false reason of State shall feign to it self
an impossibility of well doing, without shedding innocent blood, and shall
therefore resolve to found upon so crying a sin, the hope of perpetuity in
succession; since nothing is truer, the that sin was ^uer an unsure basis to
settle las^ing works upon. But o the narrow capacities of the most seeing men;
the confidence whereof did undoubtedly lead this King (herein not justifiable,
howsoever excusable in respect of humane frailty, which might propound to it
self many fears, and respects both public and private) to conniue at the
plotted death, or rather formal murder of this harmless Gentleman, whose
wrong may yet move the hardest to compassion, as it afterward stirred God in
justice to revenge, prospering no part of that great work which was thereupon
thus corruptly sought to be perpetuated. That noble Lady Katherine herself was
hereof so sensible, that when the divorce was afterward prosecuted against her
by King Henry the eight, her second husband, she is reported to have said,
That it was the hand of God, for that to clear the way to her marriage that
innocent Earl of Warwick was put to unworthy death. Neither let licentious
Practices vouch the singular Act of Solomon in taking away the life of his
elder brother Adonias to color this homicide: for he that will argue from
particular facts in Scripture, shall not only leave no Adonias living, but
perhaps no Solomon. To work this young Warwickes ruin, the mischeiuous and
dismal wretch Perkin becomes an occasion, if not an instrument, for he by his
supple insinuations and flowing promises had corrupted his keepers, the
servants of Sir John Digbie Knight Lieutenant of the Tower; who (as Stowes
Annal.
was affirmed) meant to have murdered their master, and then to have set
Perkin, and the Earl at large, to which practice of escape the poor Earl is
said to have consented. Perkin for this conspiracy had his Perkin condemned
and executed.
trial at Westminster, and he together with one John a Waters, who had been
sometime Mayor of Cork in Ireland, were condemned, and being drawn to
Tiborne, had the sentence of death executed upon them. Perkin at the Gallows
did read his former confession, A. D. 1499. An. Reg. 15.
taking on his death that the same was true, and underwent his punishment with
patience. Walter Blewet, and Thomas Astwood (being two of the conspirators, for
the other two, Strangewates and Long Roger, being the Lieutenants men also,
were not executed, nor for so much as we have read, arraigned) not long after
received the reward of their offense at the same place.

(61) Justice thus took hold at last of Perkin Warbecke, on whom, the Proverb
which says, that Pride is the Usher of shame, was worthily verified. Neither
could the world accuse King Henry for his death, unless it were, for that he
had not hanged him sooner, but suffered him to live till he had drawn after
him a greater ruin in Warwicks person, then in all the former tragedies. For
this Earl being a chief Prince of the blood, and next heir Male of The Earl
of Warwicks ruined by Perkins conspiracy.
his house to the Crown of England, (a crime of which his birth only made him
guilty and not any fact of his) being thus charged to have given assent to
Perkins plot of escape, he was publicly arraigned before the Earl of Oxford
(then High Steward of England) by the name of Edward Plantaginet Earl of
Warwick, and indicted for minding to have escaped (as they said) out of the
Tower, and consequently Io. Sotw Annal.
according to the dreadful license of inferences among our English pleaders in
cases of death) to deprive King Henry of his royal Crown and dignity, and to
usurp the Title and sovereign office, prosecuting their bloody Poetry with
the like sanguinary syllogismes, though utterly without measure, or fashion.
The Earl doubly betrayed, first by the setters of the snare, and then by their
silly or deceitful The Earl confesses the enditement.
persuasions who were put about him, confesses the enditement, and submits
himself to the Kings mercy; that is; offered up his head to be a slipperie
foundation of King Henry's farther purposes; for sentence of death was
thereupon pronounced as against a Traitor. This one practice seems
sufficient, if not to cast upon Henry the Title of a shrewd and perilous man,
yet to raise a doubt, whether ( Sir F. B. MS.
as one writes) he was more sincere and entire then Ferdinando King of Spain,
upon whom (says that Author) he did handsomely bestow the envy of the death
of Edward Plantagenet Earl of Warwick. The life therefore of this Prince
(according to rigor of Edward Earl of Warwick last Male Plausage^ beheaded.
law) being thus in his power, the King gently pardoned all the pains, but
the loss of his head, which was cut off upon a scaffold at Tower Hill, and
then (another gracious favor) his body was not buried in the Chapel of the
Tower, or in any other common place, but at Ioh. Stow. Annal.
Bisham by his Ancestors. Jealous (says Sir Fr. B. MS.
one) the King was over the greatness of his Nobility, as remembering how
himself was set up; and much more did this humor increase in him after he had
conflicted with such Idols and Counterfeits as Lambert Simenel and Perkin
Warbeck. The strangenes of which dangers made him think nothing safe. This
Earl was the last heir male of the blood, and surname of Plantagenet; whose
race as it was a long time glorious for giving Kings to England, (even from
King Henry the second) so in the end (chiefly for the house of York) it became
hateful (as it seems) to God and man, for the most horrible and inextinguible
deadly fewdes, murder, periuries, and other horrors committed within it self,
which (as then not fully expiated) lay heavily upon the head of this Earl, and
finally threw open all those fences, which the possession of Majesty and
numerositie of issue had for sundry ages cast about it, letting in thereby the
surname of Tydder being but two descents English, and which now after three
descents and five Princes is also vanished. Now, among those few great works
of peace which ensued their firebrands of war, we must remember the marriage
of Prince Arthur, with the Princess of Spain Lady Katherine. The interim from
Warwicks death till then, brought forth a very great plague, whereof in London
there are said to have died about thirty thousand. The King and Queen remove
to Callais in May and returned in June. The maine Polyd. Verg.
business was to reuiew and ratify the state of amity, and negociations,
between the English and the Duke of Burgundies subjects. Shine also was burnt,
and being new builded, called Richmund, for which and the like, it will be
fittest to have recourse to vulgar Annals.

(62) The Coast of State now seeming clearefrom A. D. 1501. An. Reg. 17.
al thickning weather, Ferdinando and Isabella King and Queen of Spain,
according to the points of agreement between them and King Henry, concerning
their fourth daughter the Lady Katherine (borne at Alcala The Lady Katherine of
Spain landed in England.
de Finari or Complutum) sent her royally appointed in a goodly Flete to
England, there to fulfill in person, what hitherto had been only treated of,
who Polyd. Verg. in Henirc. 7.
after many difficulties took land at Add. to Feb.
Plymouth in October. Ferdinando her father was the son of John King of
Arragon and Sicilia, and although he was unlearned, as being brought up among
arms and soldiers, yet by using the familiarity of wisemen he also became
very wise, and proved that great Prince which first in these latter times
recalled the old glory of Spain, and reared it to such an envious magnitude,
as that the jealousy thereof has bred no small quarrels in Christendom. For
by his marriage with Isabella, (sole sister and heir to Henry the fourth King
of Castile and Leon,) he reigned in right of his wife, and jointly with her,
oner those two Kingdoms and their appurtenances, who together (says Res
edmirabiles and opera (...).
Marineus of Sicilia) did admirable things and works most holy. They Franc.
Tarapha. de Reg. Hisp.
recovered the huge City and Kingdom of Granada, and part of Andaluzia from
the Moors, after they had been in violent possession thereof seven hundredth
and fourscore years, and having The brief of (...) and ^bellas greatest
actions.
purged those places from the filth of Mahomets superstitions, built Churches
to the honor of Jesus Christ, by occasion whereof Ferdinando was surnamed the
Catholic King. The walls of the City of Granada at the time of the
surrender, which (after about ten years wars) was by V^bdelis King thereof
made to Ferdinando and Isabella, had Luc. Marin. Sic. Lib. 10.
twelve miles in compass, and in the same twelve Gates, and a thousand towers
enclosing seven Hills covered with building, innumerable people, and
inestimable riches, and the Spanish forces at this conquest were about 12000.
Horse, and one hundred thousand foot. The said King and Queen, besides many
other their mighty actions, did also first discover America, by Christopher
Columbus, and thereby brought a whole new world to the notice of Christendom.
Isabella Isabella Queen of Spain descended from our Edward the 3. King of
England
her self, descended of the blood roial of England, being daughter of John the
second King of Castile and Leon, son of Henry the third King of Castile and
Leon, and of Katherine his wife (daughter of Auton. Hebri^. Decad I. lib. 1.
John Duke of Lancaster, third son of our Edward the third of triumphall and
neuer-dying memory) was a Lady, whose Polyd. Verg. (...) Hen. 7.
like the Christian world had seldom any of that wisdom, gravity, chastity,
and of: so laborious a devotion, that Luc. Marin. Sic.
she did not only day by day perform the Canonical and howerly task of
prayers used by Priests, but many other, and brought up her children
accordingly.

(63) The Lady Katherine being about eighteen years old, and borne of so
great, so noble, so victorious Prince Arthur married.
and virtuous parents, is with just majesty and solemnity openly Addit. to Fab.
says on a Sunday the feast of S. Erkenwald.
married in Paul's Church to Arthur Prince of Wales, aged about fifteen
years, and eldest son to Henry the seventh, King of England, and of
Elizabeth his wife. The Archbishop of Canterbury assisted with nineteen
Bishops and Abbots, mitred, joined their hands, and performed all the other
Church rites upon that great day. The vulgar Annals can tell you the splendour
and glory thereof, in apparel, jewels, Pageants, banquets, guests, and other
princely complements, the only weighty business of many weaker brains. A
grave Lady (as some have written) was laid in bed between the Bride and
Bridegroom, to hinder actual consummation, in regard of the Princes green
estate of body; but others allege many arguments to prove that matrimonial
performance was between the^, howsoever her self, (when that afterward came in
question) 10. Stows Annal.
appealed to the conscience of K. Henry the eight (her second husband) if he
found her not a maid. But Prince Arthur enjoyed his marriage a very short
while, for in April following he died at Ludlow, being under sixteen years
of age: being Prince Arthur dies.
a Prince, in whose youth the lights of all noble virtues did clearly begin
to shine. His aptness to learn was almost incredible, for (by the report of
his Bern. Andr. MS.
Master) he had either learned without book, or otherwise studiously turned
and reuolued with his own hands and eyes these authors following. In Grammar,
Garin, Perot, Sulpicius, Gellius and Valla: In Poetry, Homer, Virgil, Luc^n,
Ovid, Silius, Plautus, Prince Arthurs books and learning.
and Terence: In Oratorie: Tullies Offices, Epistles, Paradoxes and Quintilian.
In History, Thucydides, Liuie, Caesar's Commentaries, Suetonius, Tacitus,
Plinius, Valerius Maximus, Salust, Eusebius. Wherein we have been particular,
to signify what Authors were then thought fit to be elementary and
rudimentall unto Princes; and by their example, to all of Noble or gentle
birth, whose superficial boldness in books in these frothy days, is become
most scandalous and injurious to the honor, and use of learning.

(64) But before the untimely expiration of this great hope of England, King
Henry weary of wars and tumults, and desirous to lay the beginnings of A. D.
1501. An. Reg. 17.
a long peace by most inward friendship with all his great neighbors, had
concluded a match between Margaret his eldest daughter, and James the fourth
King of Scotland, the The contract between James King of Scots and Lady
Margaret published.
assurance whereof was published in the February next before Prince Arthurs
death at Paul's Cross; in reioycement whereof, Te Deum was sung* and other
signs of public joy declared. The Ioh. Stow Annal. in Iac. 4.
Bishop of Rosse says, that the Earl of Bothwell did openly handfast, or
espouse the said fair Lady, in the name of King James at Paul's Cross, being
Saint Paul's day. This contract was brought about in manner following. After
that the storm of war had (by mediation as before said) been thoroughly laid
between the two sister Nations, it chanced certain of the Scots by their
suspicious behavior, and rough Phrases to provoke the Garrison of Norham
Castle to issue, who in the bickering slew and hurt some of them, and drove the
rest away. King Polyd. virg. Episc. Ross.
James expostulates this violence very sharply by letters with King Henry, who
returned most satisfactory answers. Richard Fox Bishop of Durham (whose the
men and Castle were) wrote also many deprecatory letters, humbly praying the
Scottish King to accept amends, whereunto he in the end inclined, and having
some matters of far greater moment to impart, desired the Bishops presence in
Scotland (knowing his deep wisdom and great grace with his Sovereign) which
King Henry gladly assented unto. The meeting was at Melrose, an Abbey of
Cistertian Monks, where the King abode, who having roundly uttered to the
Bishop his Bishop Fox his presence desired by the Scottish King.
offense conceived for the breach of good terms at Norham Castle, and yet
being finally pleased to receive satisfaction, he then secretly discovered his
whole mind, the sum whereof was, That the king of England would be pleased to
give to him in marriage the Lady Margaret his eldest daughter, as a pledge of
indissoluble amity. The Bishop promised his best diligence, and accordingly
after his return, labored therein with King Henry, who most gladly hearkened
thereunto. Whereupon the Scottish King sent the Archbishop of Glasco, the
Earl of Bothwell, and others to demand the Lady in marriage. Their
entertainment was hearty and princely. But when the proposition came to
scanning at the Council table, it had not current passage at first: for there
were who objected as an inconvenience; That by this marriage the Crown of
England might come to the Scottish line, by the issue of Lady Margaret.
Whereunto it is said, King Henry made this answer Episc. Ross. ex Polyd. verg.
What if it should? King Henry's answer to an objection against the match with
Scotland.
for if any such thing should happen, (which Omen God forbid) I see it will
come to pass, that our Kingdom shall leese nothing thereby, because there
will not be an accession of England to Scotland, but contrarily of Scotland
unto England, as to that which is far away the most noble head of the whole
Island, seeing that which is less uses to accrue to the ornament and honor of
that which is much the greater, as Normandy heretofore carue to be under the
dominion and power of the English our forefathers. When this was said, the
whole board of council received it as an Oracle, and it went clear about,
That Margaret should be married to the King of Scotland. With this answer and
other instructions the Scottish Ambassadors were sent home, who afterward
returned into England with full authority and satisfaction to all Henry's
propositions, whereupon ensued the before said publishment of assurances at
Paul's Cross. It was a principal Article in this agreement: That no
Englishman should enter Scotland, nor Scot into England without commendatory
letters from their Sovereign. Which Article was reputed a special mean to
preserve the peace inviolable.

(65) But ere the young Lady her self was conuaied into Scotland, her brother
Prince Arthur died, A. D. 1502 An. Reg. 18. King Henry a Widdower, and Henry
his son created Prince of Wales.
and in * February next ensuing, their mother also Queen Elizabeth, as she
lay in Childbed within the Tower of London. The King to repair his mind with
fresh consolations, in advancing his only remaining son, Henry Duke of
York, created him suddenly Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester and Flint,
within few days after his mothers decease. Thus was Arthurs loss supplied,
howsoever. Henry made Prince, espoused soon after ( See in the life of Henry
the 8
though with much reluctation) the Lady Katherine his elder brothers widow,
(...). Stow Ananl.
upon the five and twentieth of June, at the Bishop of Salisburies house in
Fleetstreet. And in this wise, by providing so worthy a wife for him, (though
to say truth, her great Dowet was the chief motive) the king thought, that the
estate of England was sufficiently settled; wherefore converting his cares to the
accomplishment of affinity with Scotland, he most su^ptuously furnished his
dearest eldest daughter K. Henry brings his daughte^ the Lady Margares on the
way to Scotland.
for her journey, and himself in person traveled from Richmund as far with
her as C^leweston beside Northampton, where his mother the Countess lay: Epis.
Ross.
after certain days spent in solace, the King gave her his blessing, with
fatherly counsel and exhortation, and committed the guard and conduct of her
person principally to the Earls of Surrey and Northumberland, and to such
Ladies and Gentlewomen as were appointed to that service; a great company of
Lords The Earl of Northumberl^ delivers her to King James within Scotland.
Knights, Esquiers, and men of Mark attending them as far as Berwicke. At S.
Lamberts Church in Lamer Moore within Scotland, the King attended by the
principal of his Nobles, received her from the hands of the Earl of
Northumberland, and the next year after, married her at Edenborough, in the
presence of all his Nobility. The King gave great entertainment to the
English, and showed them iusting and other pastimes after the Scottish fashion.
The Scotishmen (says I^ Iac. 4.
the Bishop of Rosse) were not behind, but far above the Englishmen, both
in apparel, rich Jewels, and massy chains, many Ladies having their
habiliments set with Goldsmith work, garnisht with Pearl and Stone of price,
with gallant and well trapped horses. Diverse Ladies also and young Gentlewomen
of England, attending Queen Margaret, remained there, and were well married to
certain Noblemen of Scotland, whose progeny lives honorably there even at
these days. The effect of this marriage is gravely described by the same
Bishop in these words. There was perfect peace and sincere amity between the
two The immediate happy effect of this marriage.
Realms of England and Scotland a long time after. And verily, during the life
of King Henry the seventh, no cause of breach was ministered by either of the
Princes, but they continued in great love and friendship, and mutual
society, contracting of marriages, continual enterchange of Merchandise
betwixt the Subjects of both the Realms, as they had been AL under the
obedience of ONE PRINCE; where through, Justice, Policy and Riches did flourish
and abound throughout the whole Isle of Albion. And of this marriage is James
the sixth descended, being that ONE PRINCE under whose obedience AL are now
governed, as under the sole and lawful lineall Monarch of great Britain: for
this James the fourth had Issue James the fifth, he had Issue Queen Mary,
she had issue our present Sovereign, the great grandchild of the said Queen
Margaret eldest daughter of K. Henry the seventh.

(66) Which effects of peace and riches, as they could not but be comfortable
to so wise a King as Henry, they being the fruit as it were of his own just
labors; so let us now observe the last worldly cares of his reign, and upon
what objects he fixed his mind, freede from the awe of open challenges of the
Crown, and from throws at his maine, which with what art, valor and
felicity, he at first achieved, and with how great hazards, troubles, and
bloody businesses, he brought it to such pass, that neighbor Kings reputed
it safe to entermarry with his family, we have already heard: Two principal
points took up the last Scenes of his life; for the rest of his time he wholly
employed, either in the service of Almighty God (wherein he was so diligent,
that every day he was present, after the devotions of those times, at two or
three Masses, oftentimes hearing godly Sermons,) or in building, wherewith he
kept his senses busied. The one of the two chief points, was to watch over the
ways of his wives kindred (the remaining branches of the turbulent and
unfortunate house of York) whose growth and greatness he supposed might at
some time or other ouertoppe his own; the other was, under opinion of justice,
to increase his treasure out of the common purses, whereby he seemed onerous to
many, and somewhat obscured the brightness of his former glory, at leastwise
diminished his opinion with the generality. Concerning his courses holden with
his wives kindred, (the laterall issues and staddles of the Plantagenets) it
fell out thus; which (by * occasion of the accidental landing of Philip King
of Spain at this time, whereby the A. D. 1506 A. R. 21.
Earl of Suffolkes taking was procured) we thought it best to handle here
together. Edmund de la Pole Addit. to Fab. calls him Duke.
Earl of Suffolk (son to John Duke of Suffolk, and of Elizabeth sister to
King Edward the fourth) in the sixteenth year of King Henry's reign, wilfully
slew a common person in his fury. Henry not sorry to have occasion of
increasing his popularity, by A Prince of the blood royal arraigned for
murder of a private person.
presenting so great a person to exemplary justice, and in the same act to
blemish the honor of a man, whose quality was to him suspected, caused him for
the same to be arraigned. The fact he was persuaded to confess, and thereupon
had pardon. The Earl nevertheless, as a Prince of the blood, holding The
Earl of Suffolk causes troubles.
himself disgraced, by having been seen a Prisoner at the Kings Bench Bar,
fled the land discontented, and went to his Aunt the Duchess Dowager of
Burgundy; but within a while after, being fairly reconciled, he returned.
After which, notwithstanding, Polyd. Verg. Edw. Hal. Hollinsh*
whether it were by reason of debt (the certain attendant of vaine-spirited,
and base-braueminded * Io. Stow. Annal.
Courtiers) wherinto he had deeply thrown himself for his furniture, at the
celebration of his cosen Prince Arthurs marriage, or for that the restless
spirit of envy in the Duchess had prevailed, he taking his brother with
him, fled again the next year after. The King who had pardoned his life,
seemed now to repent his clemency, Polyd. Verg.
though it is plain, he spared him of purpose, till he might discover more
of a conspiracy which he knew was in hammering; but his flight troubled him
not a little, knowing the violent humor of that Lord, and remembering to what a
dangerous and bloody issue his brother the Earl of Lincoln had once already
brought things at the battle of Stoke in the beginning of his reign.

(67) For remedy, he betakes himself to his wonted arts, and therefore to
learn the secrets of the enemy, Sir Robert Curson Knight (Captain of the
Castle of Hammes by Caleis) faines himself a friend to the Earl, and flies
from his charge unto him. An office unworthy of Knighthood; neither can any
good spirit in the world stoop it self to such double faced emploiment, which
besides the treacherous dissimulations thereof, cannot but be accompanied with
wilful impieties. For who is admitted into trust upon a contrary side, without
inuocations of Gods holy name, protestations, adiurations, oaths, the utmost
assurances which man can give to man, to beget a convenient affiance in his
sincerity? but by this stratagem the king ransackes the bosoms and cabinets of
his adversaries, discovering their designs and hopes. Whereupon, William
Courtney Earl of Devonshire (being most nobly descended, and having to his
wife the Lady Katherine, one of the daughters of K. Edward the fourth, and
sister to Queen Elizabeth wife of King Henry) Apprehensions of persons for the
Earl of Suffolkes cause.
William de la Pole brother to the said Edmund Earl of Suffolk, Sir James
Tirrel, Sir John Windham Knights, with other, were attached, and committed to
custody, and afterward also Polyd. Verg.
George Neuil Lord Abergenie, and Sir Thomas Green Knight, were likewise
apprehended, but were soon delivered. The Earl of Devonshire, though innocent
(for it is the misery of such great men, that their own innocence cannot
always procure their own safety; but their birthright many times, and often
other men's designations without their least priuity, is enough to hazard them,
yea it is in the power of any conspirator by The misery of great subject and a
lesson for the^.
bare nomination, to do as much, so that it concerns them to have an eye not
to their own only, but to the behavior also of their whole Alliances and
dependancies) this Earl (I say) though innocent, remained Prisoner during this
Kings life, and some years of his sons reign, who set him at liberty. The
other, William the Earl of Suffolkes brother, had not Executions for the Earl
of Suffolkes cause.
so strict an hand holden over him. But Sir James Tyrrell, Lieutenant of Guines
Castle, and Sir John Wyndham, Welbourn, servant to Sir James Tyrrel, Curson a
Purseuant, Matthew Jones yeoman, and a Shipman were condemned of treason for
aiding the Earl of Suffolk. The Stowes Annal.
two Knights were beheaded at Tower hill. The Shipman quartered at Tiburne:
Add. to Fab.
Curson and Jones suffered death at Guines.

(68) This so round and quick dealing with the Earls accomplices and favorers,
startled his shallow and raw inventions, and made their whole bulk to swerve
and splinter; but the King rested not so; for upon the Sunday before the feast
of SS. Simon and Jude, in the same year, of the said executions, there was
published at Paul's Cross, by the Kings procurement from Pope Alexander the
sixth, a Bull of Addit. to Fab. The Earl or Duke of Suffolk, and Sir Robert
Curson and others accursed.
Excommunication and curse against the said Earl of Suffolk, Sir Robert
Curson, and five other persons by special name, and generally all other which
aided the Earl against the King to the disturbance of the Kingdom. Thus did
the most prudent Henry pursue his enemies, not only with secret countermines
and open weapons of Law, before they could assemble to make any show, but also
with spiritual lightening; which doubtless, had they been upon just cause,
and by lawful authority fulminated, ought infinitely to be dreaded of good
Christians, because (as Saint Paul says) they deliver over to Satan. Sir
Robert Curson was named, of purpose, to make the Earl secure of him; which may
well be called a perilous, if not a profane devise, though his Holiness were
made the instrument thereof. Neither did the King leave here, for by his
letters and messengers he so prevailed with Pope Antiquit. Britan. in Mortons
life names Innocentius, and not Alexander.
Alexander, as he decreed by his Bull, That no person should afterward have
privilege of Sanctuary, who had once taken the same, and come forth again:
and that, Polyd. Uerg. Antiquis. Brit. in vita Morton.
if any Sanctuarie-man should afterward commit any murder, robbery,
sacrilege, treasons, etc. he should by lay force be drawn thence to suffer
due punishment. This was of great use to the King, and preserved many subjects
from precipitation, for the abuse of Sanctuaries had been an efficient of many
troubles. But the same Pope (having sent John Giglis his Receiver, to gather
money in England) showed himself much more favorable to such as perpetrated
those said heinous offenses, as also, Usury, simony, rapines, adulteries, or
whatsoever offenses (excepting certain offenses against the Pope and Clergy,
etc.) when he sent a * Bull of pardons (for money) to all Antiquit. Britan.
Ibidem.
such offenders in England; dispensing also thereby, with such, as kept away,
or by any fraud bad gotten the goods of other men, which they should now
retain still without scruple of conscience, so as they paid a ratable portion
thereof, unto his Holiness Receivers. Sir Robert Curson (though before
accursed by the Pope) returns, when he saw fit time, into England, and withal
into wonted favor with his Sovereign. The Earl, seeing himself thus stripped
of all hope to do much harm, wandered about Germany and France to find
repose, but in the end quite tired, he put himself into the grace and
protection of Philip then Philip the first, King of Spain and his Queen
driven by tempests into England.
in Flanders who by the death of Isabella was King of Spain, in right of Joan
his wife, eldest daughter of Ferdinando and Isabella; where he remained in
banishment, till King Phillip was driven by tempest in the month of January
into England, as he meant to have passed through the sleeue, or English Ocean,
into Spain, there to take possession of that Kingdom and other the
appertinances. A. D. 1506. An. Reg. 21.


(69) The chief Ship of the Navy Royal, wherein the King was, and two other
(all the rest being scattered by the fury of the weather into several places
and other Ports of England) thrust into ^arbour at Ioh. Stow. Annal. Polydor
says Way^outh.
Falmouth. Himself weary and sick with the violent tossings of the Sea
(whereunto he had never as it seems, been vse^ would needs come on shore,
and refresh his spirits, though the principal men about him dissuaded that
course, as foreseeing it would procure a longer stay, then the nature of their
occasions would perhaps well bear. And so indeed it fell out, for being now in
another Princes (though his friends) dominions, where he had no power over
himself, nor others, and the rumor of arrival stirring the men in authority
thereabout, Sir Thomas Trenchard Knight with the sudde^ forces of the Country,
not knowing what the matter might be, came thither, and understanding the
royal quality of the person, invited him with all humble humanity to his
house, and forthwith dispatched posts to Court; not long after Sir John Car^
Knight (with a great troop of armed men) repaired also, pursuing the like
humble entreaties; which the King, fearing constraint, because they were but
subjects and durst not let him pass without their Lord and Masters leave
necessarily yielded unto. Upon notice of this mighty Princes casual arriual,
King Henry presently commanded the Earl of Arundel to entertain him till
himself could come, who very magnificently did so, with Io. Sotw Annal.
three hundred Horses by Torch-light; and in the mean while King Henry
himself prepares. Philip perceiving, that whatsoever speed his affairs
required, yet now there was no remedy but to stay, thought not good to expect
his approach, but to prevent it, and came upon the The Kings of England and
Spain at Windsore.
spur to Windsore, that he might be gone again the sooner, after whom Queen
Joan his wife came leasureably. The rest of this entertainment, because it
has matter of weight, and is well set down by Polidor Vergil, it shall
suffice us to follow his footsteps At Windsore, the two Kings, after long and
several Polyd. Verg.
discourses, began to confer about renewing their league. Henry required
that Edmund Earl of Suffolk might be delivered up into his power, which
Philip denied to be a thing that he could do, as holding it most unreasonable
to be the author of his death, whom he had taken into Protection: but when at
the last he found, that no excuse nor reason, could satisfy, for that, Henry
voluntarily offered to save the Earls life, he promised to do therein what he
desired, and presently took order for his sending over. According whereunto,
King Henry (to draw out the time, till he had the wished prey) conveyed King
Philip to London, to show him the head City of his kingdom, out of which after
a little stay he reconducted him. The Earl in the mean time, who conceived
horror at the first news of King Philips landing in England, as fatal to him,
and resolved that no hope was longer to be reposed in the faith of foreign
Princes, came over not unwillingly, presuming that after pardon of life, he
might also in time regaine his liberty; or if that hope failed, yet should he
at lestwise obtain to die, and be buried in his Country. But King Philip and
his Queen, having feasted with her sister the Princess of Walls, departed
England. The Earl was brought through Flanders to Calleis upon the sixeteenth
of March, and landed at Dover upon the four and twentieth of the same,
conueighed thither by Sir Henry Wiat, and Sir John Wiltshire, with threescore
men in armor The Earl of Suffolk delivered up and sent to the Tower.
of the Garrison of Calleis; and at Dover Sir John Louel and others receiving
him, guarded him safe to the Tower of London. King Philipp, not long after his
landing in Spain deceased, being not thirty years old. That tempest which
drove him into England was holden by the people as prodigious; for it blew down
the golden Eagle from the famous Spire of Paul's Steeple (being of Copper richly
ouerguilt, of forty pounds weight, in length four foot, and in breadth
three,) which also in the fall thereof, brake The ominous fall of the weather
cock of Paul's.
and battered the sign of the Black Eagle, in Paul's Churchyard, in the place
where now the Schoole-house stands. This accident even then made some
conjecture, that the Emperor Maximilian (whose Imperial Ensign the Eagle is)
should suffer some loss accordingly (says Polydore) as indeed he did by the
death of King Philippe his son. Which (if any supersticiously delight in
Calculations of that blind nature) we may well parallel with that Suet. in
Ang. cap. 97.
lightning which stroke the letter C. out of Caesar in the inscription of
Caesar Augustus his statue; whereupon it was gathered, that Augustus should live
but one hundredth days after, and then be called a God, (Aesar the remaining
syllables so signifying in the old Hetruscan tongue,) which accordingly happened.

(70) Thus was the Earl of Suffolk brought back, and the King anchored his
quiet at the safe King Henry's gathering of treasure.
custody of his person within the Tower. The other wordly point wherein he
chiefly bestowed his ages care, was to gather money, though by courses seeming
very grievous and full of bitterness; the too griping greediness, and
too-profuse lavishness of money in Princes, being both alike offensive to a
well settled estate. Some excuse his doings herein (amongst whom Polydor is
chief) as not proceeding from any deprauation or uncorrected affection of his
nature; but from an opinion and forecast of general profit: because a Princes
humor of gathering, tends, though with distaste of particular men, to the good
public, whereas his profusenes, though with some particular men's profit,
ends in the empouerishment of the whole. And Henry himself protested (says
Polydor) he did it not for love of money, but with a purpose to bridle the
fierce minds of a nation bred up among factions: though they (says the same
author) who felt the smart, and were wounded by his Instruments, N^n tam
seueritatis, quam anaritia tela esse clamabant.
cried out they were not so much the darts of severity, which did hit them, as
of anarice. Yet Polydors Apology may be current: for it is not to be doubted,
but that such use the King might propound himself; and yet withal, we can
hardly find any commendable root thereof, the ways being so importune and
harsh, by which he raised money. Let us hear in this point the obseruatiue
Sir F. B. MS
Knight. Of nature (says he) Henry coueted to accumulate treasure, which the
people (into whom there is infused, for the preservation of Monarchies, a
natural King Henry gives way to the needless molestation of his people.
desire to discharge their Princes, though it be with the unjust charge of
their Counselors and Ministers) did impute unto Cardinal Morton, and Sir
Rcinald Bray, who (as it afterward appeared) as Counselors of ancient
authority with him, did so sound his humor, as nevertheless they tempered it.
Where it is truly said, it afterward appeared: for till they were gone to
account to God, and his fear for the maine quite banished, the king did not
let loose the reins to his immoderate desire of having, which yet was not more
sinful, then the means under him practiced, were odious. For Sir Fr. B. MS
Empson and Dudley that followed, being persons that had no reputation with
him, otherwise then the servile following of his own humors, gave him way, and
shaped him means to those extremities, whereby himself was touched with
remorse at his death, and which his successor disauowed. And this we take to be
a true judgment. To be particular in the recital of things worthy to die in
forgetfulness, is not only to recite, but in a sort to teach them also, as
some, who by broad inuectiues, have as it were read a lecture of those vices,
against which they have pretended to inueigh. But public and shameful Arts
may more safely be delivered. The instruments whom the King set on work (or
who p^aps set the King on work) were * two Lawyers, Richard Empson (afterward
knighted) and Edmund Dudley Esquier; their Addit. to Hard. The foul practices
used to empouerish the subject.
emploiment was to call the richer subject into queon for breach of old penal
laws, long before discontinued and forgotten, whereby they brake in upon the
people, as it were at unaware, like a kind of authorized robbers, masked under
the pretext of service for the King, and the names of Delators or Promoters, a
Cor. Tacit.
familiar sickness in the times of ancient Tyrannies. But the courses to
execute their employment, were void of all conscience and color. For one of
them was to Polyd. Verg.
outlaw persons secretly, and then to seize their estates, driving them to
chargefull compositions with the King, and heavy bribes to the Authors of their
trouble. More detestable was another practice of theirs. For there 10. Stow
Annals.
were false Jurors and ring leaders of false Jurors, who would never give any
verdict against the will of their patrons, the said Empson and Dudley; so that
if any durst stand out upon trial, the destiny of their causes was squared
forth by the leaden rule of those fellows consciences; which to be a truth,
the expiatory punishment which K. Henry the eight took of them in the first
year of his reign, does clearly convince. By these means many honest and
worthy subjects were rigorously fined, imprisoned, or otherwise afflicted,
which filled the land with sorrow and repinings. Among very many others thus
abused Sir William Capell Alderman of London was eminent, as from whom, in the
tenth year of the kings reign, A. D. 1508. A. R. 23.
had been scruzed, under the color of moth-eaten and vnreuiued Laws, above
sixteen hundredth pounds sterling, and was now again plaide at afresh, and
another hand drawn upon him for two thousand pounds, which because he would
not pay, he was by Dudley commanded prisoner to the Tower; but by the death
of the King which ensued, all such prisoners were released. If any perhaps will
slight the hard usage extended to Citizens, and to the like, they are unwise
therein, neither think as Patriots ought. For though it may so fall out that
the personal vexation of some few, merits no great pity; yet the example is
pestilent; and it is a part of the cunning, to choose out at first such for
patterns, as upon whose persons least compas^on may fall, which examples may
afterward be extended to whomsoever. These revels and rages against the
wealthier sort continued, till it pleased God to sting the Kings heart with
just compunction, toward the horror of his death; who had the favor from
heaven, as to lie sick of a consuming disease, which The King falls sick.
wasted him by such insensible degrees, as gave him the use of his whole self
(as it were) till the last gasp, whereby he had means to recollect himself,
after those many soule-wounding assaults which attend regal greatness, and to
submit his thoughts to such ghostly admonishments (touching another life)
whereunto in days of health, the hearts or ears of great Princes are seldom
attentive.

(71) About the year of his death, having understood that Lewis King of
France, despairing of issue Pol. Verg.
male, had annulled the Contracts made between Charles King of Spain (son
of the late King Philip, and afterward elected Emperor by the name of Charles
the fifth) and the Lady Claudia his eldest daughter, whom he newly betrothed to
Francis of Valois Dolphin of France, and Duke of Angolesme; King Henry (whose
care for preservation of King Henry seeks to assure his daughter Mary to
Charles King of Castile.
the common quiet, and good of his Country, by foreign alliances, was ever holy
in him and awake) thought it a fair occasion for him to match his younger
daughter the Lady Marie. The French King to have the advice of James the fourth
King of Scots, in the bestowing the said Madam Claudia The French King sends
for advise to the King of Scots.
his eldest daughter, had before sent Bernard Steward Lord Dobignie, and the
President of Tholouz, Ambassadors for that purpose; who finally in effect
received this answer: Epis. Ross.
That the said King James thought it best that his eldest daughter should be
married within his own Realm of France, for if she were married upon any
foreign Prince, it might give color to claim title to the said Realm
afterward. And if he did marry her at home, rather to him the said Francis,
whom he had appointed to succeed then any other. Which resolution was very
acceptable to K. Lewis, because it iumped with his own purpose, and it was
followed accordingly. King Henry therefore hearing that King Charles might be
obtained, so pursued the po^ Polyd. Verg.
by the prudent managing of Richard Fox (now Bishop of Winchester) his
Ambassador, that King Charles his Ambassadors coming out of Flanders, where
h^ was educated, and meeting The Lade Mary promised to King Charles.
him at Caleis, the aff^ was opened, disputed, concluded, and the Lady Mary
then about ten years of age (as King Charles himself) was by solemn contract
assured to him for wife.

(72) Now therefore his son Henry Prince of Wales, being heir of the
Crown, and married; his A. D. 1508. A. Reg. 24.
eldest daughter, the Lady Magaret, Queen of Scotland; the Lady Mary his
youngest, provided for so highly (though in the end it came to nothing) all
likelihood of peril by competitors, or busy Factionists, buried in the Tower,
by the emprisonment of Edmund Earl of Suffolk; his people tractable and
calm; his coffers full, and the state of things K. Henry the 7. dies.
ripe for a successor: death (the executioner of the Almighties sentence,) was
ready to discharge him of the prison of his flesh. Before he departed, John
Stowe
well disposed persons tendering the health of his soul, did both in sermons,
and otherwise, inform him of the exclamations against informers; Wherefore he
of his blessed disposition, granted to all men general pardons, certain
General pardons granted by the King.
only excepted. In his life time he founded the goodly Hospital of the
Saudy, built six religious Houses for Franciscan Friars, three of them for
Obseruants, and the other three for Conuentuals. Of his building also was
Richmund Palace, and that most beautiful piece, the Chapel at Westminster,
the one the place of his death, and the other of his burial: which forms of
more curious and exquisite building, he and Bishop Fox, first (as is
reported) learned in France, and thence brought with them into England. He died
about the age of fifty two years, upon the two and twentieth of Sir Fr. B.
MS. Io. Stow. Annal. The year of his age, and reign.
April having reigned twenty three years and eight months. A right noble,
wise, victorious and renowed King, and one whose piety would have been far
more eminent, then all his other virtues, if from the beginning the malignant
quality of the times, would have permitted him to live in quiet. He specially
honored the remembrance of that Saint-like Man, Henry the sixth, the founder
of his Family, and Prophetical fore-teller of that fortune which now he died
seized of, whom also A Saint lost for want of pay.
he labored to have Cambden. in Surrey. See more Supra in Edward 4.. 79. and
80.
Canonized for a Saint, but that Pope Iulio held that honor at two high a
rate. It is reckoned by some writers Addit. to Fab. King Henry saluted Defensor
of Christ's Church by three Popes.
of that age among his principal glories, that three Popes, Alexander the
sixth, Pius the third, and Julius the second, did in their several times, with
authority and consent of the Cardinals, elect and chose him for chief defensor
of Christ's Church, before all other Christian Princes. In his last will and
Testament, after the disposition of his soul and body, he devised and willed
Restitution should be made of all such moneis, as had unjustly been levied by
his Officers. A most pious and truly Christian care, whereby also appears,
that he hoped the wrongs done under him were not so enormous nor innumerable,
but that they might fall within the possibility of redress. The description of
his whole man, is had in the beginning of his life, and the course thereof
described in his Actions. There remain of his wisdom many effects, and those
as his fame likely to continue for ever.

His Wife.
(71) Elizabeth the first Child Legitimate, and eldest daughter of King Edward
the fourth, was at the age of nineteen upon the eighteenth of January and
year of Christ Jesus, 1485. married unto King Henry the seventh, whereby was
united the long contending Families of Lancaster and York, and the Roses red
and White joined into one, to the great joy of the English Subjects. She was
crowned at Westminster upon the fiue-and twentieth of November, the third of
her husbands Reign, and of Grace 1487. She was his wife eighteen years and
twenty four days, and died in childebed in the Tower of London, the eleventh
of February, even the day of her own Nativity, the eighteenth of her husbands
Reign, and year of our Salvation, 1503. and is buried at Westminster in the
most magnificent Chapel and rich Monument of Copper and gilt where she with
her husband lie entombed.

His Issue.
(72) Arthur the eldest son of King Henry the seventh and of Queen
Elizabeth his wife was borne at Winchester the twentieth day of September, the
year of Grace, one thousand four hundred eighty six, and the second of his
Fathers reign. In whose fifth year he was created Prince of Wales; Duke of
Cornwall and Earl of Chester, and at the age of fifteen years, one month
and twenty five days, upon the foureteenth of November, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand five hundred and one, espoused the Lady Katherine daughter
to Ferdinando King of Spain, she being then about eighteen years of age, in
the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, London; and presently sent into Wales the
better to govern that principality by his own Presence, enjoyed his marriage
bed only four months and ninteene days, departing this life at Ludlow the
second of April, the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred and two, of
his Fathers reign seventeen, and of his own age fifteen years, six
months and thirteen days. His body with all due funeral solemnities, was
buried in the Cathedral Church of Saint Mary's in Worcester, where, in the
South side of the Quire he remains entombed in Touch, or Iette, without any
remembrance of him by picture.

(73) Henry the second son of King Henry the seventh and of Queen
Elizabeth was borne at Greenwich in the County of Kent, the two and twentieth
of June, in the year of Grace, one thousand four hundred ninety and one,
being the seventh of his Fathers reign. In his Infancy he was created Duke of
York and Marshall of England, and so trained up in his youth to literature as
he was rightly accounted the best learned Prince in Europe, and by the death
of his brother succeeded his Father in all his Dominions; whose Reign and Acts
are presently to be related.

(74) Edmund the third son of King Henry and of Queen Elizabeth, was borne
in the year of Christ, one thousand four hundred ninety five, and in his
young years was created Duke of Sommerset, which Title he no long time
enjoyed, being taken away by death at Bishops Hatfield before he attained
fully to five years of age, the year of Grace, one thousand four hundred
ninety and five, and fifteenth of his Fathers Reign, and his body lies
interred at Saint Peter's in Westminster.

(75) Margaret the eldest daughter of King Henry and of Lady Elizabeth his
Queen, was born the nine and twentieth day of November the year of Christ
1489. and fifth of her fathers reign; she at the age of fourteen was
married unto James the fourth King of Scotland, the year of our Lord one
thousand five hundred and three, unto whom she bare James the fifth, Arthur
and Alexander and a Daughter: which last three, died all of them young; and
after the death of King James (being slain at Flodden Field in fight against
the Engglish,) she was remarried unto Archibald Douglas Earl of Anguisse, in
the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred and fourteen, unto whom she
bare Margaret, afterward espoused unto Matthew Earl of Lennox, Father by her of
the Lord Henry, who died at the age of nine months, and lies interred in the
upper end of the Chancell in the Parish Church of Stepney near London, upon
whose Grave is engraven in brass, as follows: Here lies Henry Steward Lord
Darle of the age of three quarters of a year, late Son and Heir of Matthew
Steward Earl of Lennoux and Lady Margaret his wife, which Henry deceased the
XXV III. day of November in the year of our Lord God. 1545. Whose Soul Jesus
perdon.

Her second son was Henry Lord Dernley a Noble Prince; and reputed for
person one of the goodliest Gentlemen of Europe, who married Marie Queen of
Scotland, the royal Parents of the most royal Monarch James the first King of
great Britain, and of the Britain World. And her third son was Charles
Earl of Lennox father unto Lady Arbella.

(76) Elizabeth the second daughter of King Henry and Lady Elizabeth his Queen
was borne the second day of July, one thousand four hundred ninety two, and
died the foureteenth of September and year of Christ, one thousand four
hundred ninety five, and is interred at Westminster.

(77) Mary the third blossom of the Imperial Rose-tree of England, was first
wife to Lewis King of France, who lived not long after, and died without issue
by her. Her second husband was that Martial and pompous Gentleman, Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk.

(78) Katharine fourth daughter of this seventh Henry and of Elizabeth his
Queen, was borne upon Candlemas day, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
five hundred and three, and in the eighteenth year of her fathers reign, who
was called to her part in a far better Kingdom within a short while after.

HENRY THE EIGHT OF THAT Monarch 58
Henry VIII.
NAME, KING OF ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, etc. THE
FIFTY EIGHT MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS REIGN, ACTS, WIVES, AND ISSVE.
CHAPTER XXI.


THe rich and wise King (Henry the seventh) gone (as is said) the way of all A.
D. 1509.
flesh, his son bearing the same name, a most magnanimous and heroical
Prince, succeeded in his Throne over al his dominions, as the only true heir
unto the Crown, by both the houses of Lancaster and York. His birth was at
Greenwich in the year of Grace, 1491. the twentieth King Henry his birth
place. Polydor.
two of June: and his youth so trained up in literature, that he was accounted
the most learned Prince of all Christendom, endued with parts most befitting a
King, both in lineaments of body, and liberality of mind, besides his ripe
knowledge in politic The most learned King of Christendom^
affairs, and was made the more agreeable to the affections of men, by the
consideration of his flourishing age, as having not attained unto nineteen at
his fathers death. In his infancy he was created Duke of York; at twelve
years (his brother deceased) Prince of Wales, and at eighteen became sole
Monarch of the land, when at Westminster upon Sunday the twenty fifth of June,
even the festival of King Henry and Queen Kathe^ crowned Edw. Hall.
Saint John Baptist, and year of Christ Jesus, 1509. he with his beauteous
Queen Katherine received their Crowns at the hands of William Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury, no Prince giving better hopes unto justice, or
seeking the wealth of his subjects more then himself.

(2) His Counselors he chose of the grauest divines, and the wisest Nobility,
with whom he not King Henry used to sit often in Council him self in person.
only often sat, to the great increase of his politic experience; but would
also yield his authority to their grave and far inseeing wisdoms: Of whom
the plaints of Petitioners were so mouingly regarded, that Proclamations went
forth, with promise of restitution, to them that had been wronged by Dudley or
Empson, two persons that had abused the authority of K. Henry his Father, by
enriching their Dudley, Empson.
own coffers, with the vrter undoing of many better subjects. These men, King
Henry the seventh had Ioh. Stow.
made his Instruments for the finding out of offenders in his penal Statutes,
themselves being learned in the laws, and apt enough to execute their
Commissions to the full: for, by their daily informations and recovering of
fines, they dug and brought a filuer Mine into the Kings Exchequer, some
veins Hollinsh. page 791.
whereof by the way, ran also into their own coffers, to the great vexation
of all, and utter undoing of many; whereat the Noblemen grudged, the Gentility
repined, the Commons lamented, and all of them felt the teeth of these ravening
Wolves: Edw. Hall.
But the father King departed, and his sonneset on his throne; the complaints
of the oppressed so oppressed the King and his Council, that Dudley and Empson
were sent prisoners to the Tower, and both of them by Parliament attainted of
Treason.

(3) Edmund Dudley by descent was a Gentleman, and by profession a Lawyer,
having both wit and words at will, had he not abused both to his own
destruction. Richard Empson his inferior by birth, was the son of a poor
Sieue-maker, but yet had In Yocester Northamptonshire
he stepped before him to the degree of a Knight: These night-sprung Mushrumps
that sucked the earthes fatness, from far better plants then themselves, saw
not the many hands ready to pluck up them by the roots, when the season
should serve to clear the land of such weeds: for albeit they had their
discharge under the Kings own hand to do what they did, and their service
known Crown service, a matter impugnable, yet no sooner were they left to
stand upon their own basis, but that they felt the weight of their done wrongs
too importunable for them any longer to bear; for so importune were all
degrees against them, that Dudley forthwith in Guild Hall London was arraigned
and condemned to die: and King Henry in progress, Edmund Dudley condemned.
(through the cry of the people) could take no pleasure, til he had sent for
Empson into Northamptonshire, Io. Sotw Annal.
where among them he was arraigned, and received sentence of death, which was
so desired and followed, as to satisfy his Subjects, the King sent a special
writ for their executions, which with great joy of all was performed upon Tower
hill, by taking from them their heads; when they left their riches to be spent
by others, and their names to remain upon Record for the Caterpillars of those
times: whose like if any such live, shall leave their hateful remembrance to
the like stains of reproachful infamy, how pleasing soever the promotion so
gotten in their own eyes shall seem, or the employments in their self
conceits accounted profitable to the State.

(4) This justice of King Henry wanne him great praise of his people, and his
charity extended toward London, when that City was sore distressed K. He^ies
justice and charity commended.
with famine, by sending six hundred quarters of corn, great love; so that
never any King entered his reign with better hopes then himself. That his
person was tall, is not to be doubted, though not like unto Souls, as some
have alleged, whose Holinsh.
report is, that at the siege of Bulloigne, he was higher by the head then any
in his Camp, and every joint Henry a goodly man of shape and stature.
proportionable to so royal a stature: but that he was strong, his many Iusts
and Tilts, and fights at Turnay (most dangerously performed) was manifested
upon them that underwent his heavy hand: for at Tilt he bare down a man at
Arms both horse and all, and threw Sir William Kingston a Knight of K. Henry's
great strength.
great strength to the ground at Barryers; with battell-axe he combated against
one Giot a Germane very strong and tall, and lent him better blows then he
could again repay.

(5) His glory thus mounted the Trophie of fame, and young Henry the only
morning star in this Western Orb, Pope Julius the second, fearing the
further incroch of the French, who then had entered into some part of Italy,
thought this Prince the strongest pillar whereunto to trust, and the fittest
Card to trumpe the French King, well knowing the Title that the English Kings
had unto France, and the readiness of his Subjects to forward that way:
whereupon writing his letters unto King Henry, complained against Lewis the
French king, and twelfth of that name, who neither (as he alleged) esteeming
of God, good fame, nor conscience, detained the revenues The Popes letters
unto King Henry.
of the Clergy, supported the Cardinal William to aspire the Papacy, aided in
the siege of Bonen, Alfonso of Ferrara, and the Benteuoly, both traitors to the
Papal Sea, where he intended to lay the foundation of his Empire, to usurp
all Italy, besought him for the pity of our Savior, and by the virtue of his
famous ancestors, (for I use the words of the Popes brief) that never forsook
the Church of God in distress, and by the filial obedience, the strongest
bond, to enter into the holy league, they having elected him against Lewis,
Caput faederis Italici.

(6) And indeed to speak as it was, Lewis much emulated King Henry's
greatness, fearing that fortune would give him occasions to make his claim by
sword unto the Kingdom of France; which the sooner he did by this holy
fathers instigations, and by his Herald Clarentius roughly demanded, the K.
Henry demanded France.
Dutchies of Normandy, Guyen, Anion and Maine, and with them also the Crown
that king Lewis John Lesly Bishop of Rosse.
ware. The Scottish king likewise, in case of Andrew Barton slain in his
Piracies (as the English alleged) by the Admiral of England, accounted the
A. D. 1510.
truce broken, and sought the revenge upon the Borders adioining. Against these
two nations young Henry at once prepared, and happily obtained fair victories
against both: but the success of the one, (though not following precisely the
time) we mean to relate before we enter discourse of the other.

(7) The enterprise great which K. Henry meant to undergo, he thought it good
wisdom to join amity with Maximilian the Emperor, Fardinando K. Henry makes
league with many Princes. Guiccardin.
King of Spain, and many other Princes, holding also correspondency with Pope
Julius the second, that busy Pontifical Prelate of Rome: then propounding his
purposes in Parliament, sent over certain Nobles before him into France, and
afterward followed them himself, pitching down his King Henry enters France.
Tents before the Town of Terwin, where he raised his royal Standard of the
Red-dragon, and begirt An. Reg. 1. Edw. Hal.
the City with a strait siege.

(8) To this place Maximilian the Emperor repaired, and to the great honor of
Henry entered into his pay, wearing the Cross of Saint George, with a Sleidans
Com. The Emperor serves K. Henry.
rose (the Kings badge) as his faithful Soldier, and received wages by day
for every of his, according to their degree: The French seeing the Town in
Anglorum praelia.
distress, sought the relief with victuals, and men, but were so encountered
by the king and his company, as that many of their chiefest Captains were
Paulus Iouius.
taken, and six of their Standards won, the rest for safeguard of life so
posted away, that this conflict was called the battle of Spurs.

(9) Then was the battery brought so near their walls, Battle of Spurs.
that many breaches were therein made, and the Town by composition yielded
unto the King; A. D. 1513 August. 24
whereupon the Earl of Shrewsbury was sent to see all things safe, who stuck
upon the highest Turret the Banner of Saint George, and took the oath of
alleagiance of all the French Citizens, to acknowledge Terwin won and the
Cit^zens sworn unto Henry.
King Henry their supreme Lord: This done, the King as a Conqueror enters
Terwine, sent thence their Ordinance, dismounted the Turrets, cast down the
walls, filled up the ditches, and fired the Town, excepting only the
Cathedral Church and Bishops Palace.

(10) Then was the siege removed unto Turnay: about which City King Henry
commanded diverse Edw. Hall. Turnay befieged by K. Henry.
Trenches to be cast, and placed his Ordinance to such advantage, that none
might enter in, or come out of the same. Into this Town a great number of the
French from the Countries adioining had lately fled, relying much upon the
strength and safety of the place, which indeed had ever been accounted so
invincible, that this sentence was engraued over one of the gates. Iannes ton
me a perden The strength of Turnay.
ton pucellage, thou have never lost thy maidenhead: Notwithstanding, it was
yielded up unto Henry with ten thousand pounds sterling for the Citizens
redemption, who to the number of fourscore thousand, then took their oaths
to become his true Subjects, and four of their principal bare up the Canopie
under which the King in triumph-wise entered, having born before him his sword,
axe, spear, A. D. 1513. October. 2. King Henry in triumph entered Turnay.
and other abiliments of war, every Citizen holding a staffe-Torch for his
light. The safe keeping of this City, the King committed to Sir Edward Poinings
Knight of the Order of the Garter, whom he there made his Lieutenant, and
ordained Thomas Wolsey his Almoner the Bishop of Turnay. The year now spent,
and season unfit for the field, a surcease from war was determined until
the next spring; whereupon all were shipped for England with full payment, and
praise, but Terwin and Turnay stuck heavily upon the French men's hearts.

(11) King Lewis thus endammaged in his own Dominions, thought it best policy
to pay like for like, to which end at the first attempts against Terwine Ioh.
Lesly.
he solicited James the fourth of that name, King of Scotland (though brother
by marriage unto King Henry of England) to disturb the peace of his Subjects,
that so he might be drawn out of France; which James for his part put
presently in practice: for writing his letters to Henry in the French K. James
of Scotland incited by the French King. Edw. Hal. Holinsh. See the contents of
this letter in Ioh. Leslie Bishop of Rosse, dated at Edenbrough the twenty sixth
of July in A. D. 1513.
Kings behalf, charged him with breach of Truce, both in the case of his Scots
slain at the sea, as also against his Confederates the Duke of Gelder, and
King of France, against which last he desired him to desist, otherwise he
should be forced to revenge the Frenches wrongs upon his English: and to give
letters of Mart to recover the losses of his Subjects.

(12) King Henry a Prince of a Maiesticall spirit, most highly offended at
these his brothers requests, and threats, was so far ouergone with fury and
rage, that Lions King at Arms the bringer, was Lions terrified at K. Henry's
answers.
thereby somewhat daunted at his present answer, which he desired might be
sent in writing, refusing to carry in words his reply to his Sovereign. This
See the contents of this letter in Holinshed, dated from the Camp at the fiege
of Terwin the 12. of August. A. D. 1513.
Heralds wise and weighty request, was forthwith granted, and letters framed to
King James demands, answering those imputations with rough and round words,
which notwithstanding he never read or saw, being slain in the battle of
Flodden, before that Lions could come to deliver the same.

(13) For James King of Scots preparing for war, had in the mean while entered
the borders, and with his Ordinance battered and won the Castle of James
King of Scotland enters England.
Norham; making still forward upon the English. Against whom Thomas Howard
Earl of Surrey made the Kings Lieutenant of the North, at his going into
France, assembled an Army of twenty six thousand strong, unto whom came his
son the Lord Admiral of England, with a great supply of good Thomas Earl of
Surrey King, Henry's Lieutenant makes toward the Scots.
soldiers well appointed for war. The Earl from Newcastell came unto the
water of Till, and pitched his battle besides a little Town called
Brankeston, under Flodden hill, a mountain lying in the North of
Northumberland, betwixt the rivers of Till and Tweed, where upon a rising
bank, the Scottish host had taken the advantage of the ground: unto King
James, Thomas Earl of Surrey sent Rouge Cross a Purseuant at Arms, with
proffer of battle to be done upon Friday the ninth of September, if so it
pleased his Highness, who withal Lord Howard profereth battle unto K. James.
carried this message from the L. Admiral, that he was come in person to
justify his Act against Andrew Barton, and would abide the last drop of his
blood in the Vant-gard of the field.

(14) King James most readily accepted the offer, and by his Herald Hay sent
the Earl word, that if King James accepts of battle
he were as then in Edenbrough, yet would he most gladly come to fulfill his
desire; and withal sent his letters for the just occasions given him to invade
England as he did The day approached, and the John Lesly.
Scots keeping the higher ground, the Earl marched upward along the river, and
by two Bridges passed over with his host, making still forward, as though he
meant either to have taken into Scotland, or else to circumuent K. James his
return, which he perceiving, hasted down the hill, putting from him his
horse, raised his royal Standard, and as a most valiant Chiefetaine encouraged
his Soldiers to the fight.

(15) The Scottish Ordinance discharged from above, ouershot the English with
very small damage, The fight begun.
and the ground of no difficult ascent, gave them the easier access, so that
Sir Edmund Howard, who lead a wing to the Vant-gard (whereof his brother the
Admiral was Captain) got almost to the Paulin (...).
height; against whom the Earls of Lennox and Argile, with their Battles of
Spears on foot so violently encountered, that they beat down, and brake the
wing of the English, wherein many were slain, The Scots at the first encounter
be at the English back.
and the horsemen disbanded, and put to flight; but presently recalled, joined
themselves again to the great battle, which by this time had attained to the
top of the hill. King James that saw this first brunt performed, made full
account that the day was his own, supposing verily the English had fled, and
therefore most valiantly he advanced forward, not staying for the reregard to
second his battle, and encountering the Earls Battalion, a bloody The battles
ioin.
fight was performed, with the loss and life of many a man: but strength near
spent, and the Scottish somewhat disioyned, through force of a great shore of
arrows falling among them; Sir Edward Stanley having three bands reserved for
the like purpose, with a fresh onset invaded the open sides of the enemy, whose
force was so violent, that the Scots no longer were able to stand, but took
down the hill unto flight, which the Earls of Lennox The Scots put to flight.
and Argile perceiving, did their best to stay them, and fighting most
valiantly, themselves were slain in the same place.

(16) King James then perceiving the wings of his Battle distressed and gone,
and that the enemy began to enclose him about; with a stout resolution
encouraged his men, willing the^ to regard the person The valiant courage of K.
James.
of their King, their own honor, their valiant Ancestors, and now their present
imploiments; that their blood might be bought dear to the English, and the
Scottish valors recorded for ever in the volumes of fame for this their one
days work; and thereupon rushing among the thickest began a most eager and
bloody battle, and piercing through with a strong hand went so far, that he had
almost ouerthrown the Earls Standard: thus busied in doubtful chance, the
Lord Howard and Sir Edward Stanley having discomfited the enemy in either wing,
returned in the face of the maine battle, and the Lord Dacres with his
Horsemen came upon their backs, so that the Stotish were forced to fight in a
round compass, but being ouer-laid, the Kings Standard was stricken down, and
himself most valiantly fighting slain in the midst of his enemies: with
whom died (...) king of Scots slain with 12. Earls, and 17. Lords.
three Bishops, whereof one was Alexander Archbishop of Saint Andrews the
Kings base son, two Abbots, twelve Earls, and seventeen Lords,

Kent unto Black Heath near unto Greenewich, was there met and received by
the Duke of Norfolk, The Honorable receiving of Cardinal Campiut.
many Knights, but many more Prelates, where in a Tent of Cloth of Gold, he
shifted himself into his Cardinal Roabes, which was edged about with most
rich Ermine, and thence rode to London, in more pomp and estate then Christ
did to Jerusalem when Hosanna was sung. Matthew. 21 9.


(32) Eight Mules he had laden with necessaries belonging, but those made no
show in proud Wolseis eyes, therefore twelve more he sent him to furnish his
Pageants through the streets of London, these either wanton, or ashamed to be
wondered at, played the skittish Iades indeed: For in Cheape-side, as this
Triumph forth passed, these beasts by breaking their Collers and escaping
their Leaders, cast their Carriages and Coffers upon the cold ground; whose
lids flying open The Cardinals rich treasures showed in Cheap side.
laid most of their riches to the sight of the people. For, from some of them
fell old Breeches, Boots and broken shoes, from others torn stockings
tottered rags, old Iron and horse shoes, and for fainting by the way
therein was bestowed, and now cast abroad, broken meat, mary-bones, roasted
eggs, and crusts of bread, ywiffe worth the keeping: this Shipwreck made upon
the Shelues of Cheape-side, no need it was to bid the muliters to bestirre
them, who like good thrifty mariners saved from spoil as much as they could,
and trussing up their trinkets, laded again these wantons, with the wealth of
the Cardinal, who (good man) was iogging on before with his Crosses, Pillars,
Gilt-axe and Mace, unto Paul's Church, where he was met with many mitred
Bishops, and attended upon to Bath place, where we will leave him, and return
to the place where we left.

(33) The unity agreed upon betwixt England and France, a meeting was motioned
for the two Kings, and to that end great preparation made as well of the one as
of the other. But in the heat of this business, King Henry had word that
Charles, his Queens Nephew, and new made Emperor, would Charles the Emperor
comes into England.
visit him in England, which accordingly he did, accompanied with the Queen
of Arragon, and a most Royal Train, and was as Royally entertained by King
Henry: the cause of his coming was to hinder the peace concluded with France,
for although, John Stow.
this Emperor were young, and but newly established; yet was he wise and well
foresawe the hurt that this amity with France, would bring him, and therefore
came in person of purpose to dissuade the Kings mind and to stay his entrance
with the French if he could, but finding Henry so forward in those proceeds, he
baited his hooks with golden gifts to the Cardinal, and wanne him wholly to
his devotion.

(34) King Henry passing the Seas unto Callis, met with King Frances at a place
appointed, and for that Rich. Turpin.
purpose newly built betwixt the Towns of Guisnes, and Arde: where to describe
the Iusts, Banquets, King Henry goes into France.
and Maskes were to fill up (with Hall, Grafton and Holinshed) whole sides of
excessive great Cost. At Callis also the same time the Emperor, with his Aunt
Rich. Grafton.
the Lady Margaret Duchess of Sauoy landed, whither King Henry and his Queen
repaired, to the no little grudge of the French King, though he kept it to Edw.
Hall.
himself, and consented unto the ancient league tripertite betwixt these three
Monarchs, which done the Kings returned into their own Realms.

(35) Displeasures shortly arising betwixt the Emperor and the French King,
King Henry assaied to A. D. 1521. An. Reg. 13.
bring the^ to peace, but that failing, fell himself from the French, imputing
the fault unto Frances for suborning the Scots against him, and King Frances
again Variance betwixt England and France.
laid all the blame in the Cardinal, accusing him of dissimulation, abhorted
practices and what not: but wheresoever lay the defect, the Duke of Albany John
Stow.
was sent into Scotland; the French followed a Spanish ship fraught with the
goods of English-Merchants R. Grafton.
unto Margate, and took her even in the Kings streams, in both which King
Frances excusing himself with ignorance, alleged no breach of truce broken by
him.

(35) Then was it thought best by the Cardinals Taken out of the Cardinals own
letters dated January 16. Anno. 1524.
advice to repay like with like, and therefore counseled his King, to rear
Charles Duke of Burbon against France and to persuade him to invade the very
heart thereof, encouraging him with sufficient pay, and making him his Champion
general of the Field; whilst the Emperor likewise held him play Duke Burbon
made King Henry's Captain General. Instructions of King Henry dated in Anno
1524. Rich. Pace Secretary.
against Millan. And to that end was sent in way of loan to the Emperor a
great sum of money, and foreign Princes solicited to take arms against
France, for effecting which, King Henry sent his Ambassadors to the States of
Venice and Swissers with these instructions as follows.

(36) That whereas in a treaty of peace it was concluded betwixt the Emperor,
King Henry, and Frances the French King, that if any Controversies should arise
betwixt any two, the Prince not inuading should give aid and assistance
against the inuader: but now the Emperor being invaded by The English
Embassages into foreign States.
the French Kings Captains in the Realm of Navarre, and in his own Country
by Robert de la March, and others by his procurement, and our king (said they)
being often called upon by the Emperor, has often entreated the French King to
surcease, but has nothing obtained besides fair words and detraction of
promises. Complaining likewise that in the intercourse of these businesses, the
French The wrongs done by the French unto the English.
King contrary to his Oath had sent the D^ of Albany into Scotland (in contempt
of King Henry) and to the great danger of the young Kings death or deposition,
he being the next in blood to succeed, and to the dishonor of the Queen
mother, had caused a separation betwixt her and her lawful husband the Earl
of Angus. That the French King had detained the payment compounded for the
delivery John Lest.
of Turnay; and kept back the dowry of his sister Queen Dowager of France,
that he had entertained the rebellious Subjects of King Henry, and The Queens
Dowry vapaid.
spoiled his Merchants both by Land and Sea. Neither was unremembered the danger
that the Venetians stood in, if the Realms of Naples, and Sicilie, the
Seigniories of Ieans, and Millane were lost from the Empire. These therefore
seemed fair proiects unto King Henry for him to war against France, and to
that end, a general Muster by Commission was taken A. D. 1522. A general
muster.
of all able men from sixteen years and upward, of every Hamlet, Village,
Borough, City, Hundred, and Shire, throughout England, which seemed to many
Io. Stow.
another Domesday Book: and yet was there neither peace nor war against
France.

(37) In this great and hasty preparation, Charles the Emperor, as he passed
toward Spain, landed at Charles the Emperor comes again into England.
Dover, where King Henry met him, and in great estate brought him to London;
which was so prepared with Ornaments and Pageants, as if it had been the Kings
Coronation, and in the Blacke-friers the Emperor was lodged in a most Princely
Palace new built by the King; then was he feasted at Winsor, where he sat in
his state, in his Mantle and Garter, and by receiving the Sacrament these two
Potent Monarchs took their Corporal Oaths to observe the Covenants concluded
betwixt them: whereof one was, that the Emperor Charles agreed to stay
Holinsh. in Anno 18. Henry. 8.
for, and take to wife the young Princess Lady Marie, King Henry's then only
daughter; and in such golden bands of love, Charles and Henry, seemed to The
Emperor affianceth Lady Mary.
be linked, as in London this sentence was set up in the Guild Hall over the
door of the Counsel Chamber, where it still remains. Carolus, Henricus,
viuant, defensor vterque
Henricus fidei, Carolus Ecclesiae.^


(38) Why the Titles defender of Church and Faith, were attributed unto these
two Princes is no marvel; for Charles chosen Emperor, was scarsly confirmed,
but to purchase the Popes favor, he directed forth a solemn Writ of Out-lawry
against Martin Luther, who then had given a great blow to the Papal Crown.
And King Henry likewise John Sleidan. Com.
was renowned in Rome, for writing a book against the said Luther:
underpropping the tottering or downe-cast countenance of the Popes pardons;
which Luther shrewdly had shaken; the Pope therefore K. Henry wrote against
Martin Luther.
to show himself a kind father unto those his sons, gave them these Titles;
which in truth were none other, then the same which they swear unto, when the
Crowns of their Empires were first set upon their heads. But with what
acceptance his Holiness received King Henry's book, his own Oration
solemnly made at the delivery thereof unto M. John Clarke the presenter and
Kings Ambassador, in his Consistory, and in presence of his Cardinals
sufficiently does show, the translation whereof we have inserted as we find it
in the Original it self.

We do receive this book with all alacrity: it is The Popes Oration at the
delivery of K. Henry's book. Ex Original.
indeed such as there could not be any thing sent us, and our venerable
brethren, more acceptable then it is. For the King himself, a most mighty,
most prudent, and most truly Christian Prince, we know not whether we may
more praise or admire, being the first that by war with happy success has
subdued the enemies of the Church of Christ, that seek to rend Christ's coat,
and at last ouercomming the enemies, has restored peace to the Church of God,
and to this holy See. But now against so soul a Monster, both to understand,
to be able, and willing to write this book, he has showed himself no more
admirable to the whole world for his elegant style, then for his wit. We humbly
give thanks to our Creator for giving such a Prince to defend his Church, and
this holy See, desiring the same God to grant to this his King a happy life,
and all his desires, and after this life in his heavenly Kingdom, to keep for
him an everlasting Crown. And we so far as we are able to entreat of God,
will never be wanting to the said most wise King in the faculties granted to
us of God.

(40) To manifest which his readiness, himself among his Cardinals decreed an
augmentation unto King Henry's royal Style to be annexed unto his others;
confirming the same by his Bull which that it perish not by the devouring teeth
of Time, we have here published from the original Parchment, and leaden seal
it self, as follows.

(41) Leo Episcopus seruus seruoru^ Dei, etc. Leo Bishop servant of the
servants of God; to our most dearly beloved Son in Christ, Henry King of
England defendor of the Faith, health and Apostolical Benediction. We by
divine permission, the chief ouerseer for the government of the universal
Church, though insufficient for so great a work, do power forth the
cogitations of our heart, that the Catholic faith without which no man can
attain to salvation, may receive continual increase, and that those good
laws and constitutions decreed by the wisdom and learning of such as are in
authority, especially the faithful in Christ, for restraining the attempts of
all that labor to oppress the same, or by wicked lies and fictions seek to
pervert and obscure it, may prosper with perpetual increase, do bestow our
pains and utmost endeavor in our office and Ministry. And like as the Roman
Bishops our Predecessors, were wont to show especial favor to Catholic
Princes (according as the quality of matters and timesrequired) especially to
them that in troublesome times, when the madness and perfidious dealing of
Schismatikes and heretics most of all abound, did abide constant and
immovable, not only in soundness of faith and pure denotion to the holy
Roman Church, but also as the most legitimate sons and valiant Champions of
the same, opposed themselves both with mind and body against the furious madness
of Schismatikes and heretics: so likewise also do we desire to extol your
Majesty with worthy and immortal praises, for your high and immortal deserts
and labors toward us, and this holy See, wherein by Gods permission we sit,
to grant unto it those things for which it ought to watch, and drive away the
Wolves from the Lords flock, and to cut off with the material sword rotten
members, which infect the mystical body of Christ, and to confirm the hearts
of the faithful in soundness of belief. Now where of late our beloved son
John Clarke your Majesty's Orator with us, being in our Consistory before our
venerable brethren of the holy Roman Church, the Cardinals and many other
Prelates of the same, exhibited a book unto us to be examined and allowed of
us, which book your Majesty's self (who does all things with diligence and
nothing amiss) enflamed with charity and zeal to the Catholic faith, and
with ardent devotion toward us and this holy See, has composed, as a most
worthy and sovereign Antidote against the errors of diverse heretics, often
condemned by this holy See, and of late stirred up and brought in by Martin
Luther: And your said Orator has also largely declared unto us, that your
Majesty is ready, and purposes, like as you have confuted the notorious errors
of the said Martin, by true reason and invincible authorities of sacred
Scripture, and Ancient fathers, so you will punish to the uttermost of your
power, all those of your whole Kingdom, that shall presume to follow, or
defend them: and we have diligently and exactly perused and viewed the
admirable doctrine of your said book, watered with the dew of heavenly Grace,
and do heartily thank Almighty God, from whom every good and perfect gift
does come, who has vouchsafed to inspire your Noble mind, inclined to every
good thing, and to endue you with so great Grace from heaven, as to write those
things; whereby you are able to defend his holy faith, against such a new
Innouator of damned errors; and also incite by your example all other Christian
Kings and Princes, to be willing to favor and further with all their best
aides the Orthodoxall faith, and Evangelical truth, whenever it be brought
into danger or doubt. And we think it also meet, that they who have
undertaken such godly labors for the defense of the faith of Christ, should
have all praise and honor of us; and we are desirous, that not only the
things themselves which your Majesty has written, being both of most sound
doctrine, and no less eloquence, should be extolled and magnified with
condign commendations, and allowed and confirmed by our authority; but also
that your Majesty should be graced with such an honor, and such a Title, as
that both for our time and ever hereafter all men might perceive how grateful
and acceptable this gift of your Majesty's has been unto us, especially
offered unto us now at this time. We, who be the true successors of Peter,
whom Christ at his ascension into heaven left his Vicar on earth, and to whom
he committed the care of his flock: We I say, who sit in this holy seat,
from which all dignities and titles do flow, upon mature deliberation had with
our said brethren about these things, have by the general agreement, and
consent of them decreed, to bestow upon your Majesty this title, namely, THE
DEFENDER OF THE FAITH. And accordingly by these Presents do instile you with
such a title, commanding all faithful Christians, that they name your Majesty
with this Title, and when they write to you, that after the Word KING, they
adioine DEFENDER OF THE FAITH. And truly we diligently considering and
weighing your singular merits, were not able to bethink us of a name more
worthy and convenient for your Majesty, then the excellency and dignity of this
Title, which so often as you shall hear and read so often you may call to mind
this your singular virtue and great desert, nor may you by this Title puff up
your self in pride, but according to your wonted prudence become more humble,
and be more valiant and constant in the faith of Christ, and in denotion to
this holy See, by which you have been exalted, rejoicing in the Lord the giver
of all good things, leaving this as a perpetual and immortal monument of your
glory to your children, showing them the way unto the like, that if they shall
desire to be graced

(55) Whilst these things were in working at Rome, arose great troubles in
Ireland, the Kerns casting Troubles in Ireland.
off all obedience, and killing the Kings subjects where they found them:
against whom. Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, Lord Lieutenant of that kingdom,
made forth his power, and followed them himself with such danger of life,
that the visor of his Helmet was shot off, as he pursued the enemy through the
desert woods: but these Rebels cut off by his high valor, and wars
proclaimed at one time against Scotland and France, the Lord Lieutenant was
recalled into England; and Piers Butler Earl of Osorie made Deputy of Ireland
in his stead; betwixt whom, and Girald Fitz-Girald, Earl of Kildare, whose
sister he had married, arose no Holinsh page 84.
little strife and debate, which grew to that height as King Henry sent
Commissioners to try and examine Discention betwixt the Lord Deputies of
Ireland.
the differences, which was so cleared on Kildares behalf, that Osorie was
discharged of his Office, and the Lord Fitz-girald sworn deputy in his place;
whereat Cardinal Wolsey (whose hand chiefly steered all states affairs, a
deadly enemy to the Earl of Kildare) was highly offended, and to undermine the
foundations of this his new Government, gave ear unto Osorie, who accused the
new deputy of many misdemeanors, among which these were the Kildare accused to
the Cardinal.
principal; that he winked at Desmonds escape whom he should have attached by
order from the King: that he grew over familiar with the native Irish; and that
he put to death the Kings best subjects: for these the Lord Deputy was
commanded into England, in whose absence Osory his enemy was again chosen
Lord Deputy by the Kings Counsel, but himself none of the wisest for
polliticke Government, was altogether therein ruled by his wife, and she made
it no courtesy to abuse her husbands honor against her natural brothers
folly: who now in England must answer his demeanor before the Lords of the
Counsel, and to their Table was he brought, where the Cardinal Lord
Chauncellor made his faults nothing less, and thus addressed himself against
the Earl of Kildare.

(56) I wot well (my Lord) that I am not the meetest at this board to charge
you with these The Cardinals speech at the Counsel Table against Kildare.
treasons, because it has pleased some of your Pew-fellowes to report, that I
am a professed enemy to all Nobility, and namely to the Giraldines: but seeing
every shrewd boy can say as much when he is controuled, and these points so
weighty, that they should not be dissembled of us; and so apparent, that they
cannot be denied of you: I must have leave (notwithstanding your stale slander)
to be the mouth of these honorable Lords at this present, and to trumpe your
treasons in your way, howsoever you take me. First you remember, how the lewd
Earl of Desmund your kinseman (who passes not whom he serves might he change
his Master) sent his Confederates with letters of credence unto Francis the
French King: and having but cold comfort there, went (...) Charles the Emperor
proffering the help of Mounster, and Conaught, toward the Conquest of
Ireland, if either of them would help to win it from our King. How many
letters, what precepts, what messages, what threats, have been sent you to
apprehend him and yet not done? Why so? Forsooth I could not catch him? Nay,
nay Earl, forsooth you would not watch him: If he be justly suspected, why
are you partial in so great a charge? If not, why are you fearful to have
him tried? Yea, for it will be sworn and deposed to your face, that for fear
of meeting him, you have winked wilfully, shunned his sight, altered your
course, warned your friends, stopped both ears and eyes, against his
detectors, and whenever you took upon you to hunt him out, then was he sure
before hand to be out of your walk. Surely, this iugling and false play, little
became either an honest man called to such houour, or a Noble man put in so
great trust: had you lost but a Cow or a Horse of your own, two hundred of your
retainers would have come at your Whistle to rescue the prey from the uttermost
edge of Vlster: all the Irish in Ireland must have given you the way. But in
pursuing so needful a matter as this was; merciful God, how nice, how
dangerous, how wayward have you been? One while he is from home, and another
while he keeps home, sometimes fled, sometimes in the Borders, where you
dare not venture. Ywisse, my Lord, there be shrewd bugges in the borders, for
the Earl of Kildare to fear; the Earl, nay the King of Kildare: for when you
are disposed, you reign more like then rule in the land: where you are pleased
the Irish foe stands for a just Subject: hearts and hands, lives and lands
are all at your courtesy: who fawneth not thereon, cannot rest within your
smell, and your smell so rank, that you tracke them out at pleasure. Whilst
the Cardinal was speaking, the Earl chafed and changed color and at last
brake out, and interrupted him thus.

(57) My Lord Chauncellor I beseech you Kildare interrupteth the Cardinals tale.
pardon me, I am short witted, and you I perceive intend a long tale: if you
proceed in this order, half my purgation will be lost for lack of carriage: I
have no School tricks, nor art of memory: except you hear me while I
remember your words, your second process will hammer out the former. The Lords
associate, who for the most part tenderly loved The Lords tender Kildare.
Kildare, and knew the Cardinal his manner of taunts so ready being inured
there with many years together* humbly besought his grace to charge him
directly with particulars, and to dwell in some one matter until it were
examined thoroughly.

(58) That granted: It is good reason (quoth the Earl) that your Grace bear
the mouth of this He answers the Cardinals objection.
board: but my Lord, those mouths that put these things into your mouth, are
very wide mouths: such indeed as have gaped long for my wrack: and now at
length for want of better stuff, are feign to fill their mouths with smoke:
what my Cosen Desmond has compassed, as I know not, so I beshrew his naked
heart for holding out so long. If he can be taken by mine agents that
presently wait for him, then have mine adversaries bewraied their malice: and
this heap of heinous words shall resemble a scarre-Crow, or a man of straw
that seems at a blush to carry some proportion, but when it is felt and
peized, discovers a vanity serving only to fear Crows: and I verily trust
your honors shall see the proof by the thing it self, within these few
days. But go to: suppose he never be had? What is Kildare to blame for it
mo^e then my good brother of Osorie, who, notwithstanding his high promises,
having also the Kings power, is yet content to bring him in at leisure? Cannot
the Earl of Desmond shift but I must be of Counsel? Cannot he hide him except
I wink? If he be close am I his mate? If he be friended am I a traitor? This
is a doubtie kind of accusation which they urge against me, wherein they are
stabelled and mired at my first denial. You would not see him (say they): who
made them so familiar with mine eie-sight? Or when was the Earl within my
view? Or who stood by when I let him slip? Or where are the tokens of my
wilful hudwinke? But you sent him word to beware of you: who was the
messenger? Where are the letters? Convince my negatiu^, see how loose this idle
gear hangs together. Desmond is not taken: well, you are in fault: why?
Because you are: who proves it? No body: What Conjectures? So it seems: To
whom? to your enemies. Who told it them? They will swear it. What other
ground? None: Will they (...) it my Lord? why then of like they know it, either
they have mine hand to show, or can being forth the messenger, or were present
at a Conference, or privy to Desmond, or some body bewraied it to them, or
they themselves were my Carriers or vicegerents therein: which of these parts
will they choose, for I know them too well: To reckon my self convict by their
bare words, or headless sayings, or frantic oaths, were but mere
mockery. My letters were soon read, were any such writing extant; my
servants, and friends are ready to be sifted: of my Cosen of Desmond they may
lie loudly, since no man here can well contrary them. Touching my self I never
noted in them much wit, or so fast faith, that I would have gaged on their
silence the life of a good hound, much less mine own: I doubt not, may it
please your honors to appose them, how they came to the knowledge of those
matters which they are so ready to depose: but you shall find their tongues
chained to another man's trencher, and as it were Knights of the Post, suborned
to say, swear and stare the uttermost they can, as those that pass not what
they say, not with what face they say it, so they say no truth: but on the
other side, it grieueth me, that your good Grace, whom I take to be wise and
sharp, and who of your blessed disposition wishes me well, should be so
far gone in crediting these corrupt Informers that abuse the ignorance of
your state and Country to my peril. Little know you (my Lord) how necessary it
is, not only for the Governor, but also for every Nobleman in Ireland, to
hamper the uncivil neighbors at discretion, wherein if they waited for
process of law, and had not those lives and lands you speak of within their
reach, they might hap to loose their own lives and lands without law. You hear
of a case, as it were in a dream, and feel not the smart that vexes us. In
England there is not a mean Subject that dare extend his hand to fillip a Peer
In what ease stand the Noblemen of Ireland with Rebels.
of arealm: In Ireland except the Lord have cunning to his strength, and
strength to save his Crown, and sufficient authority to take thieves and
variets when they stir, he shall find them swarm so fast that it will be too
late to call for justice. If you will have our service take effect, you must
not tie us always to these judicial proceedings wherewith your Realm (thanked
be God) is inured. Touching my kingdom, I know not what your Lordshippe should
mean thereby; If your Grace imagine that a Kingdom consists in serving God,
in obeying the Prince, in governing with love the common wealth, in supporting
subjects, in suppressing rebels, in executing justice, in brideling blind
affections, I would be willing to be invested with so virtuous and roial a
name: but if therefore you term me a King, in that you are persuaded that I
repine at the government of my soueraign, or wink at malefactors, or oppress
civil livers: I vtterlydisclaim that odious term, maruelling greatly that one
of your Graces profound wisdom would seem to appropriate so sacred a name to
so wicked a thing: but howsoever it be (my Lord) I would you and I had changed
Kingdoms, but for one month, I would trust to gather up more crummes in
that space, then twice the revenues of my poor Earldom: but you are well
and warm, and so hold you, and vpbraide not me with such an odious term. I
slumber in a hard Cabine, when you sleep in a soft bed of Down: I serve
under the Kings Cope of heaven, when you are served under a Canopie: I drink
water out of my skull when you drink wine out of golden cups: my Courser is
trained to the field, when your Gennet is taught to amble: when you are graced
and belorded, and crouched and kneeled unto, then find I small grace with our
Irish borderers, except I cut them off by the knees.

At these girds the Lord Chancellor much fretted, and finding Kildare to be no
babe, deferred the hearing of his cause, till more proofs were produced from
Ireland; then in a great fume he arose from the Council board, and committed
the Earl unto prison, against the minds of most at the Table, who knew well,
that this his accusation was more of hatred borne by the Cardinal, then any
occasion Kildare committed to prison.
given by the accused late Deputy. Whereupon Thomas Duke of Norfolk stepped to
the King, and craved that Kildare might be his prisoner, offering to be bound
in goods and body for his forth coming, whom he obtained, though with no
great liking of the L. Chancellor, who daily entertaind new plaints against
him, till at last he pressed him sore with letters sent to Oneale and Oconor,
to encourage Kildare accused for suborning of Traitors
their rebellions against Osorie the Lord Deputy; which letters were brought
them by his own daughter and their sisters, the Lady Elice Fitzgirald wife to
the Baron of Slane.

(59) This presumption being vehement, the King suspicious, the Cardinal
eager, and his friends faint, Kildare was sent to the Tower, where he committed
himself to God, and expected daily his Kildar committed to the Tower.
death, but with such courageous resolution, as he being in play with the
Lieutenant at slide-groat, when the mandate was brought for his execution on
the next morning, and seeing the Lieutenant struck into a sudden sadness;
by Saint Bride, Lieutenant (quoth the Earl) there is some mad game in that
scrowll; but fall how it will, this throw is for a huddle: and when the worst
was told him, Kildares noble courage. Holinshed. Hist. of Ireland.
now I pray thee (quoth he) do no more but learn assuredly from the Kings
own mouth, whether his Highness be witting thereto or no; the Lieutenant
loving his prisoner well, repaired to the King, and showed him the Cardinals
warrant, who then controuled the sawcines of the Priest (for those were his
terms) and gave the Lieutenant his Signet for a countermand, whereat the
Cardinal stormed, but Kildare delivered from his eminent death, and not long
after from his imprisonment also, was sent into Ireland, where at his entrance
into Dublin, he was Kildar received into Dublin with procession.
met with a solemn procession, and so brought into the City; so well-beloved was
this Earl abroad, and at home.

(60) But the French Kings fortunes were nothing so good, who was straightly
imprisoned at Madrill in The French king imprisoned at Madril. G^ard.
Spain, and great suite made for his deliverance, which notwithstanding would
not be heard. The Queen mother then Regent of France, wise of her self, and
forwarded by others, saw no better means to free her son the King, then to
enter amity with England, which to accomplish, she solicited King Queen mother
soliciteth King Henry.
Henry; working upon the occasions then ministered, which was some unkindness
grown betwixt the English King, and the Emperor, the one of them more strange
by the greatness of his fortunes, and the other in jealousy of lessening
renown. The sparks of which Cinders were steared to flame, by Dislikes (...)
the Emperor and K. Henry.
Wolsey that ever was in the ear of the King: alleging his potency, so much
esteemed of all Christian Princes (a sound very tunable in Henry's wide ear)
would be less regarded by the Emperors late victory; who now began to
carry himself with another respect, and never after that victory gotten
subscribed his letters to King Henry, according to his accustomed manner, your
Sun and Cosen; but to the draught of his Secretaries, in fixed his hand with
the word Charles and no more.

(61) These dislikes and other intercourses of State, drew Henry shortly to a
peace with France. Peace betwixt England and France.
In the exemplification of which league the Venetians, and other Princes were
left to their choice, whereof himself notwithstanding would be styled the
Protector. And to his leaguer Ambassadors sent these instructions to move the
States to consider Signed with (...) own (...), in Ann. 1526.
the Emperors aspired greatness, who now commanded the Kingdoms of Naples,
and Sicilie; the Duchy of Millan, the Seigniorie of Joan, the County of Ast,
and other possessions in Italy, the whole Country of Germany, being the
greatest The great Dominions of the Emperor.
part of Christendom, already either totally in his

Enacted in the Church of Saint Peter in Anion. May 7, Anno 1530.

The Determination of the University of Burges.
We the Deane and faculty of Divinity, in the University of Burges, after the
example of Saint Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, begin with prayer to the
quieting of the conscience, to whom this our writing shall come; the Question
moved is whether the brother taking the wife of his dead brother, the marriage
consummated, and perfect, be a thing lawful or no. We by much labor and
turning of Books, every one of us a part by himself, free from corruption,
the better to obey the truth, find it forbidden by the Leuiticall law which is
Gods, and that such marriage is an abominable discovering of his brothers
shame, which cannot be allowed by the authority of any man: which our
determination we have caused to be signed with the seal of our faculty, the
tenth day of June, and year of our Lord. 1530.

The opinions of the Divines in the University of Bonony.
All we Doctors of Divinity in this University, unto whom this Question was
propounded, whether it was forbidden only by the Ordinance of the Church, or
else by the Law of God, that a man might not marry the left wife of his brother
departed without children, and having examined the matter every one of us
alone, lastly came altogether, and as it were line by line, and rule by rule,
brought forth the reasons for the contrary part, with those of the most
Reverend Father Cardinal Caietaine, yea and of the dispensation for raising up
seed to his brother, spoken of in Deuteronomie; thus we determine, give
judgment, and say, and confidently do hold and witness that such marriage is
horrible, accursed, and to be cried out upon, and utterly abominable, not
only for a Christian man, but for an Infidel unfaithful or heathen: and that
it is prohibited under grievous pains and punishments by the Law of God, of
Nature, and of man, and that the Pope, though he may do much, unto whom Christ
gave the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, has no power to a dispensation to
any man to contract such marriage: In witness whereof we confirm this our
judgment, both under the Seal of our University, as also with the Seal of
our College of Doctors of Divinity, and have substribed it in the Cathedral
Church of Bonony this tenth of June, the year of our Lord. 1530.

The determination of the University of Padua.
Seeing that certain great Orators and Ambassadors did humbly require of us,
that we would vouchasafe to search out with all diligence this question
following, whether to marry the wife of our brother departed without children
is forbidden only by the Law of the Church, or by the Law of God also: and if
forbid by both the Laws, whether the Pope may dispense with any man for such
Matrimony or no? which Question we have discussed and as far as we can, have
made it clear, both private every man by himself and after al together
openly, we say, judge, decree, witness, and for truth affirm, that such
marriage is no marriage: yea and that it is abhorred and cursed of every
Christian man, and to be abominate as a grievous sin, and that it is clearly
forbidden under cruel penalty by the Laws of nature, of God, and of man, and
that the Pope unto whom the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are committed by
Christ the Son of God has no power to dispense by the right of Law for any
cause, suggestion, or excuse, that any such Matr^ny should be contracted. In
witness whereof we (...) made this writing, and have authorized it, with the
accustomed Seal of our University, dated at Padua in the Church of the
Heremites of Saint Augustine the first of July, and year of our Lord. 1530.

The determination of the University of Tholouze.
It was treated in our University of Tholouze: whether it were lawful for a
brother to marry her which had been wife to his brother now departed, and
without children: as also whether the Pope which has the cure of Christ's
flock allowing it by his dispensation, it be lawful: to resolve which, the
best Doctors of Divinity, and the Laws, did swear that they would obey the
sacred Counsels, and would follow the holy Decrees of the Fathers, and falling
to conclusion stuck fast upon this point, that it is lawful for no man,
neither by the Law of God, nor by the Law of nature, to take her to wife that
his brother has left: neither can the Pope dispense with this law of God: as
touching the commandment in Deuteronomy that the brother should marry his wife
to raise up seed unto him, that his name should not perish among the Tribes of
Israel, we answer that that Law was but a shadow and figure of things to come,
which vanished away as soon as the substance of the Gospel appeared. Thus have
we given our sentence, which we have signed with our Authentical Seal of
this University. Yeouen at Tholouze, the Calends or first day of October, the
year of our Lord, 1530.

These and many more were read by the Lord Chauncellor unto the lower house of
Parliament that they might report in their countries, the Kings just cause of
divorce. To forward which (as was thought) Cardinal Wolsey the said Lord
Chancellor was sent Ambassador into France, laden with Guicchard. Rich.
Turpin. G. C^.
Crowns, as Guicchardine says, and with surpassing Pomp as London beheld,
who with 900. Horse passed the Bridge toward Dover, and so into France.

But rumors in England still spreading of the good Queens divorce, about a
year after, K. Henry to satisfy A. D. 1528.
all, sent for his Nobles, his Councellers, Judges, The Kings Oration to his
Nobility.
and many wise Commoners unto whom he made a most pithy Oration, showing them
with what care he had ruled almost twenty years with honor and victory, which
as he said, would shortly be clouded, if he should die and leave them a
litigious Edward Hall.
Heir, examples he showed of the woeful experience of Lancaster and York, in
whose dissentions the Realm was like to have been utterly destroyed: and
although (says he) we have a daughter to the great comfort of her mother and
me, yet it is told us by great Clearkes, our marriage is not lawful, but that
she stands in case of illegitimation; The Kings complaint.
and we both, are said to live in abominable Adultery; think you (my Lords)
that these words do not touch my very soul, the peril whereof we venture, as
you do also your inheritance, for which cause I have asked counsel of the
greatest Clearkes in Christendom, and have likewise heard the opinion of mine
own. But as touching the Queen, if it be judged by the Law of God that she
is my lawful wife, there shall be nothing more acceptable unto me, whose
noble The commendation of Queen Katherine.
conditions, I assure you, (besides her great Parentage) is most gentle, loving
and obedient, whereof I have had a true experience almost these twenty years:
and were I to choose a wife (if the marriage might stand with Gods Law) my
Choice should be of her, before any other woman in the world, and if it shall
otherwise be proved, I shall not only be most sorrowful for parting with so
loving a companion, but much more have occasion to lament my chance, and life
in so foul a sin; these then are the sores that torments my mind, for the
saving of my soul, and for which cause I have here assembled you, that you
may declare to our loving Subjects this our true meaning, and to stay if it may
be the rumors of unstaid reports: and this being said, he let them to depart,
each man bewraying in countenance the affection of his mind, some pitying the
King to see him so perplexed, some favoring the Queen sorrowed her case, and
some sighed deeply at this strange speech and sudden alteration.

(68) But the Cardinal of York fearful to wade too far alone in these
troubled waters, desired the George Couen. Learned men assembled to decide the
Kings marriage.
assistance of the learned in the Realm, and thereto got the Kings license,
which with his Legatine authority, commanded many learned men both Divines and
Lawyers, from Oxford and Cambridge, with the presence of many Bishops
besides. These assembled at London, were showed the Instruments and Seals of
many foreign universities, all of them disabling the marriage, and holding the
dispensation (allowing it) unlawful: but because that string The testimonies
of many Universities sent unto Rome. John Stow. page 9^1.
could not be touched without sound of reproach to the Pope, as also to clear
the King from calumnious reports; it was thought fittest to send the said
instruments to Rome, whereunto these so appointed set their own seals, with
an humble request to his Holiness, that an indifferent Judge might be sent
them, to determine this great and strange cause of the King; which was so
followed by his Ambassadors in the Popes Court, that Lawrence Campeius a
Cardinal of great credit and wisdom, from their Cardinal Campeiu comes
into England.
Consistory was sent into England, unto whom, wise Wolsey Cardinal of York
was joined in commission, with power to erect a Court, to hear the cause
pleaded, and to give sentence definitive, as they found the equity of law.

(69) To that end therefore a place was ordained at the Blacke-fryers in
London, and the King with the Queen removed themselves unto his palace of The
King and Queen summoned to appear personally in the Court at Black Friars.
Bridewell near adioining, whence ere long they were summoned by Process
personally to appear in Court, which accordingly they did, having several
seats ordained under clothes of estate, mounted somewhat higher then the two
Cardinals, the Presidents, under whose feet sat the Scribes and other
Officers; the Court being framed Consistorywise, was furnished with Bishops,
Doctors, Lawyers, and learned Counselors, in most solemn wise: the Doctors
for the King, were Simpson and Bell, and his Proctors Peter and Tregonell: for
the Queen were Fisher, Standish, and Ridley, a very little man but a great
Divine, the Court thus set, and Commission read, the Crier called the King, by
the name of King Henry to come into the Court, who forthwith answered and said,
Here. Then was the Queen called by the name of Queen Katherine to come into
the Court, who made no answer at all, but presently rose up, and going about
the Court to the King, fell down on her knees, before his feet, and in the
hearing of the people spoke thus in effect.

Sir, I desire you to take some pity upon me, Queen Katherines speech to the
King.
and do me Justice and Right: I am a poor woman, a stranger borne out of
your Dominions, having here no indifferent Council, and less assurance of
friendship. Alas, wherein have I offended, or what cause of displeasure
have I given, that you intend thus to put me away? I take God to my Judge, I
have been to you a true and humble wife, ever conformable to your will and
pleasure, never gaine-saying any thing wherein you took delight, without all
grudge or discontented countenance; I have loved all them that loved you,
howsoever their affections have been to me ward, I have borne you children,
and bin your wife now this twenty years, of my virginity and marriage bed, I
make God and your own conscience the Judge, and if it otherwise be proved, I
am content to be put from you with shame. The King your Father in his time for
wisdom was known to be a second Solomon, and Ferdinando of Spain my Father,
accounted the wisest among their Kings; could they in this match be so far
ouerseene, or are there now wiser and more learned men, then at that time were?
surely, it seems wonderful to me that my marriage after twenty years
should be thus called in question with new invention against me who never
intended but honesty. Alas Sir, I see I am wronged, having no Counsel to
speak for me, but such as are your Subjects, and cannot be indifferent upon
my part. Therefore I most humbly beseech you, even in Charity to stay this
course, until I may have advise and counsel from Spain; if not, your Graces
pleasure be done. And Queen Katherine departed the Court.
therewithal rising, and making lowly obeisance to the King, departed thence,
leaning upon the Arm of her receiver, each man expecting she had returned to
her seat, when as she took directly out of the place; which being perceived,
the Crier again called her by the name of Queen Katherine to come into the
Court; Madam quoth her guide, you are again called; on, on, said she, it
makes no matter, this is no indifferent Court for me; therefore go forward.

(70) The King perceiving that she was departed, presently spoke thus unto the
assembly. I will The Kings report of his Queen.
(quoth he) in her absence declare before you all, that she has been to me
a most true, obedient and comfortable wife, endued with all virtuous qualities
and conditions, according to her birth; and in lowliness equals any of baser
estate. With that Cardinal Wolsey made unto the King an humble request, that
his Majesty would be pleased to declare before that honorable audience,
whether he had been the causer of this his intended divorce, wherewith he
was charged in the opinions of the people.

My Lord Cardinal quoth the King, I can well excuse you in this, and rather
affirm that you The King excuses the Cardinal.
have been against me, in attempting it thus far: but the chiefest motive for
this matter, was the scruple of conscience, conceived upon certain words
spoken by the Bishop of Bayon, the French Ambassador, sent from the King to
conclude a marriage betwixt Prince Henry his second son, Duke of Orleance,
and our only daughter Lady Mary, which Bishop made doubt, and desired
respite to be satisfied for the legitimation of our said daughter, in respect
of our marriage with this woman, being my own brothers wife, which presently
engendered such scruples and doubts in me, that my conscience has been
continually vexed, lest by continuing in that sin after knowledge, I King
Henry's conscience and care.
draw Gods indignation against me, which I fear we have already done in that
he has sent us no Issue male, and them that were begot in this nuptial bed,
no sooner came into the world, but were taken again thence, and hopeless now
of more issue by her, it behooves me to consider the state of this Realm, and
the danger that may follow for lack of a lawful Prince to succeed. This
burden too weighty for my weak conscience (not in any dislike of the Queens
age, or person, with whom I desire only to continue, if our marriage may stand
with the law of God) I have in this place assembled you our grave Prelates, and
learned Divines, to determine of, and will God willing submit my self to your
judgments. My doubts in this case I moved in confession to you my Lord of
Lincoln, and ghostly father, whereof your self being somewhat trobled, said
you would ask counsel of you all my Lords. Then of you my Lord of Canterbury
being Metropolitan, I got license to put the matter in question, to which gra^
you all put your seals, as here in this Court the same is to be seen. True
it is, said the Lord of Canterbury, and I doubt not but that all my brethren
here present will acknowledge the same. Not so my Lord said the Bishop of
Rochester, you never had my hand to that Instrument, nor never shall. Indeed
said Canterbury you did it not your self, but admitted m^e to subscribe your
name, and allowed The Bishop of Rochester contradicts the Archbishop of
Canterbury.
me your Seal; under your correction said Rochester that is not so; Well,
well, (quoth the King) you are but one man, against whom at this time we will
not dispute, and so rose up, and the Court adiourned

ned to England; but he took his way toward the Emperor (to whom the cause
somewhat appertained) being then at Vienna in his expedition against the Turk,
unto whose learned men he offered disputation, and in private conference so
satisfied Cornelius Cornelius Agrippa yields to the proposition.
Agrippa, the most respected for learning in the Emperors Court, as he held
the Proposition most true. Whereupon others learned were discouraged to
dispute, and suffered Cranmer to depart without any further proceedings.

(80) The matter thus manifested in most parts of Christendom, this Gordians
knot was lastly unloosed by King Henry himself, who now besides this his
marriage, began to call in question, what authority the Pope had in his
dominions; which being afterward debated in Parliament, an Act passed against
The Popes usurpation forbid by Parliament.
his usurped Hierarchy, and all persons forbidden to appeal, or to make any
paiments unto Rome. The Kings marriage with Lady Katherine, was ^x Parl. 24 H.
(...). K. Henry's marriage dissolved by Parliament.
by the same Parliament dissolved, and his separation from her, made by the
Archbishop of Canterbury to stand good, and effectual by Law, and that Queen
Katherine from thenceforth should be called Fox Mart. 1197.
Princess Dowager, which doings she took so to heart, as she procured the
Popes curse against King Katherine Dowager.
Henry, and his Realm, which curse was set up at Dunkirke in Flaunders, for
that the bringer thereof durst come no nearer. And the Pope in revenge of
himself, being set in his Consistory accompanied Holinsh. page 93^.
with his Cardinals, proceeded to the Censure of these great Princes marriage,
which he then adjudged Pope Clement 7. adiudgeth the marriage lawful.
to stand most firm and Canonical, and enjoined King Henry to hold
matrimonial society with the said Katherine his lawful wife and Queen, and
in that estate to account and maintain her as it became a King and loving
husband to do, and if he refused to accomplish these premises, then to be
compelled thereunto, and never after to be heard in any Court as touching the
inualiditie of the said marriage, and The thunderings of Pope Clement 7.
to pay the expenses of the said trauerse, as he the holy father should limit
and think meet. This was done a year after that the King had married Queen
Anne, and bare date from Rome, the 23. of March and year of Christ 1534. For
in the mean while King Henry had set his affection upon the Lady Anne Sleidan.
com. li. 9.
Bullen, a Phoenix indeed in his Princely eye,, and another Hester for Englands
salvation, both in her self and royal Bud succeeding, as the heavens and
world do witness to this day. She was the daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen
Viscount Rochford, Earl of Wiltshire, The descent of Anne Bullen.
and of Lady Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. This Earl
Thomas her father was the son of Sir William Bullen, whose wife was Lady
Margaret, the second daughter and Coheire of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond, and
the said Sir William was the son of Sir Godfrey Bullen Lord Mayor of London,
who lies buried in Sir Godfrey Bullen Lord Mayor of London. Anne 1457.
Saint Laurence Church in the Iewrie, pictured in his winding sheet upon a
Plate of Brass, and about his Graue-stone upon a border of brass in many
places these words are written, Now thus, Now thus, Now thus, whose Charity was
extended upon the poor householders of that City, in distributing among them a
thousand pounds. His Lady was Anne, eldest daughter and Coheire unto Thomas
Lord H^ and Hasting, and his descent out of the house of the Bullens, an
ancient Family in the County of Norfolk; accursed therefore be the pen, that
Sanders in Schis. Angl.
slanderously brings this rose from a defiled Bed, whose Serpents mouth to
uphold his God the Pope, has spewed out his poison of untruths, and made his
tongue a sharp sword against the Lords anointed; let him therefore receive
his portion with the Serpent of deceit, and his reward with Satan the father of
Lies.

(81) This Ladies religion was different from all Papal indulgences, embracing
the Gospel that then Anne Bullen religion.
began in our vulgar language to be read, for which cause says Sleidan she
was accounted a Lutheran, cause Sleid. com. lib. 9.
enough to be envied at, by the Bishops of that time.

(82) Her, the King invested Marchioness of Pembroke with Mantle and Coronet,
both in regard Anne Bullen Created Marchioness of Pembrooke.
of her Nobility and many virtues (for so run the words of her Patent)
which done, he took the seas, for France, accompanied with such a train of
his Nobles, as the like had not been seen, and among A. D. 1532. October. 11.
many Ladies Anne Bullen was one, where he complained to the French King of
the great wrongs offered him by the dull Pope as he called him; who K. Henry
complains of the dull Pope.
would have Kings in person to attend his leisure at Rome, and contrary to
their Kingly dignities, to expose themselves and affairs at his will there, to
bondage and great danger; and therefore he earnestly requested that the Pope
might be summoned to a Council, to answer the many abuses that he had
offered unto most of the Princes in Christendom, and unto himself not the
least; who for his part had King Henry allowed the Pope 60000. Angels monthly.
allowed him threescore thousand Angels monthly to maintain an Army for his
deliverance out of the Castle of Angel; where the Emperials under the Prince
of Orange kept him. Which his business being ended in France, and the King
again returned John Stow pa. 946 Anne Dom. 1533. Nou^mb. 14. Upon S.
Erkenwalds day, says Hollinshd and Groston. King Henry married Anne Bullen.
into England, he presently (though privily) married the said Lady Marchioness
in his Closet at White Hall, in the presence of many; the Lady Anne Savage
bearing her Train, * and Doctor Lee doing the rites of their conjunction, who
was afterward consecrated Bishop of Chester, Couentree and Lichfield, and
President of Wales.

(83) The Romanists much fearing that Babel would down, if Queen Anne might
be heard against wicked The Pope.
Haman, sought to vnderproppethe foundations thereof, with certain devises of
their own; and that the same might pass without note of suspicion, they laid
their forgery even upon Heaven it self; whose pretended Oracle Elizabeth
Barton (commonly called, the holy maid of Elizabeth Barton the false Oracle or
the Romanists.
Kent) was made to be; and the pillars of this godless Fabric were Edward
Bocking, a Moncke by profession, and doctor of Divinity, Richard Masters,
Parson of Aldington, the Town wherein she dwelt, The assisters of this false
Prophe^esse.
Richard Deering a Monk, Hugh Rich a Friar, John Adestone, and Thomas Abell,
Priests, put to their helping hands, and Henry Gould Bachelour of Divinity,
with John Fisher the Reverend father of Rochester, employed their pains to
daube these downe-falling Read Statue. in Anne 25. of King H. (...).
walls, with their untempered Mortar. The Scribes that set their pens for her
Miracles, were Edward Thwaites Gentleman, and Thomas Lawrence Register, besides
Hankherst a Monk who writ a letter that was forged to be sent her from
Heaven; and Richard Risby and Thomas Gould, were the men which dispersed her
Miracles abroad to the world. This holy maid Elizabeth made a Votarisse in
Canterbury, was taught by Bocking her Ghostly Father, and suspected Paramour,
to counterfeit many feigned trances, The counterfetings of Elizabeth Barton.
and in the same to utter many virtuous words for the rebuke of sin, under
which, more freely she was heard against Luthers Doctrine, and the Scriptures
translation, then desired of many: neither so only, but that she gave forth
from God, and his Saints, by sundry suggestiue Revelations, Edward Hall. Ioh.
Stow. Holinsh.
that if the King proceeded in his divorce, and second marriage, he should not
reign in his Realm one month after, nor rest in Gods favor the space of an
hour. But the truth discovered by Gods true Ministers, this Oracle gave place
as all other such Cranmer. Cromwell. Latimer.
did, when Christ by his death stopped their lying mouths: for her self and
Elizab. Barton. Edward Bocking. Richard Deering. Richard Risby. Richard
Master. Henry Gould. Two Monks.
seven of her Disciples were executed for Treason at Tiborne, and the other
six put to their fines and imprisonment. With the like counterfeit revelations
and fained predictions this Generation of Hypocrites had brought Edward Lord
Stafford, Duke of Buckingham unto his unhappy end, when as by the working of
John de la Court, his own Confessor, together with Nicolas Hopkins a Monk of
the Carthusian Order, in the Priorie John Stow.
of Henton in Somersetshire, who by his visions from heaven forsooth, heartned
him for the Crown; but Edward Duke of Buckingham beheaded.
before his own Coronet could aspire to that top, he worthily lost both
head and all upon Tower Hill for his treason, Ann. Dom. 1521. Unto such sins
the world was then subject, and into such conceits their reputed holiness had
brought them, Holinshed.
not only among the simple and unlettered, but even with them that seemed to
be learned indeed: for by certain predictions foreshewing a great deluge,
Prior Bolton of Saint Bartholmewes in London The vain fear of Prior Bolton.
was so fearful, that he built him a house upon the height of Harrow hill,
storing it with provisions necessary, to keep himself from drowning, in A. D.
1524.

(84) But the Popes Holiness fearing the event of the game, if every man might
set and cast at his The Pope inciteth James King of Scotland against England.
Crown, thought it high time to lay hand on his own State, and to keep what
was left, lestal would be gone; to which end he solicited many Christian
Princes to stand on his part, and among them sent his Brief unto James the fifth
king of Scotland, desiring his assistance against King Henry of England, whom
in John Lesly.
his Consistory he had pronounced to be an Heretic, a Schismatike, a
manifest Adulterer, a public murderer, a committer of Sacrilege, a Rebel,
and High treason
convict of Laesae Maiestatis, for that he had risen against him who was his
Lord. And therefore he had justly deprived him of his said Kingdom, and would
dispose the same to him and other Princes: so as The Pope gives England to him
that could get it.
they would assist to recover the same, a very good provision, and very well
foreseen; for notwithstanding these boisterous blasts from Rome, the King kept
his Crown, and was rather feared of the Popes best Abetters, then did fear
any potent power that the world could afford, whose thoughts were now busied
for the Coronation of his Queen.

(85) For Queen Anne conceived, and perceived with Child, her royal
Coronation was forthwith Queen Anne crowned.
prepared, which with all royal obseruances upon the first of June, being
Whitsunday was performed; and the seventh of September following, she bare
into the world that excellent Princess, which afterward Lady Elizabeth's
birth. A. D. 1533.
proved the mirror of the world, even Lady ELIZABETH, our late and most famous
Queen.

(86) True it is, that the zealous conversation of this godly Queen gave great
encouragements unto many, more publicly with boldness to profess the Gospel;
so that the Ministers formerly fled in case Fox Martyr. 1366.
of Religion, returned again into England, where the new Testament (translated
by Tyndall) was read, but with such dislikes to the Bishops, that they got it
to be burnt. Notwithstanding, to tickle the Kings ear, they preached against
the Popes supremacy, and took the oath for the King themselves; abolished his
authority by Act of Parliament, and Statut. Parl. H. 28. cap. 10.
suppressed many Monasteries; leaving their revenues to the Kings will; fair
introductions indeed for what they intended, as the sequel of the six
Articles by them procured, does manifestly show: and those purposely made
against the maintainers of the Gospel, whereof Queen Anne was the chief,
Queen Anne a great lover of the Gospel.
who first was most favorable to those learned Divines, that laid man's
salvation upon the Rock Christ, next in procuring a tolleration from the king
for them, whose doctrine did daily undermine the Papal foundation: and lastly,
she by no means would consent to marry the King, until a lawful divorce was
had for his separation from Lady Katherine; his brother Arthurs wife, which
thing this Pope greatly withstood: these were causes sufficient to move his
Holiness to bend his brow, and by his Instruments in Court to cut off the
principal mouer, who foreslowing no time took the Ball before his rebound.

(87) For the Queen delivered of a dead Child, A. D. 1536. Ian. 29.
and the Kings affection wandering elsewhere, gave them occasion to work on
that Subject, which God in his wisdom would have down, lest his deliverance
from the bondage of darkness should be attributed Queen Anne delivered of a
dea^ Child.
to any fleshly arm, or that she who then sat in the throne of the worlds
full felicity, should fix her senses on so fickle a Center, who having had
experience what it was to be a Prince, must henceforth practice the patience
of a poor prisoner, which in the third year of her marriage, and second of
May, to act the woeful Scene of her Tragedy, she came upon the Stage, being
sent to the Tower of London, and charged with high Treason against the King: at
whose first entrance she fell on her knees before Thomas Audley Lord
Chancellor, Queen (...) sent to the Tower.
the Duke of Norfolk; and Thomas Cromwell Secretary her bringers, desiring God
so to help her as sne was guiltless of those things whereof she was accused,
beseeching those Lords to be Petitioners unto his Majesty in her behalf, who
lamenting her case, left her Prisoner with Sir William Kingston Constable of
the place.

(88) I will in no wise excuse her guilt, having had judgment and death by
law, though others, and that upon just occasions before me have done, but will
speak from them what they have said; and namely one, that wrote thereof unto a
worthy and reverent person; in whose defense his words are these: I^seemeth
very plain, that the crimes supposed Much. Sandt. The (...) of Queen Anne.
against this Christian Queen Anne, were matters contrived by the devise of
the Pope, and his Instruments her enemies. None of them all that were accused
in the same Treason, confessing the Act even unto death, but have left direct
Testimonies in writing to the contrary; one mean Groom excepted, namely Mark
Smeton, made confession upon some promise of life belike, but had his head cut
off before he was aware, or had time to recall what he had said. The like did
Cromwell the Secretary Cromwels letter to the King under his own hand
signify to the King, after the prisoners had been thoroughly examined in the
Tower by the Council, who wrote thus in his letter on the same day; many
things have been objected, but nothing confessed, only some circumstances have
been acknowledged by Mark. And so does Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury in
his letter of comfort unto Archbishop Cranmers let (...) to the King.
the King, who sore lamented that such a star was fallen, if her gilt could
be proved, and willed his Highness to stand in defense of the Gospel as she
had done, without any report of confessing or acknowledging any such Acts as
were objected, which as Sleidon writes, were Adultery, and incest, but
unjustly (says he) as it is supposed and proved since: With Sleidans Com. l. 10
her were executed certain Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber, namely,
Norris, Weston, Brewton, and one Marks, which contrary to his conscience (as it
is reported) for hope of preferment subscribed to a bill, whereby he L.
Rochford. No^is. West. (...) and Marks beheaded.
condemned both himself and all the rest.

(89) For upon the seventh of May, her brother George Bullen Lord Rochford, for
his supposed offense with these four before named, were all of them beheaded
upon the Tower hill, but none of them confessing the Action; I have heard it
reported that Rochford the Queens brother coming to her bed side to solicit
a suite, leaned thereupon to whisper her in the ear; which the Spials gave
forth that he did so, to kiss the Queen, howsoever, they are dead, and the
Queen must die, who two days before May 15.
had been arraigned in the Tower, the Duke of Norfolk being her Judge; to her
indictment she answered so effectually, that she seemed to clear Queen Anne
condemned and beheaded.
all matters laid to her charge; yet was she found guilty, and upon the
nineteenth day of May; was brought to a Scaffold erected on the Green within
the said Tower, where, in presence of many noble men, the Lord Mayor of
London, the Shiriffes, and some principal commoners, she is said to have
spoken these words in their presence.

(90) Good Christian people, I am come hither Robert Green.
to die; for according to the Law, and by the Law Queen Annes speech at her
death.
I am judged to death, and therefore I will speak nothing against it; I come
hither to accuse no

ye shall be judged hereafter to be shedars of some of Crystyn blood, and
destroiers of your even Christian. From Robart Ask chief Captain of the
Comynalty assembled in pilgrimage, For the Barony and Cominalty of the same.

By me Robert Ask in the name of all the Comynalty and Barony.

Of such terror and haughty spirit was this Captain Ex MS.
Ask, that when Lancaster an Herald at Arms, was sent to declare the Kings
message in Pomfret Castle (which the Rebels had got by surrender from the Lord
Darcy) he so blustred out his answers, that the daunted man excusing himself
to be but a messenger, fell before him on his knees; till the Archbishop of
York took him up, saying, it was not beseeming the Coat he wore, to
prostrate to any, but only to his Sovereign. Read likewise if The audacious
dealings of the Rebels.
you please this strange Mandate from some mean man among them; the false
suggestion that they possessed the ignorant with, and the Oath whereunto these
holy Pilgrims were sworn, as I find them recorded by themselves in these
very words.

To the Commyns of Hawkeside parish Bailiffs, or Constables, with all the
Hamlets of the same.

Well-beloved we greet you well, and whereas our brother Poverty, and our brother
Rogers, goith forward, is openly for the aid and asistance of your faith, and
holy Church, and for the reformation of such Abbeys and Monasteries, now
dissolved and subpressed without any Just cause. Wherefore gudde brethers, For
as much as our said brederyn has send to us for aid and help, we do not
only effectualy desire you, but also under the pain of deadly sin we
comaunde you and every of you, to be at the stoke Green beside
Hawkeside-kirke, the Saturday next being the xxviij. day of October by xi. of
the Clokke, in your best array: as you will make answer before the heigh Judge
at the dreadful day of Dome, and in the pain of pulling down your Houses,
and leasing of your gudds, and your bodies to be at the Capteyns will: For at
the place aforesaid, then and there, ye and we, shall take further direction
concerning our faith, so far decayed, And for gudde and laudable Customs of
the Country, And such naughty inventions and strange Articles now accepted and
admitted, so that our said brother be subdued, they are like to go furthwards
to utter undoing of the Commyn wealth.

(97) And the more to draw forward the rude multitude which were forward
enough of themselves, Slanderous untruths against the King.
they set forth in writing these slanderous untruths against the King.

1 The first is that no infant shall receive the blessed Sacrament of Baptism,
bott unless an trybett to be paid to the King. 2 The second is that no man
under xx1. Lands shall eyte no bread made of Wheat, ner Capon, chekyn, gois,
ner pigge, bott unless to pay a trybett to the King. 3 The third is that for
every ploghe land the King will have en trybett, with other diverse extreme
urgent causes, and hertely fareye well.
The Oath of the holy Pilgrims.

Ye shall not enter into this our Pilgrimage of Grace for the Commyn wealth, but
only for the love that you do The oath of the Pilgrims.
bear unto Almighty Godde, his faith, and to holy Church militant, the
maintenance thereof, to the preservation of the Kings person, his issew, to the
purifying of Nobility, and to expulse all vilayne blood, and evil Councellers
against the Commyn welthe, from his Grace and the privy Counsel of the same,
and that ye shall not enter into our said Pilgramege, for no particular
proffite to your self, nor to do no displeasure to no pri^ey person, but by
Council for the Commyn welthe, ner slay, ner murder for no envy, but in your
hertts put away all fear and dread, and take before you the Cross of Criste,
and in your herts his faith, the restitution of the Church, the subpression of
these Herytyks, and their opynyons, by all the holle contents of this Book.

And for the observation of this Oath, hear another command of the
Commissioners, as we find it recorded.

To the Bayliffes and Communes of the Town of Skarboro.

Welbelouyd, we Francys By god Knight, and John Halom yoman, in the name of
all the Communes, command anacharde you, that ye assemble your selves together
mediately upon recepete hereof, and so take this oath wychys we here send unto
you, and then after in all haste possible to assist and hayde these ower
brethern, women we send to you to keep, and make sure the Castle, Town, and
Port of Skarboro, that no man enter into the same Castle, that belongys unto
Rafe Euers the younger Knight, nor any outher whiches did not take full part
with the Communes, at ower first and last assemblynge in whoys name, aethority,
or attorney soever they cume, unless they have license of all the communes, in
like manner, ye shall truly keep all sichys ordinance, and ship to the use
of the Communes, with wyches we charde you at our late being here, and this
not to fail, upon pain of yower lives, ye shall refer credence unto this
messyngeres, thus in have: Fare ye well, from Settrynton this Mondaye Sancte
Mawris day.

Francis Bigott Knight in the name, and by Commandment of all the Communes.

Against these rout of Rebels, George Earl of Shrewsbury, not staying for the
Kings commission The Earl of Shrewsbury makes against the Rebels.
mustred his men, misdeemed of many, that he meant to be a Pilgrim himself,
unto which suspectors he made a loyal Oration, disclaiming all intention
against their attempts, how colorable so ever they laid their pretense; which
done he caused his Chaplen to minister him an Oath of his loyalty, before them
in the Field. It was likewise reported that the Earl of Darby was set forward
toward them, whom the Pilgrims well hoped would have sided Ex MS. R. Coe.
with them, as by their mandate sent to the Brethren appears, where is forbid
that none of them should aid him, unless he took the Oath: which he never
meant to assay or swear to.

(98) But true it is the King sent Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Lord General
against them, accompanied Thomas Duke of Norfolk Lord Lieutenant of the North.
with the Marquess of Excester, the Earls of Huntingdon and Rutland; who
ioining their powers made toward Doncaster, where the Rebels then lay in their
Randiuou; in whose sight immediately they set up their Tents, and determined
battle upon the next day; but on the night betwixt, such fluds of water fell,
that the river Dun ouerflowed his bancke, and admitted no passage over the
Bridge, which thing was taken as a token from God; and thereupon the Lord
General offered them Conference, alleging that the King was tender of his
Subjects lives, Pardon and peace offered to the Rebels.
and very unwilling to shed Christian blood: that their cause should be
favorably heard, and just complaints redressed, if with submission and duty of
Subjects, they would yield themselves and affairs to the Kings mercy; that
this their rebellious proceedings, was not only the forerunning messenger of
destruction to themselves and partakers, but gave also a great advantage unto
the Scots, the dangerous enemy unto the Land, and them all: with these and the
like persuasions the matter was so forwarded, that a conference was appointed
at Doncaster, and four pledges were sent from the Lord General unto the
Commons, for the safe returns of their assigned Commissioners, which were
these by name.

Lord Neuill. Lord Darcy. Lord Stressre. Lord Lumley. Lord Latimer. Sir Thomas
Percy. Sir George Darcy. Robert Ask Captain. Sir Raufe Clayer, Seni. Sir
Raufe Clayer Iun. Sir Raufe Euers. Sir William Constable. Sir Raufe Constable.
Sir Rich: Tempest. Sir Raufe Romemer. Sir William Eustan. Sir George Lawton.
Sir Thomas Hylton. M. Robert Constable. M. Richard Banner. M. Wiseroppe.
Whose Articles and demands were these, as follows. Ex Original MS.


The instruction for Sir Thomas Hilton and other Companyons.
1 First to declare to the Duke of Norfolk, and other the Lordys, that
thentent of our meeting of our party, The demands of the Commons
surely is meant and thought of assured troth, without any manner of disceyte,
or male engyne. 2 The second is to receive the Kings s^ecundyth, under the
Broad Seal of England, and to deliver our s^ecundyth, and promise, under owre
hands, for the Lordys there. 3 The third to entreat of owre general perdon,
for all causys, and all persons, which be within the Realm, wyche in heart,
word, or deed assentyd, edyter procured, the furtherance in this our quarrel,
may be pardoned life, lands, goods; and that in the said perdon, nor other the
Kings records, we be not witon reputed; ne taken, as Rebylleous or tretors, nor
rehersyd in the same. 4 The fourth that Thomas Cromwell, nor any of his band
or serte, be not at owre metyng at Doncastre, but abcente themself from the
Council. 5 The fifth, to receive the Kings answer by the declarations of the
Lords, and to certify the vere ete^t thereof to us there.
Also to know what authority the Lords have to etrete, in promise with us there,
as well of owre promise of other things.

Also to know what plege the will deliver for owr Capitans.

Also if this pertyculars be concluded, then for to condyscend of other
perticulars.

1 The first touching our faith, to have the heresies of Luther, The whole
drift was to down with the Gospel.
Wyclyf, Hussee, Melancton, Ecolampadius, Busyrs, the Confession Germane, the
Applege of Melanqton, the work of Tyndale; of Bernys, Fryth, of Marshall,
Rastell, the Books of Sent Germane, and such other of any manner Heresy,
without the Realm, not to be kept, but utterly to be dystryed. 2 The secund to
have the supreme of the Church t^ching cure of sowlle to be reseruyd to the Sea
of Rome, as before hit whas accustomyd for to be; and to have the consecration
of Byshoppys fr^e him without any first fr^ts, or pencyons to him to be paid
out of this Realm, or else a pencion reasonable for the outward defense of
our faith.
Also we beseke humble our most drade Soueraign Lord that the Lady Mary may be
legetymate, and the estatutes contrary to the same to be a^lyd for the dome of
the title that might incur to the Crown by Scotland, and that to be by
Parliament.

Also to have the Abbeys that be suppressed to be restoryd to their Lands,
Howsys, and Goods.

Also to have the Tents and first fr^ts clearly dischargyd, onles the Clergy
will of their selfys gr^ a Rent or Charge to the augmentation of the Crown.

Also to have the Freres obser^s restoryd to their houses again.

Also to have the Heretics Bishoppys, and temporal men of their seete, to have
condign ponysment by fire, or such An uncharitable and unchristian motion.
other; or else to try there quarrel with us and our partaker sin batell.

Also to have the Lord Cr^mwell, the Lord Chanceler, and Sir Ryc. Rych Knight
to have condign ponysment, as subuerters of the gudlawes of the Rea^me; and
onetemers of the stese sect of this false heretykes first inuenter and brengers
of them.

Also that the Landys in Westmorland, Comberland, Kendale, Dentsyd, Furnes, and
the Abbeis lands in York, Worsaidyshire, Kerbyshire, Neuerdale, main be
Tennant Right, and the lord to have at every change two years rent, in the
name of a agarsumme, and no more, according to a grant now made by the Lords to
the Commens under their Seals, and this to be done by Act of Parliament.

Also the hand-gunnys and Crosse-boys, with the penalty of the same to be
repelled, onles hit be in the Kings forests and Parkes to kyllers of Dear.

Also that Doctor Lee, and Doctor Leyton, may have condign ponyshment for
their extortions in time of visitation, in brybes, of some religyous houses, x.
l. xx. l. and for other sums, beside horsys, vowsens, leases, under covent
seallys, by them taken, and other abominable Acts by them committed and done.

Also to see reformation for the election of Knights of shire, and the B^rgys;
and for the use among the Lords in the Perlament after the ancient custom.

Also the Statute for inclosyng Intackes to be put in execution, that all
Intacks, Inclosys sith Anno quarto Henrici ^eptimi be pullyd down exceeding
Forests, and Parkys to be dystrud of their qu^ition, and tax now granted by
Parliament.

Also to have the Parlyament in a convenient place as Nottingham or York, and
the same to be so moved shortly.

Also that it may be enacted by authority of Parliament, that all recognisans,
stat^tys, penaltyes, newly forfeyted during the time of the Commission may be
pardoned and discharged, as well against the King as stranger.

Also the Privilege of the Right of the Church to be confirmed by Act of
Parliament, and Prysts not to suffer onles they be degraded; a man to be saved
by his Book; Sanctuary to save a man in all causes in extreme need, and the
Church to save a man for forty days; and further according to the ^wes as they
were used in the beginning of the Kyngys days.

Also the libertyes of the Church to have their old Customs, as the County
Palatine of Durham, Beuerley, Reppon, S. Peter of York, and such other by Act
of Parliament.

Also to have the Statute that no man shall declare his will on his land to be
repelled.

Also the Statute of treason for W^ys, made since Anno xxi. of our Sovereign
that now is to be in like wise repelled.

Also that the common Law may have place as well as was used in the beginning of
your gracious reign, and that all Injunctions be clearly denied, and not
granted, unless the matter be heard in the Cha^cery, and there determined.

Also that no man upon sub poena, or Privy Seal from Trent Northward, appear
but at Yo^rke, or by Attorney unless it be directed upon pene of allegyance,
or for like matter concerning the King.

Also a rem^dy against Exchequer for f^ing of false Offices, and extortions in
taking of Fees, for that which is not held of the King, and against the Pr^ters
thereof.

These were the Instructions given to their Co^ssioners to be c^ferred upon,
all which as it should seem, were drawn into four Articles or heads, as by
the mynute of the Kings answer thereunto does appear: which Original in many
places with his own hand is interlined with so wise and learned additions, as
do confirm his Kingly care, both for the Church and common weal: the true
copy whereof to his great f^e is as follows: his corrections and additions is
varied from the rest by a several Character.

[Petitions]

An Answer to the [demaunds] of the Rebels in Yorkshire, by the Kings
Highness.

for the premises, or any of them, by his heirs, or by any his Officiaries,
Ministers, or Subjects, by any manner of means or in any manner of wise.
Provided always, that you and every of you in token of a perfect declaration
and knowledge, that ye do heartily lame^nd be sorry for your said offencies,
shall make your humbly submission unto his Highness, in the presence of his
right trusty and right entirely beloved Cosens and Concellairs: the Duke of
Norforlke, and the Earl of Shrewsburie his Lieutenants General, or any of
them, or to their Deputy or Deputies of them, or any of them, or such other
person, or persons as the Kings Highness shall appoint for the same: Furthermore
the Kings most royal Magesty, streitely charge and commands, that you and
every of you, shall from henceforth, like true and faithful Subjects use your
selves, in Gods peace, and his, according to the duties of alleagance, and
that you shall in no wise hereafter, attempt to make or procure, any such
rebellion, intent, unlawful Assemblies, Riots, Rowts, and Conspirations, nor
at the Commandment, nor by the Authority of any person, of what estate or
degree, or for what cause soever it be, shall arise in any forcible manner, and
array, unless it be at the special commandment of the Kings Highness, or his
Lieutenant sufficiently auctorised for the same. In witness whereof the Kings
most royal Magesty, has caused this his Proclamation to be made Patent, and
sealed with his great sail at Richemounte the IX. day of December in the
XXVIII. year of his Reign. 1536.

Pexsall.

Notwithstanding this General pardon and merciful dealings of the King a new
Insurrection was raised in the North, wherein many of the former were now again
Actors, as by name Robert Ask whom Holinsh. page 944.
the King had not only pardoned, but also highly rewarded, the Lord Dacres,
Sir Robert Constable, Sir Francis ^ygod, Pulmer, Percy, Hamilt^n, Tempest and
Lumley, all of them put to death, as they well deserved. Ask executed.


(99) In which Commotions those men whose profession was only the Book and
their ^eades, mistaking Christ's meaning, who bad his Disciples to sell their
coat, and to buy a sword, came armed among Luke ^2. 36. Spiritual men
Commotioners.
the Rebels into the Field, and with them were taken as Traitors against the
Crown: for which offense many of them suffered death: namely, John Paslew
Abbot of Whaley in Lincolneshire, John Castegate and William Haydocke Monks of
the same house, Monks hanged for rebellion.
Robert Hobs Abbot of Woborne in Bedfordshire, Adam Sudbury Abbot of Gernaux
with Astbeed a Monk of that house; the Abbot of Sawley in Lancashire and the
Prior of the same place, William Would Prior of Birlington, the Parson of
Pudington, five Priests of Lincolnshire, and with them their chiefetaine,
Captain Cobbler, and John Allen Priest.

(100) These stirs thus quieted and the Statesmen at leisure to prevent the
like, a Commission Idols and Monasteries suppressed by Parliament.
came forth to purge the Churches of Idols; and to suppress the Monasteries
to the Kings use, granted unto him by Parliament: the one of them, the only
working cause, through the gain that was got by ignorant devotion, and gadding
on pilgrimage, and the other, the Nest and very receptacle of all traitorous
attempters, against the peace of the Land and Supremacy of the Crown. The
abuse of the first was solemnly showed at Paul's Cross in London, A. D. 1538.
upon Sunday the twenty four of February, by Doctor John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, where the Roode The Roode of Grace broken at Paul's Cross.
of Boxley in Kent, commonly called the Rood of Grace, made with diverse vices
to bow down and to lift up it self, to shake, and to stir both Heads, Lamb.
Peram. in Boxeley.
hands, and feet, to roll the eyes, move the lips and to bend the brows;
was then broken and pulled in pieces. So likewise the Images of our Lady of
Walsingham and Ipswich, set and besprinkled with Jewels, Our Lady of Walsingham
and other Images burnt.
and Gemmes, with diverse others both of England and Wales; were brought to
London and burnt at Chelsey before the Lord Crumwell. Then the Axes of the
hewers began to cast down the walls of all Monasteries, whose number (as
Cambden does account Cambd. Brit. 645. Monasteries in England, 90. Colleges.
110. Religious Hospitals. 2374. Chaunteries and free Chapels.
them) were six hundred forty five, besides fourscore and ten Colleges,
them of Oxford and Cambridge not accounted: of Hospitals one hundred and ten,
and of Chaunteries and free Chapels two thousand, three hundred, seventy
four, all of them almost were then borne down with the sudden deluge of those
tempestuous times, whilst the world stood amazed, King Henry proceeded, and
the Clergy men groaned under their own destructions; among these the Shrine of
Thomas Becket was defaced, which did abound with more then Princely riches:
whose meanest part was pure gold, garnished with many precious stones, as
Erasmus that saw Eras. Dialogue.
it, has written, whereof the chiefest was a rich Gemme of France, offered by
King Lewis, who asked W. Lamb. Peram.
and obtained (you may be sure, he buying it so dear) that no passenger
betwixt Dover and White-sand should perish by shipwreck; his bones by Stephen
Langton had been laid in a golden Shrine, The state and opinion of Tho.
Beckets Shrine.
his name canonized, and the day of his death made annually holy, such concurse
of Pilgrim, such pressing to touch him, and such creeping and kneeling to his
Tomb, that the prints of their devotion in the Marble stones, remains to this
day; every Pillar resounding the miracles of this reputed Martyr, and the
Church it self dedicated to Christ, forced to give place to the name of Saint
Thomas. The Timber work of this Shrine was covered with John Stow.
plates of gold, damasked and embossed with wires of gold, garnished with
broches, images, angels, precious The great riches of Beckets Shrine.
stones, and great Orient Pearls: all these defaced filled two Chests and were
for price of an inestimable value. But in steed of these Dagons, the Bible in
English was commanded to be read in all Churches, and Register Books of
weddings, Christenings and Burials in every of them to be kept.

(101) The yearly revenues of these, as they were valewed by the
Commissioners, at their subuersions The great revenues of the Monasteries.
amounted to an inestimable sum, as appears by the Original Book itself
presented to the King, whereof more shall be spoken in the end of this chapter,
and yet most of them rated at Robinhoods penny-worthes, what their rents were,
a libell Supplication of Beggars.
scattered abroad, and read to the king, by demonstration did prove, wherein
was accounted, that unto the five Orders of Friars, (every householder paying
them five pence the Quarter) the sum of forty three thousand, three hundred,
thirty three pound, The great revenues of the Friars.
six shillings and eight pence sterling, was paid them by year, besides the
revenues of their own lands, which was not a little, so that not without
cause many entered into a Monastical life, rather to live at full, and without
cares of this world, then to feed the flock of Christ, or to win them, and
not theirs, after the example of the Apostle. For the Testament 2. Cor. 12. 14.
of Christ, was unto most of these, as a book sealed with seven seals, and
their mouths vnmuzled they did devour, but not tread out the Corn, D^ut. 25.
4.
so that the Sun by their doctrine seemed to be darkened, as with smoke, and
themselves to be the Apoca. 9.
Locustes that ouerspread the superficies of the Earth, whose faces were like
men, pretending humanity, their hair like women in show of modesty, their
Crowns of counterfeited gould, signifying their usurped authority, their
teeth like Lions showing their Tyranny, their force like horses prepared for
battle, their habergions of Iron betokening their strength, the sound of their
wings, the thundering out their mandates like to the rumbling of Chariots in
war, their Tails ((...) Prophets) having stings like unto Scorpions, a^
their King the bad Abaddon, even the Angel of the Bottomless pit. All those
allusions most aptly sitting these Cloistered Friars, who now grown to the
height of their sins, their skirts were discovered, that their shame might
Iere. 13 26.
appear; being the only men then laid open to the world.

(102) Against whose doctrine, (besides many others in other foreign parts)
two in the days of K. Henry the fourth, the first English King that put any
Many suffered death for the Gospel before that Martin Luther wrote.
to death for the doctrine of Rome; (omitting Sir John Oldcastle and others,
that died for the Gospels defense, in the days of King Henry the fifth) four
in the reign of innocent Henry the sixth. One in the days of King Edward the
fourth; and ten in the time of King Henry the seventh, sealed the doctrine
against the papal religion with their blood; all of them being martyred before
that Martin Luther wrote. And in the reign of this King twenty six suffered
the fire, before the flames thereof could be quenched, which a while was done
by the means of good Queen Anne, till afterward they mounted Queen Anne
Bullen a favorer of the Gospel, stayed the rage against the Professors.
higher, when the six Articles were made: but because this Ecclesiasticke text
is handled elsewhere, and seems unsociable to our begun Subject, we will
refer the Reader for these matters unto the industrious pains of that worthy
and ever venerable man M. Fox, taken in his Acts and Monuments of
Ecclesiastical history.

(103) The Monasteries thus dissolved, and the Revenues thereof converted to
temporal uses, King (...) doings displeased many Chri^ Princes.
King Henry ran in great obloquie of many foreign Potentates, but most
especially of the Pope; who with Cardinal Poole instigated diverse Princes in
Christendom to invade England thus fallen from his faith: Yea, and home-borne
Subjects disliking the course for Papisticall subversion, by secret working
sought to deprive King Henry, and to raise up Reynold Poole unto the Regal
dignity, as by their inditements appears. The persons convicted, were Lord
Henry Courtney Marquess of Excester, and Earl of Devonshire, the son of
Lady Katherine, the seventh daughter of King Edward the fourth. Henry Poole
Lord Montacute, with Sir Geffrey his brother, and Sir Edward Neuill brother to
the Lord of Abergauenny. These Pooles were the sons of Lady Margaret
Countess of Salisbury, the only daughter of George Duke of Clarence: and of
these (...) Poole once Deane of Excester, and now Cardinal^ at (...) was
accounted the only man.

(104) And this foresaid Lord Marquess had formerly been in such favor with
King Henry, that at his going into France he ordained him his Heir apparent,
though at his return upon grave deliberation, he saw it better policy to
pluck him down Camb. Brit.
then was used in setting him up, lest in acting his part upon that infectiue
stage, he put the land to as much trouble as the arreared Duke Richard of
York had done, after he was ordained heir apparent, which Title produced the
Tragedy of his raiser King Henry the sixth, and now having him and his Abetters
upon the advantage, the better to secure Lord Marquess and others beheaded. A.
D. 1539. Ian. 9.
his own Estate, he caused the heads of this Lord Marquess with the Lord
Montacute, and Sir Edward Neuill to be cut off upon Tower Hill.

(105) The King then a Widdower, since the death of Queen Jane, who departed
this life two years before, meant to (...) wh^ he had done, maugre all (...)
better ^o effect, by the Counsel* (...) (...)* (...) sought and obtained the
(...) the Princes of (...), and heard the motion for marriage with the Lady
Anne sister to William Duke of (...), whose other Ioh. (...).
sister Frederick Duke of (...) had espoused, a great favorer of the Gospel,
and (...) of Martin Luther the zealous Preacher (...) thereof. But whether for
the death of (...), or that he would have his wives sister bestowed nearer at
home (which thing he pretended) a great hind^er he was of that match. But the
Lady sent into England, and married unto King (...), (...) nothing King Henry
married Anne of (...). (...). 6. An. 1540.
pleasing in his eye; which (...) then Bishop of Winchester perc^ing* thought
it a fit subject for him to work upon, (...) Lord Cromwell the maker of the
much* he therefore instigated iealousies daily into the Kings (...), (...)*
Mart. 1296.
first exasperating the hatred of the Princes of (...)ny to him-wards, and
especially of Duke Frederick his compulsiue brother in Law, the Emperor,
French Kings, Scots and the Pope, all seeking at once to raise their powers
against England. The civil tumults lately passed, and new commotions greatly
to be feared, he let not to remember, and all to nip the spring of the new
spreading Gospel, whereby The six Articles devised*
this wise Politician in the end got six such Articles against it, as the
Consistory of Hell could devise no worse. Whose cruelties were such that not
long after, and in the days of this King, some of those Acts were again
repealed, and some of them qualified, 32. H. 8. chap. 10* 35. H. 8. cap. 5.
as too sharp and searching into the blood of the Kings best Subjects.

(106) The fruit of these bloodthirsty instigators, the Lord Cromwell, and
Lady Anne of Cleue soon Lord Cromwell imprisoned.
tasted of, he by imprisonment and death, and she by disgrace and divorce;
having been his wife from lanuary to June, in all which time the King refrained
the mutual knowledge of her body, for the dislike he had of her person, even
at the first sight, as himself called to witness the Lord Cromwell then
Prisoner In a letter writ^ ten by himself. Ex MS. An^ 32. (...). (...). cap.
^5.
in the Tower, for whose report he wrote a Letter with his own hand; and she
good Lady no other cause alleged, was divorced by Parliament, when also it
was enacted that she should no Queen (...) divorced by Parliament.
longer be styled Queen. The Lord Cromwell was charged by the Lord Rich, and
Sir George Throgmort^ with speaking of certain general words, not excepting
therein the Kings person, which neuertheresse were thought so slight and
insufficient to take away his life, that his enemies feared to put it to the
trial of his Peers, lest he should be acquitted by them, as the Lord Dacres
of the North not many years before had been; wherefore Cromwell affect his
death (...)ted by (...)meant. Ex MS.
there was a Bill drawn to attaint him of here^ and Treason, in general
words, rather then in particular proofs, which when he was dead, passed in
both houses of Parliament with the Kings assent:

(107) Howbeit S^ders that seldom speake^ well of the Gospels professors, will
have him to die D. (...)*
for the breach of a Law made by himself, which was, that one appeached of
treason, should not come in the Kings presence, till he had tried himself not
guilty; but besides that we find no such Act by him made: his indictment does
not charge him with treason, but with setting at liberty certain persons
committed for misprision of treason and here^* for favoring and maintaining
the transation of No such things as (...) (...) poseth (...) Cromwell.
heretical books into English; for bearing out Barnes and other heretical
Preachers* that himself was an heretic, and had spoken words* great word^ for
the upholding of his said religion, which were, that the King should not change
it if he would* for these things he was (...) by Parliament of high Treason,
and that grounded either upon a St^ute made in the fi^e and twenty of Edward
the N^ (...) by (...) well to cause (...).
third, or else by the explanation of that Act which refers the exposition
of Treasons to the (...), and so no way did (...) devise or make any law of
treason, which himself (...)* (...) that partial Romanist has said.

(108) But most sure it is* that the King^ ^on, altogether guided by the (...)
object* (...) ^other point in the Compass to fire his (...) eye, besides that
only, which by his (...) touched by the (...) of (...), and the (...) to be
the Lady (...), (...) ^ward (...) the Lady (...)*
the brother of Thomas Duk^ of (...)* (...) whom Cromwell standing in the
defense of (...) Anne, and using words of dis^ke (...) the Lady (...),
distasteful unto the King* was thereupon apprehended (his enemy so (...)) and
upon the A. D. 1540.
twenty eight of July suffered (...) with the (...) of the Axe upon (...),
(...) beheaded the (...) (...) of (...), neither (...) nor (...) quietly dying
for his offense (...).
committed (...)*

(109) The sword thus unsheathed upon the necks of the Nobility; struck off
the head of Margaret A. D. 1541. May 17.
Countess of Salisbury, daughter and he^re unto George Duke of Clarence, and
mother unto Reynold Poole Cardinal, being neither arraigned nor tried, but
condemned by Parliament as Cromwell had bin. Margaret Coun tesse of Salisbury
beheaded.
And the Lord Leonard Gray in this present year lost his head for treason, the
twenty eight of June. And the next day following Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of
the South, died at Tyborne for killing a private man in a fray. Neither was it
put up, until that Lord Dacres hanged.
the heads of Queen Katherine Howard, and the Lady Jane Rochford were stricken
off, the one for Adultery, the other for concealment, as was alleged, the
parties offending were Fra^it Dereham, and Thomas Culpepper, Dereham before
she was Queen, and Culpepper after, who both were executed at Tiburne, the
tenth of December, and the Stat. in 33. of H. (...). cap. 21.
twelfth of February following, Mistress Katherine Howard (for so in the Act
of her Attainture (...) is called) who had been styled and received Queen for
the space of six months, and fou^ days, with Since the eight of August (...).
the Lady Jane then widow, and late wife unto (...) Bullen, Lord Rochford, were
both of them brought unto a Scaffold raised upon the hill within the Queen
Katherine and the Lady Jane Rochford beheaded.
Tower, where they in lamentable passions suffered death.

(110) Howsoever those times afforded such Queens to the Kings bed, or
himself unfortunate in making his choice: yet many of no mean judgment have
rather accused King* Henry for his changing and variable affections, then
think them guilty in the breach of Matrimony. Of Anne we have seen what has
been said, and of this Queen let us hear what she protested after her
condemnation to (...) White Bishop of (...) her last Confessor, and by him
delivered to a noble young Lord of her name, and near alliance: Her words were
these: As to the Act my (...) Lord for which I stand condemned, God and his
holy Angels I take to witness upon my souls (...), that I die (...), never
having so abused my Sovereigns (...): what other sins and follies of youth I
have (...), I will not excuse; but (...) assured that for these, God has
brought this punishment upon me, and will (...) his (...) them, for which I
pray you, pray with me, unto his son and my S^iour Christ.

(111) As these then in case of Treasons either acted or intended, ended their
lives; so others in case of conscience (though diversely affected) c^e to The
(...) of (...)cted.
their deaths, and that by fo^ce of the Statutes enacted under this King;
whereof one was the abolishing of the Pope, and the oath of Supremacy, the S^t.
H. 8. 28. c. 10.
re^sers of either made offenders in stare of high Treason, and the other in
(...) of religion, when (...) Articl^ enacted by Parliament, was made Heresy
and death, to such as held or taught the con^, which Ar^cles were thus
concluded in both (...). H. 8. 3^. c. 4.
the houses of Parliament with consent of the King.

1* That after the words of consecration spoken by the Priest, the real and
natural body and blood The fix bloody Articles enacted.
of Christ, as he was conceived and crucified, was in the Sacrament, and no
other substance consisting, in the form of (...) and wi^e, besides the
substance of Christ God and man. 2 That the communion in both kind was not
necessary unto (...), the flesh only in form of bread, sufficient for the
Laity. 3 That Prie^ (...) they have recei^ed ^ders might not marry by the law
of God. 4 That the vows of chastity either in (...) or woman, ought by God^
law to be (...), and by which they are exempted from other (...) of Christian
people. 5 That priu^ Masses was necess^ry for the people, and agreeable to the
law of Go^. 6 That auricular confession was ^pedient (...) be retained, and
continued (...) the Church of God.
These Statutes I say as well the one as the other, brought many to their ends,
which otherwise were very good Subjects, and worthy instruments in the common
weal: for offending in the first, there died Bishop Pisher, and Sir Thomas
More, besides many Abbots, Priors, and Friars, and among John Fisher. Sir
Thomas Moore beheaded.
them, in Smithfield the Welsh rode set Friar Forest on fire, according to the
prophecy very rife in their mouths, that this holy rode should set a whole
forest on fire. For the other suffered in flames, many godly Christians,
whereof Robert Barnes a reverend Doctor, and worthy minister of Christ, the
first reducer (as M. Fox reports) of the University of Cambridge from
rudeness and barbarity, unto good Fox. Mart. pap. 1363.
literature and learning, was with the first: And Anne Askew a Gentlewoman of
an incomparable dexterity one of the last, who, above the weakness of her
sex most valiantly stood against the violence of the time.

(112) Her birth was worshipful, and education accordingly, bestowed in
marriage, unto John Anne Askew her story. Io. Bale Cent. 8. ^ol. 669.
Ky^e a Gentleman in (...), and commended by Bale for her rare wit, and elegant
beauty; which her pars the pensill of N. D. with his uneven hand (ever ouerhard
to shadow the truth,) has slanderously blurred and measured those graces in
her, by his own loose affections, and those want on (...), which in the height
of sin have changed Romans 1. 16.
the natural use of women against nature.

This young heifer (says he) abiding no yoke, a coy dame, and of very evil
fame, left the company of Master Three conuersions by N. D. page 495.
Ky^e, to (...) up (...) a Gospelling and G^ssipping where (...) might, and
ought not, but especially in London, and (...) the Court, now she being fair
and but twenty (...) years old at her death* does (...) show what Anne accused
by no rule of Christianity.
may be suspected of her life, and the mystical speeches and demands of the
Kings Co^sell touching her departure from her (...), were grounded upon
somewhat, especially in that she called her self (...) Askew alias Ky^e. Thus
(...) this (...) man has accused this holy Anne by the outward appearance of
her youth and beauty: as holy Anne by Eli was accused of (...) and (...)
compared.
drunkenness when her heart was most seruent, in supplications to her God, and
his partial pe^ made the (...) to (...) the (...) of her holy conversation to
find out some chafe, whereof none is free, nor is ^ee to be condemned upon
the imagerie of his suspicious head (who undoubtedly would have ^old all if any
thing could have been found) whereas she in the vigor of beauty and
weakness of her Sex, (...) the gaine-saiers of the truth with her dearest
blood: testifying from the Prisons her faith and constancy, and from the The
Counter* Newgate and the Tower.
Rack preached Christ, whereon most vnhumanely and against kind, she was
twice tormented; and lastly sealed her (...) in Smithfield through the (...) of
fire: being borne to the place of her death (...) (...)ned in Smithfield.
in a Chair, her bones so (...) by the R^cke that she could (...).

(113) The (...) N. D. whose affection to Chri^ Gospe^ (...) to the English
Crown (...) as (...) suppose. Three (...)ons. page 493.
has sufficiently (...)* to make her no (...), and that her (...) did demerit
the Rack, says that the King himself commanded that torture to be (...)*
(...) with her erroneous doctrine, his Court, his (...)* (...) daughters,
(...)* (...) and (...).
and (...). (...) the truth tells us that the (...) to rack her the second
(...) was (...) by (...) Lord Chancellor (who did it himself) to be
complained of to the King, who immediately took Boat and told the whole
Tragedy; whereof King (...) seemed to be sore offended, for using a woman with
such (...). (...) had the Popes (...) under the (...) of the Church and wing of
this (...), (...) they (...) not to follow the appeal of (...), even (...)
that slept in (...) own (...), which (...) (...) Parre, espoused Queen
(...)rines life laid (...).
unto him (...) three years before, and (...) (as this States intellige^cer
does confess) he meant to have Ibid. co^. p 494.
burned had he longer lived. For the truth is (says he) that the Kings
sickness and death shortly ensuing was the chief cause of her escape; and
the error of the Lord Chancellor Wriothesley, who let fall out of his boso^e,
the (...) three con^ersions.
Kings hand and commission for carrying her to the Tower gave occasion (the
paper found and brought her) to go and humble her self to the King; the
principal occasion against The Lord Chancellor lost his commission.
her, was Heretical Books, found in her closet, both brought and sent her by
Anne Askew, whereof thewitnesses were the Lady Herbert, Lady Jane, Lady Tyawit,
and others. Indeed it is true that by Gods providence such papers were let fall
out of the Lord Chancellors bosom containing certain Articles against her,
with a warrant to commit her to the Tower, whereunto the Kings hand was
subscribed: which being found was presently brought unto the Queen, whereof
the unexpected The Queen sees the sentence of her death.
content so deeply touched her tender heart, that forth with she fell into
great fears, laments, and a most heavy melancholy, and was in such danger of
death, that the King came to visit her, having not gone forth of his Chamber
of many days before; whereat she so reioiced, as she began to (...): and to
acknowledge her like love and duty, the next night following, repaired to the
Kings Bedchamber, accompanied only with the Queen Katherine visits the
King* who falls in conference with her about (...).
Lady Herbert her sister, and the Lady (...) the Kings niece, carrying the
Candle before her, of whose presence the King seemed to be most desirous* and
presently falling in talk of Religion, began to debate some question thereof
with the Queen, demanding to have her resolutions therein, but she knowing
that his nature was not to be crossed, and the soreness of his leg to increase
his chol^er, made him answer that she was a woman, accompanied with many
imperfectio^s, but his Majesty wise and (...), of wh^m Act. and Mon. Queen
Katherines wise answer.
she must learn as of her Lordand Head, for so God has appointed you (said
she) the Supreme Head of us all, of whom next unto him I will ever learnt.
Not so, by Saint Mary, said the King, you are become a Doctor Kate to instruct
us, and not to be instructed by us as often heretofore we have seem. Indeed
(said (...)) if your Majesty have so conceived, I have been mistaken in my
meaning, who have ever held it preposterous for a woman to instruct (...)*
Lord. And whereas I have heretofore held talk with your highness touching
Religion, it was to le^ne of your Majesty some excellent (...) which my self
stood in doubt of: and sometimes to the end that you might with less grief
passover this paineful time of your infirmity, wherein if by my overmuch
boldness I have failed in the latter, yet have I not (...) in the former, to
my no small benefit and comfort. And is it even so sweet heart? (quoth the
King) why then, are me friends, and so kissing her, gave her leave to depart.
But the The Lord Chancellors purpose to apprehand the Queen.
day drawn on for her apprehension, and the King disposed to take the ^yre,
sent for the Queen to walk in the (...), himself accompanied only with two
Gentlemen, and she with the three foresaid Ladies. Whenas suddenly the Lord
Chancellor with forty of the Guard, came into the Garden, with purpose to h^e
apperhended and carried the Queen to the Tower; whose malep^rt approach the
King greatly misliked, and ^ernely beholding him, slept aside, (...) him with
the names of (...), fool, and (...), bidding (...) out of presence. The Queen
seeing the King chased, but knew not the cause, indeauo^ed by all means to
(...) his Majesty, and i^treted for the Lord Chancellor, whose faultas she
thoughtand alleged, was rather through misimprision then will, and therefore,
said she, I will become an humble (...) him unto your Highness. Ah (...) (quoth
the King) (...) little (...) Kate (...) evil he (...) this (...) at thy hands:
of my word (sweet heart) (...) a (...). But in following this tr^ct of blood,
^owed from the fountain of (...) A^ticles, we have stepped over some other
occurrences that happened somewhat before this time, unto which with thy
patience, goodReader, we will return again.

(114) King Henry by order of Parliament having Henry assumeth the name of
King of Ireland. A. 154* confirmed by Parl. 35. Hen* (...). John (...)
assumed the Style and Title of King of Ireland, with the submission of most of
the Irish Nobi^ty, James his Nephew, King of Scotland, took it not well,
forthat, as Li^ley says, a great part of Ireland, especially in the North, had
been in possession of the Scotishmen for many hundred of years before. These
discontents conceived, King Henry well perceived; and because he would have
no ill will so near him, that had so many enuiers abroad, he sent unto King
James that it would please him to repair The Kings of England and Scotland
appoint to meet at York*
unto the City of York, where he would meet him, to confer for the wealth of
both the Realms, which at first was granted, but upon better advise,
unaccomplished, his Counselors moving the dangers; and his Clergy the fears,
lest their Religion should be changed to the offense of his confederates the
Pope, the Emperor, and the French King.

(115) The unkindness growing from this small spark, was presently kindled into
great flames, for A. D. 1542.
Commissioners being sent from both Kings, to view the limits of either
Kingdom, they fell at ods about a small piece of ground, and from that took
occasion of emulations and wars: to prosecute which King Henry prepared an
Army, and sent them into Scotland under the Conduct of the Duke of Norfolk,
accompanied with the Earls of Shrewsbury, An expedition into Scotland.
Darby, C^mberland, Surrey, Hertford, Augus and (...)land. These passing the
English Marches, did much hurt in the Kingdom of Scotland. To withstand whom
King Ia^es gathered a power, of five and thirty strong, and at Fa^aw more meant
to have bidden the Duke battle, which as that writer relaxed, was not then
minded to do, but made again into England, and passing the water Twe^d,
sustained great loss by the courageous pursuit of the Lord Huntly. King James
upon a lusty courage meaning to repair the Scot^ losses with the English
spoils, was very forward to follow the Duke into their Borders, but the
Scottish Nobility wisely waying the danger of war, by no means would either
assent, or assist The Scottish noblemen refuse to invade England*
him out of his own kingdom, affirming it honor sufficient, to have forced
the English back with no little loss.

(116) King I^es discontented at his Nobles danials, made toward the Burders
himself; where, moving the Lord Maxewell, Lord Warden of the West The Lord
(...) of the We^-Borders y^eld to the Kings persuasions.
Borders, with many other men of special favor and account, to invade
England, whereunto they gave their consents. These passing the River Eske, did
some small damage upon the Western Borderers, whereof Thomas (...) Dacres,
and Willi^ (...) says Stow.
(...) of (...) Hollinshed calls them, sent word to Thomas Wharton, Lord Warde^
for the King upon the West Marches: But the Scot^ coming forward* they were
forced to prepare for ^ight before the Lord (...) could come, and out of their
(...) company lest a stand upon the side of a hill.

(117) The Scots advanced forward with no little The mistaking of the (...).
hope, were pres^ly (...) the ^ght of these men, and verily thought (...) the
Lord (...) had assembled (...) Charge* or (...) the Duke of (...) with a great
Army were come to their (...), whereupon they began to consu^ what (...) to be
done, and demanding who was deputed (...) by the King, Oliver (...) of (...)
(...) the Kings (...) General.
nor honorable (...), being lifted up upon the Shoulders of two Soldiers,
(...) the (...) Commission, wherein himself was appointed their General, and
(...) it (...)* the Lords (...) that so many The Scottish No^ in (...) of their
general (...).
more worthy, honorable, and approved Cap^ of the (...)* should be (...) by
this his (...)* but ^o (...) of (...). In whose (...), and for the (...) of
their (...) (...).
^o (...), (...) willingly lost the (...).

(118) This (...) upon the twenty fourth of November, at a place beyond
Carliel, called Solem-mosse, where were taken Prisoners the Earls of
Solem-mosse.
Cassils and Glencarne, the Lords Maxwell, Flemming, Summerwell, Oliphant, and
Gray, Sir Oliver Sinclere, and Gra^n says four and twenty.
others, to the number of one and twenty men of account, who were conueighed to
London, and committed to the Tower. For grief of which loss, and suspicion of
his Nobility, King James fell into a melancholy Passion, which the birth of his
newborn Princess rather increased, then gave him any comfort, so as he
deceased the foureteenth day of December following, foreshewing (says Leslie)
great troubles to The death of K. (...) of Scotland.
follow in Scotland.

(119) News brought near at one instant, of the death of King James, and
birth of the Princess his daughter, King Henry intended to do that by the
match of a marriage, which long had been assayed A marriage intended betwixt
Prince Edward, and the young Queen of Scotland.
by the sword of Mars: all things so consorting as it did, he having one only
son, then above five years of age, and Scotland no heir beside this newborn daughter; their years suiting a consent for marriage, the whole Island
offering both the ioynter and dowry, and that which most moved, their chief
Nobility in his own hands, to be molded for this design, as if heaven it
self had bid the banes.

(120) Those Prisoners therefore which had remained in the Tower only two
days, upon the twenty The Scottish prisoners honorably entertained.
one of December, he sent for to Westminster, the Earls and Lords all suited
in Gowns of black damask, furred with Cunny, whereafter some words of
friendly reproof, they were bestowed among the English Nobility, who used them
according to their estates: and the third day in Christmas were invited to the
Court at Greenewich, where they went before the King to (...) Chapel, were
royally feasted, and the motion then made for the establishing of peace, by the
Conjunction of the two Princes, whereunto the Scottish were as willing as the
English, and proffered The Scottish Prisoners released without Ran. some.
all forward assistance to have it accomplished. So that these Nobles were
delivered without other ransom, and richly rewarded at their departure from
Court.

(121) These returned into Scotland, declared what they had done, and so
effectually followed the Io^ (...).
business, that in a Parliament assembled of the three Estates, the marriage was
confirmed, and a peace proclaimed to continue betwixt the two Realms The
marriage of Prince Edward and Queen Mary, concluded by Parliament.
the space of ten years, which agreements were sent into England by
honorable Ambassadors, and there interchangeably sealed betwixt these Potent
Estates. But Cardinal Bet^ Archbishop of Saint Andrews, fearing least
Scotland would change the Church Orders, (...) England had done (the Bible
already read in their own language, and the Popes usurped Cardinill (...)
against the (...)ringe with England.
power called in Question, as then it began to be* by the fervent preaching of
Friet Guiliam, to the great liking of most of the Lord*) made some exceptions
against the Earl Arraine the new chosen Governor, and second person in the
Land, being nearest in blood to the young Queen. And the French King not
liking this union with England, sought by The French King set^ faction* in
Scotland.
all means to (...) the same match: to effect which, he sent the Ea^le of
Lennox to persuade with the Governor, with great proffers and promises of
assistance, but finding him faithful unto King Henry* presently made faction
for the French, wherein he drew the Queen mother, the Earls Huntly, Argile,
M^trosse, Menteith, and many more Peers, the Cardinal amongst them ever the
chief.

(122) Earl Lennox thus grown into credit with the Queen mother, (...) made
strong by her adherents that favored the French, presently claimed to be
Governor of Scotland, being the second person of degree in the Realm, and
withal to have The Queen, and Queen mother conueyto ed (...).
the custody of the young Queen, who with he^ mother were forth with taken
from (...) under the charge of the Governor Arrai^e, and brought unto
Striueling strongly guarded, with the continual presence of the Lords, (...),
Ersk^, Fle^ing, and Ruthwen, least Queen Mary should be conveyed into England
unto King Henry. These violent courses, caused great Emulations among the
Scottish Nobility, each of them siding as their affections were settled, but
lastly agree to set the Crown on their young Queens head: prepared for the
solemnity, whereunto all the Lords came, excepting those that stood for
England, and from them the Governor Queen Marie of Scotland crowned.
with much ado was drawn to be present at the Coronation: but that
accomplished, and the state affairs consulted upon, it was agreed that the
French Kings suite should be favored, and that the Earl Arran should be
Governor still, whereat Earl Lennox conceived such displeasure, as he became
wholly The Earl of Lennox falls from the Queen mother.
for King Henry, and joined himself with the Earls of Augus, Gle^carne, and
Cassils, the Lords, Maxwel, Summeruell Gray, and others that stood with the
English for the match with Prince Edward.

(123) King Henry then hearing what was done, and intended* sent presently into
Scotland to demand King Henry d^ mandeth the young Scottish Queen.
the Custody of the young Queen, and that certain Scottish Noblemen might be
appointed to guarde her in England, until she came to years of consent,
according to Covenants formerly concluded; which no ways would be granted, and
thereupon he prepared an Army thetherward, under the Conduct of Lord Edward
Sei^er Earl of Hertford Lieutenant General by Land, accompanied with the
Earl of An Army (...) into Scotland.
(...), and a Fleet of two hundred sail by Sea, whereof Sir John Dudley,
Vicount Lisle was Admiral.

(124) To the aid of the Scots the Peopes holiness was very forward, who sent
them the Patriarch Io^n Leslie.
of Venice as his Legate, and Orator, to persuade their Resolutions, with whom
the French King sent Monfieur John Leslie. The Pope and French King send aid
into Scotland.
la Broche, and Monfieur Menager, to lead them to fight* and fifty thousand
Crowns of the Sun, to su^taine the Charge; with munition worth ten thousand
Crowns more. It seems by Lesly that part of this silver fell into the Earl
Lenn^ his hand, and that therewith he made head against the Governor, but not
able to match him, sent unto King Henry for aid, with proffer of his service
against the French side, which so well was accepted of Henry, as he made him
his Nephew, by giving the Lady Margaret his sisters Math. Earl of Lennox
marries Lady Margaret.
daughter to be his wife.

(125) The English thus seconded with this unlooked for Alliance, Cardinal
Beton thought good Earl Lennox proclaimed an enemy to the state.
to bind all to the Governor, who with the Authority of the Queen Dowager
proclaimed Lennox an Enemy to the State. But in the mean while the Admiral of
England was entered the Frith, and at new Haven landed his men, where ioining
his, to the land Service, they altogether marched thence toward L^th, himself
leading the Vaward, Shrewsbury the Rereward* and the Lord Lieutenant the maine
Battle. The English en^ Scotland.
These coming to Lies, spoiled the Town, and thence to Edenbrough, burnt the
City, and wasted the Country for seven miles about, this done they set fire
upon Haddington, and (...), and then the whole Army returned unto Barwicke.

(126) Whilst things thus passed in Scotland, and the maine purpose resting in
suspense, King Henry A. D. 1544.
well knew where the greatest rub did lie in his way, which was the French
King, the chiefest* A better of the Scots, whom he ever vpheld, to hold him
tacke at home, least otherwise he should (...) with France for his own right.
And therefore having joined with the Emperor against the French, sent his
Herald, Garter, King at Arms, to demand certain covenants, which if he
refused, (...) proclaim defiance Defiance sent into France.
unto open wars, but he not suffered to do his message to the King,
retur^ed, and (...) prepared an expedition into France, wherein he employed the
Dukes of (...) and (...), the Earle^ of A^, Oxf^rd and Sur^ey, the Lords,
R^ssell, Gray, (...)rers, (...), and Sain^-Iohn, besides many other Io^. Stow.
serviceable Knights, and Sir (...) appointed high Admiral for the Se^. Of
these some (...) with the Emperials, and showed their value in the siege of
Mattrell.

(127) The Duke of Suffolk in the mean while struck down his Standerds on
the East side of Bolloigne, and with many sharp skirmishes, entered the
Bolloigne besieged.
base Town, which siege King Henry himself in person seconded, who having
passed the Seas from England, upon the six and twentieth of July, encamped
before Bolloigne on the East Side, whence his Canons so rent the Walls and
Bulwark, as their mounted tops lay upon the Ground, and his great mortar
pieces were discharged with so skillful a Compass, that their bullets falling
down right, beat all buildings down upon the Enemies heads. Whereby (says
Sleidane) in short time he got that, which neither Io^. Sleid^. (...).
his Father, nor the Kings in former times could never win. For thereupon the
Town was surrendered and cleared of the French soldiers, women and children.

(128) The King like a Conqueror with his sword borne before him entered the
Gate, where the Bolloigne won.
Duke of Suffolk presented him with the keys of the Town, the Trumpets still
sounding, and nothing wanting that might applaud his fame. The Town thus
won, the English meant still to keep; for the strengthening whereof, the King
commanded the fair Church of Saint Mary's to be taken down, and in the same
place, a mount to be raised for the planting of Ordinance, to annoy any siege.
But being thus busied in Bolloignes affairs, the Emperor without his
knowledge or consent, came to a peace with the French King, whereat King Henry
was sore displeased, and the sooner left France, leaving R. Gra^con.
Sir John Dudley Lord Lisle, his deputy in Bolloigne, and landed at Dover the
first day of October, to his great honor and joy of his Subjects.

(129) The French King chafed with this late and great loss, sought to try
fortune in further attempts, John Serres.
and that not only for the recovery of Bolloigne (which with twenty thousand
well appointed he assaied) but also in assayling the English dominions, as the
I Will of Wight and those parts of Sussex The French invade the I Will of Wight and
the coasts of Sussex.
that lay upon the Seas, though with loss of many Captains and thousands of
Soldiers, that never returned to tell him what intertainement they had; as
likewise in sending aid unto Scotland, where Monsieur Mungumry of the Order of
France, with 5000 strong, entered to maintain the breach betwixt them A Road
made into Scotland.
and K. Henry, which was so followed on both parts, as the English making a
Road toward Gedworth, got praise for their valor, but reproach for their
spoils, and the Scots renown for killing the Lord Eure, Lord Warden of the
East-Marches, with many other Captains in defense of their Country. Lord
(...) slain.


(130) Hereupon an Army of twelve thousand strong was sent into Scotland,
whereof the Earl of Hertford was General: with these he forraged the Borders
before him, and burnt many Towns in the Middle-Marches, with Kelsey and
Coldingham Abbey, the French not hasty to stay the incursion, lay still, and
let them (unfought with) depart for England.

(131) But the wars removed again into France, the Reingr^e with a great
power came to victual A. D. 1546.
a Fort built near unto Bolloigne; to impeach which, the Earl of Surrey, then
Lie^tenant of the Town made forth, but was discomfited in the enterprise, and
Sir Edward Poy^ings Captain of a Band A great loss of English in France.
slain, with fifteen other Captains, besides many Officers and Common
Soldiers. These Princes wars in these violent proceedings, became very
fearful least they would grow to the Common hurt of Christendom, and
therefore many other potentates, whereof the Emperor was first, solicited
these Kings unto a peace, which the sooner was heard and (...) Serres.
embraced, for that they were both of them old, and King Henry diseased in
body, Commissioners therefore appointed certain articles were agreed upon: the
first thereof was, that the French King should pay unto King Henry, eight
hundred thousand (...). (...). lib. 7.
Crowns in eight years space, and then to r^nter upon Boll^igne, but in the
mean time it to remain under the English; to accomplish which peace Mounsieur
Peace concluded betwixt England and France.
Danebalt high Admiral^ of France, was sent into England; and Sir Thomas
Cheynie Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, to be the Kings Agent at the Font, for
the Baptism of the Dolphins newborn daughter.

(132) Notwithstanding these Complements, the sight of Bolloigne was a great
sore in the French men's eyes* insomuch that Monsieur Chatillon Captain
Holinshed.
of Mountplaisier, began to make a new Bastilion Chasti^ raises a fort near
unto Bolloigne.
near unto the Town, even in the very mouth of the River, which the Lord Gray
of Wilton perceiving certified the King, what inconvenience would happen if
that were made strong, and the same discussed at the Counsell-Table, it passed
with one voice that the Peace with France was not to be infringed,
notwithstanding this French attempt: to which end a prohibition drawn,
whereunto King Henry also set his hand, that no let should be made against
Chatillon in his Fort. Howbeit the King commanded Sir Thomas Palmer (employed
in this business) to bid the King Henry's command against his own writing.
Lord Gray to impeach the new work, and to flat so much as was raised thereof
unto the Earth. This commission read with the report of Command to the
Contrary, the Counsel of State, thought it most meet to follow their
instructions in writing, least the words might either be mis-deliuered or
mistaken. But the Lord Gray causing the messengers words to be writ, and
subscribed with all their hands that were present at the report, suddenly and
unlooked for, came to the Fort, and in four hours space cast down, what had
been in raising three The Lord Gray fla^teth Chatill^ ^ort.
months before, which when the King heard off, he asked his Counselors what
they thought of this, that Chatill^-garden was cast down* amongst whom one of
them answered, the d^er thereof was worthy to loose his head, I had rather
(said the King) loose a dozen of such heads as thine is, then his that had
done the deed, and immediately sent the Lord Gray his pardon with many great
thanks. A. D. 1547.


(133) But now the d^te of his time almost run* and he preparing toward the
way of all flesh, the King (...) (...).
great and fair Church of the Gray Friars London, lately suppressed by
himself, he caused again to be opened, and to be made a Parish Church, giving
the revenues thereof unto the City of London toward the relief of their
poor, whereunto he gave five hundred Marks yearly of Lands for ever to
maintain Gods divine service and the said Churches John (...) in Survey London.
reparations, within whose walls we find this often written, This is Christ's
Church founded by King Henry the eight.

(134) And his sickness in^asing to the great danger of life he prepared
himself to make his Will, wherein howsoever titles had been vnhabled in
Parliaments, (...) the (...)* of December and* (...). of his reign.
he ordained his three children to succeed each after others; for want of
other Issue; One thousand marks he commanded to be given to the poor, and to
twelve poor Knights at Winsere each of them twelve pence a day for ever, every
year a long Gown of white cloth, the G^ter imbroidered upon the breast,
wherein was placed the Cross of Saint George, and a Mantle of red cloth to be
worn thereupon, ord^ning for his Executors in the minority of Prince Edward,
these here under named.

1 Thomas Cr^er, Archbishop of Ganterbury. 2 Thomas (...)* Lord Chancellor* 3
William (...) Knight of the Order. 4 Lord Saint-Iohn Great Master of the
Household 5 John Russell Lord (...) Seal. 6 Edward (...) of Hertford Lord great
Chamber^ine. 7 John (...) Lord high Admiral 8 Cutbert (...). of (...). 9 (...)
Knight Mr. of the Horse* 10 (...) Page^ Knight of the Order. 11 (...) Chief
justice of the Common-ple^. 12 Thomas Bromley Lord Chief Justice. 13 Anthony
Deny Knight. 14 Edward North Knight. 15 Edward Wotton Knight. 16 Doctor Wotton
Deane of Canterbury.
And for their aid and assistance in Counsel he appointed these following.
1 Henry Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel. 2 William Parre Earl of Essex. 3 Thomas
Cheney Knight, Treasurer of the Household. 4 John Gage Knight, Co^troler of the
Household. 5 Anthony Winkefield Knight, Vice-Chamberlaine. 6 William Peter
Knight, principal Secretary. 7 Richard Rich Knight. 8 John Baker Knight. 9
Ralph Sadler Knight. 10 Thomas Seimer Knight. 11 Richard Southwell Knight. 12
Edmund Pecham Knight.
And in great penitency for his sins, died upon Thursday the twenty eight day
of January, in the King Henry's death.
year of Christ Jesus 1546. when he had reigned thirty seven year, nine
months, and five days, and had lived fifty five years, five months, and five
days, whose body with great solemnity was buried at Windsore under a most
costly and stately Tomb begun in Copper and guilt, but never finished, in
the enclosures of whose Grates is curiously cast this inscription. HENRICUS
OCTAVUS REX ANGLIAE, FRANCIAE, DOMINVS HIBERNIAE, FIDEI DEFENSOR with what cost
and state this his Monument was intended, is manifested by a Manuscript taken
from the true model thereof, which I received from that industrious Herald,
Master Nicholas Charles Lancaster, and for the great magnificence is worthy
here to be inserted.

The manner of the Tomb to be made for the Kings Grace at Windsore.
First, the pauement whereupon the Tomb shall stand, shall be of Oriental
stone: That is to say, of Alabaster, Porfido, Serpentines, and other stones of
diverse colors, as in the pattern shows.

Item, upon the same Pauement shall be two great steps under all the work of
like Oriental stones.

Item, the Basement of the Pillars shall be of white Marble with Angel^ holding
between them Crowns or Garlands guilt, and white Marble as more plainly
shows in the Pattern.

Item, above the said Basement and Angels, shall be all the old Testament, that
is to say, xiiij. Images in the xiiij. Casements of the same two Pillars of the
Prophets, and all the Pillars which shall be xvi. shall be of stones
Serpentine, Porfido and Alabaster, and other fine Oriental stones, of such
colors as is showed in the Pattern; and the foot of every pillar, and also
the head shall be of Brass. And every Prophet shall have an Angel sit at his
foot, with Scripture of the name of his Prophet, and above over the head of
the same shall be the story of his Prophet: in every of which Story shall be
at least viij. or xi. figures.

Item, above all the same Pillars shall be another Basement of white Marble,
with a partition being made of such fine Oriental stones as the Pillars be,
wherein shall be written such Scripture as please you.

Item, above the same Basement shall be the Story of the new Testament, that is
to wit, with the Images of the Apostles, the Evangelists and the four Doctors
of the Church, and every Image shall have sitting at his foot a little child
with a Scripture of the name of his Image, and a little Basket full of red and
white Roses, which they shall show to take in their hands, and cast them down
off the Tomb and over the Pauement, and the Roses that they shall cast over the
Tomb shall be enamelled and guilt, and the roses that they cast over the
Pauements shall be of fine Oriental stones of white and red.

Item, behind all the same Images of the new Testament round shall be made in
brass and guilt all the life of Jesus Christ from the nativity to his
ascension, and it shall be so clearly and perfectly made, that the Mystery of
Christ's life to his ascension shall plainly appear.

Item, above the said new Testament and Images thereof, and above the said life
of Christ, shall be a Quire of xx. Angels standing upon a Basement of white
Marble, with great Candlestickes in their hands having lights in them showing
to honor and reverence the same Tomb.

Item, all these foresaid figures, stories and ornaments shall be made to
garnish and ornate the two Pillars of the Church between which the Tomb shall
be set.

Item, between the said two great Pillars of the Church thus garnished, shall
be a Basement of white Marble of the height of the Basement of the Pillars, and
therein the Epitaph of the King and Queen, with letters of gold, of such
Scriptures as ye devise.

Item, upon the same Basement shall be made two Tombs of blacke-touch, that
is to say, on either side one, and upon the said Tombs of black Touch shall be
made the Image of the King and Queen on both sides, not as death, but as
persons sleeping, because to show that famous Princes leaving behind them
great fame, their names never do die, and shall lie in royal Apparels after
the antique manner.

Item, over the right hand, over both the sides of the same Tomb shall be an
Angel which shall hold the Kings Arms, with a great Candlestick, having as
it were light on it as a Lamp, and in like manner shall be an other Angel
holding the Queens Arms on the left hand with a like Candlestick.

Item, on the right hand and left hand on both the sides over the said Images
of the King and Queen, shall be two Angels showing to the people the bodies of
the King and Queen holding above their Heads veiles of gold, and the Crowns
of the King and Queen on their hands.

Item, between the said two Tombs of black Touch and the said Angel over
the King and Queen shall stand an high Basement like a Sepulcher, and on the
sides whereof shall be made the story of Saint George, and over height of the
Basement shall be made an Image of the King on Horseback, lively in Armor
like a King after the Antique manner showing in countenance and looking on the
said two Images lying on the said Tombs.

Item on the right hand and left hand of the said two Tombs shall be four
Pillars of the foresaid Oriental stones, that is to say, on either side two
Pillars, and upon every Pillar shall be a like Basement of white Marble with
partitions for Scriptures as shall be above the other Pillars. And on the same
four Basements of the said Pillars shall be made four Images, two of Saint
John Baptist, and two of Saint George, with four little children by them
casting roses, as is aforesaid.

Item, over the said Image of the King on Horseback shall be made an Arch
triumphall, of white Marble wrought within, and about it, and upon the same
Arch, in manner of a Casement of white Marble garnished with like Oriental
Stones of diverse colors, as the pattern shows, and on the two sides of the
said Casement shall be made and set of brass guilt, the story of the life of
Saint John Baptist, and one hight of the said Casement shall be made five
steps, every one more then other downward, of like Oriental stones, as the
said Pillars shall show.

Item, on the four corners of the said Casement shall be made the Images of
the four Cardinal virtues having such Candlestickes in their hands as is above
said.

Item, on the top of the highest step of the said five steps on the one side
shall be an* Image of the Father, having in his left hand the Soul of the King
and blessing with his right hand, with two Angels holding abroad the Mantle of
the Father on either side.

Item, in like wise shall be made on the other side the said Image of the
Father, having the soul of the Queen in his left hand, blessing with his
right hand with like Angels.

The height of the same work from the Father unto the Pauement shall be
xxviij. foot.

Item the breadth and largenes of the said work shall be xv. foot, and the
Pillars of the Church in greatness, v. foot: and so the largenes of the said
work, from the uttermost part of the two great Pillars shall be xx. foot.

Item, every of the Images of the xiiij. Prophets, shall contain every Image
V. foot in length, and the Angels shall contain two foot and a half in
length.

Item, every of the xx. Pillars shall contain in length X. foot.

Item, every of the Images of the Apostles, Evangelists and Doctors shall
contain in length V. foot and the Angels as is abouesaid.

Item in likewise every of the xx. Angels of the quire shall contain in length
two foot and a half, and in likewise the Images of the Children two foot and a
half.

Item, the four Images of St. John Baptist and St. George and all the figures
of the father and Angels on the V. steps shall be V. foot.

Item, the four Images of the King and the Queen shall be of the Stature of a
man and woman, and the four Angels by them of the stature of a man every one.

Ite^, the Image of the King on Horseback with his Horse shall be of the whole
stature of a goodly man and large Horse.

Item, there shall be a Cxxxiiij. figures, Xliiij. Stories, and all of Brass
guilt, as in the pattern appears.

(135) This magnificent Monarch was of presence Maiesticall, and of Personage
more then ordinarily t^l, fair of Complexion and Corpulent of body, very wise
and very well learned, of a sudden and ready speech, in youth very prodigal,
and in his age very liberal, pleasant and affable, but not to be dallyed with,
bold in attempting, and ever thirsty of potent glory: an expert Soldier, and
favoring such as were active or serviceable, according to the then usual
saying, King Henry loves a man: and indeed somewhat too well the delights with
women, as by his many wives here ensuing, may well appear.

His Wives.
(136) Katherine the first wife to King Henry was the daughter of Ferdinando
the sixth King of Spain, and widow dowager of Prince Arth^r his elder brother,
as has been said: she was married unto this King the third of June: and first
of his Reign, the year of salvation 1509. being solemnly crowned with him
upon the twenty fourth day of the same, and was his wife above twenty years,
and then divorced from him by the sentence of the Archbishop of Canterbury:
lived three years after by the name of Katherine Dowager. She deceased at
Ki^balton A. D. 1533
in the County of Huntington the eight of January, and year of Christ 1535.
and lies interred on the North-side of the quire in the Cathedral Church of
Peterborow under a hearse of Black Say, having a white Cross in the midst.

(137) Anne, the second wife of King Henry, was the second daughter of Sir
Thomas Bullen, Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond. She was solemnly at Windsore
created Marchioness of Pembrooke, the first of September and twenty four of
his Reign, having A. D. 1532*
one thousand pound given her by year, to maintain her estate. She was
married unto king Henry in his Closet at White Hall, upon the twenty fifth day
of January, and year of Christ Jesus, 1533. being the four and twentieth of
his Reign, and was Crowned with all due obseruances, at Westminster upon
Whitsunday the first of June, where the Crown of Saint Edward was set upon her
head, the scepter of Gould delivered into her right hand, and the Iuory rod
with the Dove into her left. She was his wife three years, three months and
twenty five days, when being cut off by the sword the nineteenth of May, her
body was buried in the Quire of the Chapel in the Tower, leaving her accused
fame to be A. D. 1536.
censured as affections best pleased the uncharitable minded, and her bed to
be possessed of a virtuous Lady.

(138) Jane, the third wife of King Henry, was the daughter of John Seimer
Knight, and sister to Lord Edward Seimer, Earl of Hertford, and Duke of
Sommerset. She was married unto him the twentieth of May, even the next day
after the beheading of Queen Anne, and the twenty eight of his Reign. She
was his wife one year, five months and twenty four days, and died in
Childbed the foureteenth of October, to the great grief of the King, who not
only removed from the place, but kept himself private, and wore the Garment
of mourning even in the Festival time of Christmas, her body was solemnly
conveyed to Windsore the eight of November following, where she was interred in
the midst of the Quire of the Church within the Castle.

(139) Anne the fourth wife of King Henry and sister to William Duke of Cleue
was married unto him the sixth of January in the thirty one year of his
Reign, the year of Grace, 1540. she was his wife six months, after which
time certain Lords of A. D. 1540.
the upper House of Parliament came into the nether, and alleged cause for
which that marriage was unlawful, whereunpon she was divorced, and by Statute
enacted, that she should no more be taken for Queen, but should be called the
Lady Anne of Cle^e. See remained in England long after the Kings death, though
small mention is made of her by any of our Writers, only we find that she
accompanied the Lady Elizabeth through London at the solemnizing of Queen
Mary's Coronation.

(140) Katherine the fifth wife of King Henry the eight, was the daughter of
(...), and Niece unto Thomas Howard his brother, Duke of Norfolk: She was
married unto him the eight of August and year of ^race 1540. being the thirty
two of his Reign, at Hampton Court, and continued his Queen the space of one
year, six months and four days, and for her unchaste life was attainted by
Parliament, and for the same beheaded within the Tower of London the twelfth of
February and her body buried in the Chauncell of the Chapel by Queen Anne
Bullen.

(141) Katherine the sixth and last wife of King Henry was the daughter of Sir
Thomas Parre of Kendall and sister to Lord William Parre Marquess of
Northampton, she was first married to John Neuill, Lord Latimer, and after his
decease, upon the twelfth of July married unto the King at Hampton Court, the
year of Salvation, 1543. and thirty five of his Reign: She was his wife
three years, six months and five days, and suruiuing him, was again married
unto Thomas Seimer Lord Admiral of England, unto whom she bare a daughter, but
died in the same Childbed, the year of Grace, 1548.

His Issue.
(142) Henry the first son of King Henry by Queen Katherine his first wife,
was borne at Rich^d in Surrey upon the first of January, and the first of his
fathers Reign, whose Godfathers at Font were the Lord Cranmer, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Earl of Surrey: his Godmother, Lady Katherine Countess
of Devonshire, daughter to King Edward the fourth. This Prince lived not fully
two months but died in the same place wherein he was borne, upon the two and
twentieth of February, and his body with all due obsequies buried in
Westminster.

(143) A son not named was borne unto King Henry by Lady Katherine his first
Queen in the month of November, and the sixth year of his Reign, who lived
not long, and therefore no further mention of him can be made: the deaths of
these Princes King Henry took as a punishment from God, for so he alleged it
in the public Court held in Blacke-friers London, they being begot on his own
brothers wife.

(144) Marie the third child and first daughter of King Henry by Queen
Katherine his first wife, was born at Greenewich in Kent, the eighteenth of
Februar^ in the year of Christ's humanity, 1518* and the eighth of his Reign.
She was by the direction of her mother brought up in her Childe-hood by the
Countess of Salisbury her near kinswoman, for that as some thought, the
Queen wished a marriage betwixt some of her sons and the Princess, to
strengthen her Title by that Aliance into York, if the King should die without
issue Male. In her young years she was sued to be married with the Emperor,
the King of Scots, and the Duke of Orleance in France, (...). p. 183.
but all these failing, and she succeeding her brother K Edward in the Crown,
at the age of thirty six years, matched with Phillip King of Spain, to the
great dislike of many, and small content to her self, he being employed for
the most part beyond the Seas, for grief whereof and the loss of Calice, she
lastly fell into a burning fever, that cost her her life.

(145) Elizabeth the second daughter of King Henry, and first child by Queen
Anne his second wife, was borne at Greenwich, upon Sunday the seventh of
September, the year of Christ Jesus, 1534 and twenty five of her Fathers
Reign, who with due solemnities was baptized the Wednesday following,
Archbishop Cranmer, the old Duchess of Norfolk, and the old Marchioness of
Dorset being the witnesses at the Font, and the Marchioness of Excester at the
confirmation: She succeeded her sister Queen Marie in the Monarchy of
England, and was for wisdom, virtue, piety, and Justice, not only the
Mirror of her Sex, but a pattern for Government to all the princes in
Christendom: whose name I may not mention without al dutiful remembrance, and
whose memory unto me is most dear, amongst the many thousands that received
extraordinary favors at her gracious and most liberal hand.

(146) Another man child Queen Anne bare unto King Henry, though without life
upon the nine John Stow.
and twentieth of January, and twenty seven of his Reign, to the no little
grief of the mother, some dislike of the King, as the sequel of her accusation
and death did shortly confirm.

(147) Edward the last child of King Henry, and first of Queen Jane his third
wife, was borne at Hampton Court, the twelfth of October, the year of Grace,
1537. and twenty nine of the Kings Reign, being cut out of his mothers womb
as is constantly affirmed, like as Julius Caesar is said to have been: his
Godfathers at the Font, was Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Duke of Norfolk, his sister Lady Mary being Godmother, says Grafton: Six
days after his birth he was created Prince of Wales, and at the death of his
Father, succeeded him in all his Dominions, of whom more follows hereafter.

His Natural Issue.
(148) Henry Fitz-R^ie the natural son of A. D. 1519.
King Henry the eight was begotten of the Lady (...) called Elizabeth Blunt,
and borne in the Manor of Black^moore in Essex about the tenth John Stow.
(...).
year of his Reign; at the age of six years he was created Earl of
Nottingham and in the five and twentieth of his Fathers Reign upon the
eighteenth of June in the Kings Palace of Bridewell was made Duke of Richmond
and Sommerset, Lord Warden of the East, West, and Middle-Marches against
Scotland, and Lieutenant General of all the parts of England Northward, he was
a Prince very forward in Marshal Actiuities, of Good literature and knowledge
in the tongues, unto whom the learned Antiquary Leland dedicated a Book; He
married Marie daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall and
Lord high Treasurer of England, with whom he lived not long, but died at Saint
James Thomas Mille^. Holinshed says (...) Thetford in Norfolk. p. 1237.
by Westminster the two and twentieth of July in the year of Christ Jesus,
1536. and was buried at Framingham in Suffolk.

THe tempestuous (...) in the Reign of this King Henry the eight, and the
violent deluge raised against the Church State of his times; bare down so many
religious strong foundations, and were the destruction of so many beautiful
Monasteries, as the only relation of their numbers and names, would have much
interrupted the narration of his history. Wherefore to retein^ their memorials
(though their walls are laid wast^) as well for the reverence we owe unto
venerable Antiquity, as for the example of their Founders holyzeale, we have
inserted a Catalogue of their names, orders, and true valuations, as in the
original Book thereof taken by Commission, and given unto the King, we find
them set down, though at their dissolutions their values were favorably and
far under rated. Some Founders, and times of foundations we want, the rest,
Tablewise, to avoid prolixity we have set down in this present following
CHAPTER.

A CATALOGVE OF THE RELIGIOUS HOUSES WITHIN THE REALM OF ENGLAND AND Wales,
with many their Orders, Founders, and Values, most of them being suppressed by
King Henry the eight. Together with such other sacred places, as either then
wereby him left standing, or since have been erected.
BARKESHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Reeding.
-- Saint Jacob -- By Queen Alfrith. By King Henry the first. First Nuns,
after Black Monks, Cluniacenses. 2116 03 09 oo q Abingdon. -- Saint Mary. -- M
Cissa, King of the West Saxons. -- Black Monks. -- 2042 02 08 ob q Bromhall
in Windsor Forest. S. Mary Magd. -- N Edward the Black Prince. -- Black
Nuns. -- Bistleham now Bisham. Christ Jesus and our Lady M William Montacute
the first Earl of Salisbury, A. 13. E. 3. Canons. -- 0327 04 06 oo o
Donington. -- -- F Richard de Abberbury Knight. -- Ordinis Sancta Crucis. 0020
16 06 oo o Donington. -- -- H Richard de Abberbury Cheualier. -- -- Hamme. --
S. Mary Magd. N -- Black Nuns. -- Hurley. -- Saint Mary. -- M -- Black
Monks, Westmonast. 0134 10 08 ob o Murresley. -- -- P -- -- 0014 03 01 oo o
Poghley. -- -- M The Predecessors or Ancestors of the Abbess of Almesburie. --
0071 10 07 oo o^ Shottesbroke. -- -- C -- -- 0033 18 08 oo o Wallingford. --
Saint Trinity. -- P Edmund son of Richard, King of the Romans, and Earl of
Cornwall. Black Monks of Saint Albans. Wallingford castle -- C Edward the
Black Prince. -- -- Wallingford. -- Saint John. -- H -- -- 0006 00 00 oo o

BEDFORDSHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founders and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob q Bedford. --
-- F. Lady Margaret de Patteshall. -- Friars Minors, alij Gray Friars. 0005 00
00 oo o Bedford. -- Saint John. -- H -- -- 0021 00 08 oo o Bedford. -- Saint
Leonard -- H -- -- 0016 06 08 o q Bigleswade. -- Sancta Trin. in Ecc S^. Andrea
C -- -- 0007 00 00 o o Bosco. -- -- M. -- -- 0143 18 03 o o Bushemede alias
Bissemed -- P Hugo de Bello Campo, and Roger his brother. Canons Augustines --
0081 13 05 ob o Caldewel. -- S. John Baptist. -- P The Lord Latimer. Alij John
de Byddysley. -- Black Canons. -- 0148 15 10 o o Chicksand. -- Saint Mary. --
P Pain de Beauchamp. -- White Canons. Nuns 0230 03 04 ob o Eaton. --
Corporis Christi -- C -- -- 0007 16 00 o o Dunstable. -- Saint Peter. -- P King
Henry the first. -- Black Canons. -- 0402 14 07 ob o Dunstable. -- -- F --
Friars Preachers. -- 0004 18 04 o o Fraternitas ibidem. -- -- -- 0009 08 07 o o
Elnestowe alias Helenstow, now Elstow. -- N Iudith^ wife to Waltheof E. of
Huntingdon. -- Black Nuns. -- 0325 02 01 ob q Harwold alias Harewood. Saint
Peter -- P Samson surnamed Fortis. -- Black Nuns -- 0047 03 02 o o
Markeyate. -- Saint Giles -- N Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford. Anno 6. E. 1. Nuns. -- Newenham. -- -- P Roise the wife of Pain de
Beauchampe. -- Canons Augustines. -- 0343 15 05 o o Northyle. -- -- C -- --
0061 05 08 ob o Sanctingfield iuxta Whitsand. -- H King Henry the second. --
-- Wardon. -- Saint Marie -- M King Henry the first, and Walter Espe^. --
White Monks. -- 0442 11 11 o o Woburne. -- Saint Mary -- M Hugo de Bolbick.
Alij Robert de U^re, Earl of Oxford by license of King Richard. 2. White
Monks. -- 0430 13 11 ob o

BVCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Ailesburie.
-- -- F Edith daughter of Frewald. -- Friars Minors: alibi Gray Friars. -- 0003
02 05 o o Ankerwicke. -- -- N -- Nuns. -- 0045 14 04 o o Asheridge. -- Saint
Augustine. -- C Edmund Earl of Cornwall son to Richard King of the Romans.
-- Bonorum virorum Eremits. -- 0447 18 00 ob o Bordesley. -- Saint Marie. --
Maude the Empress. -- Cistertians. -- Bradewell. -- Saint Mary. -- P
Manef^lmus. -- Black Monks. -- Burnham. -- -- M -- 0091 05 11 ob o Byttelsden.
-- Saint Mary -- M Arnald de Bosco, A. D. 1127 -- Cistertia^ white Monks. 0142
01 03 o Eaton. -- -- C King Henry 6. -- Praefectus: Socy 8. and Ca^tores
Scolares. 60. Laueden. -- Saint Marie. -- M John de Bedon. -- White Canons. --
0091 08 03 ob Luffeld. -- Saint Mary. -- P Robert Earl of Leicester. -- White
Canons. -- Medmenham. alias Mendham -- M The Ancestors of the Earls of Suffolk.
-- -- 0023 17 02 o Merlowe parua. -- -- M -- Black Nuns. -- 0037 06 11 o
Myssenden. -- Saint Mary. -- M D'Oiles ^ue Doily. -- Black Canons. -- 0285 15
09 o Newport painel -- Saint Leonard -- H John Peynton of Newport. -- -- 0006
06 08 o Noteley. -- Saint Marie. -- M Walter Giffard Earl of Buckingham. A.
1112 Black Canons. -- 0495 18 05 ob Paretrendune. -- -- P -- Black Canons. --
Raueneston. -- -- M Domini Regis Progenitor. -- -- 0066 13 04 o Sandewell. --
-- M The Ancestors of Thomas Stanley of Safford. -- -- 0038 08 04 o Snelshall.
-- -- P -- -- 0024 00 00 o Stoke-Pogeis. -- -- H Edward Baron Hastings of
Loughborrow. -- Poor people. -- Tekeford. -- Saint Marie. -- P Fulco Paganell,
Alij, Domini Regis progenitor. Black Monks. -- 0126 17 00 o Wicombe, or high
Wickham. -- H -- -- 0007 15 03 ob S. Margaret. -- P -- -- 0022 06 07 o

CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Cambridge.
-- -- F K. Edward the first, and Sir Guy Mortimer. Thomas de Hertford a great
Benefactor. White Friars. -- -- -- Cambridge -- -- F King Edward 1. -- Friars
Minors, alibi, Gray Friars. -- -- -- Cambridge. -- -- F -- Friars Augustines.
-- -- -- Cambridge. -- -- F -- Black Friars. -- -- -- Cambridge. -- Saint
Radegund -- N -- Black Nuns. -- -- -- Cambridge. -- -- P -- Canons. -- -- --
The Colleges in Cambridge. Peterhouse. -- -- Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely. An.
Dom. 1^84 -- -- -- -- Clare-hall. -- -- Rich. Badew and El^. Clara Countess of
Vlster. Anno Dom. 1340. -- -- -- Pembroke-hall. -- -- Maria de Sto. Paulo
Countess of Pembroch. A. 1347. -- -- -- -- Corpus Christi or Bennet College
-- Societas fratrum Corporis Christi. A. D. 1346. -- -- -- -- Trinity-hall. --
-- William Bateman Bishop of Norwich. 1353. -- -- -- -- Gon^ill and Caius
College. -- Edmund Gon^le and John Caius. A. 1348. -- -- -- -- Kings-Colledge
and Chapel. -- King Henry the sixth, A. D. 1441. -- -- -- -- Queens College.
-- -- Queen Margaret wife of H. 6. A. D. 1448. -- -- -- Katherine-hall. -- --
Robert Woodlarke. A. D. 1459. -- -- -- Iesus-Colledge. -- -- John Alcocke
Bishop of Ely. A. D. 1497. -- -- -- Christs-Colledge St. Iohns-Colledge -- Lady
Margaret Countess of Richmond mother to K. Henry the seventh. A. 1506. -- --
-- Magdalen-Colledge. -- -- Thomas Awdley Chancellor of England. A. D. 1542.
Christopher Wray Lord Chief Justice of England. -- -- -- Trinity College. --
-- King Henry the eight. Anno Dom. 1546. Tho. Neuil Deane of Canterbury, the
Mr. thereof has most magnificently enlarged -- -- -- Emanuel-Colledge. -- Sir
Walter Mildmay Knight, a Councellor to Queen Elizabeth. -- -- -- Sydney-Sussex
College. -- -- Lady Frances Countess of Sussex gave five thousand pound to
build it. -- -- -- Ely. -- St. Peter and S. Ethelred Eccles. Cath. M -- Andry
wife to King Egfrid, placed Priests in it. Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester
stored it with Monks: King Henry 1. made it a Bishops See: King Henry 8. in
steed of the Monks placed a Dean, Prebends, and a Grammar School, with
maintenance and teaching for 24. Scholars. Black Monks. -- 1301 08 02 o Ely.
-- S. John and S. Mary Magd. H Thomas Bishop of Ely. -- -- 0025 05 03 ob q
Anglesey. -- -- P Richard de Clare. -- -- 0149 18 06 ob Barnewell. -- S.
Andrew. S. Egidius. P Sir Pain Penerell, Standard Bearer to Robert Duke of
Normandy, in the Holy Wars against Infidels, in the time of Henry the first.
Black Canons. -- 0351 15 04 oo o Chatters. -- Saint Mary annexed by H. 1. to
Ely. N Alfwena a devout woman, and her brother Ednothus Abbot of Ramsey. Black
Nuns. -- 0112 03 06 oo q Denny. -- Saint Clare. -- N Maria de Sancto Paulo,
wife of Adomar Earl of Pembroke. Anno Domini, 1341. Nuns. -- 0218 00 01 ob o
Saint Edmunds -- -- P King Canute. -- White Canons. -- 0016 16 00 oo o Fordham.
-- -- P Henry Deu, or Dew. -- De ordine Simplingham 0046 03 08 oo o Ikelington.
-- -- P -- -- 0080 01 10 ob o Marmound. -- -- P -- Canons. -- Soffam Bulbecke
-- -- N -- Black Nuns. -- 0046 10 08 oo o Shengaye. -- A Come^don and
Praeceptoria to S. John of Jerusalem. Sybil daughter of Roger Mountgomery,
Earl of Shrewsbury, and wife of l. de Pains. A. D. 1130. Knights Templers. --
0175 04 06 oo o Swauesey. -- -- Alan la Zouch brother to the Vicount Rohan in
the lesser Britain. Black Canons. -- Thorney -- Saint Mary and Saint Botulph.
M Sexwulph a devout man for Eremites, Aethelwold B. of Winchester for Monks,
and King Edgar. -- 0508 02 05 oo o

CARLIOL
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Apelby in
Westmorland. -- F Lord Vescy, Lord Percy, and Lord Clifford, A. D. 1281. White
Friars. -- Armethwait in Cumberland. -- N King William the Conqueror, Anno
Regni, 2. Nuns. -- 0018 18 08 oo o Carliolin Cumberland. Saint Mary. -- P
Domini Regis Progenitor. -- -- 0482 08 01 oo o Holme Coltreyn in Cumberland
Saint Mary -- M David King of Scots, and Henry Earl of Huntington his son.
-- 0535 03 07 ob. q. Lanercost in Cumberland. Saint Mary Magd. P Robert de
Uanlx, Lord of Gillesland. -- -- 0079 19 00 oo o Sharp in Westmorland -- M
Thomas the son of Gospatricke, son of Orms. -- 0166 10 06 ob o

CHESHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Chester. --
Saint John; Eccl Cath. King Henry the eight. -- Secular Canons. -- Chester, --
-- F Thomas Stadham Gentleman. A. D. 1279. -- White Friars. -- Chester. -- -- F
King John. -- Gray Friars. -- Chester. -- -- F -- Black Friars. -- Chester. --
Saint Wereburg. M Hugh the first of the Norman blood that was Earl of Chester.
Black Monks. -- 1073 17 07 ob o Chester. -- The virgin Mary M Fundator Domini
Regis Progenitor. -- Black Canons. -- 0099 16 02 oo o Chester. -- Beatae
Mariae. -- N -- Nuns. -- Chester. -- Saint John C Baptist, alii H Fundator
Domini Regis Progenitor. -- -- 0013 07 10 oo o Birkehead. -- S. James. -- M
Fundator Comitis Derbia Antecessor. -- Black Canons. -- 0102 16 10 oo o
Bunbury, alias Boniface-bury -- C Hugh Cal^ley and the Egertons. -- Priests. --
Combermere. -- -- M William de Maibedeng. A. D. 1134. -- White Monks. -- 0258
06 06 oo o Maclesfeild. -- -- C Thomas Sanage first Bishop of London, and
afterward Archbishop of York. -- Norton. -- Saint Mary -- N William
Fitz-Nigell a Norman. -- -- 0258 11 08 oo o Stanlaw. -- -- John Lacy Constable
of Chester. A. D. 1173. -- Monks. -- Valle Regalis. -- -- M King Edward the
first. -- -- 0540 06 02 oo o

CORNWALL.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Saint
Anthony. -- -- M -- Black Monks of the Angels. Bodmin. -- Saint Peter. -- M
First by K. Adelstan, after William Warnast Bishop of Excester, and confirmed
by king John. Black Canons after Gray Friars. 0289 11 11 oo o Bonury. -- Saint
Petrorsi -- M King Athelstan. -- Black Canons. -- Crantocke. -- -- C -- --
0089 15 08 oo o Saint German. -- -- M -- -- 0243 08 00 oo o Glassoney. -- Saint
Thomas. -- C Walter Br^nescome B. of Oxford. A. D. 1288. -- -- 0205 10 06 oo o
Helston. -- S. John Baptist. -- P -- -- 0014 07 02 ob o Launceston. -- Saint
Stephen. -- M Reginald Earl of Cornwall, A. D. 1150. -- Black Canons, Aug. --
0392 11 2 oo q Saint Mary de val. -- M -- Black Monks of the Angels. Saint
Michael de Monte. -- M William Earl of Cornwall and Morton. -- Black Monks of
the Angels. Saint Michael de magno monte -- M -- Black Monks. -- Sulli Isle.
-- Saint Nicholas -- M -- Black Monks. -- Saint Syriace. -- -- M -- Black
Monks. -- Talearn. -- Saint Andrew. M -- Black Monks of the Angels. Trury. --
-- F -- Black Friars. s -- Tywardreth. -- Saint Andrew. -- ^P -- -- 0151 16 01
oo o

DARBY-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. (...)* ob. q. Darby.
-- Omnium Sanctorum. Eccl. Collegiat. -- -- 0038 14 00 o o Iuxta Darby. --
Beata Mariae de Pratis. M -- -- 0018 06 02 o o Darby. -- Saint James -- Cella
Fundator Domini Reg^ Progenitor. -- Black Canons. -- Darby. -- Saint Marie. --
P Black Monks. -- Darby. -- Beatae Mariae -- N Fundator Domini Regis
Progenitor. -- Nuns. -- Darby. -- -- H The Countess of Shrewsbury. -- Eight
pooremen, four women. Bello-Capite. -- Saint Thomas. -- M Robert the son of
Ranulph L. of Alfreton, a Canon there. -- 0157 10 02 oo o Bredsall or Brisol
Park -- M Fundator Antecessor Iohannis Diricke, alias Duthik Armigeri. -- 0010
17 09 oo o Brend in the Peake -- M Sir Robert Duin Knight. -- -- Chesterfeild.
-- Saint Cross Saint Mary C -- -- 0019 00 00 oo o Dala. -- Beatae Mariae or S.
Mary. M William Fitz-Ralph Antecessor Geruasy Kingston. -- 0144 12 00 o
Derelege or Darleigh. Beatae Mariae. -- M -- Black Canons. -- 0258 14 05 oo o
Fauerwell. -- Saint Marie. -- N -- Black Nuns. -- Gresly. -- Saint George.
-- M William de Lions called Fitz-Nigel of Gresley -- 0039 13 08 o Pollewerke.
-- Saint Edith. -- N -- Black Nuns.^ -- Repingdon, alias Repton. Saint
Marie. -- M Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. Alij Aimer de Valence and
Randulph E of Chester Black Canons. -- 0167 18 02 o Yeuelay or Iuelay and
Barrow. -- P -- -- 0107 03 08 oo Yeuelay or Iuelay, and Barrow. Praceptoria. --
-- -- 0093 03 04 ob o

DEVON-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Excester.
-- S. Peter, Episcop. -- King Athelstan. -- Secular Canons. -- Excester. --
Saint James. M -- Black Monks. -- Excester. -- Saint Nicholas. P -- Black
Monks Benedict. 0154 12 00 oo o Excester. -- Saint John -- P -- Gray Friars. --
0102 12 09 o Excester. -- S. Nicholas. -- H -- -- 0147 21 00 o Barnstaple. --
Saint Mary Magd. P Iohel, son of Ailred. -- Black Monks Benedictines
Cluniacens. 0129 15 03 oo q Berdleston. -- -- P -- Black Canons. -- Buckland.
-- Saint Mary. S. Benedict. M Amice Countess of Devonshire. Isabelde Fortibus,
and Lady of the Isle a benefactor. Cistertians. -- 0241 16 09 ob q Buckfaster.
-- Saint Marie. -- P -- White Monks. Cistertians. Canonleigh. -- Beata Mariae.
-- M -- Nuns. 02 2 15 03 o Cliue. -- S. Mary Magd. -- M Almar Earl of
Cornwall. -- Black Canons. -- Cornworthy. -- -- N -- Nuns. 0063 03 10
Cowyke. -- Saint Andrew. -- P Thomas Earl of Devonshire. -- -- Crediton. -- S.
Crueis. -- C -- -- 0140 14 5 Cuich. -- Saint Andrew. -- M -- Black Monks. --
Dunkiswel. -- -- M -- Cistertians. -- 0298 11 10 oo Ford. -- Saint Mary. -- M
Adelize daughter to Baldwine of Okehampton, A. D. 1140. White Monks. -- 0381
10 6 ob Frethelstoke. -- Saint Gregory. -- P -- -- 0127 03 04 oo q Hartland. --
S. Nectan the Martyr M Githa Earl Goodwins wife. Richard Pictauensis Archdiac:
and Geffrey de Dynan Senior, and Oliver his brother benefactors. Black Canons.
-- 0306 13 02 oo q Saint Michael de Monte. -- P -- Black Monks Malms. Molery.
-- Saint Gregory. -- M -- Black Monks. -- Newham, alias Newenham. -- M
Reginald Mohun, Earl of Dunster, Anno Domini, 1246 -- 0231 14 04 oo o Othery.
-- Saint Marie -- C John Grandison B. of Excester, tempore Ed. 3. -- Black
Monks. -- 0303 02 09 o o Pilton. -- Saint Mary the Virgin. P King Adelston. --
Black Monks Benedictines. 0056 12 08 oo o Plymouth. -- -- F -- Gray Frie^. --
Plimpton. -- Saint Peter Saint Paul. P Baldwyn de Reduers, Earl of Devonshire,
and Dominus de Insula, in Henry 3. time. Black Canons Augustines. 0912 12 08
ob q Polsloo. -- Saint Katharine. N -- Black Nuns. -- 0170 02 03 oo q Syon.
-- -- M -- -- Tauystocke. -- Saint Mary Saint Burion M Ordolph the son of
Ordgare, Earl of Devonshire, Anno Dom. 961. Black Monks Augustines. 0902 05
07 ob q Torre. -- Saint Savior. -- M William de Briewer. -- White Canons
Augustines. 0396 00 11 oo o Tottenes. -- Saint Mary Aliens. P Roger Newman. --
Black Monks Benedictines. 0124 10 02 ob o Twynham or Christ-Church Twynham.
-- M Isabel de Fortibus sometime Countess of Albemarle and Devonshire, and
Lady of the Isle founded it for William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle, and
Richard de Reduers Earl of Devonshire. A. D. 1161 This is placed also in
Hampshire.

DORSET-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Dorset. --
-- M The Ancestors of Sir John Chediok Knight. -- Franciscane Friars. --
Shirb^rne. -- Saint Peter. -- M A Bishops See under Adelmus the first Bishop
thereof, A. D. 704. Sunning, another See translated to it by Hermannus
Bishop, tempore Ethelredi Regis. After that by the said Hermannus translated
to Salisbury, left for a retiring place to them, tempore Gulielm^ Conquestoris,
the Church where the Bishops seat was, became a Monastery. Robert Neuill Bishop
of Salisbury, a chief founder.
Black Monks Benedictines. 0682 14 07 ob o Abbotesbury. -- Saint Peter. -- M
Orking King of Denmark. -- Black Monks. -- 0485 03 05 ob q Bindon. -- Saint
Mary. -- M -- White Monks. Cistertians. 0229 02 01 ob o Brydport, alias
Birtport. -- P -- -- 0006 00 00 oo o Brydport, alias Birtport. Saint John Bap.
-- H -- -- 0008 06 01 oo o Camestrum. -- S Mary Magd. N -- White Nuns. --
Cerne. -- Saint Peter S. Adelwold. M M. Camden says, Augustine the English Apo
stle. Others, Agelwaldus a rich m^. Some say, Almarus E of Dorset, or rather of
Cornwall Black Monks. -- 0623 13 02 ob q Cranborne. -- -- M Aelward a noble
Gentleman. A. D. 930. -- -- S. John Baptist. -- -- H -- -- 0051 10 04 oo q
Kalendarum. -- -- D -- -- 0^10 18 08 o Beata Marie Magdalen. -- D -- -- 0021 11
03 oo o Saint Mark alias LeGaunts. -- H -- -- 0112 09 09 oo o Melcombe. -- --
-- Black Friars. -- Middleton alias Milton. Saint Mary. S. Savior. M
Athelstanus Rex. -- Black Monks. -- 0720 04 01 o Shafton. -- -- -- -- 1329 01
03 o o Shaftesbury. -- Saint Edward Martyr. N Elfgine wife to Edmund King
Aelfrids nephews son. Black Nuns Benedictines. Tarent. -- -- A Cel.
Richard Poer Bishop of Sarisbury. -- Virgins Votarics. -- 0239 11 10 o
Warham. -- S. Peter. S Adelwold -- Black Monks -- Winburn Minster -- -- N
Cuthburga sister to Ina King of the West Saxons, and husband to the King of
Northumberland. A. D. 713. Nuns. --

DVRHAM DIOCES.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. b. ob. q Durham. --
S. Cuthbert. -- P Bishop Aldwin the first builder. William de Car^leph B.
gathered ag^ne the dispersed Monks. Ralph his Successor finished what he had
begun. N. Fernham Bishop Thomas Melscombe Prior enlarged it. A. D 742. William
Skirlaw Bishop builded that part called Galilee. Black Monks. -- 1615 14 10 ob
o Dutham in Oxonia. -- C Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. -- -- 0115 04 04 o o
Chester in the St^eet. -- C Anthony Bec Bishop and Patriarch of Jerusalem. A
Deane and 7. Prebends. Egleston. -- -- M Conan Earl of Britain, and
Richmond, and after by Ralph de Molton. -- Finchcale. -- -- Cella R. brother
unto that rich Bishop, Hugh Pudsey. -- 0146 19 02 oo Gateshead. -- Saint
Edmund. H -- -- 0109 00 04 oo o Gretham. -- -- H Robert Bishop of Durham. --
-- 0097 06 03 ob o Hartlepoole. -- -- M Hien, a religious woman. -- -- Iarrow.
-- -- Cella Abbot Ceolfrid, in the 16. year of K. Ecfrid Antecessor Episcop.
Dunelm. -- 0040 07 08 o o Keprey. -- Saint Egidius. -- H -- -- 0167 02 11 oo o
Lanchester. -- -- C Anthony Bec Bishop of Durham. -- Dean and Prebends. --
Letham. -- -- Cella. -- -- 0053 15 10 oo o Monks Weremouth. Saint Peter's. -- M
Benedictus Biscop. -- -- Monks Weremouth. Saint Paul. -- M Benedictus Biscop.
-- -- Nesseham. -- -- N Fundator Domini Dakers Antecessor. -- Nuns. -- 0026
09 09 o o Sherborne. -- -- H Hugh Pudsey. B. and E. of Northumberland. -- --
0135 07 0 o o Stanedrop. -- -- C Fundator Domini Neuill Antecessor. -- -- 0126
05 10 o o Stampford or Sampford. -- Cella -- -- 0036 17 0 o o Warmouth. -- --
Cella -- -- 0026 0 0 o

ESSEX.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Colchester,
-- S. John Baptist -- M Eudo Dapifer Henriciprimi. -- Black Monks. -- 0008 01
08 o o Colchester. -- Saint Botulph. -- P -- -- 0113 12 08 o o Colchester. --
Sanctae Crucis. -- F -- Fratres Sanctae Crucis -- 0007 07 08 o o Colchester. --
S. Mary Magd. H Eudo Dapifer. -- Leprosi. -- Barking. -- Saint Mary and S.
Eadburg. M -- Black Nuns. -- 1084 06 02 ob q Barking. -- -- H The Ances^ors
of Sibel de Felton Abbess of Barking. -- Bierdon. -- -- P -- -- 0031 05 01 ob
o Bileigh. -- -- M First by Robert Moruile, after by Heruey de
Monte-Merenciano. -- 0196 06 05 o o Blakamore. -- Saint Laurence -- M Jordan de
Samford. -- -- 0085 04 07 o o Brendwood. -- S. Thomas the martyr chap pell.
Isabel Countess of Bedford. -- -- Chelmsord. -- -- Domus -- Friars Preachers.
-- 0009 06 05 o o Chich. -- Saint Peter Saint Peter Saint Osith M Richard B. of
London, Anno Dom. 1120. -- Black Canons. -- 0758 05 08 o o Coggeshall. --
Saint Marie. -- M K. Stephen, Nephew to William the Conqueror White Monks. --
0298 08 0 o o Dunmowe. -- Saint Marie -- P Iuga a Noble Lady, A. D. 1111. --
Black Canons. -- 0173 02 04 o o Earles-colne. -- Saint Marie. -- P Albericus
de Uere. -- Black Monks of Abingdon. 0175 14 08 ob o Ginge-attestone. -- -- P
-- Black Canons. -- Halstide sieve Hasted. -- C Robert Bourchier. -- -- 0023 16
05 ob Hatfeild Regis. -- -- P Robert de Uere Earl of Oxford, tempore Henrici
tertij. Black Monks. -- 0157 03 02 ob o Heneningha^ castle. -- P John
Haukewood Knight, John Oliver Esquier, and Thomas Newenton, Esquier. -- 0029 12
10 o o Horkislegh. -- -- M The Ancestors of Sir Roger Wentworth, in the right
of his Wife. -- 0027 07 11 o o Ilford. -- -- H -- -- 0016 13 04 o o Lyghes. --
-- P -- -- 0141 14 08 o o Maldon. -- F Richard Grauesend, Bishop of London, and
Richard Iselham Priest, Anno Dom. 1292. Carmelites or White Friars. 0026 00 08
o o Mercy This is also placed in Hertfordshire, because it is doubtful in
which of these 2 it is. Saint Helen. P Alien. Roger Fitz-Ranulph. -- --
Newport. -- -- H -- -- 0023 10 08 o o Saint Osithe. -- -- M Richard B. of
London, A. D. 1520. -- Regular Canons. -- 0758 05 08 o o Pipewell or Pritwell.
Saint Mary. -- P -- Black Monks. -- 0194 14 03 ob o Plecy. -- -- C -- -- 0139
03 10 o o Stanesgate. -- -- P The Predecessors of the Prior of Lewis. -- Black
Monks. -- 0043 08 06 o o Stratford Langthorne. Saint Mary. -- M Gulielmus
Mountfitchet primus Fundator, and postea Richardus secundus Rex Angliae, regni
20. -- 0573 15 06 ob q Thoby, -- -- P Michael de Capra Knight: the ancestors of
John Mounteny, Fitzherbert and Iermin. -- 0075 06 10 ob o Tiptree. -- -- M The
Ancestors of Anthony Darcy. -- -- 0022 16 04 o o Tiltie. -- Saint Marie. -- M
Maurice the son of Gilbert. -- White Monks Cistertians. 0177 09 04 o o
Tremhale, alias Trenchale. -- P -- -- 0070 19 03 ob o Walden parua. -- Saint
Jacob. -- M Galfridus de Magna-villa. -- Black Monks. -- 0406 15 11 o o
Waltham. -- Sanctae Crucis. -- M King Harold the last; after by King Henry the
second. Black Canons. -- 1079 12 01 o o

GLOVCESTER-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Gloucester.
-- Saint Peter. -- M King Osrick of Northumberland first made it a Nunnerie:
afterward Aldred Archb. of York, and B. of Worcester, A. D. 68^. Black Monks
Benedictines. 1550 04 05 ob o Iuxta Gloucester -- Saint Oswald. -- P Egelfleda
Daughter of King Elfred, first Foundresse, Anno Domini, 910. Black Canons,
alij Friars Preachers. 0090 10 02 ob o Gloucester. -- Saint Barth. H -- -- 0044
07 02 ob o Gloucester. -- Saint Barth. H -- -- 0025 11 02 oo o Gloucester. --
-- F Queen Aeleanor wife to King Edward the first. Sir John Giffard, and Sir
Thomas Barkley Knights. Carmelites or white Friars. Gloucester. -- -- King
Athelstan. -- Canons Augustines -- Barkley. -- -- N -- Nuns. -- Bro^feild. --
-- P -- Canons. -- 0078 19 04 oo o Cirencester. -- S. John and S. Laurence. H
The Abbot of Cirencester. -- -- Cirencester. -- Saint Marie. M First the
Saxons, afterward King Henry the first. Black Canons. -- 1051 07 01 ob o
Dierherst sieve Dereherst. -- First by King Etheldred, after by Edward
Confessor, after made a Cell to S. Dennys in France, by Edward king of England.
Black Monks. -- Flaxeley in the forest of Dean. -- M Roger Earl of Hereford
in King Henry the seconds time. Cistertians. -- 0112 03 01 o o Hailes. -- -- M
Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of Romans, A. D. 1246. -- 0357 07 07 ob o
Kingeswood. -- Saint Marie M Barkleis of Duresley. -- White Monks. -- 0254 05
10 o o Lanthonie near Glouc. Saint Marie. P Milo Earl of Hereford. -- Black
Canons Augustines 0748 19 11 ob o Lanthonie parua in the Marches of Wales. -- P
-- -- 0112 00 05 o o Minching-hampto^ -- N -- Nuns. -- Niwetton. -- -- --
Black Monks -- Quinington. -- -- H -- -- 0137 07 01 ob o Stanley. -- Saint
Leonard. M Mande^il Earl of Essex. King Henry the second. -- 0126 0 08 o o
Stow. -- -- H Almare Earl of Cornwall. -- -- 0025 14 08 o o Teuxbury. -- Saint
Mary. M Odo and Dodo, men of great power in Mercia founded it at Cranborne,
afterward removed by Robert Fitzhamon to Te^xbury, A. D. 717. made first a
Priory, after an Abbey, A. D. 1102. Black Monks Benedictines. 1598 01 03 o o
Westbury. -- -- C For Richard Duke of York, and Edmund Earl of Rutland: K.
Edward gave them the Hospital of S. Laurence by Bristow. Deane and Canons. --
^232 14 0 o o Winche^combe. -- Saint Mary. M Kenulph the Merci^ King. -- Black
Monks. -- 0756 11 09 oo o

HAMP-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q.
Winchester. -- S. Swithin, M S. Peter. Lucius the first Christian King, after
by Ke^alch King of the West Saxons, Aelfred and Edgar circa annu^, 670. Black
Monks. -- 1507 17 02 oo q Winchester. -- Saint Mary N S. Edburg. Aelfwida the
wife of King Aelfred, after by King Edward the first. Black Nuns. -- 017^ 07
02 o o Winchester. -- -- F Peter of Winchester Parson of Saint Hellons in
Winchester, A. D. 1278. Carmelites or White Friars. Winchester. -- -- F --
Austine Friars. -- Winchester. -- -- F K. Henry the third. -- Grey-Friers. --
Winchester. -- -- F Peter of Rochi^. -- Black Friars. -- Iuxta Winchester.
Beatae Mariae. -- C William Wickham Bishop of Winchester. -- 0639 08 07 oo
Iuxta Winchester. -- H Henry Beauford Cardinal of Winchester founded it, and
gave it lands to the value of 158. l. 13. s. 4. d. And S. John de Fodering
bridge an Ho^pital was given to it Two Chaplens. 35 Poor Men. 3. Women.
Iuxta Southampton, Le teley, alias Le^o loco. S. Edward and M S. Marie. Henry
the third, and Peter de Rupibus. -- Augustine Eriers. -- 0160 02 09 ob o Iuxta
Southampton. Sancti Dionis. P K. Richard the first, called Cord^-Lion, Anno
Dom. 1179. Black Canons. -- 0091 09 00 o Southampton. -- Beatae Mariae Magd. H
Confirmed by Pope Alexander, Anno Dom. 1179. -- 0016 16 02 ob o Apple-durwell,
in the Isle of Wight. -- P Nicholas Spenser, and Margerie his wife. -- --
(...). -- Praeceptoria. -- -- -- 0118 16 7 oo Bello-loco -- -- M. King John. --
-- 0428 06 08 oo o Bromere. -- S. Trinity. P S. Mary. S. Michael. Baldwin Earl
of Rivers, and Devonshire. -- Black Canons. -- 0200 05 01 ob o Chritwynh^ms si
^e Christ-church of Twynham. -- P Isabel de Fortibus, sometime Countess of
Albemarle and Devonshire, and Lady of the Isle founded it for William de
Fortibus Earl of Albemarle, and Richard de Red^ers Earl of Devonshire, A. D.
1161. This is placed also in Devonshire. 0544 06 00 oo o Caresbroc in the Isle
of Wight. S. Mary Magd. -- P -- Black Monks. -- Deretford in the Isle of
Wight. Sa^ctae Elizabetha. P King Edward the third. -- -- Ham^le. -- Saint
Andrew. -- P -- Gray Monks. -- Hide. -- Saint Peter. M Saint Paul. S. Grimball.
First King Alfride, after performed by K. Edward Senior, and lastly the Monks
themselves removed from the old, tempore Henrici primi. Black Monks. -- 0865
01 06 ob q Mottisfount. -- Sanctae Trinitatis. P Ranulph Flammard Bishop of
Durham, Richard de Riparijs Earl of Devonshire, and William de Bruere, tempore
Gulielms Rufi. Black Canons or Augustines of Berton. 0167 15 08 ob o
Portsmouth. -- A Church and Hospital. Peter de Rupibus. -- -- 0033 19 05 ob o
Quarrer in the Isle of Wight. S. Mary Magd. -- M Baldwine Earl of Devonshire,
and Richard his son. About the time of King Stephen. White Monks. -- 0184 01
10 o o Redford or Redbridge. -- M -- -- Romsey. -- -- N King Edgar, and Earl
Alwyn. -- Nuns. -- 0528 08 10 ob o Southwyke. -- Saint Mary. -- P William
Pontlarge, sieve Pont-le-arch, and William Danys Normans. Also William de
Ponteys a Benefactor. Regular Canons. -- 0314 17 10 ob o Tychefeild. -- Saint
Marie -- M Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester. -- -- 0280 19 10 ob o
Whorwell. -- Sanctae Crucis N Saint Peter Queen Aelfrith. -- Black Nuns. --
0403 12 10 o o Wyntney. -- -- P -- -- 0059 01 00 oo o -- Sa^ctae Elizabethae C
-- -- 0112 17 04 ob o -- Sanctae Crucis. -- H Henry Blois brother to King
Stephen. -- -- 0084 04 02 o o

HEREFORD-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s d ob q Hereford. -- S.
Mary Epa^ tus. S. Ethelbert Milfrid a petty King of the Country. Reinelm
Bishop, tempore Henrici primi. Secular Canons. -- Hereford. -- S. Guthlac. -- F
Henry Penbrigge. -- Gray Friars. -- 0121 03 03 ob o Hereford. -- S. Peter. S
Paul. -- P John Pe^brigge. -- Black Monks. -- Acornebury. -- S. Katherine. --
N -- White Nuns. -- 0075 07 05 ob o Barrone. -- -- -- Black Monks --
Clyfford. -- Saint Marie. -- P -- Black Monks. -- 0065 11 11 oo o Door. --
Saint Mary. -- M Robert Lord of Ewias^ -- White Monks. -- 0118 00 02 o o
Flansford. -- -- M Richard Talbot. -- Regular Canons. -- 0015 08 09 oo o
Kilpeke. -- -- P -- -- Ledbury. -- S Katherine. -- H John Bishop of Hereford.
-- -- 0022 05 00 oo o Leomenstre. -- Saint Jacob. -- P M^rewald a King of the
Mercians, and K. Henry the first. Black Monks of R^ding. Lymbroke. -- -- N --
White Nuns. -- ^023 17 08 o Wiggemore. -- Sancto Iacobo. -- P -- Black
Canons. -- Wormesty. -- -- P -- -- 0083 10 02 Hertford, a Cel to S. Albans. --
P -- Black Monks. -- 0086 14 8 Saint Albans. -- Saint Alban Martyr. M Offa
King of the Mercians, Anno D^. 795. Black Monks. -- 2510 06 01 ob q

HERTFORD-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Beluero, a
Cel to S. Albans. Saint Mary. S. Ioh. Baptist. P -- Black Monks. -- 0135 05
10 oo o Bosco, near Flamsteed. S. Egidius. -- N -- Nuns. -- 0046 16 01 ob o
Button. -- Saint Marie. -- P -- Monks. -- Binham, in Com. Norff. A Cel to S.
Albant. -- P -- -- 0160 01 00 oo o Chesthunte. -- -- N Henr. Rex Angliae, Domin
us Hibernia, Dux Norm. Aquitan. and Comes Anged. confirmed Shestrehunt Moniales
totam terram Dom. ten. cumpertin. suis quae Canonicis de Cathale, quos amoueri
fecimus. At Westminster. 11. Aug. 24. Regni nostri. Nuns. -- 0027 06 8 Chille. --
-- N -- Black Nuns. -- Chiltree. -- -- N -- Black Nuns. -- Hatfeild
Peuerel, in Com. Essex, A Cell to Saint Albans. Saint Mary. -- P Daughter of
Ingelrick, and wife to Peuerel, in K. William the Conquerors time. Black
Monks of Saint Albans. 0083 19 07 o o Hychin. -- -- F K. Edward the second;
John Blomnil, and Adam Rouse, and John Cobham. Carmelites or White Friars. 0004
09 04 Langley Regis. -- -- F Robert, son of Roger Hell Baron. -- Preaching
Friars. -- 0150 14 08 o o Langley, vid^ Leicestershire. -- N Fundator
Antecessor vxoris Francisci Bigo^ Militis, and einsdem vxoris Sororum. Nuns.
-- Mersey. -- S. Helen. P Alien Roger Fitz-Ran^lph. -- -- Mirdiall. -- Saint
Mary. -- P -- Black Canons. -- Monketon, in Dioc. S. David's, A Cel to S.
Alba^s -- P -- -- 0113 02 06 ob q New-bigging infra villam de Huchyn. -- P --
-- 0015 01 11 oo o Royston, alias Cr^x Rohaysiae. S. John Baptist. S. Them.
Martyr. P Eustach de Marc Knight, Lord of N^cels, and Radulphus de Rancester,
and others renewed it. Canons. -- 0106 03 01 oo o Royston. -- S. John. S. I^mes
Apostles. H -- -- 0005 06 10 oo o Roweney. -- A Free Chapel or Hospital. --
-- 0013 10 09 o o Sopewell. -- Saint Mary. N The Abbots of Saint Albans. --
Black Nuns. -- 0068 08 00 oo o Thele. -- -- C William Bishop of London. -- A
Master. 4 Chaplens. Tynmouth, in com. Northb. a Cel to S. Albans. -- P Fundator
Antecessor Dueis Norfolcia. -- -- 0511 04 01 ob o Ware. -- -- P The Progenitors
of King Richards mother. -- -- Wymondley. -- -- P Richard Argenten. -- Canons.
-- 0037 10 06 ob o

HVNTINGDON-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. (...). (...). q.
Huntingdon. -- Saint Mary. P Eustachius Lo^tot. -- Black Canons Augustines.
0232 0 00 ob Huntingdon. -- S. John Baptist -- H Founded by David Earl of
Huntingdon, Lord of Connington, tempore H. 2. -- 0006 07 08 oo o Hinchingbroke.
-- -- N William Conqueror, in place of Eltesly by him suppressed. Nuns. --
0019 09 02 oo o S. Neot, A Cell to Becco in Normandy. -- P E. Aelfric first:
Roisia de Claraster. A. D. 1113. -- Black Monks. -- 0256 01 03 ob o Ramsey.
-- Saint Mary S. Benedict. M Earl Aylwin. Anno Dom. 969. -- Black Monks
Benedictines. 1983 15 03 oo q Saltry. -- Saint Mary. -- M Simon 2. Earl of
Huntingdon: Kings of Scots, and Lords of Connington, in the reign of King
Stephen. White Monks Cistertians. 0199 11 08 oo o Stoneley. -- -- P Mande^le
Earl of Essex. -- Black Canons Augustines. 0046 00 0b oo o S. Yuo, A Cell to
Ramsey. -- P Earl Ad^us in the reign of Ed^d Ir^side. Black Monks
Benedictines.

KENT.
Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. (...). (...). (...).
Canterbury. Christ-Church Saint Trinity --. P (...) ^ll believing Romans, after
Et^lred King of Kent. (...) -- 2489 04 09 oo o Iuxta Canterbury. Saint
Augustine. M King Ethelbert, and after King Edward the second. Black Monks.
-- 1412 04 07 ob q Iuxta Canterbury. S. Gregory, or S. George. P Lowffran
Archbishop there. -- Black Canons. -- 0166 04 05 ob o Iuxta Canterbury. Saint
Sepul^hers. N -- Black Nuns. -- 0038 19 07 ob o Canterbury. -- -- F King
Henry the third. -- Grey-Friers. -- Canterbury. -- -- H -- Poor Priests. --
0010 13 08 ob o Iuxta Canterbury. Saint Laurence. -- H -- -- 0031 07 10 o o
Canterbury extra Mur^s. Saint Jacob. -- H -- -- 0032 11 01 ob q Ailefford. --
-- F Richard Lord Gray of Cod^r, in the time of King Henry the third, Anno Dom.
1240. Carmelites or white Friars. Ashford. -- -- C Sir R. Fogge Knight. --
Priests. -- Beigham. -- Saint Marie. -- P The Ancestors of Thomas Sak^ile, Alij
Sir Robert Thornham. White C^nons. -- 0152 19 04 ob Bels^ton or Bilsington.
Saint Mary. -- P John Maunsell Praepositus Be^lacensis for King Henry the
third, and Eleanor his wife. Black Canons. -- 0081 01 06 o o Bradgare. -- -- C
Robert de Bradgare, T. Ioseli^ Clerie. and John at Uise. -- Bradesoke. -- S.
Radegundis. -- M Hugh the first Abbct. -- White Canons. -- 0142 08 09 o o
Boxley. -- Saint Marie M William de Ipres a Fleming, Earl of Kent, tempore
Regis Stephani. White Monks. -- 0218 19 10 o o Cobham. -- -- C John Baron
Cobham. -- -- 0128 01 09 ob o Combewell. -- S. Mary Magd. M -- Black Canons.
-- 0080 17 5 o q Dar^ford. -- -- N King Edward the third, Ann^ Reg^i Anglia 30.
Francia ver^ 17. Nuns. -- 0400 08 00 oo o Daunton. -- -- N -- Black Nuns.
-- Dover. -- Saint Marie, Saint Martin P King Henry the first. -- Black
Monks. -- 0232 01 05 ob o Dover, (...) Dei. -- H Henricus tertius Rex Anglia.
-- Knights Templers. -- 0159 18 06 ob q Eastbridge. -- -- H King Henry the
first gave for William his Father, quicquid Robertus Bru^ dederat Ec^lesia de
Esteburch, and fratribus ibidem Regularibus. -- 0023 18 09 ob q El^et. -- -- N
Dom^* -- Nuns. -- Feuersham. -- S. Saviors. -- M King Stephen and Maud his
wife. -- Black Monks Cluniacenses. 0286 12 06 ob o Folkestone. -- S.
Eanswide. -- N Eanswide daughter to Eadbald King of Kent: After Roger Segrane
and Julian his wife, and John Clinton Baron. Black Nuns. -- 0063 00 07 o o
Greenwich. -- -- F King Henry the seventh. -- Obseruant Friars. -- Greenwich.
-- -- C William Lambard. -- Queen Elizabeth's poor people. Greenwich. -- F
Alien K. Edward the third, Anno Regni 55. John Norbury. Friar Minors. --
Harballdowne. -- -- H John Stratford, or Stafford, Archbishop of Canterbury. --
0109 07 02 oo o Heyham. -- -- N -- Black Nuns. -- Horton. -- Saint John
Evangelist. P -- Black Monks Cluniacenses. 0111 16 07 ob o Langdon. -- S.
The. Martyr. M -- White Canons. -- 0056 06 09 o o Leedes. -- Saint Nicholas. P
Robert Cre^equeur. -- Black Canons Augustines. 0362 07 07 o o Lesnes upon
Thames. S. Augustine or S. Th. Martyr. P Richard de Luci^, Chief Justice of
England. Anno D^. 1179. Black Canons. -- 0186 09 00 o o Lewesham -- P Alien
John Norburie. -- Black Monks. -- Maidstone. -- Omniu^ Sanctoru^. C Boniface
of Sa^y. -- -- 0159 07 10 oo o Malling. -- Saint Marie. -- N Gundulph Bishop
of Rochester. -- Black Nuns. -- 0245 10 02 ob o Mottynden. -- -- M -- --
0060 13 00 ob o Newenden. -- -- F Built at the charges of Sir Thomas Albuger
Knight, A. D. 1241. Carmelites or White Friars. Northgate. -- Saint John's -- H
-- -- 0091 16 08 ob o West Peccam. -- -- Praeceptoria Johannes Culpepper,
Justice. de communi Banco, Anno 10. H. 4 -- 0063 06 08 o o Reculuer. -- -- M
Bassa an English Saxon. -- -- Rochester. -- Saint Andrew. -- M Bishop Gundulph
a Norman, A. D. 1080. -- Black Canons. -- 0486 11 05 o o Rochester. -- S
Bartholmew, -- H King Henry the third confirmed it, and Edward the third
discharged them of all Taxes, Tallages, etc. Leprosi. -- Rumney. -- P Ali^ --
-- Sandwich. -- -- F Henry Cowfeild an Almane, Anno D^. 1272. Carmelites or
White Friars. Sandwich. -- Saint Thomas. H Thomas Ralyng Clerk, William Swanne
Clerk, John Goddard and Richard Long. -- Strode or Strowde. -- H Robert
Glanuile. -- -- 0052 19 10 ob o Swingfeild. -- -- Pracept^ria. -- -- 0087 03 03
ob o Sh^pey. -- S. Sexb^rg. N Sexburga wife of Erc^bert King of Kent or
East Angles, Anno D^. 710. Nuns. -- 0129 07 10 ob o Shepey. -- Saint Marie.
-- William de-la-Poole Marquess of Suffolk, by the name of William de-la --
Poole Earl of Suffolk. Tunbridge. -- S. Mary Magd. -- P Richard Clare Earl
of Gloucester. -- Black Canons. -- 0169 10 03 o o Wingham. -- -- C Founded by
Archbishop Pecham. -- Canons. -- Wye. -- -- C John Kempe Archbishop of
Canterbury. Priests. -- 0093 02 0 ob o -- Saint Mary S. Swythin. Sir John
Segraue. -- --

LANCA SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Lancaster.
-- Saint Marie. -- P John Earl of Morton, and confirmed by him afterward when
he was King of England. Monks. -- Lancaster. -- -- A Cell Roger of P^ictiers.
-- Monks Aliens. -- Burstough. -- -- P -- Canons. -- 0129 01 00 o o Calder. --
-- Fundator Antecessor Domini de Copeland. -- -- Cartmele. -- -- P William
Marshall the elder, Earl of Pembroke for King Henry the second, Anno D^. 1188.
-- 0113 19 07 oo o Cokersand. -- -- M Ranulph de Meschines. -- Monks Cluniacks.
-- 0228 05 04 ob o Conyshed. -- -- P Fundator Antecessor G^lielmi Pennington.
-- -- 0124 02 01 o o Furnes. -- -- M Stephen Earl of Bullen, afterward King of
England. Monks Cistert^ans. -- Holland. -- -- P Robert Holland and Maud his
wife. Alij Antecessores Comitis Derbia. -- 0061 03 04 o o Horneby. -- -- Cella
Fundator Antecessor Domini Mounteagle. -- -- Ieruaux. -- -- M -- -- Manchester.
-- -- C The Grelleyes Ancestors to Thomas West Lord La Ware, tempore H. 5. --
Penwortham. -- -- M -- -- 0114 16 09 oo o Whalley. -- -- M The Ancestors of the
Lacyes Earls of Lincoln, Anno D^. 1296. White Monks. -- 0551 04 06 oo o

LEICHESTERSHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. (...). d. ^b. q.
Leicester. -- Saint Mary. -- M Robert de Bossu, Earl of Leicester. -- Black
Canons or Friars Preachers. 1062 00 04 ob q Iuxta Leicester Castle. Saint Mary.
-- C Henry Duke of Lancaster. -- -- 0023 12 11 o o Bredon, A Cell to S Oswald.
-- M Fundator Domini Regis Proge^tor. Alij Al^ Earl of Cornwall. Black
Canons. -- 0025 08 01 o o Bradley. -- -- P -- -- 0020 15 07 oo o Burton. -- --
Mowbrayes and by a common contribution over all England. Leprosi. -- 0265 10 02
o q Canwell. -- -- M. The Ancestors of the Lord Lizle. -- -- 0025 10 03 oo o
Croxton. -- -- M The Lord Barkleyes Ancestors. -- Pramonstratenses. -- 0458 19
11 ob q Castledonington. -- S. John Baptist. -- H -- -- 0003 13 04 o o Cumbe.
-- Saint Mary. M -- White Monks. -- Cale. -- -- P -- Black Canons. --
Dalby-Rothley Heyther. Praceptoria. -- -- -- 0231 07 10 oo o Garradon. -- -- M
Fundator Antecessor (...) Comitissa Oxford. -- -- 0186 15 02 ob o Gracedew, nee
re Donington. -- N Roisia wife of Bertram de Verdon. -- Nuns. -- ^01 08 02 ob
o Gerewerdon. -- Saint Mary. M -- White Monks. -- Hinkley. -- -- P Alien -- --
Kirkby Bellers. -- -- P Roger Bel^rs, and A^yse his wife. -- -- 0178 07 10 oo q
Launda. -- -- M Richard Basset Di^c. Lincoln. -- Black Canons. -- 0510 16 05
ob q Langley. -- -- Fundator Antecessor Uxoris Frane. Bigot Mil. and (...)
Vxoris S^rum. Nuns. -- 0034 06 02 oo o Litterworth. -- Saint Iohnns. H -- --
0^26 09 5 o o Noui-Operis. -- -- C -- -- 0595 7 04 o o Olneston, or Oselneston.
-- M Robert Grimbald. -- -- 0173 18 09 oo q Staue. -- N -- Black Nuns. --
Vlneserost. -- -- P Roger Quiney Earl of Wint^n. -- -- 0101 03 10 ob o
Werewerdon. -- -- M -- Black Canons. -- -- Saint Ursula. -- H -- -- 0008 00 00
oo o

LINCOLN SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Lincoln
Epa^tus. -- Saint Marie. -- M -- Secular Canons. -- Lincoln. -- -- F M. Odo de
Kilkenny, a Scottish mam, A. D. 1269. Carmelites or White Friars. Lincoln. --
Saint August. -- F -- Friars Eremites. -- Lincoln. -- -- F John Pickering of
Stampwike. -- Friars Minors. -- Iuxta Lincoln. -- S. Katherine. -- P Robert de
Caneto Bishop of Lincoln. -- Gilbertines. -- 0270 01 03 oo o Aluingham. --
Saint Mary. -- P Anthony de Bec Bishop of Durham and Patriarch of Jerusalem.
White Canons and Nuns Gilbertines. 0141 15 00 oo o Balwatus Aquilae. -- -- --
0124 02 00 oo o Bello-vero, sieve Beauuoir. Saint Marie. -- Ralph de Todeney. --
Black Monks of S. Albans. 0129 17 06 o o Berling^s. -- -- M Radulphus de
Haya. -- -- 0307 16 06 oo o Bolyngton. -- Saint Marie M -- White Canons and
Nuns Gilbertines. 0187 07 09 oo o Boston. -- -- M S. Botolph in the Saxons
time. -- -- Boston. -- -- F Sir Orby, A. D. 1300. -- Carmelites or white
Friars. Boston luxta Mare. Saint Mary. -- P T. Morley Knight, John Bacon
Esquier, John Hagon, Thomas Hoke de Shynham, and John Hyrd of Boston. --
Boston, -- Beatae Mariae. C -- -- 0024 00 00 oo o Boston. -- Corporis Christi.
C -- -- 0032 00 00 oo o Boston. -- Saint Peter. -- C -- -- 0010 13 04 o
Bradney. -- Saint Oswald. M Confirmed by William de Gannt, son and heir of
Gilbert de Gannt, Anno Dom. 1115. -- 429 07 00 oo o Brunne. -- Black Canons.
-- -- -- Bryggerd. -- -- P -- -- 0101 11 00 ob o Cateley, or Catlin. Saint
Marie. -- M John Spaule Esquier. -- White Canons and Nuns Gilbertines. 0038 13
08 o o Croyland or Crowland. -- M Aethelbald King of the Mercians, Anno Dom.
716. It was new built at the benenolence of the whole land, given upon pardon
for their sins. Black Monks. -- 1217 05 11 oo o Elsham. -- -- P William
Dyne. -- Black Canons. -- 0083 17 10 oo o Eppworth in the Isle of Axholme. A
Conuentual House. Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham and Marshall of England.
Carthusians. -- 0290 14 07 ob q Fosse. -- -- N -- Nuns. -- 0008 05 04 oo o
Frisetun. -- -- Mauritius de Creon Baron. -- Black Monks. -- Glamfordbridge
in Parochia de Wrawby. -- H William Tirwhit. -- -- Goykewell. -- -- N --
Nuns. -- 0019 18 06 oo o Greenfeild. -- Saint Mary. -- N Dudon de Gro^esby.
-- Black Nuns. -- 0079 15 01 o o Grimmysby. -- Saint Leonard -- N Robert
Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, and Thomas Hesterton Knight. Black Nuns. --
0012 03 07 o Grimmesby. -- S. Augustine. and S. Toloss. Fundator Domini Regis
Progenit^r. -- Black Canons. -- Hagneby. -- -- M Herbert of Orbe^ or Orreby.
-- -- 0098 08 04 oo o Hauerholm. -- Saint Mary. M Alexander Bishop of
Lincoln. -- White Canons, and Nuns Gilbertines. 0088 05 05 oo o Heuings. -- --
N -- -- 0058 13 04 oo o Hunston or Humberston. Our Lady and S. Peter. M
Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. -- -- 0042 11 03 oo o Irford. -- -- M -- --
014 13 04 ob o Kirksted. -- Saint Marie. -- M Hugh Britay. -- White Monks. --
0338 13 11 ob q Kyme. -- -- M Philip de Valisby. -- -- 0138 04 09 oo o
Letherstoke. -- -- John Gifford Clerk. -- -- Leyborne. -- Our Lady M Robert
Fitz Gilbert. -- -- 0057 13 05 o q Louthparke. -- Saint M^ry. -- M -- White
Monks. -- 0169 05 06 ob o Markeby. -- -- P -- -- 0163 17 06 ob o Newebo. -- --
M -- -- 0115 11 08 o o Newhouse. -- S. Martial. -- Peter de Ga^lia. -- White
Canons, the first house of the Order Prmonstratenses in England. Newnersby, or
Nun-orm^by. -- P -- White Canons and Nuns Gilbertines 0098 00 00 oo o Newsom.
-- -- M -- -- 0114 01 04 ob o Newsted near Stansford. -- M -- Gilbertines. --
0042 01 03 oo Newsted near Axhol^e. -- P -- -- 0055 11 08 oo o Noton, or
N^cton-Parke. S. Mary Magd. M Robert D'Arci^. -- Black Canons. -- 0052 19 02
ob o Nun-Cotton. -- Saint Mary. P -- White Canons and Nuns. 0046 17 07 oo o
Oxeneyes. -- -- -- Black Canons. -- Raueston. -- Saint Augustine. -- C -- --
Reuesby, or Reuyswy. -- M William Romare. -- Nuns. -- 0349 04 10 oo o
Sempringham. -- Saint Gilbert. M Saint Gilbert beginner of the said Order. --
White Canons and Nuns Gilbertines. 0359 12 07 oo o Sixle. -- Saint Marie. -- --
Whit Canons and Nuns. Spalding. -- Saint Mary, and S. Nicholas. M Iuo Talbois
comes Andegauensis, and William de Romara, and Lucy Countess of Chester and
Lincoln. Audegauenses Monachi. 0878 18 03 oo o Iuxta Stansford -- Saint
Michael. M -- Black Monks. -- 0072 18 10 ob o Stanford. -- Saint Mary and
Saint Nicholas -- Black Monks. -- 0065 19 09 o o Stanford. -- -- F King
Edward the third. -- Carmelites or White Friars. Stanford. -- -- H William
Brown Citizen there. -- -- Stanford. -- -- H The L. Burghley L. Treasurer of
Engand. -- -- Staynsfeld. -- -- P Confirmed by K. John for his Father Henry the
second. Black Nuns. -- 0112 05 00 oo o Stixwold or Stixwell. Saint Marie. --
M Lucie first Countess of Perch. -- White Canons and Nuns. 0163 01 02 o ob
Swinshed in Holland. Saint Marie. -- M Sir Robert Grisley. -- White Monks. --
0175 19 10 oo o Syxhill. -- -- P -- Gilbertines. -- 0170 08 09 o o Tatteshall.
-- -- C Sir Ralph Cromwell Knight. -- -- 0348 05 11 ob q Temple-Bruer. --
Praeceptori^. -- -- -- 0184 06 08 oo o Thorneholme. -- -- P -- -- 0155 19 06 ob
o Thornton. -- -- M -- -- 0730 17 02 ob o Torington. -- Saint Marie. -- William
de Arundell. -- Black Canons. -- Torkesey. -- -- P -- Black Canons. -- 0027
02 08 o o Tupholme. -- Saint Mary. M Alain Neuill. -- White Canons. -- 0119 02
08 oo o Valla Dei. -- Saint Mary. -- M Gilbert Gaunt Earl of Lincoln. --
White Monks Cistertians. 0177 15 07 ob q Wello. -- -- M -- -- 0152 07 04 oo o
Willoughton. -- Praeceptori^. -- -- -- 0174 11 01 ob o -- Saint Peter. and
Saint Paul M -- -- 0197 17 05 oo q -- Omnium Sa^ctoru^ H -- -- 0018 16 00 ob q

MIDDLESEX. London within the Walls.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Eccles.
Cath. -- Saint Paul. -- Ethelbert King of Kent, Anno Dom. 610. -- Secular
Canons. -- Iuxta Ludgate. -- F -- K. Edward the first, and Aeli^ora his wife.
Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Citizens of London, A. D.
1276 Black Friars. -- 0104 15 04 oo o Iuxta Newgate. F -- Queen Margaret
second wife to K. Edward the first, and John of Britain, Earl of Richmond,
with diverse other Citizens of London, A. D. 1225. and 1306. Friars Minor. or
Gray Friars. 0032 19 10 oo o Iuxta Aldersgate. C Saint Martius. -- Ingelricus
and Edward his brother, Anno Dom. 1056. Secular Clerks. -- Guild Hall. -- --
Peter Stambarr, Adam Frances, Henry de and William Brampton Chaplens, A. D.
1299. A Chapel and 4. Chaplains. 0012 18 09 oo o In Cheap Side. -- H S.
Thom. of Acon. -- Thomas Fitz-the bald de Heily, and Agnes his wife, sister to
Thomas Becket; in the reign of Henry the second. -- 0277 03 04 oo o In
Candleweek street. C Corpus Christi. -- John Poultney Mayor of London, Anno 20.
Edward. 3. -- 0079 17 11 oo o S. Laurence Pountney. VVhittingdon. -- C --
Richard Whitingdon a Citizen of London, An. 3. H. 6. -- 0020 01 10 oo q In Gay
spur lane. Elsing Spittle. H -- William Elsing Citizen of London. An. Dom.
1329. Anno 3. Ed. 3. Canons Regular, A lij 100. blind men. 0239 13 11 ob o In
Lothburie. -- -- Anno Dom. 1257. -- Fratres de Sacra. -- In Broadstreet. -- F
S. Augustine. -- Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, A. Dom. 1253.
Austine Friars. -- 0057 00 04 oo o In 3. Needle street, A Cel to S. Anthony of
Uienna. H S. Anthony. -- King Henry the third. -- -- In Bishopsgate street. N
Saint Helens. -- William Basing Deane of Paul's, in the second year of Edward
the second. Black Nuns, -- 0376 06 00 oo o In Leaden Hall. -- H S.
Trinitatis. -- William Rouse, John Risby, and Thomas Ashby Priests. A. D. 1466.
60. Priests. -- Iuxta Aldgate Christ's Church P The holy Trinity. -- Queen
Matilda wife to K. Henry the first Anno Dom. 1108. Black Canons or Canons
Regular. In Hartstreet. -- -- Ralph Hosiar, and William Sabernes. A. D. 1298.
Fratres Sancta Crucis. 0052 23 ^2 oo o Barking Chapel. -- Our Lady. -- John
Earl of Worcester, made it a fraternity. King Richard the third made it a
College of Priests, and reedified it. --

London without the Walls, in the Suburbs.
Westminster. -- M Saint Peter. -- Sebert King of the East Saxons, Dunstan B.
of London. K Edward Confessor. Back Monks. -- 3977 06 04 ob q Westminster. C
Saint Stephen. -- King Stephen: after by King Edward the third. Secular Canons.
-- 1085 10 05 oo o Westminster in Tote-hill street.. H -- The Lady Anne Dacre.
-- -- 0100 00 00 oo o Westminster. -- H Saint James. -- The Citizens of London.
-- -- Westminster near Charing Cross, A Cell to our Lady of Rouncinall in
Navarre. H Saint Marie. -- Anno 15. Edward 4. -- -- Westminster, S. Giles in
the fields. H -- Queen Matilde, wife to King H. 1. A. D. 1117 -- Westminster,
The Sauoy. H Saint John Bap. -- King Henry the seventh. A. D. 1509. -- -- 0529
15 07 ob o In Fleetstreet New Temple. Our Lady. -- Founded by themselves in the
reign of Henry the second. Knights Templers. -- In Fleestreet. -- -- Richard
Gray of Codnor. A. D. 1241. -- White Friars. -- 0063 11 04 o o In Smithfield.
-- M S. Bartholmew. -- Henricus Rex Anglia pri^, (...) Ecclesiam. After by
Rahere first Prior of the same, Anno Dom. 1102.
Black Canons or Canons Regular. 0757 08 04 ob q In Smithfield. H S.
Bartholmew. -- Rahere a Prior, A. D. 1102. -- -- 0305 06 07 oo o The
Charterhouse in Saint John's street. -- Sir Walter Many of Cambrey Knight, A. D.
1340. or 1371. Carthusians. -- 0736 02 07 oo o In Saint John's street. P Saint
John of Jerusalem. Jorden Brises Baron, and Muriel his wife. A. D. 1100. --
2385 19 08 oo o Clerken-well. N Saint Mary. -- Jorden Briset Baron, the son
of Ralph, Anno Domini 1100. and Muriel his wife. Black Nuns. -- 0282 16 05 oo
o Exta Creplesgate, Corpus Christi. H Our Lady, Saint Giles.
Matildis Regina, Henrici secundi Auia. After by John Bela^r, 35. Edw. 3. -- In
White Cross street. H Saint Giles. -- King Henry the fifth. -- Of the French
Order. Halywell. -- N S. John Baptist. -- A Bishop of London. -- Black
Nuns. -- 0347 01 03 oo o Extra Bishops gate, New-Hospitall. P Beata Maria, --
Walter Brunne and Roisia his wife, A. D. 1235. Canons Regular. -- 0557 14 10 ob
Extra Algate. N Saint Clare, -- Blanch Queen of Navarre, and her husband
Edmund E. of Lancaster, Leicester, and Darby, brother to K. E. 1. 1292. 21. E.
1. Nuns Minors. -- 0342 05 10 ob o In East Smithfield near the Tower. New
Abbey. M S. Marie Gracis. King Edward the third, Anno regni cius 25. A. D.
1359. White Monks Cistertians. 0602 11 10 ob o Near the Tower. H S Katherine.
-- Matilda wife to King Stephen, and after by Aelioner, wife to King Edward the
first. A Custos. 3. Chaplens. 3. Sisters. 18. poor women. 6. poor Clerks.
0315 14 02 o o

Middlesex.
Iuxta Brainford. F Ecclesia sanctorum Angeloru^. John Sommerset Chancellor of
the Exchequor, and the Kings Chaplain. -- Kylborne. N Saint Mary. -- --
Nuns. -- 0086 07 6 o o Hownslow. Domus -- -- Captives. -- 0080 15 00 ob o
Langley. -- -- The Earl of Derby. -- -- Okeburn. -- P. Alien -- -- -- Stanes.
-- P -- Ralph Stafford. -- -- Stratford Bow. -- M Sancti Leonards. -- King
Henry the second. -- Nuns or white Monks. 0121 16 00 oo o Syon. -- M -- King
Henry the fifth, Ann. 2. of his reign. Nuns and Priests Augustines. 1944 11 08
o q Vxbridge. -- M Saint Mary. -- Hugh Rowse. -- --

NORFFOLKE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Norwich
produced from the Abbey of Feschamp in Normandy. Ecc. Cat. Saint Trinity. --
Elbert de Losing. Bishop Herbert of Thetford, Anno Dom. 1096. in the reign of
King William Rufus. Black Monks, Benedictines. 1061 14 03 ob o Norwich. -- F --
Philip Cowgate Citizen and Mayor of Norwich, A. D. 1268. Carmelites or White
Friars. Norwich. -- F -- John Hestynford. -- Gray Friars. -- Norwich, -- F --
-- Black Friars. -- Norwich. -- F -- Remigie, or the King. -- Austine Friars.
-- Norwich. -- H Saint Egidius. -- -- -- 0090 12 00 oo o Linne. -- F -- Lord
Bardolf, Lord Scales, and Sir John Wignhall, Anno Dom. 1269. Carmelites or
white Friars. 0001 15 08 oo o Linne. -- F -- Thomas Geduey. -- Black Friars.
-- Linne. -- F -- T. de Feltsham. -- White Friars. -- Linne. -- H Saint John.
-- -- -- 0007 06 11 o o Attilburgh. -- C Sancta Crucis. -- Robert Mortimer. --
-- 0021 16 00 ob o Beeston. -- P -- -- -- 0050 06 04 ob q Blakburgh. -- N -- --
Nuns. -- 0076 03 09 ob o Blakeney. -- F -- Lord Rosse, Sir Robert Bacon, and
S. John Bret Knights, A. D. 1321. Carmelites or White Friars. Bokenham, alias
Bukkenham P Saint Jacob. -- -- Black Canons. -- 0131 11 00 oo o Bromhall in
Windsor Forest. P -- Edward the Black Prince. -- -- Bromholme. -- P S.
Sepulchers. -- G. Glamnile. -- Black Monks Cluniacenses 0144 19 00 ob q
Bromholme. -- Saint Andrew. -- William Glamnile. -- Benedictines. -- Brunham.
-- -- Sir Ralph Hempnall, and Sir William Calthrop, Anno Dom. 1241. Carmelites
or white Friars. 0002 05 04 oo o Budham. -- Saint Mary. -- -- Black Canons. --
Carow. -- N Saint Mary. -- King Stephen. -- Black Nuns. -- 0084 12 01 ob q
Carbroke. -- C S. John Jerusalem. -- -- -- 0065 02 09 ob o Castell-acre. -- M
Saint Marie. -- -- Black Monks Clunic. -- 0324 17 05 ob q Crobbehouse. -- N --
-- Nuns. -- 0031 16 07 oo o Flytham, A Cel to Walsingham. N -- -- Nuns. --
0062 10 06 ob o Hempton or Hompton. P Our Lady and Saint Stephen. Richard Ward
Chanon here. -- -- 0039 00 09 oo o Heringby. C -- -- -- 0023 06 05 oo o
Hilderlands. H -- -- -- 0000 14 00 o o Horsseham. -- P Saint Fidis. -- Robert
Fitz-Walter. -- Black Monks Benedictines. 0193 02 03 ob o Hulme. -- M Saint
Benedict. -- King Kanute the Dane. After K. Edward Confessor. Black Monks. --
0677 09 08 oo q Hyckelyng. -- P -- -- -- 0137 00 01 ob q Kockesforth, or
Cokesford. M -- Sir William Cheyney Knight. -- Black Canons. -- 0153 07 01 oo
o Langley. -- M -- Fundator Antecessor vxoris Francisci Bigot Militis, and
eiusdem vxoris Sororum. Vide Hertf. and Leicest. Nuns. -- 0128 19 09 ob o
Marmound. N -- -- White Nuns Gilbert. -- 0013 06 01 ob o Markham Barbara. M --
-- -- 0042 04 07 ob q Pentney and Wormegay. M S. Mary Magd. -- Reginald de
Warenna. -- Black Canons. -- 0215 18 08 oo o Rushworth. C -- Sir Robert
Wingfeild Knight. -- -- 0085 15 oo ob Shuldeham. -- P Sancta Crucis and S.
Marie. -- White Nuns Gilbertines. 0171 06 08 oo o Thetford. -- F Sancta
Trinitatis. -- Bishop Arfast of El^ham, in the reign of King Edward
Confessor, made it a Bishops See. After Henry Duke of Lancaster, made a
Society of Preachers. Friars Preachers. -- Thetford. -- F -- John of Gaunt,
Duke of Lancaster. -- Augustine Friars. -- Thetford. -- F S. Sepultur. -- The
Earl of Warren. -- Black Friars. -- Thetford. -- P S. Mary, and S. John --
Roger Bigod Earl of Norffolke. -- Black Canons. -- 0049 18 01 oo o Thetford.
-- N Saint Gregory. -- -- Black Nuns. -- 0050 09 08 o o Thetford. -- M Saint
Andrew. -- Hugh Bigod Steward to King Henry. -- Black Monks Clunicenses. 0418
06 03 ob o Thetford. -- C Beata Mariae. -- -- -- 0109 00 07 oo o Thetford. --
S. Mary Magd, and S. John Bap. John Warren Earl of Surrey. -- -- Tomeston. --
C -- Thomas de Shardelow, and John his brother A. 23. E. 3. 6. Chaplens. --
0052 15 07 ob Wabburne. -- P -- -- -- 0028 07 02 oo o Walfingham -- M Saint
Marie -- Edmond Earl of March, and Elizabeth de Burgo. Black Canons Friars
Minors. 0446 14 04 ob q Wendling. -- F -- William de Wendling Priest. --
Austine Friars. -- 0055 18 04 ob q Westacre. P S. Mary and alSaints -- Black
Canons. -- 03^ 19 11 ob q Westdereham. M -- -- White Canons. -- 0252 12 11 ob
o Weybridge or Wexbridge. P Saint Margaret. -- Robert Oliver, Thomas Monday,
John Palmar and John Barford. -- 0007 13 04 oo o Wirham. -- P VVinewald. -- --
Black Canons de martial Wymondham. -- Saint Marie -- William D'Albiney, Butler
to King Henry the first. Black Monks of S. Albans. 0072 05 04 oo o Yarmouth.
-- F -- King Edward the first, Anno Domini, 1278 Carmelites or white Friars.
Yarmouth. -- F -- Galfridus Pilgrim, and Thomas Fastolfe -- Black Eriers. --
Yarmouth. -- F -- Sir William Gerbrigge. -- Gray Friars. -- Iuxta Yarmouth in
Castretleg. C S. John Baptist. -- First Robert de Castre, after by John
Fastolfe Esquier, father to Sir John Fastolfe. -- Yngham. P Saint Marie -- --
Black Monks of Saint Albans. 0074 02 07 ob o -- F -- -- Friars Preachers. --
0000 18 00 o o -- F -- -- Austine Friars. -- 0001 04 06 oo o

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Northampton.
-- M Saint Jacob. -- -- Black Canons. -- 0213 17 02 ob o Northampton. P Saint
Andrew. -- Simon de Sancto Licio, first E. of Northampton. -- Black Monks. --
0334 13 07 oo o Iuxta Northa^p ton. N S. Mary de pratis, or de laprey Simon de
Sancto Licio second Earl of Northampton. Nuns. -- 0119 09 07 oo q
Northampton. -- F -- -- Friars Minors or Gray Fricrs. 0006 17 04 o o
Northampton. -- F -- -- Friars Preachers. -- 0005 07 10 oo o Northampton. -- F
-- Simon Mountfort, and Sir T. Chitwood Knights. A. D. 1271. Carmelites or
white Friars. 0010 10 00 oo o Northampton. -- N Saint Mary. -- -- Black
Nuns. -- Northampton, -- F -- John de Glannile. -- Augustine Friars. --
Asheby. -- P -- -- -- 0127 19 00 oo o Catesby. -- N S. Tho. and S. Mary. -- --
Nuns of Sempringham. 0145 00 06 oo o Chacum. -- P S. Peter. S Paul. -- William
Knowles. Sir Hugh Awresey. -- Black Canons. -- 0093 06 03 ob o Cotherstoke. --
C -- John Gifford Clerk, A. 22. E. 3. -- -- Dauintree. -- P Saint Austin.
Angl. Apost. Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. -- Black Monks Clunicenses.
0236 07 06 oo o Fynneshed the Church of Saint Mary's of the Castle of Hyuiell.
M S. Mary the Virgin Richard Engaigne. -- -- 0062 16 00 oo o Foderinghay. C --
Edmund de Langley Duke of York. King H. 4 and Queen Joan his wife, an. 13.
lastly, H. 5. and Edward Duke of York. -- 0419 11 10 ob o Gare. -- N S. Mary
Magd. -- -- Black Nuns. -- Higham-Ferrars. C -- Henry Chicheley Archbishop
of Canterbury. -- -- 0156 02 07 ob o Brackley. C -- The L. Zouchs. -- -- Irt
elingburgh. C -- John Pool. -- A Dean and 6. Clerks. -- 0064 12 10 ob o Iuxa
Kingesthorp H Saint David. -- -- -- 0024 06 00 oo o Peterborough. M Saint
Peter. -- Wolpherue. fill. Regis Restani Etheldredus. Ethelwoldi. Black Monks.
-- 1972 07 00 (...) q Pipewell. -- P Saint Mary. -- William Boteuillei, and
Robert Boteuillei, and Ranulph Earl of Chester. A. H. 2. White Monks
Cistertians. 0347 08 00 ob o Rothewell. -- N S. John Baptist. -- -- Nuns. --
0010 10 04 oo o Sainct-Dauy. P Saint Trinity, and Saint Mary. -- Black Canons.
-- Sewesby or Sewardesley. N S. Mary Magd, -- -- Black Nuns. -- 0018 11 02 oo
o Stanford. -- N -- -- Nuns. -- Sulby. -- M Saint Mary. -- -- Black Monks.
-- 0305 08 05 ob o Towceter. -- C -- -- -- 0019 06 08 oo o Withorpe. -- M -- --
Black Monks. -- H Saint Leonard. -- -- -- 0010 00 00 oo o H Saint John's. --
-- -- 0025 06 02 ob q C Omnium sanctorum -- -- 0001 19 04 oo o P S. Michael. --
-- Black Monks. --

NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q.
Nottingham. F -- Sir Reginald Gray of Wilton, and I. Shirley, Anno Dom. 1276.
White Friars. -- Nottingham. F -- King Henry the third. -- Gray Friars. --
Nottingham. H -- John Plomtree. -- -- Bawtree. H -- -- -- 0006 06 08 oo o Bella
valla. P -- John Cantelupe, and Nicholas de Cantelupe Confirmed by Edward the
third, Anno 19. Angliae, and 6. Franciae. Carthusians Cistertians. 0227 08 00
oo o Bingham. C Beatae Mariae. -- -- -- 0040 11 00 oo o Blythe. P Saint Mary.
-- Roger Busly, and Foulk de Lisieurs. -- Black Monks. -- 0126 08 02 ob o
Blythe. H -- -- -- 0008 14 00 o o Brodham. P -- -- -- 0016 05 02 oo o Clyston.
C -- -- -- 0020 02 06 oo o Felley. M Our Lady. -- Fundator Antecessor Iohannis
Chough Militis. John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Black Monks. -- 0061 04 08
oo o Lenton P Sanctae Trinitatis. -- William Penerell the base son of King
William the Conqueror. Black Monks, Cluniacenses. 0417 19 03 oo o In Marisco,
apud Capell. Sancti Thomae Ebor. Cella. -- -- -- 0063 06 08 o o Mattersey. --
-- Fundator Antecessor Edwardi Thirland. -- -- 0061 17 07 oo o Newsteed, or
Nono-Loco in Shirwood. Our Lady. -- King Henry the second. -- -- 0219 18 08 ob
o Rufford. M -- Dominus Beaumount Antecessor Domini Norreys. White Monks. --
0254 06 08 oo o Shelford. P -- Ralph Hanselin: and H. Norris Antecessor. -- --
0151 14 01 oo o Southwell. C -- Paulinus the first Archbishop of York. -- --
0039 05 06 ob o Thurgarton. P Saint Peter. -- Sir Ralph D'eincourt, and
confirmed per Regem. Black Canons. -- 0359 15 10 oo Wallingwells. N -- The
Lord Fitzhugh, Ancester to the L. Dacres. Nuns. -- 00087 11 06 o o Welbeck.
M Saint James. -- Fundator Antecessor Episcopi Eliensis. Tho. de Cukeney, or
Cokeney. Black Canons. -- 0298 04 08 oo o Workesope. M Saint Mary of Radford.
William Louetot, and the Ancestors of the Earl of Shrewsbury. Black Canons.
-- 0302 06 10 oo o

NORTHVMBERLAND.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q
Alba-Launda, or Blancheland. M -- Fundator Antecess. Comitis Westmorlandia.
John de Torington a Benefactor. K. John confirmed it. Anno 16. Cistertians. --
0044 09 01 ob o Alnewicke or Holne. F -- John Lord Uesey (Antecessor Cmitis
Northumbria) brought this Order first into England. A. D. 1240. Carmelites or
White Friars. 0194 07 00 oo o Barwicke. F -- Sir John Gray, Anno Dom. 1270. --
Carmelites or White Friars. Brekenbourne. P -- William Batram the elder, father
to Roger Bartram, tempore Regis Iohannis. -- 0077 00 00 oo o Frameland,
Ferne-Eland, or Flaneland. Cel la. -- -- -- 0012 17 08 oo o Hexham. -- P --
Fundator Antecessor Archiep. Eboracensis. -- -- 0138 01 09 oo o Holiscombe. N
-- -- Nuns. -- 0015 10 08 o o Insula-sacra. -- Cella -- -- -- 0060 05 00 oo o
Lambley. -- N -- The Lucies. -- Nuns. -- Newcastle. F -- -- Gray Friars. --
Newcastle. N -- -- Nuns. -- 0037 04 02 oo o Newcastle. F -- King Edward the
first. -- Carmelites or White Friars. Newcastle. H S. Mary. Magd. -- -- -- 0009
11 04 oo o New-Monastery, alias New Minster. M -- Fundator Antecessor Domini
Dakers. -- -- 0140 10 04 oo o Ouingham Cella de Hexam. -- -- -- 0013 04 08 oo o
Tynmouth. a Cell to Saint Albans in Hertfordshire. N -- Fundator Antecessor
Ducis Norfolcia. -- Nuns. -- 0511 04 02 ob o

OXFORDSHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Oxford,
Ecclesia Cathedralis. -- King Henry the eight. -- -- Oxford. P S. Frideswid. --
Frideswida filia Algari, Restaurator Ethelredus Rex, and Dom. Regis
Progenitores. Nuns, afterward Black Canons. 0224 04 08 9 Oxford. -- F --
Richard Carry. -- Fratres Sanctae Crucis. -- Oxford. -- F -- Henricus Rex. --
Friars Minors, or Gray Friars. Oxford. -- F -- K. Edward the second, Anno 11.
Edwardi 2. Carmelites or White Friars. Oxford. F -- -- Black Friars. --
Oxford. F -- King Henry the third. -- Augustine Friars. -- Oxford. M S. Mary
Osney. -- Rob. the son of Niele, brother of Rob. D Oily a Norman, A. D. 1129.
Black Canons. -- 0755 18 06 ob Oxford. M Locus Regalis, alias Rewley. Edmund
Earl of Cornwall. -- Monks Cistertians. -- 0174 03 00 oo o The Colleges in
Oxford. University College. -- First King Aelfred, after William Archdeacon of
Durham. Baliol College. -- -- John Baliol Father of John Baliol King of Scots,
tempore H. 3. Merton College. -- -- Walter Merton B. of Rochester. Anno D.
1274. Exceter College. -- -- Walter Stapledon Bishop of Excester, tempore Edw.
2. Hearts Hall. -- -- Walter Stapledon Bishop of Excester, tempore Edw. 2.
Kings, now Oriall. College. -- King Edward the second. -- S. Mary's Hall. --
-- King Edward the second. -- Queens College. -- -- Queen Philip wife K.
Edward the third. -- S. Edmunds Hall -- -- Edmund Archb. of Canterbury, vt
creditur. Canterbury now Christ's Church College. -- Simon Islip Archbishop
of Canterbury. After Cardinal Wolsey, and K. Henry the eight. S. Mary, alias
New College. -- William Wiccam Bishop of Winchester. Gloucester College --
Benedictine Monks. -- Durham, now Trinity College. -- Thomas de Hatfeild,
Bishop of Durham. After in our time, Sir Thomas Pope knight Lincoln College.
-- -- Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincoln. -- S. Albans Hall. -- -- -- Broadgate
Hall -- -- -- All-Soules College. -- Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury
tempore H. 5. New Inn. -- -- -- Bernard now S. John Baptist College. -- Henry
Chicheley, Archbishop of Canterbury, tempore H. 5. After in our time, Sir
Thomas White L. Mayor of London. Sancti Iohannis Hospitale, now Mary Magdalen
College. -- Fundator Henricus Rex, Afterward William Wainflet B. of
Winchester. Magdalen Hal. -- -- William Patten, alias Wainflet. -- Brazen Nose
Col ledge. -- William Smith Bishop of Lincoln, tempore H. 7. Doctor Nowell
Dean of Pa^les, Benefactor. Corpus Christi College. -- Richard Fox B. of
Winchester, Hugh Olda^ B. of Excester, Benefactor. Jesus College. -- -- Hugh
Price Doctor of the Laws. -- Wadham College. -- Wadham, an Esquier, and his
wife. -- Banbury. H Saint John. -- -- -- 0015 01 10 ob o Banbury. C Beat
Mariae. -- -- -- 0048 06 00 oo o Brackele. P Saint Mary. -- -- Black Canons.
-- Bruern. M Saint Mary. -- Nicholas Basset. -- White Monks. -- 0124 10 10 oo
o Burcester, vulgo Bisset^r. Saint Eadburgh. -- Gilbert Basset, and Egelina
Courtney his wife, tempore Henrici Secundi. -- 0167 02 10 oo o Burford. P -- --
-- 0013 06 06 oo o Chiping Norton in Ecclesia. -- -- -- 0007 14 00 oo o
Clattercote. M Sancti Leonardi. -- -- -- 0034 19 11 oo o Coges. P -- -- Black
Monks. -- Dorchester. M Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Birinus the Apostle of the
West Saxons, and after by Nicholas Huntercombe, heir of William Huntercombe.
Black Canons. -- 0219 12 00 oo o Ewelme, or New Elm. H -- William de la Pole
Duke of Suffolk. -- -- 0020 0 0 o o Eynsham, M Saint Marie. -- Athelmar a
Nobleman. King Aethelred confirmed it. A. D. 1005. Black Monks Benedictines.
0421 16 01 oo o Godstowby Oxf. N Saint Mary. -- Dame Ida a rich Widow. Repaired
by K. John. Black Nuns. -- 0319 18 08 oo o Goring. N Saint Marie -- --
Black Nuns. -- 0060 05 05 oo o Lidmore, alias Littlemore. N -- Fundator
Domini Regis Progenitor. -- Black Nuns. -- 0033 06 08 oo o Norton. -- P --
Domini Regis Progenitor. Reginald Earl of Boloigne gave 108. Acres to it.
Richard Sergeaux.
Black Canons. -- Saucombe. P Saint Marie. -- -- Black Canons. -- Stodeley. N
Saint Mary. -- Peter Corbyzen* and William de Cantelop. -- -- 0102 06 07 oo o
Tame. M Saint Mary. -- Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, the great builder of
Castles. White Monks. -- 0256 13 07 ob o Wroxton. P Saint Mary. -- Master
Michael Bylet, for Heruey Bylet his Father, and confirmed by K. John. Canons.
-- 0078 14 03 o o

RICHMOND-SHIRE.
Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Richmond. M
Saint Agath. -- Roaldus Constable of Richmond, and Gracian his wife. Fundator
Antecessor. Dom. Scroope. A. D. 1152. -- 0188 16 02 oo o Richmond. H Saint
Nicholas. -- -- -- 0010 00 00 oo o Couerham, alias Somerham M -- First founded
at Swaynsie by Halwisia daughter of Ralph Glam^ill, wife to Ralph Lord of
Midleham, but removed after to Couerham. A. D. 1182. Chanons Praemonstratenses.
0207 14 08 oo o Cander. M -- -- -- 0064 03 09 oo o Ellerton. N Saint Mary. --
William Fitz-Pier. -- Nuns. -- 0015 14 08 oo o Furnesse. M Saint Mary. --
First, Stephen Earl of Bolleyn. Anno Dom. 1127. After William de Mowbray gave
lands to it, which lands he had of Richard Moruill, and Amie his wife. King
Henry the 1. confirmed it. White Monks. -- 0966 07 10 oo o Fountains. M
Saint Mary. -- Thurstin Archbishop of York. A. D. 1132. White Monks. --
1173 00 07 ob o Gilling. N -- -- Nuns. -- Ieruall. M Saint Mary. -- Stephen
Earl of Britain and Richmond. -- White Monks Cistertians. 0455 10 05 oo o
Iuxta Kendall. H -- -- -- 0006 04 03 oo o Near Knaresbrough. F Saint Robert.
-- Richard King of Romans, Earl of Cornwall, A. D. 1218. Friars. -- 0035 10
11 oo o Maryke. N -- Asks. -- Nuns. -- 0064 16 09 oo o Middleham, or
Barnards Castle. -- Richard Duke of York. -- -- Nun-Munketon. N -- Fundator
Antecessor G^ll. Gascoign Militis. Nuns. -- 0085 14 08 oo o Rybleston.
Commendary. -- -- -- 0207 09 07 oo o Rypon Eccles. Collegiat. -- -- -- 0035 03
08 oo o Rypon. H S. Mary Magd. -- -- -- 0024 00 07 o o Rypon. H S. John
Baptist. -- -- -- 0016 14 04 oo o Seton. N -- Fundator Antecessor Henrici
Kirkeby. -- Nuns. -- 0013 17 04 oo o Wells. H S. Michael. -- Ralph Lord
N^ill. A. D. 1367. -- -- 0020 17 11 oo o

RVTLAND-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Occham,
under the custody of a Prior of Saint Anne Carthusians by Couentree. Saint
John H Evangelist. H William Dalby of Ext^. -- 2 Chaplens, 12 poor, each 30.
s. yearly. Brook. -- S. Mary the Virg. P -- 0043 13 04 oo o

SHROPSHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Shrewsbury.
M Saint Peter, Saint Paul. Saint Melb.
Roger Earl of Mountgomery. Anno Dom. 1081. Black Monks. -- 0615 04 03 ob o
Shrewsbury, Eccles* Collegiat. Saint Chadds. -- -- -- 0014 14 04 oo o
Shrewsbury, Ecc. Colleg. Saint Mary. -- -- -- 0013 01 08 oo oo Shrewsbury. F --
-- Carmelites or white Friars. Shrewsbury. F -- -- Black Friars. --
Shrewsbury. F -- Geffrey Lord of Powis. -- Gray Friars. -- Abberbury, given to
Al-Soules in Oxford by the King. P Alien. -- Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor.
-- -- Battlefield. C -- King Henry the fourth. -- -- 0054 01 01 oo o Bildewas.
M Saint Marie. -- Roger Bishop of Chester. -- Black Monks Cistertians. 0129 06
10 oo o Brewood. M -- -- -- 0031 01 04 oo o ^ridgenorth. H F

-- John Earl of Shrewsbury, Cosen and Heir to Ralph Strange Original
Founder. Gray Friars, -- 0004 00 00 oo o B^umfeild. -- -- -- Black Monks. --
Chirbury. P -- -- -- 087 07 04 oo o Halisowen. M -- King John. Peter de Rupibus
Bishop of Winchester. -- 0337 15 06 ob o Haughmond. M Saint Mary, and S. John
Euang. William Fitz-Alane. -- White Canons. -- 0294 12 90 oo o Ludlow. F -- Sir
Laurence Ludlow Knight, An. Dom. 1349. Carmelites or White Friars. Ludlow. F --
Edmundus de Pontibus, sieve Briggman* Benefactor. Augustine Friars. -- Ludlow. H
Saint John. -- -- -- 0017 03 03 o o Lyleshull. M -- Bea^meis Family. -- Black
Canons. -- 0327 10 00 oo o Stone. P Saint Michael. -- -- Black Monks. --
Tongue. C Saint Bartholmew. Isabel wife of Fulke de Penbridge Chenalier. -- 0022
08 01 oo o Wenlocke. P Saint Milburg. -- Earl Roger of Montgomerie. A. D.
1081. Black Monks. -- 0434 00 01 oo o Womebridge. P -- -- -- 0072 15 08 oo o
Wygmore. M -- Hugo de Mortu^-Mari, A. D. 1172. -- White Canons. 0302 12 03 ob o

STAFFORD. SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Lichefeild
Eccles. Cath. -- Oswy King of Northumberland made it a Bishops See. Pope
Adrian made it an Archbishops See. Gray Friars, and lately Canons. Lichefeild.
P S. John Baptist. -- Roger B. of Couen^ree and Lichefeild. -- -- Lichefeild. H
Saint John. -- -- -- 0008 15 00 oo o Stafford, P Saint Thomas Martyr. Ralph
Earl of Stafford, and Richard Bishop of Chester. Black Canons and Augustines.
0141 13 02 oo o Stafford. C Saint Marie. -- -- Gray Friars. -- 0035 13 10 oo o
Brewood. N -- -- Black Nuns, -- 0011 01 06 oo o Briuerne. P Saint Marie. --
-- Black Monks. -- Briuerne. N Saint Leonard. -- -- White Nuns. -- Burton
upon Trent. P S. Mary, Saint Modwen. Ulfricke Sprot Earl of Mercia. -- Black
Monks. -- 0356 16 03 ob o Catune. P -- -- Black Nuns. -- Chetwood. P --
John Chetwood Chidlet. T. Conell, William Gardener Parson of Somerton. John
Parson of Godyngton. -- Croxden. P -- Barons Uerdon. -- -- 0103 06 07 oo o
Delacresse. M -- Ranulph the third of that name E. of Chester. White Monks. --
0243 03 06 oo o Dudley. A Cel to the Priorie of Wenlocke. P -- John the son
and heir of John lare Baron de Dudley. Black Monks. -- Faireweld. N Saint
Mary. -- -- Black Nuns. -- Ferburge. H -- -- -- 0050 00 00 oo o Hulton. M --
The Ancestors of the Lord Audley. -- -- 0076 14 10 ob o Lappele. P Saint
Remigij. -- -- Black Monks. -- Meriuall.. -- -- -- -- 0199 14 10 oo o
Penchriche. -- C -- -- -- Renton. -- P -- The Noels Ancestors of Sir Simon
Harecourt. -- 0090 02 10 ob o Roceter. -- M -- -- -- 0111 13 07 oo o Stone. --
P Saint Wolphade. -- Ralph Earl of Stafford. -- Black Canons. -- 0119 14 11
oo o Tameworth. -- N -- Edith King Edgars daughter. -- Veiled virgins or Nu^s.
Tameworth, Eccles. Colleg. -- Marmions of Normandy. -- -- Iuxta Tameworth. H
Saint James. -- -- -- 0003 06 08 oo o Trentham. -- P -- Ralph Earl of Chester.
-- Canons. -- 0106 03 10 oo o Tricingham. M -- Saint Werburg. -- -- Tutbury. --
P Saint Mary. -- Henry de F^rrars a Nobleman of Normandy, in the reign of
William Conqueror. Black Monks. -- 0244 16 08 o o Woller-hamptonC -- Clement
Luson Chaplen, and William Waterfall. --

SOMERSETSHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Bristow. M
Saint Augustine. -- King Henry the second, and Lord Robert the son of
Harding, the King of Denmarkes son. In our time King Henry the 8. made it a
Cathedral Church. Black Canons Uictorines. 0767 15 03 oo o Bristow. P Saint
Jacob or Saint James. Robert Earl of Gloucester, the base son of K. Henry
the first. Black Monks Benedictines. Bristow. F -- King Edward the first. A.
D. 1267. -- White Friars. -- Bristow. Eccl. Colleg. now a Hospital. -- The
former by Sir Henry Gaunt knight. The other by Thomas Carre a wealthy Citizen.
Orphans. -- Bathe. M Saint Peter, and Saint Paul. King Edgar, Edwyn, Ethelred
and Wolstan. Afterward John Bishop of Wells made it a Cathedral Church,
tempor^ H. 1. Black Monks. -- 0695 06 01 ob o Bathe. -- -- Reginaldus Bishop
of Bath. -- -- 0022 16 09 ob o Wells. M S. John Bap. or Saint Andrew. King I^a
built the Church and College, King Kinewolph gave it great possessions, A^.
766. King Edward senior made it a Bishops See. Robert and Iocelinus Bishops,
and Ralph of Shrewsbury. Secular Canons. -- 0041 03 06 ob q Wells. H --
Nicholas Bubwith Bishop. -- 24. Poor. -- Glastenbery. M Saint Marie. -- Joseph
of Arimathea. De^i Bishop of S. David's. Twelve Northern men. King Ina.
Dunstane changed these Monks into Benedictines: this Order continued 600.
years. Black Monks. -- 3508 13 04 ob q Athelme. M Saint Peter, S. Athelwin.
King Alfred. -- Black Monks. -- 0209 03 00 oo q Barlynch. P -- Fety-places.
-- -- 0098 14 08 ob o Bearwe. N S. Mary. S. Edwin. -- -- Black Nuns. --
Bridgewater. P -- -- Gray Friars, -- 0120 19 01 ob o Bridgewater. H Saint John.
-- William Briewer junior. -- -- Buckland. P -- Amice Countess of (...). -- --
0223 07 04 ob o Bruton. M Saint Mary. -- The Mo^s there entombed. --
Benedictines. -- 0480 17 02 oo o Cadbury, or North-Cadbury. C Saint Michael. --
Elizabeth Botreaux, and her son William Botreaux. A Rector. 7 Chaplains. 4
Clerks. Cliue. M -- -- White Monks. -- 0155 09 05 oo q Conington. N Saint
Marie. -- William de Romara, Cosen to the Earl of Lincoln. Black Nuns. --
0039 15 08 oo o Dunkeswel. P -- William Briewer junior. -- -- Dunster. P --
John de Mohun de D^ster. -- -- 0037 04 08 oo o Fareley. P S. Mary. Magd. --
Humfrey Bohun. -- Black Monks -- Henton. -- -- Ela Countess of Salisbury. --
Carthusians. -- 0262 12 00 oo o Keynsham. M Saint Mary. -- William Earl of
Gloucester. -- Black Canons. -- 0450 03 06 oo o Montague. M Saint Peter and
Saint Paul. Earl Moriton brother by the mothers side to K. W. Conqueror,
confirmed by H. 1 Black Monks Cluniacenses. 0524 11 08 ob o Moundroy. C -- --
-- 0011 18 08 oo o Muchelney. M Saint Peter. -- King Athelstane. -- Black
Monks. -- 0498 16 03 oo q Mynchinbarrow. P -- -- -- 0029 06 08 ob o Stoke
under Hamden. C Saint Andrew. -- Gornays. -- Black Monks. -- Tau^ton. N Saint
Peter and Saint Paul. William Giffard and Henry de Bl^is Bishop of Winchest^r.
Black Nuns. -- 0438 09 10 oo o Temple-Combe Commendary. -- -- -- 0107 16 11
ob o Westbury. C -- William Canings Mayor of Bristow. -- -- Worspring. P -- --
-- 0110 18 04 ob q Wytham. -- Saint Mary. S. John Bapt. All Saints.
King Henry the third. -- Carthusians. -- 0227 01 08 oo o -- H Saint Katherine.
-- -- -- 0021 15 08 oo o Yeueley, or Iuell. -- John Woborne Petty Canon of
Paul's, and Richard Hewet. --

SVF FOLK.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. (...). ob. q.
Ipswich. P Saint Trinity. -- Norman and John de Oxenford. -- Black Canons. --
0088 06 09 o o Ipswich. M Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Cardinal Wolsey, but
before him Th^as de Laey and Alice his wife. Black Canons. -- 0088 06 10 oo o
Ipswich. F -- Henry de Manesby, Henry Redred, and Hen ry de (...). Frie^s
Preachers. -- Ipswich. F -- The Lord Bardeley, Sir Geffrey Hadley, and Sir Rob.
Nort^n knights. A. D. 1279. Carmelites or White Friars. Ipswich. F -- Robert
Tilbot. -- Gr^y Friars. -- Ipswich. F -- John Hares gave ground to build their
house (larger. Black Friars. -- Blyburgh. P -- King Henry the first. Richard
Beluois, or Beanuols Bishop of London. Black Canons. -- 0048 08 09 oo Brisete.
-- P Saint Leonard. -- -- Black Canons. -- Bungey N -- Roger Glanuil and
Gundreda his Wife, Alij, the Ancestors of Tho. Brotherton, Earl of Norffolke.
Nuns. -- 0062 02 0^ oo o Burshyerd or Brusyed. M -- -- -- 0056 02 01 o
Butley. P Saint Marie -- Ralphde Gla^ile. -- Black Canons. -- 0318 17 02 ob q
Campsey. M Beatae Maria Virginis. -- -- 0182 09 05 oo o Clara or Stoke. P Saint
John. Bapt. -- Henry Earl of Essex, and Isabel his wife. Black Monks or
Austine Friars. Cnobersburg, or Burgh-Castell. -- Fursey a Scottish man. Also
Sigebertus King of the East Angles. -- Denston. C -- -- -- 0022 08 09 oo q
Dodnash. M Saint Mary. -- The Ancestors of the Duke of Norffolke -- -- 0042 18
08 ob o Dunwich, Seeds Episcopalis. -- Foelix the Burgundian, that reduced the
East Angles again unto the christian faith, Anno Domini, 630. -- S.
Edmundsbury. M -- King Canute. -- Black Monks. -- 2336 16 00 oo o Saint
Edwards place, si^ Edwardsstow. M -- Peter Bishop of Winchester. -- -- Eye. M
Saint Peter. -- Robert Malet Lord of Eye. -- Black Monks. -- 0184 09 07 ob q
Flyxton. M -- -- -- 0023 04 01 ob q Heringflete. M Saint Olanes. -- Roger the
son of Osbert. -- Canons Regular. -- 0049 11 07 oo o Hoxon. M -- -- --
Leiston. N Saint Mary. -- 1 Ralph Glanuile. 2 Sir Robert Ufford. White Canons
Pramonstratenses 0181 17 01 ob o Letheringham. P -- -- -- 0026 18 05 oo o
Liteburch. P Saint Mary. -- -- Black Canons. -- Mettingham. C Beatae Maria
Uirginis. Sir John de Norwich, Lord of Mettingham. -- 0202 07 05 ob o Rafford.
M Our Lady. -- Robert Bishop or Earl of Lincoln. -- -- Ratisford. H Saint
John. -- -- -- 0053 10 00 oo o Redlingfeild. M Saint Mary. -- Manasses de
Guies. -- Black Nuns. -- 0081 02 05 ob o Rumbuthe. P Saint Michael. -- --
Black Monks. -- Snapes. P Saint Marie. -- William Martill, Alij, Domini Regis
Progenitor. Black Monks Roffienses. 0099 01 00 11 ob Stock. C -- -- -- 0324
04 01 ob o Suthbery. P Saint Barthol^. -- Simon Sudbiry Archbishop of
Canterbury and John Chartsey. Black Monks West^, or Friars Preachers. 0122 18
03 o o Sybbeton M Saint Mary. -- William Cheiney, or de Caneto. -- Black
Monks Cistertians.
0250 15 07 ob o Walton. P S. Foelicis. -- -- Black Monks Rochester.
Wangsford. P Saint Marie. -- Ansered of France. -- Black Monks Cluniacenses.
0030 09 05 oo o Wingefeild. C -- -- -- 0069 14 05 oo o Woodbridge. M Saint
Mary. -- -- -- 0050 03 05 ob o Wykes. -- -- Domini Regis Progenitor. -- -- 0092
12 03 ob o -- M Saint Bennet. -- -- -- Ykesworth or Ixworth. P -- Gilbert
Blund. -- -- 0280 09 05 oo o

SVRREY.
Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Barmondsey.
M S. Saviors. -- Alwyn Child Citizen of London, Ann. D. 1081. Monks
introduced., A. D. 1087.
Black Monks Cluniacenses. 0548 02 05 ob q Chartsey. M Saint Peter. --
Frithwald a Petty Regent of Surry, Anno Dom. 666. -- 0744 13 06 ob q Guilford.
F S. Crucis. -- -- Preaching Friars. -- Guilford. F -- -- Back Friars. --
Horsham. P S. Fidis. -- Mary Saint Paul founded it. Alij Robert Fitz-walter and
his sons. -- Lingfeild. C -- Reginald Cobham Knight, William Cro^an, John
Arderne, and John Bayhall. -- 0075 00 00 oo o Marton. P Saint Mary. -- King
Henry the first, An. D. 1117. -- Black Canons. -- 1039 05 03 oo o Newarke, vel
de Nouo Loco. P Saint Mary and S. Thom. Martyr. -- -- 0258 11 11 ob o Reygate.
P Sanctae Crucis. -- William Warren first Earl of Surrey, and after John
Mowbray. Augustines. -- 0078 16 08 oo o Shene. P -- King Henry the fifth. --
Carthusian Monks. -- 0962 11 06 oo o Southwarke, M Sanctae Mariae Uirginis, de
Ouerey. First by Swethen a noble Dame, after by a maiden called Mary, and after
converted to a College of Priests, by William Pont-le-Arch. Canons first
introduced. 1016. Black Canons. -- 0656 10 00 ob o Southwarke. H Saint Thomas.
-- Richard Prior of Bermondsey, Anno Dom. 1213. -- 0266 17 11 oo o Tanrigge. M
-- -- -- 0078 16 10 ob q Wauerley. N S. Mary. -- William Gifford Bishop of
Winchester. -- White Monks. -- 0174 08 03 ob o

SUSSEX.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Chichester
Epa^tus. Saint Trinity. -- Radulphus Episcopus, primo suo ipsius sumptu, deinde
munificentia Henrici pri^, postea Seffridus secundus eius nominis Episcopus
tempore Regis Richardi primi. Secular Canons. -- Chicheste. M Saint Peter. --
-- Gray Friars. -- Chichester. F -- -- Black Friars. -- Iuxta Chichester. H
Saint Jacob. S. Mary Mag. -- Leprosi. -- 0004 03 09 oo o Infra Chichester. H
Saint Mary. -- -- Pauperes. -- 0011 11 06 ob o Arundel. H Saint Trinity. --
Thomas Earl of Arundel, and Beatrix his wife -- Elemosinarij. -- 0042 03 08 oo
o Arundel. P Saint Nicholas. -- Richard Earl of Arundel. -- Black Monks. --
0168 00 07 ob o Acceseale. -- Saint Peter. -- -- Black Monks. -- Battle. M
Saint Martin. -- King William the Conqueror. A. D. 1066. -- Black Monks. --
0987 00 11 ob q Bidlington. H S. Mary Magd. -- -- -- 0001 00 00 oo o Bosenham,
or Boseham. M -- Di^l a Scottish Monk. -- -- Boxgraue. -- Saint Mary. -- John
Saint John. Alij, Robert de la Hay. Black Monks Benedictines. 0145 10 02 ob
o Durfford. M S. John Baptist. -- -- White Canons Pramonstratenses. 0108 13 09
oo o Eastborne. P -- -- -- 0047 03 00 oo o Hastings. P Saint Trinity. --
Founded by John Pelham Knight, when their lands were devoured by inundation of
the Sea. Black Canons. -- 0057 19 00 o o Lewis. P Saint Pancras. -- William de
Warren, first Earl of Surrey. Black Monks, Cluniacenses. 1091 09 06 oo q
Lullmenster. N S. Mary Magd. -- -- Black Nuns. -- Michelham. P S. Mary Magd.
-- -- Black Canons Aug. -- 0191 19 03 oo o Occeham. P S. Laurence. -- -- White
Canons. -- Remsted. N S. Mary Magd. -- -- Black Nuns, -- Roberts Briggs. M
Saint Mary. -- Aluredus de Sancto Martino, tempore Hen ricisecundi. White
Monks Cistertians. 0232 09 08 oo o Rupperar. N S. Mary Magd. -- -- Black
Nuns. -- 0039 13 07 oo o Sel^ey. M and seeds Episcopal. -- King Cedwall. --
-- Shulbred. P -- -- -- 0079 15 06 oo o Southmalling. C -- -- -- 0045 12 05 ob
q Stenings. -- S. Mary Magd. -- -- Secular Canons. -- Shoreham. F -- King
Edward the second and the Lord Mowbray. Carmelites or white Friars. Tortyng. P
S. Mary Magd. -- -- Black Canons. -- 0101 04 01 oo o Winchelsea. F -- King
Edw. 2. -- Friars Preachers. -- -- M Our Lady. -- William de Buckingham,
confirmed by K. Edward 3. --

VVARVVICKESHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Warwick. P
Saint Sepulchers. -- Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick. -- -- 0049 13 06 oo o
Warwick. P -- Peter de Mountford. -- Black Canons. -- Warwick. F -- --
Friars Preachers. -- 0004 18 06 oo o Warwick. Eccles. Colleg. -- -- -- 0247 13
00 ob Warwick. H Saint Michael. -- -- -- 0010 01 10 oo o Warwick. H Sancta
Baptista. -- -- -- 0019 03 07 oo o Warwick. -- Saint George. -- Robert de
Deneby, William Russell, and Hugh Cook for the state of the King and Anne the
Queen. Michael de la Poole, and all their Brethren, and Sisters, and for Enne
Prince of Wales. A Fraternity. -- Warwick. Hongingate, Chauntry. -- Thomas
Beanchampe Earl of Warwick. -- -- Warwick. H Saint John. -- Thomas
Beanchampe. -- -- Couentree. P Saint Anne. -- Friar John of Northerbury a
Carthusian Prior. Carthusians. -- 0251 05 09 o o Couentree. P Saint Mary. --
King Canute and Leofricke Earl of Mercians, A. D. 1043. Black Monks. --
Couentree. F -- Sir John Poultney Knight, Anno Domini 1332. Carmelites or White
Friars. 0007 13 04 oo o Couentree. H S. John Baptist. -- -- -- 0083 03 03 oo o
Alcetter, or Alnecester. P S. John Baptist. -- -- Black Monks. -- 0101 14 00
oo o Asteley. C -- Thomas Lord Astley. -- Deane and Secular Canons. 0039 10 06
oo o Atherston. F -- -- Augustine Friars, -- 0001 10 02 oo o Auecater A C^to
Mal^rno Priorie in Worcestershire. P -- -- -- 0034 08 00 oo o Babelacke. C --
-- -- 0045 6 008 oo o Berdeslege. M Beata Maria. -- -- White Monks. --
Cadbury. -- -- The Ancestors of Sir Ralph Botelar knight, Baron, and Lord of
Sudley, Treasurer of England. -- Comb. M Saint Mary. -- Camuils and Mowbraies.
-- White Monks. -- 0343 00 05 oo o Erneby, or Erdebury. P -- -- -- 0122 08 06
oo o Godscliffe. C -- Richard Earl of Warwick. -- -- Henwood. N Saint
Margaret -- Cethelbarne de la Laund. -- Nuns. -- 0021 02 00 ob o Kenelworth.
M -- Geffrey Clinton Chamberlain unto King Henry the first. Black Canons. --
0643 14 09 ob o Kingeswood. N -- -- Black Nuns, -- Knolle. C -- Elizabeth
wife to John Lord Clinton. -- -- 0018 05 06 oo o Maxstocke. P -- -- -- 0129 11
08 ob o Meriuall. M Saint Mary. -- Robert Ferrars. A. 1. H. 2. -- White Monks.
-- 0303 10 00 oo o Nuneaton. N -- Amice wife to Robert Bossu Earl of
Leicester. Nuns. -- 0290 15 00 ob o Pollesworth. N Saint Edith. -- Modwena an
Irish Virgin. Repaired by R. Mar^ a Nobleman. Black Nuns. -- 0023 08 06 oo o
Pynley. N -- -- Nuns. -- 0027 14 07 oo o Stoneley. M -- K. Henry the second. --
White Monks. -- 0578 02 05 oo o Stratford super Anon. Eccles. Colleg. -- John
of Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury. -- -- 0123 11 09 oo o Studeley. P -- --
Black Canons. -- 0181 03 06 oo o Thelford. -- -- The Lucies Knights. -- Poor
folk and Pilgrims. 0023 10 00 oo o Wroxhall. N God, and Saint Leonard. Hugh
de Hatton. -- Black Nuns. -- 0078 10 01 ob o

WESTMORLAND.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Sharp. M
-- Thomas the son of Gospatricke, son of Ormes. -- 0166 10 06 ob o

VVILT-SHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Salisbury.
Epa^tus. Saint Peter. -- Osmond Bishop of Salisbury, temp. W. Rufi, Anno Dom.
1091. Secular Canons. -- Salisbury. C Saint Edith. -- -- -- Salisbury. F --
King Edward the first, and Robert Kilward by Archbishop of Canterbury. Black
Friars. -- Salisbury. F -- -- Gray Friars, -- Iuxta Salisbury. H Saint Michael.
-- Richard B. of Salisbury, A. D. 1382. -- -- 0025 02 02 oo o Ambresbury. M --
Alfritha King Edgars wife. -- White Monks. -- 0558 10 02 oo o Ambresbury. N --
King Etheldred. -- Holy Virgins. -- Austy. H -- -- -- 0081 08 05 ob o
Bradnesioke. P Saint Marie. -- Walter the eldest son of Walter de Eureux,
Earl of Rosmar in Normandy. Black Monks. -- 0270 10 08 oo o Bromhore, or
Bromere. P Saint Mary and S. Michael. Banldwin Earl of Rivers and Devonshire.
-- Black Canons. -- Brioptune. P S. Mary Magd. -- -- Black Canons. -- Calne.
H -- -- -- 0002 02 08 oo o Crekelade. H -- -- -- 0004 10 07 ob o Edoros. P --
King Henry the second, and after Henry the third. Black Canons. -- 0133 00 07
ob o Edindon. P All Saints. -- William de Edindon Bishop of Winchester. --
Bonis hominibus. -- 0521 12 05 ob o Eston. P Saint Trinity. -- -- -- 0055 14 04
oo o Farleigh Monachoru^ P S. Mary Magd. -- The Earl of Hereford, or Hertford.
-- Black Monks Cluniacenses. 0217 00 04 ob o Fishhart. F -- Mary Countess of
Norffolke. -- Friars Preachers. -- Heitesbury, Eccles-Collegiat. -- Robert Lord
Hungerford and Margaret. -- -- Henton. N -- Dame Ela Countess of Salisbury. --
Nuns. -- Kynton. P Saint Mary, and S. Michael. -- Nuns. -- 0038 03 10 oo o
Lacocke. M Saint Mary. -- Dame Ela Countess of Salisbury, An. D 1232 -- 0203
12 03 ob o Malmesbury. M Saint Adelme. -- Madulph an Irish Scot. Adelme his
Scholar. King Athelstan.
Black Monks. -- 0803 17 07 oo o Middleton. P -- King Athelstan. -- --
Marleburgh. P Saint Margaret. -- Edmund Earl of Cornwall. -- Canons. -- 0038
19 02 oo o Marleburgh. F -- John Goodwyn and William Rems^ich, A. D. 1316
Carmelites or White Friars. Iuxta Marleburgh. H S. John Baptist. -- -- -- 0006
18 04 oo o Maiden-Bradley. P -- Manasses Bisset. Confirmed by King John. -- --
0197 18 08 oo o Maiden Bradeley -- One of the Inheritrices of Manasses Bisset.
-- Leprosi. -- Stanley. M Saint Mary. -- -- White Monks. -- 0222 19 04 oo o
Wilton. N Saint Mary and Saint Edith.
Weolsthan Earl of Ellandanum or Wilton. Edith wife of S. Edward.
Black Nuns. -- 0652 11 05 oo q Iuxta Wilton. H Sant Egidius. -- -- -- 0005
13 04 oo o Westchurch. P -- -- --

WORCESTERSHIRE.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Worcester M
now Eccl. Cath. Saint Marie, Saint Wolstan, Saint Katherin
Sexwulph Bishop of the Mercians, Anno Domini 680. Oswald Bishop of
Worcester. Wolstan Bishop there also Anno Domini, 1090. These continued, 500.
years. K. Henry the eight, in stead of these placed in it a Dean and Prebends,
and ordained to it a Grammar School. Black Monks. -- 1386 12 10 ob q
Worcester. F -- -- Gray Friars. -- Worcester. F -- William Beanchampe. --
Black Friars. -- Worcester. H Saint Wolstan. -- -- -- 0063 18 10 oo o Alcetur.
Cellula. -- -- -- 0075 07 00 oo q Bordelege. P Saint Mary. -- K. Henry the
second, and Maud the Empress. White Monks. -- Bredon. M -- Offa king of the
Mercians. -- -- Brodesey. M Saint Mary. -- -- White Monks. -- 0392 08 06 oo o
Cokehill. N -- -- White Nuns. -- 0034 15 11 oo o Elnecester. P -- -- Black
Canons. -- Euesham. M S. Mary, and S. Aedburg. Egwin Bishop of Worcester,
first Abbot there with king Kenred the son of Wolpher king of the Mercians
and K^ Offa, A. D. 700. Black Monks -- 1268 09 09 oo o

Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Stokekyrke.
Cella -- -- -- 0008 00 00 oo Sutton. Ecclesia Collegiata. -- -- -- 0013 18 08
oo o Swinhey. N -- The Ancestors of Sir John Melton knight. -- Nuns. -- 0134
06 ^9 ob o Thy^kehead or Thikenhead. N -- The Ancestors of John Ask. --
Nuns. -- 0023 12 02 oo o Tickhill. F -- John Clarrel Deane of Paul's. --
Fricrs Augustines. -- Warter. P Saint Jacob. -- Galfridus Trusbut knight, and
William Rosse de Hamela. About king Henry the firsts time. Black Canons (...)
Augustines. 0221 03 10 oo o Watton. M -- Eustach the son of Fitz-Iohn with
one eye, in the reign of King Stephen. White Canons and Nuns. 0453 07 08 oo
o Whitby. M Saint Peter and Saint Hilda. Saint Hilda: Enriched by Edelfleda,
King Oswins daughter, and himself: destroyed by the Danes, it was reedefied by
William Perey, about the coming in of the Normans. Black Monks. -- 0505 09 01
oo o Woderhall, Cella Sanct^ Trinitatis. -- -- -- 0128 05 03 ob o Woodkirke, A
Cell to S. Oswald. -- Earl Warren. -- -- 0047 00 04 oo o Wycham. M -- The
Kings Ancestors* -- White Canons and Nunne^. 0025 17 06 oo o Wylberfosse. M --
The Ancestors of the Archbishop of York. -- Nuns. -- 0028 08 08 o o
Yedingham. N -- The Ancestors of the Lord Lati^er. -- Nuns. -- 0026 06 08 oo
o -- N Saint Clements. -- -- Nuns. -- 0055 11 11 oo o -- H Saint Nicholas. --
-- -- 0029 01 04 oo o -- M Sancta Sepultura. -- -- -- 0011 18 04 oo o Montis
Sancti Iohannis. Commendari^. -- -- -- 0102 13 10 oo o Chapel Sepulchers. --
-- -- 0138 19 02 ob o

S. ASAPH DIOCES.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Basingwerke
in Flintshire. M -- -- -- 0157 15 02 oo o Conway, or Aber-conway in
Carnaruonshire. M Saint Marie -- Kenelme son of Geruaise, once Prince of
North Wales. -- 0179 10 10 oo o Hawston Commendarie. -- -- -- 0160 14 10 oo o
Lanllugen, or Wanligan, in Montgomereshire. N -- -- Nuns. -- 0022 13 08 oo o
Strata-Marcel la or Stratmarghill, in Montgomereshire. M -- Owen the son of
Gryffin, and confirmed by his son (...)* Ann^ Dom. 1202. -- 0073 07 06 oo o
Valla de Cruce in Denbighshire. M -- -- -- 0214 03 05 oo o

BANGOR DIOCES.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Bangor. F
-- -- Black Friars. -- Bardesey in Carnaruonshire. M Saint Mary. -- -- -- 0058
06 02 o ob Beaumarys in Anglesey. F -- -- Gray Friars. -- Beth^ylhert. M -- --
-- 0069 03 08 oo o Castr. Cubij, Ecclesia Collegiat. -- -- -- 0024 00 00 oo o
Holyhead in Anglesey. C -- -- -- Kynner in Merion^thshire. M Saint Mary. --
Lewellyne the son of Geruais. -- -- 0058 15 04 oo o Penmon. P -- -- -- 0040
17 09 ob o Siriolis. M -- -- -- 0047 15 03 oo o

S. DAVID'S DIOCES.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Abe^guylly.
C -- -- -- 0042 00 00 oo o Alba-launda, in Carmardenshire. M -- -- -- 0153 17
02 oo o Brechon. P S. Evangelist. -- -- -- 0134 11 04 oo o Cardigan in
Cardigansh. P -- -- -- 0013 04 09 oo o Carmarden, in Carmardensh. F -- -- Gray
Friars, -- 0174 00 08 oo o Combehyre. M -- -- -- 0024 19 04 oo o Iuxta S.
David's in Pembrokesh. C Saint Mary. -- John Duke of Lancaster. -- -- 0106 03 06
oo o Denbigh in Denbighsh. F -- John (...), Ann^ (...), 1339. -- Car^elltes or
White Friars. Saint Dogma^lls in Pe^brokshire* M -- Marti^ de Turonibus Lord of
Ke^ys: after by William Ualence, (...) H. 3. -- 0068 01 06 oo o Hau^fordwest in
P^brokeshire. P -- -- -- 0135 06 01 oo o Kydwelly in Carmarde^sh. Cella. -- --
-- 0029 10 00 oo o Llanleyre in Carmardesh. M -- -- -- 0057 05 04 oo o Newport.
F -- -- Austine Friars. -- Pulla. P -- -- -- 0052 02 05 oo o Slebach in
Bembrockshire. Praeceptoria. -- -- -- 0184 10 11 ob o Strata^lorida o^
Stratflower in Cardiganshire. M -- Griffith Rhese and Meredith. -- -- 0122 06
08 oo o Swansey Gardianatus -- -- -- 0020 00 00 oo o Talleia. M Saint Mary. and
S. John Bapt. Restus. -- -- 0153 01 04 oo o Tyronense. -- -- Robert Martin,
tempore Hen. -- --

LANDAFFE DIOCES.
Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Landaffe.
Eccles. Cath. Saint Telean. -- German and Lupus ^rench Bishops. -- --
Abergeuenny in Monmouth shire. P -- -- -- 0059 04 00 oo o Brecknocke a Cell to
Battle Abbey. F S. John Euang. -- Barnard de Newmarch: Miles and Roger Earls
of Hereford, in the reign of H. (...). Black Friars. -- Cardiffe. F -- --
Gray Friars. -- Cardiffe. F -- -- Black Friars. -- Chepstow, in Monmouthsh. M
-- -- -- 0032 04 00 oo o Gods-grace or Gratia Dei in Monmouth shire. M Beata
Maria Virginis. -- -- 0019 04 04 oo o Goldcliffe, in Monmouthsh. P -- Chandos,
-- -- S. Kynmercy, with a Chapel. P -- -- -- 0008 04 08 oo o Lanterna in
Monmouthsh. M -- -- -- 0071 03 02 oo o Malpas, by Newport near the River of
Uske. Cel la. -- -- -- 0014 09 11 oo o Monmouth in Monmouthsh. P S. Katherine
and Saint Florence. -- Black Monks. -- 0056 01 11 oo o Morgan in Glamorgansh.
M -- William Earl of Gloucester. -- -- 0188 14 00 oo o Neth in Glamorgansh. M
Beata Maria Virginis. Richard Gran^ils. -- -- 0150 04 09 oo o Tinterna in
Monmouthsh. M -- Walt^rus fili^s Richards, Comitis de Ogi, frater G^berti
Comitis Pembrochia. -- 0256 11 06 ob o Vske in Monmouthsh. P -- -- -- 0069 09
08 ob o

The Total Number and Value of these and all the Promotions Spiritual
certified at the Taxation in King Henry the eight his time of the first Fruits
and Tenthes, are by the Record, as follows.
Promotions. Number particular Number total. Value total. Archbishoprickes
and Bishoprics. -- 21. Deaneries. -- 11. Archdeaconries. -- 60. Dignities and
Prebends in Cathedral -- Churches. -- 394. l. s. Benefices. -- 8803. 12474. l.
320180. 10. Religious Houses. -- 605. Hospitals. -- 110. Colleges. -- 96.
Chauntries and free Chapels. -- 2374.

Taken from the possession of the Clergy by Henry the eight, and converted to
temporal uses out of the former sum, 161100. l. 9. s. 7. d. q. Since in this
precedent Table, we have laid to the Readers view a great part of this Kings
ill, the waste of so much of Gods reuenewe (howsoever abused) let him not hold
it in curiosity, out of season, since it may in charity fall well in sequence
by setting down the Churches either erected, or restored by him, or by him
(which is the now state of our Clergy) continued, to redeem his memory
blemished by the former error, from the vulgar aspersion of sacrilegious
impiety.

This King after the dissolution of the Religious houses, erected these six
Bishoprics, to wit, Westminster, Chester, Peterborough, Oxford, Bristoll,
and Gloucester, whereof the five last are in esse, and at the same time he
erected also these Cathedral Churches here after mentioned, wherein he founded
a Deane, and the number of Prebends following. viz.

Canterbury. -- 12 Winchester. -- 12 Worcester. -- 10 Chester. -- 6
Peterborough. -- 6 Oxford. -- 6 Ely. -- 8 Gloucester. -- 6 Bristoll, -- 6
Carliol. -- 4 Durham. -- 12 Rochester. -- 6 Norwich. -- 6
The yearly value of which Cathedral Churches so newly by him erected, with
the Collegiats of Windsor, Westminster, and Woluerhampton, over and besides the
Petti-Cannons, and other inferior Ministers amounts by estimation to 5942.
l. 8. s. 2. d.

The Promotions Ecclesiastical, which for the most part, except a little
pared, he preserved entire, are in a general estimate by the Shires, wherein
they stand in the ensuing Table expressed.

The present Number and Value of the Spiritual Promotions in England and Wales.
Counties. Promotions. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Barkeshire. -- 139. -- 2^53 06 00
ob o Bedfordshire. -- 116. -- 1506 05 05 oo o Buckinghamshire. -- 172. -- 2236
02 06 oo q Cambridgeshire. -- 151. -- 1902 18 07 ob o The Town of Callis, and
the Marches thereof. -- 26. -- 0590 06 10 oo o Cheshire. -- 68. -- 1776 12 00 ob
o Cornwall. -- 161. -- 2706 16 02 oo o Cumberland and Westmorland. -- 63. --
1022 06 06 ob q Darby. -- 106. -- 1017 11 10 ob o Devonshire. -- 394. -- 7466
01 04 oo o Dorsetshire. -- 248. -- 3077 05 08 ob q The Bishopric of Durham in
the County of Northumberland. 118. -- 2332 07 05 ob o Essex. -- 378. -- 5347 06
11 oo q Yorkshire. -- 440. -- 4974 00 00 ob o Glostershire. -- 288. -- 3296 06
04 ob q Huntingtonshire. -- 79. -- 1097 02 06 oo q Hartfordshire. -- 120. --
1837 16 00 ob o Herefordshire. -- 160 -- 1364 19 02 ob q Kent. -- 335. -- 3974
13 00 ob q Lancashire. -- 30. -- 0789 10 01 oo o Leicestershire. -- 199. --
2564 14 08 oo o Lincolneshire. -- 638. -- 6129 01 04 ob o The City of London.
-- 96. -- 3365 00 10 ob o Middlesex. -- 58. -- 1074 19 06 ob o Norffolke. --
668. -- 6505 15 10 ob o Northamptonshire. -- 271. -- 3884 08 11 ob q
Nottinghamshire. -- 168. -- 1640 07 09 ob o Oxfordshire. -- 164. -- 1917 17 07
ob o Rutlandshire. -- 52 -- 0548 00 10 oo o The Archdeaconry of Richmond. --
105. -- 1841 11 08 ob q Shropshire. -- 190. -- 1530 05 10 ob o Staffordshire.
-- 134. -- 0884 03 11 oo o Southamptonshire. -- 158 -- 3749 06 07 ob o
Sommersetshire. -- 385. -- 4910 13 07 oo q Suffolk. -- 428. -- 4811 08 00 oo o
Surrey. -- 113. -- 1701 08 09 oo q Sussex. -- 322. -- 3069 16 04 oo o
Warwickshire. -- 158. -- 1732 18 10 ob q Worcestershire. -- 153. -- 2035 14 00
ob o Wiltshire. -- 305. -- 3505 02 09 ob q Number total of the Benefices in
England, 8501. Value total of the Benefices in England, 16772. l. 5. s. 2.

The several Dioces of Wales. Promotions. Value. The Bishopric of Saint
Assaph. -- 312 -- 1536 18 07 ob The Bishopric of Bangor. -- 104. -- 1225 05
08 oo o The Bishopric of Landaffe. -- 166. -- 1204 11 10 ob o The Bishopric
of Saint David's. -- 323. -- 2531 12 09 oo o Number total of the Benefices in
Wales. 905. Value total of the Benefices in Wales. 6498. l. 8. s. 11. Number
total of all the Benefices both in England and Wales. 9407. Value total of all
the Benefices both in England and Wales. 113 270. l. 14 s. 1. d.

The value of these inferior Promotions in England which have cure of Souls, I
have suited into several Proportions as they are rated in Record, and
distinguished the Vicaradges from Parsonages in the Table following.
Livings under ten pound. -- 4543 Personages. -- Vicarages. -- Livings of
ten pound, and under twenty Marks. 1445. Personages. -- 905. Vicarages. --
540 Livings of twenty Marks, and under twenty pound. 1624. Personages. --
1134. Vicarages. -- 0490 Livings of twenty pound, and under twenty six pound.
0524. Personages. -- 0414. Vicarages. -- 0179. Livings of twenty six^ and, and
under thirty pound. 0206. Personages. -- 0163. Vicarages. -- 0043 Livings of
thirty pound, and under forty pound. 0248. Personages. -- 0188 Vicarages. --
0060 Livings of forty pound and upwards. 0144 Personages. -- 0115. Vicarages.
-- 0029

To prevent any mistaking in the Reader, I have thought it not unfit to
conclude this Table with the discovery of my meaning by certain letters
before used. viz.

M. Monastery. P. Priorie. F. Frierie. N. Nunnery C. College H. Hospital.
EDWARD THE SIXTH OF THAT Monarch 59
Edward VI.
NAME, KING OF ENGLAND, FRANCE AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, etc. THE
FIFTY NINTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS LIFE, ACTS, AND DEATH. CHAPTER XXII.


EDWARD the sixth of that Name, and only son living unto King Henry A. D.
1547.
the eight, was borne at his Manor of Hampton Court in Middlesex, the twelfth
of October, and year of salvation, 1537. and six days after being R. Graston.
the eighteenth of the same month, he was created Prince of Wales, Duke of
Edward created Prince of Wales presently after his birth.
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester: his birth was joyful unto the King and
Commons; but the death of his mother, the virtuous Queen Jane, brought immediate
sorrow unto both, whose womb was cut (as some have affirmed) to the saving of
his, but loss of her own life, upon whose death these elegant verses were
writ; Phoenix Iana iacet nato Phoenice, dolendum
Sacula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas. Alluding to the Crest of her father a
Phoenix in flames within a Crown.

Here lies the Phoenix Lady Jane,
whose death a Phoenix bare,
O grief two Phenixs at one time,
together never were.


(2) Nine years and od months he was virtuously trained up in the life of
his father, and at his death appointed the first of his heirs, and for want By
his will dated the 30. of December. A. D. 1546.
of Issue (if it so chanced) Mary, and she failing, Elizabeth to succeed in
his throne: for as Henry with Solomon was blameworthy for women, so left he
but one son and two daughters, as the other in Scripture is said to have
done: Solomon had Rehoboam Solomon and Henry compared in their sins and in
their Issue.
a fool and unfortunate, his daughters, but obscure, and both of them
Subjects; but Henry

much ado, lastly to little purpose these Articles were agreed upon, and sent
to the King, the Copy whereof was thus.

(22) For as much as man, except he be borne of Water Articles of the Rebels.
Sacrament of Baptism.
and the holy Ghost, cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and for as much as
the gates of Heaven be not open without this blessed Sacrament of Baptism,
therefore we will that our Curates shall minister this Sacrament at all times
of need as well in the week days, as on the holy days.

Item, we will have our children confirmed of the Bishops whenever we shall
within the Diocese resort unto Confirmation.
them.

Item for as much as we constantly believe that after the Priest has spoken the
words of Consecration being at Consectation of the Lords body.
Mass, there celebrating and consecrating the same, there is very really the
Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ God and Man, and that no substance
of Bread Holinshed.
and Wine remains after, but the very same Body that was borne of the Virgin
Mary, and was given upon the Cross for our Redemption: therefore we will have
Mass celebrated as it has been in times past, without any man communicating
with the Priests, for as much as many rudely presuming unworthily to receive the
same put no difference between the Lords body and other kind of meat; some
saying that it is bread before and after: some saying that it is profitable to
no man except he receive it, with many other abused terms.

Item we will have in our Churches reservation.

Item we will have holy bread, and holy water in the Reservation of the Lords
Body consecrated. Holy Bread and Holy water.
remembrance of Christ's precious Body and Blood.

Item we will that our Priests shall sing and say with an audible voice, Gods
service in the Quier of the Parish Churches, and not Gods service to be set
forth like a Christmasse play.

Item for as much as Priests be men dedicated to God, for ministering and
celebrating the blessed Sacrament, and preaching of Gods word, we will that
they shall live chaste Priests' not to be married.
without marriage, as Saint Paul did, being the elect and chosen vessel of
God: saying unto all honest Priests, be ye followers of me.

Item we will that the six Articles which our Sovereign The six Articles.
Lord King Henry the eight set forth in his later days, shall be used, and so
taken as they were at that time.

Item we pray God save King Edward, for we be his both body and goods.

(23) To these their Demands the King sent this answer, therein pitying their
ignorance, and blaming their folly, and therewithal his General pardon, The
Kings answer and general pardon.
to as many as would desist whiles it was time. First he reproved them, for
their presumptions, thus contumeliously to rise against their dread Sovereign,
to the disturbance of his loyal Subjects peace; whose simplicity they had
notoriously abused, in using his name to draw them into action of Rebellion:
and no less likewise in the grounds of their demands. As in their first
Article for Baptism, The first article answered.
where it was well known the same was admitted as necessity required, or
rather commanded by the Book of Common prayer, published by authority of
Parliament, and as themselves knew in present practice. But touching the
Sacrament in their The second article answered.
second Article, how impudently they did belie the true receivers thereof, was
manifest, who make so much difference in that holy administration, that they
account no profit in Common bread, besides the nourishment of their natural
Bodies: but this blessed bread to be the food of their souls unto eternal
life. And as you are seduced in these (says the The third article answered.
admonition) so in confirmation also they carry your simplicities captive, for
the truth teaches no otherwise then themselves believe, namely, that a Child
baptized, and dying before confirmation is nethelesse in state of Grace, else
are themselves causers of their childrens damnation: so the service of God
brought from an unknown tongue, cannot surely Their other objections answered.
offend any reasonable man, which is only to make him understand that, which
before he knew not, and to give his consent to those prayers, whereof he has
most need, and gives the nearest touch to his own feeling conscience, for God
requires the heart only which with an understanding service, we must
sacrifice unto him. But most of all (says this good King) we marvel at your
demand, for the six Articles restored, to have them in power as formerly has
Answer to the six articles.
been. Do you know what you ask, or in obtaining do you know what you get?
They were laws indeed lately made, but quickly repented; too cruel for you,
and too merciless for us; who would have our Reign written with milk, and
not with blood, and because they were bloody, we took them away, with the same
authority, by which they were King Edwards laws written in mi^ke and not in
blood.
made; least reteining them, our sword should be too often drawn, and rigor
extended upon our true and well-deseruing subjects. We for our parts seek no
longer to live, then to be a father unto our people, and as God has made us
your rightful King, so has he commanded you unto obedience: by whose great
Majesty we swear, you shall feel the power of the same God in our sword;
which how mighty it Spoken like a King.
is, no subject knows: how puissant it is no private man can judge, and how
mortal no English heart can think: therefore embrace our mercy while it is
offered, least the blood spilt by your means cry vengeance from the Earth, and
be heard in the ears of the Lord in Heaven.

(24) All this notwithstanding, the Rebels persisted in their traitorous
attempts: against whose seditions Sir John Russell Lord Privy Seal, was
appointed General of the Kings Army; unto whose assistance Forces sent against
the rebels.
was joined the Lord Gray of Wilton, under whom served a band of Italians
intended against Scotland, these lay at Bristow attending the coming of the
Lord General: who now was marched Westward to Honiton, where daily looking for
more John Hooker in description of Excester.
supply, those which he had, began to shrink away, whereby the Rebels were
emboldned to make toward him, and came as far as Fenington-bridge within three
Miles of Honiton, and in a fair Meadow The rebels make toward the Lord
general.
there spread their Colors. The Lord Russell though weak in comparison of
them, holding it more honor to assail then to be assaulted, made forward even
unto the Bridge: at whose sight the Enemies prepared themselves to fight, and
with a strong guard maintained the Bridge, besides which there was passage over
the River, that held his course betwixt the two Armies.

(25) Great were the attempts the Lord Lieutenant gave, and manfull was the
resistance that the The valiant attempt of the Lord Russell.
Rebel made, yet lastly the way was won, and followed unto the battle of
the disloyals: where presently began a most cruel fight, and a while was
maintained to the loss of their blood, but the false hearts failing, and the
true subjects courage increasing, the Cornish immediately gave back and fled,
whereat the Kings soldiers out of Order fell to the spoil, minding nothing
less then that which presently The rebels put to flight.
ensued, for the Cornishmen perceiving their disordered carriage, suddenly
returned, and began a new fight, when the Lord Russell likewise ordered a new
his Army: these furiously ioining, a sharp and cruel encounter ensued, with
the loss of much The rebels return and maintain the fight.
blood, and the lives of three hundred Rebels, who lastly took to their heels
and left the field: the chase a while followed, and the soldiers scattered, a
fearful cry suddenly arose, that all the Commons were up, which caused the
Lord General to And again put to flight.
return unto Honiton: whether shortly came the Lord Gray of Wilton, having in
pay Spiniola an Italian Captain with three hundred shot.

(26) The Lord Russels forces augmented, his greatest care was to relieve the
City Excester, whither upon the third of August he hasted from Honiton being a
thousand strong; and passing over the Downs toward Woodbury, lodged his Camp
that night near to the Windmill, whereof the Rebels having intelligence,
raised themselves from Saint Mary Clift, and made amain unto the Downs,
thinking to surprise the Lord General before he was ready; but he as
vigilant as they were forward, encountered them again in battle, and again
The Rebels again ouer-throwne.
gave them the overthrow with the loss of the most of their lives, the rest
escaping by flight, got unto the Town of Saint Mary Clift.

(27) The news whereof bruted, and the Papal side bruised by these three
overthrows, the Commons M. Fox. in Act. and ^on.
in whole troops resorted to their aid, and to make all sure on their side
(by the presence and help of their consecrated God) they brought into The
Crucifixe brought in a cart into the field.
the field the Crucifixe under a Canopy, which in stead of an Altar was set in
a carte', accompanied with Crosses, and Candlestickes, Banners, Holy-Bread, and
holy water, both to drive away Devils, and to dull their enemies swords; which
notwithstanding they did not, neither could they deliver themselves in the day
of destruction; for the Town being fired, and the Armies met upon Clift heath,
a most cruel and bloody battle was fought, The Rebels again ouer-throwne.
wherein was slain the whole rout of the Rebels, and all these trinkets cast
in the dirt.

(28) The chief Captains were taken and sent unto London, who were Humfrey
Arundell, Winsland, Holmes and Bury, who there paid the law with the The
Captains of the Rebels executed.
loss of their lives. Many others were executed without judgment, only by
Marshall Law, as was Boier Mayor of Bodmin in Cornwall, unto whom The Mayor of
Bodmin hanged.
Sir Anthony Kingston, Provost Marshall sent word he would visit him at
dinner, but before he was set down, commanded the Mayor to cause a pair of
Gallows to be set up; and the Table taken away, he willed the said Mayor to
acompany him to the place, and there presently commanded Boier his Host to the
halter, and saw him hanged before he departed.

(29) At the same time, and near the same place dwelled a Miller, who had
been a busiedoer in the Rebellion, but he knowing the danger, willed his man
to take the name of the master, if any enquired after him; whereupon the said
Sir Anthony came to the mill, and calling for the master, the man in his name
presented himself, who strait commanded him unto the Gallows, the servant
then seeing the A Millers man hanged for his master.
danger of death, confessed he was not the master, but the man: well, said the
Knight, thou can never do thy master better service then to hang for him,
and thereupon trussed him up in the next tree.

(30) As these things were in acting in the West, so other Commotions arose in
other parts of the Land, though broched under another pretense, Commotions for
Enclosures.
namely the laying open of enclosures, which the king by Proclamation had
commanded to be done, but many offenders bearing themselves out with
greatness, slackened the execution, and the poorer presuming upon the Kings
pleasure, began to execute his commission themselves, and those in many places
at once, as in Kent, Essex, Sommerset, Buckingham, Northampton and Lincolue
shires they did.

(31) But most dangerous was that in Norfolk, whose Inhabitants following the
examples of the A. D. 1549. Commotions in Norfolk.
rest, held out much longer, and in more violent manner. Their first attempt was
at Atilborough against one Green that had taken away part of their commons,
Grene.
next at Wimonham, where by the instigation of John Flowerdew they cast down
the fences of Enclosures, belonging to Robert Ket a Tanner in the same Town;
who to be even with Flowerdew John Flowerdew and Robert Ket the caulers of the
commotions.
brought them to Hetherset, and set them on work to pull down both hedge and
ditch of his pasture grounds enclosed: to which work he gave such desperate
encouragements, that these vnrulies presently Ket made Captains of the
Commotion.
chose him for their ringleader, who with them passed to Bowthrope, laying all
leuel where they came.

(32) Their number increasing, and doings outrageous, Sir Edmund Windam Knight,
at that time high Shiriffe of the Shire, made proclamation among them in the
Kings name to depart, which if they did not forthwith, he pronounced them
Traitors, but had not his Horse been the swifter, he had been either Sir
Edmund Windam in danger.
taken or slain, thereupon their terror began to be fearful, and themselves
to be furnished with weapons, Armor, and Artillery, daily brought them in
abundance by the By-dwellers, besides store of victuals to maintain their
Camp.

(33) But now considering what dangers were open, if dispersedly scattered they
should attend their bad work, they held it best policy to draw to one place:
and to fortify themselves together with further strength; whereupon with full
resolution, Monshold was thought fittest near unto Mount Surrey, Monshold the
place of the randeuo^.
a place built by these Earls of that County, and upon S. Leonards hill which
hangs over Norwich, they vnkennelled themselves; besides these of Monshold, a
lesser rabble of them lay at Rising-chase near Linne, which were rowsed thence
by the Gentlemen of those parts: who first from Watton, then from Thetford, and
next from Brandon, were forced to their litter at Monshold.

(34) Their parts were rigorous, or rather inhumane even to their welwillers,
for it is a known truth, that Sir Roger Woodhouse in kind courtesy The
inhumanities of the Commotioners.
bringing them two Carts laden with Beer, and another with victuals, was
recompensed with the loss of all his Horses, his own apparel, and his body
tugged, and torn, cast into a ditch, whom lastly with others was imprisoned by
them in the house of Mount Surrey, and yet would they seem very Religious,
having one Coniers for their Chaplen, who devoutly said service unto them both
morning and evening.

(35) To these, the lewdly disposed of Suffolk assembled, as also the scum and
dregs out of Norwich, Supplies of the commotioners.
adding still fuel to their own smoaky flames by firing of Beacons, ringing
of Bells, and what not, to set all in an vproare: some true and faithful
subjects they violently led away, and made them of their counsel, namely
Thomas Cod, Mayor of Norwich, Robert Watson Preacher, and Thomas Alderiche
Gentleman, Sergeant and Catlyn, Sergeant Gaudy, whom Many good subjects forced
to attend upon the Rebels.
they kept fettered, and compelled them to be attendant upon Kette; who now
took upon him to be the Kings Deputy, and to give out warrants in his
Majesty's name, by virtue of which many of Worship and credit were fetched from
their dwellings, brought before him, and violently cast into prison: their
Rabble increased to the number of sixeteene thousand men.

(36) And that the show of justice and piety was only the mark whereat these
lawless leuelled, they ordained a tribunal seat in an old tree, whose
Canopie was the Cope of Heaven: In this sat the The tree of Reformation.
Tanneras Chauncellor or chief Judge, accompanied with his Counselors,
assisted by two chosen men out of every hundred among them, hither assembled
the complaints of the Camp, and hence had they commission to fetch out of
Ships both Ordinance, powder and short, and out of Gentlemen's houses all
abileaments of war: and here such Raskals as had exceeded their commission
had judgment of imprisonment, so that this tree was termed, the Oak of
Reformation, whence likewise sometimes Sermons were delivered to the people,
and once by the Reverent Doctor Parker, which had almost cost him his life.

(37) To these the Kings general Pardon was publicly pronounced by an Herald
at Arms, but The Kings pardon contemned.
so far off from embracing, as the Rebels from the height of the hill, shot
at the City, which doing little harm, they removed their Ordinance to the
lower ground, and thence began to batter the Norwich (...) by the Rebels.
walls, and without great resistance entered the town, where they became
Masters of all the munitions, and emprisoned the Mayor, and many other Citizens.

(38) These times thus troublesome, the King

and Citizens of London, requiring their aid in these their opposite quarrels,
and surely in their assembly the talk of the Lords by the Recorder was so well
told, as had not a grave George Stradlon.
Citizen stepped up betimes, the common Council had granted aid against their
King, whose wisdom and loyalty, in regard my self a Citizen, would have it
recorded to his everlasting memory, and an example and motive for our obedient
love and duty toward our Sovereigns, I will insert as I find them uttered and
spoken.

(58) In this case (said he) good it is to think George Stradlon his Oration.
on things past, to avoid the danger of things to come; for I remember a
story written by Fabian in his Chronicles of the wars betwixt the King and
his Barons, who even then as our Lords do now, demanded aid of the Mayor and
Commons of London, against their Soueraingne King Henry the third, and that in
a cause rightful, and good for the Commonweal, which was the execution of
certain wholesome laws, somewhat derogating from his princely prerogative,
which he would not permit. The aid was granted, and quarrel came unto
battle, wherein the Lords prevailed, and took the King and his son
prisoners. But they again restored to liberty, among other conditions this was
one, that the King should not only grant his free pardon to the Lords, but
also unto the Citizens of London; which was done, yea and the same confirmed by
Parliament. But what followed? was it forgotten? no surely, nor never forgiven
during the Kings life: for the liberties of the City were taken away, strangers
appointed to be our heads and Governors, the Citizens given away both body
and goods, and from one persecution to another, were most miserably afflicted:
such it is to enter the wrath of a Prince, which (as Solomon says) is death:
Wherefore, forasmuch as this aid is required of the Kings Majesty, whose voice
(being our high Shepherd) we ought to obey, rather then to hearken to the
Lords, whom nevertheless I wish not to be utterly cast off* my counsel is,
that they with us, and we with them, become humble Petitioners unto his
Highness, that it would please him to hear such complaints against the Lord
Protector, as may be justly alleged and proved, and I doubt not but this
matter will be so pacified, that neither shall the King, nor yet the Lords
have cause to seek for further aid, neither we to offend any of them both.

(59) These words well weighed, and the Council dissolved, five hundred
Londoners were prepared in a readiness: for Sir Philip Hobby being sent from
the Lords to the King, so delivered their minds, that the Lord Protector was
commanded out of presence, and the next day being the twelfth of October, the
Lords of the Council resorted to Windsor, where John Stow
they so wrought with the King, as his uncle was delivered into their hands,
whom the same night they imprisoned in Beauchamps Tower in the same Castle, and
the next day strongly attended, brought him to London, whence the streets were
guarded only by householders, the Aldermen taking the charge of the business,
and so to the great grief and wondering of the people he was conveyed to the
Tower, and The L. Protector committed to the Tower.
there left.

(60) Whither shortly after the Lords themselves repaired, and charged the
Protector with these 20. M. (...) in (...).
Articles as follows.

1 That at his entry into that weighty office, he was expressly prohibited to
do any thing in State Articles dr^wne against the Lord Protector.
without the assent of the last Kings Executors.

2 That he had contrariwise upon his own authority both subverted laws, and
stayed justice, (...) well by letters, as commandment.

3 That he had delivered diverse persons arrested, and committed to prison for
felony, manslaughter, murder and treason, contrary to the laws and statutes
of the Realm.

4 That he had made Captains and Lieutenants over weighty affairs under his
own Seal and Writing.

5 That he had alone communicated with foreign Ambassadors about most weighty
State affairs.

6 That he had checked diverse of the Kings Privy Council, speaking for the
good of the State, yea and threatened to displace them if they consented not to
his mind.

7 That he had against law erected a Court of Requests in his own house,
whither were enforced diverse of the Kings Subjects to answer for their
Free-holds.

8 That he had for money disposed Offices in the Kings gift, money, leases,
and Wards, and given presentations of Benefices, and Bishoprics, yea and
meddled with sale of the Kings lands, which by office he could not, without
consent of the mayor voice of the Council.

9 That he had commanded multiplication by Alcumistrie to the abuse of the
Kings coin.

10 That against the King and Councels will, he had set forth a Proclamation
against enclosures, which had caused dangerous insurrections in the land,
wherein diverse of the Kings liege Subjects have been spoiled, and many a
worthy man therein slain.

11 That to the same end he had given commission with Articles annexed
concerning enclosures of Commons, high ways, and decayed Cottages, giving the
Commissioners authority to hear and determine the same causes, contrary to the
laws and statutes of the Realm.

12 That he had suffered Rebels and traitors to assemble, and lie in Camp
and Armor, against the King, his Nobles, and Gentlemen, without any speedy
suppressing of them.

13 That by his gifts in money, with promises of Fees, rewards and services, he
had encouraged many of the said rebels.

14 That in favor of them contrary to law he had caused a Proclamation to be
made, that none of the said Rebels, or Traitors should be sued, or vexed for
any of their offenses committed in the said Rebellion.

15 That he had liked well of these rebellions, and had said that the
covetousness of the Gentry gave the occasion, affirming that it was better for
the Commons to die, then to perish for lack of living.

16 That he had reported the Lords of the Parliament were loath to reform
themselves for the reformation of Enclosures, and therefore the people had good
cause to reform the things themselves.

17 That upon the report of the defaultes and lackes of Bulloigne nothing was
there amended.

18 That the Forts of Newhauen and Blackness standing in want of men and
victual, whereof he was informed, were suffered notwithstanding still to
want, to the great encouragement of the French, and dishonor of the English.

19 That he had untruly published, that the Lords at London minded to destroy
the King, which he instantly desired he would never forget, and to that end
instigated many young Lords, whereby sedition and discord was made among the
Nobles.

20 Lastly, that whereas the Lords assembled at London, only to consult upon a
charitable communication to be had with the Protector for his misgouernment of
the King and Realm, he contrariwise sent letters of credence to many places
and persons, that the said Lords were no less then high Traitors to the King,
and great disturbers of the whole realm.

All these accusations notwithstanding (the young King so laboring it) he was
released from the Tower The Protector released from the Tower.
the sixth of February following unto his free liberty, though not unto his
former authority, and so remained untouched for the space of two years and two
days.

(61) Whilst these his and other troubles were commencing in England, the Lord
Gray of Wilton left Lieutenant of the North, remained in Scotland, where many
feats of war were undergone, and many Forts fortified, and some taken, such
were Lowden, Hadington, and Yester, at whose assault certain opprobrious
speeches in most contemptuous manner were uttered by a Scottish man against King
Edward of England, whereat the Lord Gray was so offended, as upon composition
for the delivery of the Castle, Vlpian Fulwell.
all were let go with life, only that person excepted, and his name known to
be Newton, was appointed A combat fought between two Scottishmen before the
Lord Gray.
to die for the same; but he denying the words, imposed them upon one
Hamilton, a man valorous enough, and wrongfully touched, who denied the
accusation, and challenged Newton the combat, which he accepted, and in
performance slew Hamilton, though more at disadvantage then for lack either of
courage or strength: The victor was rewarded with a great chain of gold, and
the gown that the Lord Gray ware at the present, though many maligned and
accused him still to be the vtterer of those base words.

(62) The English keeping foot still in Scotland, burnt Dawketh and
Muskelburgh, and fortified Hadington The English forced out of Scotland.
both with munition and men, spoiling the Country, says Bishop Lesly, all
about Edinburgh, Lowthian and Mers: repairing of Forts, and placing of
Garrisons, as if they meant there to remain and abide: but their young Queen
being conuaied into France, and the Scots aided with the assistance of the
French, so quit themselves, that they voided their land of the English, and
recovered of them all they had lost. In which times of variable success, the
King but a child, the Nobles at variances, and the combustuous Commons obedient
to neither, the French sought to recover the holds that the English had in
their Country, and first by stealth meant to surprise the fortress of
Bulloig^berg, unto which enterprise seven thousand were chosen, under the
conduct of Monsieur Chatillon.

(63) These secretly marching in the night with ladders and furniture meet for
the enterprise, approached within a quarter of a mile unto Bullingberg The
French intend to surprise Bulloignoberge.
fort, amongst whom was an English Soldier discharged out of their pay, for
that he had taken a French woman to wife. This Carter for so was his name got
entertainment under Chatillon, and now understanding whereabout they went,
hastily made from his Company, and gave the Alarm to his Countrymen The good
seruico of Carter an English soldier.
within the Fort; where Sir Nicholas Arnalt Captain of the piece, caused him
to be drawn up betwixt two pikes to the height of the wall, unto whom he
declared the attempt in hand, and among them stood so valiantly in defense of
the fort, that he gave many a wound, and ^ed some himself: by him and this
means the Piece was quit from surprisall, and the slaughter of the French so
great A great slaughter of the French.
that fifteen Wagons went laden away with dead Corpse.

(64) This loss sustained, and the English masters in those parts of their
Maine, the French sought to try fortune for their Isles in the Seas, namely
^nesey and Iersey, possessed and subject to King Edwards Crown, their
preparations were great, and their The French assault the Isles of Garnesey and
Iers^e.
Marshallists many; which notwithstanding with such loss were beaten back
from their (...), as a thousand men at Arms were ^ine in the attempt, and the
success so unfortunate, as the French for fear of further discouragement
forbad ^e report, and made an inhibition, not to mention the expedition of that
journey.

(65) Nevertheless the French King ceased not his desired purposes, till he
had got by under (...), Black^sse, Bulloignberg, and the town (...) upon
composition de^ liuered to the French.
of Bulloigne it self, though bought at a dear rate, and delivered with great
grief to the English; unto such a lamentable state, and dishonorable
composition was the good King Edward brought, by the bandings of his great
Counselors, and insurrections of his unruly Commons; after which calamities
John Caix^.
a great and mortal disease followed, namely the sweating sickness, that
raged extremely through the land, wherein died the two sons of Charles
Brandon, both of them Dukes of Suffolk, besides an A. D. 1550.
infinite number of men in their best strengths, which The sweating sickness.
followed only Englishmen in foreign Country, no other people infected
therewith, whereby they were both feared and shunned in all places where they
came.

(66) And to fill up the dolours of these doleful times, the good Duke of
Sommerset was again apprehended, even when the least suspicion was of any
indirect workings: for upon his first releasement, to A sained reconcilement.
link a firm love betwixt him and the potent Earl of Warwick, his most
malignant; a marriage was contracted betwixt the Lord Lisle his eldest son
and heir, and the Lady the Earls eldest daughter, which was solemnized with
great joy at Sheene, in presence of the young King; this amity was outwardly
carried with all fair shows for a time, though John St^.
inward hatred lay secretly hid, as by the sequel incontinently appeared: for
after a solemn creation of many Estates, wherein the Earl of Warwick had his
style raised to be Duke of Northumberland, unto whose rays at that time most
of the Courtiers cast their eyes: the sparks of emulation began presently to
break forth; where the simplicity of the one gave advantage to the other, to
compass that which long had been sought.

(67) The Duke of Sommerset not well advised, The Duke of Sommerset priusly
armed.
and yielding too much unto Sycophant flatteries, was put in fear of some
sudden attempt intended against him, and therefore counseled to wear under
his garment a coat of defense, which he accordingly did, and being so armed
came unto the Council Table, supposing no man had known of any such thing; but
his bosom being opened and the Armor perceived, he was forthwith
apprehended, as intending the death of some Counselor, and by Northumberland
so vehemently taxed (who Rich. Grafton.
in Counsel was ever the principal man) that he was forthwith attached, and
sent to the Tower, upon The Duke of Sommerset sent to the Tower.
the sixteenth of October with the Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir Michael Stanl^p,
Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir Ralph Vane, and Sir Mile^ Partridge, and the next day
Stow. A. D. 1551.
the Duchess his wife was likewise committed; all of them for suspicion of
treason and fellonie; and he standing so indicted upon the S^w says the first.
second of December following; was arraigned at Westminster, attended with the
Axe of the Tower, Bills, Halberds, and Pollaxes a great number.

(68) His indictment was for treason and felony, The Duke of Sommersets
indictment.
and the same urged unto extremity, with many amplifications, and bitter
inuectiues, especially that he had sought and pretended the deaths of the
Duke of Northumberland, the Lord Marquess, and Pembroke: where after many mild
answers to these * Of (...) William Herbert.
matters objected, he put himself to be tried by his Peers, who acquitted him
of treason, but found the indictment of felloni^: when presently the A^ The
Duke condemned of (...).
was commanded away, whereat the shout of the people showed the great
affection that was bo^e to the Duke: little mistrusting that the sentence of
death was p^ounced against him, or that the ki^ uncle should die as a fellon;
neither did Sta^ intend any such thing as some are of opinion, but rather was
purposely made for the suppression of ^bellions, and unlawful (...) herein
such as should seek or procure the (...) C^sellor should be guilty as in case
of felloni^. But such was the pleasure of the all ordering power (...) he which
knew no theft should die for that sin; so that neither himself, nor (...)
demanded the benefit of (...) would have saved his life if it had been
required.

(69) His sentence thus pronounced, he was again sent back to the Tower,
wherein he kept a very sad Christmas, yea and that in the Court, inclined to
little mirth, the King lamenting the condemnation Rich. Graf. John Stow.
Holinsh.
of his uncle, had not some witty disportes broke off his passions, which how,
and by whom they proceeded, let others report, and us continue the Tragedy of
this Duke; who upon the two and twenty of February following being Friday was
brought to the Scaffold upon Tower-hil, by eight in the morning, where turning
himself toward the East, he spoke to the people, as follows.

(70) Dearly beloved friends, I am brought hither to suffer death, albeit I
never offended against the King, neither in word nor deed, and have always
been as faithful The Duke of Sommersets speech at his death.
and true unto this Realm, as any man has been: but for so much as I am by law
condemned to die, I do acknowledge my self as well as others to be subject
thereunto: wherefore to testify mine obedience which I owe to the laws, I am
come hither to suffer death, where unto I willingly offer my self with most
hearty thanks unto God, that has given me this time of repentance, who might
through sudden death have taken away my life, that I neither should have
acknowledged him nor my self.

(71) These words uttered, besides others exhortatory, that the people would
continue constant in the Gospel, suddenly was heard a great noise, whereby A
great fear without any cause.
the assembly was struck into great fear, some thinking that a storm or
tempest descended from above, some supposed that the barrels of Gunpowder in
the Armorie had taken fire, and were all blown up into the Air, others
thought that they heard a noise of horses prepared to battle, some again
affirmed confidently that it did thunder, and others thought verily it was an
earthquake, and that the ground moved: unto such confusion and terror were
they presently brought, which (says Stow) was none other, but that certain
men from the Hamlets Ioh. Stow in Annals.
warned with weapon to guard the Tower Hill, came thither somewhat after the
hour appointed, whose foremost seeing the Prisoner on the Scaffold, began to
run forward themselves, and call to their fellows to come away: which word
away sounding as an Echo in the peoples ears, they thought that rescue had
come to the Duke to take him away: and seeing the Bil-men to make forward so
fast, began themselves to shrink back from the hill, every man seeking to
save one, and by this accident and confused cries, this fear among them fell
and began: This stir scarce ended, another ensued by the running of the
people toward the Scaffold, who seeing Sir Anthony Brown riding thitherward,
supposed a pardon had come from the King, so that a sudden shout arose,
apardon, apardon, God fane the King; by The Duke entirely beloved of the
Commons.
which it only appeared in what love he was had, and how much his life was
desired of the Commons.

(72) The Duke whose mind being altogether prepared for death, was little moved
either to hope The Dukes second speech upon the Scaffold.
or fear, and thereupon addressed his second speech to the people, and with no
dejected countenance spoke again and said: Beloved friends there is no such
matter intended as you vainly hope and believe: It seems thus good to the
Almighty, unto whose ordinance it is meet that we all be obedient, wherefore
I pray you be quiet and without tumult, for I am quiet, and let us so join in
prayer unto the Lord for the preservation of our Noble King, unto whose Majesty
I wish c^uall health, with all felicity and abundance of prosperous success.
Moreover, I wish to his Counselors the grace and favor of God, whereby they
may rule all things uprightly with Justice, unto whom I exhort you all in the
Lord, to show your selves obedient, the which is also very necessary for you
under pain of condemnation, and also most profitable for the preservation of
the Kings Majesty. And thereupon asking every man forgiveness, freely forgave
every man against him, and desiring the people to be quiet, lest the flesh
should be troubled, though his spirit was willing, he meekely laid down his
head to the Axe, and received at one stroke his rest by death.

(73) Howsoever this Dukes cause was balanced by law, and him taken away that
stood betwixt some Duke of So^merset soon mist, and sore lamented.
and their Sun; yet was his death heavily disgested by the people, that spoke
very bitterly against the Duke of Northumberland; but most especially the young
King sore mourned, and soon missed the life of his Protector thus unexpectedly
taken away, who now deprived of both his uncles, howsoever the times were
passed with pastimes, plays and shows, to drive away dumpes, yet ever the
remembrances of them sat so near unto his heart, that lastly he fell sick of
a Cough, which grievously increasing ended with a consumption of the lungs.
King Edward falls sick.


(74) His sickness continuing with great doubt of his life, upon purpose says
Grafton to alter the Rich. Grafton.
succession of the Crown, three marriages were in one day solemnized, whereof
the first was betwixt the Lord Guilford Dudley, fourth son to the Duke of
Northumberland, and the Lady Jane, eldest daughter of Henry Duke of Suffolk:
the second was betwixt Three marriages intended to reuert the succession.
the Lord Herbert, son and heir to William Earl of Pembroke, and the Lady
Katherine the younger daughter of the said Duke of Suffolk, and the third was
between Hanry L. Hastings, son and heir of Frances Earl of Hantington, and
Katherine the youngest daughter of the Duke of Northumberland, which tending
(says he) to the di^erison of the rightful heirs, they proved nothing
prosperous, for two of them were presently made frustrate, the one by death,
and the other by divorce.

(75) The policy established, and languishing sickness of the King gave way
unto such, as sought the euersion of the State, and alienation of the Crown. In
whose eye no head was scene fitter for that fair Diadem, then was Guilfords
Bride, Jane the elder daughter of Suffolk, whose mother Lady Francis then
living, Lady Jane made successor by sick King Edward.
was the daughter of Mary the French Queen, the younger sister to King Henry
the eight, unto whom King Edward ouer-wrought in his weakness, ordained his
Crown by Will, at the suggestions of such Politiques, as mount to disherite
the two lawful Princes, Mary and Elizabeth, and to impugn the Statute, in
case provided for the succession of K. Henry the eight his children: unto which
Will (O Vide Stat. in an. 35. de R. ^. ^. M. Fox. in all. and M^.
grief to hear) subscribed all the Kings Council, most of the Nobility, the
reverend Bishops, and all the Judges of the land, one only excepted, oven Sir
James Halles knight, a Justice of the common Pleas, upright in judgment, and a
favorer of the Gospel, Sir James Halles refused to subscribe to K. Edwords
Will.
he, I say, never would write or consent to the disheriting of the Lady Mary.

(76) The King thus accomplishing what his Statists had wrought, lay
languishing in his faintnes: the end wherefore could not be expected but only
by death, and now being worn almost to nothing (his last (...) drawing to the
limits of Nature) he lift up his eyes with a prepared heart, and prayed as
follows.

Lord God deliver me out of this miserable and wretched life, and take me among
thy Chosen: howbeit not K. Edwards prayer.
my will but thy will be done; Lord I c^^^i^ my spirit to thee: O Lord thou
know how happy it were for me to be with thee: yet for thy chosen sake, if
it be thy will send, me life and health that I may truly serve thee: O my Lord
bless thy people and save thine inheritance: O Lord God save thy chosen people
of England: O my Lord God defend this Realm from Papistrie, and maintain thy
true religion, that I and my people may praise thy holy (...) for thy son
Jesus Christ's sake.

So turning (...), and seeing some by him said, I thought you had not been so
nigh: you, said Doctor Owen, we heard you speak to your self, then said the
King, I was praying to God: O I am faint, Lord have m^rcy (...) me, and revive
my spirit: (...) so saying, gave up the Ghost; to the g(...) of ^^gl^^d, in
whom they had conceived most hopes.

(77) His virtues were rare and many, exceeding most Princes, and vices so few,
that none can be taxed with less; very learned (according to his years) The
virtues of King Edward.
he was in the Latin and Greek tongues, the French, Spanish, and Italian, yea
(and says Hieronymus Cardanus) The report of Hieronymus Cardanus, ex Fox.
he was adorned with the skill of Logic, natural Philosophy, and Music,
and for Astronomy (says he) my self had experience, whom he learnedly opposed
of the cause and course of Comets: for Humanity, he is the very Image of
Morality, and in princely grave Majesty best beseeming a King: briefly, he may
well His learning.
seem to be a miracle in Nature: nor do I speak thus Rhetorically to
amplify things, or to make them more then truth is, for the truth is more then
I do utter: and in this he was most admirable, that he could tell and recite
all the Ports, Havens, and Creekes, not within his own Realm only, but also
in Scotland, and His Memory.
likewise in France, what coming in there was, how the tide served in every of
them, what burden of Ship, and what wind best served the coming in into
them.

(78) Of all his Nobles, Gentry, Justices, and Magistrates, he took special
name of their Hospitality, His Care.
and religious conuersations, and that which is best accepted of a Prince, he
was very liberal, loving, merciful, meek and gentle* toward his people, and
so far from blood, as he ever favored and spared as much as might be the
life of man, yea even of Rebels, as we have seen; neither was he willing to
put Heretics to His Mercy.
death, as in a certain dissertation had once with M. Cheek it appeared:
insomuch that when Joan Butoher should be burned for her heresy, all the
Council could not move him to set his hand to the warrant of her execution,
until D. Cranmer his Godfather, Archbishop of Canterbury labored to induce
him, unto whom ^ee said, what my Lord? will you have me to send (...) quick to
hell, and taking the pen used this speech: I will lay all the charge hereof
upon Cranmer before God. Then how his hand had been gotten for his uncles
death is to be admired.

(79) But his constancy unto Christ's Gospel, with the abandoning of all
superstition, was very admirable, one example among many we will not K.
Edwards zeal to Christ's Gospel.
let to declare. Lady Mary his sister through the suit of Charles the Emperor,
made great means to have Mass said in her house, and that to be done without
all prejudice of law: the greatness of her Person being the immediate
successor, and the might of the Emperor in amity with England, moved the
Council to give their consent to the suit; to forward which Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury accompanied with Ridley Bishop of London were
employed from them to the King, who hearing their message, gave the replication
so grounded upon Scripture, as they gave over to urge more that way: but like
Politicians alleged the danger in breach of amity with the Emperor, to which
the King answered, he would rather adventure the hazard of his own life then
to grant that which was not agreeable to the truth. The Bishops yet urged him
with the bonds of nature, and submissiuely said, they would have no nay: the
King seeing himself so importunated, burst into weeping, and sobbingly desired
them to be content, whereat the tears so abundantly burst from their eyes, as
they departed his presence not able to speak. And for a further testimony of
this young Kings zeal, read if you please a letter sent unto his sister the
Princess Lady Mary, out of the original.

(80) Right dear, and right entirely beloved sister we greet you well, and let
you know that it grieneth us much to (...) no amendment in you of that, which
we for K. Edwards letter to Lady Mary.
good cause, your souls health, our conscience, and common tranquillity of our
Realm have so long d^sired; assuring you* that our sufferance has more
demonstration of nat^r all love then contentation of our conscience, and
foresight of our safety. Wherefore, although you give (...) ^sion as much
almost as in you is, to diminish our natural lode; yet be we loath to feel
it decay, and mean not to be so careless of you as we be provoked. And
therefore meaning your weal, and therewith joining a care not to be found
guilty in our own conscience to God, having cause to require forgiveness that
we have so long for respect of love toward you omitted our bound duty, we
do send at this present our right trusty, and right well-beloved Counselor the
L. Rich, our Chancellor of England, our trusty and right well beloved
Counselor Sir Anthony Wingfield Knight, Comptroler of our Household, and Sir
Will. Peter Knight, one of our two principal Secretaries in message to you
touching the order of your house, willing you to give the^ firm credit in
those things they shall say to you from us, and do there in our name. Yeouen
under our Signet at the Castle of Windsor, the of in the fifth year of our
Reign, 1556.

(81) The fruits of which Religion this godly King showed by his works of
compassion toward the poor, and that especially upon the foundation of
Christ's Hospital, the late suppressed place of the Gray Friars in London, and
that upon occasion as follows. It chanced the reverend Bishop Doctor Ridley
to preach before his Majesty at Westminster, wherein D. Ridleies sermon before
King Edward.
he Christianlike exhorted the rich to be merciful unto the poor, and to that
end amplified the words of the Text against the merciless rich, and the
negligence of such as were in great place. The Sermon ended, and the King set
to dinner, he sent to the Bishop, commanding him not to depart the Court,
before he knew his further pleasure, and thereupon causing two Chaires to be
set in the Gallery, all others avoided, he compelled the Bishop to sit down
by his side, and in no wise would admit him to be uncovered.

(82) Where entering conference, he first gave him hearty thanks for his
Sermon, repeating unto him the chief points thereof, and coming to his
exhortation The conference betwixt the King and Bishop Ridlay.
for the poor, he then told him that he thought himself first touched in the
speech; for said he, my Lord you speak to them in authority, whereof v^ God I
am the chief, and must first ma^e answer to him if I be negligent, and
therefore I think you principally meant me: Gods commandment I know most
expressly inioineth us to have compassion of ^s poor members, for whom we must
make account; and truly my Lord I am most willing to travel that way, not
doubting but that your long approved learning and wisdom, whose zeal is such
as wishes them help; but that also you had conference with others what is
best herein to be done, which I am also desorous to know, and therefore I pray
say freely your mind.

(83) The mouer unto these pious considerations little looking for such
questions of the Prince, sat a while silent, ouerioyed at his words, and
lastly unprepared of any present instructions, told the King that the Citizens
of London were best able to direct the plot, whose great Charity, and well
ordered government, besides their daily charges, being ouer-burdened with
poor, had sufficient experience, and if it would please his Majesty to direct
his letters unto ^em himself, he would be very ready to further this godly
resolution so far as his means might any wise extend: whereupon the King
presently commanded his letters to be writ, and would not suffer the Bishop
to depart before himself had K. Edwards great care for the poor
thereto set his hand and signet, desiring him to deliver the same to the Lord
Mayor, and with him to confer about this business, which he wished might be
accomplished with all expedition.

(84) The Bishop as ready as the King was desirous, posted apace to the Lord
Mayor of London, where delivering the letter, offered his assistance to King
Edwards (...) delivered to the L. Mayor.
forward the work, and they together with some Aldermen, and twenty four
Commoners agreede upon three degrees of the poor, and them divided again into
nine.

(85) The Book thus drawn, and presented to the King, he thereupon desired to
be accounted the chief Founder of their relief, and forth with (...) unto the
City S. Bartholmewes Hospital by Smithfield, The Kings great liberality for
the poor in London.
and the Grey-Friers Church near adjoining,


