THREE PROPER, and witty, familiar Letters: lately passed between two
University men: touching the Earthquake in April last, and our English
reformed Versifying.

With the Preface of a wellwiller to them both.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by H. Bynneman, dwelling in Thames streate, near unto
Baynardes Castle.

Anno Domini. 1580.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

TO THE CVRTEOVS Buyer, by a VVelwiller of the two Authors.
CVrteous Buyer, (for I write not to the envious Carper) it was my good hap,
as I interpreate it, now lately at the fourth or fifte h^^^e, to be made
acquainted with the three ^^^^ters following, by means of a faithful friend,
who with much^ entreaty had procured the copying of them out, at Immeritos
hands. And I pray you, interpret it for your good hap, so soon after to
come so easilye by them, through my means, who am only to crave these two
things at your hands, to think friendely of my friendly meaning, and to take
them of me with this Presumption, In exiguo quandoque cespite latet lepus: and
many precious stones, though in quantity small yet in quality and valewe are
esteemed for great. The first, for a good familiar and sensible Letter, sure
likes me very well, and gives some hope of good metal in the Author, in
whom I know myself to be very good parts otherwise. But show me, or
Immerito, two English Letters in Printe, in all points equal to the other
two, both for the matter it self, and also for the manner of handling, and
say, we never saw good English Letter in our lives. And yet I am credibly
certified by the foresaid faithful and honest friend, that himself has
written many of the same stamp both to Courtiers and others, and some of
them discoursing upon matter of great weight and importance, wherein he is
said, to be fully as sufficient and hable, as in these schol^erly points of
Learning. The which Letters and Discourses I would very gladly see in Writing,
but more gladly in Printe, if it might be obtained. And at this time to speak
my conscience in a word of these two following, I esteem them for two of the
rarest, and finest Treaties, as well for ingenious devising, as also for
significant uttering, and cleanly conueying of his matter, that ever I read in
this Tongue: and I heartily thank God for bestowing upon us some such proper
and hable men with their pen, as I heartily thank the Author himself, for
using his pleasant, and witty Talente, with so much discretion, and with so
little harm, contrary to the vein of most, which have this singular
conceyted grace in writing. If they had been of their own setting forth, I
grant you they might have been more curious, but being so well, and so
sufficiently done, as they are, in my simple judgment, and having so many
notable things in them, together with so great variety of Learning, worth the
reading, to pleasure you, and to help to garnish our Tongue, I fear their
displeas^re the less. And yet, if they think I have made them a fault, in
not making them privy to the Publication: I shall be always ready to make
them the best amende^ ^ can, any other friendly way. Surely, I wish them
both hartilye well in the Lord, and betake you and them to his merciful
gouernemente, hoping, that he will at his pleasure convert such good and
divine gifts as these, to the setting out of his own glory, and the benefit of
his Church. This XIX. of June. 1580.

Your, and their unfeigned friend, in the Lord.

Three proper witty familiar Letters, lately passed between two University
men, touching the Earthquake in April last, and our English reformed Versifying.
To my long approved and singular good friend, Master G. H.
GOod Master H. I doubt not but you have some great important matter in hand,
which all this while restrains your Pen, and wonted readiness in provoking
me unto that, wherein your self now fault. If there be any such thing in
hatching, I pray you heartily, let us know, before all the world see it. But
if happly you dwell altogether in Justinians Court, and give your self to be
devoured of secreate Studies, as of all likelihood you do: yet at least
imparte some your old, or new, Latin, or English, Eloquent and Gallant
Poesies to us, from whose eyes, you say, you keep in a manner nothing hidden.
Little news is here stirred^ but that old great matter still depending. His
Honor never better. I think the Earthquake was also there with you (which I
would gladly learn) as it was here with us: overthrowing diverse old buildings,
and pieces of Churches. Sure very strange to be heard of in these Countries,
and yet I hear some say (I know not how truly) that they have known the
like before in their days. Sed quid vobis videtur magnis Philosophis? I like
your late English Hexameters so exceedingly well, that I also ^nure my Pen
sometime in that kind: which I find indeed, as I have heard you often
defend in word, neither so hard, nor so harshe, that it will easily and
fairly, yield it self to our Moother tongue. For the only, or chiefest
hardness, which seems, is in the Accente: which sometime gapeth, and as it
were yawneth ilfauouredly, coming short of that it should, and sometime
exceeding the measure of the Number, as in Carpenter, the middle syllable being
used short in speech, when it shall be read long in Uerse, seems like a
lame Gosling, that draws one leg after her: and Heaven, being used short
as one syllable, when it is in Uerse, stretched out with a Diastole, is like a
lame Dog that holds up one leg. But it is to be won with Custom, and
rough words must be subdued with Use. For, why a Gods name may not we, as else
the Groekes, have the kingdom of our own Language, and measure our Accentes,
by the sound, reserving the Quantity to the Uerse? Lo here I let you see my
old use of toying in Rymes, turned into your artificial straightness of
Uerse, by this Tetrasticon. I beseech you tell me your fancy, without
parcialitie.

See ye the blindefoulded pretty God, that feathered Archer,
Of Lovers Miseries which makes his bloody Game?
Wot ye why, his Moother with a Veale has coouered his Face?
Trust me, least he my Love happily chance to behold.
Seem they comparable to those two, which I translated you ex tempore in bed,
the last time we lay together in Westminster?

That which I eat, did I joy, and that which I greedily gorged,
As for those many goodly matters leaft I for others.
I would heartily wish, you would either send me the Rules and P^ecepts of Art,
which you observe in Quantities, or else follow mine, that M. Philip Sidney
gave me, being the very same which M. Drant devised, but enlarged with M.
Sidneys own judgment, and augmented with my Observations, that we might both
accord and agree in one: least we overthrow one an other, and be ouerthrown
of the rest. Trust me, you will hardly believe what great good liking and
estimation Master Dyer had of your Satyricall Verses, and I, since the view
thereof, having before of my self had special liking of English Versifying,
am even now about to give you some token, what, and how well therein I am
able to do: ^or, to tell you truth, I mind shortly at convenient leisure,
to set forth a Book in this kind, which I entitle, Epithalamion Thamesis,
which Book I dare undertake will be very profitable for the knowledge, and
rare for the Invention, and manner of handling. For in setting forth the
marriage of the Thames: I show his first beginning, and offspring, and all the
Country, that he passe^h thorough, and also describe all the Rivers throughout
England, which came to this Wedding, and their right names, and right
passage, etc. A work believe me, of much labor, wherein notwithstanding
Master Holinshed has much furthered and aduantaged me, who therein has
bestowed singular pains, in searching out their first heads, and sourses:
and also in tracing, and dogging out all their Course, til they fall into the
Sea, O Tite, siquid, ego,
Ecquid erit pretij?


But of that more hereafter. Now, my Dreams, and dying Pellicane, being fully
finished (as I partelye signified in my last Letters) and presentlye to be
imprinted, I will in haude forthwith with my Fa^ry Queen, which I pray you
heartily send me with all expedition: and your friendly Letters, and long expected
Judgment wythal, which let not be short, but in all points such, as you
ordinarilye use, and I extraordinarily desire. Multum vale. Westminster. Quarto
Nona^ Aprilis 1580. Sed, amabo te, Meum Corculum tibi se ex animo commendat
plurimum: iamdiu mirata, te nihil ad literas suas responsi dedisse. Vide queso,
ne id tibi Capitale sit: Mihi certe quidem erit, neq tibi hercle impune, vt
opinor, I^erum vale, and qu^m voles saepe.

Yours always to command IMMERITO.

Postscripte.
I take best my Dreams should come forth alone, being grown by means of the
Gl^sse, (running continually in manner of a Paraphrase) full as great as my
Calendar. Therein be some things excellently, and many things wittily discoursed
of E. K. and the Pictures so singularly set forth, and purtrayed, as if Michael
Angelo were there, he could (I think) nor amend the best, nor reprehende the
worst. I know you would like them passing well. Of my Stemmata Dudleiana, and
especially of the sundry Apostrophes therein, addressed you know to whom,
must more aduisement be had, than so lightly to send them abroad: howbeit,
trust me (though I do never very well,) yet in my own fancy, I never did
better: Veruntamen te sequor solum: nunquam vero assequar.

A Pleasant and pitthy familiar discourse, of the Earthquake in April last.
To my loouing friend, M. Immerito.
SIgnor Immerito, after as many gentle Godmorrowes, as your self, and your
sweet Heart lists: May it please your Maistershippe to dispense with a poor
Orator of yours, for breaking one principal graund Rule of our old
inviolable Rules of Rhetoric, in showing himself somewhat too pleasurably
disposed in a sad matter: (of purpose, to meet with A coople of shrewde witty
new married Gentlewomen, which were more Inquisitiue, than Capable of Natures
works) I will report you a pretty conceited discourse, that I had with them no
longer ago, than yesternight, in a Gentleman's house, here in Essex. Where
being in the company of certain courteous Gentlemen, and those two Gentlewomen,
it was my chance to be well occupied, I warrant you, at Cards, (which I dare
say I scarcely handled a whole twelve moonth before) at that very instant,
that the Earth under us quaked, and the house shaked above: besides the
moving, and rattling of the Table, and fourmes, where we sat. Where upon, the
two Gentlewomen having continually been wrangling with all the rest, and
especially with my self, and even at that same very moment, making a great
loud noise, and much a do: Good Lord, quoth I, is it not woonderful strange
that the delicate voices of two so propper fine Gentlewoomen, should make such
a suddayne terrible Earthquake? Imagining in good faith, nothing in the world
less, than that it should be any Earthquake in deed, and imputing that
shaking to the suddayne sturring, and remoouing of some cumberous thing or
other, in the upper Chamber over our Heads: which only in effect most of us
noted, scarcely perceiving the rest, being so closely and eagerly set at our
game, and some of us taking on, as they did. But behold, all on the suddayne
th^re comes stumbling into the Parlour, the Gentleman of the house, somewhat
straungely affrighted, and in a manner all aghast, and tells us, as well as
his Head and Tongue would give him leave, what a woonderous violent motion,
and shaking there was of all things in his Hall: sensibly and visibly seen, as
well of his own self, as of many of his Servants, and Neighbors there. I
strait ways beginning to think somewhat more s^riously of the matter: Then I
pray you, good Sir, quoth I, send presently one of your servants farther into
the Town, to enquire, if the like h^th happened there, as most likely is, and
then must it needs be some Earthquake. Whereat the good fearful Gentleman
being a little recomforted, (as misdoubting, and dreading before, I know not
what in his own House, as many others did) and immediately dispatching his man
into the Town, we had by and by certain word, that it was ge^erall over all
the Town, and within less than a quarter of an hour after, that the very
like be happened the next Town too, being a far greater and goodlyer Town.
The Gentlewoomens hearts nothing acquaynted with any such Accidents, were
maruellously daunted: and they, that immediately before were so eagerly, and
greedily praying on us, began now forsooth, very demurely, and deuoutely to
pray unto God, and the one especially, that was even now in the House top, I
beseech y^u heartily quoth she, let us leave off playing, and fall a praying.
By my truly, I was never so scared in my life, Me thinks it marvelous
strange. What good Parte^er? Cannot you pray to your self, quoth one of the
Gentlemen, but all the House must hear you, and ring Allin to our Ladies
Mattins? I see woomen are every way v^hement, and affectionate. Your self was
liker even now, to make a fraye, than to pray: and will you now needs in all
have be on both your knees? Let us, and you say it, first dispute the matter,
what danger, and terror it carries with it. God be praised, it is already
ceased, and here be some present, that are able cunningly, and clearkly to
argue the case. I beseech you master, or mystresse, your zealous and d^uoute
Passion a while. And with that turning to me, and smiling a little at the
first: Now I pray you, Master H. what say you Philosophers, quoth he, to this
suddayne Earthquake? May there not be some sensible Natural cause thereof, in
the concauities of the Earth it self, as some forcible and violent Eruption of
wind, or the like? Yes no doubt, sir, may there, quoth I, as well, as an
Intelligible Supernatural: and peradventure the great abundance and
superfluity of waters, that fell shortly after Michaelmas last, being not as
yet dried, or drawn up with the heat of the Sun, which has not yet
recovered his full attractiue strength and power, might minister some occasion
th^reof, as might easily be discoursed by Natural Philosophy, in what sort
the poores, and ventes, and crannies of the Earth being so stopped, and filled
up every where with moisture, that the windy Exhaltations, and Uapors, pent up
as it were in the bowels thereof, could not otherwise get out, and ascend to
their Natural Original place. But the Terms of Art, and very Natures of
things themselves so utterly unknown, as they are to most here, it were a
piece of work to lay open the Reason to every on^s Capacity.

I know well, it is we that you mean, quoth one of ye Gentlewomen (whom for
distinction sake, and because I imagine they would be loath to be named, I will
hereafter call, Mystresse Inquisitiua, and the other, Madame Incredula:) now I
beseech you, learned Sir, try our wits a little, and let us hear a piece of
your deep University Cunning. Seeing you Gentlewomen will allgates have it
so, with a good will, quoth I: and then forsooth, very solemnly pawsing a
while, most gravely, and doctorally proceeded, as follows.

The Earth you know, is a mighty great huge body, and consists of many
diverse, and contrary members, and veins, and arteries, and concaui^ies,
wh^rein to avoid the absurdity of Vacuum, most necessarily be very great
store of substantial matter, and sundry Accidental humors, and fumes, and
spirits, either good, or bad, or mixte. Good they cannot possibly all be,
whereout is engendered so much bad, as namely so many poysonfull, and venomous
Herbs, and Beasts, besides a thousand infectiue, and contagious things
else. If they be bad, bad you must needs grant is subject to bad, and then
can there not, I warrant you, want an Object, for bad to work upon. If mixed,
which seems most probable, yet is it impossible, that there should be such an
equal, and proportionable Temperature, in all, and singular re^pecte^, but
sometime the Evil (in the devils name,) will as it were interchaungeably have
his natural Predominaunt Course, and issue one way, or other. Which evil
working vehemently in the parts, and maliciously encountering the good,
forcibly tosse^h, and cruelly disturbeth the whole: Which conflict indureth so
long, and is fostred with abundance of corrupt putrified Humors, and
ylfauoured gross infected matter, that it must needs (as well, or rather as
ill, as in men's and women's bodies) brust out in the end into one perilous
disease or other, and sometime, for want of Natural voyding such fe^erous, and
flatuous Spirits, as lurk within, into such a violent chill shiuering shaking
Ague, as even now you see the Earth have. Which Ague, or rather every fit
thereof, we scholars call grossly, and homely, Terrae motus, a moving, or
sturring of the Earth, you Gentlew^men, that be learned, somewhat more finely,
and daintily, Terr^ metus, a fear, and agony of the Earth: we being only
moved, and not terrified, you being only in a manner terrified, and scarcely
moved therewith. Now here, (and it please you) lies the point, and quidditie
of the controu^rsie, whether our Motus, or your Metus, be the better, and more
consonant to the Principles and Maxims of Philosophy? the one being manly, and
deuoyde of dread, the other woomannish, and most wo^ully quiuering, and
shiuering for very fear. In sooth, I use not to dissemble with Gentlewoomen: I
am slatly of Opinion, the Earth whereof man was immediately made, and not
wooman, is in all proportions and similitudes liker us than you, and when it
fortuneth to be distemp^red, and disseas^d, either in part, or in whole, I am
p^rsuad^d, and I bele^ue Reason, and Philosophy will bear me out in it, it
only moves with the very impulsive force of the malady, and not trembles, or
quak^th for dastardly fear.

Now, I beseech you, what think ye, Gentlewomen, by this Reason? Reason,
quoth Madame Incredula: By my truly, I can neither pick out Rhyme, nor Reason,
out of any thing I have heard yet. And yet me think^s all should be Gospel,
that comes from you Doctors of Cambridge. But I see well, all is not Gould,
that glist^reth. In deed, quoth Mistress Inquisitiua, here is much adooe, I
trow, and little help. But it please^h Master H. (to delight himself, and
these Gentlemen) to tell us a trim goodly Tale of Robinhood, I know not what.
Or suer if this be Gospel, I dowte, I am not in a good belief. Trust me
truly, Sir your Eloquence far pass^th my I^telligence. Did I not tell you
aforehand, quo^h I, as much? And yet would you needs presume of your
Capacities in such profound mysteries of Philosophy, and Priuiti^s of Nature,
as these be? The very thinking whereof, (unless happily it be per fidem
implicitam, in believing, as the learned believe, And saying, It is so, because
it is so) is nighe enough, to cast you both into a fit, or two, of a
dangerous shaking fever, unless you presently seek some remedy to prevent
it. And in earnest, if ye will give me leave, upon that small skill I have in
Extrinsecall, and Intrinsecall Physiognomie, and so forth, I will wager all
the money in my poor purse to a pottle of Hyppocrase, you shall both this
night, within somewhat less than two hours and a half, after ye be laid,
Dream of terrible strange Agues, and Agonyes as well in your own pretty
bodies, as i^ the mighty great body of the Earth. You are very merrily
disposed, God be praised, quoth Mistress Inquisitiua, I am glad to see you so
pleasurable. No doubt, but you are marvelous privy to our dreams. But I pray
you now in a little good earnest, do you Scholars think, that it is the very
reason in deed, which you spoke of even now? There be many of us, good
Mistress, quoth I, of that opinion: wherein I am content to appeal to ye
knowledge of these learned Gentlemen here. And some a ^^^ne, of our finest
conceited heads defend this Positio^, (a very strange Paradox in my fancy:)
yt the Earth having taken in too much drink, and as it were over lavish Cups,
(as it has sensibly done in a manner all this Winter past) now staggereth^ and
reeleth, and tottereth, this way and that way, up and down, like a drunken
man, or wooman (when their Alebench Rhetoric co^mes upon them, and specially
the moving Patheticall figure Pottyposis,) and therefore in this forcible
sort, you lately saw, payneth it self to vomit up again, that so
disordereth, and disquieteth the whole body within. And, forsoothe, a few new
Contradictorie fellows make no more of it, but a certain vehement, and
passionate neesing, or sobbing, or coffing, wherewithal they say, and as they
say, say with great Physical, and Natural Reason, The Earth in some place, or
other, ever lightly after any great, and suddayne alteration of weather, or
diet, is exceedingly troubled, and payned, as namely this very Time of the
year, after the extreme pynching cold of Winter, and again in Autumn,
after the extreme parching heat of Summer. But shall I tell you, Mistress
Inquisitiua? The soundest Philosophers in deed, and very deepest Secretaries
of Nature, hold, if it please you, an other Assertion, and maintain this for
truth: (which at the leastwise, of all other seems marvelous reasonable, and
is questionl^sse farth^st off from Heresy:) That as the Earth, upon it, has
many stately, and boisterous and fierce Creatures, as namely, Men and Women,
and diu^rs Beasts, whereof some one is in manner continually at variaunce and
fewde with an other, evermore seeking to be revenged upon his enemy, which eft
soones breaks forth into profess^d and open Hostility: and then consequently
follow set battles, and mortal wars: wherein the one party bends all the
force of his Ordinance and other Martial furniture against the other: ^o
likewise within it too, it has also some, as vengibly and frowardly bent, as
for Example, Woormes, and Moules, and Cunnyes, and such other valiauntly
highminded Creatures, ye Sons and daughters of Mars, and Bellona^ that
nurrish civil debate, and contrary factions amongst them selves: which are
seldom, or never ended too, without miserable bloodshed, and deadly war: and
then go me their Gunnes lust^ly off; and the one discharges his Piece
co^tagious^y at the other: and there is such a General dub a dubbe amongst
them, and such horrible Thundering on every side, and such a monstrous cruel
shaking of one an others For^es and Castles, that the whole Earth again, (...)
at the least, so much of the Earth, as is ouer^ or near them, is terribly
hoysed, and -- No more An^s, or Ifs, for Gods sake, quoth the Madame, and this
be your great Doctorly learning. We have even Enoughe already for our Money:
and if you should go a little farther, I fear me, you would make us nyghe
as ^unning as your self: and that would be a great disgrace ^o the
Uniuersi^i^. Not a whi^te, gentle Madame, quoth I^, there be of us, that have
greater store in our bowgets, than we can well occupy our selves, and
therefore we are glad as you see, when by the favorable, and gracious aspect
of son^e bl^ssed Planet, and specially our Mercury, or your Venus, it is our
good Fortune, to light on such good friends, as you, and some other good
Gentle woomen be, that take pleasure, and comfort in such good things. Whereat
Mistress Inquisitiua, laughing right out, and beginning to demand I know not
what, (me thought, she made, as if it should have been some goodly plausible
Jest, whereat she is, and takes her self prettily good:) Well, well, Master H.
quoth the Gentleman of the house, now you have playde your part so cunningly
with the Gentlewoomen, (as I warrant you shall be remembered of Inquisitiua^
when you are gone, and may happily forget her: which I hope, Mistress
Incredula will do sometime too, by her leave:) I pray you in earnest, let us
men learn some thing of you too: and especially I would gladly hear your
Judgment, and resolution, whether you count of Earthquakes, as Natural, or
Supernatural motions. But the shorter, all the better. To whom I made answer,
in effect, as follows:

Master Hs. short, but sharp, and learned Judgment of Earthquakes.
Truly Sir, under correction, and in my fancy: The Earthquakes themselves I
would say are Naturall^^ as I verily believe the Internal Causes there of,
are: I mean those two Causes, which the Logicians call, the Material, and the
Formall^ Marr^, the Exter^^ll ^auses, which are the Efficient and Final, I
take rather of the two, to be sup^rnaturall. I must ^ra^e a little lea^e to
l^ye open the matter.

The ^^teriall Cause of Earthquakes, (as was superficially ^ouche^ in the
begin^ing of our speech, and is sufficiently proo^ed by Aristotle in ye
second Book of his Meteor^,) is no doubt great abundance of wind, or stoare
of gros^^ and ^^y^ ^^^^^s, and spirits, fast shut up, and as a man would say,
emprysoned in the Caves, and Dange^ns of the Earth^ which wind, or vapors,
seeking to be set at liberty, and to get them home to their Natural lodgings,
in a great fume, violently rush out, and as it were, break prison, which
forcible Eruption, and strong breath, causes an Earthquake. As is excellently,
and very lively expressed of Ovid, as I remember, thus: Vis fera ventorum
caecis inclusa cauernis,
Exspirare aliquo cupiens, luctataque frustra
Liberiore fru^ coelo, cum carcere Rima
Nulla foret, toto nec peruia flatibus esset,
Extentam tumefecit humum, ceu spiritus oris,
Tendere vesicam solet, and so forth.


The formal Cause, is nothing but the very manner of this same Motion, and
shaking of the Earth without: and the violent kind of striving, and wrestling
of the winds, and Exhalations within: which is, and must needs be done in
this, or that sort, after one fashion, or other. Now, sir, touching the other
two Causes, which I named External: The first immediate Efficient, out of all
Question, is God himself, the Creator, and Continuer, and Corrector of
Nature, and therefore Supernatural: whose only voice carries such a reverend
and terrible Majesty with it, that the very Earth again, and highest
Mountains quake and tremble at the sound and noise thereof: the text is rife
in every man's mouth: Locutus est Dominus and contremuit Terra: howbeit, it is
not to be gainesayd, that is holden of all the ancient Natural Philosophers,
and Astronomers, for the principal, or rather sole Efficient, that the
Influence, and heat of the Sun, and Stars, and specially of the three
superior Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, is a secondarie Isntrumental
Efficient of such motions.

The final, not only that the wind should recover his Natural place, than
which a natural reasonable man goes no farther, no not our excellentest
profoundest Philosophers themselves: but sometime also, I grant, to testify
and denounce the secret wrath, and indignation of God, or his sensible
punishmen^ upon notorious malefactors, or, a threatening Caveat, and
forewarning for the inhabitants, or the like, depending upon a supernatural
Efficient Cause, and tending to a supernatural Moral End.

Which End, (for that I know is the very point, whereon you stand) albeit it
be acknowledged Supernatural and purposed, as I said, of a supernatural
Cause, to whom nothing at all is impossible, and that can work supernaturally,
and myraculously without ordinary means, and inferior causes: yet
nevertheless is, we see, commonly performed, by the qualifying, and conforming
of Nature, and Natural things, to the accomplishment of his Divine and
incomprehensible determination. For being, as the old Philosophers call him,
very Nature self, or as it has pleased our later schoolmen to term him, by
way of distinction, Natura Naturans, he has all these secondarie inferior
things, the four Elements, all sensible, and insensible, reasonable, and
unreasonable Creatures, the whole world, and what soever is contained in the
Compass of the world, being the workmanship of his own hands, and, as they
call them, Natura naturata, ever pliable and flexible Instruments at his
Commandment: to put in execution such Effects, either ordinary or
extraordinary, as shall seem most requisite to his eternal Providence: and
now in these latter days, very seldom, or in manner never works any thing
so myraculously, and extraordinarily, but it may sensibly appear, he uses the
service and Ministry of his Creatures, in the atchoeuing thereof. I deny
not, but Earthquakes (as well as many other fearful Accidents in the same
Number,) are terrible signs, and, as it were certain manacing forerunners,
and forewarners of the great latter day; and therefore out of controversy the
more reuerendly to be considered upon: and I acknowledge considering the
Euentes, and sequeles, according to the collectio^ and discourse of man's
Reason, they have seemed to Prognosticate, and threaten to this, and that
City, utter ruin and destruction: to such a Country, a general plague and
pestilence: to an other place, the death of some mighty Potentate or great
Prince: to some other Realm or Kingdom, some cruel imminent wars: and
sundry the like dreadful and particular Incidentes, as is notoriously evident
by many old and new, very famous and notable Histories to that effect. Which
of all other the ancient Romans, long before the Nativity of Christ, did
most religiously or rather superstitiously observe, not without a number of
solemn Ceremonies, and Hollydayes for the nonce, ever after any Earthquake,
making full account of some such great rufull casualtie or other, as
otherwhyles fell out in very deed: and namely, as I remember, the year Ante
bellum Sociale, which was one of the lamentablest, and myserablest wars, that
Italy ever saw: and Pliny, or I know not well who, has such a saying: Roma
nunquam tremuit, vt non futurus aliquis portenderetur insignis Euentus.

But yet, notwithstanding, dare not I aforehand presume thus far, or arrogate
so much unto my self, as to determine precisely and peremptorily of this, or
every the like singular Earthquake, to be necessarily, and undoubtedly a
sup^rnaturall, and immediate fatal Action of God, for this, or that singular
intent, when as I am sure, there may be a sufficient Natural, either
necessary or contingent Cause in the very Earth it self: and there is no
question, but the self same Operation in Genere, or in specie, may at one
time, proceeding of one Cause, and referred to one End, be preternaturall, or
supernatural: at another time, proceeding of an other, or the same Cause, and
referred to an other End, but Ordinary, and Natural. To make short, I cannot
see, and would gladly learn, how a man on Earth, should be of so great
authority, and so familiar acquaintance with God in Heaven, (unless happily for
the nonce he has lately entertained some few choice singular ones of his
privy Counsel) as to be able in such specialties, without any iustifyable
certificate, or warrant) to reveal his incomprehensible mysteries, and
definitiuely to give ^entence of his Majesty's secret and inscrutable purposes.
As if they had a key for all the locks in Heaven, or as if it were as clear
and resolute a case, as the Eclipse of the Sun, that darkened all the Earth,
or at the least all the Earth in those Countries, at Christ's Passion,
happening altogether prodigiously and Metaphysically in Plenilunio, not
according to the perpetual course of Nature, in Nouilunio: in so much that
Dionisius Areopagita, or some other graunde Philosopher, upon the suddayne
contemplation thereof, is reported in a certain Patheticall Ecstasie to have
cried out, Aut rerum Natura patitur, aut Mundi machina destruetur: as my mind
gives me, some of the simpler, and vnskilfuller sort, will go nigh to do upon
the present sight, and agony of this Earthquake. Marry the Error I grant, is
the more tolerable, though perhaps it be otherwhiles, (and why not even
now,) a very presumptuous Error in deed, standing only upon these two weak
and deceitful grounds, Credulity and Ignorance: if so be inwardly (not
only in External show, after an Hypocritical, and Pharisaicall manner) it
certainly do us good for our reformation, and amendment, and seem to preach^
unto us, Paenitentiam agite, (as in some respect every such strange and rare
Accident may seem:) how Ordinary, and Natural so ever the Cause shall
appear otherwise to the best learned: especially, as the Earthquake shall be
known to endure a longer, or a shorter Time, or to be more or less general,
in more, or fewer places. Which two differences, touching the quantity of
Time, and Place, after I had a little more fully prosecuted, alleging certain
particular Examples thereof, how in some places huge Castles, in some Towns,
in some great and mighty Cities, in some Shires and Seigniories, and
Provinces, in some whole Countries, and Regions have been perillously moved
and shaken therewith: in one place, a long time together: in an other place,
not so long, or at several and parted times: in another, very short, as^ God
be thanked here even now: and finally by the way, showing a third and most
notable difference of all, (as well for the present or imminent terror and
danger, as otherwise) by the sundry species, and forms which Aristotle,
Pliny, and other Meteorologicians have set down of Experience, as they have
heard, or read, or seen the earth to quake, to stir, and hoyse up Houses,
Walls, Towers, Castelles, Churches, Minsters, whole Towns, whole Cities,
whole Provinces, without farther harm: to ruinate and overthrow, and destroy
some: to yawne and gape, and open like a grave, and cons^quently to swallow up
and devour other: and sometime also to drink up whole rivers, and mighty
big running waters withal, or to change and alter their common woonted
course some other way: to sink and fall downewardes: to cast out and vomitte
up either huge vaste heaps, as it were Mountains of Earth, or large Islands
in the main Sea, never remembered, or seen before: or great over flowing
waters, and fountaynes: or hot scalding sulphurous lakes: or burning sparkles
and flames of fire: to make a horrible hissing, gnashing, rattling, or some like
wonderful strange noise, (which all Effects are credibly reported, and
constantly avouched, of our most famous and best allowed Philosophers) a few
such particularities, and distinctions, compendiously and familiarly coursed
over. The good Gentleman gave me heartily, as appeared, very great thanks, and
told me plainly, he never either read, or heard half so much of Earthquakes
before: confessing withal, that he yielded resolutely to my opinion: that an
Earthquake might as well be supposed a Natural Motion of the Earth, as a
preternaturall, or supernatural ominous work of God: and that he thought it
hard, and almost impossible, for any man, either by Philosophy, or Divinity,
evermore to determine flatly the very certainty either way. Which also in
conclusion was the verdit, and final resolution of the greater and sager part
of the Gentlemen present: and namely of an ancient learned common Lawyer, that
had been Graduate, and fellow of a College in Cambridge, in Queen Mari^s
days. Who took upon him, to knit up the matter, and as he said, determine the
controversy, with the authority of all the natural Philosophers, old or
new, Heathen or Christian, Catholic or Protestant, that ever he read, or
heard tell of. Th^re Physickes quoth he, are in every man's hands: they are old
enoug^ to speak for them selves, and we are young enough to turn our Books.
They that have Eyes and Tongues, let them see, and read. But what say you
now, quoth I, to the staying and quieting of the Earth, being once a
moving? May it not seem a more myraculous work, and greater woonderment,
that it should so suddenly stay again, being moved, than that it should
so suddenly move, being quiet and still? Move or turn, or shake me a thing
in like order, be it never so small, and less than a pynnes Head, in
comparison of the great mighty circuit of the Earth, and see if you shall not
have much more a do to stay it presently, being once sturred, than to stu^re
it at the very first. Whereat the Gentleman smyling, and looking merrily on the
Gentlewoomen, here is a school point, quoth he, that by your leaves, I
believe will poase the better scholar of you both. But is it not more than
time, think ye, we were at Supper? And if you be a hungered, Master H. you
shall thank no body but your self, that have holden us so long with your
profounde and clerkly discourses, whereas our manner is to suppe at the least a
long hour before this time. Being set, and new occasion of speech
ministered, our Supper put the Earthquake in manner out of our minds, or at
the least wise, out of our Tongues: saving that the Gentlewoomen, now and then
pleasauntly tyhyhing between them selves, especially Mystresse Inquisitiua,
(whose mind did still run of the drinking, and Neesing of the Earth,)
repeated here, and there, a broken piece of that, which had been already said
before Supper. With deep judgment no doubt, and to marvelous great purpose,
I warrant you after the manner of woomen Philosophers, and Divines.

And this summarily in Effect was our yesternyghtes grave Meteorologicall
Conference, touching our Earthquake here in the Country: which being in so many
neighbor Towns, and Uillages about us, as I hear say of this morning, makes
me presuppose, the like was with you also at London, and elsewhere farther ^f.
And then forsoothe, must I desire Master Immerito, to send me within a week
or two, some odd fresh paulting threehalfepennie Pamphlet for news: or some
Balductum Tragical Ballet in Ryme, and without Reason, setting out the right
miserable, and most wo^ull estate of the wicked, and damnable world at these
perilous days, after the deuisers best manner: or whatsoever else shall first
take some of your brave London Eldertons in the Head. In earnest, I could wish
some learned, and well aduized University man, would undertake the matter,
and bestow some pains in deed upon so famous and material an argument. The
general Nature of Earthquakes by definition, and the special diversity of
them by division, being perfectly known: (a thing soon done) and a complete
Induction of many credible and autenticall, both old and new, divine and
profane, Greek, Lattine, and other Examples, (with discretion, and judgment,
compyled and compared together) being considerately and exactly made, (a thing
not so easily done) much no doubt might be alleged too or fro, to terrify or
pacify us, more or less. If it appear by general Experience, and the
foresaid Historical Induction of particulars, that Earthquakes, sine omni
exceptione, are ominous, and significatiue Effects, as they say of Comets,
and carry ever some Tragical and horrible matter with or after them: as
either destruction of Towns and Cities, or decay of some mighty Prince, or
some particular, or general plague, war, or the like, (vt supra) whatsoever
the Material, or Formal cause be, Natural, or supernatural, (howbeit for
mine own part I am resolved, as well for the one, as for the other, that these
two I speak of, both Matter and Form, are rather Natural in both, than
otherwise) it concerns us, upon the vewe of so Effectual and substaunciall
evidence, to conceive seriously, and reverently of the other two Causes: the
first, supreme Efficient, whose Omnipotent Majesty has nature self, and all
natural Creatures at commandment: and the last final, which we are to judge
of as advisedly, and prouidently, as possibly we can, by the consideration, and
comparison of Circumstances, the time when: the place where? the qualities, and
dispositions of the persons, amongst whom such, and such an Ominous token is
given. Least happily through over great credulity, and rashness, we mistake
Non causam pro causa, and sophistically be entrapped Elencho Finiu^. Truly, I
suppose, he had need be an excellent Philosopher, a reasonable good Historian,
a learned Divine, a wise discrete man, and generally, such a one as our Doctor
Still, and Doctor Byng are in Cambridge, that should show himself accordingly
in this argument, and to the judgment and contentation of the wisest,
perform it exactly. My self remember nothing to the contrary, either in
Philosophy, or in Histories, or in Divinity either, why I may not safely and
lawfully subscribe to the judgment of the noble Italian Philosopher, and most
famous learned Gentleman, whilst he lived, Lord of Mirandola, and Earl of
Concordia, Count Ioannes Franciscus Picus, in my opinion, very considerately,
and partly Philosophically, partly Theologically set down, in the sixth Chapter
of his sixth Book, against Cogging deceitful Astrologers, and Southsayers, De
rerum Praenotione, pro veritate Relligionis, contra Superstitiosas vanitates.
In which Chapter, (if happily you have not read it already,) you shall find
many, but specially these three notable places, most effectual and directly
pertinent to the very purpose. The first more vniuersal^. Naturae opere fieri
non potest, vt Ostentis, vt Monstris magni illi, seu dextri, seu sinistri
euentus portendantur, and ab aliqua pendeant proxima causa, quae and futura
etiam proferat. Impostura Daemonum, vt id fiat, videri potest. Sed and
plaeraque non monstrosa, non prodigiosa per se^e, pro monstri^ tamen, and
portentis, haberi possunt, and solent a quibusdam, quibus Rerum Natura non
satis comperta est, causarum enim ignoratio, noua in re Admirationem parit.
Propter quam, philosophari homines capisse, in exordys primae philosophiae
scribit Aristoteles. Wherein those two several points, Impostura Daemonum, and
Ignoratio causaerum, are no doubt marvelous probable, and most worthy both
presentlye to be noted now, and more fully to be discussed hereafter:
appearing unto me the very right principal Causes of so many erroneous
opinions, and fantastical superstitious dreams in this, and the like behalf.

The second more special, as it were hitting the white in deed, and cleaving
the Pin in sunder.

Idem in Terraemotibus etiam, quod in fulguribus, fulminibusque interpretandis,
obseruauit Antiquitas. Cuius Reiliber, Graeco eloquio, nuper ad manus peruenit,
in Orpheum relatus Autorem: sed perabsurdum nimis, vt quod frequentissime fit,
pro vario terrae anhelitu, pro ventorum v^^lentia, vaporumque conductione,
(mark you that?) ex e^ rerum futurarum significationem petere, quorum nec
effectus esse possunt, nec causa, praeterq forte mortis inferendae illis, qui
fulmen exceperit, aut qui terrarum hiatu perierit. Sed nec ab eadem proxima
deduci causa possunt, a qua and futurae pendeant res, vt supra deductum est.

And then shortly after, the third, most agreeable to the second, as flatlye
determining on my side, and as directlye concluding the same position as may be.

Nec sane Orpheus ille, si tamen Orpheus fuit, vllam affert omnino causam, cur
quispiam ex terrae motibus, vrbium, hominum, regionum euenta praesagire possit.
Solum va^^ narrat arbitrio: si terrae contigerit motus, nocti, si aestate, si
hyeme, si ^urora, si interdus, quid portendatur: Quae certe, and saniore
possunt a^bitrio refelli, and Experientiae testimonio, vt arbitror, non secus
irrideri, ac supra Tagis portenta irrisimus, Haruspicinae Autoris.

A most excellent sound Judgment in my conceit: and full well beseeming so
Honorable and admirabl^ a Wit, as out of Question, Picus Mirandula had: who
b^ing yet scarcely thirty years of age, for his singularity in all kind of
knowleege, as well divine as profane, was in Italy and France^ as Paulus Iouius
reports, surnamed Phoenix, as the odd, and in effect the only singular
learned man of Europe: and to make short: such a one, in most respects, as
I would wis^e now to be tempering with this new notorious incident: staying
my self in the mean while upon this probable and reasonable Interim of his:
and preferring it before all the frivolous coniecturall Allegations, and
s^rmises, that o^ce counterfaite, and reasonlesse Orphes oppose to the
contrary. But, Jesus, what is all this to Master Immerito? For soothe I know
not by what mischaunce, these miserable balde odious three half penny
^ellowes, alas, a company of silly beetleheaded Asses, came into my mind, that
will needs be sturring, and taking on in every such rare and unaccustomed
event, as if they saw farther in a Millstone, than all the world besides,
whereas every man, that has but half an eye in his ^ead^ sees them to be
more blind, than any Buzzarde, or Bayarde, Scribimus indocti, doctique
Poemata passim, and surely, as the world goes now in England, rather the
first, for aught I see, than the last. O interim miseras Musas, and
miserabiles: Where the fault should rest, viderint Oculi, atque capitae Reip.
Mihi quidem is it hic, neque seritur admodum, neque metitur. Non valde me^ nou^s
Bibliotheca libros desiderat, s^ipsa, id est, quos ha^et, veteribus contenta
est. Quid plura? T^ vale, mi Immerito, atque ita tibi persuade, Aliquid esse
eum, qui istorum long est dissimilimus, quos Typographi nostri habent venales
maxim. Commend me. to thine own good self, and tell thy dying Pellicane,
and thy Dreams from me, I will now leave dreaming any longer of them, til with
these eyes I see them forth indeed: And then again, I imagine your
Magnificenza, will hold us in suspense as long for your nine English
Commoedies, and your Latin Stemmata Dudleiana: which two shall go for my
money, when all is done: especially if you would but bestow one seuennights
pollishing and trimming upon either. Which I pray th^e heartily d^e, for my
pleasure, if not for the^r sake, nor thine own profit. My Scholars Love, or
Reconcilement of contraries, is shrunk in the wetting: I had purposed to
have dispatched you a Coppie thereof, long ere this: but, no remedy, hitherto
it has always gone thus with me: Some new occasion, or other, ever carries
me from one matter to another, and will never suffer me to finishe either one
or other. And truly, Experto creed, it is as true a Uerse as ever was made,
since the first Uerse, that ever was made: Pluribus intentus minor est ad
singula sensus: which my Anticosmopolita, though it grieve him, can best
testifye, remaining still as we say, in statu, quo, and neither an inche more
forward, nor backewarde, than he was fully a twelue-month since in the Court,
at his last attendaunce upon my Lord there. But the Bird that will not sing
in April, nor in May, may peradventure sing in September: and yet me thinks,
Sat cit^, si sat been, if I could steal but one poor fortnight, to peruse
him over afreshe, and copy him out anewe. Which I hope in God to compass
shortly. But I bese^ch you, what News all this while at Cambridge? That was
wont to be ever one great Question. What? Det mihi Matter ipsa bonam veniam,
eius vt aliqua mihi liceat Secreta, vni cuidam de eodem gremio obsequentissimo
filio, reuelare: and sic pauci^ hab^to. Nam alias fortasse pluribus: nunc non
placet, non vacat, molestum asset. Tully, and Demosthenes nothing so much
studied, as they were wont: Liuie, and Salust possiblye rather more than
less: Lucian never so much: Aristotle much named, but little read: Xenophon
and Plato, reck^ed amongst Discoursers, and conceited Superficial fellows:
much verbal and sophistical iangling: little ^ubtile and effectual
disputing: noble and roy^ll Eloquence, the best an^ persuasiblest Eloquence: no
such Orators again, as re^headded A^gelles: An exceeding great difference,
between the countenaunces, and ports of those, that are brave and gallaunt,
and of those, that are basely, or meanly apparelled: between the learned, and
unlearned, Tully, and Tom Tooly, in effect none at all.

Matchiauell a great man: Castilio of no small reputation: P^trach, and Boccace
in every man's mouth: Galateo^ and Guazz^ never so happy: over many acquainted
with Vnico Are^^no: The French and Italian when so highlye regarded of
Scholiers? The Latin and Greek, when so lightly? The Queen mother at the
beginning, or end of euery^ conference: many bargains of Mounsieur: Shymeirs
a noble gallant fellow: all inquisitiue after News, new Books, new
Fashions, new Laws, new Officers, and some after new Elements, and some
after new Heavens, and Helles to. Turkishe affairs familiarly known: Castles
builded in the Air: much ado, and little help: Jack would feign be a
Gentlemanne: in no age so little so much made of, every one highly in his own
favor, thinking no man's penny, so good silver as his own: Something made of
Nothing, in spite of Nature: Numbers made of Ciphars, in spite of Art:
Geometrical Proportion seldom, or never used, Arithmeticall overmuch abused:
Oxen and Asses (notwithstandiug the absurdity it seemed to Plautus) draw both
together in one, and the same Yoke: Conclusio fere sequitur deteriorem partem.
The Gospel taught, not learned: Charity key cold: nothing good, but by
Imputation: the Ceremonial Law, in word abrogated: the Judicial in effect
disanulled: the Moral indeed abandoned: the Light, the Light in every man's
Lips, but mark me their eyes, and tell me, if they look not liker Howlets,
or Battes, than Egles: as of old Books, so of ancient Virtue, Honesty,
Fidelity, Equity, new Abridgementes: every day fresh span new Opinions:
Heresy in Divinity, in Philosophy, in Humanity, in Manners, grounded much
upon heresay: Doctors contemned: the Text known of most, understood of few,
magnified of all, practiced of none: the Devil not so hated, as the Pope: many
Inuectiues, small amendment: Skill they say controlled of Will: and Goodness
mastered of Goods: but Agent, and Patient much alike, neither Barrel greatly
better Herring: No more ado about Cappes and Surplesses: Master Cartwright
nighe forgotten: The man you wot of, conformable, with his square Cappe on his
round head: and Non resident at pleasure: and yet Non-residents never better
bayted, but not one the fewer, either I believe in Act, or I believe, in
Purpose. A number of our preachers sibbe to French Soldiers, at the first,
more than Men, in the end, less than Women. Some of our pregnantest and
soonest ripe Wits, of Hermogenes metal for all the world: Old men and
Counsailours amongst Children: Children amongst Counsailours, and old men: Not
a f^we ^ubble faced Iani, and chaungeable Camelions: ouer-manye Clawbackes, and
Pickethanks: Reeds shaken of every Wind: Iackes of both sides: Aspen leaves:
painted Sheathes, and Sepulchers: Asses in Lions skins: Dunglecockes: slipperye
Eles: Dormise: I blush to think of some, that ween themselves as fledge as
the rest, being, God wot, as kallowe as the rest: every yonker to speak of as
politic, and as great a Commonwealths man as Bishop Gardner, or Doctor
Wutton at the least: as if every man now adays having the ^raming of his own
Horoscope, were borne in decimo coeli domicilio, and had all the Wit, Wisdom,
and Worship in the world at commandment. Sed heus in aurem: Meministin'
quod ait Varro? Omnes videmur nobis esse belli, festiui, saperdae, cum sumus
Canopi: David, Ulysses, and Solon, feigned themselves fools and madmen: our
fools and madmen feign themselves David's, Ulysses, and Solons: and would go
nigh to deceive the cunningest, and best experienced Metaposcopus in a country:
It is pity fair weather should ever do hurt, but I know what peace and
qui^tnes has done with some melancholy pickstrawes in the world: as good
unspoken as vname^ded. And will you needs have my Testimonial of your ol^e
Controllers new behauior? A busy and dizy head, a brazen forehead: a l^dden
brain: a wooden wit: a copper face: a stony breast: a factious and eluish
heart: a founder of novelties: a confounder of his own, and his friends good
gifts: a morning bookeworm, an afternoon maltworm: a right Iuggler, as full of
his sleights, wyles, fetches, casts of Legerdemaine, toys to mock Apes
withal, odd shifts, and knauish practizes, as his skin can hold. He often
tells me, he looueth me as himself, but out liar out, thou lie abhominably
in thy throat. Jesus, I had nigh hand forgotten one thing, that ywis sometime I
think often enough upon: Many Pupils, Iackemates, and Hayle fellows well met,
with their Tutors, and by your leave, some too, because forsooth they be
Gentlemen, or great heirs, or a little neater and gayer than their fellows,
(shall I say it for shame? believe me, it is too true) their very own Tutors. Ah
mala Licentia, ab initio no^ fuit sic. Stulta est omnis iuuenilis Doctrina,
sine virili quadam Disciplina. Quasi vero pauperioribus duntaxat pueris, ac non
multo magis generosa, atque nobili Iuuentuti conueniat, pristinae illius
Institutionis, atque Educationis seueritas, and ingenuae, and prudentis, and
cruditae, and cum Tutoris personae, tum pupillo, etiam ipsi perquam
accomodatae. Vsquequaque sapere oportet: id erit telum acerrimum. Caetera
faere, vt ^^lim: Bellum inter Capita, and membra continuatum: (...) publicis
defensa scholis, priuatis confirmata parietibus, omnibus loc^s ostentata, Scire
tuum nihil est, nisi te scire, hoc sciat alter. Pl^^imi passim fit Pecunia,
Pudor parui penditur: Nihili habentur Literae: Mihi creed, credendum nulli: O
amice, amicus nemo. Quid tu interim? Quomodo te inquies geris? Quomodo? Optimum
est aliena frui insania. Video: taceo, rideo: Dixi. Et tame^ addam, quod ait
Satyricus ille: Vi^^endum est recte, tum propter plurima, tum his
Praecip^e causis, vt linguas Mancipiorum Contemnas.


E meo municipio, Postridie quam superiores de Terraemotu sermones haberentur,
id est, ni fallor, Aprilis septimo, Vesperi. With as many gentle Goodnightes,
as be letters in this tedious Letter.

Nosti manum tanquam tuam.
POSTSCRIPTE.
This Letter may only be showed to the two odd Gentlemen you wot of. M^rry I
would have those two to see it, as soon as you may conveniently. Non multis
d^rmio: no^ multis scr^bo: non cupio placere multis: Alij alios numeros
la^dant, praeferunt, venerantur: Ego fere apud nos, fere apud vos Trinitatem.
Verbum sapientisat: nosti caetera: and tres Charites habes ad vnguem.

A Gallant familiar Letter, containing an Answer to that M. Immerito, with
sundry proper examples, and some Precepts of our English reformed Versifying.
To my very friend M. Immerito.
SIgnor Immerito, to pass over your needelesse complaint, with the ^^sidue of
your preamble (for of ye Earthquake I presuppose you have ere this received my
goodly discourse) and withal to let my la^^ ^nglishe Hexametres go as
light^ye as they came: I cannot choose, but thank and honor the good Angel,
(whether it were Gabriell or some other) that put so good a motion into the
heads of those two excellent Gentlemen M. Sidney, and M. Dyer, the two very
Diamondes of her Majesty's Court for many special and rare qualities: as to
help forward our new famous enterprise for the Exchanging of Barbarous and
Balductum Rymes with Artificial Uerses: the one being in manner of pure and
fine Goulde, the other but counterfeit, and base ylfauoured Copper. I doubt not
but their lively example, and Practice, will prevail a thousand times more in
short space, than the dead Aduertizement, and persuasion of M. Ascham to the
same Effect: whose Scholemaister notwithstanding I reverence in resp^ct of so
learned a Motive. I would gladly be acquainted with M. Drants Prosodye, and I
beseech you, commend me to good M. Sidneys judgment, and gentle M. Immeritos
Observations. I hope your next L^tters, which I daily exspect, will bring me in
farth^r familiarity and acquaintance with all three. Mine own Rules and
Precepts of Art, I believe will fall out not greatly repugnant, though
peradventure somewhat different: and yet am I not so resolute, but I can be
content to res^rue the Coppying out and publishing thereof, until I have a
little better consulted with my pillowe, and taken some farther aduize of
Madame Sperienza. In the mean, take this for a general Caveat, and say I have
revealed one great mystery unto you: I am of Opinion, there is no one more
regular and justifiable dir^ction, either for the assured, and infallible
Certainty of our English Artificial Prosodye particularly, or generally to
bring our Language into Art, and to frame a Grammar or Rhetorike thereof: than
first of all universally to agree upon one and the same Ortographie, in all
points conformable and proportionate to our Common Natural Prosodye: whether
Sir Thomas Smithes in that respect be the most perfect, as surely it must needs
be very good: or else some other of profounder Learning, and longer Experience,
than Sir Thomas was, showing by necessary demonstration, wherein he is
defective, will undertake shortly to supply his wantes, and make him more
absolute. My self dare not hope to hoppe after him, til I see something or
other, too, or fro, publickely and autentically established, as it were by a
general Counsel, or act of Parliament: and then peradventure, standing upon
firmer ground, for Company sake, I may adventure to do as other do. Interim,
credit me, I dare give no Precepts, nor set down any Certain General Art:
and yet see my boldness, I am not greatly squaimishe of my Particular
Examples, whereas he that can but reasonably skill of the one, will give easily a
shreude guess at the other: considering that the one fetches his original and
offspring from the other. In which respect, to say troth, we Beginners have
the start, and advantage of our Followers, who are to frame and conform both
their Examples, and Precepts, according to that President which they have of
us: as no doubt Homer or some other in Greek, and Ennius, or I know not who
else in Latin, did prejudice, and ouerrule those, that followed them, as well
for the quantities of syllables, as number of feet, and the like: their only
Examples going for current payment, and standing in stead of Laws, and Rules
with the posterity. In so much that it seem^d a sufficient warrant (as still
it does in our Common Grammar schools) to make (...) in (...), and (...), in
Vnus long, because the one has (...), and the other, Vnus homo nobis, and so
consequently in the rest. But to let this by-disputation pass, which is
already so thoroughly discoursed and can^assed of the best Philosophers, and
namely Aristotle, that point us, as it were with the forefinger, to the very
fountains and head springes of Arts, and Artificial precepts, in the
Analitiques, and Metaphysikes: most excellently set down in these four Golden
Terms, the famoussest Terms to speak of in all Logique and Philosophy,
(...): shall I now by the way send you a January gi^t in April: and as it
were show you a Christmas Gambowlde after Easter? Were the manner so very
fine, as the matter is very good, I durst presume of an other kind of Plaudite
and Gramercie, than now I will: but being as it is, I beseech you, set
parcialitie aside, and tell me your maisterships fancy.

A New years Gift to my old friend Master George Bilchaunger: In
commendation of three most precious Accidents, Virtue, Fame, and Wealth: and
finally of the fourth, A good Tongue.
V^r^ue sends a man to Renown, Fame lends Abundance,
Fame with Abundance makes a man thrice blessed and happy.
So the Reward of Famous Virtue makes many wealthy,
And the Regard of We^lthie Virtue makes many blessed:
OF blessed Virtue blessed Fame, bl^ssed Abundance,
O ^^^t I had you ^h^ee, wi^h the loss of thirty Come^^^^mentes.
Now farewell Mistress, whom lately I loved above all,
These be my three bonny lasses, these be my three bonny Ladye^,
Not the like Trinity again, save only the Trinity above all:
Worship and Honor, first to the one, and then to the other.
A thousaud good leaves be for ever granted Agrippa.
For squibbing and declayming against many fruitless
Arts, and Crafts, deuisde by the Diuls and Sprites, for a torment,
And for a plague to the world: as both Pandora, Prometheus,
And that cursed good bad Tree, can testify at all times.
Mere Gewegawes and Bables, in comparison of these.
Toys to mock Apes, and Woodcockes, in comparison of these.
Iugling castes, and knicknackes, in comparison of these.
Yet behind there is one thing, worth a prayer at all times,
A good Tongue, in a man's Head, A good Tongue in a woomans.
And what so precious matter, and food for a good Tongue,
As blessed Virtue, blessed Fame, blessed Abundance.
L' Enuoy.
Marvel not, what I mean to send these Verses at Euensong:
On Neweyeeres Even, and Oldyeeres End, as a Memento:
Trust me, I know not a ritcher Jewel, newish or oldish,
Than blessed Virtue, blessed Fame^ blessed Abundaunce,
O blessed Virtue, blessed Fame, blessed Abundance,
O that you had these three, with the loss of Forty Val^tes^
He that wishes, you may live to see a hundredth Good New years, every one
happier, and merrier, than other.

Now to requite your Blindfolded pretty God, (wherein by the way I would gladly
learn, why, The, in the first, Y^ in the first, and third, H^, and My, in the
last, being short, M^, alone should be made longer in the very same) Imagine me
to come into a goodly Kentishe Garden of your old Lords, or some other Noble
man, and spying a flourishing Bay Tree there, to demand ex tempore, as
follows: Think upon Petrarches Arbor vittoriosa, tiromfale,
Onor d' Imperadori, e di Poet:
and perhaps it will advance the wings of your Imagination a degree higher:
at the least if any thing can be added to the loftiness of his conceit, who^
gentle Mistress Rosalinde, once reported to have all the Intelligences at
commandment, and an other time^ Christened her, Segnior Pegaso.

Encomium Lauri.
WAat might I call this Tree? A Laurel? O bonny Laurel:
Needs to thy bows will I bow this knee, and veil my bonetto:
Who, but thou, the renown of Prince, and Princely Poeta:
The One for Crown, for Garland the other thanketh Apollo.
Thrice happy Daphne: that turned was to the Bay Tree,
Whom such seruaun^es serve, as challenge service of all men.
Who chief Lord, and King of Kings, but the Emperor only?
And Poet of right stamp, ouerawith the Emperor himself.
Who, but knows Aretyne, was he not half Prince to the Princes.
And many a one there lives, as nobly minded at all points.
Now Farewell Bay Tree, very Queen, and Goddess of all trees,
Ritchest perle to the Crown, and fairest Flower to the Garland.
Feign wod I crave, might I so presume, some farther aquaintaunce,
O that I might? but I may not: woe to my destiny therefore.
Trust me, not one more loyal servant longes to thy Personage,
But what says Daphne? Non omni dormio, worse luck:
Yet Farewell, Farewell, the Reward of those, that I honor:
Glory to Garden: Glory to Muses: Glory to Virtue.
Partim Ioui, and Palladi,
Partim Apollini and Musis.
But seeing I must needs bewray my store, and set open my shop wyndowes,
now I pray thee, and conjure thee by all thy amorous Regardes, and Exorcismes
of Love, call a Parliament of thy Sensible, and Intelligible powers together,
and tell me, in Tom Trothes earnest, what Il fecondo, and famoso Poeta, Messer
Immerito, says to this bold Satyriall Libell lately devised at the instaunce
of a certain worshipful Hartefordshyre Gentleman, of mine old acquayntaunce:
in Gratiam quorundam Illustrium Anglofrancitalorum, hic and vbique apud nos
volitantium. Agedum vero, nosti homines, tanquam tuam ipsius cutem.

Speculum Tuscanismi.
Since Galateo came in, and Tusc^^isme began usurp,
Vanity above all: Villainy next her, Statelynes Empress.
No man, but Minion, Stowte, Lowte, Plain, swayne, quoth a Lording:
No words but valorous, no works but woomanish only.
For life Magnificoes, not a beck but glorious in show,
In deed most frivolous, not a look but Tuscanish always.
His cri^ging side neck, Eyes glauncing, Fisnamie smirking^
With forefinger kiss, and brave embrace to the footewarde.
Largebelled Kodpeasd Dublet, vnkodpeased half hose,
Strait to the dock, like a shirte, and close to the britch, like a diueling.
A little Apish Hatte, cowched fast to the pate, like an Oyster,
French Camarick Ruffes, deep with a witness, starched to the purpose.
Every one A per se A, his terms, and braueries in Print^
Delicate in speech, queynte in array: conceited in all points:
In Courtly guyles, a passing singular odd man,
For Gallantes a brave Myrrour, a Primerose of Honor,
A Diamond for nonce, a fellow perelesse in England.
Not the like Discourser for Tongue, and head to be found out:
Not the like resolute Man, for great and serious affairs,
Not the like Lynx, to spy out secrets, and priuities of States.
Eyed, like to Argus, Earde, like to Midas, Nosd, like to Naso,
Wingd, like to Mercury, fittst of a Thousand for to be employde,
This, nay more than this does practice of Italy in one year.
None do I name, but some do I know, that a piece of a tweluemonth^
Has so perfited outly, and inly, both body, both soul,
That none for sense, and senses, half matchable with them.
A Vulturs smelling, Apes i^sting, sight of an Eagle,
A spiders touching, Har^^^ h^aring, might o^ a Lion.
Compoundes of wisdom, wit, prowes, bounty, behavior,
All galla^t Virtues, all qualities of body and soul:
O thrice ten hundredth thousand times blessed and happy,
Blessed and happy Travail, Trauailer most blessed and happy.
Penatibus He^ruscis laribusq^e nostris Inquili^i^:
Tell me in good sooth, does if not too evidently appear, that this English
Poet wanted but a good pattern before his ^yes, as it might be some delicate,
and choice elegant Poe^^e of good M. Sidneys, or M. Dvers, (over very Castor,
and Pollux for ^ach and many greater matters) when this trim geere was in
hatching: Much like some Gentlewooman, I could name in England, who by all
Physic and Phystognomie too, might as well have brought forth all goodly fair
children, as they have now some ylfauored and deformed, had they at the time of
their Conception, had in sight, the amiable and gallant beautiful Pictures of
Adonis, Cupido, Ganymedes, or the like, which no doubt would have wrought such
^eepe impression in their fantasies, and imaginations, as their children, and
perhaps their Childrens children too, might have thanked them for, as long as
they shall have Tongues in their beads.

But mine own leisure fails me: and to say troth, I am lately become a
marvelous great stranger at mine old Mistress Poetries, being newly
entertained, and daily employed in our Emperor Justinians service (saving that
I have already addressed a certain pleasurable, and Moral Politic Natural
mixte devise, to his most Honorable Lordshippe, in the same kind, whereunto
my next Letter, if you please me well, may perchance make you privy:) marry
now, if it like you in the mean while, for variety sake, to see how I task
a young Brother of mine, (whom of plain John, our Italian Master has
Cristened his Picciolo Giouannibattista,) Lo here (and God will) a piece of
hollydayes exercise. In the morning I gave him this Theme out of Ovid, to
translate, and vary after his best fashion.

Dum fueris foelix multos numerabis Amicos,
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.
Aspicis, vt veniant ^d can^^da tecta columbae?
Accipiat nullas fordid^ Turris A^es?
His translation, or rather Paraphrase before dinner, was first this: 1.
Whilst your Bearnes are fat whilst Cosers stuffd with abundance,
Friends will abound: If bearne ware bare, then adie^ ^ir a Gods name
See ye the Doo^es^ they breed, and feed in gorgeous Houses:
Scarce one Dooue does love to remain in ruinous Houses,


And then fors^oth th^^ ^ t^ make proof of his faculty In P^^^^meters too
(...) a (...) withal.

2.
Whilst your Riches abound, your friends will play the Place^oe^,
If your wealth do decay, friend, like a feend, will away,
Dooues light, and delight in goodly fairetyled houses:
If your House be but old. Dooue to remove be ye bold.
And the last and largest of all, this: 3.
If so be goods increase, then daily increases a goods friend.
If so be goods decrease, then strait decreaseth a goods friend.
Then God night goods friend, who seldom proves a good friend,
Give me the goods, and give me the good friend, take ye the goods friend.
Douehouse, and Louehouse, in writing differ a letter:
In deed scarcely so much, so resembles an other an other.
Tyle me the Doouehouse trimly, and gallant, where the like storehouse^
Fyle me the Doouehouse: leave it unhandsome, where the like poorehouse?
Look to the Louehouse: where the resort is, there is a gaye show:
Gynne port, and money fail: straight sports and Company fails.


Believe me, I am not to be charged with above one, or two of the Uerses: and a
four or five words in the rest. His afternoones Theme was borrowed out of
him, who^ one in your Coat, they say, is as much beholding unto, as any
Planet, or Star in Heaven is unto the Sun: and is quoted as your self best
remember, in the Gloss of your October.

Giunto Alessandro ala famosa tomba
Del fero Achille, suspirando disse,
O fortunato, che sichiara tromba
Trouasti.
Within an hour, or there aboutes, he brought me these four lust. e
Hexameters, altered since not past in a word, or two.

Noble Alexander, when he came to the tomb of Achille^,
Sighing spoke with a big voice: O thrice blessed Achilles.
That such a Trump, so great, so loud, so glorious have found,
As the renowned, and surprising Archpoet Homer.
Upon the view whereof, Ah my Syrrha, quoth I here is a gallant exercise for
you in deed: we have had a little pretty trial of you Latin, and Italian
Translation: Let me see now I pray, what you can (...) your own Tongue: And
with that, reaching a certain famous Book, called the new Shephardes
Calender: I turned to Willyes, and Thomalins Emblemes, in March: and bad him
make them either better, or worse in English verse. I gave him an other howr^s
respite: but before I looked for him, he suddenly rushed upon me, and gave me
his devise, thus formally set down in a fair piece of Paper.

1. Thomalins Emblem.
Of Honny, and of Gaul in Love there is store,
The Honny is much, but the Gaul is more.
2. Willyes Emblem.
To be wize, and eke to Love,
Is granted scarce to God above.
3. Both combined in one.
Love is a thing more fell, than full of Gaul, than of Honny,
And to be wize, and Love, is a work for a God, or a Gods peer.
With a small voluntary Supplement of his own, on the other side, in
commendation of her most gracious, and thrice excellent Majesty: Not the like
Virgin again, in Asia, or Afric, or Europe,
For Royal Virtues, for Majesty, Bounty, Behavior.
Raptim, vti vides.
In both not passing a word, or two, corrected by me. Something more I have
of his; partly that very day begun, and partly continued since: but yet not so
perf^tly finished, that I dare commit the view, and examination thereof, to
Messer Immeritoes Censure, whom after those same two incomparable and
myraculous Gemini, Omni exceptione maiores, I recount, and chaulk up in the
Catalogue of our very principal English Aristarchi. Howbeit, I am nigh half
persuaded, that in time (siquidem vltima primis respondeant) for length,
breadth, and depth, it will not come far behind your Epithalamion Thamesis: the
rather, having so fair a president, and pattern before his Eyes, as I warrant
him, and he presumes to have of that: both Master Collinshead, and M.
Hollishead too, being together therein. But ever, and ever, me thinks your
great Catoes, Ecquid erit pretij, and our little Catoes, Res age quae prosunt,
make such a buzzing, and ringing in my head, that I have little joy to
animate, and encourage either you, or him to go forward, unless ye might make
account of some certain ordinary wages, at at the leastwise have your meat,
and drink for your days works. As for my self, howsoever I have toyed, and
tri^led heretofore, I am now taught, and I trust I shall shortly learn, (no
remedy, I must of mere necessity give you over in the plain field) to
employ my travail, and time wholly, or chiefly on those studies and
practizes, that carry as they say, meat in their mouth, having evermore
their eye upon the Title De pane lucrando, and their hand upon their
halfpenny. For, I pray now, what says M. Cuddie, alias you know who, in the
tenth AEglogue of the foresaid famous new Calender?

Piers, I have piped erst so long with pain,
That all mine Oten reeds been rent, and wore,
And my poor Muse has spent her spared store,
Yet little good has got, and much less gain.
Such pleasaunce makes the Grasshopper so poor,
And ligge so laid, when winter does her strain.
The Dapper Di^ties, that I wont denize,
To feed youths fancy, and the flocking fry,
Delighten much: what I the bent for thy?
They han the pleasure, I a s^lender prize.
I bea^e the hushe, the birds to them do fly,
What good thereof to Cuddy can arise?
But M^ster C^lli^^ Cloute is not every body, and albeit his old Companions,
Master Cuddy, and Master Hobbmoll ^e as little beholding to their Mistress
Poetry, as ever you w^st: yet he peradventure, by the means of her special
favor, and some personal privilege, may happily live by dying Pellicanes^
and purchase great lands, and Lordshippes, with the money, which his Calendar
and Dreams have, and will affourde him. Extra iocum, I like your Dreams
passingly well: and the rather, because they savor of that singular
extraordinary vein and invention, which I ever fancied most, and in a
manner admired only in Lucian, Petrarche, Aretine, Pasquill, and all the most
delicate, and fine conceited Grecians and Italians: (for the Romans to speak
of, are but very Ciphars in this kind:) whose chiefest endeavor, and drifte
was, to have nothing vulgar, but in some respect or other, and especially in
lively Hyperbolicall Amplifications, rare, queint, and odd in every point,
and as a man would say, a degree or two at the least, above the reach, and
compass of a common Scholars capacity. In which respect notwithstanding,
as well for the singularity of the manner, as the Divinity of the matter, I
heard once a Divine, prefer Saint John's Revelation before all the veriest
Maetaphysicall Visions, and iollyest conceited Dreams or Ecstasies, that ever
were devised by one or other, how admirable, or superexcelle^t soever they
seemed otherwise to the world. And truly I am so confirmed in this opinion,
that when I bethink me of the very notablest, and most wonderful
Prophetical, or Poetical Uision, that ever I read, or heard, me seems the
proportion is so unequal, that there hardly appears any semblaunce of
Comparison: no more in a manner (specially for Poets) than does between the
incomprehensible Wisdom of God, and the sensible Wit of Man. But what needs
this digression between you and me? I dare say you will hold your self
reasonably well satisfied, if your Dreams be but as well esteemed of in
England, as Petrarches Visions be in Italy: which I assure you, is the very
worst I wish you. But, see, how I have the Art Memoratiue at commandment. In
good faith I had once again nigh forgotten your Faerie Queen: howbeit by good
chance, I have now sent her home at the last, neither in better nor worse
case, than I found her. And must you of necessity have my Judgment of her in
deed? To be plain, I am void of al judgment, if your Nine Comoedies,
whereunto in imitation of Herodotus, you give the names of the Nine Muses, (and
in one man's fancy not unworthily) come not nearer Ariostoes Comoedies, either
for the finenesse of plausible Elocution, or the rareness of Poetical
Invention, than that Eluish Queen does to his Orlando Furioso, which
notwithstanding, you will needs seem to emulate, and hope to ouergo, as you
flatly professed your self in one of your last Letters. Besides that you know,
it has been the usual practice of the most exquisite and odd wits in all
nations, and specially in Italy, rather to show, and advance themselves that
way, than any other: as namely, those three notorious dyscoursing heads,
Bibiena, Machiauel, and Aretine did, (to let Bembo and Ariosto pa^^e) with the
great admiration, and wonderment of the whole country: being in deed reputed
matchable in all points, both for conceyt of Wit, and eloquent decyphering of
matters, either with Aristophanes and Menander in Greek, or with Plautus and
Terence in Latin, or with any other, in any other tongue. But I will not stand
greatly with you in your own matters. If so be the Faerye Queen be fairer in
your eye tha^ the Nine Muses, and Hobgoblin run away with the Garland from
Apollo: Mark what I say, and yet I will not say that I thought, but there an
End for this once, and fare you well, till God or some good Angel put you
in a better mind.

And yet, because you charge me somewhat suspitiously^ with an old promise, to
deliver you of that jealousy, I am so far from hyding mine own matters from
you, that lo, I must a needs be revealing my friends secreates, now an
honest Country Gentleman, sometimes a Scholar: At whose request, I bestowed
this pawlting ^ungrely Rhyme upon him, to present his Maistresse withal. The
parties shall be namelesse; saving, that the G^ntlewomans true, or
counterfaite Christen name, must necessarily be bewrayed.

of one, but wo^lde as well in Writing, as in Speaking, have them used, as
Monosyllaba, thus: heaven, seaevn, a leavn, as Master Ascham in his Toxophilus
does Yrne, commonly written Iron: Up to the pap his string did he pull, his
shafte to the hard yrne.


Especially the difference so manifestly appearing by the Pronunciation,
between these two, a leavn a clock and a leaven of Dowe, which lea -- ven
admits the Diastole, you speak of. But see, what absurdities this ill
favored Orthographye, or rather Pseudography, has engendered: and how one
error still breeds and begets an other. Have we not, Mooneth, for
Moonthe: sithence, for since: whilst, for whilste: fantasy, for fancy:
even, for evn: Devil, for Divl: God his wrath, for Gods wrath: and a
thousand of the same stamp: wherein the corrupt Orthography in the most,
has been the sole, or principal cause of corrupt Prosodye in over many?

Marry, I confess some words we have indeed, as for example, fayer, either
for beautiful, or for a Mart: air, both pro acre, and pro haerede, for we
say not Heir, but plain Air for him to (or else Scoggins Aier were a poor
jest) which are commonly, and may indifferently be used either way^s. For you
shall as well, and as ordinarily hear fayer, as fair, and Aier, as Air, and
both alike: not only of diverse and sundry persons, but often of the very
same: otherwhiles using the one, otherwhiles the other: and so died, or did:
spied, or spide: tried, or tried: fire, or fire: myer, or mire: with an
infinyte company of the same sort: sometime Monosyllaba, sometime Polysyllaba.

To conclude both points in one, I dare swear privately to your self, and
will defend publicly against any, it is neither Her^sie, nor Paradox, to
set down, and stand upon this assertion, (notwithstanding all the
Preiudices and Presumptions to the contrary, if they were ten times as many
mo^) that it is not, either Position, or Dipthong, or Diastole, or any like
Grammar School Device, that does, or can indeed, either make long or short,
or increase, or diminish the number of Sillables, but only the common allowed,
and received Prosodye: taken up by an universal consent of all, and continued
by a general use, and Custom of all. Wherein nevertheless I grant, after
long advise, and diligent observation of particulars, a certain Uniform
Analogy, and Concordance, being in process of time espied out. Sometime this,
sometime that, has been noted by good wits in their Analyzes, to fall out
generally alyke? and as a man would say, regularly in all, or most words:
as Position, Dipthong, and the like: not as first, and essential causes of
this, or that effect, (here lies the point) but as Secundarie and Accidental
Signs, of this, or that Quality.

It is the vulgar, and natural Mother Prosodye, that alone works the feate,
as the only supreme Foundresse, and Reformer of Position, Dipthong,
Orthographie, or whatsoever else: whose Affirmatiues are nothing worth, if she
once conclude the Negative: and whose secundae intentiones must have their
whole allowance and warrante from her primae. And therefore in short, this is
the very short, and the long: Position neither makes short, nor long in
our Tongue, but so far as we can get her good leave. Peradventure, upon the
diligent suruewe, and examination of Particulars, some the like Analogy and
Uniformity, might be found out in some other respect, that should as
universally and Canonically hold amongst us, as Position does with the
Latins and Greeks. I say, (peradventure,) because, having not yet made any
special Observation, I dare not precisely affirm any general certainty:
albeit I presume, so good and sensible a Tongue, as ours is, being wythall so
like itself, as it is, cannot but have something equipollent, and
counteruaileable to the best Tongues, in some one such kind of conformity,
or other. And this forsooth is all the Artificial Rules and Precepts, you are
like to borrowe of one man at this time.

Sed amabo te, ad Corculi tui delicatissimas Literas, propediem, qua^ potero,
accuratissime: tot interim illam exquisitissimis salutibus, atque
salutationibus impertiens, quot habet in Capitulo, capill^s semiaureos,
semiargenteos, semig emmeos. Quid quaeris? Per tuam Venerem altera Rosalindula
est: eamque non alter, sed idem ille, (tua, vt ante, bona cum gratia) copiose
amat Hobbinolus. O mea Domina Immerito, mea bellissima Collina Clouta, multo
plus plurimum salve, atque vale.

You know my ordinary Postscripte: you may communicate as much, or as little,
as you list, of these Patcheries, and fragments, with the two Gentlemen: but
there a straw, and you love me: not with any else, friend or foe, one, or
other: unless happily you have a special desire to imparte some part hereof, to
my good friend M. Daniel Rogers: whose courtesies are also registered in my
Marble b^^ke. You know my meaning.

Nosti manum and stylum.

G.
TWO OTHER, very commendable Letters, of the same men's vvriting: both touching
the foresaid Artificial Versifying, and certain other Particulars: More lately
delivered unto the Printer.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by H. Bynneman, dwelling in Thames streate, near unto
Baynardes Castle.

Anno Domini. 1580.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the Worshipful his very singular good friend, Master G. H. Fellovv of
Trinity Hall in Cambridge.
GOod Master G. I perceive by your most courteous and friendly Letters your good
will to be no less in deed, than I always esteemed. In recompense whereof,
think I beseech you, that I will spare neither speech, nor writing, nor aught
else, whenever, and wheresoever occasion shall be offered me: yea, I will not
stay, till it be offered, but will seek it, in all that possibly I may. And that
you may perceive how much your Counsel in all things prevails with me, and how
altogether I am ruled and ouer-ruled thereby: I am now determined to alter mine
own former purpose, and to subscribe to your aduizeme^t: being notwithstanding
resolved still, to abide your farther resolution. My principal doubts are these.
First, I was minded for a while to have intermitted the uttering of my
writings: least by overmuch cloying their noble ears, I should gather a
contempt of my self, or else seem rather for gain and commodity to do it,
for some sweetness that I have already tasted. Then also me seems the work
too base for his excellent Lordship, being made in Honor of a private
Personage unknown, which of some yl-willers might be vpbra^ded, not to be so
worthy, as you know she is: or the matter not so weighty, that it should be
offered to so weighty a Personage: or the like. The self former Title still
likes me well enough, and your fine Addition (...) less. If these, and the
like doubts, may be of importance in your seeming, to frustrate any part of
your advice, I beeseeche you, without the least self love of your own
purpose, council me ^or the best: and the rather do it faith^ullye, and
carefully, for that, in all things I attribute so much to your judgment, that
I am evermore content to ad^^hil^te mine own determinations, in respect
thereof. And indeed for your self to, it sits with you now, to call your
wits, and senses together, (which are always at call) when occasion is so
fairly offered of Estimation and Preferment. For, whiles the iron is hot, it
is good striking, and minds of Nobles vary, as their Estates. Verum ne quid
durius.

I pray you bethink you well ^ereof, good Master G. and forthwith write me
those two or three special points and caueats for the nonce, De quibus in
superioribus illis mellitissimis, longissimisque Litteris tuis. Your desire to
hear of my late being with her Majesty, must dye in it self. As for the
two worthy Gentlemen, Master Sydney, and Master Dyer, they have me, I thank
them, in some use of familiarity: of whom, and to whom, what speech passes
for your credit and estimation, I leave your self to conceive, having
always so well conceived of my unfeigned affection, and zeal toward you. And
now they have proclaimed in their (...), a general surceasing and silence of
balde Rymers, and also of the very best to: in stead whereof, they have by
authotie of their whole Senate, prescribed certain Laws and rules of
Quantities of English sillables, for English Verse: having had thereof already
great practi^e, and drawn me to their faction. New Books I hear of none,
but only of one, that writing a certain Book, called The School of Abuse^
and dedicating it to Master Sidney, was for his labor scorned: if at least it
be in the goodness of that nature to scorn. Such folly is it, not to
regard aforehande the inclination and quality of him, to whom we dedicate
our Books. Such might I happily incur, entituling My Slomber, and the
other Pamphlets, unto his honor. I meant them rather to Master Dyer. But I am,
of late, more in love with my English Uersifying, than with Ryming: which I
should have done long since, if I would the^ have followed your council. Sed
te solum iam tum suspicabar cum^ Aschanio sapere: nunc Aulam video egregios
alere Poetas Anglicos. Master E. K. heartily desires to be commended unto your
Worship: of whom, what account he makes, your self shall hereafter
perceive, by his paynefull and dutiful Uerses of your self.

Thus much was written at Westminster yesternight: but coming this morning,
being the sixteenth of October, to Mystresse Kerkes, to have it delivered to
the Carrier, I received your letter, sent me the l^ste week: whereby I
p^rc^iue you otherwhiles continue your old exercise of Uersifying in English:
which glory I had now thought should have been only ours here at London,
and the Court.

Trust me, your Uerses I like passingly well, and envy your hidden pains in
this kind, or rather malign, and grudge at your self, that would not once
imparte so much to me. But once, or twice, you make a breach in Master
Drants Rules: quod tamen condonabimus tanto Poetae, tuaeque ipsius maximae in
his rebus autoritati. You shall see when we meet in London, (which, when it
shall be, certifye us) how fast I have followed after you, in that Course:
beware, least in time I overtake you. Veruntamen te solum sequar, (vt
saepenumero sum professus,) nunquam sane assequar, dum viuam. And now requite
I you with the like, not with the very best, but with the very shortest,
namely with a few Iambickes: I dare warrant, they be precisely perfect for the
feet (as you can easily judge) and vary not one inch from the Rule. I will
imparte yours to Master Sidney, and Master Dyer, at my next going to the
Court. I pray you, keep mine close to your self, or your very entire
friends, Master Preston, Master Still, and the rest.

Iambicum Trimetrum.
Unhappy Verse, the witness of my vnhappi^ state,
Make thy self fluttring wings of thy fast flying
Thought, and fly forth unto my Love, whersoeuer she be:
Whether lying reastlesse in heavy bed, or else
Sitting so cheerelesse at the cheerful boorde, or else
Playing alone careless on her heavenly Virginals.
If in Bed, tell her, that my eyes can take no rest:
If at Boorde, tell her, that my mouth can eat no meat:
If at her Virginals, tell her, I can hear no mirth.
Asked why? say: Waking Love suffers no sleep:
Say, that raging Love does appall the weak stomach:
Say, that lamenting Love marreth the Musical.
Tell her, that her pleasures were wont to lull me asleep:
Tell her, that her beauty was wont to feed mine eyes:
Tell her, that her sweet Tongue was wont to make me mirth^
Now do I nightly waste, wanting my kindly rest:
Now do I daily starve, wanting my lively food:
Now do I always dye, wanting thy timely mirth.
And if I waste, who will bewail my heavy chance?
And if I starve, who will record my cursed end?
And If I dye, who will say: this was, Immerito?
I thought once again here to have made an end, with ^ hearty Vale, of the
best fashion: but lo, an ylfauoured myschaunce. My last farewell, whereof I
made great account, and much marvelled you should make no mention thereof, I
am now told, (in the Devils name) was thorough one man's negligence quite
forgotten, but should now undoubtedly have been sent, whether I had come,
or no. Seeing it can now be no otherwise, I pray you take all together, with all
their faults: and now I hope, you will vouchsafe me an answer of the
largest size, or else I tell you true, you shall be very deep in my debte:
notwythstandyng, this other sweet, but short letter, and fine, but few
Uerses. But I would rather I might yet see your own good self, and receive
a Reciprocal farewell from your own sw^et^ mouth.

Ad Ornatissimum virum, multis iamdiu nominibus clarissimum, G. H. Immerito
sui, mox in Gallias nauigaturi, (...).
SIc malus egregium, sic non inimicus Amicum:
Sicque nouus veterem iubet ipse Poeta Poetam,
Saluere, ac calo post secula multa secundo
Iam reducem, calo mage, quam nunc ipse, secundo
Vtier. Ecce Deus, (modo sit Deus ille, renixum
Qui vocet in scelus, and iuratos perdat amores)^
Ecce Deus mihi clara dedit modo signa Mari^us,
Et sua veliger^ lenis parat AEquora Ligno,
Mox sulcanda, suas etiam pater AE^lus Ira^
Ponit, and ingentes animos Aquil^nis --
Cuncta vijs sic apta meis: ego solus ineptus.
Nam mihi nescio quo men's saucia vul^ere, dudum
Fluctuat ancipiti Pelago, dum Na^ita pr^ram
Inualidam validu^ rapit huc Amor, and rapit illuc.
Consilijs Ratio melioribus vsa, decusque
Immortale leui diffessa Cupidinis Arcu.
Angimur hoc dubio, and portu vexamur in ipso.
Magne pharetrati nunc t^ contemptor Amoris,
(Id tibi Dij nomen precor haud impu^e remittant)
Hos nodos exsolue, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.
Spiritus ad summos, scio, te generosus Honores
Exstimulat, maiusque docet spirare Poetam,
Quam leuis est Amor, and tamen haud leuis est Amor omnis.
Ergo nihil lauds reputa^ aequale per^nni,
Praeque sacrosancta splendoris imagine tanti,
Caetera, quae vecors, vti Numina, vulg^^ a^orat,
Praedia, Amicitias, vrbana peculia, Nummos,
Quaeque placent oculis, form^^, spectacula, Amores
Conculcare soles, vt humum, and ludibria sensus.
Digna meo certe Haruejo sententia, digna
Oratore amplo, and generoso pectore, quam non
Stoica formidet veterum Sapientia vinclis
Sancire ^ternis: sapor haud ^amen omnibus idem.
Dicitur effaeti proles facunda Laertae,
Quamlibet ignoti iactata per aequora Caeli,
Inque procelloso longum exsul gurgite ponto,
Prae tamen amplexu lachrymosae Coniugis, Ortus
Caelestes Diuumque thoros sprenisse beatos.
Tantum Amor, and Mulier, vel Amore potentior. Illum
Tu tamen illudis: ^ua Magnificentia tanta est:
Praeque subumbrata Splendoris Imagi^e tanti,
Praeque illo Meritis fam^sis nomine parto,
Caetera, quae Vecors, vti N^mina, vnlgus adorat,
Praedia, Amicitias, armenta, peculia, nummos.
Quaeque placent oculis, f^rmas, spectacula, Amores.
Quaeque placent ori, quaeque auribus, omnia temnis.
Nae tu grande sapis, Sapor at sapienti^ non est:
Omnis and in paruis been qui scit de sipuisse,
Saepe supercilijs palman^ sapientilius ^ufer^.
Ludit Aristippum m^do ^^trica Tur^a Sophorum.
Mitia purpureo moderantem verb^ Tyranno
Ludit Aristippus dictamina vana Sophorum,
Quos leuis emensi male torquet Culici^ vmbra:
Et quisquis placuisse Stude^ Her^ibus alt^^,
Desipuisse studet, ^ic gratia cre^^it ineptis.
Denique Laurigeris quisquis s^^a tempora vittis,
Insignire volet, Populoque placere fa^enti,
Desipere insanus discit, turpemque pudend^
Stultitia laudem quaerit. P^ter Ennius vnu^
Dictus in innumeris sapiens: laudatur at ips^^
Carmina vesano fudisse liquentio vino.
Nec tu pace tua, nostri Cato Maxim sacli,
Nomen honorati sacrum m^reare Poelae,
Quantamuis illustre canas, and nobile Carmen,
Ni stultire velis, sic Sultorum omnia plena.
Tuta sed in medio superest via gurgite, n^m Qui
Nec reliquis nimium v^lt desipuisse vid^ri,
Nec sapuisse nimis, Sapientem dixeris vnum.
Hinc te merserit vndae, illinc combusserit Ignis.
Nec tu delici^s nimis aspernare fluentes,
Nec sero Dominam, venient^m in vota, nec Auru^
Si sapis, ablatum, (Curijs ea, Fabricisque
Linque viris miseris miseranda Sophismata: quondam^
Grande sui decus ij, nostri sed dedecus aeui:)
Nec sectare nimis. Res vtraque crimine plena.
Hoc been qui callet, (si quis tamen hoc been callet)
Scribe, vel invito sapientem hunc Socra^e solum.
Vis facit vna p^os: Instos facit altera: and altra
Egregie cordata, ac fortia pectora: verum
Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci
Dij mihi, dulce diu dederant: verum vtile nunque:
Vtile nunc etiam, o vtinam quoque dulce dedissent.
Dij mihi, (quippe Dijs aeq^i^alia maxima par^is)
Ni nimis inuid^ant morta^^bus esse ^^^tis,
Dulce si^^^l tribuisse queant, simul vtile: tanta
Sed Fortuna tua est: pariter quaeque vtile, quaeque
Dulce dat ad placitum: saeuo nos sydere nati
Quaesitum imus eam per inhospita Caucasa longe^
Perque Pyrem^^os montes, Babilonaque turpem,
Quod si quaesitum nec ibi invenerimus, inge^s
AEquor inexhaustis permensi erroribus, vltra
Fluctibus in medijs s^cij quaeremus Vlyssis.
Passibus inde Deam fessis commit abimur aegram,
Nobile cui furtum qu^renti defuit orbis.
Namque sin^ pudet in patrio, tenebrisque pudendis
Non nimis ingenio Iuuonem infoelice, virentes,
Officijs frustra deperdere vilibus Annos,
Frugibus and vacuas speratis cernere spicas.
Ibimus ergo statim: (quis eunti fausta precetur?)
Et pede Clibosas f^sso calcabimus Alps.
Q^is dabit interea condit a^ rore Britanno,
Quis tibi Litterulas? quis carmen amore petulcum^
Musa sub O^balij desueta cac^mine monti^,
Flebit inexhausto tam long a silentia planctu,
Lug^bitque sacrum lachrymis Helicona tacentem.
Harueiusque bonus, (charus licet omnibus idem,
Idque suo merito, prope suauior omnibus vnus^)
Angelus and Gabriel, (qu^muis co^itatus amicis
Innumeris, geniumque choro stipatus amaeno
Immerito tamen vnum absentem saepe requiret,
Opt^bitque, Vtinam meus hi^ Edmundus adesset,
Qui noua scripsisset, nec Amores conticuiss^^,
Ipse s^os, and saepe animo, verbisque benignis
Fausta precaretur: Deus illum al^quando reducat etc.
Plura vellem per Ch^^ites, sed non lic^t per Musas.
Vale, Vale plurimu^, Mi amabilissime Harucie, meo curdi, meorum
omnium long charissime.
I was minded also to have sent you some English verses: or Rymes, for a
farewell: but by my Troth, I have no spare time in the world, to think on such
Toys, that you know will demand a freer head, than mine is presently. I
beseech you by all your Courtesies, and Graces, let me be answered, ere I go:
which will be, (I hope, I fear, I think) the next week, if I can be
dispa^ched of my Lord. I go thither, as sent by him, and maintained most what
of him: and there am to employ my time, my body, my mind, to his Honors
service. Thus with many superhartie Commendations, and Recommendations to your
self, and all my friends with you, I end my last Farewell, not thinking any
more to write unto you, before I go: and withal committing to your faith^ull
Credence the eternal Memory of our everlasting friendship, the in^ialable
Memory of our unspotted friendship, the sacred Memory of our vowed
friendship: which I beseech you Continue with usual writings, as you may, and
of all things let me hear some News from you. As gentle M. Sidney, I thank
his good Worship, has required of me, and so promised to do again. Qui
^^onet, vt facias, quod iam facis, you know the rest. You may always send
them most safely to me by Mistress Kerke, and by none other. So once again,
and yet once more^ Farewell most heartily, mine own good Master H. and love me,
as I love you, and think upon poor Immerito, as he thinks upon you.

Leycester House. This.5. of October. 2579.

Per mare, per terras,
Viuus, mortuusque,
Tuus Immerito.
To my very Friend, M. Immerito.
LIberalissimo Signor Immerito, in good soothe my poor Storehouse will
presently affourd me nathing, either to recompense, or counteruaile your gentle
Masterships, long, large, lavish, Luxurious, Laxatiue Letters withal, (now a
Gods name, when did I ever in my life, hunt the Letter before? but, belike,
there is no remedy, I must needs be even with you once in my days,) but only
for soothe, a few Millions of Recommendations, and a running Coppie of the
Uerses enclosed. Which Uerses, ( extra iocum) are so well done in Lattin by two
Doctors, and so well Translated into English by one odd Gentleman, and
generally so well allowed of all, that chanced to have the perusing of them:
that trust me, G.H. was at the first hardly entreated, to shame himself, and
tru^ly, now blusheth, to see the first Letters of his name, stand so near
their Names, as of necessity they must. You know yt Greek proverb, (...), and
many colors, (as in a manner every thing else) that severally by themselves,
seem reasonably good, and fresh enough, being compared, and ouermatched with
their betters, are maruellously disgraced, and as it were, dashed quite out of
Countenance. I am at this inst^n^, very busilye, and hotly employed in
certain great and seri^us affairs: whereof, notwithstanding (for all your
vowed, and long exp^rimented s^cre^^^) you are not like to hear a word more
at the most, till I my self see a World more at the least. And therefore,
for this once I beseech you (notwithstanding your great expectation of I know
not what Uolumes for an aunsweare) content your good self, with these
Presents, (pardon me, I came lately out of a Scriueners shop) and in li^u of
many gentle Farewels, and goodly God be wyes, at your departure: give me once
again leave, to play the Coun^aylour a while, if it be but to justify your
liberal Mastershippes, Nostri Cato maxim sacli: and I con^ure you by the
Contents of the Uerses, and Rymes ^nclosed, and by all the good, and bad
Spirits, that attend upon the Authors themselves, immediately upon the
contemplation thereof, to abandon all other fooleries, and honor Virtue, the
only immortal and suruiuing Accident amongst so many mortal, and
euer-perishing Substaunces. As I strongly presume, so good a Terte, so clearkly
handeled, by three so famous Doctors, as old Master Wythipole, and the other
two be, may easily, and will fully persuade you, howsoever you tush at the
fourths unsuitable Paraphrase. But a word or two, to your large, lauishe,
laxatiue Letters, and then for this time, Adieu. Of my credit, your doubts
are not so redoubted, as your self ^uer suspiciously imagine: as I purpose
shortly to aduize you more at large. Your hot iron, is so hot, that it
strikes me to the heart, I dar^ not come near to strike it: The Tide
tarryeth no mann^, but many a good manne is feign to tarry the Tide. And I
know some, which could be content to be their own Caruers, that are glad
to thank other for their courtesy: But Beggars, they say, must be no
choosers.

Your new-founded (...) I honor more, than you will or can suppose: and make
greater account of the two worthy Gentlemenne, than of two hundredth Dionisij
Areopagitae, or the very notablest Senators, that ever Athens did affourde
of that number.

Your English Trimetra I like better, than perhaps you will easily believe:
and am to requite them with better, or worse, at more convenient leisure.
Marry, you must pardon me, I fin^e not your warrant so sufficiently good, and
substauntiall in Law, that it can persuade me, they are all, so precisely
perfect for the Feet, as your self ouer-partially ween, and ouer-confidently
auouche: especially the third, which has a foot more than a Lowce (a
wondrous deformity in a right and pure Senarie) and the sixte, which is
also in the same Predicament, unless happly one of the feet be sawed off with
a pair of Syncopes: and then should the Orthographie have testified so much:
and in stead of H^au^nli Virgin^ls, you should have written, Hea^nl^ Virgn^ls:
and Virgn^ls again in the ninth, and should have made a Curtoll of Imm^r^t^ in
the last: being all notwithstanding usual, and tolerable enough, in a
mixte, and licentious Iambicke: and of two euilles, better (no doubt) the
first, than the last: a third superfluous syllable, tha^ a dull Spondee.
Then me thinks, you have in my fancy somewhat too many Spondees beside: and
whereas Trochee sometime presumes in the first place, as namely in the second
Uerse, Make thy, which thy, by your Maistershippes own authority must
needs be short, I shall be feign to supplye the office of the Art
Memoratiue, and put you in mind of a pretty Fable in Abstemio the Italian,
implying thus much, or rather thus little in effect.

A certain lame man being invited to a solemn Nuptial Feast, made no more
ado, but sat me him roundlye down foremoste at the highest end of the
Table. The Master of the feast, suddenly spying his presumption, and hansomely
remoouing him from thence, placed me this haulting Gentleman below at the
nether and of the bourd: alleging for his defense the common verse: Seeds
nulla datur^ praeterquam sexta Trochae^: and pleasantly alluding to this foot,
which standing upon two syllables, the one long, the other short, (much like,
of a like, his guestes feet) is always thrust down to the last place, in a
true Hexameter, and quite thrust out of doors in a pure, and just Senarie.
Now Sir, what think you^ I began to think with my self, when I began to
read your warrant first: so boldly, and venterously set down in so formal,
and autentique words, as these, Precisely perfect, and not an inch from the
Rule? Ah Syrrha, and Jesus Lord, thought I, have we at the last gotten one, of
whom his old friends and Companions may justly glory, In eo solum peccat,
quod nihil peccat: and that is yet more exact, and precise in his English
Comicall Iambickes, than ^uer M. Watson himself was in his Latt^n Tragical
Iambickes, of whom M. Ascham reports, that he would never to this day suffer
his famous Absolon to come abroad, only because Anapaestus in Locis paribus,
is twice, or thrice used in stead of Iambus? A small fault, ywisse, and such a
one in M. Aschams own opinion, as perchance would never have been espied,
no neither in Italy, nor in Fraeunce. But when I came to the curious scanning,
and fingering of every foot, and s^llable: Lo here, quoth I, M. Watsons
Anapaestu^ for all the world. A good horse, that trippeth not once in a
journey: and M. Immerito does, but as M. Watson, and in a manner all other
Iambici have done before him: marry he might have spared his preface, or at y^
least, that same restrictiue, and streightlaced t^rme, Precisely, and all had
been well enough: and I assure you, of my self, I believe, no piece of a fault
marked at all. But this is the Effect of warrantes, and perhaps the Error
may rather proceed of his Master, M. Drantes Rule, than of himself. Howsoever
it is, the matter is not great, and I always was, and will ever continue of
this Opinion, Pauca multis condonanda vitia Virtutibus, especially these being
no Vitia neither, in a common and licencious Iambicke. Verum ista obiter, non
quidem contradicendi animo, aut ^tiam corrigendi mihi creed: sed nostro illo
Academico, pristinoque more ratiocinandi. And to say truth, partly too, to
requite your gentle courtesy in beginning to me, and noting I know not what
breach in your gorbellyed Masters Rules: which Rules go for good, I perceive,
and keep a Rule, where there be no better in presence. My self neither saw
them, nor heard of them before: and therefore will neither praise them, nor
dispraise them now: but upon the suruiewe of them, and farther conference,
(both which I desire) you shall soon hear one man's opinion too or fro. Your
self remember, I was wont to have some prejudice of the man: and I still
remain a favorer of his deserved, and just commendation. Marry in these
points, you know, Partiality in no case, may have a foot: and you remember
mine old Stoicall exclamation^ Fie on childish affection, in the discoursing,
and deciding of school matters. This I say, because you charge m^ with an
unknown authority: which for aught I know yet, may as well be either
insufficient, or faulty, as otherwise: and I dare more than half promise, (I
dare not say, warrant) you shall always in these kind of controversies,
^inde me nighe hand answerable in mine own defense. Reliqua omnia, quae de
hac supersunt Anglicorum versuum ratione, in aliud tempus reseruabimus, ociosum
magis. Your Latin Farewell is a goodly brave yonkerly piece of work, and
Goddilge ye, I am always maruellously beholding unto you, for your bountiful
Titles: I hope by that time I have been resident a year or two in Italy, I
shall be better qualifyed in this kind, and more able to requite your lauishe,
and magnificent liberality that way. But to let Titles and Tittles pass, and
come to the very point in deed, which so near touches my lusty Trauayler
to the quick, and is one of the praedominant humors yt reign in our common
Youths: Heus mi tu, bone proce, magne muli^rcularum amator, egregie Pamphile,
eum aliquando tandem, qui t^ manet, qui mulierosos omnes, qui vniuersam
Faeministarum sectam, Respice finem. And I shall then be content to appeal to
your own learned experience, whether it be, or be not, too too true: quod dici
solet ame saepe: ate ipso nonnunque: ab expertis omnibus quotidie: Amare
amarum: Nec deus, vt perhibent, Amor est, sed amaror, and error: and quicquid
in eandem solet sententiam Empiric^^s aggregari. Ac site mihi quide^ Agrippa
Ouidianam illam, de Art Amandi, (...) videtur correxisse, meritoque, de Art
Meretricandi, inscripsisse. Nec vero inepte alius, Amatores Alchumistis
comparauit, aureos, argenteosque montes, atque fontes lepide somniantibus, sed
interim misere immanibus Carbonum fumis propemodum occaecatis, atque etiam
suffocatis: praeterque celebratum illum Adami Paradisum, alium esse quendam
praedicauit, stultorum quoque Amatorumque mirabilem Paradisum: illum vere, hunc
phantastice, fanaticeque beatorum. Sed haec alias, fortassis vberius. Credit
me, I will never linne baityng at you, til I have rid you quite of this
yonkerly, and womanly humor. And as for your speedy and hasty travel: me
thinks I dare still wager all the Books and writings in my study, which you know,
I esteem of greater value, than all the gold and silver in my purse, or chest,
that you will not, (and yet I must take heed, how I make my bargain with so
subtle and intricate a Sophister) that you shall not, I say, be gone over
Sea, for all your saying, neither the next, nor the next week. And then
peradventure I may personally perform your request, and bestow the sweetest
Farewell, upon your sweetmouthed Mashippe, that so unsweet a Tongue, and so
sour a pair of Lipp^s can affoorde. And, think you I will leave my Il
Pellegrino so? No I trow. My Lords Honor, the expectation of his friends, his
own credit and preferment, tell me, he must have a most special care, and
good r^garde of employing his travail to the best. And therefore I am studying
all this fortnight, to read him such a Lecture in Homers Odysses, and Virgils
AEneads, that I dare undertake he shall not need any further instruction, in
Master Turlers Trauayler, or Master Zuingers Methodus Apodemica: but in his
whole travail abroad, and ever after at home, shall show himself as very
liuelye and absolute picture of Ulysses and AEneas. Whereof I have the stronger
hope he must needs prove a most capable and apt subject (I speak to a
Logician) having the self same Goddesses and Graces attendant upon his body
and mind, that evermore guided them, and their actions: especially ye ones
Minerua, and the others Venus: that is (as one Doctor expounds it) the
pollitique head, and wise government of the one: and the amiable behavior,
and gracious courtesy of the other: the two very principal, and most
singular Companions, of a right Trauailer: and as perhaps one of our subtle
Logicians would say, the two inseparable, and indivisible accidents of the
foresaid Subjects. De quibu^ ipsis, caeterisque omnibus artifici^ Apodemici
instrumentis: inprimisque de Homerica illa, diuinaque herba (...)) qua Vlissem
suum Mercurius, aduersus Cyrcea and pocula, and carmina, and venena, morbosque
omnes praemuniuit: and coram, vti spero, breui: and long, vti soleo,
copiosius: and fortasse etiam, aliquanto, quam soleo, cum subtilius, tum vero
Pollitice, Pragmaticeque magis. Interim tribus eris syllabis contentus, ac
valebis. Trinity Hall, still in my Gallerie. 23. October. 1579. In haste.

Yours, as you know. G. H.

Certain Latin Verses, of the frailty and mutabilitie of all things, saving
only Virtue: made by M. Doctor Norton, for the righ^ Worship^^^^, M. Thomas
Sackford, Master of Requests unto her Majesty. (...).
Th. TEmpora furtiuo morsu laniantur amaena,
S Sensim florescunt, occubitura breui.
A Anni vere salit, Senio mox conficiendus,
C Cura, labor ditant, non ^ademque premunt?
F Fallax, vel vigili studio Sapientia parta:
O Oh, and magnatum gloria saepe iacet,
R Res inter varias fluimus, ruimusque gradatim:
D. Dulcia Virtutis praemia sola manent.
The same paraphrastically varied by M. Doctor Gouldingam^ at the request of
old^ M. Wythipoll of Ipswiche.
T. TEmpora furtiuo labuntur dulcia cursu,
S Subsiduntque breui, quae viguere diu.
A Autumno capitur, quicquid nouus educat annus:
C Curta Iuuentutis gaudia, Fata secant.
F Fallax Ambitio est, atque anxia cura tenendi,
O Obscurum decus, and nomen inane Soph^.
R Res Fors humanas incerto turbine voluit,
D. Dulcia Virtutis praemia sola manent.
Old Master Wythipols own Translation.
Our merry days, by theeuish bit are plucked, and torn aw^y,
And every lusty growing thing, in short ti^^ does decay.
The pleasant Spring times joy, how soon it grows old?
And wealth that gotten is with care, does noy as much, be bold.
No wisdom had with Travail great, is for to trust in deed,
For great Men's state we see decay, and fall down like a weed.
Thus by degrees we fleet; and sink in worldly things full fast,
But Virtues sweet and due rewards stand sure in every blast.
The same Paraphrastically varied by Master G. H. at M. Peter Wythipolles
request, for his Father.
THese pleasant days, and Months, and years, by stelth do pass apace,
And do not things, that flourish most, soon fade, and lose their grace?
Jesus, how soon the Spring of year, and Spring of youthful rage,
Is come, and gone, and overcome, and ouergone with age?
In pain is gain, but does not pain as much detract from health,
As it does add unto our store, when most we roll in wealth?
Wisdom her self must have her doom, and grauest must to grave,
And mightiest power sib to a flower: what then remains to crave?
Now up, now down, we flow, and row in seas of worldly cares,
Virtue alone eternal is, and she the Laurel wears.
L' Enuoy.
Soon said, soon writ, soon learnd: soon trimly done in prose, or vers^:
Beleeud of some, practizd of few, from Cradle to their Hearse.
Virtut^^non tibi Feci.
M. Peter Wythipoll.

Et Virtuti, and mihi:
Virtuti, ad laudem:
Mihi, ad vsum.
FINIS.

