THE MYSTERY OF GODLINESS: A GENERAL DISCOVRSE OF THE REASON THAT IS IN
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

By WILLIAM SPARK Divinity Reader at Magd: Coll: in Oxford, and Parson of
Blechly in B^^kingham-shire.

1. Cor. 14.19. I had rather speak five words with my understanding that I
might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.

1. Pet. 3.15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear.

OXFORD Printed for WILLIAM WEBB. 1628.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, GEORGE DVKE OF BVCKINGHAM, LORD HIGH ADMIRAL OF
ENGLAND etc. KNIGHT OF THE HONORABLE Order of the Garter.
THE singular grace and Munificent bounty, which your Grace pleased to
vouchsafe my humble petition, for repair of the Parish Church, where I live
under your Honorable Patronage, most Noble Lord, binds, and at once
imboldneth me to make this public acknowledgement, having labored in the
spiritual building, whilst the material was in hand, to set up through lights
in the house of God. Such pious deeds of Gracious Lords, and Noble
Benefactours, are worthy to be reported after many reasons, now principally for
this, that the world may discern against the slanderous adversaries of true
religion, that she has not been barren, nor unfruitful of good works,
whilst in a few late years, more Churches, Colleges, and Hospitals have
been repaired, and built, then in many ages of their devoutest ignorance and
superstition; In the mean time what havocke have they made of the Churches,
not breaking down the carved work with axes, and hammers, but devouring the
living temples of the holy Ghost with fire and sword, and setting up their
abomination of desolation, where they can prevail? Your Grace will go on to
do good as you are great, and to Patronise the truth, which here comes into
your presence, in her naked simplicity, craving to go forth honored with your
name and authority: Knowing that God will honor them that honor him, 1 Samuel
2.30.
but they that despise him shall be lightly esteemed. To him therefore, having
learned of the good courtier Nehemiah, Nehem: 2.4.
to direct our prayers even whilst we make petition unto Princes, I bow the
knees of my soul, that he will be pleased to add of his Grace to your Grace
still more and more, who is able to make all graces abound toward you, 2. Cor.
9.8.11.
that you always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work, which shall cause by us many thank giuings unto God.

Your Grace his faithful Chaplain and humble servant in Christ Jesus WILLIAM
SPARK.

The Preface to the Reader.
TRVTH proves it self, and disproues error. Which if it might be fully, and
fairly cleared in the great mystery of revealed grace, would soon put to
silence the endless controversies of religion, with all honest hearts. Wherein
many have at all times languished away, and which being now grown from words
to blows have wasted the Churches, and shaken the faith of the most, insomuch
that if Christ should now come Luke 18.8.
should he find faith on the earth, when Mat. 24.12.
the love of so many is waxen cold? Religion has been so long disputed that
now it may be questioned whether there be any or no, most men seeming to be
resolved according to that of Nigidius in A Gellius, Religentem esse oportet,
Noct. Attic. l. 4. c. 9.
religiosum nefas. Whose practice is either vanished into an empty speculation,
or merely pretended under an idle profession. Was ever chaste Virgin, or
matron so shamefully handled by the most debaushed ruffians, as sacred truth
has been by her love making paramours whilst every faction haling her to
themselves, they have torn her peece-meale amongst them? That we need not
serve her now, as once the Levite did his concubine, Judge. 19.29.
to cut her in pieces, and to send her into all the coasts of Israel. Every
tribe has a part, and that they make much of, (more then of the whole) which
best serves their own turns. How infinitely is the pretending head swollen
bigger then the whole body, being long since fallen from it? Never was any
Saints relic, so improved, and vbiquitated. How vast are the secular arms
grown, being cemented to that monstrous head, without neck, or shoulders? A
Catholic head with Catholic arms. How far are the legs divaricated
beyond the stride of any Colossus, as if they would never come together again,
to walk one and the same way? How is the body pined the while, and utterly
wasted away, whilst every part stands apart, as in the Menen. Agrip. Live. l. 2.
Apologue, refusing to labor or take care for the whole? Is not this the
truth? Thus has she been used, whose life is Christ, whose body is the
Church, in the house of her friends. They have peirced my hands and my feet,
yea my head, and my side, they may tell all my bones, there is no whole part in
me. And they who should have taken down her tortured body, imbalmed, and
wrapped it up in fine linen, until it rose again, have played the curious
Anatomists, and dissected every member, with so many subtle quaeries and
disputes that it is almost as hard to find the truth in their books, as in
the others lives. Which could we see as fair as she is in her just proportion,
and comely feature, such is her grace that she would even ravish our souls
with insatiable love, and delight, and would make us all of one mind, minding
that one thing which is necessary. There have not wanted skillful hands I
confess, to gather up, and put together her dismembered limbs, to adorn and
set her out in her lively beauty, and I think many of them had the Spirit of
God to reviue her again, and to quicken her. Since she has brought forth
many children unto God. And now what more? No more, but the same again, in an
other manner, if by any means this vvayvvard age not pleased with varieties,
may be persuaded 2 These. 2.10.
to receive the love of the truth that we may be saved. Likeness begets
liking, and looks beget love. I have therefore endeavored to present unto
rational men a view of the reason that is in Christian Religion. The reason I
say, not of it, for it is of faith, which has no vvorth if the truth be
obvious; but the reason that is in it, how it is thus in the Analogy and
Symmetrie of the whole, and every part, not why every particular is so or so.
which being revealed from God, may be apprehended by faith, can not be
comprehended by any wit of man. Suffice it us who proceed in our knowledge
upon certain principles, by comparing their issues, that we find all things
answerable to what we have received, and our faith in nothing deceived, or
deluded. My principal aim in this ensuing discourse, is to give the Christian
Reader a Synopsis or full view at once of our religion in the whole contexture
thereof, for his better resolution. Which lest I should obscure, or confound by
incident discourses, I have been forced to pass (it may be too cursorily)
thorough most particulars, which would require so many, and far larger tracts
then this little model of the whole. And because I seek not herein to
persuade or convince Infidels (which seems to be the scope of Justin. Martyr.
Tertul. in their Apologies. Arnob. Aug. de Civit. Dei. Morn. Viues. Raimundus
de Sabunde.
others, who have written of this argument) but to resolve, and confirm our
selves in the present truth (with whom it were a folly not to dispute ex
praecognitis and concessis) I have laid the foundation of this little
Fabric, in the received principles of Religion. And lastly, that I may not
build heterogeneous stuff thereon, Cor. 3.12.
wood, hay, stubble; but rather, gold, silver, precious stones, I have used, so
much as might be, the very words and phrases of Scripture, not only for
proof, but for expression, which being the Word of GOD, can best speak his
own meaning, howsoever to some it may make the style seem not so aequable and
pleasing. The Word of God is it not 1 Pet. 2.2.
(...), the rational milk of our reasonable souls, whereby they are
nourished to eternal life? And our faith has such force of reason thereby,
that it is Heb. 11.1.
(...), the clear evidence, and most evicting argument of things not seen,
most sublime and abstruse. And it is able to convince and persuade 1 Cor.
14.23. etc.
unbelievers, never so unlearned, and 2 Cor, 10.5.
to cast down all contrary reasonings of the most subtle adversaries, that
exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ. The Romans 12.1.
service of God thereby prescribed unto us, is it not (...), a reasonable
service to all that are not 2 These. 3.2.
unreasonable and wicked men? To whom howsoever they take it, we must and can
give 1 Pet. 3.15.
a reason of the hope that is in us. The Lineaments whereof I have endeavored
to draw, and shadow out in a new, but I hope not unnatural, method, which
being done, seems to me rather a bare skeleton, then any complete systeme of
that solid body, which I took in hand. Yet it suffices me, if as in Ezekiel.
37.7.8.9
Ezekiels vision, in the valley of dead bones, the bones become together, bone
to its bone. For the sinews and the flesh shall come upon them, and the skin
shall cover them about, when the breath of GOD shall come from the four
vvindes, and blovv upon them, and they shall live. Howsoever, I am willing to
be delivered of this meditation as it is, after a longer, and more painful
travel, by fitts, then such an imperfect embrio, and unshapen birth may seem
worthy of. And by his help John 15.5.
without whom we can do nothing, I may hereafter polish and perfect what I
have now conceived, not altogether, I hope, without his Spirit. When I shall
have better discerned thereof at a distance, and may happily have gained some
farther or clearer discovery by information, or obtrectation of others. For
although I have no reason to expect an adversary herein, having not willingly
irritated, or provoked any, yet because truth many times finds foes, where it
makes none, if any shall trouble themselves to quarrel this little piece, what
shall be justly found amiss, I shall most willingly amend, easily neglecting
what shall be petulantly carped, and submitting my self in all things to my
blessed Mother, this faithful Church of CHRIST JESUS.

Tertul.
Difficilium facilis est venia.

The Contents.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. The bond of Nature. The glory of God. The author of our good. The
true zelotes of his glory. To glorify the Creator is the glory of the
creature. How we should glorify God prescribed by the Law of Nature. Natural
reason of the Law. The covenant of Nature. The Law ever in force. The case.
CHAP. II. The Covenant of Grace. The Articles and Authors of Grace. The Son
of God the Mediator. The Son of man. The offices of Christ. The grace of our
Lord Jesus. The spirit of Grace. Preventing Grace. The state of Grace. The
praise of the glory of Gods Grace. CHAP. III. The Testaments. The Will of God.
The Word. The Scripture. That the Scripture is the Word of God. The intent of
it. The consent in it. The old legal Testament. The new Evangelicall
Testament. The event of prophesies. The power of the Gospel. The Church. The
administrators and overseers. Scripture the absolute Canon of faith and life.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. The Stipulation of Faith by the Sacraments. The answer of a good
conscience toward God. The Creed. The Sacraments. Baptism. Poedobaptisme.
Anabaptisme. Confirmation and penance. Communion. No transubstantiation.
Participation by faith. Communion in love. The Law conditioned. The Covenant
indissoluble. CHAP. II. Faith working by love according to the Law. The Law
established by faith. Gods Law our prayer. Faith in the Trinity denies not the
unity of God. Christ the only Image of God, to be worshipped by faith in his
Name. By Prophanenes, Hypocrisy, Blasphemy, the Name of God unhallowed. The
Christian Sabbath of the holy Catholic Church. The Sabbath not abrogated by
Christ. Nor by his Apostles. The Jews typical use thereof abolished. The
Christian Sabbath day within the compass of the Commandment. The Lords day
designed by himself for our Sabbath. It has ever been observed as the
Sabbath by the Church. It respects the Kingdom of God. The Perfect will of God
to be done on earth. The heavenly conversation. CHAP. III. The Refuge of Hope.
We are saved by Hope. The Law perfect, we imperfect. Good works not well
done. Grace and merit incompetible. The Christian hope. Our daily bread.
Forgiveness of sins. No immunity to sin. Temptations. Preservation.
Resurrection. Life everlasting and glorious,
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. The bond of Nature.
The glory of God. The author of our good. The true zelotes of his glory. To
glorify the Creator is the glory of the creature. How we should glorify God
prescribed by the law of Nature. Natural reason of the Law. The covenant of
nature. The fall. The Law ever in force. The case.

What is chiefly to be desired?
THat God may be glorified in our salvation. The glory of God.
Wherein trusting him for our parts we are principally to intend his glory. For
unless we will mock God, and deceive our own souls, we must desire as we
pray; first that the name of God may be hallowed by the advancement of his
Kingdom, in the universal subjection of all to his holy will: then that we
may be saved, through his grace, by pardon of our sins, protection in
temptations, and delivery from evil: and by the way, that we may be supplied
with things needful for this life, by his ordinary providence, and all to the
eternal praise of his Kingdom, power and glory. Which is not only the first,
and greatest part, but the very end, and reason of our most earnest, and
devoted desires, not only of things spiritual and temporal for our better
enablement, and encouragement in his service here, but even also of life
eternal hereafter; that seeing we cannot through our own default, so
glorify God in this life, as we ought, and might, if we had been so happy, we
may yet happily be saved through his grace, and mercy, to his eternal praise,
and glory in the world to come. Neither has CHRIST herein taught us to pray
otherwise then GOD commanded us to do. For 1. Tim. 1.5.
the end of the Law is love, 2. Tim. 3.2.4.
not of our selves, but of God, Deuteronomy. 6.5
with all the heart, with all the soul, with all the mind, and with all the
strength. This is true godliness in the zeal of his glory. A duty never
repealed, but ratified by the Law giver himself here in person, saying, Matt.
22.37.38.39.
This is the first and great Commandment, and the other is like unto it,
namely, that thou love thy neighbor as thy self: both in Incomparabiliter
plus charitatis Deo quam nobis, fratri autem quantum nobis ipsis impendere
debemus; nam Deum propter se, nos vero and provimos propter Deum diligere
debemus. Aug. de arin. l. 8. c. 8.
a second place unto God, that is, for his sake, and according to his will, to
do and to be done by, as he has commanded. The reason why we should
principally intend GOD his glory trusting him for our safety, is intimated in
the first words of the prayer, calling GOD our heavenly Father, grounded upon
the first Article of our faith, In God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and
Earth. For a son honors his father, the father provideth for his children.
Now GOD is our Father both by Nature and Grace, who made us, and all things
both in Heaven and Earth, redeemed us by his Son Christ Jesus, calls us by
the Holy Ghost, and thereby communicates himself, and all good unto us, and
will bring us to everlasting life, that we may eternally praise him. Romans 11.36.
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to him be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

We made not our selves, The Author of our good.
neither can we save our selves therefore we are not our own, but his
creatures and instruments, Act. 17.28.
in whom we live, move, and have our being. Prove. 16.4.
Who made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil.
Initio non quasi indigent Deus hominem plasmavit Adam sed ut haberet in quem
collocaret sua beneficia. Non solum ante Adam, sed and ante omnem conditionem
glorificavit verbum patrem suum manens in eo, and ipse a patre glorificabatur
quemadmodum ipse ait, Pater clarifica me, etc. Qui in ^umine sunt, non ipsi
lumen illuminant, sed illuminantur ab eo. Irenaeus lib. 4. adversus haeres.
cap. 28.
Not that his glory depends on the creature: for as there was light, when yet
there was no star in the Heaven to express it, no body on earth to reflect
it, so was Ioh. 17.5.
the glory of God with himself, before the world was. Only it pleased him by
the exuberance of his goodness, to manifest his glory in us, whom he made after
his own Image, Et c. 31. Non indigebat Deus dilectione hominis. Deerat autem
homini gloria Dei, quam nullo modo poterat percipere, nisi per eam
obsequentiam, quae est erga Deum.
not to gain any accession of glory by us to himself, who is himself
all-sufficient, but by communicating his goodness to make us most glorious,
Romans 11.22.
had we continued in his goodness, to the praise of his glory. Art requires
some complete materials to work upon, and Nature out of a rude matter
produces every creature, but Deus non (...) solum vt a Platone, sed (...)
dicendus. Just. Mart. in exhort. ad Gent.
God who is above both, made all of Ex nihilo terminative non materialiter.
Iul. Scal. exerc. 6. sect. 13.


nothing, by creation. Which the deepest Philosophy, most busy in the search
of Nature, could never fully reach, nor can comprehend by discourse of reason,
howsoever some of them seem to have had some notice thereof. For the wisest of
that profession supposing generally, that of Ex nihilo nihil sit in natura
constituta, non constituenda. Vid. Tertul. adversus Hermogin.
nothing, nothing can be, vanished away in their imaginations, of the Si nulla
fuit genitalis origo, Terrarum and coeli semperque aeterna fuere, Cur supra
bellum Thebanum and funera Troiae. Non alias alij quoque rescecinere Poetae.
Lucret. lib. 6. Vid. Theoph. Antioch. adversus Autolyc. lib. 2.
Worlds eternity, or of an eternal creation, or else of a natural manner of
productio^ of al things, out of some matter, and by some means, when as yet
there were none of the^. But Neb. 11.3.
we through faith understand by the word of God, in the history of the
Creation, that the Worlds were framed by the Quin and Deum foecundissimo verbo
creasse mundum aliquoties agnoscere videtur Trismegist. Neque materia, nec novo
consilio opus fuisse Deo ad mundi creatiouem asserere videtur. Algazel. contra
Averroem.
Word of God; so that things which are seen, were not made of things which do
appear. The last of all was man, as it were a recapitulation of all, for who^
all was made. Who as he had an interest in all the creatures by his making, so
God gave him power to use them all by his blessing. Psalm. 8.6.
For he made him to have dominion over the work of his hands, and put all
things under his feet. Of all the creatures, the Angels who were made the
first day, when they were all made Angels of Angelus est imago Dei,
manifestatio occulti luminis etc. Dionys. Areop. de divine. nomin. cujus ve ba
prosequitur. Alex. de Ales. part. 2. qu. 20. memb. 3. art. 2. and Bonavent. l.
2: sent. distinct. 9. ad textum.
light, and man who was made the last day, a light shining in darkness,
having his divine soul pent up in a body of clay, are only called the (...)
etc. A Deo profecta semina non solum. ea quibus pater meus me procreavit and
patrem avus, verumetiam, in res omnes e terra nascentes, ac praecipue in
ratione praedita. (...). Quidninominet quispiam eum filium Dei? Arrian. epise.
l. 1. c. 9.
sons of God, James 1.17.
who is the Father of lights. And again, we are his sons by grace, who of
his own will James 1.18.
begat us by the word of truth through faith in his Son. John. 1.12.13
For to as many as receive him, to them he gives power to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his Name, which are borne not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Who for his part
fails not to provide for our good, both in the course of nature, and in the
state of grace. For if an earthly father knows how to provide good things for
his children, how much more does our Father which is in Heaven? Acts 14.17.
who never left himself without witness doing good. And if he make Mat.
5.45.
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and send rain on the just and
on the unjust, he will certainly cause the Mal. 4.2.
sun of righteousness to arise, and Es. 60.1.
shine upon his gracious children, and will c. 44.3.
send down sweet dewes of his spirit into their hearts. And Romans 8.32.
he that has given us his Son, how shall he not with him give us all things
also. Nay our heavenly Father preuents us with all good things both of nature
and grace, and all to this end, that we should have the good nature, or the
grace to use all to the praise of his glory. Which whilst we principally
intend, we may be well assured, that in the end we shall be no loosers, both
because our true happiness consists naturally in the (...): Deus salutaris
est, sed and bonumipsum salutare, Arrian. Epict. l. 2. c. 8. Summum amare bonum
summa est beatitudo. August. epist. 111. ad Julian.
fruition, and admiration of Gods glory, according to the covenant of nature,
Levit. 18:5. Romans 10.5.
do this and live: and also because the glory of God is engaged upon the
salvation of his faithful people by the covenant of grace, Habak. 2.4. Romans
1.17.
The Just shall live by his faith.

In assurance whereof the faithful children of God have been well content,
The true Zelotes of God's glory.
not only to frame their lives to his glory, but to lay down their lives for
his sake, putting the last adventure of their souls, that they could make, in
well-doing; 1 Pet. 4.19.
into the hands of God a faithful Creator. The Lord Himself Phil. 2.6.
being in glory equal with God the Father, and that without robbery, was
willing to be abased, in the form of a servant, to the pit of hell, that the
will of GOD might be done on earth by man, for the redeeming of his Kingdom in
us, to the glory of his holy Name. For although the flesh was weak, which for
the time put him in a terrible agony, yet, he soon resolved, being strong in
the spirit, Luke 22.42.
Not my will but thy will be done. John 12.27.28.
Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this
hour: but for this cause came I to this hour, Father, glorify thy Name. And
at this mark of our high calling his zealous Saints resolved by his grace
through faith, press hard in hope and love. Abraham was content to submit so
far to the will of GOD, as to Genesis 22.
sacrifice his son Isaacke, whom he loved, and with him for ought that
appeared, his own and all men's expected happiness. For the promise that in
his seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed, was before restrained
to Isaacke, Genesis 21.12. Heb. 11.17.18.
In Isaacke shall thy seed be called. Only he believed that God was able to
raise him up from the dead, V. 19.
from whence also he received him as in a figure. Moses wished to be Ex. 32.32
rased out of the Book of life, rather then that God should not maintain his
own glory, in the safety and prosperity of his people Israel, whereon his
glory lay engaged. Job resolves in his greatest affliction, Job. 13.15.
though the Lord slay me yet will I not forsake him. The three children
Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, were resolute not to give the glory of God to
Nebuchadnezzar in his golden image, whatsoever came of them, though they
perished. Dan 3.17.18
Our God, say they, whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of thine hands, O
King, and he will deliver us: but if not, be it known unto thee, O King,
that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden image which thou have
set up. St Paul was content to be Romans 9.3^
Anathema from Christ for his brethrens sake, not in mere natural affection to
them, though it were great, but in a fervent zeal of Gods glory, which now
might seem to lie at stake with the^. Because V. 4.
to them belonged the adoption, and the glory, and the covenant. And generally
all the newborn, which only are the true borne children of God, seem to be
of the same mind, Christianos dicit Plinius Secundus omnia vitia detestari,
sanctissime vivere, and hoc solum in eis posse reprehendi, quod nimis faci e
pro Deo suo profundant vitam, quodque horis antelucanis furgant ad canendas
lauds Christi. l. 10. ep. 97. ad Traian.
who rejoice not only in hope of the glory of God, but even in their greatest
tribulations; Heb. 10.34.
suffering joyfully the spoiling of their goods, yea of their Heb. 11.35.36.37.
lives with most exquisite torments, because the Romans 5.5.
love of God is shed abroad in their hearts, 1 Pet. 1.8.
whom having not seen they love, in whom though now they see him not, yet
believing they rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Nay and every creature does even by nature spend it self to set forth the
glory of the Creator in some sort or other, To glorisie the creatoris the glory
of the creature.
being then most happy when it can serve best, and is most used to that end for
which it was made. Job. 12.7.
Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of the air,
and they shall tell thee. Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee, and
the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee. If we were not dull of hearing,
might we not perceive an Cicero in Somn. Scip.
harmony of the Spheres, and the Earth below with a deep base in consort to
the Heavenly quier, and every creature of God bearing his part, and all coming
in with a full Chorus to the close: Glory be to God on high; as it were an
Echo or report to that word of vvisdome, power, and goodness, whereby they were
all made: Psalm. 145.10.
All thy works praise thee, O God; and the more excellent the work is, the
more it (...) etc. Si Phidiae esses effigies meminisses vtique and tui ipsius,
atque etiam sculptoris. (...); Talis artificis cum sis opificium, quare id
ipsum dedecoras? Arrian. Epict. l. 2. c. 8.
co^mends the Maker. Yet is all this but in dumb Psalm. 19.1. V. 3.
The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handywork. But there is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard,
unless it be the Romans 8.22. v. 21.
groaning of the Creation, under the burden of corruption, all abased, being
abused by sin to the dishonor of the Creator. Wherefore it earnestly
expects, v. 19.
and vvaiteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God, that it may be
delivered in their glorious liberty. Of all the creatures, v. 21.
man only in this inferior world, was made with an understanding heart to know
God, and with speech to praise him, which was his excellency above other
creatures. In which respect, the holy king, calls Psalm. 108.1.
his tongue his glory, accounting this use thereof, when we bless God, the
greatest happiness, Psalm. 84.4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they shall be ever praising thee.
Now the whole world is Gods house, for there his Esa: 6.1.
temple is, wheresoever he manifests his glory, which we may behold and
contemplate in his works, whithersoeuer we look. Genesis 28.17.
Surely this is none other but the house of God. And the large volume of
nature, if there were none other, is it not a fair copy of Gods glory, laid
before our eyes in his temple, that we should read it and praise him? Which he
has written with his own finger, as it were in emblemes and hieroglyphikes,
even things themselves. Every work of God being a word, for he spoke
things; every day a line, and there is not a day without a line. Psalm. 19.2.
Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge; v. 4.
their line is gone out through all the earth. And the whole text fairly
continued in the course of nature, notwithstanding the many parenthesies of
miraculous events, and our continual digressions. But if this volume be too
large, read man the epitomy of all, know thy self, and know all. And who can
hide such knowledge in him, but it will break forth into the Ego conditoris
nostri verum hymnum compono: existimoque in co veram esse pietatem, no^
tauroru^ hecatombas ei plurimas sacrificari, and casias aliaque sexcenta
odoramenta ac vnguenta suffumigari: sed si noverim ipse primus deinde and aliis
exposuerim, quaenam sit illius sapientia, quae virtus quae bonitas. Hoc autem
omne invenisse quo pacto omnia adornarentur summae sapientiae est: effecisse
autem omnino quae voluit, virtutis est invictae ac insuperabilis. Gal. l. 3. de
vsu. part. c. 10.
praise and glory of God, that made him. Psalm. 139.14.
I will praise thee O Lord, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Yet are
there greater wonders then this, which God has made known unto us. 1. Tim. 3.
v. 16.
Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in
the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. And all this to
bring us unto the same glory, whereof we are assured by his spirit. And now
what greater happiness, than to have our hearts full of joy, and our mouths of
(...). Arrian: Epict. l. 1. c. 16.
praise unto our God in whom we enjoy all good? Such was the happiness of man,
and his chief delight in the state of innocence, who called all things, as
they were presented to him, by their Genesis 2.19.
names, speaking of them, no doubt, to the glory of God the Creator. And such
is the glory, and happy estate of the Saints and Angels, in heaven, who cease
not day and night, saying, (...) etc. Hominem Deus animal praestantissimum, et
vt suae naturae respondens, ita vniuersi constitutionis oculum in mundo
collocavit. Quamobrem hic and rebus imposuit nomina, quarum fuit signator.
Euryphamus Pythagoricus, l. de vita ex Stobaei Ser. 101.
holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almigty, which was and is and is to come. Rev. 4.8.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

verse. 11.
All the glory that we can do our God and heavenly Father is only in his name,
which he has, How we should glorify God prescibed by the law of Nature.
as it were, gotten by himself, by his Exodus 33.19.
works, and published by his word, c. 34.5.6.
proclayming his name, The Lord, the Lord, etc. we can add nothing to his
glory in Person, who is above all glory and praise. Psalm. 50.23.
Who so offers praise, he glorifieth God. Yet must we glorify him, not
only in word, praising his works, but in deed also, doing his word, Mat. 5. c.
16.
That others seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in
heaven. Mich. 6.8.
Wherefore, he has showed thee, O man, what is good, whose Dei voluntas est
non tantum recta, sed etiam regula, Bonav. in sent. lib. 1. did. 41. q. 2. in
conclus.
will is the rule of all good, and who only knows how himself will be served.
Which he has prescribed at first by nature, since by the law given in ten
commandments, as it were Exodus 34.28.
ten words, requiring so many duties, and forbidding so many sins, in general,
with all their particulars and accessaries. A perfect law for man to have lived
by to the glory of God the lawgiver. Which he thereby prescribes in the same
manner, and order, as we are taught to desire the same of God by prayer. For
the hallowing of his name in heart, word, and deed, he gave us the three first
commandments, that we should know, and acknowledge him, the only true God,
with faith, fear, and love, and none other by that name, or with any such
religious honor and affection. Esaias. 42.8.
This is my name, says he, and my glory will I not give unto another. The
fourth commandment prescribes his kingdom, and the other six his will, to be
done by us in earth, as it is in heaven. Yet so as that the glory of God is
interessed, not only in the immediate worship, and hallowing of his name, but
even in our carriage, and dealings amongst our selves. Insomuch that if a man
do but Prove. 30.9. Romans 2.24.
steal any way, he takes the name of God in vain, and causes it to be evil
spoken of. It was just that the Creator should give a law to his creature,
whereby every one should Romans 14.4.
stand or fall to his own master. Wherefore God left not things to
themselves when he made them, to do as might chance by the contingence of
secondary causes, nor to the arbitrament of men and Angels, but he set a
general course for nature by instinct; in his several blessings upon every
kind, (...). Non modo te condidit, sed etiam tibi soli credidit, and quid
faceres in mandatis dedit. Arrian. Epict. l. 2. c. 8.
he gave a law unto man in his making, and the Angels do his commandments.
Neither was that Iam. 2.8.
royal law any impeachment to the liberty of man's will, which although it have
an arbitrarie power over the locomotiue, and other like faculties, yet had it
never the absolute command of it self, but was to be subject to the
arbitrament of divine providence, and to the commandment of the Almighty.
Wherefore man was not left to his own will, but was by nature made willingly
subject to the Iam. 1.25.
law of liberty, which God commanded him for his good. Other things were made
by a word of command; Psalm. 148.5.
For he commanded and they were created, but man was made by a word of
counsel, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man; a reasonable creature, capable of counsel, as it were privy
to his own making, and conscious of the word whereby he was made. And God
created him verse. 27. Ita imago est ut ad imaginem sit, (i) non aequatur
parilitate, sed quadam similitudine accedit. Aug. l. 7. de Trin. c. 6.
in his own image according to his likeness, namely with a conscience, and good
liking of his will, a man after his own heart, like minded as he intended.
Which appears partly by the remainders of the law in our corrupt Lex est ratio
summa insita in natura, quae iubet ea quae facienda sunt, prohibetque
contraria. Eadem ratio cum est in hominis mente confirmata, and confecta, lex
est. Cic. de leg. l. 1. Et mox^ constituendi vero iuris ab illa summa lege
capiamus Exordium, quae saeculis omnibus ante nata est, quam scripta lex vlla,
aut quam omnino ciuitas constituta.
hearts. Romans 2.14
For the Gentiles which had not the law did by Nature the things of the law:
which showed the works of the law written in their hearts, Ante legem Moy^i
scriptam in tabulis lapideis, legem fuisse contendo non scriptam, quae
naturaliter intelligebatur, and a Patribus custodiebatur. Tertul aduersus
Iudaeos. Ista lex quae in cord scribitur, omnes continet nationes, and nullus
est qui hanc legem nesciat: Hieron. tom. 3. ep. ad Algasian: q. 8. In lege
temporali nihil est iustum and legitimum quod non ex hac aeterna sibi homines
deriuauerint. August. de lib. arb. l. 1. c. 6.
their consciences also bearing witness. But by our Coll. 3.10.
renewing in knowledge after the image of him, that created us, it is manifest,
that man was made with an understanding of himself, and of Gods will
concerning him, and not only so, but with an heart to do accordingly. For
Ephesians. 4.24.
the new man is created in righteousness and true holiness, the very text,
and tenor of the two tables of the law, in two words. And now 2. Cor. 3.17.
where the spirit is, there is liberty: again, not from the law to do as
we lust the miserable bondage of sin unto Satan, but to the law, to do as we
should, the gracious liberty of the sons of God.

The natural reason of the law is yet so apparent, that for the duties of the
second Table, Natural reason of the Law.
Ex sapientissimorum sententijs principem legem illam and vltimam mentem esse
omnia ratione aut cogentis aut vetantis Dei: ex qua leges illae laudatae, quae
generi dantur humano. Cic: de leg. l. 2.
all nations generally have followed and embraced the same, as being most
agreeable to mankind, by nature a sociable, and civil creature, only the Non
ulla vnquam lex sanxit qui furari voluerit culpae reus erit, sed qui furatus
fuerit, inquit Cato pro Rhodiens.
last commandment is without the compass of man's law to search or punish.
Because God only tries the hearts. Yet Has patitur poenas peccandi sola
voluntas. Nam scelus intra se tacitum qui cogitat vllum, facti crimen habet.
Cedo si conata peregit. Iuvenal. Satyr. 13.
moral Philosophy goes far by reason to moderate passions, and affections.
And the Stoikes, who were not the worst moralists, go yet a step farther,
even beyond reason, to root up natural affection. Howbeit none of them could
by the light of nature, reach to the root of this law, namely our natural
corruption: whereof that sect, either by common sense, or by some
intelligence, might yet seem to have a kind of conscience. But Romans 7.7.
I had not known lust, says the Apostle, namely that the first motion thereof
is sin, if the Law had not said, Thou shall not lust. Now for the duties of
the first table, there could be no reasonable doubt of the three first
commandments, that they are natural, if we did but rightly understand, and
duly consider the nature of God. Nulla gens est tam fera, quae non etiamsi
ignoret qualem Deum habere deceat, tamen habendum sciat. Cic: l. 1. de leg.
Never were any so brutish, but that in Vnius Dei virtutes per mundanum opus
diffusas, multis vocabulis inuocamus, quoniam nomen eius. cuncti proprium
videlicet ignoramus. Maximus nomine gentilium ep: ad Augustum inter suas 43.
Cui nomon omne convenit vis illum fatum vocare? non errabis. Hic est, ex quo
suspensa sunt omnia, causa causarum. Visillum prouidentiam dicere? recte dices.
Est enim cuius consilio huic mundo prouidetur, ut inconcussus eat, and actus
suos explicet. Vis illum naturam vocare? non peccabis. Est enim ex quo nata
sunt omnia, cuius spiritu viuimus. Vis illum vocare mundum? non falleris. Ipse
enim est totum quod vides totus suis partibus inditus, and se sustinens vi sua.
Sen: Nature. Quaest. l. 2. c. 45.
some sort they have acknowledged a prime cause, a supreme power, which made
and ouer-rules all. Rom 1.20.
The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.
And if we do but fetch our own pedigree, as needs we must, from one Luke
3.38.
man, at the last, we shall find, that one God, whose son he was, even the
work of his hands. Act. 17.26.27.
For God made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the
earth, and determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation, that they should seek the Lord. And if we observe the course of
times, we shall come to the ancient of days, Act. 14.17.
who has never left himself without witness at any time: whose being
beyond time, without place, above nature must needs be infinite, and
therefore Neque in natura, neque extra, duo possunt esse infinita. Iul: Scal:
exercit: 395. Socrates damnatus ad cicutam, a vita quam a sententia, de vno
Den, decedere maluit. Plato orsus epistolam ab vno Deo agebat serio ad Dionys.
ep. t 3. Cum iurant, cum optant, cum gratias agunt, non Iovem aut Deos multos,
sed Deum nominant. Lactant: l. 2. de ver. sap. c. 1. Anima licet falsis dijs
exancillata, cum tamen resipiscit, ut ex crapula, and somno, Deum nominat, and
quod Deus dederit, omnium vox est, iudicem quoque contestatur illum, Deus
videt, and Deo commendo, and Deus mihi reddet. O testimonium animae naturaliter
Christianae. Tertul. in Apolog.
singular, admitting no partner. For the second commandment, we can worship
God no otherwise then we can know him. But that which can be known of God,
namely hiseternal power and Godhead, was never seen by any man, but only
understood by the effects thereof, in his works, and by his word. Nor can he
be expressed but by word, whom we know only by name, beleiuing his word.
Neither the nature of God, who is invisible, nor of man, whose heart was most
answerable, ca^ in reason the worship of God by any Solemn and lunam specula Dei
non adoranda, sed spectanda, mundumque illius templum dicit Plutarchus de Iside
and Osiride.
creature or outward shape, no whit agreeable to either. For the third
commandment it were most unreasonable in nature to take the name of God in
vain, when nature it self tells us for Deus and natura nihil faciunt frustra.
a principle, that God made nothing in vain, as if God were nothing but an
empty name, who is all in all, and all the bonour we can do him is only in
his name. De die septimo qui inter omnes mortales celebris est, magna apud
plerosque ignorantia est: hic enim dies qui inter omnes mortales celebris est
Sabbatum vocatur, graece si quis interpretetur, Septimana dicitur. Hoc nomine
mortales omnes diem istum appellant, at nominis causam nesciunt plerique.
Theoph. Antiochen: Patriarch: l. 2. ad Autolycuum.
The greatest difficulty of natural reason, is for the fourth commandment,
not because there is no such reason thereof, but because nature it self being
corrupt, and disturbed by sin, bears little or no mention, and remembrance
of the first creation, nor can hardly be persuaded thereof. But God has
therefore expressly given us the reason of that law, plainly taken from the
vvorkemanship of nature it self, Namely that it was finished in six days, and
so Sicut cum been operamur ipse dicitur operari in nobis cuius munere operamur:
ita cum requiescimus ipse requiescere dicitur quo donante requiescimus. August.
ep. 119. ad Ianuar. agens dc Sabbato.
rested, as it seems in its perfection, and gave, as it were, rest unto God on
the seventh day. Wherefore, the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.
Of which Septem dies sunt qui volumine temporum per sua vestigia reuocantur.
Aug. ep. 86. ad Casulan.
period of time there seems still to be some mention in nature,
notwithstanding our corruption, namely by the continual changes of (...)
formam lun complectitur: nam prima est corniculata, quam (...) Graeci vocant:
deinde medilunia, qua^ dicunt (...), Dehine dimidsato mayor, quae dicitur
(...). Mox plena, quae dicitur (...). Item tres formas praedictas desiciens
repetit. Hic numerus, lunae cursum significat, nam vnum 2.3.4.5.6.7. faciunt
28. Martian. Capel. Satyric. l. 7. de Heptade. Ecclesia vero adhuc in ista
mortalitate carnis constituta, propter ipsam mutabilitatem lunae nomine in
scripturis signatur. August ep. 119 agens de Sabbato. Vid. Isidor Eccles.
offic. lib. 1. cap. 31.
sublunary things, every seven days, (...) etc. Hipp lib. 2. aph 24. Idem de
carn. (...).
as Physicians observe, who are most versed in the works of nature, and
accordingly to be credited in their faculty. And something there is in it that
the very Quis enim sacrum illum diem. per singulas hebdomadas recurrentem non
honorat? Philo Iudaeus de vniversis gentibus loquens lib 2. de vita Mosis. Idem
testatur Josephus lib. 2. contra Apion. ad finem.
Heathens have solemnised the seventh day, although they knew not why, but
vainly consecrated it to the resting planet Vid. Clav. in cap. 1. Johan. de
Sacro Bosco. page 84. (...) die septimo post natum puerum ei nomen imponebatur,
vtpote die auspicatissimo Scholiast: in Aristoph. ad Aves. Vid. quae habet
Clemens Alexandr. lib. 5. Strom. ex Homero Hesiodo, and Callimacho.
Saturn, as it might seem for the slow motion thereof, or to some other such
Amnis sabbaticus qui in Iudaea sabbatis omnibus siccatur. Plin. nature. hist.
lib. 31. cap. 2. Aliter enarrat Josephus de bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 24. Vid.
Fulleri Misc^ll. lib. 1. cap. 9.
fond imagination. But we who by Heb. 11.3.
faith understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God (the first
article of our creed) can easily admit in common equity, the natural reason,
which God has given of this law: And knowing that the Sabbath was made for man
in his best estate, for whom all things were made, and he last of all with
vnderdanding to behold, and praise God in his glorious work, that he might
rest in so doing most glorious and happy; upon which day it seems the man was
so excercised, when he gave names to all things according to their natures to
the glory of the creator; we are well persuaded that there is, and ever will
be a perpetual cause even in nature, to remember the Sabbath once in seven
days, so long as the Romans 8.21.22.
creation groneth under the burden of corruption, until we enter into his
rest, and enjoy an eternal Sabbath in glory.

Upon this law stood the covenant of Nature, Do this and live. The covenant of
Nature.
To live is to be doing, for life is the energie of nature, and consists in
action. And to do this law, which God had by nature inacted in man, should
have been the natural life of man. Not a means to attain life, which he
then already had in present fruition, but the very form and manner of living,
and that well and happily; (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 7.
a perpetual well doing, and perfect being in that blessed estate, wherein
he was made. Luke 10.26.28.
What is written in the law? This do and thou shall live. For these things if
a man do he shall live in them, not for the doing, but in the doing of them.
And James 1.25.
who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, being a doer of the work,
that man shall be blessed in his deed. Of which covenant God gave
Primordialis data est lex Adae and Evae in paradiso, quasi matrix omnium
praeceptorum Dei etc. Tertull. adversus Iudaeos; Quae lex ei sufficeret sheffet
custodita. ibid.
man in his innocence as it were Erat homini in lignis alijs alimentum in hoc
Sacramentum. Aug.
two Sacraments. The Hac generali and primordiali Dei lege, quarn in arboris
fructu observari Deus sanxerat, omnia praecepta legis posterioris specialiter
indita fuisse cognoscimus, quae suis temporibus edita germinaverunt. Tertul.
adversus Iudeos. In hac enim lege Adae data omnia praecepta condita recognosim
us, quae postea pullularunt data per Moysen. Ibidem.
tree of knowledge respecting the law, do this; and the tree of life,
respecting the promise, live. By the former it pleased God to make trial of
man's faith and obedience. A small matter, as it may seem, a trifle, the
greater was the sin, in eating the forbidden fruit, whatsoever it was, of
the tree of knowledge, of good and evil. So it was called by God his
institution, who forbad it, to prove, and make known, what a creature Haec
ipsa quo que possibilitae eveniendi non levitati ipsius, qui non movetur, sed
retum facilitati, quae natura non indignante moueri possunt, convenienter
ascribitur. Joan: Sarisber: Policrat: l. 2. c. 21.
could do of it self, and would do being left to it self, which was by
nature free to choose, and indifferently inclinable to good or evil. It stood
not with the counsel of the Almighty and only wise God, nor with the condition
of a reasonable creature, that man should be enforced to do his duty upon
necessity, whom he had made arbitrary, or that all Quae igitur cum fiunt carent
existendi necessitate, eadem prius quam fiant sine necessitate futurasunt.
Booer. de consol. phil. lib. 5. pros. 4.
contingency of second causes should be intercepted in the course of nature by
his Almighty power, howsoever by his providence the effects shall certainly
follow, which he in his secret (...). Suidas.
counsel foreseeth, and preordaineth to his glory, upon their free, or
contingent, and sometimes contrary operations. Sicut series retum Dei
providentiam non immutat, sic and aeterna dispositio retum naturam non perimit.
Joan. Sarisber: Policrat: lib. 2. c. 20.
Every thing has its own course together with God his providence, and God
has his purpose notwithstanding their deficience. Sin which is an evil and
aberration of our actions from the righteous law of God, is the defection of
the creature from the creator, and not the Deus non est auctor illius reicuius
est vltor. Fulgent. l. 1. c. 19. ad Monim: (...). Eurip.
effecting of the creator by the creature. For it is not an effect, but a Nemo
quaerat efficientem causam malae voluntatis, non enim est efficiens, sed
deficiens, quia necilla est effectio sed defectio. August. l. 12. de Civ. Dei.
c. 7. Malum nihil est cum id facere ille non possit, qui nihil non potest:
Booet de consol. Phil. l. 3. pros. 12.
defect in the doing. The (...). Bas. Homil. Quod Deus non est author maloru^.
p. 422.
default whereof rests upon the immediate doer, and redoundeth not to the
first mover, who will have every thing work in its own kind. No man could have
had any John. 19.11.
power against Christ, except it had been given him from above. Yet did not
that excuse his adversaries, nay therefore they had the greater sin. For the
greater the Non queramur de autho-, re nostro Deos si beneficia eiu,
corrumpimus and ve essent contraria efficimus Sen. quaest: not. l. 5. c. 18.
gifts, the greater the fault, if they be abused. The Devil cannot do any
thing without God, yet (...) Neque tamen quoniam mutabiles vires habemus,
improbitatis nostrae culpa in Deum conferenda est. Non enim in facultatibus
sunt vitia led in habitibus etc. Nemes lib. de natura homin.
when he speaks a lie he speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father of it. John. 8.44.


Who being the first Apostate from God, The Fall.
and the perpetual enemy to God, and man, affecting to be the Naturales
impatientias in ipso diabolo deprehendo iam tunc cu^ dominu^ Deum vniversa
opera quae fecisset imagini suae, id est, homini subjectisse impatienter
tulisset Tertul. de pat. Adeo decepit eum quia inuiderat. ibid.
Prince and God of this world in a proud emulation of God himself, and an Ephesians.
2.2. Ioh. 14.30. 2. Cor. 4.4.
envious indignation against man, whom God had deputed as it were his
Vicegerent, here upon earth, soon took occasion by the inhibition, and
watching his opportunity, wrought subtly upon the woman's frailty, in nature 1.
Pet. 3.7.
the weaker vessel, and by her prevailed also against the man, with whom
naturally the woman's importunate weakness is most powerful. And like as
Ahitophell after his example gave counsel since to a rebellious son against
his father, so did the Devil persuade the man to 2 Samuel 16.21.
usurp upon that which God had precisely reserved unto himself, the knowledge
of good and evil ( Acts 15.18.
foreknowne unto God are all his works and the issues of them from
everlasting) pretending that by this means, the man should become as God
himself, with absolute power, and command over the creature, whereof before
he had but the bare use, and that only upon allowance, and with limitation.
Thus was he fondly persuaded to prefer his own vain affected glory to the
glory of God, wherein he stood until then truly glorious and most happy. And
so the forbidden tree proved indeed as it was Ideo arbor illa appellata est
scienti dignoscendi boni and mali, non quia inde talia quasi poma pendebant,
sed quicquid esset arbor illa cuiuslibet pomi, cuiuslibet fructus esset, ideo
sic vocata est quia homo qui nollit bonum a malo discernere per praeceptum,
discreturus erat per experimentum, vt tangendo vetitum invenirct supplicium.
Aug. in Psalm. 70.
called, the fruit of knowledge of good and evil, by man's sin and
transgression. For now he learned what it meant by woeful experience, who knew
not what evil should be, until he felt it, nor what was his own good with
God, until he had Non solum vt sint dij homines else desierunt, sed etiam qui
quasi dij erant suam gratiam perdiderunt Ambrol.
lost it. A loss not to himself alone, but through his default, to all his
posterity, who being in his loins are Falso queritur de natura sua genus
humanum. Salust. initio bell. Iug.
justly atteinted of his rebellion; because it was the covenant of nature which
he violated. And we naturally are not only made guilty of that In quo erat
natura communis, ab ejus vitio est nullus immunis Aug. ep. 106. ad Paulin.
Restat vt in illo primo homine peccasse omnes intelligantur, quiain illo
fuerunt omnes, quando ille peecauit, vnde peccatum nascendo trahitur, quod nisi
renascendo non soluitur. August. contra duas Pelagian. ep. lib. 4. c. 4.
original sin, by imputatio^, but are by Peccara parentum alienasunt
proprietate actionis, nostra sunt contagione propaginis. idem l. 6. contra
Julian. c. 4.
propagation corrupted with sin, or Peccatum Originarium, vitium, languor,
(...) Vetus iniquitas. Ignat. ep ad Trallian.
vice originary the polluted issue thereof, in all mankind, as an (...). O
insirmitatem meam! Nam meam dico istam primi parentis infirmitatem. Greg.
Nazianz. orat. 38.
he reditary disease infecting the blood, and a stigmaticall skarre, that
cannot be done away, until nature it self shall be dissolved. For after that
the man in his person had once viciated our nature, he begat a son in his
own Genus humanum in parente primo, velut in radice, putruit, and ariditatem
traxit in ramis. etc. Greg. ep. 53. lib. 7. indict. 2.
likeness, and after his image, the likeness of sin, and the image of
corruption. Natura erat seminalis ex qua propagamur, qua scilicet propter
peccatum vitiata, and vinculo mortis obstricta, iusteque damnata non alterius
conditionis homo ex homine nasceretur. Aug. l. 13. de Civ. Dei c. 14.
And do not we all sin, if we live to it, after the Romans 5.14.
similitude of Adams transgression, Liberum arbitrium captivatum non nisi ad
peccatum valet, Aug. ad Bonifac. l. 3. c. 8.
preferring the pleasures of sin to the law of God, Act 7.51.
always resisting the will of God? As our Fathers did so do we. Rom 7.11.
For sin taking occasion by the commandment, works in us all manner of
concupiscence, deceives, and by it slays us.

Thus the law which by the covenant of nature Romans 7.10.
was appointed to life, The Law ever in force.
is by our transgression, and perverseness become unto us C. 8.2.
the law of sin and of death, nature it self being judge. For the very
Gentiles without the law had their Romans 2.15. Quos diri conscia facti. Men's
haber attonitos and surdo verbere caedit, Occultum quatiente animo tortore
flagellum. Iuvenal. Satyr. 13.
thoughts accusing or else excusing one another; C. 1.32.
knowing the judgment of God, that they who commit such things as are
forbidden by the law, are worthy of death. For the covenant of nature being to
do this and live, the not doing thereof, but the contrary, must needs be
death pro magnitudine culpae illius naturam damnatio mutavit in peius, vt quod
poenaliter praecessit in peccantibus hominibus primis, etiam naturaliter
sequeretur in nascentibus coeteris. August. de Civ. D. l. 13. c. 3.
ipso facto. Genesis 2.17.
In the day thou eatest thou shall dye the death. For our breaking the law
could not disanull the law, but that it is ever in force to bind us, although
never of force to enable us to perform our duties. Nor could the forfet of our
bond discharge our debt to God, but that his law is ever of force against us,
to exact the penalty, if there were not a remedy. But has not God abrogated
the law of nature, by contracting with us a covenant of grace? Nay thereby he
has established the law of an holy life. Exodus 34. v. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 13.
The words of the covenant were the ten Commandments. At the first promise of
grace, there was a law of perpetual Genesis 3.15.
enmity set between the seed of the woman and of the serpent; and in the
contract of the covenant with Abraham, obedience to God his law is conditioned
being employed in his charge, Genesis 17.1.
walk thou before me and be thou perfect. But when God establshed that
covenant with the children of Israel, he gave them the law written most
authentically with his own finger, in Exodus 31.18.
two tables of stone, to be kept for a testimony of his covenant with them, in
the Deuteronomy. 10.5.1. Kings 8.9. Heb. 9.4.
arc of his gracious Numb. 10.35.36. Psalm. 24.7.8.
presence for ever. And by the new testament, wherein the same covenant is
renewed as he promised. Ier. 31.32.33.
God will put his law in our minds, which was then put in the arc, and will
write it in our hearts, which before was written in stone, that we may serve
him in newness of spirit and not in the oldnesse of the letter. Did Christ
Jesus then when he came prove so unlike Moses, of whom he had said Deuteronomy. 18.15.
that he should be like unto him? did he set himself so much against Moses, as
utterly to dislike, and abolish that eternal law, which was given by his
ministry? Nay he the lord over his own house, wherein Moses was a faithful
servant, ratifies the law in every title. Saying Mat. 5.19.
whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men
so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. v. 17.
For he came not to destroy the law but to fulfill it; and he did so, not only
as the great prophet, expounding it aright, and giving the true meaning thereof
against the vain glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees; nor yet farther as the
great high priest, making satisfaction for our transgressions thereof, but as
the sovereign Lord and King, he ratified it a royal law for ever. And
therefore in the Apostles commission he gave them express charge to teach
them, Age Marcion omnesque iam commiserones and coodibiles eius Haeretici; quid
audebitis dicere? Resciditne Christus priora praecepte non occidendi, non
adulterandi, non furandi? Ter. aduersus Marcion. l. 4. c. 36.
whom they baptized, Mat. 28.20.
to do whatsoever he had commanded them. Now we know what commandment they
gave us by the Lord Jesus, the very same things in substance (as Saint Paul
reckons them up. 1 Thessalonians. 4. and elsewhere) which had been formerly given in
command by Moses, and were at first written in man's heart to know and to do,
and were ever acknowledged due by the light of nature. Whereof they were very
careful, being tender, least by any means, their doctrine of grace by Romans 3.31.
faith, should in that respect be misconstrued.

Wherefore the law remains the perpetual rule of our duty, The Case.
whereby we should live unto God his glory; though it be now altogether
insufficient for our safety, Romans 8.3.
being weak through the flesh. Romans 3, v. 19.
Now we know that what things soever the law says, it says to them who are
under the law, from the which none are exempt, Jew nor Gentile, Christian, nor
Heathen, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty
before God. For by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in
his sight. Which we are taught ever to acknowledge to the praise of the glory
of his justice, and mercy, in the latter part of the prayer. First, that being
shut out for the present from the tree of life, in the Paradise of GOD, whereof
we might have eaten, and have lived for ever, we now justly stand bound over
unto death, living only upon sufferance, and begging our bread from day to day.
Secondly, the guilt of sin, by Natures admonition, does continually gaul our
consciences, with Ipsa confusio and verecundia quae semper turpitudinum castra
sequuntur, quasi crudelissimi carnisices conscientiae, lacessunt and
improperant peccatori, and instant quasiquaedam Eumonides, agitatrices, furiae,
reprehensionis stimulos cordi saucio offigentes Ipsa se malitia praejudicat and
punit. Arnold. Bonaeval. de operibus sex dier. cap. 16.
shame, sorrow, and fear, whilst we do nothing but trespass one an other,
and all against GOD, transgressing his righteous Law: whereby our life is lost,
and death the forfeite and penalty of natures bond, is a debt due by us, which
we can not avoyde, nor recover, unless God show mercy and forgive. Thirdly,
praying against temptations, we acknowledge that every thing in the world
which should have been for our wealth, is now by Gods just proceedings become
unto us Quibus accedendo animae consentiendoque quam invexere sibi, adjuvant
servitutem, and sunt quodam modo propria liberate captivae. Boeth, lib. 5.
pros. 1.
an occasion of falling. For it is just with God to Fiunt eadem peccata and
peccatorum supplicia praeteritorum, and suppliciorum merita futurorum, Aug. l.
5. c. 3. contra Iul. Pelag.
punish us by the same things whereby we have offended him; whilst through lust
we take to heart all occasions of sin, as tinder takes fire, and use all means
with rage and fury, as fire does fuel, to accomplish our own destruction.
These are the 2 Timothy 2.26.
snares of Satan, wherein he takes men captives at his pleasure, these are
the chains and fetters of darkness, whereby he leads the^ on, that they Psalm.
69.27.
fall from one wickedness to another, and never come into the righteousness of
God, without his special grace and mercy. Thus (...), 1 Ioh. 5. v. 19 Heb. 2
14.
he that has the power of death, that is the Devil, being Gods executioner,
holds men captives through the fear of death all their life long, and all
the long life of eternal death, under the power thereof, Psalm. 49.14.
which gnaweth upon them, like sheep, that lie in Hell, where the worm dies
not, and the fire never goes out. Yet howsoever it fare with us, God neither
will, nor can be defeated of his glory, who Ephesians. 1.11. Non fit praeter cius
voluntatem, etiam quod fit contra ejus voluntatem. Aug. Enchiric. 100.
works all things wonderfully after the counsel of his own Will, even
whilst he suffers them to do what (...): Cum enim sit potestas, and natura
liberae potestatis, nihil neque naturae necessitate, neque legis sanctione
facit. Nemesius lib. de natura hominis c. 38.
possibly they can, against the Law of his revealed will, prescribed unto
them. For he will get Himself glory upon the proud and haughty, and upon all
that forget God, as he did upon Exodus 14.17.
Pharaoh and his Host, in their just confusion, and utter destruction. So that
the very Romans 3.5.
unrighteousness of men, will they nill they, shall commend the righteousness
of God, V. 7.
vvhilest the truth of God does more abound through their lie unto his glory.
And by his special grace and providence, this general defectio^ shall turn
in the end; to the advantage of his Elect, in the advancement of his glory. Who
knows to bring light out of darkness, and good out of evil. Romans 9.22.
What if God vvilling then to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
suffered at the first, and Quod non statim in peccatores vindicat, patientia
est, non negligentia. Non isle patientia^ perdidit, sed nos ad poenitentiam
reservavit. Aug. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 35.
endure still with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction: And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the
vessels of mercy, which he had prepared unto glory?

CHAP. II. The Covenant of Grace.
The Articles and Authors of Grace. The Son of God the Mediator. The Son
of man. The offices of Christ. The grace of our Lord Jesus. The spirit of
Grace. Preventing Grace. The state of Grace. The praise of the glory of Gods
Grace.

How shall we be saved, and God be glorified by us?
BY grace we are saved through faith, The articles and authors of Grace.
whereby God is glorified. For we by faith receiving the benefit, give him the
Ephesians. 1.6.
praise of the glory of his grace, whereby he prevents us, wherein he accepts
us, wherewith he succors us, and having first brought salvation unto us, will
finally bring us to salvation, according to the articles of the covenant of his
grace in our Creed where the agreement is first drawn betwixt God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, on the one part, and the holy Catholic tholicke Church,
on the other, as he says, Ier. 31.33
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Then the conditions of the
Covenant are expressed, first for this life present, the Communion of Saints,
on our part with God, and with one an other in love, according to his Law; and
on Gods part, the continual forgiveness of our sins: For so is the
Covenant, Ier. 31.33.34. Heb. 10.16.17.
I will put my Laws in their hearts, says GOD, and in their minds will I
write them. And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And for
the life to come, God will recover us from death, by the resurrection of our
bodies, and we shall ever live in his sight, praising him, as he says, Ps:
50.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Who himself alone is the
only and all-sufficient cause of our salvation, and that of his free grace and
goodness: the author and first mouer, the Mediator and procurer, the immediate
worker and dispenser of all in all. The unsearchable love of God the Father,
who made all things, and c whose desire is to the work of his hands,
foreseeing that man would not abide in honor, to glorify him unto eternal
life, according to the course of Nature, provided from everlasting this way of
grace, to glorify himself in our salvation. Which he has ever from the
beginning promised; and in time performs, 2 Timothy 1.9.
calling and saving us, according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the World began. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ our Mediator and Redeemer, has abundantly performed the same for us,
2, Cor. 1.20.
in whom all the promises of God are yea, and in him Amen, to the glory of God
by us, 1 Pet. 1.20.21
who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the World, but was
manifest in these last times for us, who by him do believe in God, that raised
him from the dead, and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God.
The Holy Ghost who proceeds from the Father and the Son, does by an entire
fellowship, most comfortably communicate the same grace unto us, Romans 8.16.
testifying to our spirits that we are the children of God in Christ, that we
are in grace and favor with him, and thereby working Heb. 12.28.
grace in us again, to serve him with reverence and godly fear, Ephesians. 1.14.
the earnest of our purchased possession, whereby we are sealed to the day of
redemption. Although the several parts of our salvation be thus severally
attributed to the Persons of the Trinity, for distinction in respect of their
order, and the economy amongst themselves, according to their personal
proprieties, yet is our whole salvation, as all the outvvorkes are, the joint
work of the Trinity. But in this whole mystery of grace, the eye of our faith
is most set upon our Lord JESUS, the mal. 3.1.
Angel of the Covenant, Heb. 12.24.
the Mediator of the new Testament, Heb. 3.1
the Apostle and High Priest of our calling, 1 Pet. 2.25.
the Pastor and Bishop of our souls, Heb. 2.10.
the captain of our salvation, the C. 12.2.
author and finisher of our faith. Because Col. 1.19.
in him it pleased the Father all fullness should dvvell. Ioh. 1.16.
And of his fullness we all receive by his Spirit, even grace for grace. The
Son of God the Mediator.


As he said of Abraham, so might he have said of Adam, before he was, I am.
For he is the (...). Sybil. apud Lactant. l. 4. de vera sapientia c. 6.
eternal Son of God, John. 1.1.
his Word, and Prou. 8.
Wisdom, John. 1.9.
the light Iam 1.17.
of the Father of lights, Heb. 1.3.
the express Image of GOD, and brightness of his glory, Exo. 23.20.21. c.
33.14. Esai 63.9.
the Angel of his presence, very God of very God, begotten not made, Mich. 5.2.
whose goings out have been from everlasting, and Es. 53.8.
who can declare his generation? Christus est homo etsi Deus, Adam novissimus
etsi sermo primarius. Tertul. de resur. carn.
Although he be called the second Adam in regard of the flesh assumed; for,
the work of our redemption, as it was promised from the beginning, Prove. 8.22.
The Lord possessed him, his essential word and wisdom, in the beginning of
his way before his works of old, the Rationem vero eorum, quae Deus ab
aeterno in sapientia, id est in vnigenito verbo disposuit, creans ibi omnia
simul, quae postmodum consequenter producit in opera, secundum provisum ordinem
singula traducens etc. Joan. Sarisber. Policrat. l. 2. c. 21.
mirror of his mind, the Col. 1.15.
Image of the invisible God, the first begotten of every creature. By whom he
purposed to make all things, to preserve some Angels, to recover Nulla est
personarum acceptio, quia sic alius gratis honoratur, vt alius debito non
fraudetur. Et mox, Nec vlla est personarum acceptio in duobus debitoribus
aequaliter reis, fi alteri dimittitur, ab altero exigitur, quod pariter ab
vtroque debetur. August. ad 2. ep. Pelag. l. 2 c. 7.
some men, of whom he made choice in him, with a non obstante, notwithstanding
the general fall at once in Adam, and our continual failing his grace, and
falls in sin. For the Almighty and only wise God proceeds not merely upon
occasion, or according to a bare speculatiue Scientia existentium praescientia
futurorum, dispositio faciendorum, providentia gubernandorum, praedestinatio
salvandorum, est. Joan. Sarisber. Polycrat. l. 2. c. 21.
prevision of what would happen, but by provision with Almighty power, most
wisely and justly ordered by his providence, to accomplish his own purpose:
Ephesians. 1.11.
who works all things after the counsel of his own will. Wherefore it
seems most agreeable to Scripture, and to the nature of the mystery of his
will, therein revealed unto us, which Durand, in 1. sent. did. 41. q. 1. art.
9. Thom. Aq. 1. part. q. 23. art. 4.
some have well observed, that election was first ordine naturae, in the Son
of God, as being the mirror, and then predestination by him, as the Mediator;
that being an act of Gods praescience, this a Primitiva disponentis Dei gratia.
Joan. Sarisber. Policrat. l. 2. c. 22.
praedisposing of his providence. Romans 8.29.
For whom God did foreknow, that is, approve, and make choice of in him, in
whom he foresaw all things before he made them, from everlasting, Antiqui
praedestinationem ad electos vt plurimum restrinxerunt Fr-Iun. These. Theol.
10.. 2. vid. Hypognost. l. 6. Inter gratiam and praedestinationem hoc tantum
interest, quod praedestinatio est gratiae praeparatio gratia vero jam ipsa
donatio. Aug. de praedest. sanct. c. 10.
those he did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his Son, in their
order and time, that he might be the firstborn amongst many brethren. Ephesians.
1.4.5.
And again, he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the World, that
we should be holy and unblameable before him in love, having predestined us
to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, to himself according to the good
pleasure of his will. Now Christ is the Mediator by whom all things are done,
as they were purposed in him the mirror, from everlasting. He was the
Mediator of creation, Ioh. 1.3.
by whom all things were made, and without him was not any thing made that was
made. Col. 1. v. 16.
For by him all things were created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were created for him, and by him. He is
the Mediator of conservation, Heb. 1.3.
upholding all things by the Word of his power. Col. 1. v. 17.
For he is before all things, and by him all things consist, as well men as
Angels, C. 2. v. 10.
for we are all complete in him which is the Head of all principality and
power. And he is the Mediator of redemption, for the sons of men. A different
manner of mediatio^ by Christ, for effecting that one eternal election of men,
and Angels in him. By whom they were confirmed that they should not fall, we
are recovered though we did fall at once in Adam, and do often fall foul our
selves. Col. 1.18.
For he is the Head of the body the Church, who is the beginning, the first
borne from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. None
could be the Lords Christ, to perform the offices of Jesus, the Savior,
employed in that title, Mat. 1.21.
to save his people from their sins, from the power and dominion of sin,
from the punishment, damnation for sin; but the Son of God himself C. 3.17.
in whom alone he is well pleased, and by whom all the powers of Satan could
be conquered. 1 John 3.8
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested in the flesh, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil, and deliver us into the liberty of the
sons of God. John 8.36.
Now if the Son make us freee, then are we free indeed.

Therefore the Son of God, The son of man.
the middle Person of the three in order, became a middle person betwixt God
and us, by participation of each nature, that he might be a fit means, and
all-sufficient Mediator of our reconciliation, and redemption. Gal. 4.4.
When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, as
was promised from the beginning, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, and was afterward more
plainly prophesied, Es. 7.14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou shall call his Name
Immanuel. The blessed Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35.
by the power of the Highest, through the vvorking of the Holy Ghost, Non autem
omnes sunt sicut Maria, vt dum de Spiritu Sancto concipiunt, verbum pariant.
Ambros. l. 2. in Lucam. Vbi virgo been credula mente^ suam and ossuum aperuit
yt diceret, Ecce ancilla etc. mox iuxta dictum Angeli. Spiritus Sanctus
superveniens in eam per apertas fidei ianuas, sese infudit: quo autem? nimirum
prius in sacrarium pudici pectoris, deinde in templum sacri vteri, ut Christi
matrem faceret. etc. Rupertus l. 1. de operibus Sp: S: c. 9. and, c. 10.
conceptusiste Spiritus Sancti non generatio sed operatio est.
conceived, bare, and brought forth our Savior in the flesh. Luke 1.35.
Therefore also that holy thing which was borne of her, is called the son
of God. As at the first Genesis 1.2.
God spoke the word, and the spirit moned upon the deep, working therein an
obedientiall power to be what God would: So in the fullness of time, the Word
himself was made man of the blessed virgin, Hunc ergo cum confiteamur, natum
de Spiritu Sancto, and Maria-virgine, quomodo non sit filius Spiritus Sancti,
and sit filius virginis Mariae, cum and de illo, and de illa sit natus,
explicare difficile est. Proculdubio quippe, non sic de illo, ut de patre, sic
autem de illa, ut de matre natus est. August: Enchir. ad Laurent. c. 38.
by the ouershadowing of the same spirit, which wrought Et idem lib. 1. de
peccatorum meritis and remiss. c. 29. Non concupiscentia carnis, sed obedientia
mentis virgo concepit. etc.
faith and obedience in her heart, whereby she became indeed the mother of
the Son of God. At first she doubted at the Angels message; Luke 1. v. 34.
Non dubitat esse faciendum, quod quomodo fiat inquirit. Ambros. in Lucam: l. 2.
obstabant quidem adhuc multa, quae carnis rationi dubium mouere poterant, sed
procul explosis illis omnibus, diuinae voluntati sese committit, et it a ex
fide concipit, sicut de Sarah in epistola ad Hebraeos scribitur, Gualte^. hom.
3. die conceptionis.
How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? But Atque iam tune spititu donatam
fuisse Mariam non est dubium. Sed significatur singularis and efficacissima Sp.
S. operatio, ut supra Samp. et prophet. ib.
when the spirit of God came upon her (which might well be even whilst the
Angel was speaking, Acts 10.44.
As vvhilest Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the
word) then she believed what was told her; that the Son of God should
become her child, assuming flesh of her, and then she said, Luke 1.38.
Contingat mihi secundum verbum tuum, conceptus est voti. Ambros. l. 2. in Lucam.
Be it unto me according to thy word. She conceived the Word first in her Deum
verum prius mente quam ventre fuscepit virgo. Rupertus l. 1. de operibus Sp. S.
c. 9. Mente prius quam carne concepit. Gersontin prooem. centil. Responde O
virgo Verbum, et suscipe Verbum, profer tuum, et suscipe diuinum. Bern. hom. 4.
supermissus, etc. Responde Verbum, et suscipe Filium, da fidem et senti
virtutem. Aug. Sermon. de nativ.
heart by faith, and then his flesh in her womb. Heb. 11.11.
Did not Sarah her self receive strength through faith to conceine, and was
delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful who had promised? So did the blessed Virgin; and more then so,
Faelix Maria quae Dei promissionem cord amplexa, sibi totique mundo salutem
concepit ac peperit. Calu. in locum.
by faith; Legerat Maria, ecce concipiet in utero, et pariet filium, imo
credidit futurum, sed quomodo heret non antea legerat. non enim quemadmodum
fieret, vel prophet tanto fuerat reuelatum.
for she having heard and believing that the seed of the woman should break
the serpents head, as it was promised at the beginning, that a virgin should
conceine and bear a son, God with us, as it was afterward prophesied, and
now believing through the Holy Ghost that she her self was so highly honored
to be that woman, that virgin, blessed amongst women, Tantum enim mysterium
non hominis fuit, sed Angelorum ore promendum. Ambros. lib. 2. in Lucam.
as she was greeted by the Angel, she became, not only the mother, but the
Mifit Deus Filium suum natum, non per mulierem, sed ex muliere. Bafil. in locum.
matter of Christ his humane nature. And therefore her cosen Elizabeth
congratulating her conception, said, Blessed is she that Luk: 1.45. Vides
minime dubitasse Mariam, sed credidisse, etideo fructum fidei consecutam:
Ambros: in verba Elizabet: Beata quae credidisti: l: 2: in Lucam. Dicens, beata
quae credidisti, aperte indicat, quia verba Angeli, quae dicta ad Mariam
fuerant, per Spiritum agnouit. etc. Greg. hom 1: in Ezekiel. Itaque ab illa mox
discedit Angelus, v^pote confecto plane negotio, cujus causa ad illam missus
fuerat: Gualter: hom: 3: die conceptionis.
believed, for there shall be a performance of the things that were told her
of the Lord. Thus the eternal son of God assumed, or took unto himself the
humane nature, and without confusion of natures, became God and man in one
person.

It was necessary that Christ should be as well man, as God, to discharge his
threefold office. The offices of Christ.
First of a Prophet to bring unto us the word of reconciliation, the glad
tidings of saving peace and truth. For man having sinned, could no more endure
to hear God himself speak in his majesty. And therefore when the Law was
given, they craved an intercessor, saying, Exodus 20. v. 19.
Let us not hear the voice of God any more, lest we die, wherefore Gal. 3. v.
19.
the law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. And for the
gospel, Moses promised them, saying, Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15.16.
The Lord your God shall raise up a Prophet unto you, from the midst of your
brethren, like unto me, him shall you hear. Therefore the son of God came
veiled under the flesh, that he might familiarly, and yet powerfully teach us
his Fathers will. Again, because Heb: 8:3.
every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts, and sacrifices, therefore it
was of necessity that Christ should have somewhat also to offer. And that such
as was shadowed by their sacrifices, as might be acceptable to God, and
availeable for us. Heb: 9.22.
But without shedding of blood is no sacrifice, no remission, c. 10.45.
Neither is it possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away
sin. Wherefore when he comes into the world he says, Sacrifice and
offering thou would not have, but a body have thou prepared me. It was just
with God, that man should make satisfaction for man's transgression, and it was
meet for us, that so the children of men might have the benefit of the Son of
man's merit. Lastly, for his greater conquest, and of the more glorious
redemption of us, and for the kingdom in us, to the Father, from the hands of
our enemies, it became our Lord, and King, the captain of our salvation, to
take our feeble nature, and that of the weaker vessel, that he might show his
strength in our weakness, and conquer Satan at his own weapon. Heb. 2.14.
He was therefore partaker of flesh and blood, v. 15.
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil, and deliver them, who through the fear of death, were all their
life time subject to bondage. v. 10.
And it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation
perfect through sufferings, that he might be Isay. 45.21.
a just God and a Savior. All which offices are accordingly discharged, and
performed for our reconciliation and redemption, by that one Mediator betwixt
God and man, the man Christ Jesus. The office of the great Prophet he performed
in the days of his flesh. Ioh. 7.46.
He spoke as never man spoke, and sealed the truth of the word, which he
had preached with his blood, as generally all the Prophets did. Act. 7.52.
For which of the Prophets have they not slain. The office of the High Priest
he performed at his death, himself the sacrifice, himself the Priest, as he
had foretold by the word of his Prophecy, and he ever makes it good unto us
by the power of his Majesty. He suffered a cruel, a shameful, a cursed
death, upon the cross, measuring out the height, and depth, the length, and
breadth, of his merit and satisfaction, for the sins of the whole world. Heb.
12.2.
And now he that endured the cross despising the shame, is set down at the
right hand of the throne of God. Where he exercises his regal power and
authority, with all might and majesty, making good his word and sacrifice with
God, for his faithful people, against all the enemies of his-grace. Act. 5.31.
For him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior,
to give repentance unto Israel and forgiveness of sins. And he shall come
again to judge both the quick and the dead: Es. 33.22.
The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he
will save us. Wherefore although it be the scandale of the Jews, and the
reproach of Christians with them, and with all Infidels unto this day, that
Christ should come in the form of a servant, and should suffer such indignity,
and extremity as Jesus did, not beseeming the innocence, and excelleney of such
a person; as they supposed the Messiah should be: yet is it our glory, that
the Son of God has vouchsafed us such grace, and Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that we should glory, save in the cross of Christ Jesus, Luke
24.26.27
knowing by all the Scriptures, that he ought to suffer such things, and so
to enter into his glory. As it was showed by the 1. Pet. 1.11.
Prophets through the spirit of Christ, that was in them, testifying before
hand, his sufferings and the glory that should follow. Habak. 2.3.
The vision whereof is yet for an appointed time, but in the end it shall
speak and not lie. Which we are well assured, because the promises are by him
already performed. For he has broken the serpents head, in that he overcame
the Devils temptations in person, cast him out of possession in other men,
triumphed over principalities, and powers on his cross, and led them captive
when he ascended, and has ever since Magnus Deus Pan mortuus est. vide
Plutarchi libellum de defectu oraculorum.
silenced their deluding oracles, and he will shortly trample Satan under our
feet. And for the other promise of the blessing upon all nations, he has
Ephesians. 2.16.
reconciled all unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity
thereby, who came and preached peace to us, that were afar off, and to them
that were nigh. Gal. 3.8.
The very same Gospel which was preached before to Abraham, in thee shall all
the nations be blessed, was thus performed. v. 14.
For now the blessing of Abraham is come on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ.

The grace of our Lord Jesus.
1. Cor. 1.30.
Who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. Wisdom in the acknowledgement of him by faith, Colos. 2.3. Wisdom.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and of the Father
by him, Matthew. 11.27. Cui enim veritas comperta sine Deo? Cui Deus cognitus
sine Christo? Cui Christus exploratus sine Spiritu Sancto? Tert. l. de an; c. 1.
For no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son has
revealed him; And both by the Holy Ghost, who proceeding from the Father and
the Son, spoke by the Prophets and Apostles, and still speaks in their word,
to the heart of every true believer. 1. Cor. 12.3.
No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, by whom we also
cry Abba Father. Prove. 30.4.
Tell me now, who is he that ascended and descended, and has established the
bounds of the earth, what is his name, and what is his sons name, if
thoucanst tell? If thou can not tell, v. 2.
Surely thou art more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a
man. v. 3.
Thou have not learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. 1. John.
5.20.
But we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life.
For John. 17.3.
This is life eternal, to know the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus
Christ, whereby we are made wise unto salvation.

Christ is our righteousness, Righteousness.
even Ier. 33.16.
the Lord our Righteousness. Rom: 3:25. Iustitia Dei dicitur, non qua iustus est
Deus, sed quam dat homini Deus, vt iustus sit homo per Deum. August. tract. 26.
in Johan.
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness, that he may be just, and the iustifier of him that
believes in Jesus. Romans 10.5.
Moses describes the righteousness of the Law, that the man that does those
things shall live, by them. Which Saint Paul applies unto us in Christ: That
v. 6.7.
we need not ascend into heaven, nor descend into the deep to seek the man,
Christ is the man, who has fulfilled all righteousness, and has Christi caro
damnauit peccatum, quod nascendo non sensit, quod moriendo crucifixit, vt in
carne nostra esset justificatio per gratiam, vbierat ante colluvio per culpam.
Ambros: cont: Novatian: de poenitentia: lib: 1. cap. 2.
satisfied for our unrighteousness. Romans 10.4.
Wherefore he is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes. Cap. 5.18. Obedientia in vtramlibet partem propenderit, aut culpam
adiungit aut gratiam. Haec nos in primo Ada^ traxit ad mortem, haec nos in Adam
secundo ad vitam vocavit. Ambros. l. 1. de Jacob and vita beata. cap. 3.
For as by the offense of one man, judgment came upon all men to condemnation,
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift is come upon all men, to
justification of life. Whereof they are altogether ignorant, Romans 10.3.
who going about to establish their own righteousness, hauc not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. But Luke 7.35. Deus ergo sapientia est
quia sapientia Dei Filius est: and mox, Iustificemus ergo Dominum vt
iustificemur a Domino. Ambros, in Luc. l. 6. c. 1.
wisdom is justified of her children: And as it is our glory to glorify God,
so to justify him is our righteousness.

Again Christ is our Sanctification, Sanctification.
for Heb. 2.11.
both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, both
of one nature, he having assumed the flesh, and we through him being made 2.
Pet. 1.4.
partakers of the divine nature by his spirit, and both in one case, he in our
stead 2. Cor. 5.21.
being made sin for us, and we in him by grace, Col. 1.21.22.
whom he reconciled in the body of his flesh, through death, to present us
unto God, holy and unblameable, and vnreproveable in his sight. For as he
satisfied God for us by his suffering; so he sanctified us unto God, by
offering us up in himself. Lo I come, says he, to do thy will O Lord. And he
submitted unto the death, saying, not my will, but thy will be done. Heb.
10.9.10.
By the which will we are sanctified, by the offering of the body of Jesus, once
for all. And by that offering he has perfected for ever all those that are
sanctified. Romans 5.19. In ptimo Adam offendimus, non faciendo praeceptum; in
secundo autem Adam reconciliati sumus obedientes vsque ad mortem crucis.
Irenaeus lib. 5. advers. haeres.
Wherefore as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many also be made righteous.

Lastly Christ is our redemption. Redemption
Gal. 3.13. Delevit chirographum, debita nostra, and affixit illud cruci, vti
quemadmodum per lignum facti sumus debitores Deo, per lignum accipiamus nostri
debiti remissionem, Irenaeuslib. 3. cap. 17.
For he has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.
For it is written: Cursed is every one that hangs on tree. And wherefore was
the death on the tree accursed above all kinds of death but as the serpent was
accursed above all beasts of the field? Both for the first transgression,
whereof the serpent was the inst^^^^t, the tree the occasion. The father of all
mankind would needs eat the sinful fruit of the forbidden tree, and the
son of man must needs taste the deadly fruit of the cursed tree; to recover
our salvation, as it were back again by the same way. 1. Cor. 15.22.
Wherefore as in Adam all dyed, so in Christ shall all be made alive. Who
having on the tree satisfied the law, Colos. 2.14.15.
blotted out the had writing of ordinances that was against us, and took it
out of the way, nayling it unto his cross. And having so spoiled
principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in it. For when the law was satisfied and cancelled, Satan's commission for
Quomodo mors a capite superata videtur quae tanta adhuc liberate saevit in
membra? victa plane mors opus diaboli and peccati poena, victum peccatum causa
mortis, victus and malignus ipse, and peccati author and mortis. Nam and
peccatum licet simul cum Christo cruci ipsius non dubitetur affixum, adhuc
tamen interim non regnare quidem, sed habitare etiam in ipso, dum viveret
Apostolo permittebatur. Sic and mors ipsa minime quidem adhuc abesse cogitur,
sed cogitur non obesse. Bernard. sermon: in transit: S. Malachiae.
death which he had by the law, expired. 1. Cor. 15.55.56.57.
O Death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God which
gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus the grace of God, The spirit of Grace.
that brings salvation, has appeared unto us in Christ Jesus, by which Ephesians.
2.8.
grace we are saved through faith; and that not of our selves it is the gift
of God, who works all grace in us by his spirit. As by the word and spirit of
God every thing was made at first as God would have it: So now he calls men
Deus quos dignatur vocat, and quem vult religiosum facit. Ambros. l. 6. in
Lucam: c. 46.
whom he pleases, out of the world that lies in wickedness, and they Hic
absque cmendicatisaliunde suffragijs quos co^pungit inungit, quos invitat
consummat, quod praecipit efficit. Arnold. Bonav. lib. de operibus sex dierum
cap. 2.
moved and enlightened by his spirit believe and come. Haec erit vis divinae
gratiae, potentier vtique natura, habens in nobis subjacentem sibi liberam
arbitrij potestatem, quod (...) dicitur. Tertul:de an. cap. 21.
Without whose grace we have no present faculty, or ability by nature to make
means for grace, or of our selves to use the means being offered, Ephesians. 2.1. c
4.18.19.
Being dead in sins and trespasses, alienated from the life of God, past
feeling. For although we have the same Potentias habemus potestatem amisimus.
powers of nature as at the first, yet have we not the same nature all power to
use them, being in our selves utterly indisposed and disabled; as paralytikes
have little or no use of their limbs and senses. And is it not often so with
perfect men, Potentia prima secunda

that they have not the power (as we say) to do on a sudden an ordinary
thing at hand, (...). Chrisost, in ^ad Corinth. hom. 24.
or to make use of that which is their own? Eccl: 5.19.
Every man to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has given him power
to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labor, this is
the gift of God. And if it be so with us in these natural things and
temporal, how much more Neque fideles fiunt, nisi libero arbitrio, and tamen
illius gratia fideles fiunt qui eorum a potestate tenebrarum liberavit
arbitrium. August, ep. 107. ad Vitale^. mox ab initio.
in things spiritual and eternal? 1. Cor. 2.10.11.
Again what man knows the things of a man which is in him? Even so the
things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God by whom they are revealed
unto us. For v. 9.
they are such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man. And naturally nothing enters into the heart but by some
sense, whereby we have all our intelligence. Now (...).

Haec absque meliori afflatu, ac^ diviniore virtute, non posunt venire in
contemplationem hominum. Origin l 4. contr: Celsum.


the things of God are not perceived by sense, nor comprehended by science, but
by manifestation of the truth to every man's conscience, in the sight of God,
through a private intelligence, betwixt him and us by his spirit, whereby he
reveals himself in the word, (...). Neque enim ab vllis perspici aut
intelligi possunt, nisi quibus Deus and Christus eius concesserit
intelligentiam. Just Mattyr. in Dialog. cum Triphone Iudaeo.
to whom he pleases, from under the letter, as Christ did sometimes manifest
himself to be the word, the Son of God, from under the flesh. Prou. 17.16.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he
has no heart to it? 1. Cor. 2.14.
For the natural man receives not, nor indeed perceives the things of God,
both because all our Iam. 3.15.
natural wisdom being carnal is earthly, and sensual, if not deuillish; and
because the things of God are supernatural. But 1. Cor. 2.14.
they are spiritually discerned, by the same spirit, whereby they were
revealed. Job. 32. v. 8.
Surely there is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives
them understanding.

Every grace of God in us, Preventing Grace.
is the impresse of the like grace of God toward us expressed in Christ Jesus,
(...): Vocat Chrisost: eiusque discipulus Isiodor. Pelus. (...). Chrisost.
(...).
impressed on our hearts by the Holy Ghost, the almner and dispenser of the
manifold gifts and graces of God, 1. Cor. 12.11.
dividing to every man sueuerally, as he will, Ephesians. 4 7.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Job. 1.16.
Of whose fullness we all receive even grace for grace, but every grace in its
order, first faith, then those that are of faith, to wit, love and hope. 2.
Cor. 3.18.
For we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of God, namely c.
4.6.
in the face of Jesus Christ, v. 4.
by the light of his glorious Gospel, c. 3.18.
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of
the Lord. God that spoke things at the first, when he spoke them their being,
still Romans 4.17.
calls things that are not, is if they were, and anon they are so; Hos. 2.23.
^ Pet. 2.10.
He says to the^ that were 'not his people, thou art my people; and they moved
by the holy Ghost say, Thou art my God Gal. 4.9.
Now we know God by faith, Ab initio fidei misericordiam consecutisumus, non
quia fideles eramus, sed vt essemus. August. ep. 105: ad Sixtum. Fidem vocat
Clemens Alexand: (...), primam salutis inclinationem l. 2. (...). Fides est
prima quae subjugat animum Deo. August. lib. de agone Christiano. c. 9.
or rather we are known of God in Christ, 2. Tim. 2.19.
having this seal, The Lord knows who are his. 1. John. 4.10.
And herein is love, not that we loved him, but that he loved us, and sent his
son to be a propitiation for our sins. Non habet homo vnde diligat Deum nisi ex
Deo, Aug. l. 15. de tri. c. 17. Tales nos amat Deus, qualesfuturi sumus ipsius
dono, non quales sumus nostro merito, Conciliu^ Arausicanu^ 2. can. 12. vid.
plur. c. 25. Amor Dei* quo pervenitur ad Deum, non est nisi a Deo patre, per
Iesum cum Spiritu Sancto. Per hunc amorem creatoris, been quisque vtitur
creaturis Auglib. 4. cont. Iul. c. 3. ad caleem.
When we were not loving unto him, nor any thing lovely in our selves, but
Ezekiel. 16.6.
lay weltring in our blood, and were Colos. 1.21.
enemies in our minds by evil works; then he reconciled us unto himself in
Christ, and Ezech. 16.6.
passing by, said unto us, live, yet now having Romans 5.5.
the love of God shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given
unto us, 1. Pet. 1.8.
we love him also though we have not seen him, and Romans 5.2.3.
we rejoice not only 'in hope of his glory, but in our afflictions for his
sake, with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1. Pet. 4.14.
because the spirit of glory and of God rests upon us. And still we follow
after in hope, God succouring us with his grace, Phil. 3.11.12.
if having not yet attained, we may be any means apprehend that for the which
we are apprehended of Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
In who^ after that we believed, we were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the
purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory. Reu. 22.17.
Now the spirit and the bride say, come, and let him that hears say, come.
And let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water
of life Ideogratia quia gratis datur, ideo gratis datur, quia non quasimerces
redditur post discussionem metitorum, sed donum datur post delictorum veniam.
August. de verbis Domini: sermon. 61.
freely.

If it were in man to preve^t God by preparing and disposing himself unto
grace, or any way to make himself more worthy thereof the^ others, why should
not Romans 9.13.
Israel that followed after the law of righteousness, have attained to the law
of righteousness? Because they sought it not by faith. True: but why did they
not believe? because they (...). Chrisost. homil. 30. in acta At post.
had not the grace, Matthew. 13.11.
For to them it was not given to know the mysteries of of the kingdom of
heaven. And for them who received the Gospel unto salvation, Saint Paul who
was Phil. 3.5.6.
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and concerning the righteousness which is by the
law blameless, professes saying, Tit. 3.5.
not by the work of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us. And how did Romans 9.30.
The Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, attain unto righteousness
eve^ the righteousness which is by faith? Rom 10.20.
Esaias is bold and says, I was found of those that Fides erat qu data est non
oranti; quae vtique nisi data esset, orare non posset. quomodo enim invocabunt
etc. Aug. ep. 105. ad Sixtum.
sought me not, I was made manifest to those that asked not after me. 1. Cor.
1.26.
And why are not many wise called, Deum praeterijsse multos philosophos,
homines acuti ingenij, and eximiae eruditionis, praeteriisse etiam multos, qui,
si civiles mores spectes, innocents erant, and vitae probatae, vt enim
divitias misericordiae suae patefaceret, id magis consequitur, si eos adducat,
qui and magis reluctentur, and propter vitae merita ab ea magis sint alieni,
quam si eos qui humanae rationi videntur esse aptiores. August. 1. lib. ad
Simplicianum quaest. 2.
many who have the same means, and far better natural parts, helps of art,
and commendations of life, then some poor Publicans and sinners? We see our
calling, How that Mat. 20.16.
many are called but few are chosen, as it pleases him, 2. Tim. 1.9.
who has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus Electi sunt ante mundi constitutionem, ea praedestinatione, in qua
Deus sua futura facta praescivit, electi autem lunt de mundo ea vocatione, qua
Deus id quod praedestinavit implevit. August. de praedest. sanct. c. 17.
before the world began. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
We are bound therefore to give thanks unto God always, for the beloved of
the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen them unto salvation
through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth, whereunto we
are called by the Gospel. Whilst many others stand (...): Iud. 4. (...),
proscripti Plutarch. in Syll. p. 825. and 863.
proscribed by the law, whereby they were of old fore written to condemnation.
For the law remains an Col. 2.14.
handwriting against them uncancelled, 2 Thessalonians: 2.10.
who receive not the love of the truth that they might be saved.

Hab. 2.4.
Now the just shall live by his faith, The state of Grace.
for it shall be unto him according to his faith, which is of life, from God
the father, in Christ Jesus his son our savior, by the Holy Ghost, quickening
the Holy Habet popusus Dei plenitudinem suam, and qua^vis magna pars hominu^
salvantis gratia^ aut repellat, aut negligat, in electis tamen and praescitis,
atque ab omnium gegeneralitate discretis, specialis quaeda^ censetur
vniversalitas, vt and detoto mundo, totus mundus liberatus, and de
omnibushominibus omnes homines videantur assumpti. Ambr. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1
c. 3.
Catholic Church, which is his body, Ephesians. 1.23.
the fullness of him that fills all in all. A life of grace here by
reconciliation and communion with God, and a life of glory hereafter, thorough
the forgiveness of sins, and resurrection of our bodies to eternal life;
The 1. Pet. 3.7.
grace of life in Christ works in us a life of grace by his spirit. For the
sanctifying graces of GOD rest not in the habit, but are in action. 1 Thessalonians.
1.3.
The work of faith, the labor of love, the patience of hope. Heb. 11.
By faith A bell, by faith Abraham, by faith every one of the holy men in the
cloud of witnesses, did some notable work, which did evide^ce their faith to
be indeed, as they professed. v. 16.
Wherefore God was not ashamed to be called their God. Iam. 2.22.
Faith wrought with their works, for Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God, Iam. 2.22.
and by works was their faith made perfect: For the perfection of virtue
consists in action. So must c. 1.4.
Patience have her perfect work; 1. Ioh. 3.18.
So must love be not in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth.
Iam: 2.15.16.
If a brother or a sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of
you say unto them depart in peace, be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding
you give them not those things, which are needful to the body, what does it
profit? 20.26.
Faith without works is dead, and so is love, no faith indeed, but a bold
presumption; no love indeed, but a mere pretense. Iam. 2.18.
"Show me thy faith by thy works, but do thy works before God in faith. By
faith our selves are justified before God, by good works our faith and
profession are justified, and approved unto men. For thereby it appears that
we are in the faith, and that our faith is in God. Tit. 3.8.
This therefore is a faithful saying, that they which have believed in God,
be careful to maintain good works. Iam. 2.26.
For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith whithout works is dead
also. And if our faith be dead, whereby we live, how dead are we? Iud: 12.
twice dead and plucked up by the roots. Rom: 3.4 5. C.
We are justified by a lively faith, says Saint Paul, Iam: 2.
We are not justified by a dead faith, says St James, wherefore little
children, 1. John 3.7.
Let no man deceive you, says St John. He that does righteousness, is
righteous, even as he is righteous. 1. Tim: 1.14.
Now the grace of our Lord is exceeding abundant, with faith and love, which
are in Christ Jesus. 2. Pet: 1.3.
According as his Divine power has given unto us all things that pertain unto
life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory
and virtue.

Now although the whole Church, and every true member thereof, whom the Father
has chosen, whom the Son has redeemed, whom the Holy Ghost has effectually
called, through sanctification and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, be holy
in Gods account, and although God be glorified in his Saints here upon earth,
by their blessed communion with him, and with all men in love, whereby they are
also highly dignified, and in a manner diefied, 2 Pet. 1.4.
being made partakers of the divine nature, so that they do far excel all the
world besides 1 John 5.19.
that lies in wickedness: In hac vita multi sine crimine, nullus vero esse sine
peccatis valet. Greg. in Moral. Vae etiam laudabili hominu^ vitae, si remota
misericordia discutias eam. Aug. l. 9. confess. c. 13. Nemosine peccato. Negare
hoc sacrilegium est, Solus enim Deus sine peccato est. Confiteri hoc Deo
immunitatis remedium est. Ambros. in Ps. 118. v. vlt.
yet when all is done, we believe and confess, that we have still need of
farther grace and mercy, even the forgiveness of our sins, if by any means we
may attain the resurrection of our bodies to eternal life. Wherefore as on the
one side, 1 John. 1.6.
If we say that we have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, and
do not the truth. So on the other side, V. 8.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If any man think that being of
the Church, and in the communion of Saints, he needs not the forgiveness of
sins to the last, let him also raise his own body, from death to life. Phil.
3.20, 21.
But we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our
vile body, that it maybe fashioned like unto his glorious body, inheriting
eternal life. Which begins so soon as we believe, John 5.25.
for the hour is come, that the dead hear the voice of the son of God, and
they that hear it live, and never ends, nor shall ever be quite interrupted by
sin, nor death. V. 24.
For he that believes has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life.

The brief of all is, The praise of the glory of Gods grace.
that, Habak. 2.
The just shall live by his faith; which the Prophet Habakucke received of God,
like as Moses received the Law, namely upon his watch-towre, with express
charge v. 2.
to write it, and to make it plain on tables. And the Apostle has given us
the constat thereof, purposely Gal. 3.
comparing the two covenants together. v. 11.
That no man is justified by the Law in the sight of GOD it is manifest, For
the Just shall live by faith. v. 12.
And the Law is not of faith, but the man that does them, shall live in them.
Romans 3.27.
Where is boasting now? It is excluded. By what Law? By the Law of works? Nay,
but by the Law of faith. 1 Cor. 1.31.
That according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.
Which we do, if we believe and do as we profess: if denying our selves, and
al other means, we ascribe the Totum Deo deturqui vosuntatem hominis bonam
praeparat adjuvan. dam, and adjuvat praeparatam. August. Enchir. ad Laurent. c.
37.
whole work of our salvation to God alone, indeauouring so to live, as may
Tit. 2.10.
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things, and not cause 1 Timothy 6.1.
his Name and doctrine any way to be blaspheamed. First acknowledging our own
natural unworthiness, and vntowardlines, 2 Cor. 3.5.
who are not able of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, we give
God the praise of his Hominis bonum propositu^ adjuvat quidem subsequens
gratia, sed nec ipsu^ esset nisi praecederet gratia. Aug. l. 2. contra duas
Pel. ep. c. 9
preventing grace, Phil. 2.13.
who works in us both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure. And then of
his Sine illo vel operante vt velimus, vel cooperante cum volumus ad bona
pietatis opera nihil valemus. Idem de. great. and lib. arb. c. 27.
assisting grace if we be willing, and obey, 2 Cor. 6.1.
and receive not his grace in vain, Mat. 3.8.
but bring forth fruits meet for repentance. For by well-doing we shall show
forth the praises of him, 1 Pet. 2.9.
that has called us out of darkness, into his marvailous light, V. 12.
and shall thereby occasion others also to glorify God in the day of their
visitation. John 15.8.
Hereby God is glorified, that ye bear much fruit. Again acknowledging our
vnanswerablenesse yet to the grace received, by reason of our continual
infirmities, we give him the Majoris prtij beneficium est quod praestatur
indignis. Salvian. l. 4. de. gub. Dei,
praise of the al-sufficiency of his grace to save us, notwithstanding our
manifold deficience therefrom, whilst 2 Cor. 12.9.
his strength is made perfect in our weakness. Therefore we glory in our
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon us. And withal confessing
our continual sins, we give him the praise of his righteousness, 1 John 1.9.
who is just to forgive us our sins, though many times he suffer not
malefactors to go unpunished. Josh. 7.19.
As Ioshuah willed Achan to make confession of the fact, and to give glory to
GOD. And as David himself did, saying, Ps. 51.4.
against thee have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou may
be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou iudgest. Lastly,
believing the resurrection of the body, we give God the praise of the Ephesians. 1.19.
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, Phil. 3.21.
according to the mighty working of his power, whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself. As To. 5.17.18.20
Abraham beleiuing God, who quickneth the dead, against hope believed in hope,
and staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but being strong in faith,
gave glory to God. And if we give him the praise of the glory of his grace, Ps.
84 11.
he will give us both grace and glory, and no good thing shall he with-holde
from them that live a godly life. Ier. 9. v. 23.
Wherefore let not the (...). Basil. hom. in Psalm. 33.
wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might,
let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that glories, glory in
this, V. 24.
that he understands, and knows me, that I am the Lord which exercise
loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth; for in these things I
delight, says the Lord.

CHAP. III. The Testaments.
The will of God. The word. The Scripture. That the Scripture is the word of
God. The intent of it. The consent in it. The old legal Testament. The new
Evangelical Testament. The event of prophesies. The power of the Gospel, The
Church. The administrators and over seers. Scripture the absolute Canon of
faith and life.

What assurance is there of the Covenant of Grace?
WE have GOD his Word for it in the Scripture, and that in two Testaments, both
written from his own mouth, and by the direction of his Spirit.

The covenant of grace being not a bargain made with God by our own selves,
The Will.
but procured for us by the intercession of a Mediator, and that through his
death, he therefore disposes the estate of life so purchased, to the 1 Pet.
3.7.
heirs of grace, by Will and Testament. Luke 22.29.
I bequeath, says he, a Kingdom unto you, as my Father has bequeathed unto
me. A Testament is a covenant by will, Heb. 9.16.17.
made good by the death of the Testator, who alone prescribes the conditions on
both sides, because he inables the Executour, who proving the Will, stipulates
and gives his faith by acceptilation. For he that accepts the offer, undertakes
and binds himself to perform the condition. So is the estate of grace
conveyed by Berirh. Foedus. (...). Testamentum. vid. Iun. paral. l. 3. in c. 9.
ad Heb. ver. 15. etc.
covenant testat, or by testament covenanted, in which respect the terms are
promiscuously used. And the authentike books of Scripture, being the public
instruments of God his will in writing, are called testame^ts, because they
contein the Quae Deus occulta esse voluit, non sunt scrutanda: quae autem
manifesta fecit non sunt neganda, ne in illis illicite curiosi, and in istis
damnabiliter inveniamur ingrati. Ambros. l. 1. de vocat. Gent. c. 7.
perfect will of God concerning us in Christ Jesus; the Gospel declaring what
he will do for us, the Law what service he will have us do unto him.
Whatsoever else is mentioned in Scripture, whether God's promises or threats of
things temporal or eternal, or his works of creation, or providence, his
blessings or judgments, or whether the words or deeds of men or angels, good or
bad, all serve one way or other to confirm, or illustrat the will of God,
concerning us, in some point of the Law, or in some article of our Creed. Which
two parts of the covenant, as it were the condition and the obligation, have
bin ever the same in substance, though not always in like manner dispensed,
especially the Gospel by reason of some weighty circumstances. The Law was
never given or made positive without the Gospel, neither is the Gospel now
without the Law, although the old testament be usually called the Law, and the
new the Gospel, because the Law is predominant in the one, and the Gospel in
the other; and the form of the covenant, is in the one logall, in the other
Evangelicall.

At first it was only a promise by word of mouth, The Word.
Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. Which GOD afterward
drew in form of Covenant with Abraham, saying, c. 12.3.
In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. Romans 4.11.
And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
faith. It pleased the Son of GOD in personal appearances, to converse with men
more familiarly, and to acquaint them with his Fathers will, and purpose by
lively voice, whilst yet they walked with him, in their vprightnes and
simplicity. Habet vocalis traditio nescio quid latentis onergiae. Hier.
Such kind of instruction, by the Word himself in person, did best befit the
infancy of the Church, that we might betrayned up by degrees to spell his
grace, when it should afterward be committed unto us in writing. And it was
needful for the first believers to have a more immediate conference with God,
that they might begin to us in the faith, with a full assurance. Who also
being long lived and faithful, might more safely transfer the will of GOD
committed to their trust, by tradition to their posterity, for many
generations. Genesis 18.17.18 19.
Shall I hide from Abraham, says the Lord, that thing which I will do, seeing
that Abraham shall become a great and mighty nation, and all the Nations of the
earth shall be blessed in him? For I know him that he will command his children
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.

But when once the Church was grown by the blessing of GOD, The Scripture.
as he had promised, into a nation, then confirming the covenant with them,
which he had made with their Father Abraham, GOD gave them the copy of his Will
in writing, Exodus 31.18.
the ten commandments written with his own finger, and the whole Law written
by Moses, with the history of the Creation, and of his providence from the
beginning of the world. And after Moses was gone, c. 33.11.
with whom God spoke face to face, he continually stirred up other Prophets,
whom he instructed Numb. 12.6.
by dreams and visions and secret inspirations, rising up early, and sending
them day by day unto his people Israel, whom they acquainted, in the name of
the Lord, with his will from time to time, according to the Law and the
testimony. Whose prophesies or sermons were recorded by themselves, and other
Quihaec scripserit valde supervacue quaeritur. Ipse haec scripsit qui haec
scribenda dictavit. Quid aliud agimus nisi legentes literas magni eujusdam viri
de calamo perscrutamur? Graeg. praef. in Job. c. 1. Haec prius per prophetas,
deinde per seipsum, postea per Apostolos, quantum satis esse judicavit,
locutus, etiam scripturam condidit, quae canonica nominatur, eminentissimae
authoritatis: Cui fidem habemus de his rebus quae ignorare non expedit, nec per
nosmetipsos scire idonei sumus. August. de civ. Dei lib. 11. cap. 3.
public notaries to the same spirit of truth, and were received by the people
of God, Hos. 8.12.
to vvho^ he had written the great things of his law, whereby they might try
and examine the same, Romans 3.2.
and to vvho^ his Oracles were committed in trust, their chiefest prerogative
and advantage above all nations, until himself came and confirmed all, saying,
John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures for they testify of me. 2 Timothy 3.16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and the prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man, but the holy men of GOD spoke as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost. Heb. 1.2.
But in these last days, God has spoken unto us by his Son in the flesh.
For c. 2.3.
the great salvation began to be spoken by the Lord himself, as it is reported
in Act. 1.1.
the Gospel, a treatise of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, and
Heb. 2.3.4.
it was confirmed to us by those that heard him. God also bearing them witness
both with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will. 2. Pet. 1.15. Apostolos idem Evangelium quod
praeoncionaverant postea per Dei voluntatem in Scripturis no, bis tradidisse
fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae suturum dicit Irenaeus l. 3. c. 1.
Who also provided that after their decease, the Church might always have a
memorial of those things which they had preached. And therefore after their
acts, it was not greiuous unto them to write the same things which they had
taught, and for us it was a safe thing, that by their several epistles, some
of them to the Church in general, which were accordingly dispersed, in many
places, others to certain particular Churches, which they also Coloss. 4.16.
were to communicate unto others, as it were so many copies, in so many men's
hands, to be Ipsi sane pauci esse debuerunt, ne multitudine vilesceret, quod
clarum religione esse oporteret, nec tamen ita paucivt little non sit micanda
consensio. Aug. de Civ. D.
produced, all consenting in the same truth, we might be asfured of God his
will, and confirmed in the present truth. And last of all S. John, who was, as
we may say, of Christ his bosom, besides his Gospel, and Epistles, continued
on by revelation until his coming again, foretelling all things concerning
the Church of God in the mean time, which experience makes good daily in our
eyes.

Now we may be sure that the Scripture is the Word of God, That the Scripture
is the Word of God.
Not only because it says so, but proves it by a threefold argument not to be
eluded. The intent of it, The consent in it, The event by it. Non ex sapiencia
sapiena Deus, sedex sapiente Deo sapientia procedit. Orig. ad Romans in calce.
Theology is not the inventio of humane study, but as the name imports, it is
the Word of God, which he spoke, and which speaks of him. For God is both the
author and the matter thereof, and all in Christ, Col. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of vvisdome and knowledge. Which mystery
provided in the counsel of God from everlasting, it was needful for us to
know from the beginning, that we might have the benefit thereby, and God the
glory by us. Edocuit autem Dominus, quoniam Deum scire neme possit, nisi Deo
docente, hoe est sine Deo non cognosci Deum: Irenaeus: l: 4: c. 14:
And that could not be, but by God his own word, who only was privy to his
own purpose. Therefore the eternal word and vvisdome of the Father, Prove.
8:31.
Who was ever delighted to be with the sons of men, has spoken in diverse
manners, at sundry times; at first in personal appearances, Praeludia
incarnationis Tertul:
the forerunnings of his incarnation, afterward by his forewitnessing spirit
in the Prophets, for Revel: 19:10:
the testimony of Christ Jesus is evermore the spirit of prophecy, and now at
last in the flesh, as was promised from the beginning. He is the Word in
substance, whereof the Scripture is the utterance. The unbelieving Jews
cavilled with Jesus, John: 8.13.
that his testimony of himself was not good, v. 15.
judging of him after the flesh, and according to their manner c. 5.44.
who received honor one from another, and sought not the honor that comes
from God.

But as Christ then proved himself to be the Word incarnate, The intent of
Scripture.
so does the Scripture prove it self to be the word written. John: 7.18.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his
glory that sent him, the same is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
So did Christ seek the glory of God unto the death, so does the Scripture
throughout. For it is the maine scope both of the law and of the gospel; and
of all that have spoken or written the word of God. For they speak not in
their own names, in any vainglory, but in the name of the Lord, thus says
the Lord; and they conceal not their faults, and infirmities, that God only
may have the glory of his own word. Which though it be sometimes Number vero Deus
and mentis and vocis and linguae artifex, diserte loqui non poterit? Imo vero
summa providentia carere fuco voluit ea, quae diuina sunt, vt omnes
intelligerent, quae ipse omnibus loquebatur. Lactant.
plain, is always Ps. 19.8.
pure, though sometimes dark, is always Heb. 4.12.
powerful, and in all respects most Institui animum intendere in Scripturas
sanctas, vt viderem quales essent. et ecce video rem non compertam superbis,
neque nudatam pueris, sed incessu humilem, successu excelsam, and velatam
mysterijs. August. l. 3. confess. c. 5.
maiesticall. Again, Job. 5.3.4.
I receive not testimony from man, says Christ, but these things I say, that
ye might be saved. Indeed in matter of judgment, where there is a claim of
right, and a strickt proceeding in law, Deuteronomy. 17.6. Ioh. 8.17.
every word shall stand, in the mouths of two or three witnesses. v. 15. c.
5.45.
But I judge no man, says Christ. So for the Scripture first of the old
Testament: Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. And for
the Gospel in the New Testament: Ioh. 20.31.
These things are written, says Saint John, that ye might believe, that Jesus
is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing you might have life through
his name.

We may be sure all this is not forged by any creature, man or Angel, good
or bad: for none that has any fear of God, durst arrogate to himself such
power, and authority, as is proper to God alone; and no Devil nor instrument
of his, would ever speak so much good of God, and Nulla alia scriptura nisi
ista immediate ducitad vitam beatam, quae sola est vita simplicitet quia mortem
neseit. Lyranus in prolog: in SS. bibl.
so much for our good, to his glory in our salvation. It is our part therefore
to give him the glory, that we may reap the benefit. John. 3.33.
He that has received the testimony of Christ, has set to his seal, that
God is true; but he 1. John. 5.
that beleueeth not, has made God a liar, because he believes not the record
that God gave of his Son. And this is the record, that God has given to us
eternal life, and this life is in his Son. It were unreasonably foolish for
us in this case to demand farther proof of God his word, because it is a case
not of judgment but of covenant, and that of his free grace, for our only
benefit, not for any advantage to himself; and that upon this only condition,
that we truly believe and accept it. Ioh. 5.24.
He that believes shall never come into condemnation, Ioh. 3.18.
He that believes not, needs no more judging, he is already condemned in
himself, because he has not believed. For therefore his sin remains, for
the which the law condemns. Will condemned malefactors stand upon it, to have
the King prove his pardon, before they will accept it? (...). 1. Tim. 1.15.
This therefore is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners. Let him receive it that can,
saying, I am the chief.

For the consent of Scripture, The consent in Scripture.
it has in effect bin declared already, the sum whereof is, that the Law and
the Prophets give testimony to Christ, foretelling what he should do. Ioh.
5.39.
Search the Scriptures, says he, for they testify of me. Quibus Dominus
testimonium perhibet, tanquam testibus suis. Aug. l. 2. contra ep. Gaudentii.
c. 23.
And he again gives testimony unto them, performing what they forespake of
him. Ioh. 5.36.
The works, says he, that the Father has given me to finish, the same
works do witness of me. For all things were foretold of him, Ioh: 13:19.
that when they came to pass we might believe. So that the two Testaments
give Nam quia latorem duo testamenta per vnum pacta Deum in Christo copulat vna
fides, Lex antiqua novam firmat, veterem nova complett In veteri spes est, in
novitate fides. Sed vetus atque novum coniungit gratia Christi.
mutual testimony one to the other in Christ, and both give testimony of him,
and he to them: like Exodus 25.18. c: 37: 8. 9. Nonne tanquam duo Seraphin
clamant adinuicem concinentiam laudis altissimo: Ita duo testamenta fideliter
concordantia sacratam concinunt veritatem Deo? Aug. ep. 119: ad Ianuar.
as the 2. Cherubims, over the mercy seat, point with their wings one to the
other, and both look down into the Arc of the covenant. They in the Old
Testament 1. Pet. 1.12. (...).
minister the things, which are now reported unto us, by them that have
preached the Gospel unto us, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which
things the Angels desire to look into: Ephesians. 3.9.10.
Even the mystery which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God,
who created all things by Jesus Christ, which now by the Church is made known
unto principalities and powers, in heavenly places, even the manifold wisdom
of God, according to the eternal purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus
our Lord. The word in substance and the word in utterance, the two principal
pillars of God his Church stand like the 1. Kings: 7.21.
two pillars in Solomon's porch, Iachin and Boaz. The word gives testimony unto
Christ, first foretelling, and then reporting all things of him, and Christ in
whom is strength, shall stablish his word, performing all things accordingly.
The same reason evicts by process from the word of God, that Jesus is the
Christ, and by regresse from Christ, that the Scripture is the word of God: for
if those things be fulfilled in Jesus which were spoken of Christ, and which
none could foretell but God, then is Jesus the Christ, and the Scripture the
word of God. 2. Cor. t. 20.
Now all the promises of God are yea, and in him amen, to the glory of God by
us. The Prophesies of the Messiah are precisely observed, throughout the
Gospel, to be fulfilled in him, with this note, That it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophets. The offices of Christ intimated in that
title, and shadowed in the Law, are all accordingly discharged by our Lord
Jesus, as the Apostle demonstrates by a perpetual parallel, in his epistle to
the Jews; who stood much thereupon.

Whatsoever is future, is until then obsoure. The old Legal Testament.
So was the covenant in the Old Testament, and that so much the more, because
it was in a legal form, and went on in a legal tenor by command with
promise, as that of works did. Exodus 34.28. Ps. 78.5.
He declared unto them his covenant which he commanded them to perform, even
ten commandments. Nay not only the moral duties, but even the graces which
had been promised, were commanded in certain types, and figures, to be
observed, and their faith thereof to be professed by rites and ceremonies. The
Law was so given, that it might be, not only an hand writing of ordinances
against them, but withal an hand leading of them unto Christ the ever promised
Messiah, so shadowed unto them. Quid est aliud hodieque gens ipsa Iudaeorum,
nisi quaedam scriniaria Christianorum, balulanslegem and Prophetas ad
testimonium assertionis ecclesiae. Aug: contra Faustum Manichaeum: l 12. c. 23.
Et idem in Psalm: 56. In qua erergo opprobrio sunt Iudaei? Codicem portat
Iudaeus, vnde credat Christianus: Librarij nostri facti sunt, quomodo solent
serui post dominos codicesferre stisti portando deficiant, illi legendo
proficiant.
And it ever remains unto us an handwriting against them who have not
believed. For it should have been their Gal. 3.24.
Schoolmaster unto Christ, v. 19.
For it was added because of transgressions, to keep them within the pale of
the covenant, which they were ever most ready to transgress, and to lead them
to the fountain of grace, which else they would never have sought: whilst by
the one law they knew how God would be served, and failing thereof, they might
perceive by the other, how yet notwithstanding they should be saved. A kind
of discipline fitted to the Gal. 4.1.
nonage of the Church and frowardnes of that people, that by visible things
they might be drawn on, and be kept under by the Law, as it were Gal. 3.23.
guarded, and shut up, and paled in unto the faith, which should afterward be
revealed. The ceremonial law, given by Moses, in certain signs and figures,
proper to that time of infancy, for the help of their faith, is now ceased,
since the things themselmes came in sight. 1. Cor. 13.10.
For when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away: as the lesser lights are swallowed up in the glorious splendor of
the Sun. Wherefore to practice those ceremonies of figure, which are abolished,
being accomplished, were Iewishly to deny Christ, and to bring in practice
their ceremonies of order, by any imposed, or with any supposed necessity,
which was the wall of partition, is very repugnant to Christian liberty. Galo:
5.1.
we must therefore stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free; else Christ shall profit us nothing. The judicial law proper to that
kingdom of the Jews, for their civil government, although it be not
necessarily enjoined us, yet being God his own commentary upon the moral law,
and an absolute form of government, appointed by God himself, for his own
people, cannot be unworthy our imitation, in the equity thereof, so far as it
may stand with these times, and with the conditions of several nations. But
the moral law of the necessary duties of love, abides for ever. 1. Cor. 13.8.
For love never fails, but is ever more and more perfected, from a kind of
servile fear at the first entrance, to a vvilling obedience, and from the
will here, to a perfect deed hereafter.

Iobn: 1:17:
The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. They
under the Old Testament lightly following the letter, mistook the meaning, 2
Cor: 3:13.
not looking to the end of that which was to be abolished, whereunto Moses
had an eye under the veil. For they perceived not so well the grace intended
by the legal Testament, which the perfection of the moral law, whereof they
could not but fail, should have forced them to seek; and the imperfection of
the typical law Heb: 7:19:
which made nothing perfect, should have led them to find: But they generally
rested in the in opere operato:
work done, as was commanded by either law, when as themselves were
insufficient to do the one, and the other was in it self as insufficient to
help them. Heb: 10:1.
For if the sacrifices which they offered year by year, continually, having
a shadow of good things to come, and not the real form of them, could make
the comers thereunto perfect, would they not have ceased to be offered? Heb.
7.11.
And if perfection were by the first Testament, what farther need was there
that another Priest should arise, a Priest of another order, v. 16.
made after the power of an endless life? c. 9.15.
For this cause therefore Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of death for the redemption of transgressions, that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. The New Evangelicall Testament.


And now the Gospel preached unto us, what is it, but the performance of that
Romans 1.1.2.
which was promised long before by the Prophets in the holy Scripture? What
is it but 1. Pet. 1.12.
the report of those things which they did minister unto us? What is it but
the revelation of that grace in Christ which was shadowed in the law? What is
it but the Act. 13.32.
glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has
fulfilled the same unto us? For Heb. 4.2.
the same Gospel was preached unto them and unto us. Iste intellectus
Ecclesiae Catholicae conuenit, quae and veteris et novi Testamenti vnam asserit
prouidentiam, nec distinguit in tempore quos condition consociauit. Hieron: l.
2. com. in ep. ad Gal. c. 4.
The old covenant in the New Testament, promised by the Old, performed by the
New, (...). Just. Mart. Quaest, and Resp. ad Orthod: p. 354. Novum Testamentum
in veteri est figuratum, and vetus in no vo est revelatum. Aug. contr. adu.
legis. l. 1. c. 17.
shadowed in the Old, revealed in the New, reserved to one nation by the Old
Testamen, extended to all nations by the New. The new covenant spoken of in the
old Testament, not a covenant upon new conditions, but a new condition of the
old covenant. No new covenant ( 1. Ioh. 2.7.
as Saint John speaks of the commandment) but the old covenant which was from
the beginning. And yet a new covenant God makes with us, which thing is true
in him and in us: In him, because the covenant is renewed, as he promised in
the seed of Abraham, which is Christ, with all nations of the earth. Gal. 3.8.
For the scripture foreseing that God would instifie the heathen through faith
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed. It is true in us because we are Israel spiritualis a
carnali non nobilitate patriae, sed novitate gratiae, nec gente sed mente
distinguitur. August: doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 34.
renewed thereby. p. 2. Cor. 5.17.
For if any man be in Christ Jesus he is a new creature, Old things are past
away, behold all things are become new. The new Testament is ever new, being
once perfected, never to be antiquated. Heb. 7.18.
But there is verily a disanulling of the commandment going before, for the
weakness and unprofitableness thereof. The covenant of promise was rather a
promise, then a covenant, and the typical Testament was Regem expressurus
pictor, cum suo equitatu and hostibus victis in triumpho, rudi adhuc operi
line. as tenues and obscuras inducit, quae autem totum complectuntur quod erat
effigiandum, quae tamen ita picta non discernuntur, nisi a peritissimis: sed
posteaquam colores and splendidos and florentes obduxit, tunc omnia siunt
illustriora, and accedentibus facile cognita, and perspecta redduntur. Sermon. in
dictum Pauli, Nolo vos ignorare fratres Chrisost. 1. Cor. 10.
a draught of God his purposed will aforehand, rather then the Testament it
self, and therefore until it was fully inacted, it was rather called a
testimony, then the Testament. Ps. 78.5.
He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which
he commanded our Fathers. For it tended unto this, as a testimony of what was
intended and should after be performed, Yet was that legall-testimony or
typical testament for the time a conspicuous monument of God his singular
grace, and truth unto his people, according to the covenant with Abraham their
father. In which respect Moses exulteth in their behalf, saying, Deuteronomy. 4.7.8.
What nation is there so great that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our
God is in all things, that we call upon him for? And what nation is there so
great that has statutes and judgments so righteous, as all this law which
Iset before you this day? But the will of God was not made complete, nor
consummat until Christ. Heb. 9.16.17.18.
For a Testament is not of force until the death of the testatour whereupon
neither was the first testament dedicated without blood. But at the last when
all was performed indeed, by the mediator, and testatour himself, which was
promised, and prefigured, then was his Testament consummat, as his act and
deed for ever. And his will is his deed to them that prove it. The event of
Prophesies.


Nay the Word proves itself to be of God Es: 44.7. c. 42.9.
For who as I says the Lord shall call and shall declare it, and set in order
for me, since I appointed the ancient people? To instance in one or two
prophesies, most pertinent to our purpose, proving at once that Jesus is the
Christ, and the Scripture the word of God. That of Jacob at the beginning,
concerning the state of God his Church, and kingdom, that it should be amongst
his Children the Israelites until Christ, and that then it should be extended
throughout the whole world: and that of Haggay, toward the end, concerning the
glory of the second temple, a tipe also of the Church. Genesis 49.10.
The scepter says Jacob, shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet until Shilo come: and unto him shall the gathering of the
people be. Accordingly the state of the Jews had its groth, flourishing, and
decaying until Christ Jesus came. When they made open profession, saying Ioh.
19.15.
we have no king but Caesar. Until then the scepter was in Judah, or the
lawgiuer, some inferior magistracy, betwixt his feet, the Jews were a
certain nation, yea the peculiar people of God. Psalm. 114.2.
Judah was his sanctuary and Israel his dominion; But since Christ came, the
gathering of the people has been unto him, all nations of the earth have
sought unto him for the blessing, whole kingdom is over al, the Church being
now Catholic, and Universal. Es. 2.3.4.
Out of Sion the law is gone forth, and the word of the Lord, the scepter of
his kingdom, from Jerusalem: all nations flow unto it, and he judges among
the people. For the other prophecy; Hag. 2.9.
that the glory of the second temple should be greater then was of the former,
it was fulfilled when the son of God, the Lord of his house was presented in
this second temple; 1. Pet. 2.4.5.
upon whom a living stone disalowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and
precious, we also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house. Ephesians. 2.21.
And being fitly framed together in him, grow into an holy temple in the Lord.
This was the glory of the second temple, when Hag. 2.7.
the desire of all nations came and filled this house with glory, greater glory
then was of the former, as much as the Heb. 3.
Lord of the house excels the house, John: 2.21. (...). Et I esus aderat,
Deus and templum, Deus, inquam tempore omniantiquior, and templum novum, vno
eodemque die dissolutum, ac tertio post die excitatum atque in saecula manens.
Greg. Nazianz, orat. 43. its (...) p. 698.
as the temple of his body excels the body of the the temple, as much as a
spiritual house of lively stones excels a material house of earthly
stones; as much as the Church Catholic excels the narrow compass of Jury.
At this time by means of these and the like predictions, which could not but
be generally rumored abroad, the desire of all nations was kindled, and the
expectation of all people was awakned. Pluribus persuasio inerat, antiquis
Sacerdotum literis contineri, eo ipso tempore fore, vt valesceret Oriens,
profectique Iudaea reru^ potirentur. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5. Percrebuerat Orient
toto, vetus and constans opinio, esse in fatis, vt eo tempore Iudaea profccti
rerum potirentur. Sueton. lib. 10.
It was common throughout that part of the world, that the Lord of the whole
world should come forth of Judea, as the Heathen writers, together with
Josephus, do witness, whose testimony in this case cannot be suspected. Now
the time was come, that the desire of all nations should come, in whom they
should all be blessed. Malach. 3.1.
And the Lord himself whom they sought, came suddenly into his temple, even
the Angel of the covenant, whom we delight in. Luke 2.28. etc.
Whereupon the just old Simeon, having Christ in his arms, sang his Nunc
dimittis, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have
seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all people, to
be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people
Israel. For this was their glory, and the glory of their Temple, that Romans 9.4.
to them pertained the adoption, and the glory: and the covenants, and the
giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. Whose are the
fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God
blessed for ever. Amen. Many other things were foretold of him that should
come, which were accordingly fulfilled in Christ Jesus. Act: 7.24.
For all: he Prophets from Samuel and those that follow after as many as have
spoken, have likewise foretold of these days. Whose other predictions of
temporal things also were all generally subordinate to things spiritual, and
eternal in Christ Jesus. So it pleased God to temper them together, as the
promise of an abundant seed to Abraham, and the gathering of the Gentiles in
him; the promise of the land of Canaan, and of an heavenly kingdom; the
perpetual succession of David's race in the kingdom of Israel, and the eternal
kingdom of Christ in his Church; the prophecy of the Jews deliverance from
their captivity, and of the general resurrection; Christ his prophecy in the
Gospel of the destruction of Jerusalem and of the end of the world, Prophetiae
in vicem sibi tempora concinunt vt aliqua^do ex futuris. praeterita, aliquando
ex praeteritis futura probe^tur Greg. praef. in Ezech.
that by the event of these temporal things in their seasons, they and we
might be the better assured of the eternal to be fulfilled in the end: and
that by the hope of things eternal we may be comforted howsoever it goes with
us in the meanetime. Is it not the word of God who speaks things and they are
so? He foretold things to come in the old Testament, but by the new he brings
the^ to pass.

For Romans 1.16.
the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes,
The power of the Gospel.
effecting that in us which it tells us. The glutton in the Gospel was
persuaded that Luke. 16.30.
if one might come from the dead his brethren would believe him, though they
did not hearken to Moses and the Prophets. Behold Christ risen from the dead,
how by virtue of his quickening spirit, in this word of life, he gains every
where infinite believers, and so recovereth them from death to life. Behold so
many Ipse modus quo mundus credidit, si consideretur, incredebilior
(resurrectione viz: mortuorum) invenitur. Incredibile est mundum rem tam
incredibilem credidisse. Incredibile est homines ignobiles, infirmos,
paucissimos, imperitos, rem tam incredibilem tam efficaciter mundo, and in illo
etiam doctis persuadere potuisse. Aug: lib. 22. de Civ: Dei: c. 5. and c. 8.

Quisque adhuc prodigia, vt credat, inquirit magnum est ipse prodigium, qui
mundo credente non credit. Aug. l. 22. de Civ. Dei. c. 8.


witnesses come from the dead, all giving testimony to the word of God. The
Gentiles Luke 1.79.
who sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, and sinners of all sorts,
who had Ephesians. 2. c. 3.19.
been dead in sins and trespasses, alienated from the life of God, and past
feeling. Never did the word of any man or any oracle gain that general
credit, and beget such a new life in men, so holy, so happy, nor all that ever
men and angels could speak did make such a blessed change throughout the
world, as the Gospel has done; and that by most unlikely means, and motives.
A few, simple, plain, illiterate, men telling plainly what they must loose and
what they must suffer, in the world whosoever would embrace their doctrine.
Neither could the most obstinate unbelievers, potent adversaries, and desperate
enemies of the Gospel, though they conspired, and practiced against it never
so maliciously, ever be able to suppress, or withstand the mighty power of
God his word; but it certainly prevailed to their utter ruin and confusion.
Neither is it therefore any prejudice to the power and authority of God his
word: although it obtains not the same effect with all men. Is. 55.10.
For it never returns void, but effects that for which it was sent 2 Cor.
2.16
being the savor of life unto life in them that are saved, and the savor of
death unto death in them that perish. C: 4.4.
In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe
not, least the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God
should shine unto them. Esdras 4.41.
Great is the truth and it prevails.

Now is the effect shows the virtue of the cause but gives it not, so does the
Church, The Church
the professed company of believers, give testimony, but not authority to the
truth of God his word. 1. Tim: 3.15.
For the Church is the pillar of truth; not that the truth of God his word
relyeth on the Church, but because the Church is enlightened by the word of
truth, whereby it reflecteth light again unto the word, being in the world, as
Exodus 13.
the pillar of light, that went before the Israelites in the wilderness. Phil.
2.16.
For the sons of God shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of
life. Especially the faithful ministers of the word, whom Christ therefore
calls Mat: 5.14.
the light of the world: And if their Reu. 2.5.
candlestick be set up in a settled, and flourishing Church, great and glorious
is the light thereof, especially in the holy assemblies, and most principally
in general counsels. A fair way-marke, and a forcible inducement to
way-fairing men, to bend their course that way. But yet all this cannot make
one true believer. Quis enim imponat mihi necessitatem vel colendi quod nolim,
vel quod velim non colendi? Lact. lib. 5. de vera sap. cap. 14. Religionis non
est cogere religione^, quae sponte suscipi debet, non vi. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
No authority of the Church can command faith in a man, unless Hos. 2.14.
Cathedram habet in coelo qui corda docet. Aug.
God speak to his heart, muchlesse does it give truth to the word. They both
are the proper work of the same Sicut Christus legis and prophetarum impletio
est, ita spiritus Evangelij. Chrisost. (...). Basil. in ps. 95.
spirit of truth, expressed in the Scripture, impressed on the heart of every
true believer. 1. John 5.6.
It is the spirit that bears witness because the spirit is truth. 1. Cor.
14.37.38.
Wherefore if any one thinks himself to be spiritual, let him acknowledge
the things that are written, even the scripture to be the word of God. But if
any will be ignorant let him be ignorant still. 1. Corinthians. 14.23.24.25.
The coming together of the whole Church in some place, suppose it be in
counsel, or for divine service, occasioneth one that believes not, or that is
unlearned to come in, but it is the word there preached, that enters into
him, and convinces him and judges him, that opens the secrets of his heart,
and then falling down on his face he worshippeth, and reporteh that God is in
them of a truth. Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae
commoueret authoritas August.
The Church being more sensible may happily first move a man, but Ego solis
canonicis Scripturis sine vlla recusatione debeo consensum. Idem August. contr.
Pelag. de natura and great. (...). Ego in sola Scriptura acquiesco Theodoret,
Dial. 1. c. 6.
the Scripture being most certain does at last resolve every believer. They
who live in some low bottom may take notice that the Sun is risen, by the
shining thereof upon some high and eminent Church, but who so gets up
thither sees the Sun it self risen, and perceiues with his own eyes that
he is in the hemisphere of light, and says as the men to the woman of
Samaria; John. 4.42.
Now I believe, not because of thy saying, I have heard it my self, and know
it indeed that it is the word of life. 1. Ioh. 5.9.
If we receiu the testimony of men the testimony of God is greater. v. 10.
He that believes has the Testimony in himself, he that leeueth not has the
testimony against himself, because John. 12.48.
the word that has been spoken, that shall judge him at the last day.

In the mean time Christ the Testator has appointed some with power and
authority in his Church to publish and require his word, The Administrators and
overseers.
as administrators and overseers to his Will and Testament. The ministers of
the Gospel are to administer the the same with the Sacraments, as the 2 Cor.
5.20.
Ambassadors of Christ, and 1 Cor. 4.1.
stewards of the mysteries of God, having charge 1 Timothy 4.16. Act. 20.28.
to look to themselves and their doctrine, and to all the flock over which the
holy Ghost makes them overseers. For the commission once given by Christ to
the Apostles, was not to cease with them, but to continue even Mat. 28.19.20.
so long as the precept binds, and as his promise supporteth, which is unto
the worlds end. Wherefore they ordained others, by laying on of hands, to
succeed them in that office and ministry, with power also to do the like, so
to derive the same by a perpetual succession to all posterity Per ministros
dispares Dei munus aequale est, quia non illorum, sed ejus est. August. contra
Crescon. lib. 3. c. 6. loquitur de Bapt.
Now though the ministers of the Gospel be all of the same order, with equal
power to administer, yet are they not all of the same degree as ouer-seers. But
some are in higher place 2 Timothy 5.22. Tit. 1.5.
to ordeine Elders, 1 Timothy 1.3.
to charge the Pastors to teach no various doctrine, chapter 5.19.20.
to hear and to censure them, Tit. 1.11.
to stop their mouths, and to silence them. chapter 3.30.
And after the first and second admonition, utterly to reject a man that is an
heretic. Who having this special power of Jurisdiction reserved to them, for
1 Cor. 14.40.
decency and order sake, are therefore called Bishops, by an excellency, that
is Speculatores. Inspectores. Vid. Duaren. de sacr. Eccl. minist. ac benef.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
overseers. Besides these, whose special office is in the Gospel, God has
also ordained the civil Magistrate, from the beginning, 1 Pet. 2.13.14.
whether the King as supreme, or the governors that are sent by him, Custos
vtriusque tabulae. Vid. Duarenum de sacr. Eccl. Minist. ac benef. l. 1. c. 5.
and 6.
to administer his Law, and to ouersee the due performance, and execution
thereof, with power of life and death (according to the Law of Nature ever in
force) 1 Pet. 2.14.
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.
Whereunto all Nations even by the light of Nature have submitted, V. 13.
but we must submit our selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake.
Romans 13.4.
The Magistrate is the Hoc jubent Imperatores quod jubet and Christus, quia cum
bonum jubent, per illos non jubet nisi Christus, Aug. ep. 166.
Minister of God to thee for thy good, if thou do that which is good, but if
thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in
vain. These two ministrations, the one civil, the other Ecclesiastical, do
by mutual offices, as the Law and the Gospel, jointly, and mutually support
one another, for the building up of the body of Christ his Church, and
kingdom. The Vos Episcopi estis, little quae in Ecclesia sunt agenda; ego vero
episcopus extra Ecclesiam a Deosum constitutus. Constantinus Imperator. vt
refert Eusebius in ejus vita, lib. 4. cap. 24.
magistrate can not give, what himself has not, the power of orders, to
administer the Word and Sacraments. But where it pleases Isai 49.28.
God to raise up Kings and Queens to be nursing Fathers, and nursing mothers
to his Church, they may, and will give leave, to such as are ordained to
exercise their ministry, in their dominions, assisting, them, and providing for
their maintenance 1 Cor. 9.14.
worthy the Gospel of Christ Jesus. And they can Quando Imperatores veritatem
tenent pro ipsa veritate contra errorem jubent, qued quisque contempserit ipse
sibi judicium acquirit. August. ep. 166 (...). Arist. pol. l. 3. c. 11.
command their people to hear them, to 2 Chronicles. 34.32.
enter covenant with God by their ministry, and to keep the same at least in
the outvvard act, and they will not be negligent by all means to provide for
the peace of the Church. Rex nolentibus praeest, episcopus volentibus: ille
terrore subijcit, hic servituti donatur; ille corpora custodit ad morrem, hic
animas servat ad vitam. Hieron. ad Heliodor in Epitaph, Nepotian.
The Ministers of the Law have power over men's goods, the Ministers of the
Gospel have power to dispense the good things of God. They can banish and cast
out of their cou^tryes and dominions; These can excommunicate out of the Church
of Christ Jesus. Mat. 10.28. John 19.10.11.
They can kill the body having power given them from above. 1 Cor. 5.5.
These can deliver over unto Satan the lewd and ungodly, such as love not the
Lord Jesus.

Yet both Civil and Ecclefiasticall Ministers and overseers are to do
Scripture the absolute canon of Faith and Life.
In his quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt inveninntur illa omnia quae
continent fidem moresque vivendi. August. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem. Tertul. adversus Hermogen.
all according to the express will of GOD, concerning us in Christ Jesus.
Whose word in Scripture is the absolute Sacra Scriptura regula credendi
certissima and tutissima, Bellarm. lib. 1. de verbo Dei cap. 2, 13.
rule and cannon both of faith and life. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
The Apostle says, that all Scripture (which then was only the old Testament)
being given by inspiration of God, was Divinus sermo habet in publico, vnde
parvulos nutriat; servat in secreto vnde mentes sublimium in admiratione
suspendat. Quasi quidam quippe fluvius planus and altus, in quo and agnus
ambulet and elephas natet. Greg. in praefat. in lib. Moral. ad Leand. c. 4.
profitable, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God might be perfect, thoroughly furnished to
all good works. By it John 5.39.
Christ himself was content to be tried, and the Act. 17.11. 1 Cor. 15.3.4. 1 Timothy 6.3.
Apostles by the same, and by the Gospel of Christ, which they preached. Nay
the Law it self before they had the Prophets, was the perfect will of God in
respect of parts. Ps. 19.7.8.
The Law of the Lord, says the holy King, is perfect, converting the soul,
the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. And therefore the
Prophets themselves were to be tried thereby. Is. 8.20.
To the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this truth,
it is because there is no light in them. Insomuch that if their doctrine were
not agreeable thereunto, Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3.
though they confirmed it with a sign, and with a miracle that came to pass,
yet the people had warning not to harken to such, for it was but to try them,
and to prove them whether they loved the Lord their GOD, with all their heart,
and with all their soul. And since it pleased GOD once to express his Will by
writing, Spiritus Sanctus ita Scripturas sacras modificavit, vt locis
apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus autem fastidia detergeret. Nihil
enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non asibi planissime dictum
reperiatur. Aug. l. 2. de Chr. doct. c. 6.
the Holy Ghost has so ordered the matter, that almost every several book in
Scripture is a perfect model of GOD his Will in respect of parts, howsoever it
pleased God by degrees to reveal his grace ever more and more, until all was
consummate in Christ Jesus, as now we have it in the New Testament. Gal. 3.15.
If it be but a man's Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth
it, nor adds thereunto. And shall any now Romans 12.3.
thinking of himself more highly then he ought, or Aeternam igitur legem
mundis animis fas est cognoscere, judicare non fas est. Aug. de vera religione
c. 31.
presuming to know more then is meet, dare to usurp authority above the
Testament of Christ in the Scripture to prescribe against it, or to dictate any
thing Lacte gypsum male miscetur. Irenaeus l. 3. adversus haeres. c. 19. Quod
de Scripturis authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua
probatur, Hieron. in Mat. 23.
besides it, as the absolute will of GOD, to bind the conscience with
necessity, to 1 Pet. 5.3.
domineere over GODS heritage, to smite his fellow-seruants, and to usurp
dominion over the faith. Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.20.
The King sitting upon his throne, was bound to have a copy of the Law of GOD
with him, and to read therein all the days of his life, that he might learn
to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of his Law and his Statutes
to do them; that his heart might not be lifted up above his brethren, and
that he might not turn aside from the commandment to the right hand, or to
the left. And for the Ministers of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5.
if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, and is destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain is godliness, from such withdraw thy self. Gal. 1.8.9.
Nay if any preach any other Gospel though an Angel from Heaven, let him be
accursed. Revel. 22.18.19.
I testify to every man, says S. John for conclusion of all, (and his
testimony is true.) that if any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book, Canon and amussis
neque additionem patitur, neque ablationem. Theophilact, in 3. c. ad Philipp.
and if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of life, and out of
the Holy City, and from the things that are written in this book.

BOOK II.
CAP. I. THE STIPVALATION of Faith by ^^e Sacraments.
The answer of a good conscience toward God. The Creed. The Sacraments.
Baptism. Poedobaptisme. Anabaptisme. Confirmation and penance. Communion. No
transubstantiation. Participation by faith Communion in love. The law
conditioned. The covenant indissoluble.

How is the covenant transacted betwixt God and us?
BY the word of God on his part, The Answer of a good conscience.
as has been declared in the two Testaments, which being accepted on our
parts by faith, that works by love, and rests in hope, is mutually sealed,
and confirmed on both sides, by two Sacraments. Heb. 4.2.
The word preached profits not unless it be mixed with faith in them that
hear it; nor faith professed unless it work by love in them that have it;
nor have we then attained, but rest still in hope of the glory of God, to be
revealed in us. Faith in a larger sense, and not unusual, implies the other
graces, being a full assent to the word of truth, accepting the grace offered
in the Gospel upon trust, answering the law by love, which is the fulfilling
of the law and the end there of. For 2. Tim. 1.5.
the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. Which when all is done expects the full
accomplishment of the promises, but of the law, and of the Gospel in hope;
Heb. 10.36.
waiting with patience that after we have done the will of God, we may receive
the promise. Thus we stipulate with God, and Romans 12.2.
prove his will, what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God,
and Ioh. 3.33.
set to our seals that God is true. Romans 1.17.
And thus the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. From the
truth of God a faithful creator, to our faith in him, his unworthy creature.
And in us from one degree of faith to another, until we receive the end of our
faith, even the salvation of our souls.

The faith more especially is that whereof we make confession, THE CREED
saying I believe in God, etc. according to the Apostles Creed. So it is
called, not only because it agrees with the Apostles doctrine, being the very
sum and substance thereof, and might happily be Russinus in Symbol. Isiod. l.
2 de Eccl. officiis c. 23. Aug. ser. 131 Ambr. ser. 38.
agreed upon by themselves, as the absolute 2. Tim. 1.13.
form of sound words, and the rule of the (...). Athan. erat 4. coutra Arianos.
analogy of faith, but principally because it is the very form of the 1. Tim.
6 3.
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Heb. 3.1.
Apostle and high Priest of our calling. Which, besides his general doctrine,
he seems to have expressly committed in trust to the Apostles, in the very same
order, instituting the two Sacraments, to be administered by them, and their
successors, in his Church for ever: Ephesians. 2.20.
Which is built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the head corner stone. Regulam veritatis immobilem per baptismum
accepimus Iraen. adv. here is. l. 1. c. 1.
Baptism in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
takes up the former part of the Creed, to the holy catholic Church, which is
holy, being Ephesians. 5.26.
sanctified and cleansed with the washing of water by the word. And it is
catholic admitting all comers by baptism, as the Lord appointed saying, Mat.
28.19.
Go teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. Vid. Martin. procatech. tract. 4.
Which part of the Creed, being at first expressed in those few words, and
aunciently so used in baptism, was after enlarged with more articles,
especially concerning the second person, by occasion of heresies that did
arise. The supper of the Lord, which the Apostle calls 1. Cor. 10.16
the Communion, beginning with the communion of saints, includes it, and the
articles following. For Christ instituting this sacrament, calls Mat. 26.28
the cup the blood of the New Testament, saying expressly that it was shed for
many for the remission of sins: and for the other two benefits of communion
in the body and blood of Christ, namely the resurrection of our bodies, and
life everlasting, St John reports them plainly from Christ his own mouth,
saying, Ioh. 6.5^.
whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, and I
will raise him up at the last day; as he does in like manner speak of our
regeneration by baptism c. 3. For S. John only, of all the Evangelists, does
not expressly report the very institution it self of the Sacraments, but
instead thereof, as it seems, the spiritual graces intended by them. Christ
therefore himself is the author and finisher of our faith. Who gave us his
word by the Apostles, whereupon we believe, according to their Creed, the In ea
regula incedimus, quam ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus ^
Deo tradidit. Tertul. de praes. c. 14.
badge and cognizance of the Church catholic and Apostolic for ever. 2. Cor.
4.13.
So they believed and therefore so spoke, and we having the same spirit of
faith, do also believe and therefore so speak. And so it must be in the
covenant of grace, for God will write it in our hearts. Every man must have as
it were by heart the copy of grace, the evidence of his salvation, the charter
of life, the counterpane of the covenant, betwixt God and us, as it were a
duplicate of the proved will of God, to produce the same for himself, in his
own person, assenting to the truth, and consenting with the Church, rather
then barely to allege God his word for it, although the word of God be the
ground of our faith; for he may allege the word that never believes it, or
else perverts it, as they that are 2. Pet. 3.16.
unlearned and unstable do to their own destruction. But the just shall live
by his faith.

Upon these terms the covenant passes by Sacramenta mutuambabent relationem
(...).
mutual stipulation, The sacraments.
betwixt God and us in the sacraments, which are certain (...), fidelia, seu
pignora.
(...); ipsasacrificia per quae faedera intercedente iureiurando sanciebantur.
(...). Homer. Iliad. 2.
mystical acts and deeds thereof; on his part by his word, and institution,
and on our parts by faith, and acceptilation; As in civil contracts, besides
the books drawn; and agreed upon, there are by institution, custom or
compact, other isntrumental means, as it were moral instruments of
conueiance, as signing and sealing, liurey and season, or something in earnest,
representing the whole interest. Mystical acts they are, because done in a
Sacramentu^, (...).
mystery, wherein some Sacramentu^ dicitur sacrum signum, sieve sanctum
secretum. Bernard Sermon. 1. de caen. dom.
sacred, and secret matter is farther intended, by that which is outwardly
done; and used. The spiritual things signified by the outward elements are the
all sufficient Signum est res preter speciem quam ingerit sen sibus aliud
aliquid exse faciens in cogitationem venire, Aug. l. 2. de doctr. Christ. cap,
1. Verbum visibile. Aug. hom. in Johan. 80.
means of grace, the body and blood of Christ the mediator, once offered by
himself for us. The foreskinne circumcised was it not a type of the promised
seed, to Abraham, and his prosterity; Romans 9.5.
of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, God blessed for evermore? The
paschall lamb did it not represent Christ, the lamb slain from the beginning
of the world in the counsel of God? And now 1. Cor. 5.7,
Christ our passover is slain, 1. Pet. 1.19.
a lamb without blemish, and without spot. The water in baptism is it not the
v. 2.
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ? The Cor. 10.16.
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? But
besides these spiritual things, which are the means grace signified by the
outward elements, there are also spiritual acts of grace, to wit our admission
into the catholic Church, and the communion of saints, intended by the
outward actions, whereby the sacraments are administered and received, and
without the which they are not complete, being, as their names import;
certain Res gesta. Isiod: Docentur eriam homines socramenta esse actiones
diuinitus institutas. Polon. confess. Sacramenta exercitia sunt Calv inst. lib.
4. c. 14.6. Signum practicum Bell. ceremonia, ritus solennis. L. 1. de^ Sacram.
c. 9.10 11.
acts that consist in the doing. Not the foreskinne but the cutting of it, as
God had appointed, was the circumcision, not the lamb but the eating of it, as
was prescribed, was the passover; not the water but the Baptismus non est
aqua, quae est res per manens: sed lotio in aqua, quae est operatio transiens.
Gab. did. 4. q. 2. dub. 4
washing, dipping, or sprinkling with it, in the name of the Father, son, and
Holy ghost is baptism; not the bread and wine, but the using of them according
to Christ his institution, is the communion. Howsoever the materials
themselves, visible, or spiritual, or both, may sometimes be called by the
names of the sacraments, as 1. Cor. 10.16.
the cup the communion, c. 5. v. 7.
Christ the passover, by a figurative speech, most usual in things of so
near relation, and not unfit in figurative ordinances: yet the elements
although consecrated, are not complete sacraments, until the other actions
pertinent concur, whereby they are administered, and received; nor do they
continue sacraments any longer, then while they are so used. A man's deeds what
are they to any one, though in writing, signed and sealed with his own hand
and seal, unless they be delivered and received, as his act and deed?

By baptism the sacrament of our new birth, BAPTISM
the Tit. 3.5.
lauer of regeneration, the seal of adoption, initiation and admission into
the Church, and Heb. 12.23.
company of the first borne, which are written in heaven, the covenant is
contracted, God preventing us with his grace, which by the other sacrament is
confirmed or renewed. John. 3.5.
Except a man be borne again of water and the holy Chost, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven. When being regenerate, we take new names,
Christian names, Es: 44.5.
One shall say I am the Lords, and an other shall call himself by the name of
Jacob, and an other shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and syrname
himself by the name of Israel. Now because we are by nature the Ephesians. 2.3.
Children of wrath, and by corruption v. 1.
dead in sins and trespasses, we cannot be newborn, but by a kind of
resurrection from the dead. Therefore Coloss. 2.12.
we are buried with Christ in baptism, wherein also we are risen with him
thorough the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.
Whereof the water in baptism is a most significant sign. For water was the
first element, Genesis 1.2.
upon which the spirit of God moved, and produced all things according to the
word, and will of God. 2. Pet. 3.5.
By the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth consisting of the
water, and in the water. And we by sin being as water spilt upon the ground,
do by the grace of God in Christ, thorough his spirit Es. 44.4.
spring up again as willowes by the water courses, Ps. 92.12 1^
and shall flourish in the house of our God, as Ps. 1.3.
trees planted by the rivers side. Es. 44.3.
I will power out water, says God, upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground, I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy
offspring. Whether we respect our regeneration, admission, or spiritual
resurrection, all which concurrent graces are intended by this sacrament, it
implies a reciprocal act betwixt God and us. His call our answer; his
justification of us by acceptance in Christ, our (...). 1 Pet 3.21. (...). Mat.
3.6. Vid: Act. 8.37. Anima non lauatione sed responsione sancitur Tertulide
resur. carn.
stipulation of a good conscience toward him; his remission of our sins (For 1
John. 1.7.
the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin) our repentance from dead
works, to serve the living God, having our Heb. 9.14.
consciences purged by his blood, who thorough the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God. And therefore it is also called the sacrament of
Act. 2.3.
repentance for the remission of sins. Deuteronomy. 26.17.18. Lauacrum illud est
obsignatio sidei. Tertul. lib. de penit.
Now thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God; and the Lord has
avouched thee to be one of his people.

Of this contract there are 1. John. 5.7.
three that bear witness in heaven, the Father the Word and the Holy ghost:
and these three are one. For 1. Pet. 1.2.
we are elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, thorough
sanctification of the spirit, and sprinkling of the blood of Christ. 1. John.
5.8.
And there are three that bear witness in earth, The spirit and the water and
blood, and these three agree in one. For Christ Ephesians. 5.26.
sanctifies, and cleanses his Church, with the washing of water by the word,
that is by his blood, thorough the spirit, whereof the water and the word are
the most significant signs, and isntrumental means. 1. John 5.6.
This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by water only,
but by water and blood; and Es. 53.12.
poured out his soul which is in the blood for us. And now he V. 10.
sees his seed, Psalm. 22.30.
a seed that serves him, accounted to him for a generation. Ioh. 6.63.
It is the spirit that quickneth them, even the renewing of the holy Ghost by
the washing of regeneration. And 1 Ioh. 5.6.
it is the spirit that bears witness unto them, because the spirit is
truth. For Ephesians. 1.13.14 Vnde tanta virtus aqu, vt corpus tangat, and cor
abluat, nisi faciente verbo? Non quiadicitur sed quia creditur, Aug. tract. 80.
in Johan.
after that we believe we are sealed with that holy spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of our inheritance; and the pledge of our adoption. The minister
indeed baptiseth in the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, by virtue of God his word, and of the commission given by Christ Jesus.
But it is God himself that gives the blessing. As by Aaron and his sons he
ordained the blessing of the children of Israel saying. Number. 6.27.
They shall put my name upon them, and I will bless them.

In a Church once planted, Poedobaptisme.
baptism is administered unto all that come, or are brought thereunto, even to
newborn infants, by Christ his ordinance, and may not be neglected, or
needlessly deferred. First because we have Omnis anima eousque in Adam censetur,
donec in Christo recenseatur. Tert. lib. de anima. c. 40.
need to be regenerated so soon as we are borne, being still borne in sin,
which Crescit cum aetatibus culpa. Ambr. lib. de Noe and Arca c. 22.
grows every day stronger and stronger upon us. Secondly children have right
of admission into the covenant, and Church of Christ Jesus, so soon as they
are borne. Act. 2.39.
For the promise is made to us, and to our children. I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed, and not to ours only, but to all afar off. For now all nations
are called and by baptism to be admitted. Math. 28.19.
Go teach all nations baptising them. So that in what nation soever the
Gospel is preached and generally received, all therein may be baptized, being
presented thereunto by the Church. Wherein some especially, who Accommodat
illis matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes vt veniant, aliorum cor vt credant, aliorum
linguam vt confiteantur. Aug. ser. 10. de verb. Apostoli.
present them, undertake for them, as it were new parents in the Lord. For he
is a father that does a fathers part, as in the Gospel Luc. 10.29. etc.
he is a neighbor, that does the part of a neighbor. Thirdly baptism is
presently due because Christ has set no time for it, whereas the eight day was
appointed for circumcision, but has indefinitely commanded saying, Mark. 10.14.
suffer little children to come unto me, for to such belongs the kingdom of
heaven. And so it seems the Apostles did, for they baptized whole 1. Cor. 1.16.
households, amongst whom it is more then likely there were some children.
Lastly as children have need and are capable of baptism, so is it profitable
unto them, principally as a means of regeneration ordained by Christ, through
the grace of God, and withal because their godly parents, and they who
sustain that place, are bound thereby and made more careful, to teach them;
and themselves are occasioned to enquire and learn what As the Israclites of
the Passover. Exodus 12.26.
that solemn service means, and to perform the same. As for the vow in
baptism, Sicut erga secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi,
corpus Christi est, and sacrame^tum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est, ita
et sacramentum fidei, fides est. Aug. ep. 23. ad Bonifac.
it Sequitur in cord conversio cuius mysterium pracessit in corpore, Aug. l.
4. de bapt. c. 24.
respects the time to come, whereof we are capable from the first, as 1. Sam.
1.11.
Samuel was vowed by his mother before he was borne, and wherein we must be
answerable to the last. For the faith required, we are baptized into it; For
God preventeth us with his grace, and thereby inableth us to be his scholars.
Tit. 2.11.12.
The grace of God that brings salvation teaches us: (...). Mat. 28.19.
Go teach says Christ, or make Disciples, baptising them: and be Act. 2 38.
baptized say they every one of you and you shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. And so likewise for repentance it is indeed conditioned in baptism,
Ibid.
Repent and be baptized. Whereof such as be of age must give present Vid. Mat.
3.6.
testimony, with Act. 8.37.
confession of their faith. But for little children they are baptized innocents
in Christ, as they are borne peccants in Adam: and for actual transgressions,
(which repentance does properly respect) they are called innocents; I am sure
their cause is much better in that respect; then in elder age: when by
repentance we must undo as much as is done of our lives. Wherefore Christ
says. Mat. 18 3. Quanto magis a baptismo probiberi non debet infans, qui
recens natus nihil peccauit, nisi quod secundum Adam carnaliter natus,
contagium mortis antiquae prima natiuitate c^ntraxit? Qui ad remission em
peccatorum ac^ipiendam hoc ipso facilius accedit, quod illiremittuntur, non
propria, sed aliena peccata, Cypt. in ep. ad. epis. Fidum de infant: bapt.
Except ye become as little children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Baptism being the Sacrament of inititation is but once, into the covenant and
state of grace, Anabaptisme.
which is but one for all men, being once administered, as Christ has
instituted. Not 1. Cor, 1.
one of Paul, an other of Apollo, another of Cephas, an other of Christ, as if
Christ were divided, or we baptized into any man's name, sect, or faction. We
believe one baptism, for the remission of sins. Ephesians. 4.5.
One Lord, one faith, one baptism. And that but once. Sicut generatio carnalis
vna est, nec repeti vterus potest, ita regeneratio spiritualis. Semel enim
nascimur, semel quoque renascimur. Aug. tract: in Johan: 11. cap. 12.
Once borne, once newborn. For it is unto life eternal, which once begun
never ends. Romans 6.3.
Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Christ, were baptized
into his death, v. 9.
that as Christ being raised from the dead dies no more, v. 11.
so we once dead unto sin, are alive unto God for ever through Jesus Christ
our Lord? Wherefore should any then be rebaptised? For as for them, who Heb: 6.
having been once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, it is impossible to renew
them again unto repentance; and for them in whom though they fall, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
the seed remains, another baptism is needless. For by the grace of God
remaining in them Art, Eccles. Angl. 16.
they may recover and amend their lives.

Yet are there certain mystical acts though c Sacramentis numero paucissimis,
obseruatione facillimis, significatione praestantissimis, societatem novi
populi colligavit. August. de doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 9.
not other sacraments, namely confirmation and penance, Confirmation and
Penance.
which are appendants to the sacraments, and in this case and other like of
good use in the Church, for correction, and instruction. For by the one,
children that have been baptized are confirmed in the faith, when they come to
age, whereunto they were baptized: When themselves, assuming the vow of
baptism, 1. Pet. 3.21.
stipulat a good conscience toward God, and ratify what was undertaken for
them by their sureties. By the other such as are Vid. 1. Cor. 5
excommunicate, or deserve to be debarred the communion, having any way
violated, or scandalized the communion of Saints, are humbled, both for the
satisfaction of the Church whom they have offended, and for their own
reformation. That having renewed their vow in baptism by repentance, they may
be absolved and Vid. 2. Cor. 2
readmitted to the Communion. Which See the Preface to the commination in the
common prayerbooke.
godly discipline, (more frequent in the primitive Church) is much to be
wished, that it may be again restored with us, to add vigor, and life, to the
word and Sacraments. For although excommunication for sin, and absolution
from sin, be vertually implied in the word and Sacraments, for what is
preaching, but a general proclamation of pardon, to all penitent believers,
and a public denunciation of God his curse against obstinate unbelievers? And
what are the Sacraments, but the personal applying of remission, and grace to
every man in particular, and the detaining of them from the Communion, but the
retaining of their sins? Yet the positive sentence of binding and loosing, in
a judicial proceeding is more powerful with the conscience, and being Christ
his Mat. 18.18. Ioh. 20.23.
ordinance, is ratified in heaven, where it is rightly administered.

Our Birth is at once, Communion.
but our life in grace is a continued act, and therefore has continual need
of spiritual nourishment, to repair what is wasted daily by sin, and
corruption, wherewith we are incombred, and for our growth to a perfect man in
Christ Jesus. Our natural life consists in the Vita animae deus est, haec
corporis, hac fugiente soluitut hoc, perit haec destituente deo,
union and communion of the body with the soul, and our life supernatural in
the union, and communion of our soul with God; which is in Christ, who John.
14.6.
is the life, and Col. 2.9.
in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily. By what means he became
partaker of our mortality, flesh and blood, by the same having conquered sin
and death, he makes us partakers of his immortality and divine nature, imparted
in him to the humane, and by it to us. The Church and all the members thereof
are in Christ, as Eve and all her children were in Adam; Genesis 2.23.
flesh of my flesh says he, and bone of my bone. That as we drew corruption
from Adam with his nature, so from Christ we derive incorruption by his grace.
Nay nearer then so; Ephesians. 5.30.
we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones; not only derived
from him, or new begotten by him, but perpetually subsisting in him. As the
John. 15.4.5.
graft in the stock, which yields us continual sap, and spiritual
nourishment unto eternal life. John. 14.19.
Because I live says he, ye shall live also. At that day you shall know that I
am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you. So dearly has Christ loved
us, v. 20.
and so nearely has he united us unto himself, that he is not satisfied, as
not inioying himself, without us, Ephesians. 1.23.
his body, the Church, the fullness of him, that fills all in all. 1. Cor.
12.13,
And as all the members being many are one body, so also is Christ, namely his
Church. Of which communion we have this other Sacrament.

Poculum immortalitatis, quod confectum est de infirmitate nostra, and veritate
diuina, habet quidem in se vt omnibus prosit, sed si non bibitur non medetur.
Prosp. in responsione ad obiectionem Vincentianam.
The cup of blessing which we bless, No transubstantiation.
1 Cor. 10.16.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread and
one body, for we are all partakers of one bread. Bread still, though
consecrated, yea and received; For it is the (...).
communion, not the Not (...) nor (...).
commixtion or confusion of his body with the bread, as if they were kneaded
together, nor the Nor (...), seu (...).
translation of the bread into his body as if the one were supplanted by the
other. But it is the But (...).
communion of his body, by a common union of them both in the sacrament: which
does necessarily consist both of the outward sign, and inward grace. Whereof
there is such a A (...). Nazianz. (...). Theodoret. (...). Macarius hom. 27.
reciprocal relation, and mutual conjunction in a sacrament, by divine
institution, that they necessarily concur as integrant parts thereof, without
either of which it is no sacrament. And therefore to signify their near and
intimate union, they usually have one an others Solet res quae significat cius
rei quam significat nomine nominayi. August. quaest. 57. super. Leuit. (...).
Talis est praedicatio qualem admittit rerum conuenientia. Arist. (...).
names. Christ instituting this sacrament said this is my body, as John. 6.
elsewhere he calls his body bread. His body was not then made paste, no more is
the bread here made Flesh. But this being this, that is bread naturally, is the
body of our Lord in a mystery, not changed from bread into his body, by a
Possunt sacramenta honorem habere vt religiosa, non autem stuperem vt
admiranda. August. lib. 3. de trinitate: 9.10.
miracle. So that in respect of the whole sacrament, the mystical substance
whereof consists both of the sanctisied bread, and of Christ his sacred body,
they may be said in some sort to be Qui est a terra panis percipiens
vocationem dei, iam non communis panis est, sed eucharistia ex duabus rebus
constans, terrena, and celesti. Ireneus: lib. 4. adver. haeres. cap. 34.
consubstantiat, not in themselves, but in a third consisting of both. For
neither the body of Christ without the bread, nor the bread without his body is
the sacrament entire, but the one with the other; both together, not in place,
but in use, being not contiguat, but Simul sunt relate, cum e^ closse sint
(...).
coordinat to this end, by a spiritual instiution, not by any corporal
commixtion or composition. The bread, being consecrated to so high a mystery,
does truly, and really, but yet Poculum nonne communitatio sanguinis Christi
est (i) illa res externa visibilis, qua sanguis domini nobis exhibetur? Sic
panis quem frangimus, est illa res externa visibilis, qua efficimursocij and
membra cooporis Christi, sicut dicitur, evangelium est potentia Dei, (i) res
seis instrumentum quo deus est efficax, Melancht: in 1. ad Corinth. 10.
sacramentally, not only signify, but represent, and indeed present, the very
body of our Lord, not in the element, but in the sacrament, to every right
receiver.

By faith we may be partakers Ego corpus Jesus Euangelium puto, and quando dicie
qui non commederit carnem meam and biberit savguia^m meum, licri and in
mysterio possi^ intelligi, tamen verius corpus Christi and sanguis eius, sermo
scripturarum est. Hieron. in Psalm. 147.
spiritually of Christ his body without the sacred bread: Participation by
Faith:
And without faith in his word we cannot receive his body in the sacrament, but
Multi de ^ltari accipiunt and moriuntur, and accipiendo moriuntur. Aug. tract.
26. in Ioh.
are deeply guilty thereof not 1. Cor. 11.29. Reliqui discipuli manducauerunt
panem dominum Judas panem domini. August.
discerning the Lords body. Which comes to pass either thorough unbelief of
his word, who has said this is my body, as when his body is nor at all
discerned in the sacrament by faith, which is the Heb. 11.1.
evidence of things not seen, and v. 27.
discerns him that is invisible, but the sacred bread is taken as common, and
so profaned: or else by misbeleife of his meaning, as when his body is not
Eiteram sequi, and signa pro rebus quae his siguisicantur accipere, servilis
est infirmitatis. Aug. lib. 3, de doctr, Christ. Cum figisrate dictum sic
accipitur tanquam proprie dictum sit carnaliter sapitur. Neque vlla mors animae
congruentius appellatur Aug. de doct. christ. l. 3. cap. 5.
discerned from the bread, but confounded therewith; which two must needs be
distinct in themselves, how near soever conjoined in the sacrament. Now we
cannot possibly be more real partakers of any corporal thing, then by eating
it, and seeding on it, whereby we receive it into our bowels, and convert it
into our substance; neither after generation, is there any such means of life,
as nutrition, without which it would soon vanish and fade away, wherefore we
are not only borne again by water and the holy ghost, but continually
sustained and nourished up to Eternal life, and that by the very body and
blood of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. John 6.51.55.56.
I am the living bread says he which came down from heaven, if any man eat
of this bread he shall live for ever; And the bread which I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. My flesh is meat indeed and
my blood is drink indeed. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood
dwells in me, and I in him. But the spiritual food of our souls is not as
the corporal food of our bodies, assimilated unto us, but we are Hic panis in
causam vitae appetendus, and deuorandus auditu, and ruminandus intellectu, and
side digerendus. Tertul. lib. de resur. Quid paras os and dentes, creed and
manducasti. August. Haec quoties agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed
fide syncera panem sanctum frangimus. Cyprian: in Sermon: de caena domini.
changed into it. The body of Christ for our spiritual nourishment: is not
made carnal food, the sacred bread is not turned into flesh, but we are made
spiritually minded to feed thereon by Nam and ille panis viuus and cibus
mentis, ergo traiiciatur in viscera animae tuae, transeat in affectiones tuas,
and in mores tuos. Bern. Sermon. 5. de aduentu domini.
faith in his word, who has said this is my body (for Deuteronomy. 8.3. Mat. 44.
man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God) and to be made like unto him, 1 Pet. 4.1.2.
who suffered for us in the flesh, arming our selves likewise with the same
mind. For he that has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin. That he
no longer should live, the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men,
but to the will of God.

Do we now abolish the law by faith? Communion in love.
God forbid, nay we establish the law by an express article of our creed, and
confirm it by this sacrament. For what else is the communion of saints, and the
sacrament thereof? For 2. Cor. 6.14.
what communion has light with darkness? 1. John. 1.6.
If we say we have communion with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do
not the truth. But we walk in Darkness, if we know not God, for v. 5.
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. 1 Ioh. 2.4.
And he that says I know him and keeps not his comandements is a liar and
the truth is not in him. But he that keeps his comandements dwells in him,
and he in him. To will, and to nill the same things is the sure bond of all
amity and friendship. Now because the communion betwixt God and us is of
infinite disparity, therefore his will is a law to us, and our obedience is
true love unto him. And weebeing many are thereby knit together in one body,
holding the unity of the spirit in this bond of peace. Wherefore as we vow
in baptism that we will keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of our life: so by this other sacrament we renew the
same vow, so often as we receive it, repenting our sins past, the
transgressions of that righteous law, resolving and steadfastly purposing,
thorough Gods grace, to lead a new life, in all thankful obedience unto him,
and true love and charity amongst our selves. Whereupon we receive the blessed
sacrament of Christ's body and blood, most deeply binding our selves thereby to
perform the same; and in the assured faith of Gods grace and help, that we
may walk in the strength of this spiritual food, the way of life by the law
prescribed unto us.

When first the covenant was confirmed by Moses with the Israelites at Horeb,
The Law conditioned.
God gave them the law, and they accepted saying Exodus 19.8.
all the words which the Lord has commanded we will do, and be obedient. And
when he renewed the same covenant with them in the land of Moab, they gave
their faith that they would obey. And so do we. Deuteronomy. 26.17.18.
They avouched the Lord to be their God, and so do we the Father Son and Holy
ghost; and God avouches the holy catholic Church, as then he did them, to be
his people. They promised to walk in his ways, and to keep his
commandments, and his judgments; as they expected his blessing, c. 27.
they bound themselves with an oath and with a curse, all which in effect we
likewise do, to live as becomes his saints, even as we expect his mercy, to
forgive us our sins, and the power of his grace, to bring us to ternall life.
Whereunto we bind our selves by vow and consignation, and as it were by
contesseration in the sacraments. The law was not only given and required by
God, but approved and accepted by them, in their hearts to do it, as their
mouths professed. In which respect Moses said, Deuteronomy. 30.14.
the word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart that thou may
do it. Howbeit they break their faith given, and their spirit was not
steadfast with God. Ps. 78.37.
Their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
covenant. But now having renewed his covenant, as he promised, Gal. 3.7.
with the children of Abraham that are by faith, the holy catholic Church,
that they shall be his people, and that he will be their God; Ier. 31.33. Lex
dei in cordibus scribitur non quia per naturam praeventa sit gratia, sed quia
per gratiam reparata est natura. August. de ver a innocent. cap. 258.
he puts his law in their inward parts, and in their hearts he writes it, even
the communion of saints, thorough faith, that works by love. For believing in
Christ Jesus, we do thereby acknowledge that the Law is holy, just, and good.
Holy in respect of the things commanded, else were not we sinful, who have
disobayed, nor needed we a mediator. Just in respect of the penalty
inflicted, else why should Christ have dyed that we might be delivered? Good
in respect of the end purposed, life to the doer. Which Christ has done, and
lives for ever, and we also by faith in him. If the same mind be in us, that
was in Christ Jesus, to be obedient to the will of God unto the death.

Cant. 8.6.
Love is stronger then death, The covenant indissoluble.
that neither life nor death can dissolve the communion betwixt God and his
church, or any true member thereof; Whom he has set as aseale upon his heart,
as a seal upon his arm, to love and to defend for ever. For so he says;
Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. c. 6.7.
And being willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the
immutability of his counsel, he has confirmed his word by the sacraments in
his blood. v. 8.
That by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon
the hope set before us. We may therefore be bold upon it, if need be, to lay
down our lives for his sake, in whom our life is hid with God, knowing that
even in death we shall be more then (...) Romans 8.37.
conquerours thorough him that loved us. Mat. 20.22.23.
Can ye drink says Christ of the cup whereof I shall drink, and can ye be
baptized with the baptism wherewith I shall be baptized. And they said we can.
And he said ye shall. So must all 2. Tim. 3.12. Act. 14.22.
suffer affliction some way or other, that will live Godly. It is the portion
of our cup, and calling, conditioned by God, undertaken by us in these
sacraments; whereby we are assured that 2. Tim. 2.12.
if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him. We are baptized into the
death of Christ And the holy communion is not only a sacrament of the grace of
life unto us, but a sacrifice of us unto God, and a protestation of our service
unto him, even unto the death, after the example of Christ Jesus. In (...).
Monumenta salutaris passionis. Basil in cannonditur. 1 Cor. 11.26.
commemoration of whose meritorious sufferings, with a thankful remembrance
thereof, we (...). Monumenta salutaris passionis. Basil in cannonditur. 1 Cor.
11.26.
se^ forth his death until he come, and Romans 12.1.
offer up our selves a living sacrifice holy acceptable unto God, thorough
Jesus Christ, consecrating and vowing our selves, whatsoever we are, whatsoever
we have, wholly to his service, who has redeemed us. 2 Cor. 5.14.15.
For the love of Christ constrains us because we thus judge, that if one dyed
for all, then were all dead; and that he dyed for all, that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them,
and rose again. Heb. 13.15.
By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name, v. 16.
not forgetting to do good and to communicate, for with such sacrifice God is
well pleased.

CAP. II. Faith working by love according to the Law.
The Law established by faith. Gods law our prayer. Faith in the Trinity denies
not the unity of God. Christ the only image of God, to be worshipped by faith
in his name. By Profaneness, Hypocrisy, Blasphemy the name of God
unhallowed. The Christian sabbath of the holy catholic Church. The sabbath not
abrogated by Christ? Nor by his Apostles. The Jews typical use thereof
abolished. The Christian sabbath day within the compass of the commandment.
The Lords day designed by himself for our sabbath. It has ever been observed
as the sabbath by the Church. It respects the kingdom of God. The Perfect will
of God to be done on earth. The heavenly conversation.

How does faith work by love?
According to the law, teaching us to do what God has commanded. The law
established by faith
Although faith rest not in our works, which the law requires, yet are Ephesians.
2.10.
we Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God had
before ordained, not only in his counsel, but by his law, that we should walk
in them. And Gal. 3.12.
although the law be not of faith, that is of things to be only believed, but
to be done; for the man that does them shall live in them, yet does the law
require faith, Heb. 11.6.
without which it is impossible to please God. Therefore the law prescribes
faith in the first place, and throughout, namely that we acknowledge god the
lawgiuer, to be the lord our God, the only true God, and perform that faith
unto him, by an universal, and uniform obedience, to the whole law, and every
title thereof, in regard of him that commands. Which justifies our faith to
be in God, when it answers his Servus qui ex domini iussu ea facit tantummodo
quae vult facere, non dominicam implet voluntatem sed suam Salv. l. 4. de
guber. Die.
whole will, as well of command as of promise, as well in one duty as in
another. When God gave the law to the Israelites, he made himself known unto
them, by his wonderful delivery of them, out of the land of Egypt, from the
house of bondage, thereby to bind their obedience in faith to him, the only
true God. Which was but a type and figure of the great salvation, from the
power of satan by Christ Jesus. By faith in whose name, thorough his spirit,
we truly know, and rightly acknowledge the only true God. And the faith of
God his love to us in Christ, knits our hearts again in love to God, and for
his sake toward all men, as he has commanded: and improues the formal
worship of God unto all sincerity in spirit and in truth, and the common
ciuility of the world unto Christian charity zealous of good works, for his
glory that has called us to the knowledge of his grace. For if God so loved us
as we believe then ought we also to love one another, much more him who is the
God of all grace and love. Neither do we believe indeed if we love not. We
believe not Christ his incarnation, death, passion, resurrection, and
ascension, etc. Unless Phil. 2.5. etc
the like mind be in us that was in Christ Jesus. Who to redeem the glory of
god in us, laid aside his own glory, equal with the father, and humbled
himself in the form of a servant, unto the death of the cross. As the
fathers love to the son begat in him the like affection toward us, so does
Christ his Nullaest mayor ad amorem inuitatio quam praeuenire amando. Nimisque
durus est animus, qui delectionem, si nolebat impendere, nolit and rependere.
August de catech. rud. cap. 4.
love, if we embrace it by a true and a lively faith, work in us the like
love toward our brethren for his sake. John. 15.9.10
As the father, says he, has loved me, so have I loved you, continue you in
my love. If you keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I
have kept my fathers commandments, and abide in his love. It is all one in the
law, to love God and to keep his commandments. And John. 14.23.24.
if you love me says Christ, keep my commandments.

Which because we can in no sort do of our selves, Gods law our prayer.
2. Cor 3.5.
who are not able as of our selves, so much as to think any good, therefore
being prevented with his grace, Phil. 2.13.
who works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure; we desire of
God by prayer (as Christ has taught us) what he does require of us by the law.
In omnibus enim monitis dei atque mandatis, vna cademque ratio est, and divinae
gratiae and humanae ebedientiae. Nec ob aliud vnquam datur praeceptum, nisi vt
quaetatur praecipientis auxilium. Prosp.
Who therefore commands that we may know what to crave of him. And it is our
faith which by prayer obtains, what the law requires. The graces inspired of
God, faith, hope, and love, breathe all again unto godby prayer, Romans 8.26.
the spirit helping our infirmities with groans that cannot be expressed. For
as the natural life, so the spiritual confists in respiration, by hearing and
praying, without the which there can be no true life, and well doing. Therefore
Phil. 1.9.10.
this we pray, that our love may abound yet more, and more, in knowledge and
in all judgment, that we being instructed out of the law, may approve the
things that are more excellent, that we may be sincere and without offense,
till the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which
are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. Romans 10.14.
But how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? By faith in the
son of God we know and believe in him, the only true God, and worship him in
spirit and in truth. Gal. 4.6.
Who has sent down the spirit of his son into our hearts, Faith in the
trinity denies not the unity of God.
crying Abba father.

Does our faith now in the trinity contradict the unity, and transgress the
commandments. Thou shall have no other Gods but me. Nay the trinity of persons
establishes the unity of the Godhead, whilst himself is acknowledged the
author, mediator, and doer of all in all. (...). Plato in Philebo. and in
Timaeo, (...), quo sensu vide Proclum. Is autem dicit Triadem exse omnia
efficere.
Who being infinite is not confined by any person: and the persons being
distinct, are not confounded in God. (...). Serapidis responsum Thuli: in
Aegipto. De his vide August. lib, 10. de civ. Dei. cap. 23. In deo
vnasubstantia sed tres personae: in Christo duae substantiae, sed vna persona.
In Trinitate alius atque alius, non asiud atque aliud: In saluatcre aliud atq,
aliud, non alius atque alius. Vincent: Ler inens: cont: Her. cap. 19.
The father is God in his infinite essence or being, the son the same God in
his infinite presence, and glorious appearing, the holy ghost the same god in
his infinite power, and wonderful working, three persons but one God: As to
be, to be true, to be good, are all one, because transcendents. Some
resemblance we have of this great mystery in nature, but with great
inequality, for what proportion can there be of things finite to that which is
infinite? Two are much used in Scripture, the light, and the word. Genesis 1.
The light which was three days before the sun, and then condensed into that
glorious body, and ever since diffused thence thoroughout the world, is all one
and the same light. So the James, 1.17.
father of lights, that inhabiteth the light, that none can approach, and the
Mat. 4.2.
sun of righteousness, Col. 2.9.
in whom all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, and the holy Ghost
the Ephesians. 1.17.18
spirit of illumination, are all one and the same God. Again it is the same
thing that the mind thinks, and the word signifies, and the voice utters.
So is the Father as the mind conceauing, the Son as the word conceived or
Trismegistus Deum dicit alium (...) gonuisse, vt refert Lactantius l. 4. de
vera sapientia c. 6. Omne quod pradit ex aliquo secundum sit eius necesse est
de quo prodit, non ideo tamen est separatum, secundum antem vbi est duo sunt,
and tertius vbi est tres sunt. Tertul, contra Praxeam, c. 8.
begotten, the holy Ghost as the voice or speech uttered, and imparted to all
hearers, all one and the same God. Wherefore the Vni^as Monarchiae est trinitas
oeconomiae, quarum altera non destruit alteram, ibid. c. 2.
Trinity of persons does not deny the unity of God, nay our faith in them,
keeps us close to that one and the only true God, whilst he alone is
acknowledged the author and giver, the mediator and procurer, the Almner and
dispenser of all grace, and good things unto us. The superstitious thorough
want of this faith, supposing it unfit to press with their prayers immediately
upon God himself, or to employ him in our affairs, would use the intercession
of Saints, and negotiation of Col. 2.18.19.
Angels, in a voluntary humility, vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds, and
not holding the head which is Christ. Who did not only dye for us to be a 1
Ioh. 2.1.2.
propitiation for our sins, but ever lives an advocate with the Father making
intercession for us, neither is there any other. 1. Tim. 2.5.
For as there is but one God, so there is but one mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus. Job. 5.1.
Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints
will thou turn? Es. 63.16.
Doubtless O Lord our God, thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art our father, our redeemer,
thy name is from everlasting. Ps. 73.25.
Whom have we in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that we desire
with thee.

To praise the name of God and to pray unto him, Christ the only image of God
to be worshipped by faith in his name.
by faith in his name, are the special parts of religious worship, intimated
in the second commandment by bowing down, because such gesture we use, when
we give thanks or make request, or do any reverence, or worship. i Who so
offers praise glorifieth me says God.h And to hear prayer is his
praerogatiue. Now because we conceive not, nor have any Qui vero nullo potest
sensu perspicue videri facile nequit agnos^i. Quod autem non agnoscitur
diligenter coli non potest, nisi per medium Joan. Sarisber. Policr. l. 5. c. 3.
actual understanding, but by imagination, which is an imaginary presentation
of that to the mind which it intends; therefore that we may not wander in
our imagination, nor frame to our selves any unbeseeming Image, or conceit of
God to whom we bow, he has Ponitur nobis anteoculos Christus, tanquam
perspicud Dei invisibilis imago, Col. 1.5. in cuius facie Deus pater (quialio
qui procul esset absconditus) nobis apparet, ne nuda Dei maiestas immense suo
sulgore nosabsorbeat. Calv. in Joh. 5.22.
given us his son Heb. 1.3.
the express image of his person, 1. Tim. 3.16.
God manifested in the flesh. In expectation of whom the ever promised Messiah,
God gave his people the Arc of his gracious presence, and afterward the
glorious temple, 1. King. 8.
in which, and toward which their prayers being made were heard, and their
service accepted. Wherein also they were prescribed a form of religion, in
outward Sed quid profero Numam, cu^ and patres fidei nostrae, veteris legis
sacrificiae asserant instituta, ne in daemonicrum cultu populus occupatus,
verae religionis dedisceret cultum, etc? Joan, Sarisber, Policrat. l. 5. c. 3.
rites, and ceremohies, and all to keep them from Idolatry and will worship,
in a faithful expectation of him that should come. 2. Cor. 5.16. Number vt
hominem adorabimus Immanuelem? Absit. Deliramentum enim hoc esset, and deceptio
ac error. In hoc^enim nihil ab ijs differemus, qui creaturam, vlira factorem
and conditorem colunt. Cyril. lib. de recta fide ad Theodosium. Et in
anathematismum octa vum. Vna adoratioue colimus Immanuelem, sed secundum quod
essentialiter Dei filius, factus est bypostatica union caro, etc.
And when he was come, they who knew him after the flesh, would thenceforth
know him no more in that manner. For while they had his bodily presence, the
Ioh 16.7. Act. 1.6.8.
Apostles themselves were not so capable of his spirit. Much less may we know
Christnow, and acknowledge him with religious worship, in any Non vult se Deus
in lopidibus coli, Ambros. in ep. ad valentinum contra Symachum 31. Nonest
dubium quin religio nulla sit vbicunque simulachrum est. Lact. l. 2. de vera.
sap. c. 19. Impossible est vt qui Deum novit, supplex fiat statuae, Orig.
contra Cells. l. 7. Sic omnino errare meruerum, qui Christum and Apostolos
eiusnon in sanctis codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus quaesiverunt, August. de
consens. Evangel. l. 1.
image or picture, which cannot express his Godhead, and therefore cannot be
the image of his person, consisting of God and Man, and subsisting wholly in
God; neither can it express the whole man, but his body only, if peradventure
it be the right picture thereof, which who knows? The word expresses his
mind, and by the Gospel we have a true and lively Crucifix, Gal. 3.1.
Christ Jesus evidently set forth before our eyes, crucified amongst us. Whom
by the eye of faith (which is Heb. 11.1. v. 27.
the evidence of things not seen) we may discern being now otherwise unto us
invisible. And wheresoever we are, if we believe in Christ, we shall never be
far to seek where, and how to worship God. Ioh. 4.21.23
The hour is now come when (as our Savior told the superstitious woman)
neither on that mount, nor at Jerusalem, but the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in spirit and in truth. 1 Ioh. 5.20.21 In hoc quod fecit hunc mundu^
coelo terraque conspicuum, and antequam imbuereatur in side Christi, not us
omnibus gentibus Deus. In hoc autem quod non est iniuriis suis, cum dtis falsis
colendus, not us in Iudaea Deus. In hoc vero, quod pater est huius Christi, per
quem tollit peccatum mundi, hoc nomen cius prius eccultum omnibus, aunc
manifestavit iis, quos ded^ ei pater ipse de mundo. Aug. tract. 105. super
Johan.
The Father in the son who is the truth, by the holy Ghost. For we know that
the son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may know
him, that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his son Christ
Jesus. This is the true God and eternal life. Babes keep your selves from
Idols. Phil. 2.10, 11
At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess that
Jesus Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the Father. At his name, not at
his picture, in his name, not by his image, all prayers and praises offered up
to God the Father are accepted with him. 1. Tim. 2.8.
And now we pray every where lifting up holy hands, Mal. 1.11.
and from the rising of the sun, unto the going down of the same, the name of
the Lord is great among the Gentiles. And in every place incense is offered,
and a pure offering, even Rev. 8.4.
the prayers of the Saints, by the hand of the Angel of the covenant, Christ
Jesus, at the altar of God his presence. For the Ps. 141.2.
pouring out of our prayers is as the incense, and the lifting up of our hands
as the evening sacrifice.

But Lev. 10.3.
God will be sanctified of all that come nigh unto him. Profaneness,
Hypocrisy, Blasphemy
2. Tim. 2.19.
Let everyone therefore that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
Heb. 12.29.
For our God is a consuming fire, and will consume those with fire of his
indignation, Le. 10.1.
that offer strange fire upon his altar. He is a jealous God, and will not hold
him guiltless that takes his name in vain. Which we do, if either we take
notice of his word, and works, without due affection, whereby he makes his name
known; or if we use any notification of him, but in his worship, or to his
honor, with true religion and devotion. The Philosophers Romans 1.21.22.
who professed themselves wise, became fools. Because when they knew God by
his works of creation, they glorified him not as God neither were thankful.
But the due notice of God his works by his word, thorough the working of his
spirit, begets faith in us, and that faith restraines from all evil by fear,
and prouokes by love to Igitur qui innotentiam colit, domino supplicat, qui
iustitiam, deo libat, qui frandibus abstinet, oropitiat deum, quihomine^
pericuto surripit, opimam victiimam caedit. Min. Fael. oct.
good works; that we may 2. Cor. 6.1.
not receive the grace of God in vain, nor take his name in vain, and cause
it to be euilspoken of. Is. 29.14. Mat. 25 8.
Hypocrites draw near God with their mouths, and honor him with their lips,
but their hearts are far off, Ezekiel. 33.31.
running after covetousness. Ps. 66.18.
But if I regard iniquity the lord will not hear me. Ps. 50.16.17
To the wicked God says, what have thou to declare my statutes, or to take my
covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed. Prove. 28.9.
The very prayer of the wicked is abominable, even a mocking of God to his
face, as the Mat. 27.29.30.
soldiers bowing the knee mocked Christ, saying hail king of the Jews and
smote him with their hands. Wherefore Solomon's counsel is god, Eccl. 5.1. v. 2.
keep thy foot when thougoest into the house of God, and be more ready to
hear then to offer the sacrifice of fools, for they consider not that they
do evil. And that our mouths be not rash, nor our hearts hasty to utter any
thing before God, David his resolution is good in our greatest passions, and
perturbations. psalm. 39.1.
I said I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue. Least
by cursing, swearing, forswaring we pull down the curse of God upon us, and
cause Zach. 5.2.3.4.
the flying roll to come forth; and to enter into our houses, to consume the^
with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, and to cut us off on this side,
and on that side according to it. Yet are there greater prophanations then
these, whereby the name of God is blasphemed. Job. 34.18.19.
Is it fit to say to a king thou art wicked, and to princes ye are ungodly?
How much less to him that accepts not the persons of princes? Yet desperate
and forelorne malcontents, Es. 8.21.
will curse their God and their king; and look upwards, when they are hardly
bestead. And there are worse blasphemers then these; the bloody persecutors of
God his servants, stick James 2.7.
not to blaspheme that worthy name of Christ, whereby we are called. 1 Cor.
12.3.
But no man speaking by the spirit of God calls Jesus accursed. And yet there
are worse blaspheamers then they, Heb. 6.4.
who having been made partakers of the holy ghost, fall away desperately and
maliciously to blaspheme Manifestus est a side lapsus, and crimen maximae
superbiae, vel a scripto recedere, vel non scriptum admittere, Basil: sermo: de
fide.
the known truth, and the spirit of truth being possessed with a spirit of
contradictions, for who^ there is no mercy, Heb. 6.6.
no place for repentance. The profane unbeliever Acts. 7.51.
resists the spirit of God, the formal professor Ephesians. 4 30.
greiues the spirit of god, the lewd liver 1 These. 5.19.
quenches the spirit of God, but the blasphemous apostata, Heb. 10.29.
does despite unto the spirit of grace. But if we believe indeed as we were
baptized, and have professed, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy ghost,
our hearts, and tongues, and deeds, will all join together with the blessed
Angels, and all the powers of heaven, crying holy, holy, holy, lord God of
saboth. Hallowed be thy thrice glorious name, O thou holy one, as thou have
commanded.

That the name of God may be known, The Christian sabbath of the holy
Catholic Church.
and worshipped, as by every man in private, so by all of us in public, God
has appointed the sabbath for the holy assemblyes, representing the holy
catholic Church, in acknowledgement of his kingdom, attending his grace, in
holy exercises, and Christian duties, and expecting his glory. Which day may
not be otherwise employed farther then necessity enforces, (which is god his
dispensation, and has no law) or then mercy to our selves, and others
requires ^at. 12.7.
which God will have and not sacrifice. Of which duty some question has been
made of late, whether it be of faith, I suppose for these reasons principally.
First because in nature there is little or no appearance of reason for the
sabbath, that it should be moral. Secondly because it seems not to be any
where expressly recognized in the new testament, as the other commandments
are, but rather to be slighted both by Christ and his apostles. Thirdly
because in keeping the sabbath the Jews were to observe certain ceremonies,
which are now abolished by the Gospel. And lastly because Christians have
never kept that day, which the Jews did, and the commandment seems to
prescribe. Which doubts if they may be cleared, I hope the ten commandments
will hold together, and not break company, being all of the same kind, and
Exodus 31.18. c. 34.38.
written with God his own finger. He spoke these ten words and added no more
unto them. For the natural reason of the sabbath somewhat has already been
said in the proper place thereof, concerning the I book. chapter 5.
law of nature. But may not a law be moral for the use thereof, unless it be
natural in respect of the cause? Christ has promised that where two or three
are gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them. Now
although God be every where, at all times, yet for our Ne inordinata
congregatio populi fidem minuoret in Corste, propterea dies aliqui constituti
sunt, vt in vnum oomes pariter veniremus, Hieroniad Gal. 4.
meetings, there must needs be a set time, which it is just that God, who
appoints the meeting, should design, and not we. There may be holy assemblyes
as that of Acts 10.
Cornelius upon any day, to hear the word, to praise God, and to pray unto
him, as occasion is offered inseason, and out of season, and the Lord will be
found in them. But on the Lords day the holy assemblies must be, and that
weekly, because he has commanded, and has given us the reason which we have
belecued.

Now for that which Christ said or did we may be well assured that his intent
was not to violate the law of the sabbath, The sabbath not abrogated by Christ.
who came not to break the law, but to fulfill it, and was therein so
punctual and exact, Mat. 3.15.
to perform all righteousness, that if it were but a ceremony, he would have
observed it; because all was to continue until the veil, of the temple, his
body, was rent. He often took occasion indeed by their greatest assemblies on
the sabbath days, to do some miracles, and works of mercy in their sight, to
confirm the truth of what he taught, namely that he was the Lord of the
sabbath, and the merciful savior of the world. This lesson he first read
unto them out of the Luke 4.16.17.18.
Prophet Isaiah, in one of their Synagogues, as his custom was, on the sabbath
day. Which they should now have taken forth by him, being the chief and
principal end of their sabbath. But when they perversely misconstrued his
doings, he justifying the same as also his Disciples plucking the ears of
corn, to satisfy their hunger, took occasion to teach them better what was
the right use of the sabbath. Not a Cui septima quaeque fuit lu^ Ignava --
Invenal. Sat. 14. and Sat. 6. Observant vbi festa mero pede sabbata reges. De
itinere sabatico. Quos etiam irridet, Plutarch. libel. de superstitione.
superstitious cessation from work, but a spiritual attention to the works
of God, ever admitting our works of mercy, and of necessity. And if Christ
thereby abrogated the sabbath, then did he abolish the other commandments
also whereof he said, Mat. 5.
So and so it has been said unto you of old, but I say unto you, thus and
thus shall ye do; and then was the Sabbath abrogated long before by the
Prophet Isaiah, in the name of the Lord. Isa. 1.13.
The new moons and sabbaths, the calling of solemn assemblies, I cannot away
with. But this Christ has taught us concerning the sabbath: Mark. 2.27.
That it was made for man and not man for the sabbath; as indeed the whole law
was made for man, not to break, but to keep it, for his own good. This
especially was a provisionall statute for his benefit, Quian. durabile non est
quod requie caret, o^ tium quoddam sanctum Deus praecepit, vt insatiabilem
hominum cupiditatem fraenaret, qui tam seipso^ quam servos suos nimijs
laboribus exhauriunt, modo lucrum faciant. Gualterus homil. 56. in Luc.
partly in regard of his body, whose worldly heart would else give him no rest,
but would make him out-worke Gods curse, if God did not allow us a rest,
supplying us the while with necessaries by his ordinary providence, Exodus 16.24.
as he did the Israelites by miracle; but principally for his souls good, that
he might attend, and receive the Homini non ante septimum laetalis inaedia est.
Plia. hist. not. l. 11. c, 53. Plerique ex his qui septem diebus nihil edere,
aut bibere volunt in his moriuntur, quod si quidam eos super averint,
nihilominus tamen moriuntur. Hyp. l. de carn. ad sinem. Non possunt boni mores
ne secundum naturam quidem ipsam, apud eos homines constare, qui vnum de septem
diebus, non observant, and sanctificant domino. Iun. de Pol. Mosis, c. 8.
spiritual food thereof unto eternal life.

As for the Apostles, The Sabbath not abrogated by the Apostles.
St Paul writing to the Galatians condemns the superstitious Gal. 4.10.
observing of days and months, and times, and years in general, whereof the
Jews accounted some more holy, and the Gentiles some more happy. But to the
Colossians he speaks of Sabbaths by name, reckoning the^ amongst shadows, he
says Coloss. 2.16.
let no man judge you in respect of the Sabbaths, a phrase which he uses Romans
14.4.10.13.
elsewhere, forbidding all censuring, and contending about things indifferent,
amongst which he reckons the observing of a day, and it may be, that set day
for the Sabbath; for he says V. 6.
he that observes a day, observes it to the Lord, and he that observes not a
day to the Lord, he not observes it: for the which he would not have them
judge one another. To the same purpose he speaks of the sabbath to the
Colossians. Is the sabbath then a thing indifferent? Then were it no moral
commandment. The sabbath is not a thing indifferent, but at that time there
were different days of sabbath; one which the Jews observed, and were for a
Ceremony ab Apostolis, non vt foetida cadavera mox profane abiiciebantur, sed
religiose ad sepulturam deducebantur. Postquam vero semel sepultae fuerunt, fi
quis eas refodere atque observare vellet, non esset pius funeris deductor, sed
impius sepulturae violator, August. ep. 19. ad Hieron.
while to be borne withal, as for other ceremonies; an other which the
believing Gentiles observed, as they were taught by the Apostles, in honor of
Christ his resurrection: and therefore the Apostle there speaks of Sabbaths.
Now it seems that as the Corinthians, and the Galatians, so also the
Colossians, were troubled with false Apostles, or with some such as in this
case walked not uprightly, but would compel the Gentiles to observe the same
day, amongst other things, which the Jews did: of whom he warnes them at the
8. ver: and in this 16. ver: arms them against their censures. Let no man
judge you in this case, for as for the set day of the sabbath, which the Jews
stand upon, it is but as their new moons, and the like ceremonies; which
Christ buried when he lay their whole sabbath day in the grave; the substance
is Christ and his resurrection, Si nobis non resurrexit, vtique non resurrexit,
qui sibi cur resurgeret, non habebat. Ambr. in orat. de fide resur.
which Christians are to honor, where of he speaks Col. 2.12.
a little before, and an on again in the C. 3. v. 1.
beginning of the next Chapter. Brifley, whilst there were two sabbath days in
use, the one observed by the Jews, the other by the believing Gentiles, he
would not have them troubled at any man's censure in that respect, nor to
contend amongst themselves thereabout, but to look to the maine, and to hold
it which was on their parts. Non tempora observamus, se^ quae illis
significantur temporibus, Aug. contrae Adimant. c. 16.
He remoueth the ceremony of the sabbath, to establish the substance.

It seems then there was something ceremonial in the sabbath, which is the
next objection. The Jews typical use of the Sabbath abolished.
The law it self was not ceremonial but moral, only there was a ceremonial
use annexed unto the law for the time, to be observed by the Jews. As the Genesis
9.13.
Rainebow, a natural impression in the clouds, is made a sign by God his
appointment, that there shall be no more any universal deluge; and Genesis 2.24.
marriage instituted in Paradise, was after used for Ephesians. 5.23.
a type of the union betwixt Christ and his Church. The Jews had a threefold
typical use of the sabbath: First Exodus 31.13.
it was a discretiue sign that they were the only people of God, because
besides them none observed the sabbath. Which figure ceased in Christ, by whom
the partition wall was cast down, and the light of the comfortable day of rest
brake forth unto all people. Wherefore now we keep the sabbath not on the
Jews day, as if we were their Sabatarian proselites, and had title by them,
but on the Lords day, Gal. 3.28.
in whom there is neither Jew nor Gentile, but all are one in Christ. Secondly
it was a memoratiue sign unto them Deuteronomy. 5.15.
for a perpetual remembrance of their delivery out of Egypt: Which use
likewise was taken away in Christ, who has redeemed us from the miserable
bondage of sin, and Satan, where of their deliverance was a type, and
consequently that use of the sabbath, in remembrance thereof. The third
typical use of their sabbath was Heb. 4.
a figurative sign of their rest in the promised land, which was accomplished
in Christ, who thorough death is entered for us, and leads us the way into the
heavenly Canaan. And generally all outward observances, as Exodus 16.29.
not to go out of their places on the sabbath day, Cha. 35.3.
not to kindle a fire, Ier. 17.21.
not to carry a burden; and the respects to outward things, in all which they
were more superstitious then was required; were all poedagogicall appendices of
the Sabbath proper to the Jews, in whom the Church was trained up by
temporal, and sensible things, and in a most strict, and severe manner. Sic
ergo intelligendum est, sive in isto die volubili septimo prandiatur, sieve a
quibusda^ etiam ieiunetur, tarzen sabbato spirituali sabbatum carnale cessisse^
quando in isto sempite^na and vera requie sconcupiscitur, in illo vacatio
temporalis iam superstitiosa contemnitur, Aug. ep. 86. ad Casalam. (...). Non
igitur sabbatizemus more ^udaico, velut otio gaudentes. (...), etc. Sed
vnusquisque nostrum sabbatizet spiritualiter. Ignat. in Epist. ad Magnesios.
All which are eased or remitted in Christ, by whom we are plainly taught to
look unto things spiritual and Eternal, and are therein exercised with a
more free, and reasonable service. All typical uses of the sabbath tending to
Christ his coming in the flesh, and the things performed already by him, for
the work of our redemption, are ceased, and all the services belonging
thereunto. Yet in respect of things (...) Ad supernae siquaem vitae statum
spectat. Greg. Nazianz: de noua donanica crat. 43. Repudiamus ergoeam carnalem
tum apostolo, and approbamus eam spiritualem cum apostolo, qui sabbati quietem
non obseruamus in tempore, sed signum temporale intelligimus, and ad aeternam
quie^em quae illo sign significatur aciem mentis intendimus. August. l. contra
Adimant Manichaeidiscip. cap. 16.
perpetually spiritual, and of eternal, which are yet to come the sabbath may
still have some typical use. Ezekiel. 20.12.
It is a sign for ever that God sanctifies his people, and a figure of our
Eternal rest, Rev. 14.13.
when we shall all rest from our labors, Isa. 66.23.
and when from one sabbath to another all flesh shall come before him. (...),
Heb, 4.9.
There remains therefore a rest, or sabbath keeping, to the people of God.

Now for the day, the law does not say expressly, The Christian sabbath day
within the compass of the commandment.
what seventh day shall be the sabbath which may be any in respect of number
and order, according as we begin to reckon; but appointing or allowing six
days indefinitely for ordinary labor in our callings, it commands the Sed
si sabbatum audierit, non intelligit nisi vnum diem de septem, qui continuo
volumine repetuntur. Aug. de Doctr. chr. l. 3. c. 5. Iam hinc abinitio
doctrinam hanc nobis insmuat deus, erudiens, in circulo hebdomadae, diem vnum
integrum segregandum and seponendum in spiritualem operationem. Chrisost homil.
10. in Genes.
seventh to be kept holy to the worship of God, as god made all things in six
days and rested on the seventh, not specifying which were the six days, or
which the seventh, either in the precept or in the reason. How does it appear
that the World was begun upon sunday, that saturday must needs be the
seventh? And if the sabbath which is the period of the week, were not
observed nor commanded all that time, from the creation to the beginning of the
law, (as some say) by what monuments shall it appear, that the weekly account
of days was kept until then, just in the same order as it was in the
creation? The first sabbath that we read of since the creation, was Exodus 16.
when God gave the Israelites Manna from heaven, the seventh day after the
six days, whereon they gathered the Manna, reckoning from the day of their
murmuring, whatsoever day of the week, the fifteenth day of the second month,
after their departing out of the Land of Egypt. But suppose (as it is not
unlikely) whatsoever weekly reckoning had been formerly kept of the days,
that God when he gave the law, did set them the very seventh day in order
from the creation, yet were the days since that altered, Iosuah. 10.13
when the sun stood still at the prayer of Iosuah, and Isai. 38.8.
when it went back for a sign to Hezekiah. Whereby the sabbath, if it must be
the seventh part of the week, consisting of 24 hours was certainly altered,
that it came either later in the space of time, or sooner in the number of
days. Si Iudeus sabbatum colendo dominicum negat quomodo Christianus obseruat
sabbatu^? An simus Christiani and dominicum colimus: aut simus Iudaei vt
sabbatum obseruemus? Nemo enim potest duobus dominis seruire. Nonne ita
loquitur tanquam sabbati alius dominus fit alius dominici? Nec illud andit quod
and ipse commemorauit: Deminusest enim sabbati filius hominis August. ep. 86.
ad Casulan.
Howsoever the same authority which appointed one seventh day at the creation,
has appointed this other, which we now observe ever since the redemption, and
both within the compass of the same commandment, which indefinitly allows
us six days for our works, and apponiteth the seventh for a sabbath to the
Lord.

Mark. 2.28.
The son of man is Lord of the sabbath. The Lords day designed by Christ for
the sabbath.
And that he did make this the sabbath, the Apostle insinuats sufficiently,
writing to the Jews, when he says, Heb. 4.9.10. Vid: Iun. paral: ^. 3. in
locum.
There remains a rest to the people of God, for he that is entered into his
rest, that is Christ, he also has ceased from his works, as God did from his:
Leaving them to gather the conclusion, namely that as God when he had created
all things rested the seventh day ad sanctified it, Si dei requies causa
sanctisicationis diei est, consequenter vbi mayor et verior eius requies, illic
sanctificatio copiosior. Rupertus de divine: offic. l. 7. c. 19.
so Christ when he had finished the work of our redemption, rested this
seventh day, and sanctified it, in honor of his Cuius beneficii commemoratio
successit memoriae creationis, non traditione humana, sed Christi ipsius
obseruatione, atque instituto. Iun: in 2. cap. Gen,
resurrection. God gave them time and place the sabbath, and the land of
Canaan, to lead them by degrees, in types to the eternal rest in heaven; they
Heb. 3. and 4. chapter
wanted faith to discern what was figured. Chapter 4.6.7.
Seeing therefore that it remains that some must enter in, and they to whom
it was first preached, entered not in because of unbelief, again therefore he
limiteth a certain day, saying to day after so long a time. v. 5.
If Iosuah had given them rest, who brought them into the land of Canaan, if
there they should have set up their rest, then would he not afterward have
spoken of another day, v. 9.
there remains therefore a rest, even a sabbath keeping, for the people of
God, a farther place, for which another day is appointed. Christ buried their
sabbath, in so much as it was ceremonial, namely that set day, and their
sacrificing services, and outward obseruances in his grave, where he lay that
whole day of their sabbath, and rising again the next day, when all his
labors ceased, he thereby sanctified that day a sabbath, to all that believe
in him; pointing us to the Requies est quaedam ab omni labor omnium
molestiarum sancta atque perpetua: in eadem nobis ex hac vita sit transitus,
quem dominus noster Jesus Christus sua passione demonstrare ac consecrare
dignatus est. Inest autem in illa requie non desidiosa segnitia, sed quaedam
ineffabilis tranquilitas actionis otiosae. Aug. ep. 119. ad Ianuar. (...), etc.
At post sabbatum omnis Christi amator domini cum celebret diem, resurrectioni
consecratum dominicae, reginam and principem omnium dierum. Ignat: in epist: ad
Magnesios. Iure igitur sanctae congregationes die octavo in ecclesiis fiunt.
Inquit Cyrillus ib. 12. In Joan. cap. 58.
eternal rest, which he had now fully purchased for us, and whereinto he will
bring us, by the resurrection of our bodies also, in Everlasting life. And
therefore though all his former life he observed the Jews sabbath in their
assemblies, yet after that he was risen from the dead he thenceforth observed
this new day of rest, x giving his disciples meeting upon this day when they
were assembled together, and y again that day sennight. And after himself was
ascended, he sent down the holy Ghost upon them, when they were met together
again on this day. Which it seems the holy Ghost would have well noted,
saying, in such precise terms, that it was when the day of Pentecost (...)
Act. 2.1. Lev. 25.15.
was fully come, for that being reckoned as was a appointed, fifty days from
the morrow after the passover, which was that year on the saturday, to the
morrow after the seventh sabbath, it must needs be this very day of the week
which is our sabbath. So that on this same day Christ rose, appeared twice, and
thirdly sent the holy ghost, every time when they were assembled, and lastly
appeared Revel. 1.10.
to St John being in the spirit on the Lords day, teaching thereby the Church
represented in them, to assemble ever on (...), sublimi vtique sublimior, and
admirabili admirabilior. Greg: Wazianz. de nova deminica, orat. 43. p. 700.
that day, and every one to be spiritually minded, and exercised in
remembrance of his resurrection, attendance on the holy ghost, and expectance
of our final glory in the presence of God the father. It is therefore most
fitly called Quia enius sabbati tunc appellabatur dies qui nunc dominicus
appellatur: August. ep. 86. ad Casulan.
the Lords day, Ps. 118.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.
And it may be called sunday in a better sense then the Ecce enim dies solis
adest. Sic enim barbaries diem dominicum vocitare consueta est. Greg.
Turonensis: Histor. lib. 3. cap. 13.
heathens knew, because on this day Malach. 4.2. Solis autem die communiter
omnes conuentum agimus, quandoquidem, is primus dies est, quo deus e tenebris
and materia, quam prius creauerat, versa, mundum essecit, and Jesus Christus
seruator noster, eo ipsodie a mortuis resurrexit. Iuslin: Martyr apolog. lib. 2.
the sun of righteousness arose with healing under his wings. But howsoever
the name be, the duty of a sabbath remains to be performed by the express
law of God inviolable.

Which the Apostles were careful to observe, The Lords day has ever bin
observed as the sabbath by the church
as appears not only by their former assemblies, and exercises on that day,
but afterward again. Act. 20.7. and by their doctrine. The spirit calling all
things to their remembrance which Christ had taught and commanded them. For
that very day the Apostle appointed to be religiously kept, not only at Colossi
as it has been showed, but expressly in the Church of 1 Cor. 16.1.
Corinth and Galatia, and accordingly, we may well suppose, in all other
Churches. This day thus instituted, the Die dominico, qui est dies
resurrectionis slisdiosius templum domini adite. -- Quid enim apud deum
excusare poterit, qui eo die ad audiendum verbum dei salutare, de resurrectione
non conuenit? Clem; Constable. l. 2. c. 59.
Church of Christ has ever since kept as their sabbath, and that aunciently
with such severe necessity, as that for this very cause the whole Vid. Eusebius.
Eccles, bist. lib. 5. cap. 11. and Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21.
Greek Church, was excommunicated by Victor Bishop of Rome, (whose authority
and proceedings therein I undertake not) because they would keep Easter the
Lord his holy day in honor of his resurrrection, upon any day of the week, if
it were the (...) quartadecimam
foureteenth day of the month, and not put it over to this day of the week
Vid. I fiodor: de ecclesiast. offic. l. 1. cap. 31. It was decreed by the
counsel of Nice. Ruffinus lib. 1. cap. 6. Cur id obseruetur cum pascha
celebratur vt sabbatum occurrat. Hoc enim proprium Christian religionis est.
Aug. ep. 119. ad Ianuar: and paulo post, Orbi vniverso Christiano persuasum
est, eo modo pascha celebrari oportere.
as the first and great sabbath, whence all the other throughout the year are
reckoned. Were the Lords day kept weekly, as other holy days are yearly, only
as an holy day, not as the sabbath, then were the day of the month fittest
for Easter, as for other holy days, but being the same seventh day of the
week must of necessity be kept, the yearly holy day must be translated to
this day of the week, rather then the weekly sabbath varied every year by
that holy day. See the conference at Hampton Court. p. 45. reprinted: 1625.
In the Synod called and held by the late King James of blessed memory, when
many things were not found need full to be amended, the motion for a stricter
course to reform the profaning of the sabbath day, by that name without
scruple, Tertio Caroli. Constanti^us Imperat: grauissima authoritate sanciuit
dominicum. Enseb. lib. 4. de eius vita.
which now (blessed be God) is happily inacted by Parliament, found a gener
all and unanimous consent. For they well perceived that if this duty were
remitted, the life of religion, which has a long time languished, would soon
be utterly extinct, and vanish. Cum ex septem diebus vnus in domini honorem
consecratus sit, religionis prorsus dissolutae suerit nos aliorum dierum ad
opera vsu contentos non esse, neque illum domino eximium, and in violatum
conservare, sed ipsum etiam vulgarem facere. nostrisque operibus applicandum
putare. Leo imperat Novel. 54.
For howsoever it may be pretended, instead of the seventh to keep every day
holy, yet is it easily seen, that many who make no religion of the sabbath,
are indeed every day alike, profane enough; whereas they who do most devoutly
redeem some time of respit every day, from their own affairs, to the service
of God, do most earnestly desire, and carefully use the help of the seventh
day, to repair their defaults on the other six.

To conclude, The sabbath respects the kingdom of God.
of all the commandments in the moral law, the sabbath especially is of
faith, not only in God the father because of the creation, but in Christ the
redeemer, and throughout the whole creed, acknowledging Gods kingdom of
nature, grace, and glory. That day which the Jews observed, was as their other
holy days, and new moons, Colos. 2. v. 17.
a shadow; the body is of Christ; Namely the Ephesians. 1.23. 1. Cor. 12.12.
catholic Church, which is the body of Christ, his redeemed kingdom, for
which he prayed, and dyed. For that being every where dispersed, is in many
places gathered together, and generally resembled, by the holy assemblies, on
the Lords day. Ideo upostosi ne ecclesia cum Iudeorum superstitionibus aliquid
commune haberet, otium illud sacrum in sequentem diem transtulerunt. At ijdem
non tantum sibi permiserunt, vt preceptam diei septimi obseruaetionem, in
decimum aut quemcunque alium extenderent. Horum igitur exemplo nos insisterc
conuenit, nesub liber totis Christianae praetextu in illis ludamus. quae deux
certacum ratione instituit, and illa tandem in licentiam degeneret, quae vt
consusionem gignit, ita animos tandem ab omni religione alienat, Gualt. in
Lucam. hom. 56.
And therefore the Jews day of sabbath, whereby they were distinguished from
all others, as the peculiar people of God, is now altered, the grace thereof
being extended unto all nations. For now from one sabbath to another, from that
of theirs to this of ours, and from one Lords day to an other, all flesh comes
to worship before him. And this we pray, that his kingdom may come yet more,
and more, even the power of his grace, that the holy catholic church may
become every day more and more sanctified, and enlarged, until we all come to
be glorified with him, in that eternal rest whereinto he is entered for us.
Psalm. 84.1.
How amiable are thy tabernacles O Lord of hosts. My soul longs yea eue^
faints for the courts of the Lord. A day in thy courts is better then a
thousand elsewhere. Heb. 10.19, etc,
Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by
a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us, thorough the veil
that is to say his flesh, let us draw near, with a true heart in full
assurance of faith, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, Quum
deus noster singulari sua erga nos charitate e septem diebus vnum duntaxat
instaurandae fidei nostrae, atque adeo vitae aeternae, sanctificauit, eique
diei vt sacrae in eo administratae religiones, ad permouendam salutem nostram
essent efficaces, been dixit, deploratum sane is se contemptorem demonstrat,
sicut salutis propriae, ita tam admiraudae dei no stri in nos benificentiae,
eoque omnino indignum, qui in populo dei viuat, quicunque non studiat eum ipsum
diem domino deo suo glorificando, and procurandaesaluti propriae sanctificare,
etc, Bucer, lib. 1. de regno Christi: cap. 11. lege totum cap.
as the manner of some is, but exhorting one an other, and that so much the
more as we see the day approaching. Let thy kingdom come O Lord Psalm. 110.3.
that thy people may be willing now in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness from the womb of the morning. Ps. 65.1.
Then shall praise wait for thee O God in Sion, and unto thee shall the vow be
performed in Jerusalem.

Thus the duties of Love to God are all directed unto him, The perfect will of
God to be done on earth.
and exercised by faith in Christ, with true godliness; and this faith again
is approved to God by the works of love, in all goodness toward men, for his
sake, whereunto all the duties of the second table are reduced. 1 Ioh: 3.23.
For this is the commandment of God, that we should believe on the name of
his son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment.

All the duties of love prescribed, by the law are by faith improued to an
higher degree of perfection then the letter imports; he being the Mat. 5.
interpreter, who was the lawginer, and shall be our judge. For now we see
that not only the acts but thoughts and occasions of evil are unlawful, and
we find our selves bound in conscience to perform our duties to men, Colos.
3.22, 23.
not with eye service as men pleasers, but with singleness of heart, fearing
God; And whatsoever we do, to do it heartily as to the Lord and not unto
men. The first and last commandemets, which are the two great commandments
including all the rest, expressly require the heart. Thou shall have no other
gods, Nor covet an others goods. Mat. 15.9.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, thefts, false
witness, etc. which are transgressions of the several commandments, and by
them forbidden, as they are any way followed or embraced by us. But by the last
commandment the first motion of evil arising in our corrupt hearts is
condemned, and we are thereby made guilty of the sin that is in us by
natural corruption. Romans 7.7.
I had not known lust except the law had said, Thou shall not lust.

Howsoever the law be given for the most part in negative terms, to restrain
first of all from gross injuries, and exorbitances, and from all the
occasions, and appendants of sin, which are not allowable at any time, yet
does the affirmative of the law, not only where it is expressed; but as it
employed in the prohibitions, bind us at all times, though not to all times, to
do good unto all, as we have opportunity. So far must we be from doing any
evil unto others, as rather willingly to suffer evil of others for well
doing, if it may not be otherwise. And the works of perfection as some call
them, supposing that they are only (...). Plato. As where Christ says I
counsel thee to buy of me etc. Rev. 3.18. Consitium includit proeceptum
Bellarm. Est instrumentum praecepti. Thom. Praeceptum ex hypothesi.
counseled in the Gospel, and therefore arbitrary, are indeed commanded by
the law, Ps. 19.7.
for the law is perfect, and are duties necessary for every man to do, if
there be As in time of persecution or first plantation of the Gospel. So did
the first conuerts. vid. Act. 2.44.45. and cap. 4.32.34.
Cause and the case require. And otherwise who has required these things at
your hands? When the young man whom Christ bad sell all that he had, and give
to the poor, that he might follow him, Math. 19.21.
if he would be perfect, went away sorrowful, because he had great
possessions; then said Jesus unto his disciples, verily I say unto you, v. 23.
That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. Christiani
vnuiscuiusque officium est vt animo propter Christum relinquat omnia, par atus
etiam ex facto relinquere vbires desiderauerit. Iun. in Bell. contra: 5. lib.
2. c. 8. S. parag. 42.
Now that is necessary without which we cannot enter into heaven. And what did
Christ inioine him more then is intended by the precepts of the law, as he
has interpreted the same? Mat. 5.38. etc.
Ye have heard it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,
but I say unto you that ye resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on
thy righ cheek, turn to him the other also, and if any man sue thee at the
law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. Is it a greater
matter to sell that we have, and give freely to the poor, then to give to an
adversary, that has already by force, or fraud gone beyond us? We are not
forbidden Vid Augustine. epistlo. quint. ad Marcellin.
all plea of right, nor required causelessly to depart with our own; For this
were to abet, and animate malefactors, and unreasonable men; and to frustrat
God his ordinance, Romans 13.4.
whose minister the magistrate is for thy good. No more are we counseled to
cast away our goods, which are the blessings of God, Act. 17.26.
who has appointed us the bounds of our habitation; nor needlessly to live upon
the alms of others, Act. 20.35.
remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said; it is more blessed to
give then to receive. But we are taught to possess our souls in patience,
under the pressures of the world, Romans 12.21.
not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil with good. Praeparatione
animi. Aug. passim. vid. Sixth. Senens. Bibliot. Sanct: li. 6. Annotat. 156.
And to be willing to part with the lesser good for the greater, where we may
not enjoy both. Again Mat. 5.21.
ye have heard it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill,
but Isay unto you that whosoever is angry with his brother without cause shall
be in danger of judgment, and whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be in
danger of hell fire. Now tell me, whether is it easier to contain the tongue,
or to extend the hand? Saint James says, Iamer. 3.2.
if any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man. Mat. 5.27.
Farther ye have heard it was said by them of old. Thou shall not commit
adultery, but I say, whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery already with her in heart. And therefore if thy right eye
offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee, for it is profitable for
thee, that one of thy members perish, and not that thy whole body should be
cast into hell. Now whether do they more Mat. 19.12.
that make themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven? Neither the one
sort, nor the other, are commanded or counseled to use violence on their own
bodies, either to castrate, or exoculate themselves. Ephesians. 5.29.
For no man hates his own flesh, but nourishes it, and cherishes it even as
the Lord the Church. Yet must all occasions of sin be avoided upon necessity,
and the 1. Cor. 9.27.
body be kept under, Gal. 5.24.
the flesh crucified, Col. 3.5.
the members mortified, that they may be Romans 6.13.
instruments of righteousness unto God, and not the weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin 1. Cor. 9.27.
least we prove reprobates. Generally these and the like heroicke works of
grace and perfection, are directly commanded where God gives ability, that is
his gift, and lays a necessity, that is his call, Mat. 19.12.
and he that can let him do them; Extra necessicatis discrimea non sunt
operis praecepta sed affectus, in praeparatione animi seruanda, vt scilicet
semper parati simus. Aug. de his Christi mandatis, vid. Sixth, Senens. Biblioth,
sanct. l. 6. Annot. 156. But although it be a duty pleasing God to depart
with all one has; when the Lord himself, either by express commandment,
Mat. 19.21. or by his calling and providence, offering a just occasion. Heb.
10.34. enioyneth us to do it: yet the presumptuous doing hereof without any
such calling is unlawful: B. White: Orthod. page 66. Sciendum est ergo
Christum non impossibilia praecipere sed perfecta. Hieron. in 5. Math.
otherwise they are not so much as counseled: for the counsels of God are for
our 1. Cor. 7.35.
profit, not to lay a snare upon any. Mich. 6. v. 8.
He has showed thee o man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

We see by faith, The heavenly conversation.
what perfection the law requires, as Christ has interpreted the same; which
every faithful soul aims at, and desires to attain. Wherefore believing
Quoniam vitam humanam post resurrectionem similem dicit esse ventura^ vitae
angelicae, consequens est vitam muadanam ad vitam quae postmodum speratur
disponi vt in carne viventes, carnaliter non viuamus. Greg. Nisen.
the communion of Saints and Angels, we pray as he has taught us, that the
will of God may be done by us on earth, as it is done by them in heaven, that
is perfectly. For although the will of God be not prescribed them by this very
law, nor in the self same things as to us, in regard of their excellent
condition, Ps. 103.20.
yet do they his commandments, harkening to the voice of his word; and they
observe as it were the same things which are enjoined us, in a perfect and more
eminent manner, as will appear in the particulars, for our imitation. 5.
Commandment.
How glorious is the heavenly Es. 6.2.6. Colos. 1.16. 1. These. 4.16. etc.
hierarchy, keeping their stations, Angels, Archangels, Dominions,
principalities, powers, thrones, Cherubins, Seraphins. Judge. 5.20.
The stars also in the firmament march in their order. 1. Cor. 15.41.
And one star differs from another star in glory. It was pride and
presumption that cast down the devil and his Angels from heaven like
lightning, Iud. v. 6.
who kept not their first station, but as the Isai. 14.13.
Prophet alludes by the morning star, applying it to the proud king of Babel,
he said I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, I will sit upon the
mount of the congregation in the sides of the north, I will ascend above the
height of the clouds. I will be like the most high. v. 12.
How art thou fallen O Lucifer son of the morning? 6. Commandment.
As for murderers, Ioh. 8.44.
they are of their father the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning.
(...). 1. Ioh 3.12.
Cain was of that wicked one the Devil, and slew his brother. But the blessed
Angels of heaven Ps. 91.12.
bear us up in their arms, Ps. 34.7.
and pitch their tents about us for our safeguard. 7. Commandment.
Mat. 22.30.
They marry not nor give in marriage, God having made them all at once pure
spirits, but they honor our marriages. And are the glad messengers of God his
blessing upon the marriage bed; as Genesis 18.
unto Abraham, and unto Judge. 12.
Manoah and his wife. Malac. 2.15.
Did not he make one, yet had he the residue of the spirit, and might have made
all men at once, as he did the Angels. And wherefore one? That he might seek a
godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, that the seed of God be no way
adulterated, and imbased. The devil that foul seducing spirit, has devised
another doctrine, to disgrace God his holy ordinance of marriage, and is become
a lying spirit in the mouths of his Nuptiarum aditus intercludunt, and
promiscue convenire hortantur. Aug. de Manichaeis quaest. 72. in Nov. Testam.
false Prophets, forbidding to marry. 1. Tim. 4.1.3
A principal point of the doctrine of Devils, provoking to all uncleanness,
and opening a gap to all confusion. Act. 10.15.
But what God has sanctified that call not thou, nor cause thou to be called,
common or unclean. 8. Commandment.
It was the Devils delight to Job. 1.
rob Job of all that he had. He set the Sabaeans, and Chaldaeans on work, as
he does all others of that trade. But the blessed Angels 1. King. 19.5 Mat.
4.11.
minister unto us, and receive us hence into everlasting habitations. 9.
Commandment.
It is the Devil that is Rev. 12.10.
the accuser of his brethren, and a false one. Ioh. 8.44.
For he is a lier and the Father of it. But the blessed Angels, Iud. v. 9.
bring no railing accusations, no not against the Devil himself in their
greatest conflicts. 10. Commandment.
Lastly the blessed Angels having fullness of joy, and all sufficiency in God,
envy not the glory prepared for us, as the Devil did our first happiness, and
does still malign, and oppose by all means, our purchased redemption; Luke
15.10.
but they rejoice exceedingly at the conversion of a sinner, 1. Pet. 1.12.
they long and desire to look into the accomplishment of God his glory in us.
So must we Phil. 2.4.
look not every man on his own things only, but every man also on the things
of others: and not only eschew the evil forbidden, but do all good unto all
men implied in the law, Eccl. 9.10.
whatsoever our hand finds to do, as we have ability, and opportunity. Ps.
16.2.
Our goodness indeed extends not unto God, nor to the glorified Saints, and
Angels, (for what good can we do unto them?) V. 3.
but to the Saints that are on the earth, and to such as excel in virtue,
whilst Gal. 6.10.
we do good unto all, especially to them who are of the household of faith.
Whereby yet we Cum ipsis angelis sumus vna civitas Dei, cuius pars in nobis
peregrinatur pars in illis opitulatur, Aug. de civ. D. l. 10. c. 7.
hold communion with the heavenly host, in imitation of them, indeauouring to
do the will of God in earth as it is done in heaven, by the blessed Angels;
and following the examples of holy men, 1. Cor. 11.1.
as they have been followers of Christ Jesus, that we may be all like unto
our heavenly father, Ephesians. 5.1. Eorum filii dicimur quorum actus imitamur. Orig.
in Ezekiel. hom. 4.
followers of God as dear children, Ps. 119.89.
O Lord thy word is settled in heaven for ever. 90.
Thou also have established the earth, and it abides. Thy will be done on
earth as it is in heaven, V. 91.
according to thine ordinances, for all are thy servants.

CAP. III. The Refuge of Hope.
We are saved by hope. The Law perfect, we imperfect. Good works not well
done. Grace and merit incompetible. The Christian hope. Our daily bread.
Forgiveness of sins. No immunity to sin. Temptations. Preservation.
Resurrection. Life everlasting and glorious.

Do you now by grace fulfill the Law, and merit glory by good works? We are
saved by hope.

NO, God knows, we all sin continually, and still Romans 3.24.
come short of the glory of God. Which we acknowledge in the regresse of the
prayer, Heb. 6.18.4.16.
flying for refuge, to the throne of grace to lay hold on the hope that is set
before us. Romans 8.24.
For we are saved by hope in respect of the full accomplishment of our
purchased redemption, and of the real fruition thereof, which we are now
assured of, and whereinto we are firmly estated by faith. What is hope but a
faithful expectation of good things to come. V. 24. V. 25.
Hope that is seen, is not hope: for what a man sees, why does he yet hope
for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.
In the mean time we are not worth the bread we eat, but have need to beg it
upon alms, at the hands of God, from day to day: much less are we worthy
eternal life and glory. For although by the grace of God we unfeignedly desire,
and faithfully endeavor to live according to the tenor of the perfect law of
libertic, yet who dares stand to be tried by the rigor of that royal law?

For the Illud autem praeceptum non penitus impletur ab homine in bac mortali
vita, sed exparte non ex toto, quia ex part diliginues, in futuro autem
implebitur ex toto. Pet. Lomb. l. 3 sent. did. 27. lit. F.
whole law is required of every one, The law perfect, we imperfect.
insomuch, that Iam. 2.10.
whosoever offends in any one point, is guilty of all, C. 3.2.
but in many things we offend all, many things we know, many more that we know
not. Ps. 19.12.
Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins.
The Law requires the whole man, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37
all his heart, all his mind, all his soul, all his strength; but we, as 1.
Cor. 13.9.
we know but in part, so we love, and so we do but in part, the least part of
what we ought. Romans 7.22.23.
We may happily delight in the law of God after the inner man, Legem implere,
id est, non concupiscere. Quis ergo hoc qui vivit potest. August. de tempore
sermon. 49.
but still there is another law of the members warring against the law of the
mind, which often brings us into captivity to the law of sin. Romans 7.14.
The law is spiritual and perfect, but we are partly carnal, and therefore
imperfect. For althoug 1 Timothy 1.14.
the grace of God be exceeding abundant with faith and love which are in Christ
Jesus, and shall be in the end, 2 Cor. 12.9.
sufficient for us unto salvation, because it ever Romans 5.20.
superaboundeth our still abounding sins, yet in the mean time who is
sufficient for it. 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have the heavenly gift in Nemo esse sine delicto potest, quamdiu Carnis
indumento oneratus est, cuius infermit as triplici modo subiacet dominio
peccati, factis, dictis, cagitationibus, and C. Lactant, l. 6. Instit. cap. 13.
carthen vessels, whereby we fail our best actions, we corrupt our best works
with carnal respects, we stain and pollute the best motions that arise in
us, eue^ as the purest fou^tain water, running thorough a filthy channel
draws corruption. All our Hos. 6.4.
goodness is as the morning dew, Es. 64.6,
all our Ipsa iustitia nostra ad examen diuinae iustitie deducta iniustia est,
and sor det in destrictione iudicis, quod in aestimatione fulget operantis:
Greg: Mor. lib. 5. cap. 8.
righteousness as polluted rags. Job 9 30.31.
If I wash myself says righteous Job with snow water, and make my hands
never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes
shall make me filthy. What is that ditch but natures corruption, drawn by a
perpetual trench, thorough all man kind, from the loins of our first
parents? Whereof holy king David was by his fall caused to complain, Psalm.
51.5.
I was shapen in iniquity and in sin has my mother conceived me. And what are
the Zech. 3.3.
filthy clothes, but the carnal motions, which being fashioned to our corrupt
hearts, do like our garments Heb. 12:1.
easily beset us, and can never be clean put off, until nature it self be
dissolved? Which made Saint Paul cry out, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death.
Solomon puts the question to all men living, Prove. 20.9.
who can say mine heart is clean, I am pure from my sin? And himself being
now become a preacher of repentance, makes the answer for all, Eccl. 7.20.
There is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not. If there be
any, be he as just as Job, Job. 38.3.40 7.
let him gird up his loins like a man. I will demand of thee says God, and
declare thou unto me. Will thou disanull my judgment? Will thou condemn me
that thou may be righteous? Romans 3.4.
Nay let God be true, but every man a liar, let God be just, but every man a
sinner. Gal, 3 19.
Wherefore then serves the law, it was added because of transgressions; that
we may know our Sedcur praecipitur homini ista perfectio cum in hac vita eam
nemo habeat. Quia non recte curritur, si quo currendum est nesciatur. Pet.
Lomb. l. 3. Sent. did. 27. lit. G.
duties and defaults. Romans 4.15.
Where no law is, there is no transgression, 1. Ioh. 3.4.
for sin is the transgression of the law, Romans 5.13.
and without the law sin is not imputed. Where sin is not acknowledged
grace is not accepted; Romans 3.20.
but by the law is the knowledge of sin. Romans 5.20.
Therefore the law entered that the offense might abound, but where sin
abounded grace has superabounded. The law ever remains the perpetual rule of
our duty, though insufficient for our safety, Romans 8.3.
being weak through the flesh. And now it has a double use; first directly to
show us Nec latuit prceptorem, praecepti pondus hominum excedere vires, sed
iudicavit ex hoc ipso suae illos insufficientiae admonere, and vt scirent sane
ad quem iustitiae sinem niti pro viribus oporteret: Bernard. sup. Cant sermon. 50.
what is good, and evil, that Romans 2.18.
we may approve the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of
the law, and that we may perform the same in all holy obedience to him that
commands; then obliquely to bring us by Data est enim lex superbis
hominibus, and viribus suis totum tribuentibus vt cum implere non possent legem
datam, praevaricatores inuenirentur, and facti rei sub lege, peterent
misericordiam a legis conditore. August. de actis cum Felice. Manich. l. 2. c.
11.
repentance to the Heb. 4.16.
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in the
time of need. In which respect it is a Gal. 3.24.
schoolmaster still to bring us unto Christ, reducing us unto him obliquely,
as it were per impossible, not that the law is of things (...), Basil. 19.
hom. Nemo ad impossible obligatur. Non deus impossibilia iubet, sed inbendo
admonet, and facere quod possis, and petere quod non possis. Aug. l. de natura
and gratiae cap. 43.
impossible, but because we are still impotent, and unable. Both which uses of
the law Saint John has put together, saying, 1. John. 2.1.^
These things I write that you sin not, but if any man sin we have an
advocate with the father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. Now 1. Tim. 1.8.
we know that the law is good if a man use it lawfully, knowing this that the
law is not made for a righteous man, namely not to justify a man, nor to
condemn any whom God has justified; but the law is made for the lawless and
disobedient, to curb and condemn them, who will not be reformed, y. 11.
according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God.

Now if our works done in grace be not answerable to the law of an holy life,
Good works not well done.
then sure they can not merit eternal life and glory. The things happily are
good, that we do, in their own nature, and according to the law of God, and
they may do good, being beneficial unto others; as to honor our betters is
good and the law of God, alms deeds are good, and do good to the poor, and
yet are they not so good as to merit for us eternal life and glory at the
hands of God. First because they are not so Querb abs te vtrum haec opera bona
been faciant, an male. Si enim quamvis bona male tamensatit, negare non potes
eum peccare, qui male quodibe^t facit. August. contra Julian. Col. 1036. l. 4.
c. 3.
well done as they ought in regard of some necessary circumstance; Unbelievers
may happily do the things which God requires, but not their duties, because
they do them not in conscience to him that commands, and without faith it is
impossible to please God. Then if we of faith do some duties and neglect
others, when he that has commanded one, has commanded all. Can some few good
works make satisfaction for so many evil, Heb. 11.6. Whosoever will be saved:
before all things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic faith, which
except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved, Athanas. his Creed.
Aliud est quod sponte impenditur naturae, aliud quod praeceptis dominicis ex
charitate debetur obedientiae. Greg. hom, 27 in Evang. Hoc peccarunt, quod
homines sine side, non ad eum finem ista opera retulerunt ad quem refer
debuerunt. Aug. l. 4. cont. Julian. c. 3. Sordet natura sine gratia. Prosper.
ep. ad Russinum.
which we have done, and compensation for so many other good works, which we
have left undone? And yet the very works of faith, by some carnal respects
interuening, are not so good, nor so well done in true love as they ought. For
true 1. Cor. 13.4.5. Plenissima charitas, quae iam non possit augeri, quamdiu
hic homo vivit, est in nemine; quam diu ^utem augeriopotest, profecto illud
quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est, ex quo vitio, non est qui faciat
bonum, and non peccat. Aug. ep. 29. ad Hier.
love vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, seeks not her own, but
generally their works, who most stand upon them, are done either in vain
glory, or with carnal confidence, or in a superstitious opinion of meriting
thereby unto them selves, and as seeking their own good, more then the glory
of God. Wherefore although we build upon the 1 Cor. 3.11.12.13.15.
foundation Christ Jesus, yet because there is a mixture of trash, wood, hay,
stubble, with our purest gold, silver, precious stones, we shall suffer loss
in our works, and our selves be saved even so as by fire.

Again what congruity is there of Gratianon est vllo modo si non sit gratuita
omnimodo. August. ep. 106 ad Bon.
grace and Meritum meum miseratio domini. Bernard. bomil. 61. in canticum cant.
merit, Grace and merit incompetible.
that works should merit thorough grace Romans 11.6.
For if by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more
grace: but if it be of works, then it is no more grace, otherwise work is no
more work. Moreover good works are properly such as do good, as alms deeds
and the like. Psalm. 16.2.
Now our goodness extends not to God, but descends from him, Iam. 1.17.
from whom comes down every good and perfect gift. It is of God his grace if
we do any good, for what have thou which thou have not received? All therefore
that we can possibly do is no more, nor so much as we owe, and that by a
double bond, first of nature, now of grace; and therefore Luke 17.10.
when all is done we are but unprofitable servants, and can challenge nothing
upon desert, as due debt, at the hands of God. Lastly if the works done in
grace be good, and perfect, and may be thought to merit upon compact with God,
yet what Non dignus suisti quem iustificatum glorificaret. Aug. de verb. Apost.
sermon. 2. Si quis omnem obedientiam impleret and tamen omma mala and paenas
perferret, quae cadere possunt in naturam humanam vt Job, non tamen haec
condigna erunt gloriae suturae Orig. in Romans 8.
condignity is there in the best of them, equivalent in just price, and value
to the glory that is prepared for us? The effect cannot exceed the cause. But
our justification excells all works before grace, and our final salvation all
works done in grace, Quod est meritum hominis ante gratiam, cum omne meritum
noshu^ non faciatin nobis nisi gratia, and cumdeus coronat merita nostra nihil
aliud coronat, quam dona sua? Sicut enim ab initio fidei misericordiam
consecuti sumus, non quia sideles cramus, sed vt essemus: sic in sine quod erit
in vita aeterna, coronabit nos, ficut scriptum est; In miserscordia and
miseratiouibus, August. ep. 105. ad Sixtum praesbyterum.
as much as grace excells corruption, and as the state of glory shall excel
this of grace. Martyrdom suffering ill with patience for doing well, the worst
that men can inflict, for Christ cause, the best that a man can undertake, is
not equal in worth to eternal life. Romans 8.82
I reckon says Saint Paul, as having made a just and exact computation, that
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared, to the glory
that shall be revealed in us. Cor. 4.17.
For the affliction is but light and for a moment, which works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. It works for us, and we work
by it, for 2 Timothy 2.12.
if we suffer with Christ we shall also reign with him. And we by Romans 2.7.
patience in well doing Phil. 2.12.
work out our salvation, as by a means serving thereunto, yet is it not a
meritorious cause deserving the same. Which blessed estate, because it is
proposed before hand for our encouragement, and performed in the end, with
approbation of our weak endeavors, and does abundantly Si accepturus es vitam
aeternam, iustitiae quidem stipendium est, sed tibi gratia est, cui gratia est
ipipsa iustitia, etc. August: ep. 105. ad Sixtum presbit crum.
recompense whatsoever in the mean time, we do or suffer, for his sake that
bestows it, therefore it is Heb. 11.26.
called the recompense of reward. And yet when all is done, it is the free gift
of God, John. 1.16.
who gives grace for grace Mat. 13.12.
accumulating more grace upon him that has more. Ps. 84.11.
He will give both grace and glory, if we have the grace to give him the
glory.

Our greatest perfection is in aiming at it, The Christian hope
and Per hoc quantum mihi videtur, in ea quae perficienda est iustitia multum
in hac vita ille profecit, qui quam long sita perfectione iustitiae,
prosiciend^ cognou^^: August. de sp. and lit. c. 36. Haec est hominis ^^ra
sapientia imperfectum se nosse, atque vt ita loquar, cunctorum incarne iustorum
imperfecta perfectio est, Hieron. lib. (...) dial. adversus Pel. cv. 15.
acknowledging our own imperfection, to look for it in hope, and to long for
it in the mirror of all pefectio^ Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.12.13.
St Paul suffered the loss of all things making no reckoning of them, that he
might win Christ, yet did not he account himself to have attained, or to be
already perfect, but forgetting the things behind, he reaching forth pressed
toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. v.
14.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded. Heb. 11.
All the holy men in the cloud of witnesses lived by faith and every one of
the^ did by faith some good and remarkable work but they dyed also in the
faith, not having received the promises, but expecting them by faith and hope
in the grace and mercy of God. Act. 15.11.
and we believe that thorough the grace of our lord Jesus Christ we shall be
saved even as they. Tit. 3.7.
Who being justified by his grace, are made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. Propter incertitudine^ propriae iustitiae and periculum inanis
gloriae turissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere. Beliarm: de iustificat: lib. 5. cap. 7. Quis feratorantem, non
hominibus, sed ipsi domino mentientem, qui labijs fibi dicit dimitti velle, and
cord dicit que sibi dimittantur peccata non babere. Council: Melcuitan: Can: 8.
And they who most presume of their works whilst they live, are glad if they
have the grace to dye in the faith, renouncing all merit of works, to fly unto
the throne of grace, for mercy. Iud. 20. v. 21.
And ye beloned says Saint Jude, building up your selves on your most holy
faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal life. Yet is not our
salvation the less certain, because the final accomplishment thereof is
expected by hope, and is not presently put into our own hands. For as our
faith is, so is our hope, Heb. 11.1.
faith being the ground of things hoped for, and the reason of the hope that is
in us, both of them therefore are firm, and sure, because built upon the rock
Christ Jesus. Mat. 16.18.
Upon this rock as Saint Peter believed and confessed, Thou v. 16.
art Christ the son of the living God, the holy catholic Church is built,
v. 18.
against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, but that every true member
thereof, living and dying in the communion of saints shall, notwithstanding
sin, and death, attain by forgiveness of sins,, and the resurrection of the
body, eternal life. And therefore Romans 5.2.
we rejoice in hope of the glory of God, as if we had already attained. To
believe and hope as a Christian is not as the terms are vulgarly used, and may
perhaps sound in profane ears, to have an uncertain opinion and doubtful
expectation, which indeed can be no better in the things of men, subject to
falsehood and vanity, But it is to be certainly assured, fully persuaded and
firmly resolved, 2 Timothy 1.12.
knowing whom we have trusted, that he is able to keep that which we have
committed to him against that day. No weak nor uncertain hold, but Heb. 6.19.
an anchor of the soul; both sure and steadfast, entering into that which is
within the veil, whither the fore runner even Jesus is entered for us.
Faithful hope is such an assurance, Romans 8.
as Saint Paul professes by the help of Gods spirit, knit together and
firmly bound up with that 28.29.30.
golden chain of the certanity of salvation in Christ Jesus. Whereupon with a
bold confidence he bids defiance to all the enemies of grace? v. 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? etc. I am persuaded that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor
things preset, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any creature shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
As our faith and affiance is more and more fixed in God, thorough Jesus Christ,
by his spirit, and approved unto him by love in well doing, so is Si quis and
credit etdiligit, been agendo and prae ceptis obtemperando efficit, vt etiam
speret se ad id quod credit esse ventutum August: de doctor: Christ. l. 1. cap.
37.
the assurance of our salvation more and more confirmed in us. For true 1. Tim.
4.8.
godliness has the promises both of this life and of that which is to come.
Of this life: Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all
these things shill be administered unto you. And for the life to come, Pl. 50.23.
To him that orders his conversation aright will I show the salvation of God.
Therefore as we believe so we pray in hope, which is our last refuge, that
our heavenly Father who knows whereof we stand in need, will in his ordinary
providence give us things needful for this life, to whom he has given grace,
first to seek his kingdom and the righteousness thereof: (...). etc. Est
autem duplici honoris and muneris genere homo affectus, quod and ipsesolus
poenitentia veniam peccatorum impetrat, et eius vnius corpus quamvis mortale
and caducum, aeternll and immortale redditur. (...). Quorum alterum quod ad
corpus pertinet propter animum: alterum quod ad animum propter corpus
consecutus est. Nemesius lib. de natura hominis, c. 1.
And that he will freely and fully forgine us our daily sins and trespasses,
of his mere grace in Christ Jesus, remembering whereof we are made, to whom he
gives this grace, for his sake to forgive one another. Farther we believe, and
pray in hope, that he will guide, and keep us ever hereafter by his spirit, in
the way everlasting, though it please him to lead us thorough manifold
temptations, and that he will deliver us in the end from all evil, even from
death it self, and from him that has the power thereof, that is the Devil,
by the resurrection of our bodies to the eternal praise of his kingdom,
power, and glory, in the life to come. z The Lord will perfect that which
concerns me. Thy mercy, O Lord, endures for ever. Forsake not the works of
thine own hands.

Bread the Lev. 26.26.
staff of life, Our daily bread.
being the most necessary of all temporal things, implies the rest. It was God
his decree, that in Genesis 3.19.
the sweat of our brows we should eat our bread, and it is the Apostles
iniunction in the name of the Lord Jesus, 2. These 3.10.
that if any man will not work he shall not eat, whereupon he exhorts every
one V. 12.
with quietness to work and to eat his own bread. Although it be our bread,
our own bread, yet it is Gods gift, without whose blessing, Ps. 127.2.
it is in vain to rise up early, and so late to take rest, and to eat the
bread of carfulness. Iam. 4.2.
Ye lust and have not, ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain, ye
fight and war, and yet ye have not, because ye ask not, ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it on your lusts,
which should be for our daily and necessary use. Some have not of their own to
eat, Ps. 128.2.
But thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, O well is thee and happy shall
thou be; others have not the Eccles. 4.8.
power to eat of their own, either not the health, or not the heart, 5.19.
this is also the gift of God. And he gives it power to Ps. 104.15.
strengthen man's heart, and to sustain our life from day to day. Therefore it
is called (...) Mat. 6.11.
daily bread, adsubstantiall, or supersubstantiall bread, because being
digested into our bodies, it adds daily beyond its own nature and substance,
thorough the blessing of God, to our substance, what the labor of life daily
consumes. What is there in bread, to make blood and flesh, and spirits? But God
gives it virtue, and power beyond the nature, and substance thereof, to do us
good, speaking a blessing on it for our use. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Mat. 4.4.
Wherefore man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God. 1. Tim. 4.5. Prove. 30.8.
And it is sanctified and made convenient for us by the word of (...). Honestum
hoc insuper, Deum i^itio comae and prandii inuocari Diotogenes lib. de
s^^ctiltate.
God and prayer. Yet it sustaines us but from day to day, for it is but daily
bread, and not as the tree of life, whereof if the man had eaten he should
have lived for ever. The Manna which God gave the Israelites from heaven, it
was but daily bread, it would not ordinarily keep until the morrow, and Ioh.
6.49.
they that did eat thereof are dead. Such is the condition of this life and the
things thereof. 1. Cor. 15.19
And if in this life only we had hope, then were we of all men most
miserable. Wherefore our Ioh. 6.27.
labor must be not so much for the food that perishes, but for the meat
which endures to eternal life, the supersubstantiall bread indeed, Cant. 8.7.
above all the substance of our house, Ps. 119.14.
and to be rejoiced in above all substance. Which Christ gives unto us, for
him has the Father sealed. Ioh. 6.51.
I am the living bread, says he, which came down from heaven, if any man eat
of this bread he shall live for ever. Gods providence does not exclude ours in
the use of ordinary means, but requires it, directs, and gives a blessing
thereunto, both in the things of this life, and for a better. But this is our
folly, we will either do all our selves or no thing. And commonly we can be
content to leave all to God for the world to come, but in the things of this
world we will be our own caruers. Of the two Luc. 16.8.
the children of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of
light. They will provide for this life, and we must provide, V. 9.
that we may be received into everlasting habitations.

Wherein finding how short our store comes of such a purchase, how unworthy Gods
grace we walk, Forgiveness of sins.
how ill we deserve thorough our own corruption, utterly distrusting and
disclaiming our selves, we fly again unto the throne of grace for pardon of
our sins, protection in temptations, and rescue in the end from all evil. Who
can forgive sins but God only, against whom we sin, and do evil in his
sight? For howsoever we trespass, wrong, Omniamandata Dei facta deputantur,
quando quiequid non fit ignoscitur. Aug. l. 1. Retrac. c. 19.
and give offense one to another, which we may and must forgive, so far as
concerns us, yet can no man forgive the sin, which is the transgression of
the law, but he only who is the lawgiver. He forgiues Ps. 32.5.
the iniquity of our sin. Exodus 34, 7.
The Lord, the Lord forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. And he
forgiues (...).
our debts, the obligations of sin, and penalties for sin, to whom we are
so much bound in duty, and by whose law we stand bound over unto death, Romans
6.23.
the just wages of sin. Ps. 49.7.8.
None can by any means redeem his brother, or give a ransom to God for him.
For it cost more to redeem their souls, so that he must let that alone for
ever. Isa. 43.25.
But I, even I am he, says God, that blotteth out all thy transgressions for
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. For when the offense is
pardoned the Impium est a Dto diminidiaem sperare veniam. August.
punishment is remitted, because it is the forgiveness of our debts, the
penalties of sin. When Christ cured any of their diseases he used to say Mat.
9.6.
Thy sins are forgiven thee. For they are the cause of all our maladies, the
remission whereof is therefore a present, and a perfect remedy. Ps. 103.3 4.
God forgiueth all our sins, and heals all our infirmities, so that they
shall not tend to destruction in eternal death, the just wages of sin, and
our due debt for the same. Romans 5.10.
For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
son, much more being reconciled shall we be saved by his life. By whose grace
we obtain the forgiunesse, not only of Rom, 3.25.
sins past before grace, thorough the forbearance of God, but of our
Quotidianae incu^ sionis: Orabant autem vtiq, iam fideles iam apostoli. Na^
ista oration Dominica magis fidelibus datur. Si debita illa tantummedo
dicerentur quae per baptismum dimittuntur, catechumenis congeueret magis orare,
Dimitte nobis debita nostra, Aug. in Ps. 142.
daily sins, and trespasses, for which he has taught us as duly to ask
pardon, as for our daily bread, with faith to obtain. Romans 5.16.
For not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift, for the judgment was by
one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses to justification,
even so many, and so long, as we have grace to believe, and repent.
Justification a term in law, denoting an act of the judge, not any habit in
the party justified, being once passed upon us in grace, Romans 8.28.
according to his eternal purpose, is never reversed, but stands more firm
then the law of the Medes and Persians, howsoever it be often reacted and
confirmed. It was purposed of God to every one of his elect in his counsel
from everlasting, it was purchased and procured for them in the fullness of
time, by the death and passion of Christ Jesus. It is published and proclaimed
throughout the world, by the preaching of the Gospel, it is testified and
applied to every penitent believers conscience in the sight of God by his
spirit, and is sealed by the Sacraments, and being apprehended by faith is
often Multo firmior est fides, qua^ reponit poenitentia. Lactant. l. 5. c. 14.
renewed by repentance. Whereby every poor publican that with true faith, and
repentance cries God mercy, Luke 18.14.
goes away more justified the^ any proud Pharisee that iustifies himself. Job.
33.23.24
And if there be a messenger, an interpreter, one of a thousand, to show unto
man his righteousness, in his greatest a gonie and distress, God is gracious
unto him and says deliver him from going down to the pit, for I have found a
ransom for him. Mat. 18.18.
Whatsoever is loosed on earth, it is loosed in heaven, for it is God that does
it and not man, In quo quemque invenerit suus novissimus dies, in hoc cum
comprehendet mundi novissimus dies; quoniam qualis in eo quisq, moritur talis
in die illo iudicabitur, Auguss. ep. 28.
which shall at the last be pronounced in open court, when Christ that is our
advocate, shall be our judge. For as our first admission into the state of
grace was by Romans 3.25.
remission of sins past, thorough the forbearance of God. So shall our
admission at the last be into the state of glory, by the public absolution,
and acquitting of us at the tribunal of Christ Jesus from all our sins, and
trespasses. (...) 34.
Come ye blessed of my father receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world, (...) 4.6.7.
which blessedness of man, is by righteousness freely imputed unto him, as
David describes it saying, Ps. 32.1.2.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven; and whose sins are covered;
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord will not impute sin.

Yet have we no immunity to sin, No immunity to sin.
as it were a warrant dormiant, or pardon before hand, for we have no hope of
forgiveness, but only upon condition of faith, and repentance; no easy
matter, nor in our power to do at our pleasure. He that gives pardon to the
penitent, will not always give repentance to every peccant. Neither does
repentance stand upon such easy terms, but that flesh and blood chooses
rather to dye in sin, then unto sin, by crossing, and crucifying and mortefying
it self. For the which every true penitent undergoes a severe discipline, and
if the Church and our selves neglect it, God inflicteth the same upon his
children many times with sore strokes, for their humiliation, and amendment.
Ps. 89.
He will not utterly take away his loving kindness from them, when they
break his statutes, and keep not his commandments, but he will visit their
transgression with a rod, and their sin with stripes. And besides all the
exercise of mortification, God looks for Mat. ^.8.
fruits worthy amendment of life, implied in this one condition, that we
forgive one an other, without which we cannot ask forgiveness at his hands.
And if not without forgiving them that trespass against us, certainly not
without Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum. Aug. ep. 54. ad Maced
giving satisfaction to them whom our selves have trespassed. Mat. 5.23.27
if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy
way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Mat.
18.
How will God deal with that servant, to whom he forgiues an hundred talents,
if he will not forgive his fellow servant an hundred pence? Will he not
deliver him unto the torme^tors until he has paid all that is due? And good
reason, Luc. 7.43.47 Secundum bominem plus fortasse offendit qui plus debuerat,
sed per misericordiam domini causa mutatur, vt amplius diligat qui amplius
debuit, si tamen gratia^ consequatur. Ambr. l. 6. comment. in Luc. cap. 31.
for he must needs; I am sure he had need, love much to who^ much is
forgive^, and 1. Pet. 4.8.
love will cover a multitude of sins, Mat. 18.22.
not seven times, but seauenty times seven. A wonderful grace of God, where
it pleases him to bestow it, so mortifying the wrath of man, Iam. 1.20.
which works not the righteousness of God: so mollifying the heart of man
that we become Mat. 5.44: etc
like our heavenly father, loving our enemies, blessing them that curse us,
doing good to them that hate us, and praying for them which dispightfully use
us. And if God give us such grace to forgive one another, he has grace in
store to forgive us, and 1. Ich. 3.19
hereby we assure our hearts before him. Insomuch that as before we desired to
do the will of God on earth, as it is in heaven, so now we pray God that is
in heaven, to forgive us, as we on earth, thorough his grace, do forgive one
another; both alike, though nothing equal.

Now thou art made whole go thy way and sin no more least a worse thing
befall thee. The care is, Temptations.
after we have obtained the forgiveness of our former sins, and trespasses,
that we relapse not, which is ever more and more dangerous; and therefore our
humble suit, and supplication is, that God will not so lead us into
temptations, but to deliver us from the evil thereof, sin and death. We pray
not absolutely against temptation, 1. Cor. 5.10.
for then must we needs go out of the world. It is the will of God, whereunto
(...). Duc me o Jupiter, and tu fatum, co quo sum a vobis destinatus. Sequar
enim alacriter. Quod sinoluero and improbus (...), and sequar nihilominu^,
Epict. Enchir. c. 77.
we must submit, to lead us thorough a world of temptations, into the kingdom
of heaven, as he led the children of Deuteronomy. 8.2.
Israel thorough the wilderness into the land of Canaan, to humble us and to
prove us, and to know what is in our heart, and withal to manifest the
^^inquam servi Dei tentationes diaboli sustinere po^uissent, si nequitiam eius
pietas dei no temperaret vel refrnaret. Bernard. l. de m^do been vivend. Ser.
67.
power of his grace in us, to the praise of his glory. Thorough whose strength,
2. Cor. 12.9.
which is seen in our weakness, Romans 8.37.
we are in all these things more then conquerours. For it is a greater glory to
have Ephesians 6.12.
wrestled with principalities, and powers. (...). Nec vero si succumbamus,
prohibemur in hac pugna quo^ minus denuo decertemus. (...). Et iterum si non
obtineas, aggredi licebit. quod sisemel viceris, similis ei es qui succubui^
nunquam. Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c. 25.
and to overcome, then not to have been at all assaulted by them. We must Ium.
1.2.3.
therefore count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations, knowing this
that the trial of our faith works patience, Romans 5.4.5,
and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. 1.
Pet. 1.6.7.8.
When the trial of our faith shall be found to praise, and honor, and glory;
at the appearing of Jesus Christ. In whom therefore believing we rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory, (...). Itaque dolores provenientes ex
tentationibus, quas sustinemus, aut voleates aut recusantes, sunt ad profectum
vtiles, Arrian. Epictet. lib. 3. c. 25. ad calcem.
though now for a season, if need be, we are in heaviness thorough manifold
temptations. Which are indeed many, and manifold, within and without, on the
right hand, and on the left; even so many as there are things in the world and
motions in our mind,, and mouers of both. Thorough which it pleases God to
lead us, ordering the occasions, giving leave to Satan to winnowe us, and
leaving us sometimes to our selves, who^ Extrema mu^di atrocius tentaturus
aggreditur, quia tanto fit ferve^tior ad saeuitiam, quanto se viciniorem sentit
ad paenam Greg. mor. l. 34. cap. 1.
Satan subornes against our selves with a world of motives, reduceable, to
three principal heads, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Iam.
1.3.4.5.
But let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted when
he is drawn away of his own lust and entised. Then when lust has conceived,
it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death.
Which evil of sin, and death, Satan inte^deth, and we deprecate with God,
without whose will we can not be tempted, nor can resist, or escape, (...),
Ad sacrum bellum cum carnis vitiis gerendum nos confera mus oportet: Sic tamen,
vt non in nobis ipsis fiduciam collocemus, verum diuino subsidio victoriam
permittamus. Isidor. Pelus. l. 2. ep. 143. Et mox. (...). In divina autem open,
atq, auxilio si siduciam nostram positam habeamus, victoriam facile consequemur.
without his power and help.

1. John. 3.9.
Whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin, Preservation.
Omne quod radicaium est, nutritur catore solis, and non arescit. August.
tract. 3 in 1. ep. Ioh. Radicata est charitas, securus esto, nihil mali
procedere potest. tract. 8. in ^^and. ep.
for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is borne of God.
Not, that he sins not at all, or only falls into some smaller sins, or
that such sins are venial of their own nature, but he does not commit
sin, he makes it not his practice, and trade of life: and though every sin be
mortal for the Romans 6.23.
wages of sin is death, yet does not he sin unto death for by the grace of
God, he shall have time and grace, to repent, Ezekiel. 18.22.
and then all his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he has done he shall live.
Although all sin be mortal by the law, and worthy of death, yet does not
the child of God sin unto death, Audeo dicere superbis esse vtile cadere in
aliquod apertu^, manifestumque peccatum, vnde sibi displiceant, qui iam
placendo ceciderant. August. lib. 14. de ciuitate dei cap. 14. Sed etsi
aliquando predestinatorum aliquis ad eius slatum infectus contabuit, armis
poenitentiae accinctus fortior securiorque surrexit and expertus admissi
turpitudinem, hostem, suggestorem, and se consentaneum mira indignatione
exhorruit, and rursum cautior and munitior ad conflictus accessit Arnold. Abb.
Bonaeual. de operibus sex dier. cap. 4.
nay though he die for his sin, yet does he not dye in his sin, that dies
in the Lord. And howsoever we fall daily thorough our frailty, and may fall
dangerously by force of temptation, and depart for the time from the grace
given, abusing the gift of grace which was in us, yet shall we not fall from
the grace of God toward us, reserved for us in Christ Jesus. He never repents
him of giving, howsoever we may depart from the grace given by abusing our
gifts, but he that gives, forgiues his beloved, John. 13.1.
and whom he loves he loves unto the end. Neither shall they who are
effectually called according to his purpose, In sanctorum cordibus iuxta
quasdam virtutes semper permanet (spiritus) iuxta quasdam vero recessurus
venit, and venturus recedit, etc. In his itaque virtutibus, sine quibus mimime
advitam pervenitur, spiritus sanctus in Electorum suorum cordibus permanet, in
his vero per quassanctitatis virtus demonstratur, aliquando misericorditer
presto est, aliquando misericorditer recedit. Gregor. hom. 5. in Ezech.
utterly depart from the grace given, but shall by the seed thereof, remaining
in them Ar. eccel: Angli. 16.
recover and amend their lives. For Romans 11.29.
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, and cap. 6.14.
no sine shall have dominion over them, who are not under the law but under
grace. Ier. 32.40.
I will make says God an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me. And as by the fear of God we are restrained
from the dominion of sin all our life time, so 1 Pet. 1.5.
by the power of God thorough faith, we are kept unto salvation ready to be
revealed in the last time. Fides aeterna res est, a spiritu scribitur, v^
maneat. Ambros: in 2. Cor. 3. Quomodo pot est amitti, per quod fit vt non
amittatur etiam, quod posset amitti? August. de bono persev. c. 6.
Faith is not only the first answer to Gods call, wereby we enter, and are
admitted, into the state of grace, nor yet farther the continual mouer of our
hearts, in Charitas quae deseripotuit nunquam vera. fuit. August. ep. 111 ad
Julian: Ficta charitas. est, que deserit in aduersitate. vid. Sixth. Senens.
bibl. lib. 5. annot. 240.
love, according to the will of God, as has been showed, but also the final
grace whereby we persist unto the end, recovering many slips and falls in
sin, yea and redemption from death it self, if we dye in the faith of the
forgiveness of our sins, and resurrection of our bodies unto eternal life.
Petrus in lapsu gradum fidei remisit, actum intermisit, habitum non amisit,
motumque in eo fuit spiritualis vitae robur non amotum, concussum non excussum.
Tertul. See Mr Hookers sermon of the certainty and perpetuity of faith in the
elect, saying The faith therefore of true believers, though it have many
grievous downfalls yet does it still continue invincible; it conquereth and
recouereth it self in the end. Fides fundit orationem, fusa oration impetrat
fidei firmitatem non quae nunquam concutiatur, sed quae concussa nunquam
epprimatur. August de verb. Dom. sermon. 36.
And howsoever 2 Timothy 2.17.18.
the faith of some may for the time be overthrown in part, as theirs in the
article of the resurrection was by Hymeneus and Philetus, who erred concerning
the truth thereof, v. 25.
yet will God give the^ repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, who^ he
will save, which by the grace of God shall spring again out of that seed of
faith that remains in them. Romans 3.3.
Shall our unfaithfulness make the truth of God of none effect? 2 Timothy 2.12.13.
It is a faithful saying if we deny him he will also deny us. If we beliue
not, if we doubt and err in some things, for the time, yet he abides
faithful, and cannot deny himself. For v. 19.
the foundation of God abides sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who
are his. And they who are once justified with God, being effectually called
Romans 8.28.
according to his purpose, are never unjustified again. For howsoever their
sins may be such as deserve no less by the law yet their persons being under
grace in Christ, John. 5.24.
they shall never come into condemnation, but are passed from death to life.

Now Romans 8.10.
although the spirit be life because of righteousness, Resurrection.
yet the body is dead because of sin, a body of sin and of death, and
therefore Exue corpus istud quod circumfers, vestimentum ignorantiae,
fundamentum prauitaetis, vinculum corruptionis mortem viuam, cadauer sensibile,
sepulchrum portatile, domesticum surem. Hermes in Pemandro.
the body from whence our corruption springs originally, and wherein it resides
perpetually, Lex est non paena perire.
must be dissolved, (the soul being separated by death) or at least some way
changed, that it may be made a glorious body, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
Our Quam deus manibus suis ad imaginem sui struxit, quam de suo af statu ad
viuacitatis suaesimilitudinem animauit, quam incolatui, fructui, dominatui
totius suae operationis praeposuit, quam sacramentis. disciplinisque vestiuit,
cuius munditias amat, castigationes probat, passiones sibi appreciat, haeccine
non resurget totiens dei? Absit vt deus manuum suarum operam, ingenii sui
curam, afflatus sui vaginam, molitionissuae reginam, liberalitatis suae
haeraedem, religionis suae sacerdotem, testimonii sui militem, Christisui
sororem in aeternum destituat interitum. Tertul. de resur: carnis.
bodies are the work of Gods hands, as our souls are from him, he made the
first man's body of the dust of the earth and breathed into it the spirit of
life, and Psalm. 139.15.
he fashioneth our bodies below in the earth, Plato in Timoeo vt habet August:
de civ. Dei. 22. scribit animas non posse in aeternum esse, sine corporibus
Hinc (...) commenti sunt philosophi, and poetae metamorphosm.
De circida Arcadescribit Aelianus quod magno desiderio sit mortuus, inquiens
sperare se conventurum ex Philosophis Pythagoram, ex historicis Haecateum, ex
musicis Olympum, ex poetis Homerum.
neither is man complete longer then he consists both of soul and body. Now
Job. 14.15.
God who has a desire to the work of his hands, will recover and save the
whole man, and make him to live, notwithstanding the malicious practice of
Satan, the murderer, to the contrary. Whereof he has given evidence in the
whole course of nature, evening and morning, winter and summer, and in his
special providence over his Church and people, by their Miraculous
deliverances, and recoueries from captivity and desolation, as it were from
death, therefore usually called their Isai, 26.19. Ezech. 37.
resurrection. Do we not see how Eccl. 1.4.
one generation passes, and an other generation comes, but the earth abides
for ever, as it were the common stage and theater of nature, so long as it
endures. But when all parts are acted, heaven and earth and all shall be
dissolved. For as all the parts, so the universe the whole systeme of nature,
begun with time, continues in time, which is the measure of motion, until
time that spends all, has spent it self, when Rev. 10.6.
time and temporal things shall be no more. 2. Pet. 3.13.
But a new heaven and a new earth, eternal wherein dwells righteousness. A
folly it is that some ask 1. Cor. 15 35 36.
with what body shall we come? No question the same body else were it not a
(...) etc. (...), Lucianus Pythagora^vena lem exponens. quis emet? quis esse
supra homines affectat? quisscire vniuersi concentum and reviviscere.
resurrection. The same body howsoever changed, as in this life, we feed not,
we sleep not, but our bodies are altered, our digested food supplying what
nature had consumed; we are not cured but our bodies are altered, Physic
repairing what diseases had corrupted, and wasted. Insomuch that some have
doubted whether we be the same bodies in age, as we were in youth. As a ship is
still the same that where it decaies has new plancks clapped on, until in every
place all be changed; so are our bodies. And though all be dissolved into the
first materials, yet being again put together, by the same almighty hand which
made all of nothing, it is the same man's body, the same body of the same soul,
whereby it was, and ever shall be Forma principium indiuiduationio.
indiuiduated, howsoever it be widdowed for a time, and wonderously changed in
the end, and in the mean time utterly putrified, and corrupted. As the first
man's body, who was made after the image of God, and bare a majesty amongst the
creatures, was changed by sin, and became subject to manifold diseases, to
shame to death, and yet was still the same body, so through death our bodies
shall have the utmost of that change, and yet be raised the same bodies, and
changed again 1 Cor. 15.42.43.44.
from weakness to power, from corruption to incorruption, from dishonor to
glory, Phil. 3.21.
for they shall be fashioned like unto Christ his glorious body. As the pure
spirits of wine, or the spirits of life, in a man are bodies, spiritual
bodies, and the quintescence of any metal, or mineral extracted from the
gross elements, is of a celestial nature, and yet both it and the spirits are
bodies, the same bodies purified, sublimated; in like manner though far more
excellent, shall be the resurrection of our bodies, when God has as it were
distilled them through natures great lymbecke, of what form soever, whether
through the earth, or water, or bowels of beasts, or by fire (as all that
remains at the last day) and shall extract a glorious body, that shall inherit
immortality. 1 Cor. 13.51.
We shall not all sleep, but we must all be changed some way or other, v. 4^.
for as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of
the heavenly. V. 26.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, and that by the resurrection
of our bodies, to eternal life. Rev. 21.4.
When God shall wipe away all Faelices lachrymae quas benignae manus conditoris
abstergunt.
tears from our eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are
passed away which were temporal, and the life to come shall be Dies iste quem
tanquam extremum reformidas, aeterninatalis est. Sen. ep. 102. Idem ep. 24:
Moriar? Desmam alligari posse, desinam aegrotare posse, definam mori pesse,
(...). Quod interim morimur, ad immortalitatem morte transgredimur: nec potest
vita aeterna succedere nisi hinc contigerit exire. Non est exitus, sed
transitus, and temporali itinere decurso adaeterna transgressus. Cypr. de
mortal.
eternal.

A life of glory to the children of God. Life everlasting, and glorious.
The lowest degree whereof does infinitely exceed the greatest glory of this
world. Look how much the life of a perfect man, enjoying all outward
happiness in this beautiful, and goodly world, excels the condition of a
weak, poor, and wretched Embrio, shut up in the womb, a closse and dark
habitation, so much and infinitely much more does the eternal Cuius rex
veritas, cuius lex charitas, cuiuo modus aeternitas. August. ep. 5. ad
Marcellinum.
life of glory, in the highest heavens excel this life, and all the glory of
this world. Nay as much as the life of Grace, in the assurance of God his
favor, and special love, excels all worldly profits, pleasures, and
preferments so much, and infinitely much more, does the fruition of Gods
glorious presence excel this present state of grace. For this consists in
using the means, then we shall enjoy the end of all our desires, and
endeavors. It is usually expressed by such things as we know, and most
esteem, a crown, a kingdom, a paradise, a city of gold and precious stones,
life, joy, glory, 1. Cor. 2.9.
but eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Such as they
who had but a vision thereof in Christ's Mat. 17.
transfiguration, would gladly have made their abode in the admiration thereof
for ever; such as 2. Cor. 12.2.4
he who was wrapped into the third heavens, having heard, might not utter; such
wherewith we may well Romans 8.18.
reckon, that all the sufferings of this present world are not worthy to be
compared, 2. Cor. 4.17.
an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Wherein though all the Saints of
God shall have Ps. 16.11.
fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore; yet shall it be in different
degrees; for there are many and Ioh. 14.2.
diverse mansions in Gods house, and different degrees of glory 1. Cor. 15.41
as one star differs from another star in glory. Dan. 12.3.
For they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament: but
they that turn many unto righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.

The estate of glory which we believe, and expect, in eternal life, is not
only a well being, but a perpetual and perfect well doing, which is to live
indeed in the joyful fruition of all good. When the most excellent faculties
shall be imploid on the most admirable object, in the most exquisit manner,
and abundant measure, with eternal joy and glory. It is the grace of God
toward us now to take such notice, and to make such account of us, as we
believe, but it shall be our glory then to know him, ^. Cor. 13.12
as we are known of him. Now we know but in part. We see now in a glass
darkely, but then shall we see face to face, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
we shall see him as he is, Job. 19.27.
and we shall behold him with these eyes, whereby we shall become like unto
him, full of glory in our fowls and bodies, by the manifestation of his glory
upon us, Exodus 34.30.
as Moses face shone, when he came down from him in the mount. Colos. 3.4.
Now is our life hid with Christ in God but when Christ, who is our life, shall
appear, then shall we appear with him in glory. So well shall we be, and as
well shall we do. For as we shall receive glory of God in the vision of his
glory in Christ, so shall we give all honor and glory to him; and as we shall
behold him with these eyes, so shall we praise him with these tongues. Ps.
137.4.
Who can sing the song of the Lord now in a strange land. But Ps. 108.1.2.
when our glory shall awake, even this excellent instrument of praising God,
which is our glory, above other creatures, then 1. Cor. 13.1.
the tongues of men, and Angels shall be the eternal trumpets of God his
glory. Rev. 4.6.8.
The four beasts full of eyes, rest not day and night saying, holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. V. 9.
And when those holy ones give glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sits
on the throne, who lives for ever and ever, V. 10.
then also the four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sits on the
throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their crowns
before the throne saying, thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor,
and power. And all the Saints shall come in with a full quire, singing Rev.
15.3.
the song of Moses and of the Lamb, great and marvelous are thy works Lord
God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou king of Saints. Ps. 145.10.11
Yea all thy works shall praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee.
They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power. For
thine is the kingdom, power, and glory. For ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
OXFORD Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD Printer to the Famous University For WILLIAM
WEBB. Ann. Dom. 1628.


