THE ART OF LOGIC, DELIVERED IN THE PRECEPTS OF ARISTOTLE AND RAMVS.

WHEREIN

1. The agreement of both Authors is declared. 2. The defects in Ramus, are
supplied, and his superfluities pared off, by the Precepts of Aristotle. 3. The
precepts of both, are expounded and applied to use, by the assistance of the
best Schoolmen.
By THO: SPENCER.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for Nicholas Bourne, at the South entrance of
the Royal Exchange. 1638.

TO THE READER.
REader; The publishing of this Treatise, submits it to thy judgment. It may be
thou will judge it of little worth, because thou esteemest 1. the Authors
credit to be small, 2. the Art it self to be obscure, and 3. of little use,
and 4. the work to be imperfect, and 5. unfitly put forth in the English
tongue. But this Preface shall make it clear, thou art mistaken in all these
particulars.

1. Though my own credit be small: yet this need not hinder thy good liking,
because my labor is but to collect out of other Authors. So that if the credit
of Authors will please thee, I need not fear thy displeasure, for here thou
have Authors of all ages, and of the best account, yea Aristotle himself, the
Prince of Philosophers (as the learned use to call him) leads thee the way, and
guides the whole game.

2. Some account the art it self of Logic to be obscure, and therefore hard
to be attained: but though this were true, yet is it worthy of all that honor
that is due to any humane art whatsoever, because the difficulty arises not
from the thing it self: (for it agrees to humane reason, being no more but a
comprehension of precepts, directing the use of true reason) but from man's
defect, as being either unable for want of natural parts, or unwilling through
idleness to learn it. But grant this Art were in it self obscure, yet is it no
less honorable for that, because silver, gold, and other precious metals are
hard to obtain: yet are they highly esteemed of (as daily experience shows)
for what labor will not men take, and what hazard will they not undergo to
get and hold them? Nay I add further, that the difficulty of attaining unto
this Art, makes it more honorable when it is attained; for things hardly
gotten are rare, and rare things are precious, especially when they are of
excellent use: and such is this Art of Logic, as my answer to the next will
show.

3. Many are of opinion, that Logic is unprofitable, and of little use, as
serving to exercise the wits of young Scholars, and that therefore when they
grow unto years, they do wholly neglect it. This judgment is erroneous; for
whatsoever tends to some good, is truly profitable: and this is the case with
the precepts of Logic, because hereby (in some sort) is healed the wound we
received in our reason by Adams fall: and this daily trial teaches, because
by the precepts of Logic, things hidden and dark, are clearly objected to
our judgment. Truth and falsehood is made to stand naked before our knowledge.

It may be some will conceive that man's natural Logic will serve
sufficiently for the foresaid ends, and that therefore there is no need of
precepts.

I answer. True it is, many man's natural parts are ripe and prompt, so as they
are speedy and sound in judging. But this is not every man's case, therefore unto
such the precepts of Art are needful. Yea, I say, that such precepts are
needful to the promptest wits, for man has not now so ample use of reason as
Adam had at his first Creation, and therefore he needs the help o^ artificial
precepts.

To conclude, since the Art of Logic is no more but a Directour of true
Reason: the more logical a man is, the more is he like a man, and the less
logical, the less like a man who is a reasonable Creature. If this be true
(as it is most true) then must it be granted that the precepts of this Art, are
profitable for the use of man in the highest degree.

4. This work is not imperfect, because no precept, essential unto Logic,
is wanting. I have indeed omitted the modality and conversion of propositions
and Elenchs: but this breeds no defect in the art, for these three appertain
to the exposition of the precepts of this Art: they are no essential precepts
thereof. 1. The modalitie of propositions does explicate the subject or
predicate of the proposition wherein it is. 2. The Conversion of a proposition
is no more, but the right placing of things not rightly placed in a
proposition. And 3. Elenchs are the detections of falsehood in the form of
syllogismes.

5. Our Mother Tongue does not disgrace this Art of Logic to the English, no
more then Greek did to the Grecians, or the Latin to the Romans: for if it
had, then would not Aristotle have written his Logic in Greek, nor Tully his
in Latin. We have the holy Scriptures in our mother tongue, without disgrace
thereunto, why then should it be disgraceful to Logic? Besides, some men
understand not Latin, and yet have they need of Logic, because they need the
helps to the use of reason.

Thus (I hope) full satisfaction is given to every doubt that might hinder thy
profit by this art now offered unto thee: so as nothing more seems needful, or
worthy thy labor and mine: therefore here I will end all that I have to say
for this thing.

THO: SPENCER.
London the 24 of June. 1628.
THE ART OF LOGIC
CHAP. I. The Definition of Logic.
LOGIC is an Art of discoursing well. Ramus.


In this sense, it is called Dialectick.

This sentence defines, Logic. Aristotle has the same for substance. Top:
lib. 1. Cap. 2. In these words;

Dialectick is profitable unto Congresse, Excercitation, Philosophical science.


Ramus confesses in his Schools upon this place alleged, that, this sentence
comprehends (well near) all the notable things of Logic: and therefore, (in
his Judgment,) it is a definition of it. The thing it self does say no less:
for, the three words attributed by him to Logic or Dialectick, do signify,
discoursing well. Ramus makes discoursing the end of Logic: Aristotle does the
same, by the word profitable, for, as we learn by Thom: 1a. 2ae. q: 7. art. 2.
incor. q. 8. art. 3. Sed. con. Every good, ordained to some end, is said to be
profitable: That which tends to some end is called profitable.

Logic is Natural. Artificial.


Natural Logic is either the understanding it self, in that respect, that of
i'ts proper, and specificall difference, it has a power of discoursing; or
rather, the certain knowledge of the manner, or ways of discoursing, which
the reason it self, brings forth, without the help of any order, or method.
Thus far the Jesuits (in their preface before the Organon Colleg: Conimbr:
q. 6. art. 2. col 62. Logic is here taken for artificial, not natural: so
the same Jesuits tell us in that preface. col: 67. Aristotle implies this
distinction, in the first chapter, and first book of his Rhetoric: A man
(says he) is a Logician by nature, or art.

[Logick Dialectick.] Jesuits do expressly teach it, in their Commentary upon
Aristotle's Organon, Col: 26. near to the end, in these words, The whole art of
discoursing, is set out, by, either the word Logic, or the word Dialectick.
And, they do not barely avouch it; but, they confirm it with plenty of
proofs, as the Reader may find, if he please to consult the place-alledged.

Both the words do signify no more, but, a thing appertaining unto the use of
reason; therefore, the Jesuits in the same Preface, q. 4. art. 4. Col: 40. do
conceive, that, Logic (in an universal apprehension) is no more, but, a
director of the art of reason. And, Suarez has the same thing, in his
Metaphysics disp. 39. D.

[Is:]

[An art:] art, does set out the general nature of Logic: (that is) it does
signify, that nature which Logic has in common with diverse other things: as,
Grammar, and Rhetoric etc. It is called an art, in the most common use of men;
sometime it is called also a science, and, that we find in the Jesuits Preface
q. 4. art. 3. Aristotle does use both the words indifferently, as signifying
the same thing, in his Preface to the Metaphysics and first Chapter.

The word art fignifies, a multitude of Precepts, orderly digested and approved
by use. And, thus the Jesuits teach in their Preface, q. 6. art. 2. and
Aristotle has the same thing in his Preface to the Metaphysics and first
Chapter. Where, we have these words; Art is gotten by experience, experience
makes art. Art is made, when as one universal thing, is framed out of many
experimentalls: so as, to do by experience, differs nothing from art. He
brings the same thing, and the reason of it, Poster lib 2. cap. 19.

The word [An] is used to show, Logic is one entire art, that cannot be
divided, nor is subordinate to any other art, as Geometry, and many other arts
be. Logic is usually called, the art of arts, the mistress and director of all
other: and, there is good cause why, for, Logic disputes of all things, and
is common unto every being, as Aristotle has taught us in the fourth book of
his Metaphysics, cap. 2. text 4. Experience shows, that Aristotle said true,
for, there is no art, but by the help of Logic, all the precepts thereof are
framed together, in a due order, and the parts of each singular precept, are so
fitted together, that we may find truth from falsehood.

[Of discoursing] These words, Logic, the very first, and intrinsecall being
thereof, and contain the form, and the end: (I say) they contain them both,
because the form is the fountain of the end, and the end is the continuation
of the form; as we shall see hereafter.

The end of Logic, is Next. Remote.


The remote end of Logic, is the very act it self of discoursing: but, we
speak not of this end of Logic in the present definition. The next end of
Logic, is to prescribe a way, and rules of discoursing; so as the end of
Logic, is a framing of the means of discoursing; so say the Jesuits in their
Comment upon Aristotle's Organon, and the Preface thereto, Col. 27.55. So,
likewise says Gillius, lib. 1. Tra. 1. cap. 6. no. 4. The art of Logic
delivers ways, and rules of discoursing.

[To discourse] (As it is here used) is to declare one thing that is less
known, by another thing that is more known. This we have in the Jesuits
Preface col. 27. and 62. As for example, He that knows not what a man is, is
made to know it by saying a man is a reasonable Creature: the addition of
rationalitie unto man, shows what man is. So likewise, when we say, God is a
spirit, infinite in all perfection; we inform him that is ignorant, and knows
not what God is. In this very thing, this art of Logic does differ from all
other arts whatsoever: for Logic ends in speculation, and proceeds no
further than to judge whether one thing be truly affirmed of another: all other
arts, be practical: they concern man's outward or transient actions, as their
next end: as, Grammar, and Rhetoric tends unto man's speech, Geometry unto
measuring, Arithmetic unto numbering, etc. That art (says Okam) is
practical, which directs us unto the doing of a thing to be wrought, In 3.
did. q. 11. lit. V. Yea, in this, man's knowledge differs from the knowledge
that is in God and the Angels: in that they behold the things in themselves, as
they are in themselves, distinct each from other: they do not know one thing
less known, by the light and reflection of another thing, that is better
known: wherefore their knowledge, is called intellection, ours is called
rationalitie.

[Well] This word, Jesuits were of that opinion, because they define Logic,
to be no more, but an art of discoursing, coll. 27. so Gillius, lib. 1. Tra. 1.
cap. 6. no. 4. yet, indeed, in other places, they have as much as this word
comes to: for, thus they writein their Preface the last question, col. 70. He
is a good Logician, which does exercise himself in each thing well, and
diligently: and, Suarez does join with them, in his Metaphysics disp. 39. D.
Logic (says he) is an art, directing the operation of the understanding, to
exercise itself artifically, and according to reason. And all these Authors
do add, that word to very good purpose; for, thereby Logic is distinguished
from Sophistry, which is only a deceiving science: A Sophister seems to know,
but indeed, knows not, in the truth of the thing, as we learn from
Aristotle, in his Metaphysics, lib. 4. cap. 2. text. 4. And thus much shall
suffice, for the opening of the several parts of the definition of Logic.

That we may put a final end, discoursing, implies arguments, wherefore we
must now see what an argument is.

An argument is that, Ramus.
which has a force to argue.

Altissidiorensis says in his Preface, an argument, is a reason, that gives
us knowledge of a thing that is doubtful: Aristotle says, that, arguments are
such, as whereby faith (Logically) may be made, of the thing that is spoken of.
Poster. lib. 1. Cap. 22. Logice igitur etc.

[That] This word imports,

[Which has a force to argue] That is, has of its nature a power, aptitude,
or fitnes, to bring the thing, objected unto our understanding, into the
knowledge, and intuition thereof. I omit to give instance of these things,
because, that will better be done in setting out the nature of particular
Arguments: Wherefore, now, we have fully done, with the first precept of
Logic; I will proceed to the second.

CHAP. II. The Distribution of Logic.
LOGIC has two parts, the Finding out of arguments. Ramus.
Disposing of arguments.


This precept must have the second place: for, Aristotle in the 6. Book of his
Topics, and latter end of the first Chapter, requires, that, the thing
defined, be distributed into parts: Ramus took this precept out of the second
Chapter of Aristotle's Categories, where we have these words: Those things,
which are contained in Logic, be without complexion. with complexion.


I said, Ramus followed Aristotle in this partition, and, the thing it self
shows it; for, they both divide Logic, into two parts; The first part in
Logic (according to Aristotle) are things without complexion: so are they,
acording to Ramus, as his own words do witness, when he terms them,
Several respects of things, considered alone, and by themselves. Aristotle
gives, his incomplexed things no name: but, thereby he means arguments, as
they are undisposed, as, his next precept does show, and, Ramus gives them that
name expressly.

Ramus calls the first part of Logic invention: and, so does Aristotle too, as
we may gather from the 32. chapter, of the first book of his Priorums: Where,
a little after the beginning, he requires, a faculty of inuenting, in him,
that makes a Syllogism: but, more plainly, and fully: we find the same thing,
in the first Chapter of the eight book of his Topics; To find out (says he)
the place, from whence a man may argue, appertains to Logic: therefore, unto
the first part of Logic, for it can have no other place. Ramus calls, the
second part of Logic, disposition. So does Aristotle also, in the place last
alleged, where he requires of a Logician, to dispose singular things, by
themselves: and, he says, that, this disposition is proper to a Logician; and,
therefore, belongs to Logic; and, consequently, it is a second part thereof:
for, it cannot be the first: yea, that Aristotle meant thus, does undoubtedly
appear; because, he appoints his Logician, first, to find out the places,
from whence t^ argue; and then, in the second place, to dispose them, being so
found out.

[Two parts] That is, Logic, tend unto two things, or ends: and, they be
called parts, because, all those precepts be shared, or parted between these
two ends: some of them appertain to the one, and the rest unto the other.

[Finding out] To find out, sometime signifies, to discover a thing that is
secret; but, here it is not so taken, but, the meaning is, that, the precepts
of Logic, do assign the seats, and places of arguments, and describe, and
set forth the nature of them: and so much for the general Distribution of
Logic.

CHAP. III. Of the seats of Arguments in general.
Aristotle assigns ten places, in the fourth Chapter of his Categories: in
these words:

Those things, which we find in Logic, without all conjunction, do signify:
1 Substance; as, a man, a beast, etc. 2 Quantity; as, two or three cubits. 3
Quality; as, white, etc. 4 Relation; as, double, half, etc. 5 Where; as, in
the field, etc. 6 When; as, yesterday, the year past. 7 The place; as, he
sits, etc. 8 To enjoy; as, to be armed, etc. 9 Todoe; as, to cut, etc. 10 To
suffer; as, to be cut, etc.


He repeates the same doctrine in the ninth Chapter of his first book of the
Topics; and in both places, he does explicate them by certain properties,
that be common to them all jointly; viz. 1. They neither affirm, nor deny. 2.
They be neither false, nor true. 3. A conjunction being added to them, they
contain negation, or affirmation, truth, or falsehood. 4. All propositions are
framed from them.

In the fifth Chapter of his Categories, Prior. lib. 1. cap. 27. Eorum igitur.
Post. lib. 1. cap. 22. he does divide them thus.

These ten, be Either, subjected only. Predicated only. Or, subjected, and
predicated, also.


This distribution, is fitly set out by Altisiodore, in his Preface A. and B.
Where, he has these words:

An Argument, is that, which proves: or is proved.


This is all, that I find, touching arguments in general.

Aristotle delivers the doctrine of Substance (which is the first seat of
arguments) in the fifth Chapter alleged, 1. A substance, is every thing, of
which we may say, that, it is. We find the same thing in Thomas, Whatsoever
(says he) is essential to a thing, appertains unto substance, 1. p.q. 77.
art. 1. ad 1m. 2. Substance is First: as every singular and individual thing.
Second: as Genus and species.
3. Genus, and species, signify substances, by a figura^iue speech, not
properly, they signify, rather, the manner, according to which, a thing is. 4.
A singular thing, is most properly, a substance; because, all other things, be
attributed thereunto, and that, attributed unto none.


Thus, have I set down, Aristotle, touching the nature of those arguments,
which are contained in the first place, or seat of arguments: (for this time we
must omit the consideration of the second substance; for, that has the last
place in this first part of Logic) The first substance comes now to be
handled: Thomas does wholly subscribe unto Aristotle, for this distinction, and
explication of substance, reported out of Aristotle, and, he shows the same,
in this short sentence: viz In the name of first substance, is intended the
nature of universal and parts. 1. p.q. 29. art. 3. ad 2m. And, for further
explication, he says, 1. p. q 75. art. 2. ad 2m. A first, or individual
substance, may be taken two ways: one way, for every thing that has a
substance; another way, for a complete subsistency, in the nature of any
species: from whence, a man's hand may be called a first substance, or an
individual thing, after the first sort: but not after the second: so also, a
man's soul, may be called a first substance, or a singular thing in the first
sort: because, it is (as it were) a thing, that subsisteth: but, that which is
compounded of soul, and body, is called, a first substance, or an individual
being, in the second sense.

Unto this place, must be referred, every individual effect, as it consists
by force of all the causes, and, every individual subject, that receives any
outward change, whether it be by the substracting of something inioyed, or the
receiving of something that is added.

The nature of these effects, and subjects, is delivered by Aristotle, in his
tenth place, or seat of arguments, viz. of suffering. I say, they are contained
there; for, in the judgment of Thomas. 1. p.q. 79. art. To suffer, is no more,
but, to lose things inioyed, whether appertaining to nature, or not
appertaining thereto, or, to be brought from power to act: and therefore,
Aristotle's tenth seat, of suffering, imports the whole nature, of every
individual effect, and subject, as it is an effect, and subject. Now, I
conceive, that, this is wholly agreeable unto Aristotle's meaning; because, in
his doctrine of predicated arguments, he speaks not a word, of effects, and
subjects.

This Doctrine is peculiar to Aristotle: does not acknowledge it; for, he has
not a word of it: It may be, he conceived, that, 1. To set down all the seats
of arguments in one place together, would breed a needles repetition. 2. These
single terms did not appertain to Logic. 3. The first substance, or thing
subjected, in every sentence, has not the nature of an argument. It is very
likely, that, he thought thus; because, this doctrine of Aristotle has been
anciently received; therefore, he would not depart from it unless he had some
reason for it: and I conceive, he had no reason, but these 3. I answer, these
three arguments be insufficient: The first, because Aristotle does never
repeat; or handle these ten seats of arguments twice: but, in stead of them
sometime he brings in the doctrine of a definition, Property, Genus,
Accident, as the things, which are contained, in those ten seats of arguments:
and, this we find in the 8. and 9. chapters of the first book of his
Topics. Some other time, he sets out, the nature of other arguments: but, they
are such, as are either, contained in these 4. or arise from them; and, (at
most) he does but explicate at large, the same things, that he had set down
summarily, in the 10. places aforesaid.

Neither, unto them: viz, They contain truth, or falsehood, affirmation, or
negation, when one of them is attributed to the other.

The third also is insufficient, Aristotle understood that argument, which he
calls the first substance, after this sort: for, in the said 5 chapter of his
Categories, he says, it is proper unto the first substance to receive
contraries, as sickness, and health, blacknes, and whitnes, and thereby to be
changed, from well to ill, from white to black.

The only doubt is, whether an individual effect, and subject be some ways
predicated or not. Ramus says yea; and brings them as predicated arguments.
Aristotle does not so, and no doubt, he has the truth. No individual effect,
is predicated. I have three reasons for it: first, we never find any such
predication, in the formal writings in the schools, 2. No man can say, this
individual thing consisting of soul, and body, is this man: for, the
predicate is less known then the subject; The subject engenders distinct and
certain knowledge: because, it comprehends all the causes, but no man will
say so, of the predicate, nor so much, 3. The authority of the schools is
against it. I will allege Thomas for them all. An integrall whole (says he)
1. p. 1. 77. art. 1. ad 1m. is not predicated of all the parts together, unless
improperly as when we say, these walls, this foundation, and roof, is this
house. For the subject; the matter is yet more clear, we cannot say, this
learning, is this man. Thomas says truly 1. p. q. 29. art. 3. ad 3m Accidents
do man's est the subject: but he never said, nor any man else, that, the
subject does manifest the accident; and no marvel why: for, if the subject be
predicated of the accident, then we must conceive, that, the accident is
without, and before the subject: but no man will say so: therefore, we may
conclude, the individual effect, and subject, are fitly comprehended under the
name of a first substance. Thus, I have set down, and explicated, the general
nature of arguments; and, the special nature of that argument, which is
always subjected or argued. In the next place, I come to those arguments,
which be always predicated.

CHAP. IIII. The distribution of predicated Arguments.
Arguments be Positive Consenting absolutely. Ramus.
after a sort
Dissenting.
Comparatiue.


A positive argument,

A consenting argument is that, which is predicated of the subject
affirmatively.

I Find this doctrine of positive arguments, Aristotle also, and I will show
it in his doctrine of consenting arguments; in the second chapter of his
Categortes, he says, some arguments be of the subject, and other some, in the
subject: those I say be in the subject, which are no parts of it, nor can be
without that thing in which they are. The same thing is taught by Thomas, yet
more plainly, 1. p. q. 25. art. 6. In. cor. Some arguments (says he) be of the
essence, and other some, without the essence of the subtect, of which they are
predicated. I say, this of Thomas, and that of Aristotle are the same, with the
last two branches, of Ramus his division: or (at least) it is comprehended in
them: for, those that be of the essence, do absolutely agree with the subject,
of whose essence they be. They that be in the subject, but without the essence
thereof do agree to the subject after a sort, seeing therefore, they agree in
those two last branches, they must agree also in the former branches of the
division: seeing, every argument that agrees absolutely, does consent
positiuely with the subject, of which they be predicated; and consequently, it
is enough to the understanding of the whole, if we do explicate, and
prosecute, those two last branches: and, because I suppose, that the terms of
Aristotle, and Thomas, be more significant, and fit, I think it best to follow
them.

[Of the essence] By these words, Thomas has taught us in 2. did. 27. q. 1.
art. 2. ad. 9m. he says the effect is constituted by all the causes, (that is)
each one in its kind, and manner of working; for, all of them, do concur, and
bestow their force, unto the procuring of the thing to be. These arguments be
all comprehended in the 9. place of arguments viz. To do.

CHAP. V. The Definition of a Cause.
A Cause is that, by force whereof, Ramus.
a thing is. THis argument, for every thing whereupon another follows: and so
says Okam, 1. did. 1. q. 3. lit. N. wherefore (as the same Okam says) 1.
did. 41. lit. F. A Cause is taken two ways: Sometimes, for every thing that
has another thing, as an effect thereof; and, sometime also, for a
proposition, whereof another does follow: thus far Okam.

A Cause in this place, is taken, not so largely, as in Okam^ first and third
senses: but, in the second. A Cause in this notion, is also taken for the thing
it self which does cause; and sometimes also, for the nature of Causing, or,
for the thing, as it does exercise Causallitie in act, or, for the relation of
Causing: A Cause, is taken in the second sense, in this definition; wherefore,
A Cause is that, of which the effect, even by it self depends. Thus far
the Jesuits in their Preface unto Porphyrte.

By this it is manifest, that, Ramus, and Aristotle, do fully agree in the
defining of a Cause, and in the explication of that definition: therefore, we
need not say more for the opening thereof; a few examples will make it easily
understood; but, we may not do that in this place, least we be forced to
repeat the same thing again, when we come to the particulars.

CHAP. VI. The Distribution of a Cause.
There be foureCauses: Ramus.
the Efficient, and Matter, Form, and End.
THere is an universal agreement in this precept also. Aristotle makes them
these four, as we may find, in the 11. chapter of the second book of his
Postertorums; his words be these: There be 4. Causes 1. That which shows what
a thing is. 2. That which must be when the thing is. 3. That which moves
first. 4. That for which a thing is.


He has the same thing in the fifth book of his Metaphysics and 23 chapter.
Thomas does follow him, and does teach the same things in 1a. 2 a. q. 72. art.
3. in cor. and no man thinks otherwise: therefore, I will descend, to unfold
the nature of the particulars.

CHAP. VII. Of the Efficient Cause.
The Efficient Cause is that, Ramus.
from which, the thing is. [Efficient] This word imports no more;

[From which] These words do set out the nature, the whole effect: for, this
Cause does join together all the other Causes, whereof the effect is
compounded: as namely, it bestows the form upon the matter, and does
destinate the matter formed unto the producing of something that is good: and
therefore, it deserves well to be called Efficient. The form does make the
effect to be of this, or that kind: the matter formed, does make the effect to
be this, or that individual thing: the end makes it fit for this or that good:
but, the motion and efficacy of the efficient Cause only, does give being unto
the effect in the event. We have many examples of this Cause, and the
operation thereof; we find one in the second of Genesis, the seventh verse,
where it is said, God formed man, of the dust of the ground, and breathed into
him the breath of life, and he became a living soul.

In this example, the making of man is attributed unto God: therefore God is
said to be the Efficient Cause of man: the office of this efficiency, is placed
in joining the form unto the matter; he framed him of the dust, there is the
matter, and breathed life into him, and thereby the form is imposed on the
matter, and then, God did destinate him to an end, viz. The actions of life,
thereby he made him a living soul.

We have another the like example in the 11. of Genesis, the 3. and 4. ver.
where it is reported; that, The men of the earth, did build a high tower of
brick, and slime; for a memorial of their name.

The men of the earth, are made the builders of the tower, and thereby they
became the efficient cause of the whole work: they take brick, and frame it
into a tower; therefore, they join the matter and form together: they
destinate the same unto an end; viz. the continuance of their name on earth.
And, thus much shall suffice, to set out the nature of the efficient cause. We
should now divide an efficient cause into the several kinds; but, that we
cannot: for (as Ramus truly says) they are unknown unto us, therefore we
will set down, the diverse, and various manner, wherein the efficient cause
does work: for that is well known, and does help us much, in the
understanding of the office of thus Cause.

The efficient cause does work, By it self. By accident.


A Cause does then work by it self, Ramus.
when it works by force of, and according unto the inbred fitness thereof.

We find this distinction, The efficient cause (says Thomas) works, by it
self, or by accident; the first is, when it month by its own proper virtue:
The second, when something is removed therefrom, or that which remains, is
hindered from working, 1a. 2^. q. 76. art. 1. in cor. If we join Okam unto
Thomas, we shall find this matter fully opened; A Cause by accident (says
Okam. 1. did. 2. q. 10. lit. B. H.) is that, which works by a thing
different from it self, and a cause, which works by it self is that, which
causes the effect according to its proper nature, and not according to some
other thing, which outwardly does befall it.

The efficient does work by it self, in natural things, when it moves
according unto the instinct, and inbred disposition of nature: as when the
living Creature sees, eats, sleeps, avoydeth known danger. The plants
grow upright, bring forth leaves, and fruit, in due season; So does it work by
it self in the intellectual creature, when man moves himself unto doing, by
the direction of true reason, and the unrestrained, and free choice of the will.

Natural things do work by accident, when the instinct of nature is
suppressed, or diverted. The intellectual creature works by accident, when
the judgment of reason is erroneous, and the choice of the will, carried by a
previall overruling power, and all these do fall out, in case, where nature
meets with defection. The understanding is possessed with ignorance, or the
will haled by the naughtiness of corruption, and violence of temptation.
Lastly, the secret providence of God (which the Heathen called fortune) makes
the creature work by accident: in all Cases when he works against means, as
he did, when he brought the people through the red Sea, Exodus the 14. and, as
he does in all miracles; or when man intends one thing, but another thing
comes to pass: of this, we have an example in the 45. of Genesis, and 5. verse.
and 37. and 27. verse. In this place, they are said to sell Joseph, because
they would be rid of him; and, in that, Joseph says, God sent him into Egypt,
to preserve their lives. They were the efficient Cause of their own
preserving, when they sold Joseph; but, yet by accident, through Gods secret
providence, that wrought contrary to their intent. The Jews, likewise, were
the Cause of Christ's glory, and man's salvation, when they delivered him to
death; but, yet by accident, because God himself did create light out of
darkness, and made their evil intention, serve unto that good. There be many
examples, wherein we find, that, the efficient cause does work on this
manner: but these are enough, for this present.

The efficient does work Physically, Morrally.


This distinction, is received in all the Logic schools, and, is of frequent
use, in the question touching sanctification, and the actual motion of grace,
in man's conversion: the Reader may find it in Suarez opusc. 1. lib. 3. cap. 10.
no. 1. and in many other places. A Physical operation, is a real influence
into the effect, we have an example of this in man's creation: He formed him,
and that of the dust, and poured life into him, all these be real influences:
of this kind, are the builders of the Tower of Babell, they made brick, and
reard a building with brick, and stone: Of this sort, be all workmen that
labor with their hands, and tools, the strength of nature, does immediately
flow into the thing that is wrought, making a real and sensible change in the
matter where on they work.

A moral work, is a motion offered to the understanding, and serves to
allure, and draw it on with reasons, and persuasion. Of this kind, be be all
such things, as be objected to the understanding, as namely, the testimony of
God, and man, by commanding, forbidding, promising, threatening, persuading,
therefore, so often as we find, any of these attributed to God, or man, we
are to know, that then they are efficient causes, that work morally.

Ramus does call Testimonies, Exhortations, Commandments, etc. inartificiall
arguments, because, they argue, not of their own force, but, by the authority
of him that does testify: but, this is altogether unfitly spoken, for
inartificiall, and argument, implies a contradiction, if inartificiall, then no
argument; if an argument then artificial, for an argument is a member of Art.
2. These things themselves are no arguments, unless they be referred unto the
Testator, but then they argue as properties or adjuncts, and otherwise they
are never attributed to any subject. In this place affirmation, persuasion,
etc. are not brought as moral causes in themselves: but the causalitie is
referred to him that affirms, persuades etc. which makes it very plain,
that, they belong to this place or seat of arguments. God, and his servants,
are the moral causes of man's holiness, when they command good, and forbid ill,
when they promise good, and threaten ill, when they persuade unto obedience,
and dissuade from sin, thus our Savior Christ is the moral cause of all
supernatural things, when by his obedience, he deserved, that God should
bestow them upon us, he by meriting (I say) is the moral cause of Gods gifts,
because by his merits he moves God to bestow them: and so much shall suffice
for this distinction.

A Physical efficient is Principal first, second,
Isntrumental.


This distinction is very ancient in the schools; and of great use, when we
desire to know, how man's will is wrought upon, and works with the actual
motion of Gods grace; Alvarez received it from Thomas, and makes use of it.
disp. 68. no. 5. etc. where, he does thus describe each member of it.

A principal efficient is that, which works out of its own power, or form,
as Thomas says, 1. p. q. 18. art. 3. in cor. A first principal efficient, is
that which works only, out of its own power. Thus God only works, of whom
it is said, he sits in Heaven, and does what he will.

He is the universal cause: for in him we live, and moan, and have our being.

A second principal efficient is that, which is so moved by another, that it
moves it self, by a power of its own. Of this sort is man's mind, which is
moved by God, yet neverth less it works out of an active beginning,
remaining in it self, Of this sort, be all those sayings in the Scripture,
which attribute man's good works, as his conversion, and the like, sometimes,
unto God alone, and other sometimes, unto man alone.

An instrument (properly taken, of this kind are all instruments without life,
as namely the tools of a Carpenter, or Smith, etc: Thus hot water, heateth
another thing that is cold, by the heat received from the fire.

To conclude, the point touching the efficient cause, we are to know, that,
the efficient, Ramus.
always works after one of these ways, whether it works alone, or with
others, whether it begins the work, or preserues it, being already made.

CHAP. VIII. The matter, Ramus.
is a Cause of which a thing is.
[Matter.] This word is often times used to set out every bodily substance:
Thomas says, 1. p. q. 7. art. 1. in cor.) The matter (as it is a matter)
remains only in power, or capacity to receive many forms: and therefore,
according to it self has no being, nor can be objected to our understanding:
1. p. q. 15. art. 3. ad 3m. In this place it signifies a bodily substance
informed, or some intellectual thing answerable unto that.

[A cause] These words do attribute an active power, and actual efficacy unto
the matter, whereby the effect is produced.

[Of which] These words show the nature of that efficacy, and the manner how the
matter does concur unto the effect: and imports the thing that so receives
the form, that it rests and remains in it. This we see in an house, wherein
the timber, stone etc. are framed, and fashioned together, and made fit for
habitation: so does a piece of timber receive the picture made upon it by a
carver.

[A thing is] By [thing] is meant the effect produced: by [Is] is meant
essentially, so as, the matter is a part of the essence viz. in a second
degree, or notion. We conceive the timber etc. Of a house to be a part of it:
but we know, that there is an other part thereof more principal before that:
namely, the form and fashion thereof. A thing, signifies an individual
effect, so as, the office of the matter is to bring the effect unto asingular,
or individual being: thus all Philosophers do conceive of it. The matter is
the principium of individuation, says Thomas. 1. p. q. 86. art. 3. in cor. And
again, the essence is restrained unto one individual thing by the matter. 1.
p. q. 7. art. 3. in cor.

We have an instance of this, in every singular creature. Peter, is a singular
man by his body, every plant, is singular by the stem that grows up; for they
enjoy all other things in common with therest of their kinds. The soul of
Peter has the same rationalitie with all other men's souls: no singular tree
differs from other trees in vegititie. Sanctity makes men christians: Peter's
sanctity makes Peter a christian, because the holy Ghost dwells in his mortal
body.

This argument brings the subject to which it is attributed, unto our clear
understanding, and it is of singular use, to make us know the nature and
distinction of particular beings.

Yea, of absolute necessity: for (that I may use the words, and reason of
Aristotle. Meta. Lib. 2. Cap. 1 text. 11) It is not possible to know until we
come unto indiuidualls. It is impossible to know until we ataine unto those
things which do not admit division: for things that are infinite cannot
possibly be comprehended by our understandings. We have a pregnant example of
it in the 1. Cor. 15.39 etc. Where, the Apostle does describe, and destinguish
diverse kinds of singular bodies, and says, some be celestial, as the Sun,
Moon, and stars. Other some be terrestrial, and those be spiritual, as man's
body that is raised: other some be natural, viz the flesh of men, beasts and
birds: and from hence he delivers the nature and difference of glory that these
particular beings do enjoy. Likewise, the holy Ghost Revel. 21 18. etc. Makes
us know, what the new Jerusalem is, by the matter thereof. The examples of this
kind are very frequent, and well known to every man; therefore, I take this
to be sufficient for the explication of the material cause.

CHAP. IX. Of the formal Cause.
A form, is a Cause, Ramus.
by which a thing is that, which it is. [Forme.] As I said of the matter, a
certain thing common unto many: so Thomas truly says, 1. p. q. 7. art. 1. in
cor. 2. Under the name form, sometimes is comprehended a figure, which
consists in the termination of a quantity. This also I have from Thomas. 1.
p. q. 7. art. 1. ad 2m. But we take not this word, at this time, in either of
these senses. By form then we here understand, the intrinsicall part of the
compounded effect: so says Suarez, meta. disp. 10. sect. 1. no. 7. that is,
Received of the matter, informing the same: Thus says Thomas. 1. p. q. 7. art.
1. in cor.

A form (says Thomas) is General. A form (says Thomas) is Special.
A special form is that which informs the subject, but it self is not
informed by any other form of the same nature: as one color is not informed
by another color, 2. did. 27. q. 1. art. 2. ad 1m. Form in this place, is
taken in the second sense, not in the first. We have an example of this, in
the rationalitie of man, and vigiditie of plants: both of them are forms, and
distinct beings, not receiving any thing from other forms of their kind.

[Is a Cause] (That is) it has actual exercised force to infer the effect.

[By which] These words do show, Aristotle says, Meta. lib. 9. cap. 6. text
17.) The form is an act; (that is) an actual, determinate, and active being:
the Reader may see this matter fully opened by Gillius. col. 467.

[A thing is] By these words, every thing that does actually exist (says
Thomas, 1. p. q. 7. art. 2. in cor.) has some form; and again, every being
is caused by the form thereof. 1. p. q. 51. art. 4. in cor.

[That which.] thing is that which it is, by its form: thus Thomas thinks,
1. p. q 5. art. 5. and ad 3m. in cor. The whole compound is the effect of the
form; in the judgment of Okam. 1. did. 32. q. 1. and 2. lit. C. And this
sentence agrees well with the nature of the thing: for, the matter does finite,
and contract the amplitude of the form, and thereby it becomes the determinate
form of this, or that individual effect. The form, on the other side, does
perfect and determine the matter, and bring it, from power, to act, by giving an
essence thereunto: in so much, that, by the form the essence is termined unto
some special kind. And thus much we receive from Thomas. 1. p. q. 7. art. 1.
et 3 in cor. q. 14. art. 2. ad 1m.

This argument is of necessary use, It is all one says Aristotle 2. post. cap.
8. to know the nature of a thing, and to know the cause of its nature. We have
examples of this kind of Cause, in the word of God, and the nature of the
Creature: when God would show us what sin is, he does set it out by the form
thereof. Sin (says the Apostle John 1. Epist. chap. 3. v. 4.) Is a varying
from the Law: The Apostle Paul, when he would set out, what the righteousness
of faith is, he does describe it (in his Epistle to the Romans chapter 4. v.
6.7.8.) by forgiveness of sins. The holy Ghost does yield us many of these
examples, but these shall suffice.

In man we have a full representation of every part of this Argument. the form
is truly said to be the beginning of difference, that is hetweene one and
another, and not the difference it self. Thom. 1. did. 25. q. 1. art. 1. ad
2m. I say, the difference of things does flow from the form: for, as unity in
substance does make two things to be the same, as Okam does truly teach, 1.
did. 19. q. 1. lit. B. opinio 1a. and Aristotle, meta. lib. 5. cap. 15. text.
20. so difference in substance makes two things to differ. The form is not the
difference it self: for, a form is a subsistence in an unity: but, a
difference is a dissenting between the essence of two: and thus much for the
explication of the formal Cause.

CHAP. X. Of the final Cause.
The end is a cause for which the thing is. Ramus.
[End] By end is meant the last notion which we have of the effect: and
imports that whereunto the thing tends. So Aristotle tells us, meta. lib.
2. cap. 1. text. 9.

An end is External. Internal, In The intent of the doer. The thing it self
naturally Imposed.




An external end, is the actual use of the thing, to which the effect is
fitted. Thus the beatificall vision is man's end, to which he tends. An end in
the intent of the doer, is no more but either the fitnes (it self) of the
effect thought upon, and purposed by the efficient; (this is the condition of
every workman, that devises and resolves upon the fashion, and form of the
thing to be wrought) Or the commodity of the workman, and others, sought
thereby.

We have example of an end, thus understood, in those words of John 3.16. God
so loved the world etc. Where the giving of Christ is an effect, wrought by
God, wherein he intended the glory of himself, and his son, and the
salvation of the predestinate. Thus the workman that makes an axe intends, that
himself shall get reputation, and maintenance thereby.

An end of a thing imposed upon it is, when the efficient enjoined that use of
it, which the thing it self does not yield, and this end we find in laws,
and money; the one is appointed to be a rule of obedience, the other to set a
price of wares. I say appointed by him that has power to do it, the things
themselves do not yield it; as all men do know by experience. But the word
end in this place does not signify either of these four things.

end (as it is in the intent and will of the doer) is a cause indeed
metaphorically, not properly, and must be reduced unto the efficient not the
final: for, in that sort it does but move, and indu^^^ice principal efficient
unto working: and consequently, it is an efficient that works morally.

That and unto which the effect tends naturally, defined. I have received all
these things from Thomas 2. did. q. 1. art. 1 2. and 3. 1. p. q. 26. art. 3.
ad 2m. Suarez de praedest lib. 2. cap. 3. no: 2. vega in Council. Trident lib.
7. cap. 2.

[A cause] Therefore the end has an active, and an exercised act, for, that is
the property of every cause, as has been showed.

[For which a thing is] These words set out the nature of that force: It is of
the nature of a final cause (says Okam) actually to intend: and whatsoever
does not so, is not truly, and properly a final cause in Prologo. 1. sent. q.
11. lit. F.G. In the same sort writes Aristotle meta. lib. 2. cap. 1. text. 8.
An end (says he) is that for which a thing is made, that is, whose essence is
not so for another, that it follows that other: but, the essence of another
follows that.

If any inquire how tendency etc. First I answer it can, because that tendency
flows from the form, in as much as the form does determine the effect unto
an end, according to its own proportion: as the form of steel is such, as
best fitteth with cutting. Thomas. 1a. 2 e. q. 95 art. 3. in cor. Secondly, the
end imports some good so says Thomas. 1. p. q 19. art. 1 ad. 1 and all men
grant it: therefore it has an exercised force to constitute, but herein it
differs from the form that does constitute good and no more: this does both
constitute, and diffuse good: It does constitute, in as much as, it is the
perfection of the effect. I say the perfection of it, because, when the effect
has attained thy her it wants nothing requisite to a thing of that kind. It
is diffusiuely good, in as much as, it is fit, and apt to bestow good upon
others.

We have many examples that show us the nature of this argument. Fitnes to
rule the day and night is attributed to the Sun, and Moon Genesis. 1.14. As
a thing that followed their nature by creation: thus also, fitnes to accompany
and help Adam is affirmed of Evah Genesis. 2.18.21. as the end of her creation.
Man is apt, and fit to love the known good, and that is his end; this fitnes
flows from his reasonable soul or formal being, whose property it is to
judge truly, and choose freely. Now this fitnes has a maine stroke in the
constituting of man, not by the way of motion, for that belongs to the
efficient, nor by the way of reception, and retention: for, that belongs to the
matter: but, by the way of settled position as the form does from whence it
flows. 2. By this fitnes a man is made a perfect, and complete humane
creature: for, when he attaines unto that, he wants nothing requisite unto his
being. Until he be so fitted, we cannot conceive him a humane creature: for,
he would differ nothing from bruit beasts.

The use of this argument is of exceeding worth, cause, and consequently the
nature of the thing.

To conclude the doctrine of all the causes jointly; we must not forget, that,
from this place, or seat of arguments is derived knowledge, simply so called.
We are then thought to know a thing, when we understand the causes thereof, thus
says Ramus. And to the same effect speaks Aristotle, knowledge simply so
called (says he) poster. lib. 1. cap. 4. is necessary, that is, when the thing
cannot be otherwise then as we know it: and we have that knowledge, when we
understand the causes: so says the same Aristotle. Poster. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Thomas also has the same thing: knowledge (says he) opusc. de demonst. cap.
1. is to understand of certainty, and we do so when we understand the causes
of the thing, and that, both as it is a cause, and also as it is a cause in
act, of that thing: and he gives a reason hereof, Opusc. 48. de Syllog. cap. 1.
viz. Then our reason does resolve the thing caused into its causes: from whence
knowledge does flow. And thus much for the final cause, and all those
arguments which are predicated of the essence of the subject, and which
consequently do absolutely agree therewith.

CHAP. XI. Of Properties.
WE must now prosecute those arguments which import things without the
subject, and consequently consent with it, after some sort: of this kind, be
all adjuncts, as some do call them.

An adiunct is that to which something is subjected, Ramus.
and whatsoever does externally belong, or happen to any subject.

An adiunct is Proper. Common.


A proper adiunct is that which belongs unto all, and alone, and always.

A common adiunct is that which is not proper in that sort.

Aristotle dissents from Ramus in these precepts: Thomas says, 1. p. q. 77.
art. 1. ad 5m. Not every thing that is without the essence, may be called an
accident: Aristotle has not the terms of proper and common adjunct; nor the
thing comprehended under them; but the contrary; he says Top. lb. 1. Cap. 5.
An accident cannot be proper, otherwise then by relation; as when one sit^eth
and others stand, then sitting is proper to him. Lastly, Aristotle and others
with him do make a thing proper and an accident to differ formally, as we
shall presently find.

Aristotle teaches, Top. lib. 1. cap. 5. that, Arguments which are without the
subject, be properties and accidents. That is said to be proper, that is
reciprecall with the thing, but yet does not declare the essence, nor come into
the definition thereof. And of these he says also Top. lib. 5. cap. 1. They
are properties by themselves always, and do separate, and distinguish from
all other things. Porphyrie also does distinguish and describe these arguments
as Aristotle does. A property (says he cap. 4.) is that which does concur
unto all only, and always. And again, cap. 9. A property is that which is in
the whole kind to which it is proper, and only, and always, so as, if that
special kind be taken away, presently the property thereof is taken away
also. And Thomas does so set out the nature of this argument, that he gives a
reason of all this alleged out of Aristotle, and Porphyrie. A thing proper,
says he. 1 p q 77. art. 1. ad 5m. is not of the essence, but is caused by the
essential principles of the species.

Aristotle, Porphyrie gives instance of properties, in this sentence.

He that is apt unto laughing is a man.
He that is apt to learn Grammar is a man.
In this proposition, aptnes unto laughing, and Grammar-learning, is predicated
of man: This aptnes flows from his reasonable soul, and that is the
principal thing in his nature. I say it flows therefrom, not as a Contingent
motion, but as a natural emanation; therefore, this aptnes agrees unto all
men, only, and always. No man wants it, none but man has it, and all men
have it always, and consequently it is proper unto man, and proper by it
self, and the nature thereof, and not made proper by any outward efficient, so
as in necessary consecution it is convertible with man: we may truly argue
thus, If man, then apt unto Grammar skill. If apt unto Grammar skill, then man.

An accident says Aristotle, 1. cap. 5. is neither definition, Genus, nor a
property, and is in the thing: but so as that it may be, and may not be, in
one and the same thing: and Porphyrie recites the same in his fifth Chapter;
Thomas also in the place last alleged, does so set out the nature of an
accident, that he gives also a reason of Aristotle's Doctrine: An accident
(says he) is only that, which is without the subject, and not caused by the
essential principles thereof. Now, this doctrine of Aristotle is certainly
true: therefore we ought to leave Ramus and follow him. I say it is certainly
true, that there be some things proper, that be not accidents: namely, all
natural actions, as the act of seeing, is proper to all living creatures: the
act of discoursing to man: The bearing of leaves, and fruit to plants: and the
outward works of holiness, unto him that has the habit of holiness. These
are proper, because they are necessary emanations, from nature in the one, and
grace in the other: so as, when all requisite circumstances be present, man
cannot but see, and work, the plants cannot but bring forth fruit, and leaves:
wherefore, the holy Ghost does thus reason; He that does righteousness is
righteous. 1. John. 3.7.

Where the holy Ghost does necessarily join righteous actions, unto a man that
is habituated with righteousness, as proper unto him.

Properties be not adjuncts: adjuncts do out wardly befall the subject: and so
much the word imports, and Ramus expressly affirms. Properties do not
outwardly befall the subject: but, they are necessary emanations from the
principles of nature: Heat, and light do not outwardly befall the Sun, and
fire: neither does swimming of timber in the water, outwardly befall the same:
and such is the condition of properties.

To this seat or place of arguments, Aristotle, must be referred: viz.
Quantity, Quality, Relation, Where, When, The place, To enjoy. For, all of
them do outwardly befall the subject, and are not caused by the principles of
nature; as a little labor will show; for, Quantity imports no more, but
Geometrical measure, or Arithmeticall number. Quality signifies the manner,
how a thing existeth, or works. Relation is no more, but the reference, or
respect of one thing to another. Where imports the general place, wherein
the subject is, as in this, or that Country. When expresses the time, and
duration, as this year, this month, etc. The place signifies the particular
place, as this stool, this chair, etc. To enjoy signifies all indowments, as
Honor, Riches, Clothes, etc

Some man (perhaps) will require me to set out the nature of quantity,
Aristotle's authority for it. I answer, that ought not to be done in this
place; for, that belongs to other Arts, as to Geometry, Arithmeticke, natural
and moral Philosophy. This place requires no more, but that I show, what force
there is in them, to bring the knowledge of the subject, that receives them,
into our understanding; and that I have done partly already, and will make it
more plain, and full by that which follows.

Porphyrie, 5. does divide an accident into separable; as sleep to a man.
inseparable; as blackness to a Crow.


And Ramus follows him.

Aristotle has not this division; yet it may be allowed, because, it is true,
and useful. Blacknes to a Crow is an accident: for, a white Crow, is no less
a Crow then a black one, it is inseparable by Gods appointment. We may truly
say, this division is useful: for, the holy Ghost does use it; from
inseperable accidents he does argue thus. Ier. 13.23. The Ethiopian cannot
change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots, no more can he leave his sin,
that is accustomed to do evil.

Separable accidents are always of singular use, severally: yet, none of them
are so weak severally, but that they do certainly lead us to know the
outward quality, and condition of their subject, for learning, Riches,
beauty, etc. do undoubtedly argue their subjects to be learned, rich, and
beautiful, and thereby we know the condition, which the subject that receives
them does enjoy, and how they differ from others, that want riches, learning,
or beauty: therefore, the holy Ghost does so often use this kind of argument,
and then most chiefly, when he would set out his most beloved object. By this
argument the spouse is described: Can. 5.10.11.12 My love is white, ruddie etc.
By this argument also, Goliath is set out 1. Sam. 17.4.5.6. etc. Then came a
man named Goliath of Gath. etc. To conclude, such force is in this argument,
that we do certainly and distinctly know thereby, one man from another, and
what reverence, honor, and respect ought to be given to this rather then to
that: and thus Aristotle does urge it Top. lib. 1. cap. 5 adiungantur autem.

Thus are we come to an end of all the positive consenting arguments: hitherto
is to be referred all kind of unity or identitie: Ramus.
I shall not need to bestow much labor to show it: for the thing it self is
evident, there is nothing wherein one man can be the same with another, unless
it be in things essential, or without the essence. It is a ruled case in the
Schools, Two things are the same Generally, Specially, Numerically, Top. lib.
1. cap. 7. but this differs nothing from that, and both of them contain an
undoubted truth: Two men are the same generally, because both of them have a
living soul, two men are the same specially, because they have a reasonable
soul, both of them are one numerically, because each of them have a body,
flesh, and bones. Two men are the same in riches, health, etc. because they are
both rich, and in health.

In the next place we come to dissenting arguments.

CHAP. XII. Of Diversity.
A dissenting argument is that which dissenteth from the thing it argues.
Ramus.
RAMVS has this sentence out of Aristotle, Differ (says Porphyrie) in a
common sense, is no more, but by a variety to be distant some ways or other:
so as, a thing is said to differ after this sort from it self, or from
another: and we find the substance here of delivered by Aristotle. Top. lib.
1. Cap. 16.

[Dissenting] This word imports,

[Dissenteth] This word comprehends the general nature of all the arguments
which belong to this place, (I say) the general nature, because arguments do
dissent more ways then one: and it signifies a distancy, arising from a
variety as Prophyrie has fitly expressed it: for, we say those things are
distant each from other, that are severed by a space, or some bodily substance
that is between them: and this space is the variety, or variousnes that is
between several, and distinct arguments: As riches is a bar, that comes
between a rich man and poverty: by reason whereof poverty dissenteth from
him that has riches.

[From the thing it argueth] This shows the terms of this variation, does
make such a difference in a sick man from him that has health, that, that
health can no ways be affirmed of him, therefore says Porphyrie. chap. 3.
Every difference makes a thing various, when it is joined thereunto.

These kinds of arguments serve to refell error, and the use, Logic, seeing
we may be truly said to know what we knew not, when we are confirmed in our
knowledge.

To conclude, when we say these arguments do lead us to the knowledge of the
subject, we mean, the quality not the essence thereof; They show what manner
of thing it is: not of what nature it is: so says Aristotle Top. lib. 6. cap.
6. Every difference (says he) declares after what manner a thing is. We shall
see the truth hereof in the particulars following; and thus much shall suffice,
touching dissenting arguments in general.

Ramus.
Dissenting arguments are diverse. opposits.


This precept divides dissenting arguments, Ramus did not invent it;
Porphyrie, cap. 3. has it plainly: Difference (says he) is by accident, or
by it self: and Aristotle has the same thing plain enough, Top. lib. 6. cap.
6. Considerare, etc. But more plainly, Top. lib. 1. cap. 16. where he makes
the distancy of arguments to be some great, some small. We shall show the
sense hereof, when we come to the particulars.

Arguments that be diverse, Ramus.
are such as disagree in some respect only. We have this precept (also) in
Arist^^l^; difference by accident (says Porphyrie) cap. 3. Is that which is
not essential, nor makes the things that differ, to be another: but diverse.
And Aristotle implies the same in both the places last alleged. In Top. 6.
cap. 6. (he says) a difference by accident is in, and is not in, the thing
from which it differs: therefore (according to him) their difference stands
in some respect only. In Top. lib. 1. cap. 16. he shows that difference
which he says is small, in the example of sense and science. Now all men know
that the difference between these two, is respective only, not simply, and
really.

Aristotle gives instance of these arguments in Justice and Fortitude, Top.
lib. 1. cap. 16. Now, these do differ, because we conceive this man that has
the one, differs from him that has not that, but another: they differ from the
subject which they argue, but in some respect only, namely, through the
present condition thereof, because the subject inioyeth one of them: but not
the rest.

I make it manifest by this sentence: Socrates is temperate, but not just, nor
prudent.

Here, Justice and prudence dissent from Socrates, only, in respect of his
present condition, and because he has them not: this disagreement that is
between the subject, and the predicate, viz. Man, and prudence, makes a
diversity between them, and no more. For, a just man may also be prudent, and
a prudent man is not another man, from him that is Just.

We have examples of these arguments very often, we say in our English
Proverb, This man is at ods with his wits; and we mean by it, his wit, and he
differs, only, because he wants it.

In the same sort it is said, Ulysses was fair, but not eloquent.

Where, cloquence differs from Ulysses, only, in respect, that he had it not:
for, otherwise it agreed with him no less then beauty; he might have been
the one, as well as the other, notwithstanding the nature of himself, and that
quality.

The use of this kind of argument is very behoofefull: for, hereby a man is
showed his error, that thinks he has much, when indeed he has but little:
Thus the holy Ghost argues against the Church of Pergamus, Revel. 2.12.13.14.
and 15.

Although thou hold fast my Name in the time of persecution, yet thou have
many faults; for thou entertainest the doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans.
So he argues the Church of Thyatira, in the 19.20. and 21. Verses. And thus
much shall suffice touching arguments that differ from the subject, of which
they are predicated, after the manner of diversity, and in some respect only.

CHAP. XIII. Of Opposites.
Opposites are dissenting arguments, Ramus.
which wholly disagree. Aristotle, Top. lib. 1. Cap. 16. The difference (says
he) which is in those arguments that be far distant, or different is very
conspicuous. This of Aristotle, and that of Ramus are the same: for, by far
distant, Aristotle can mean no other but opposition, and by conspicuitie in
difference, he can understand no less, then an opposition that is made wholly,
and every way: for that opposition is indeed conspicuous: we may find it with
little labor, and judge of it with great certainty.

[Opposites] This word signifies such things, as are set against each other.

[Wholy disagree] That is, both respectively, because the subject does want the
thing that dissenteth: and really, because the subject cannot receive the thing
that dissenteth: When the subject, and the thing dissenting, does abhor each
other, and are (as we say) incompatible, then there is a total opposition
between them: we have examples hereof in such sayings as these be: He that is
rich, is not poor.
He that is in health, is not sick.


I say the nature of opposites is found in these, not in those wherein man
barely, and simply is subjected: for dissent is in the quality not the
quidditie, or being of the subject: as has been showed. 2. Poverty and
sickness agrees to man barely, denied. Thus much of opposites in general; in
the next place, I must set down the special kinds of them.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the distribution of Opposities.
Opposites are Ramus.
Disparats, Contraries, Affirmatine, Relatiues. Adversatiues.
Negatiues, Contradictories. Priuatiues.




ARistotle does divide Opposites, Categor. cap. 10. Just in the same manner
that Ramus does; in these words;

Opposites are Relatiues. Contraries, Without mean. with mean without name.
with name.

Priuatiues. Contradictories.


Thomas does divide opposites, De veritate, q. 28. art. 6. in cor. agreeable
unto them both: in these words, Opposits import a positive nature in both. in
one, only, as Contradictories. Privatiues.



That they all agree in the nature of the thing, the explication of the
particulars will show: their difference in manner of speaking, does help
(well) unto the understanding of the whole.

[Opposites are] In this division, cap. 12. I answer, opposition is so placed
indeed: yet this division disagrees not from that definition: for, they may be
understood two ways, and agreeable to that definition in both. If they speak
of the predicates, in case where the one is affirmed, and the other denied of
the same subject, in the same respect, part, and time, then they agree wholly
with that definition; for, then that predicate which is denied, does oppose the
thing argued: and I think that these authors meant thus: for, they know that
the predicates themselves contain neither truth, nor falsehood, and therefore
no opposition. If they speak of the predicates themselves, not attributed to
some subject, then they give them the foundation of opposition, and not
formal, and actual opposition: and therefore, they agree fully with that
definition, and truth: with that definition: for, it does suppose, that the
foundation of formal, and actual opposition is in the predicates themselves:
and they agree with truth: for, it is most certain, that the predicates
themselves are the foundation of formal, and actual opposition: by reason
they are of that nature, that if one be attributed, the rest cannot, as is
truly delivered by Ramus in this point of opposites: And Altaco. in 1. sent.
q. 2. lit. H. even as the door when it is shut, debarres all entrance: and an
armor of proof repells the bullet. Now, I have cleared this doubt, I proceed
to set out the nature of the particulars.

CHAP. XV. Of Disparats.
[Disparats] This word imports inequality, and therefore it may seem unfit
for this place: yet it is duly placed, for thereby we understand an
inequality, not in the quantity, or force of opposition, as if these
opposites did oppose, some more, and some less: but of number, and therefore,
those opposites which bear this title, are thus defined.

Disparates are opposites, Ramus.
one of which is alike opposed, to many.

Aristotle calls these opposites by the name of Contraries, They may be, and not
be, in the subject. 2. A third thing comes in the mean, or middle between
them. 3. This third, either partakes of both the opposites, or is of it self,
and partakes of neither. Now it is plain both Aristotle, and Ramus do speak
of one kind of opposites: for, both of them do instance the opposites they
speak of in one and the same example: viz, black and white. If we apply that
instance unto them both, we shall see that they disagree not 1. These colors
are opposite 2. They may be, and not be, in the same subject. 3. They have a
third thing that comes between them: as green, red, and all other colors. 4.
These middle colors do partake of black, and white. 5. each one of them is
alike, or equally opposed to the rest: a man may truly say, he that is black,
is not red, nor green etc: and so of the rest. 6. many do oppose one: for, he
that is any one of them is denied to be all the rest.

Aristotle does also instance these opposites in good, and bad: and thereby
their nature is fitly resembled: for, experience tells us, that between good,
and bad actions there be some, which be both good, and bad: and therefore, they
partake of both the opposites. There is also, a cessation or omision of action,
and that comes between them both, and partakes of neither. Thomas gives these
opposites a seventh property, viz: They import a positive nature, sometimes in
both, and sometimes but in one, and does instance the first in black, and
white; and we might instance the second, in good, and evil.

Thus we see these authors conspire in one, every one of them brings a part,
and all of them together do make a full, and complete exposition of the thing
in hand.

The use of this argument is very needful, and comes often, Laodicea, Revel.
3.17. with this argument, thou art (says he) wretched, miserable, poor,
blind, and naked: therefore, thou art not rich, nor increased with goods, nor
need nothing, as thou vainly braggest. Where, all the things denied, are
opposed unto the wretched Laodiceans, in the next place we come to Relatiues.

CHAP. XVI. Of Relatives.
Relatives are affirming Contraries, Ramus.
the one whereof consists by the mutual relation to the other. We find this
precept delivered by Aristotle in the 10. Chap. of his Categories: Those
arguments (says he) which are opposed as Relatiues, the one opposite is
referred to the other mutually: and Thomas delivers the same thing, when (says
he 1 p. q. 28. art. 2. in cor.) Things are spoken relatiuely, then a certain
relation, or reference of one opposite, to another is signified.

[Relatiues] This word imports things that are referred the one to the other.
Relatiues (says Thomas 1. p. q. 28. art. 1. in cor.) do signify according to
their proper nature, only, a respect of one thing to another.

[Affirming] This word is brought to set out unto us, that both terms opposed,
do comprehend positive beings: Aristotle agrees with Ramus in it, in the place
alleged, when he says, That, Relatiues (even) in the thing that they are, be
referred: so also, he gives instance of relative opposition in knowledge, and
the thing to be known: and both of them do signify positive beings. And
Thomas does teach the same thing, as I have showed in the 14. Chapter.

The only doubt is, Thomas does resolve this doubt, 1. p. q. 28. on this manner:

In Relatiues there is their Foundation. Relation.


Relatiues are founded upon either quantity, or action, and passion: art. 1 in
cor. In this sense, Relation does import an accidental being in the subject
art. 2. in cor: or things assisting outwardly affixed art. 2. in cor. The
proper nature of relation, consists in a respect of one thing to another,
art. 1. ad 1m. which respect does after a sort befall the thing related, in
that it tends from it self into another art. 2. in cor.

[Contraries] That is, Aristotle teaches the same thing, when he puts
knowledge, and the thing to be known, as an instance of Relative opposition.

[The one etc.] Aristotle teaches the same, when he affirms, that the terms
opposed be mutually referred each to other: and denies, that mutual reference
to all other kind of opposites. Thomas also has the same thing: Relatiues
(says he 1. p. q. 42. ar. 3. ad 2m.) are together in nature, and our
understanding; in as much as, the one is comprehended in the definition of the
other, wherefore Ramus concludes truly in these words.

Because of this mutuull relation, Ramus.
Relatiues are said to be together in nature, so that, he which perfectly
knows the one, knows the other also. To conclude this point of Relative
opposition, it may be demanded, Aristotle makes Relatiues to be consenting
arguments, as I have showed Chap. 3. foregoing. Thirdly, The things
comprehended in the terms related, or referred, be such, that, they agree not
unto the same subject, in the same respect, part, and time: and thus all
relatiues be opposites. Fourthly, The opposition that is between the terms
related, is made relatiuely, that is, each term opposed has a respect, and
relation, the one to the other: so as, we conceive the one is against the
other, and the one does constitute the other; neither of them can be in
themselves, nor known to us, but by the one, and the other: yet when they are,
they oppose one another; And thus, all relatiues be opposites. This I gather
from Tho. 1. p. q. 28. Relatiues (says he) signify a certain Relation of one
term unto its opposite, art. 2. in cor. The nature of relation is a respect of
one to another, according to which, one thing is opposed unto another
relatiuely, art. 3. in cor. Thus (I hope) this doubt is fully cleared.

fully laid open in this sentence.

He that is Father to Socrates, is not son to Socrates in the same respect,
and time. Here. I Father and Son are terms referred the one to the other, as
things that respect one another. 2. This respect goes out of the one to the
other, the Father is a respect that tends unto the Son, and the Son a
respect that extends to the Father. 3. The terms related do mutually
constitute one another, in their own being, and our knowledge; the Father is,
and is known to be, by the Son, and the Son is, and is known to be, by
the Father. 4. The foundation of this relation is Paternity, and Filialitie:
now, Paternitie being referred unto Filialitie, we find cause, and effect: but
Paternitie being referred unto the Father, is an adjunct: and Filialitie is an
adjunct to the Son. Thus far they both consent with the subject which they
argue. 5. The things comprehended under these two terms cannot agree to the
same subject, in the same respect, and time: so as, now we find them
opposites: no man can be Father, and Son in the same respect, and at the same
time. 6. We find these terms of Father, and Son opposed relatiuely, (that
is) in what sort the one does respect the other, in that sort it is referred,
as unto its opposite: but so as, one term makes the other to be in it self,
and our knowledge. 7. These terms of Father and Son be contraries: for, as
Thomas says, Contrariety is a difference according to the form. 1a. 2ae. q.
35. art. 3. and 4. in cor. And such a difference there is between Father, and
Son, Paternitie is formally one thing, and Filialitie is formally another.
The same things are to be found in many other examples, as in Prince, and
subject: Priest, and people: Master, and servant: Seller, and buyer etc. But
this shall suffice, as sufficient to open the nature of relative opposition. In
the next place we must come to adversatiues.

CHAP. XVII. Of Adversatiues.
Adversatiues are affirming Contraries, Ramus.
which are always directly opposite each to other. ARistotle teaches the same
thing touching the nature of these opposits, Those arguments which be so
contrary, that one of them must of necessity be in the subject that can
receive them, they neither are referred the one to the other, nor have any
third to come between them.

[Contraries] Adversatiues be contraries, Aristotle, when he says, One of
these opposites is in the subject that is fit to receive the same, and does
instance them in health, and sickness.

[Alwayes] This word and therest which follow, Aristotle says) no subject that
is capable hereof can possibly be without one of them: now, in this they differ
from Disparates, and relatiues: for, every subject that can be black, and
white, may at some time be neither of them; so also, a man may be neither
Father, nor Son. No Father, when he has no child, and no child when he
has no Father.

[Directly] This word imports an opposition that is without mixture,
Aristotle, when he said, These opposites be without relation, or a third thing
to come between them. Herein these opposites differ from Disparats, and
relatiues, the one receives the interposing of a third: and the other admits a
mixture of consenting, and thereby a diversion from opposing: by that relation,
and respect that the one has to the other. We have all these particulars laid
open to us, in that one instance which we find in Aristotle: namely, He that
is in health, is not sick.

In this example we find, 1. one side set against another. 2. one positive
being is set against another; for, so we conceive of sickness. 3. One of these
is true of a man always: he cannot be but sick, or well; because, the temper
of his body requires it, and therefore this opposition is in man always,
because when he is sick, he is not well: and when he is well, he is not sick.
4. There is no third thing to come between sickness, and health. 5. Sickness is
never mixed with health, nor health with sickness. 6. This opposition is direct:
he that falls from health becomes presently sick: when sickness is expelled,
then health is presently recovered: the one devours the other, and
contrariwise, the one overcomes the other: like unto two armies in the field,
the last motion in fighting on the one side, is the first motion in pursuit on
the other side: this may suffice for all those opposites which do contain
positive being in both terms.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Privatiues.
IN this Chapter and that which follows, we must handle negative contraries.

Privatiues are negative Contraries, Ramus.
the one whereof denies in that subject (only) wherein the affirmative is by
nature.

That which is affirmed is called the habit: that which is denied the
privation, or privatiue.

ARistotle teaches the same things in the tenth Chapter of his Categories,
(says he) is said concerning one, and the same thing: namely, that wherein
nature requires that the habit should be. In this we conceive the habit, and
the privation; To have the habit, and to be deprived thereof, and these two are
not the same: for, both of them cannot be attributed to the same thing. To be
deprived, and to have the habit are opposed as privation, and habit: for, after
what sort there is opposition between the privation, and habit, in the same
sort to have the habit, and to be deprived of the habit are opposed.

[Privatiues] This is the name of these opposites: Aristotle (as we see) calls
this opposition a privation, and habit; and Thomas, an opposition according to
privation, and habit: de veritate q. 28. art. 6. in cor.

[Negatiue contraries] These opposites be unfitly called negative, Thomas (in
the place alleged) does express the same thing more fitly: Some opposites
(says he) are such as one only imports a cetaine nature, and the rest no more
but the removing, or negation of that nature affirmed. Contraries they may be
called: because one is opposed to one, but not properly, for the negation of a
form has no form.

[The one whereof, These words and the rest do set out the nature of these
opposites, and places the same in these properties: 1. The one denies, the
other affirms, (that is) the one has a positive being, called a habit, the
other the absence of that habit, called a privation, or privative. 2. This
habit, and privation is opposed, not the one against the other, abstracted from
their subject: but as the one is received by the subject, so the other is
subtracted therfrom. 3. This subject whereabouts they are exercised, is one
and the same: even that subject, and no other is deprived that has received
the habit. 4. That subject whereabout these opposites are exercised, is not
every one universally; but only that wherein the habit ought to be according
to the course of nature.

The reason why these opposites must be exercised about such a subject is;

All these particulars are declared in that one instance which Aristotle gives,
viz.

He that sees, is not blind, or deprived of sight. In this sentence we find,
1. Two terms, viz. sight, and blindness. 2. The one imports a positive being,
the other the absence of that being. 3. The one is affirmed, the other denied,
therefore one is opposed to one. 4. The things themselves abstracted from the
subject are not opposed, but their oppositio^ is exercised about one subject.
5. One of the terms is due unto the subject wherein they oppose, viz. sight is
due to man's nature: for God made him a seeing creature. 6. The foundation of
that opposition is in sight, and blindness, in themselves abstracted from
their subject: we deny blindness unto the same man that has sight: because man's
body is not capable of them both together, in the same respect, part, and
time. And here I put an end, to the opposition of habit and privation.

CHAP. XIX. Of Contradictories.
Contradictories, Ramus.
are negative Contraries, the one whereof denies every where, or generally. A
Contradiction (says Aliaco 1. sent. 5. lit. M.) is the most manifest
repugnancy that is, the affirmation of one, and negation of the same: and this
is double, the one is of propositions, the other of terms: when as a fixite
term is opposed unto an infinite term. This place speaks of the last not of
the first. Some opposites (says Thomas) deverit. q. 28. art. 6. in cor. do
affirm a certain nature in one part, the other is a negation of the same, and
these are opposites according to affirmation, and negation.

Aristotle does teach the same things most fully: A Contradiction (says he) is
an opposition which by it self wants a mean, or middle between them:
Poster. lib. 1. cap. 2. Principium antem etc. And he does explicate this thing
further; Categor. cap. 10. Id quoque. That opposition (says he) that falls
under affirmation, and negation, is not affirmation, and negation belonging to
this place: but the things which fall under affirmation, and negation, and
these do oppose the one the other, as affirmation, and negation; for, there is
the same manner of opposition in these, as in them, even as affirmation, and
negation are opposed, when we say, he sits, he sits not. So also the
things subjected in both those sentences are opposed, namely, to sit, not to
sit.

[Contradictories] This word is the name of this kind of opposition, they are
the foundation of the affirmation, and negation in sentences.

[Negatiue Contraries] One part of the Contradiction is negative:

[The one denies every where.] Socrates be, or be not, one of them is always
true, and the other false: wherefore it is proper to the opposition of this
ksnde, that one of them is true, or false: as Aristotle has truly observed in
the tenth chapter of his Categories. And the reason of it is good, all things
that have any being, must either continue, or discontinue in that being: from
whence it is, that, Aristotle says, that this opposition is made by it self,
and wants the intermission of a third: for no power can put a third thing
between being, and not being, nor cause that thing not to be which is in the
same respect and time, when and as it is, nor make that to be which is not in
that respect, and during that time wherein it is not.

Aristotle and Aliaco guievs two examples in the places alleged, that do
fully represent the nature of these opposites.

He that sits, does not, not sit.
He that is a man, is not, a not man.
We have in these two sentences, two terms, viz. To sit, not to sit. A man, a
not man. The first of these terms comprehends a positive, and finite nature: in
the second, a negation, or absence of that positive nature, (by a term
infinite, and unlimited) is implied. The first is affirmed of a man, the
second is denied of the same man. 3. This denial extends to all times, and
respects, wherein that affirmation may be conceived. 4. This denial is not
voluntary, nor imposed: but, arises simply, and absolutely from the nature of
the things themselves: no power can make him that is a man, not to be a man,
during the time while he is a man. Neither can any power make that a man which
is not a man, during the time wherein he is not a man. 5. It is always true,
or false of this, or that singular man, that either he is, or that he is not,
there can be no third moment assigned, wherein he neither is, nor is not. So as
with this I may put an end to Contradictory opposition, and the explication of
all positive arguments, both Consenting, and Dissenting.

CHAP. XX. Of Comparison in general.
NOw we must come to comparatiue Arguments.

Comparatiue arguments, Ramus.
are those arguments that are compared together. Aristotle delivers the doctrine
of these arguments,

[Comparatiue] These Arguments are opposed unto positive, and therefore, they
have a sense opposite to them.

[Compared together] These words do set out the special nature of these
arguments: they are called Comparatiue, because they are compared with other
things; and this nature consists in two things: First, they are compared.
Secondly, they are arguments, by means of that comparing. Things are compared
together when the one is measured, waighed, or deciphered by the other; Thus
timber is compared with the rule; wares are compared with the waights, and the
picture with the thing pictured: and thus we understand the word Compared in
this place. A single term becomes a compared argument, when it has such a
force to argue, or set out the subject, as is received from another thing, that
it is compared withal: and herein, these arguments have an opposite nature
unto positive: for, they borrow no force to argue from the quality, or
quantity of any other arguments.

These arguments have these four properties. 1. They are equally knowne] (that
is) the two things compared, have in themselves no prioritie, or antecedency,
to argue, and be argued: as we find in the effect, and causes thereof: In the
subject, and the properties, and accidents annexed thereunto. 2. [Some men do
know the one better then the other.] That is, in the event, by reason they are
acquainted with the one, and not with the other. 3. [They are taken sometimes,
from things feigned.] And so, they may well be; for, such things have a being
in our understanding, and that is enough to make them rational beings; as we
learn from Thomas, 1 part. q. 16. art. 3. ad 2m. That is enough also, to give
them a place in Logic: for every being, as well rational, as real is
objected thereunto. 4. [Comparisons taken from fained things do argue, and set
out the subject.] Because, the force that all comparisons have to argue,
arises from the apprehension of our understanding; and not from any real
relation, or consent that the one has to the other.

Now, sometimes they are set out by certain words, which are proper to them:
and sometimes they lie open in sentences that are fit to express them: In this
case the first sentence is called the proposition: the second the reddition:
therefore, when he finds them, he needs no other direction; Sometimes also,
they are set down without notes, or marks; and the parts are inverted, or
contracted: then the matter it self must direct him. These are all, that
belong to comparisons in common.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Distribution of comparison.
Comparison is in Quantity, Equal. Unequal, the Greater Lesser. Ramus.


Quality, Like. Unlike.

ARistotle has every branch of this division; Categortes in the sixth Chapter,
he places Comparison, In quantity, as proper thereto: and divides it into
equal, and unequal. In the 8. Chapter, he places Comparison in quality, and
does divide it irto like, and unlike, and makes this kind of Comparison, to be
found only in quality. Lastly, cap. 6. At horum etc. and cap. 7. Omnta vero,
he divides unequal into greater and less: and the things themselves, that
these two Authors bring, are received in the Schools of all ages; therefore, I
will proceed to the particulars.

CHAP. XXII. Of Equality.
Quantity is that by which things compared are said to be so great, Ramus.
or so little. ARistotle does teach the same thing: Top. lib. 1. cap. 9. Ex his,
etc. Quantity, says he, imports magnitude.

[Quantitie] In the first place, we ought to understand what quantity is, else
we shall not understand, what is meant by a Comparison in quantity.

[That which etc] These words set out the nature of quantity, and place it in
a magnitude; for, according to magnitude, things are said to be greater, or
lesser: now, magnitudeis not taken here Geometrically, nor Arithmetically: but,
in a larger sense: even, for every magnitude, by which a thing may be said to
be thus, or so much: whether it be spoken of bodies, number, or virtues: of
things real, or intellectual: for, this Logic requires; because it has to
do with all things, wherein our understanding has any thing to do.

Those things are equal, Ramus.
that have the same quantity. One in quantity makes equal; Okam 1. did. 19.
q 1. lit. B. opinio. 1a. I do not find this sentence in Aristotle expressly:
yet he implies thus much, as we shall see when we come to the Comparison of
likeness, chap. 25. And no man thinks otherways, therefore we must esteem
this sentence to be a precept of Art.

[Those things are equali] That is,

[Which have the same quantity.] That is, which are adaequate in magnitude: as
when two lines be of the same length, the one is neither longer nor shorter
then the other: when neither end of the scale waighes down the other: when two
numbers agree together, as, two and two; four and four; for, thus every
magnitude is one in quantity. Now, we have the nature of Equals defined, and
set out unto us, we must know how to find and use them.

The marks, Ramus.
and signs of equality are these 5 viz. One Equal, As much, As and So,
denial of inequallitie. As and So, many times they are found in comparison of
likeness. I do not find that Aristotle, or other Schools, do thus punctually
show us how to find out these comparisons, only, I find that Thomas says 1.
p. q. 42. art. 1. in cor. Then a thing is said to be equal, when it is denied,
to be unequal, that is more or less: and I find the same thing in Aristotle
Meta. lib. 10. text 15.16. from whence we may infer their agreement with
Okam, that places the equallitie of things, in being one in quantity.

We have examples wherein comparisons of equallitie are set out by these marks,
or signs, namely;

1. Both the Cherubes were of one measure: 1 Kings. 6.25.

2. Thou have made them equal to us: Mat. 20.12.

3. Sinners lend to sinners, to receive as much again; Luke 6.34.

4. The length of the City is as large as the breadth: Revel. 21.16.

5. I cannot do less, or more then Gods word commands: Numb. 21.18.

6. Ye are not inferior to other Churches: 2. Cor. 12.13.

Sometime the Proposition and Reddition are distinctly set down.

7. As his part is, that goes to the batile, so shall his part be, that
tarrieth by the ^uffe: 1. Sam. 30.34.

8. How much she has glorified her self, and lived delictously, so much
torment, and sorrow give her: Revel. 18.7.

In these examples, we find two Cherubes to be one in dimension. Two
Laborers, one in wages. A lender, and a borrower one in quantity of money.
The length and breadth of the City one in measure. The Corinths and other
Churches one in grace, etc. They that went to war, and they that guarded the
stuff, one in the quantity of prey. The Whore of Babylons delights, and
sorrows one in extent. By this we see how to find out such comparisons, as
are marked out unto us.

I will also set down some comparisons that want those signs, viz.

What force virtue has to happiness, that force vice has to cursednes.

The Jews answered, we can not tell, Christ answered neither tell I you. Mat.
21.23.

In the first, Vice and virtue, are one in efficacy. In the second, Christ and
the Jews, are one in silence. By this we may know how to find out these
comparisons.

Now I will show how we should use them, for,

The Whore of Babylon has sorrows.

In this sentence, the word sorrow does lead us to understand what the Whore
of Babylon is: viz: in her estate or condition. Now, because some man does not
know the quantity of this sorrow: but does know the quantity of her delight:
therefore, her sorrow is laid to her delight, and thereby he comes to know
what is the quantity of her sorrow, in as much, as, she is one in the
quantity of both. By this I hope the Reader will find the way how to make use
of all comparatiue arguments, so as, I shall not need to do the like in any
of the rest which follow.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Vnequales.
Unequal things are those which have not the same quantity. Ramus.
TO the same effect speaks Thomas 1. p. q. 42. art. 1. in cor. (says he)
cannot be one in numericall quantity: and thus much Aristotle and Okam speak:
because, they make those things equal, which be one in quantity.

This definition has nothing in it to be expounded: for, Cap. 22.

The greater is that, Ramus.
the quantity whereof does exceed.

The terms of this definition, may be understood by that which is past, in the
last Chapter.

The proper marks of this Comparison, are such as these:

Not only, but also. Rather this, then that: More then: Much more.

Examples of these Comparisons, are these which follow.

I am ready, not to be bound only: but also, to dye for the name of the Lord
Jesus. Act 21.13.

I had rather be a dore-keeper in Gods house, then dwell in the tents of
wickedness. Psalm. 84.10.

The Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob. Psalm.
82.2.

If, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
son: much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Romans 5.6.7.

In these examples, we have these Comparisons. To be bound, and to dye, do
differ in the quantity of bitterness, and this is esteemed to exceed that. To
keep a door, and to dwell in the tents etc. are laid together, and this
preferred before that, in man's judgment, as exceeding in the quantity of
excellency. The gates of Sion, are compared with the other dwellings of
Israel, in the quantity of glory, and louelines, and these preferred before
that. The reconciling of an enemy, and the saving of a friend, are compared in
the quantity of difficulty, and that is judged to excel this.

In these Comparisons,

If Christ's death reconciled an enemy, then his life will save the reconciled.
The reason of this consequence is this, viz. (In the judgment of man) the
first is more difficult then the second. It is a hard thing to reconcile an
enemy; for, then the whole work is to do: But not so hard to save a friend;
for, such a one is next door to salvation. In the same sort, David argues: If I
love to dwell in Gods house, rather then in man's tents; then my affection is
exceeding fervent thereto: for, man's tents (in the judgment of man) exceed
Gods house for outward pleasure, and profit: and after this sort we may argue
from the rest.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Less.
The less, Ramus.
is that, the quantity whereof is exceeded. I Shall not need to explicate, and
avow this definition: for, that is done enough already, in the two former
Chapters: therefore, I proceed to set down examples of it.

A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a fools wrath more heavy then
them both. Pro. 27.3. I labored more abundantly then they all. 1 Cor. 15.10.
It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God. Luke 18.25. The Ox knows his owner,
and the Ass his Masters crib: But I sraell does not know, etc. Isa. 1.3. In
these Instances, the Comparison we seek for, is very apparent: A stone and a
fools wrath is Compared, in the quantity of weight: and that is said to be
less then this. Paul and others are laid together in the quantity of labor,
and he exceeds them. The passing of a Camel through a needles eye, and a rich
man's going to heaven, are compared together in the quantity of difficulty:
and that is inferior to this. The Ox, and Israel are set together, in the
quantity of ignorance: and these are more blamed then they.

These Comparisons do argue the greater, by the less, and they must be framed
thus: A fools wrath abounds in weight: for, the stones and sand are not so
heavy as it. If Israel be ignorant of me, then their ignorance is excessive:
for, the Ox in his kind is not so ignorant: because, he knows who owes him,
and feeds him, so do not they. And thus much for Comparison in quantity.

CHAP. XXV. Of Likeness.
Now follows Comparison in quality, Ramus.
whereby things are said to be such or such. I Call a quality (says Aristotle,
8.) that, of which, things are said to be of this or that manner: and a
quality must be reckoned amongst them which are said to be manifold, or of
many sorts.

Ramus.
Those things are like which have the same quality. Those are like (says
Aristotle, 5. cap. 15. text. 20.) whose quality is one. One in quality makes
things to be like, so says Okam. 1. did. 19. q. 1. lit. B. opinio 1. I will
end with Gillius, A likeness (says he) is an agreement in quality. lib. 2.
tract. 5. cap. 1. no. 1.

From hence we may conclude, that (in the judgment of Aristotle) those things
be equal, which are one in quantity: because, he makes them to be like, which
be one in quality: and consequently, he places comparison in quality in the
same thing that Okam does, whose judgment is alleged. Chap. 22.

Aristotle does explicate the nature of these Comparisons: Top. lib. 1. cap.
17. Similitudes (says he) must be considered either in things which are of
diverse kinds; Or in those which are of the same kind. The first is after this
manner: as one thing is to one, so another is to another: as for example, as
knowledge is to the thing known, so sense is to the thing sersible. Again, as
one is in one, so another is in another: as for example, as sight is in the
eye, so the mind is in the soul: as, calmnes is in the Sea, so cleernes is in
the air: and both of them are quietness. We have examples of the second
kind, when the same quality is in many: as smelling, seeing, etc. in a man, a
horse, a dog: for, how far forth the same thing is in them, so far forth
they are alike.

I will content my self with the bare allegation of Aristotle's words: Ramus,
nor seek for their sense: because, all that Ramus brings in this Comparison,
is but an explication, and Comment of the words alleged: what Aristotle
delivers in brief, Ramus opens at large; therefore, I will set down what he
says.

The marks of likeness be these, Ramus.
viz. As, like, After the manner. I will show examples of this Comparison,

Let them that love him, be as the Sun, Judge. 5.21. They saw his face as it
had been the face of an Angel. Act. 6.15. The form of the fourth is like the
son of God. Dan. 3.25. Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses:
Act. 15.1. Ramus.
Sometime the mark is left out. As in this example,

My sister is a garden enclosed, my spouse a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed, Cant. 4.12. Of this kind are all metaphors, or borrowed words, they (I
say) contain similitudes, as when Christ is called a rock, a shepherd, a
vine; and God the Father an husbandman. For in them, Christ, and God the
Father, are likened unto those things which be usually signified in those words.

The parts of a similitude are sometime laid out at large: either severed,
Ramus.
or joined; as when there are four terms distinctly set down. Four terms

As the wax melts at the fire, so let the ungodly perish, at the presence of
God. Psalm. 68.2. The terms in the Proposition are Wax, Fire: in the Reddition
ungodly, Gods presence.

As the Heart brayeth after the Rivers of Water, so pants my soul after thee,
O God, Psalm. 42.1. The terms in this full Comparison, are these four: The
Heart, River, Soul, God.

Sometime one of the marks is left out and the parts displaced. Ramus.
And this we find in this example: Husbands love your wives, even as Christ
loved the Church. Ephesians. 5.29.

The terms in this Comparison are, Christ, Church; Husbands, Wives. The
Reddition is set first, the Proposition last. If we place it orderly, this is
the frame of it: As Christ loved the Church, so must men love their wives.

Sometime both marks are left out. Ramus.
And this instance shows it.

Silver, dross, over-layd upon a potsheard: burning lips, and an evil heart.
Pro. 26.23. The Comparison lies thus; ked heart: fair without, and foul
within. The four terms are distinct: Dross, Silver; burning lips, a wicked
heart.

A Continued similitude, Ramus.
is when the second term, is to the third, as the first is to the second. This
example will make it familiar.

As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. John 15.9. In this
similitude, Father, Christ, Disciples; Christ, the second term, is referred to
the third term, Disciples; so the first term Father, is referred to the
second term Christ.

Here also one mark sometimes is omitted. Ramus.
The words of our Savior will manifest this sentence.

Ought not thou to have had pity on thy fellow servant, as I had pity on
thee. Mat. 18.33. The three terms in this similitude are these, Lord, Servant,
Fellow: it ought to have this form: As the Lord had pity on thee: so thou
should have had pity on thy fellow.

Fained similitudet are of as much force to argue as true. Ramus.
And so much we find in Scripture:

This example will show it.

The wicked are destroyed. In this sentence, destruction is attributed to
wicked men: and thereby we understand what condition befalls them. To make this
knowledge more easy, and sensible, the holy Ghost does compare them to the
meling of Wax, and thereby we find, that, this condition befalls them
secretly, certainly, vnrecoverably: for, such is the quality of melting wax,
that cannot be discerned how it melts, nor prevented from melting, nor
recovered again when it is melted.

Aristotle seems to differ from Ramus, similitudes useful to the framing of
Reasons. Syllogismes. Definitions.


To the first, because by the induction of many particular likenesses, we
conclude the universal. To the second, because we take as confessed as it is
in such and such, so it is in the thing in question. To the third, because in
Similitudes, the terms are Compared together in one thing, that is, common
unto them: such a thing, is a Genus, and a Genus is required to a definition.
Top lib. 1. cap. 18.

I answer, I must not (now) decide this doubt, because the point it self does
not fit this place: for, the first branch speaks of things Compared. The
third, of the quality wherein they are compared; and both of them belong to
the matter of a Comparison, not to the formal nature thereof. The second is a
Comparison of equality (if any at all) no Comparison of likeness: and this I
take as certain, therefore here I will end Comparisons of likeness.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Unlike.
Unlike things, Ramus.
are those, which have a diverse quality. We have little to say touching this
comparison: a comparison of unlikeness. I will therefore add examples of it,
and that shall suffice; and in that also I will content my self with these
which follow.

The fourth beast, was unlike to all the beasts before it: Dan. 7.19.

There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another of the
Stars, for one Star differs from another in glory: 1. Cor. 15.41.

There is none like me in all the earth: Exodus 9.14.

But not as the offense, so is the gift: Romans 5.15.

The Sun does set, and rise, Man dies, and lives no more.

The things compared, and the quality wherein they are unlike: are so easy to
be found in these examples, that, I should seem to lose my labor, if I
should attempt to show them The last is the most difficult, because it wants
the signs of this comparison, yet every man may see, that, the Sun and Man,
are compared together, in the quality of dying: the Sun dies by setting, and
revives by rising, man dies, but revives no more.

The use of these dissimilitudes,

CHAP XXVII. Of the Genus and Species.
IN this place we must set down, Logic; as I have showed in the third
Chapter foregoing.

The arguments of this kind, are called the second substance: consisting in
the Genus and Species: as is also declared in the place alleged. In the
handling hereof, we must first set down their nature. Secondly, how they be
predicated, and how subjected. Thirdly, we must show that they be a second
substance.

The Genus is that whole, Ramus.
that is essential to the parts.

And thus says Aristotle too. The Genus (says Porphyrie, Cap. 2.) Is a
certain whole: yea (as Okam says 1. did. 8. q. 4. lit. D. and E.) The Genus
imports the whole thing: not, because it does partake of all the specificall
differences: for then; one and the same thing should partake of contraries;
which may not be granted, in the judgment of Aristotle. Meta. lib. 2. Cap. 12.
text. 42. But because it is an essence common unto many: as the same Aristotle
teaches; Top. lib. 1. Cap. 18. ad definitiones, Cap. 5. Proprium vero and
Porphyrie, Cap. 2. Quod etiam. And a whole not designed as Thomas thinks: 1.
did. 25. q. 1. art. 1. ad. 2m.

The Species is a part of the Genus. Ramus.
Porphyrie, Aristotle do speak to the same purpose; A Species (says
Porphyrie) is placed under the Genus, as a thing that is essential thereto.
cap. 2. Explicant igatur. And yet more plainly, in the same Chapter. Continetur
igitur. The Species is both a whole, and a part: a part unto another (that is)
unto the Genus, says Aristotle, meta. lib. 5. cap 24. text. 30. A whole not
unto another, but in others: because it is a whole in the parts.

The general is either supreme, Ramus.
or inferior. The special is either middlemost, or lowest.

The supreme Genus, is that which has no Genus above it.

The inferior Genus, is that which is inferior to one, and superior to another.

The lowest species, is that which cannot be divided into other specialls.

We have all this in Porphyrie, and thus he writes in the second Chapter
alleged. In every Category there be some things that be most general, and
others that are most special; and between these, there be some that are both
general, and special. That is most general, unto which there can be no
superior Genus. That is most special, unto which there can be no other Species
inferior. Between the most general, and the most special; There be others,
which the self same thing, is both Genus and Species, being referred some
while to one thing, and otherwhile to another: as for example; a Substance is a
Genus, and under that, there is a body: and under a body, an animated body:
and under an animated body, a living Creature: and under a living Creature, a
rational living Creature: under that a singular man. Of all these, a substance
is most general, because it is a Genus only. A man is the most special,
because it is a Species only: but a body, is a Species of substance, and a
Genus unto an animated body. An animated body, is a Species of a body: Again,
a living Creature, is a Species unto an animated body: and Genus unto a
reasonable living Creature: but a reasonable living Creature, is the Genus of a
man. And so much for the nature of the Genus and Species.

We must now show, Aristotle does that, partly in the fourth book of his
Topickes, the first and second Chapters: and partly, but more fully, in the
fifth Chapter of his Categories, where he proceeds thus: The Genus is
attributed unto all, and every the Species, that are contained under the same.
The Species is subjected to the Genus, the Genus is predicated both of the
Species, and the individual: the Species is predicated of the individual.
Thus far Aristotle. We may make this familiar to our understanding, by these
examples: A man is a living Creature.
Peter is a man.


In the first, living Creature is a Genus, viz. of reasonable, and unreasonable
Creatures. A man, is a species: because it is one kind of living Creature.
Living Creature, is attributed to man: the Genus to the Species. In the second,
Peter is an individual: Man is a species, and thereby we see that the species
is predicated of the individual; and consequently, the Genus is predicated of
the individual also: for, the Genus has no being but in some species, as
Thomas has truly observed. 1. p. q. 15. art. 3. ad 4m. And the things
themselves do say no less. If a man, then a living Creature: seeing every man
is a living Creature. By this (I hope) it is plain, that the species is
subjected, and both species, and Genus are predicated.

Some man may doubt,

A living Creature, is a living body, able to moan it self. A living Creature,
is a Genus of a man: but a species of a living body, and it is subjected in
the fore said proposition. A living body, is a Genus to a living Creature: for,
under that is comprehended, the growing plants, that increase: but cannot move
themselves: as a living Creature that can both wax bigger, and move themselves
also: now, this Genus is predicated of a living Creature: therefore, we may
rest assured, that a Genus is sometimes predicated, and other some time
subjected.

The third thing that we seek for is, Aristotle Categor. cap. 5. proves that
they are: on this manner: They are a substance, because 1. We may truly say
they be something. 2. They appertain to the essence of every particular being.
3. They are subjected unto others, and others are predicated of them which is
proper unto a substa^^e. They are a second substance: because. 1. They are
Communicated to many. 2. They are predicated sometimes, and consequently, they
have not the proper nature of a substance: for, that is always subjected, in
so much, as nothing could exist, but by reason of substance properly so called.

The species comes nearer to a first substance then the Genus: Peter, then a
living Creature. 2. The Genus, is Communicated to more then the species. 3. The
species, as it is a species, is subjected always to the Genus: and it self
never predicated; but of the individual. These things are evident in
themselves: therefore, I need not add any proofs to confirm them, they are
easy, and open to our understanding: therefore, I will not stand to unfold
them. If any require me to show, how the Genus, and species do argue, and set
out the first substance. I answer, that, that request is not in vain: because
(as Aristotle truly says, in the fifth Chapter of his Categories.) All other
things are predicated of the first substance: therefore, if the first substance
were not, none of the rest could be. Yet notwithstanding, this place does not
require me to show it: because the instances given already, have done that in
part, and the precepts of a definition will show it yet more, but they belong
to the second part of Logic, and may not be brought hither, without in^urie
to nature, and our understanding.

I will satisfy the demand so far as this place permits, and this one
sentence will do it.

Peter is a man.

Here, man is a species, Peter, signifies a first substance, because it
imports a thing that cannot be divided, otherwise then into matter, and
form; viz. his soul and body: and they be in Peter, as in a whole, not as in
a subject; as we learn by Aristotle, Categor. cap. 5. Porroue nos etc. Man is
attributed unto this first substance, and thereby every superior Genus is
attributed to it also: for, if a man then 1. a living Creature. 2. A lively
body. 3. A body. 4. A substance, and consequently, when we attribute man unto
Peter, that goes not alone, all the rest go with it

I have now (I hope) satisfied the demand, Logic, in the judgment of
Aristotle, and the nature of the things themselves. Ramus does extend this
first part of Logic further then thus: but undoubtedly, he follows his own
apprehension, against the authority of all Logic Schools before him: and
the nature of the things themselves. In the next Chapter, I will set down,
what he says, and why I dissent from him, and thereby give a full Conclusion
to this part of Logic.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Coniugates, etc.
Arguments that arise of the first, are Coniugates. Notation. Distribution.
Ramus.
Definition.


These arguments have the same force to argue, that the primitiues have, from
which they are derived.

THis precept, Aristotle has, and gives them place in the first part of
Logic. They belong to Logic, and so far this precept is true; but not to
this place, and so fair it is false. I say, not to this place; for, even in
the judgment of Ramus himself, they belong to other seats of arguments,
namely, to them that he calls by the name of privatiue Arguments; for,
(according to him) they have the same force to argue that the primitiues have,
from which they are derived; therefore, they are the same with them, seeing the
nature of every argument arises from its force to argue: but the precepts of
them are already dispatched, and ought not to be repeated again.

If any say, to be in them, then we must have an endless (at least) a fruitles
number: seeing it is in vain to set ten men to do the labor of one.

The foresaid seats of arguments, Aristotle) therefore common use has not
given it them, and consequently, they ought not to have it; because Art is
approved by use: and so much for them all jointly.

Coniugates are names diversely derived from the same beginning. Ramus.
Aristotle does give the name of Coniugates unto some arguments; all those that
are of the same root, Case, Conivgation, or rank: as, Justice, Just, Justly,
Strength, Strong, Strongly, Top. lib. 2. cap. 9. therefore, there is no
difference touching the name. In their nature they are no more, but either
formal qualities, accidents, or properties.

Justice in the abstract, is nothing; if we refer it to man, it is an
accident: because he may have it, and be without it, or a formal quality,
being denominated, and constituted just by it. Justly, imports an action done
according to law; and therefore, what Justice is to man, that Justly is to an
action: Conformity to Law may be, and not be in an action, and being there it
does denominate, and constitute the action just. Aristotle (in the place last
alleged) calls them Coniugates: because when one of them is prooved good, and
landable, all the rest are so too: therefore, he never meant to make them a
seat of argumets distinct from his ten.

Notation is the interpretation of a name. Ramus.
Aristotle does acknowledge, some words do interpret the nature of things, and
denominate the things themselves: for, thus he writes; Those are called
denominates, which have the appellation of a name from some other: but so, as,
they differ in case, as from Grammar, man is called a Grammarian: from strength
he is called Strong. Categor. Cap. 1. These are the same arguments with the
former; for Grammarian, imports the skill of Grammar, and is an accident,
because it may be, and not be in man: It is a formal quality, seeing it does
constitute, and denominate a man a Grammarian: Grammar is an abstract, and
signifies nothing Logically; being no more but a comprehension of precepts. If
we refer it to man, it is the same with Grammarian: namely, the same precepts
literally, and habitually.

Distribution is when the whole is divided into parts. Ramus.


Distribution is called, the dividing of the whole. The gathering of the parts
together, to make up the whole, is called Induction.

When we say, a man has two parts, Aristotle does acknowledge these
distributions. Top. lib. 6. Cap. 1. but in a different sense.

Although it is very probable, that a distribution does formally consist in an
axiom, and therefore it belongs to the second part of Logic: yet I will not
now insist thereupon: because the arguments predicated in a distribution, are
merely the Causes themselves; and we cannot find a compounded effect more
clearly resolved into its Causes, then in a distribution. In the first example
of distribution before going, we find the matter informed, arguing the whole
effect constituted by that matter In the second, we have the specificall form,
informing each several kind, and arguing that whole effect, which
comprehends both kinds. The Reader shall find this answer fully explicated,
and proved, Chap. 38. etc. in the matter of a distribution.

Aristotle does acknowledge a division belongs to Logic: Prior. cap. 31. but
he makes it a Syllogism; because ^omething is always concluded therfrom: though
a weak one; because it pre^umes what it ought to prove. He does acknowledge
induction also. Top. lib. 8. cap. 2. lib. 1. cap. 12. Prior lib. 2. cap. 23.
and by an induction he understands, a collection of all the singulars, to make
the total: therefore he does acknowledge it in the present sense: but
(according to him) it is one species, kind, or form of disputing, little
differing from a Syllogism: for thus he says of it: A Syllogism, is for
Logicians, an Induction for the multitude: Top. lib. 8. cap. 2. Secondly, It is
an instrument more apt to persuade, more open, better known to sense: and is
common amongst the multitude: but a Syllogism has greater force to urge, and
is more effectual against them that are apt to gain say: Top. lib. 1. cap. 12.

Therefore (according to him) division, and induction belong to the second part
of Logic; not to the first: and consequently, a distribution must be referred
thither also: for both division and induction are comprehended, or employed, in
a distribution, according to Ramus.

A definition is, Ramus.
when we declare what a thing is.

Therefore a perfect definition, is nothing else, but a general mark, or
badge of the causes, which make the essence, or nature of the thing.

I have a little to say touching this fourth seat; Aristotle does acknowledge
definitions, and that in the present sense too: but gives them a place in the
second part, as we shall see, cap. 35. etc. The arguments disposed in a
definition, belong to the first part of Logic: because as Thomas says 1.
did. 25. q. 1. art. 1. ad. 2m. a definition, according to the intent thereof.
does l^a^ to the knowledge of the thing definea: and this is the case with all
axioms whatsoever. The predicate in a definition belongs to the seat of
causes, even in the judgment of Ramus himself? for the predicate does set out
what the subject, or thing defined is, and nothing can do that, but the
causes: therefore a definition deserves no other place in Logic, but the seat
of the causes.

Upon these premises, we may well conclude; these four seats of arguments in
question are superfluous; because Art has given them place already in the
precepts fore going, therefore we must not seek it here. The second part of
Logic comes in the next rank:

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. XXIX. Of disposition, or judgment.
Either to we have handled the first part of Logic; called Invention. Ramus.
We come now to the second, termed Judgment: Judgment is a part of Logic,
teaching the manner of disposing arguments, that we may judge well: for every
thing is to be judged according to certain rules of disposition. Hence this
part of Logic, is called, both Judgment, and disposition: the same thing
being signified by both terms.

THE substance of all this matter, Aristotle: I have showed the consent of both
Authors in the place aleadged, and I will now give my opinion of the sense, of
every thing that seems not clear enough.

[Iudgement Disposition] These words are used for the same thing,

[Apart] Logic has parts, even by it self: for the precepts thereof are of
distinct natures, as members in the whole, and therefore we must so conceive of
them. The precepts that are contained under this name, make a second part: for,
the disposing of things does suppose, that, the things themselves have a being
already.

[Disposing] These words, and the rest that follow, do contain the whole
shot, or general sum that arises from all the precepts, belonging to this
part of Logic: and it signifies, a joining together of distinct things in an
orderly frame.

[Arguments] viz. Those single, or incomplexed terms whereof we spoke in the
former part.

[Iudge] Judgment, is an act of the understanding, whereby we determine in our
selves, that this or that is true, or false. This word sets out the end of
those precepts which belong to this part of Logic; namely, the thing they are
fit for; and the profit we receive by them.

[Well] That is, not doubtfully: but even as the things are in themselves: and
this is the perfection of Judgment.

This first and universal precept, may fitly be expressed in these terms.

1. Some precepts of Logic, do teach us to dispose arguments fitly, that
thereby we might judge of truth, and falsehood clearly, and certainly. 2.
These precepts make up a second part of Logic.
Now we understand the gross sum, we shall the better know the particulars.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Division of Disposition.
IN this Chapter we must divide a sunder, what we found together in the
former; and so proceed, till we have veiwed every several precept.

Judgment is Axiomaticall. Ramus.
Dianoeticall.


By this sentence the precepts belonging to this part,

An Enunciatiue speech, is that, Ramus.
that contains truth or falsehood.

We have this precept from Aristotle, 4. He assigns it the first place, and
well worthy; for truth and falsehood is the first object of our judgment, and
belongs to all Axioms whatsoever, and nothing but an Axiom contains truth
and falsehood.

[Speech] This word contains the essence or nature belonging to all Axioms,
and other speeches which are not Axioms. In this place it signifies, the
inward sentence of the mind, and the written sentence, as well as the sentence
pronounced in words.

[Enunciatiue.] This word, imports a species, or one kind of speech: and
restraines that word which is common to many, unto that one kind which belongs
to this place. Enunciating, or Pronouncing implies, that speech is the Herald,
and proclaimer of man's mind, and so it is indeed, by institution, not of it
self. The signification of words, follows the intent of the speaker, and not
otherwise: so says Aristotle in the fourth Chapter alleged.

[Truth and falshood] These words, contain the proper, and formal being of
every Axiom in common. Ramus makes truth and falsehood a property belonging to
every ax^ome: but Aristotle does more, he places the primary nature of an
axiom therein; and so he may well do; for thereby all axioms are made to
differ from all other kinds of speech: If there be any other thing, that gives
being to an axiom, from whence this property does flow: either we are not
able to apprehend it, or want words to express it. I say, truth, or falsehood
does make axioms to differ from all other kinds of speech: for single terms,
as Man, Peter, to run, to sit, etc. and all commanding, and entreating
speeches, contain neither truth, nor falsehood: as Aristotle has well
observed, De interpre. Cap. 2.3.4.

Truth (in the judgment of all Philosophers) signifies, the adequation of the
thing, and our understanding. Wherefore truth, is radically in the thing, and
formally in the understanding, and declaratiuely in a proposition. We must
conceive of falsehood according hereunto.

A proposition is then true, Ramus.
when it pronounces of a thing, as the thing is indeed. Aristoile says thus
too; Speeches are then true, when they pronounce as a thing is in it self: De
interpre. Cap. 9. Quare cum orationes and meta lib. 4. cap. 7. text 27. Cum
enim convenit, etc. Thus Tho. 1. p. q. 21. art. 2. in cor. 1. did. 46. q. 1.
art. 2. ad 1m. And so all Philosophers speak; I will give you the words of
Albertinus (a learned Schooleman) in stead of them all. That proposition (says
he) is true, which is conformable to the thing pronounced of, and false if it
be inconformable. fol. 265. col. 1.

A true axiom is Ramus.
Contingent. Necessary.


Contingent, when it is in such sort true, that it may also at sometime be
false. This is called opinion.

A necessary axiom, Ramus.
is when it is always true, and cannot be false. An axiom necessarily false,
is called impossible.

Aristotle speaks wholly after this sort; Every proposition (says he) does
signify something to be, either necessarily, or contingently. Prior. lib. 1.
Cap. 1. And further, he says Poster. lib. 1. Cap. 33. That is necessary, that
cannot be otherwise. Some things are true, and are, but may be otherwise.
Opinion is concerning that, that is true, or false, but may be otherwise.

For the full explication of this point, we must first understand, that axioms
are necessary, and contingent, by reason that the things whereof they pronounce
are necessary, and contingent. Now, that is said to be necessary, that is so,
and cannot be otherwise. This is simply, and after a sort. Simply, when the
being of a thing is of, and by it self, and the causes thereof, so necessary,
that the thing that is, has its being wholly without relation to any other
thing without it self. A thing is necessary by supposition, and after a sort,
when it is by force of another, the first, is called necessary, simply, and
properly: because it is wholly impossible it should be otherwise then it is,
thus far Aristotle meta. lib. 5. cap. 8. In the first sense, all Axioms that
pronounce of God, are necessary, either in their truth, or falsehood. In the
second sense, some propositions that pronounce of the creature be necessary,
and some contingent in their truth, and falsehood. I will show you how or when.

Created effects, Necessary 1. In their present being. 2. When the next cause
is determined to one Naturally, Efficiently

Contingent, when the next cause 1. Is indeterminate unto doing, 2. Wants power
for doing.



And a proposition, when it pronounces of created effects, is true, or
falseaccording hereunto; as we shall more plainly see when we come to show
the several natures of Axioms:

Every thing (says Aristotle) is necessary when it is, and every thing
necessarily is not, when it is not: but this necessity, to not a necessity
simply. de interpre. cap. 9. Ergo. Quod.

I shall show the truth, and use of these precepts when I come to the special
kind of Axioms in the next Chapter: therefore I forbear it in this place,
least I should hale in something before the time, or repeat what I have said
sufficiently already: therefore here I will end those things which belong to
all Axioms in common.

CHAP. XXXI. Of a simple Axiom.
An Axiom is Simple. Ramus.
Compound.


A simple Axiom is that, the band whereof is a Verb.

ARistotle speaks wholly after this sort: An enuntiatiue speech is either
simple, or compounded of those that be simple. A simple Enunciation, is a voice
that signifies that something is, or is not, according to the diversity of
times: and he calls these Axioms one speech, because one thing only is
predicated of another. de interpre. Cap. 5. and 10.

Now we have the definition of a simple axiom, we must unfold it: It
contains three things. 1. The terms of it. 2. The extention of one term to
another. 3. The framing of those terms together. I call that a term (says
Aristotle) Prior. lib. 1. Cap. 1. into which the proposition is resolved, and
they be three: viz. The predicate, The subject predicated of, and the Verb
that comes between them: now the Verb of it self signifies nothing: but
serves to compound those things that cannot be understood, till they be
compounded: and therefore it is a perpetual sign of things predicated, and
subjected. Thus Aristotle has taught us De interpre. Cap. 3. The Verb (in the
common language of the Schools) is called the band, or couple: and that term
agrees well with this doctrine of Aristotle: for a band does compose diverse
things together. Ramus does call the subject, and the predicate, by the name of
antecedent, and consequent: but very unduly: for, the predicate does not
follow upon the subject; neither in the thing, nor in our apprehension. Those
terms belong to some compound axioms, as I shall show in due place.

For further illustration, it is needful for us to know: that, Predication is
Natural, Identicall. Direct.
Notnaturall Contrary to nature. Besides nature.



Identicall predication, is that which nature says must be: Direct is that
which according to rature may be Contrary to nature, is when the subject, and
predicate are incompatible: when they abhor one another (as we say.) Besides
nature, when the predicate is indecent for the subject: or the subject indecent
for the predicate. Thus the Jesuits have taught us in their Preface to
Porphyrie. q. 1. art. 4. and that to very good purpose. Now predication, is
taken in this place for natural predication, not for that which is against
nature: for predication against nature is a defection, no perfection in art:
and consequently, when we meet with it in any discourse, we must reject it, or
reform it by art.

By verb, as Aristotle has duly remembered: Interpre. Cap. 3. and 5.



Man is reasonable.
This sentence is an Axiom: be cause it contains truth or falsehood. 2. It is
a simple Axiom: because one thing barely, and vncompoundedly, is referred to
another. 3. It has three terms, viz. 1. Man. 2. Reasonable. 3. Is.
Rationalitte is the predicate: because it is referred unto man. Man is the
subject, because it receives rationalitie. Is serves as a band to tie them
both together: from whence they receive signification, and truth, or falsehood.
4. This predication is natural: because it agrees to both these terms to be
thus joined together. 5. It is Identicall: because rationalitie belongs to man's
essence.

When we say Socrates is prudent, we have the like proposition, and a direct
predication: be cause prudence sets out Socrates direstly, even as a straight
line that is extended between two points. And so much for the first thing
contained in the definition of a simple Axiom.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the several kinds of simple Axioms.
A simple Axiom is General. Ramus.
Special.


General, when the common co^sequent is generally attributed to the common
antecedent.

A special Axiom is Particular. Proper.


A proper Axiom, is when the consequent is at tributed to a proper antecedent.

Particular, when the common consequent is particularly attributed to the
antecedent.

Aristotle: for he teaches us on this manner. A proposition is either
universal, or particular, and in part. Prior. lib. 1. Cap. 1.2. interpre. Cap.
7. Top. lib. 2. Cap. 1. lib. 3. cap. 6. An universal is that, where the
predicate is referred unto all the subject. A particular, is that wherein the
predicate is referred unto some part, not unto all that is contained in the
subsect. Thus says he Prior. lib. 1. Cap. 1. but more plainly at the end of
that Chapter. Then (says he) the Predicate is referred unto all, or the whole
subject, when as there is nothing in the subject, unto which the predicate is
not referred. The same thing is taught by Atiaro. 1. sent. q. 5. lit. B. We
do then affir me vmversally, when there is nothing contained under the
subject, of which the predicate is not affirmed. That is an universal
negation, when as there is nothing comprehended under the subject, from whence
the predicate is not removed.

[Common] This word does suppose, that, predicated and subjected arguments
import things vniver sall, and singular, and in that it does well. Aristotle
has the same thing, and that very plainly opened, de interpre. Cap. 7. These
are his words, Some things are universal, other some singular. I call that
universal which of the nature thereof is apt to be attributed to many: that is
singular which is not so.

[Generally] A thing is predicated generally, when the total being thereof is
referred unto all, or the whole subject; Thus no common predicate can truly be
attributed unto the subject. We cannot truly say all men is all living
Creatures, as Aristotle has well observed. De interpre. Cap. 7. A common thing
is predicated of the subject generally, when it is referred to all, or the
whole subject, so far as the subject can receive it, and thus a common thing
may truly be predicated of the subject. Now in this case the axiom is
general, when the subject imports a thing common. It is singular, when the
subject imports a thing singular, or particular; therefore in this sense, the
definitions of a general, and special Axiom are certainly true, and taught
by Aliaco. 1. sent. q. 5. lit. M. in these words: When the subject is
sufficiently distributed by this word All, or some other that is equal
thereto: then that proposition is sufficiently universal. A proposition is
then sufficiently singular, when the subject is a term truly singular. I call
that a singular term (in proper speech) which cannot be affirmed of subject;
importing real distinct things.

That we may fully understand the nature of predications, Aristotle de
interpre. cap. 7 and 10.) That, this word All when we find it in a proposition,
it does not signify the universal predication it self: but is only a note
of predication: And further, these words All, or None, do signify no more,
but an affirmation, and negation universally made. Accordingly hereunto, Thomas
says, The predication it self is no more, but an absolute referring of a
thing signified, unto the subject: as when we refer whiteness to a man This
word All, or None, does but go with the predication, and imports an order of
the predicate unto the subject. 1. p. q. 31. art. 3. in cor. In the like
manner, he says; This word some, that makes a proposition to be particular,
does design an universal, or common term indeterminately; from whence it
does not determine the same, unto this or that singular thing. Opusc. 48. De
interpre. Cap. 8. By this (I hope) the nature of every predication is
sufficiently cleared, and made easy to our understanding.

It may be doubted, Ramus and Aristotle do agree in these precepts, and that
for three reasons. 1. Aristotle makes some propositions indefinite. 2. He makes
no proposition proper. 3. He does not require any common term unto an
universal predication. I answer, notwithstanding all this, yet they do
agree. And I do so answer, because the opening of these three things, does
give evident light unto the nature of predications: a thing worthy our
knowledge, for predication is the very Center, and life of Logic: all that
goes before, descends hither, and all that follows, flows from hence.

To the first, Arristotle does not conceive that an indefinite proposition,
does really differ from an universal, and particular. I show it two ways,
first, He names it but once in all his writings (so fair as I can find.)
Secondly, He makes a proper proposition to be indefinite, only, because it
wants the signs of universal, and particular predication. Prior lib. 1. Cap.
1. now the want of them does not make a real difference, as we have already
heard by his own words: again, they may well be referred unto universal, or
particular: because the extension of predication, follows the intent of
predicating: and it is not hard to show, where himself makes a proposition to
be general, that wants the terms of all, and none.

To the second, some man is learned, we assign no man of certainty, until
we descend to a particular, as Plato, or Aristotle etce. and this is a proper
proposition according to Ramus: moreover, if he meant not to comprehend a
proper proposition, under his particular proposition, then he has omitted one
precept, essential to this Art: I say the doctrine of a proper proposition is
essential to this Art: and I avow it even by the judgment of Aristotle
himself: for he does use them often, and must use them oftener then any other:
for, he makes an individual thing, a subject that receives all other
arguments whatsoever; without which they cannot have being, nor we any certain
knowledge: but we may not think, that he has omitted it: for that is to
charge him indecently: (seeing he has deserved so well) and against reason:
because of the allegations already made: to conclude, he does give instance of
a contradiction in singular, or proper Axioms de interpre. cap. 10.

To the third, Aristotle does require a common thing in universal
predications, and a singular in singular predications, and thinks it must be
so: because the common, and singular nature of things, is the very first
ground, and original reason from whence predications must be universal, and
singular: as we find by his own words: de interpre. cap. 7. Here I will put
an end to the second thing contained in the definition of a simple Axiom. Cap.
31.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of an affirmed Axiom.
IN this Chapter we must discuss the manner how arguments are framed in a
simple Axiom:

An Axiom is Affirmed. Ramus.
Denied.


Affirmed when the band of it is affirmed Denied when it is denied.

Aristotle teaches the same thing (for substance) de interpre cap. 5. and 6.
Prior lib 1. cap. 2. An Enunciatiue speech, is either affirmation, or negation.
It affirms when the predicate is affirmed of, or joined unto the subject. It
denies, when the predicate is denied of, or removed from the subject. We have
the same thing in Aliaco. 1. sent. q. 5. lit. BB. Every affirmation, and
negation, consists of a Noune, and a Verb: without a verb there is no
affirmation, nor negation: and this I say: because the verb [is] is referred
unto the subject, as in this example, Socrates is lust. Socrates is not Just.
Here, the word is, and is not, is referred in the one, to him that is Just: in
the other to him that is not Just. Thus far Aristotle de interpre. cap. 10.
Omnis affirmatio etc. -- Hoc dico etc.

Ramus applies this precept to all Axioms whatsoever. Aristotle makes
affirmation, and negation proper to simple Axioms: both say true, in the sense
they intended, and both those senses do agree well enough together: but
Aristotle's judgment is more accurate, and Logical, as we shall see when we
come to compound Axioms: therefore, for this time we will proceed.

From hence arises the contradiction of Axioms. Ramus.
[From hence] These words, Ramus meant to refer us to the next, and formal
reason of contradiction; then this reference is true: but if they refer us to
the first, and original ground of contradiction, then it is not true.
Aristotle de interpre. cap. 6. does refer us to the things themselves which
are subjected, and predicated, as to the first fountain, and original of
contradiction, in propositions: Because (says he) A thing that is, is
pronounced not to be, and that which is not, as if it were, so also, something
is affirmed to be after this, or that manner: and is not after that manner. At
other times, some things are pronounced to be present, which are not present:
therefore some thing that is affirmed, is denied, and some thing that is denied
is affirmed, and thereby affirmation is opposed to negation, and negation to
affirmation: which opposition makes contradiction. Thus far he. If we take
both these Authors together, we shall see the whole reason of Contradiction.

A Contradiction is when the same Axiom is affirmed, and denied. Ramus.
We have this sentence in Aliaco. sent. q. 5. lit. M. A Contradiction (says
he) is an affirmation of one thing, and the negation of the same: and this is
as well of propositions, as of single terms. Aristotle does fully agree with
them both, When (says he) the affirmation of one thing, and the negation of
the same, are opposed, then there is a Contradiction. De interpre. Cap. 6.
Atque hoc esto, etc. Now we see what a Contradiction is, we must inquire
further after the manner how one, and the same proposition is affirmed and
denied.

A Contradiction is General. Ramus.
Special.


General, when a general negation, is opposed to a general affirmation.

Special, when a particular negation is opposed to an universal affirmation,
and contrariwise.

A proper proposition, is contradicted by a proper proposition.

Aristotle teaches the same things, Propositions (according to him) are
opposed as contraries, or contradictories. When a general affirmative, is
opposed by a general negative, then they are opposed as contraries: but when
the same predicate, is universally affirmed, in the one: and not universally,
in the other, of the same subject; then they are opposed as contradictories: de
interpre. Cap. 7. A singular proposition is contradicted by a singular: as,
Socrates is wise. Socrates is not wise, cap. 10. Perspicuum autem est.

A general contradiction may be false in both parts. Ramus.


A special Contradiction cannot be true and false together, in both parts.

Aristotle has the same precept, word for word; in the places last alleged.

These examples following, will set out the precepts of an Axiom, contained in
this, and the former Chapter.

1. All men are learned. 2. No man is learned. 3. Some man is not learned. 4.
Some man is learned. 5. Socrates is learned. 6. Socrates is not learned.
The first, is an universal affirmative. The third, is a particular negative;
and the one does contradict the other. The second, is an universal negative.
The fourth, a particular affirmative: and they are opposed as Contradictories.
The fifth, is an affirmative proper. The sixth, is a negative proper; therefore,
they also are Contradictories. The first, and second are opposed as Contraries.
Ramus calls their opposition, a general Contradiction.

Now I have finished all that is contained in the definition of a simple
Axiom, touching the disposing of Arguments. In the next place we must see,
how truth is contained in an Axiom.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of simple Axioms necessarily true in common.
IN the 30. truth is contained in them variously, even according unto the
different kind of Axioms In the 31. Chapter, we have divided Axioms into
simple and compound: therefore, we must (now) set down, after what manner
truth is in simple Axioms; and thereby finish the precepts touching simple
Axioms. I think it sufficient to show how, and in what case, a simple Axiom
is necessarily true: for, thereby we shall know, how they contain a contingent
truth: and when we see how they contain truth, we shall be able to judge how
they contain falsehood.

In a necessary Axiom the Co^sequent is attributed to the Antecedent. 1. To
all of it, Ramus.
and always. 2. By it self, and essentially. 3. Not only to all, alwates, and
esse^tially But al^o first, of the whole, and enterchangably.


Aristotle, Poster. lib. 1. cap. 4. In which place he says thus.

In a necessary Axiom, the predicate is attributed to the subject. 1. To all,
that is To all of it, not to some only. At all times, not at some only.
2. By it self, that is, 1. As essential thereto. 2. the predicate is in the
subject, et contra 3. It is not said of any other. 4. Even for it self, not by
accident.
3. Universally, that is Of all by it self, and as it is in it self. It does
demonstrate the subject first. In every part.




Now, that in this place: for, here we speak of them, in an universal notion,
abstracted from all special kinds of simple Axioms. We shall come to them
in the six next Chapters; and then, we shall see the meaning, and use of this
general precept.

CHAP. XXXV. Of simple Axioms, necessarily true in special.
Necessary simple Axioms, are Definitions. Distributions.
I Do not find this precept, either in Ramus, or Aristotle expressly, yet I
bring it by the authority of them both. According to Ramus, every precept of
Art, is a necessary axiom: but (according to him also) a Definition, and
Distribution, are precepts of art; therefore, he must confess they be
necessary Axioms. The principles, and foundation of a demonstration, are
necessary axioms: in the judgment of Aristotle. Poster. lib. 1. Cap. 2. But a
Definition is a principle, and foundation of a Demonstration, even in the
sentence of the same Aristotle, Poster. lib. 1. cap. 33. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Therefore, according to him, every Definition is a necessary Axiom. We may
argue the like from his authority, for a Distribution: for he inioynes him that
makes a Definition, to distribute the thing defined into parts. Top. lib. 6.
Cap. 1. and in framing his art of Logic, he makes Distributions to be
precepts, no less then Definitions. Lastly, though I had not their authority
to avow this precept, yet I might bring it: because a Definition, and a
Distribution have the nature of a necessary Axiom, as we shall see when we
examine them.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of a Definition.
IN this Chapter, we must see what a Definition is.

A Definition, is a simple Axiom, Ramus.
wherein we declare what a thing is.

A definition is perfect. This contains the constituting causes only.
imperfect. This sets out the thing by other arguments also.


The first, is a Definition properly, the second, is called a Description.

THis precept is avowed by Aristotle. Ramus does. A definition (says he) is a
sentence that signifies what the thing is. Top. lib. 1. Cap. 5. A notification
of the essence, and does explicate what a thing is. Poster. lib. 2. Cap. 3.

A Definition thus set out, must needs be a perfect one. In the first book of
his Topickes, and 4. Chapter, he has these words; There is something that is
proper, that signifies what a thing is: and some other, that does not so
signify. The first is called a definition, the other is commonly called a
thing proper: when it is attributed to the same subject with the other. Now, in
this latter place he speaks of a Definition that differs from the former. I
say it differs. 1. In the name, he says, this name is but commonly given, he
says not so of the former. 2. In this definition, the nature of the thing
defined is set out, and more too: it is explicated by properties, that do not
declare the essence: and therefore, in all these places together, he makes one
kind of definition, that sets out the nature of the thing only; and another
that does so, and more too: and consequently (according to him) a definition is
perfect, and imperfect: and that in the sense and meaning of Ramus. Thomas
teaches the same thing expressly: A definition (says he) is either perfect, or
imperfect, that comprehends the total being of the thing, as it is constituted
by all the causes. This expresses some of these, and diverse conditions also:
and is called a description. 2. did. 27 q. 1. art. 2. ad 9m. In this place we
speak of a perfect definition; and therefore unto Thomas, I will join.
Aliaco: in him I find chese words; A good description may be converted with
the thing defined: not only for one difference of time; but for all times
whatsoever: so as, the predicate cannot possibly be severed from the thing
defined. Quest de Resumpta. lit. Q. unto them two, I will join Richardus de
Sancto victore: for, he is most full in explicating of a definition: De
trinitate. lib. 4. Cap. 21. fol. 108. That a definition may be perfect, it
ought to comprehend the total; and only essence of the thing defined: for, as
it borrowes its name from the thing, so it ought to extend it self unto the
uttermost limits of the thing defined. Neither must it exceed it, it ought to
agree unto all, and only unto the thing defined, and so far, that it may be
converted into it self: Thus far he. I might show the same out of later
Authors; but I spare that labor, because these, for their judgment, may go
in stead of all; such is their learning, and antiquity. Others say the same,
and none do dissent from them.

Cap. 34. and consequently, we see how to find out a definition from other
sentences: and to judge of the truth of it when we have found it; But because
all this does show us the very secrets of nature, (as I may say) and they
cannot be understood, neither speedily, nor easily: therefore it will be very
profitable; if I set out a definition by other notes, or marks that are better
known to us: that, when we have them altogether, the one will lead to the
other: and both together will give us certain knowledge of this root, and
original of all knowledge: yea of that knowledge, whereby we know single
terms in them selves, as Aristotle cales it: Poster lib. 1. cap. 3. Nos vero:
and that knowledge is no less then Angelical.

Aristotle has done so much in the thing we seek for, that the assistance of
any other authors may seem needles, he shows us, positiuely how to know a
perfect definition: and lest we should sorget, he shows us also, the
naughtines, and faults in a definition, he does the first in these terms.

1. A definition is constituted of the Genus and the differences: Top lib 1.
cap. 8. namely the specificall differences whose office it is to make a
difinition complete: and to design that which is more general unto one
special kind: and this it does, by reason that they are taken from the proper
form of the things differenced, as the root, and original from whence they
flow: in ^^e judgment of Thomas. 1. p. q 29 a^. 3. ad 4m. 1. did. 25. q. 1.
art. 1. ad 2m.

2. In a definition, the end whereto the thing defined is referred, is not to
be omitted. Top. lib 6 cap. 8.

3. A definition must be universal, and affirmative: Poster lib. 2. cap. 3.

4. He that defines must use words (so far as he can) that shall be of
cleerest sense: because, a definition is made for the getting of knowledge. Top.
lib. 6. cap. 1.

viz. Obscurity, and Superfluity. The Obscurities are set down Top. lib. 6
cap. 2. and they are 4 in number. First, when the thing defined (that admits
diverse senses) is not distinguished. Secondly, when it is expressed by a borrowed
speech. Thirdly, when any words are used that be rude, and improper. Fourthly,
when the definition is so made, that we cannot find: how it differs from
another that is contrary to it, or what the thing is, that is defined: for then
it is like a picture that cannot be known whose it is, unless it be showed by
writing. The superfluities of a definition are 6. He sets them down in the
third chapter of the same book, and these they are. First, when one thing is
repeated often. Secondly, when a definition is made of arguments that in nature
do follow, and in our knowledge are less known then the thing defined.
Thirdly, when in the definition the thing defined is brought: cap. 4. Fourthly,
if a superior be defined by an inferior. Fifthly, when more is brought in the
definition then ought: cap 1. Sixthly, Every thing is superfluous, that may be
taken away, yet the rest that remain does make the thing defined to be
evident; and declare the essence thereof. I will conclude in Aristotle's words;
by these things we may sufficiently know when a definition, is rightly made,
and when it is not. Top. lib. 6. cap. 3. and therefore I shall need to say no
more to set out the nature of a definition: or what manner of truth is contained
in it. Perhaps some man will require me to set forth, when a definition
contains untruth: but, I think that request needles: because every definition
contains a necessary truth that follows these rules: and that is untrue,
which does not observe them: but, commits the faults against them.

Although these things may seem sufficient to give us knowledge of a
definition,

A man is a living creature endued with reason. This is a definition in all
men's judgment. That it agrees to the former rules, is very manifest; for
herein first, Life, and Rationalitie are attributed to all men; and at all
times. Secondly, They are attributed, not by accident, or the application of a
third: but, by themselves, in as much as the essence of Life, and Rationalitie
(even of it self) has a relation unto man: and we apprehend the one, by
apprehending the other. Thirdly, Life and Rationalitie, are attributed unto man
universally: that is, not only unto all men, and at all times: but,
adaequatly: so as, all that is in Life, and Rationalitie, is said to belong to
man: and all that is in man, is denoted, and set out by life, and rationalitie:
the one is as large, and no larger then the other. Fourthly, They are
attributed unto man first: that is, they have no reflection, or relation to any
thing before man: neither is man receptiue of any thing before life, and
rationalitie: but, the first act that they do, is to give being to man: and
the first being that man receives is from life, and rationalitie. 5. Life, and
rationalitie, even such as they are in themselves, such reference they have
unto man: in so much that man is no more but an effect compounded of life and
reason: and they no more but an effect resolved into all the causes: I say all
the causes, for animalitie joined to rationalitie, comprehends all the causes
in it. Whereupon the thing defined, exceeds not the definition; nor the
definition is larger then the thing defined: but, they are convertible, we may
truly say, If man then a living Creature endued with reason; If a living
Creature endued with reason, then a man; and both of them contain one, and the
same truth.

Thus have we done with the definition, we must come to a description next.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a Description.
A description is a sentence which sets out a thing, Ramus.
even by other arguments.

THis precept is agreed on by all parties,

[A thing] That is, Aristotle in the foregoing Chapter: and he made it a law,
that every definition must be universal, but that proposition where an
individual thing is subjected, is not universal.

[Other Arguments] These words do contain the formal nature of an imperfect
definition. argument, imports an affirmative predication in a description:
for dissenting arguments cannot describe, nor define: no not in the most
imperfect manner: for defining, how imperfect so ever it is, must needs import,
that the thing is in some sort or other: but, dissenting arguments do not
serve in the least sort to set out what a thing is. They have force to show
what a thing is not, and no more. The word other, does signify, that the
arguments whereby a thing is described, are mixed: and are partly essential,
partly without the essence. Where we must know, that, the more near arguments
be unto the essence, the more force they have to set out the thing described:
and the more truly that sentence wherein they are predicated, may be called by
the name of a Definition.

Here it may be doubted, part by accidents? I answer: No accident (as it is an
accident) has place in a Definition: and I think so; because, Aristotle does
perpetually forbid accidents to come within the doors of any Definition. An
accident (according to Aristotle) may in some respects, and at some time become
proper: and in that case, they may serve to describe an individual subject: as
this, or that singular man may be made known to us, and differenced from all
others, by riches, learning, etc. which he inioyes and none other.

Now we see what arguments are disposed in a description: not of constitution
(for that is proper to a perfect definition, where the thing defined, and the
definition do Constitute each other, and is adaquatly the same thing:
according to the sentence of Thomas, 1. did. 25. q. 1. art. 1. ad 2m.) But, of
emanation, effluence, and consecution in as much as, the arguments describing,
are (at least) so proper unto the thing described, that they come convertible
therewith: and it cannot but be so; for, if the properties do belong to the
species, or the whole kind, then they are necessary emanations from the
principles of nature, belonging to that kind: and therefore, they stand, and
fall together. If the properties appertain to an individual, then they have a
necessary connection therewith, thorough a peculiar right, and possession.

I will add an instance or two,

A man is a living Creature, mortal, and capable of learning. In this
sentence, man abstracted from individualitie, (that is, not considered as this
or that particular man) is described: all the words that follow the Verb [is]
contain the description; These two terms, viz. mortal, and capable of
learning, are joined together by that Verb, and thereby the description is
affirmative. The word living Creature is essential to man: for, it is the
whole shot, (as I may say) or comprehension of all the parts of his nature in
general. The words capable of learning, import a thing proper unto mankind,
that is, as he is formally this kind of Creature, which we call man: and
therefore, that attribute bordreth next of all to man's particular essence. The
word mortal, imports an accident, now made proper to man. I say it is an
accident, and no more; because, it flows not from the principles of his
nature. Man's reasonable soul, is the chief thing in his being: but mortality
flows not from that: for, the soul is living, so says the Lord: He breathed
in his face the breath of life, and he became a living soul, Genesis. 2.7.

Mortality is now proper to all men, because they all, are subjected to death;
I say, it is proper to them all, not because they do, and must dye: but
because all of them, and none but them must dye after that sort (that is) by
accident. All other Creatures are subject to dissolution by that nature which
they had from God by Creation: but man is subject to death by imposition: he
incurred his mortality when he sinned. God threatened it before man sinned.
Genesis 2.17. and inflicted it when man had sinned. Romans 5.12. But that had
never been, if the principles of man's nature had inclined, and fitted him to
mortality. This being so, we may well conclude; man's mortality is very little
distant from man's nature. And consequently, this proposition is a definition
somewhat imperfect.

There is a necessary truth in this Description: true, which ways soever you
take it, if it be read as it lies, all men will grant it; if we invert the
parts, and say thus, Every living Creature that is mortal, and capable of
learning is man: no man will deny it. But this truth is not constitutiue: for,
mortality and capacity unto learning (as they are conceived by themselves,
and as they are in themselves) have no share in man's essence; but is a thing
flowing therefrom: and were it not for a third thing that comes between them,
they might, and might not, belong to man any ways. This truth is necessary by
emanation, and consecution: for, take man as he is a man, he must needs be
reasonable, as he is reasonable, he cannot but be capable of learning: take him
as he is now a man, and he must needs be mortal: for, he sinned, and God
imposed mortality upon him.

We have another example of a Description, Thessalonians, the 2. Chapter, and
3. verse, etc. which fitteth this place well. Antichrist (an individual) is
said to be a man of sin, the son of perdition, an outlaw, etc. Now, all
these be accidents, yet they become proper unto him, in that sense wherein the
holy Ghost meant them: and that description contains a truth so necessary,
that we may certainly know, that he is Antichrist who is a man of sin, etc.
in that sense which the holy Ghost intended in that place. This shall suffice
to set out the nature of a description: and thus have we finished the whole
matter touching a Definition.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of a Distribution.
THe next thing that comes to be handled, is a distribution: that is defined,
or set out in this one general apprehension.

A distribution, Ramus.
is a simple proposition, wherein the whole is divided into parts.

The whole, is that which contains the parts.

A part, is that, which is contained of the whole.

Aristotle and other Logic Schools have left us these precepts also:
Aristotle requires, that the thing defined, be distributed into parts: Top.
lib. 6. Cap. 1 Rursus vtrumque, etc. cap. 2. Idem Contingit, etc. Therefore
(according to him) a distribution is then made, when the whole is divided into
parts. He says further; a whole is no more but a gathering together of the
parts. Physicor. lib. 1. text. 17. lib. 4 text 43. And again, That is said to
be a whole, that wants no part of that of which it is said to be a whole:
either by nature, or as a thing containing that which is contained: so as, they
all do make one certain thing: meta. lib. 5. Cap. 25. text 31. According to
Thomas, that is a whole, which is divided into parts. 1. p. q. 76. art. 8. in
cor. These Authors do not tell us, what a part is conceived apart or
abstracted from specialties: neither need they, for that is done sufficiently
already when they tell us what a whole is; and the same thing will better
appear, when we come to the particulars: therefore I proceed.

A distribution, is of the Genus into the Species. Integrall into the members.


The integrall, Ramus.
is a whole to which the parts are essential.

The Genus, is a whole that is essential to the parts.

I find no dissent between any parties touching this precept, Aristotle: A
whole, says he, is twofold, viz. Universal; or a total existeney. meta. lib.
5. Cap. 25. text 31. And Thomas goes along with him: A whole (says he) is
either an universal, or an Integrall. 1. p. q. 77. art. 1. ad 1m. According to
Aristotle, An universal whole, is also Equivocall, or vnivocall. The first,
when the name only is common, but the things named be diverse: so a man
himself, and a picture is called a living Creature. The second, when the name
is common, and the things named are the same. Categor. Cap. 1. We take an
universal whole in this last sense. Now, Aristotle in the place of his
Metaphysics last alleged, does call that such a whole, as is one to every
part; as a living creature is to a man and a beast: in the like sort speaks
Thomas in the place last alleged; these are his words: An universal whole, is
present to every part, according to the whole essence, and power thereof as a
living Creature, is to a man, and a beast; and therefore it is predicated
properly of the singular parts: but an Integrall whole is not in each part,
neither according to their whole essence, nor virtue, and therefore it is no
ways predicated of the singular parts; no not of them all together, unless it
be very improperly. Thus far he: Aristotle in the place alleged calls this
whole, one thing that arises of the parts; and thereby agrees with Thomas: By
these allegations we have this precept agreed upon, and made plain; therefore
we may proceed to the several kinds of Distributions.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the kinds of Distribution, and first of the General into the
Specialls.
IN handling the several Distributions,

The Genus, is distributed into the species, when the general nature is
divided, into several kinds. Neither of our Authors has this precept
expressly: yet this place,

[Divided] This word is made proper to this distribution, by the common phrase
of Logicians. The meaning of it is, The general is divided into the specials,
if we inquire how it is divided to them? it may be answered, It is divided two
ways. First, In it self, being applied unto, or (as I may say) bestowed upon,
each kind: (not in the total latitude thereof; but so far, as one can
receive it). Secondly, Each special kind contains no more then is included
in the general, what is explicitly in any one of the kinds, is implicitly in
the whole: what is dilated in that, is thrust together in this.

[Severall kindes] The parts divided are called several:

A living Creature, is either reasonable, or unreasonable. This sentence, is a
simple axiom; because, one thing, is joined to another, by a verb. I say one;
for though the branches of the predicate, be two, being referred to themselves;
yet they are but one, when they are referred to the subject.

[Living Creature.] of them apart) are truly said to be living Creatures. 5.
Neither the unreasonable, nor reasonable Creatures have any thing essential to
them more then is contained in animalitie: for, that word imports no more,
but such a thing, made by God, as has life, and motion in it self. Now, that
includes a corporal substance, and a spiritualitie, called life: This as the
form, informing the matter: That as the matter informed. The reasonable
Creature has no more: thus he has a body made lively by his soul, and that
is the matter informed. He has a soul, or life, and that is the form
informing. We find the like in the unreasonable Creatures, they have a body,
wherein their life remains: this corporal substance is the matter informed,
and that life is the form informing. 6. These do differ in their kinds, (I
say) in their kinds, and not numerically; because, they have different kinds
of corporeal substances: so the holy Ghost pronounces of them. 1. Cor. 15.
and so we find by experience. The flesh of man and beasts do differ in their
proper being, and Gods destination: for, the one is made to perish finally, the
other to rise again. These Creatures do differ also in their life or
liuelines: the life of beasts is no more, but as breath that does vanish at
their dissolution: Man's life is more: for, his soul is life; being a living,
continuing, and spiritual substance: and no doubt, but that spiritual
substance, is informed by a liuelihood, differing therefrom (though our
understandings cannot but guess at it) 1. because we find a secret motion of
man's understanding, and will in his soul, differing from the spiritual
substance thereof. 2. Because man's soul lives when it is parted from the body.

It may be some will object on this sort;

I answer: I grant the assumption; upon Aristotle's authority, and proof
alleged before in the point of the Genus. But I deny the consequence; because
it does suppose, that the specificall difference, is a real being,
constituting the species: but that is utterly untrue. If that were so, then it
is a cause different from the matter, form, and end. But the last is not true:
and this I take as granted: therefore, the first is untrue also; and
consequently, the argument is so too, that is founded thereupon. The
specificall difference, is a rational entitie and no more; namely, our
understandings do apprehend this kind, to differ from another, when they are
both laid together. Now, this apprehension is a verity, no fiction: for, it
has a foundation in the thing: namely, the specificall form, our
understanding does thus argue: This has one kind of form, that has another,
therefore this does specifically differ from that. And thus the specificall
difference does flow from the form, it is not the specificall form it self.
Hitherto we have showed what arguments are disposed in this kind of
Distribution: and the manner how they are disposed; now I will declare that it
contains a necessary truth: and I may easily do that, for it fully agrees
with the rules of necessary truth, set down Chap. 34. as will appear by
laying them hereunto.

1.

2. The Creatures, reasonable, and unreasonable, are living Creatures, even by
themselves, and their own nature: there is no third thing that comes between
their nature, and the nature of a living creature, that makes the one belong to
the other: but, they are so living creatures by themselves, that the one is
essential to the other: therefore, this Distribution agrees with the second
Rule.

3. The Creatures, reasonable, and unreasonable, even in that thing wherein they
are, they are living creatures; so also, even in that nature wherein their
being does consist universally, they are living Creatures: yea, and this their
nature, wherein they are, they are the first thing in living creatures; we
cannot conceive any thing in the essence of the Creatures, reasonable, and
unreasonable, that exceeds the essence of a living Creature. Neither can we
imagine, in any sign, or moment of reason, that there is any thing in the
essence of a living Creature, which has the prioritie, or is before the
essence of the creature reasonable, and unreasonable. I say before, either in
nature, or time: but in the first moment wherein you conceive a living Creature
to be: you conceive a creature, either reasonable, or unreasonable: Whereupon
animalitie and these creatures are conuertible. All living creatures, conceived
as making one total sum, is no larger in number, then the Creatures
reasonable, and unreasonable; and contrariwise. So also we may say; If a
Creature reasonable or unreasonable, then a living Creature: If a living
Creature, then reasonable or unreasonable. And consequently, all the laws of
necessary truth agree unto this Distribution.

If any desire to know,

CHAP. XL. Of the distribution of the whole into the members.
IN this Chapter we must see,

The integrall is distributed into the members, when the comprehensiue whole,
is parted between the things comprehended therein. I must say of this precept,
as I did of the last; The doctrine, and practice of Aristotle, and Ramus does
patronize it; therefore, we may take it for a precept of art, though they have
it not in so many words; the opening thereof, will say, it came from them.

In this Distribution: 1. 4. The whole is made by their meeting together;
therefore this second kind of Distribution differs really from the former.

This one example will make the sense plain, and easy.

A man has two parts, Soul. Body.


This proposition is a simple axiom: for, one thing is, attributed to another.
I say one; because, both members, viz. soul and body be one in reference to
man: though they be distinct in themselves. 1. Man is the whole divided, (to
wit) an individual man. 2. This whole is shared, one piece to the body,
another to the soul. 3. The body and soul have distinct individual natures,
the one corporeal, the other spiritual. 4. The meeting of these two parts
together, does make man, as he is an individual whole: the soul in forming
the body, and the body being informed by the soul. This shall suffice to show,
what arguments be in this distribution: and the manner how they are framed
together.

This kind of distribution contains a necessary truth: because the laws of
necessary truth agree to it.

1. Soul and body are affirmed of all men severally, and at all times, without
exception. 2. Body, and soul are referred unto a singular man, by themselves,
and their own essence: not by the force of any third. 3. The soul, and body,
in what respect they are, and in the very essence, as they are: they are
affirmed of a singular man. I say affirmed, both universally according to the
total nature of themselves: and according to the essence of a singular man. So
as the essence of a singular man, and the essence of soul, and body, are of
equal extent: the one is as large, and no less large then the other: so also,
this their nature, is affirmed of man in the first instant, and moment of his
being; and our apprehension. Whereupon this whole, and parts, are in their
nature convertible. Thus we may say, If a man, then soul, and body. If
soul, and body, then a man. These things being so, we may undoubtedly say,
this kind of distribution contains a necessary truth: and therewithal put an
end unto this precept in hand.

To conclude, I have this to say jointly, of these precepts touching a
Definition and Distribution: their use is not known to the negligent, nor
esteemed of the ignorant: but, he that knows them, and has found the benefit
of them, will say, they are worth the having: for, by them a man may know when
a Definition, and Distribution contain a necessary truth; and an artificial
form: and consequently, he has a good guide to lead his reason in the right
way unto true knowledge, and the avoiding of error.

CHAP. XLI. Of contingent simple Axioms.
THat I may put a final Conclusion,

In a simple axiom every argument may be disposed, Ramus.
except full Comparisons, those that consent, are disposed affirmatinely: and
they that dissent negatiuely. Full Comparisons are justly excepted, out of
simple axioms, because they contain four terms distinctly laid, the one to
the other, no ways made one by any Conjunction.

By arguments, is meant single arguments, for all the four causes together,
and essential properties, belong not to simple axioms of this sort; they are
proper to definitions and distributions.

We shall find necessary truth or falsehood in all such axioms as pronounce of
a thing either as it is in present being; thing that is, or is not, that was,
or was not, cannot but be, when it is; nor but not be, when it is not: as
Aristotle has truly observed, De interpre. Cap. 9.

Simple axioms that pronounce of a thing to come, be contingent: unto Man (I
say) they are contingent: for as much as, their next causes whereupon they
depend, are contingent. All humane actions depend upon man's will, as their next
cause, and man's will is a faculty free, and indetermined unto one: and
therefore contingent All other things, not humane, are also contingent:
because, their next cause may be hindered in their execution. Man is at Gods
dispose, and all the other Creatures are at Gods, and man's. These axioms may
contain a contingent truth, in respect of man, and that is all he can have of
them. And here a final end for simple axioms.

CHAP. XLII. Of compound Axioms in general.
COmpound Axioms come now to be handled; their general nature may be
expressed in this proposition: A compound axiom is that, Ramus.
the band whereof is a conjunction.

So Ramus, Aristotle. A speech compounded of simple Axioms, is made one, by a
Conjunction, de interpre. In which words he does acknowledge. 1. Some axioms
are compounded axioms. 2. Such axioms are compounded of simple Axioms. 3.
They are made one by that composition. 4. Their parts are tied together by a
Conjunction: therefore, he delivers the same precept with Ramus, and unfolds
the meaning of it.

Thus far Aristotle went: but never further (for any thing that I can find:)
yet may we not say therefore, that his Logic is an imperfect art: because it
may be all his writings are not come to our hands; If that be so, then time
has done injury both to him and us. I think rather, he omitted compound
axioms of purpose. If he did so, he had good reason for it: for, the precepts
of simple axioms give light enough to show us how to judge of these: for these
being compounded of them, they must needs be the foundation of these: and
consequently, he that can judge truly of them, cannot be ignorant of these.
Neither may we accuse Ramus of a superfluity in art; for, reason avowes his
deed also; because, these precepts are convenient, and make the knowledge, and
use of this art more easy. 2. Learned men of all ages have used such axioms
as he calls compound: therefore, he might make the precept; of them to be
parcel of this art, seeing use, and experience is the mistress of art. The one
did well in omitting; because, he tied himself to exactnes. The other did well
to bring them in, because, he regarded precedent custom, and future ease. We
will go with Ramus alone; because, we cannot have Aristotle's company.

[Axiome] This word does put us in mind, that, from whence they are called
compound. 3. They contain truth, or falsehood: for such is the condition of all
axioms whatsoever.

[That] This word implies, Aristotle calls it.

[Band] This word gives us to understand,

[Coniunction] By this word we know, the band of a connext axiom is, a
conjunction: and herein stands a maine, and principal difference between
simple, and compound axioms; they had a verb; these have a conjunction, to tie
their parts together. In a simple axiom, we found a predicate, and subject: in
these, we find parts tied together, but no name for them: we must seek for
that in the particular axioms themselves. This is another real difference
between simple, and compound axioms: thus far, for their general nature.
This general is thus divided.

CHAP. XLIII. Of a Copulative Axiom.
A compound Axiom is Congregatiue, Copulatine. Connexiue. Ramus.

Segregatiue, discrete. disjunct.



A Copulative is that, the conjunction whereof, is Copulative. THis Definition,
And. But a little labor will not find it; yea, it seems impossible ever to
be found: for, this word, is very unfit so to tie the parts of a sentence
together, that thereby one argument should set out another: and truth, or
falsehood be pronounced: seeing it does neither affirm, nor infer, nor any ways
serve for those ends. It may be, his Copulative axioms be contained in such
sentences as these be;

Christ dyed, and rose again.

Without, shall be dogs, and sercerers, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
Idolaters, etc.

Both these propositions be compound, according to Aristotle; for, each of them
is made one by a Conjunction: they may be called Copulative, because that
Conjunction is Copulative. The forenamed axioms are compounded of simple
axioms. The first, of two axioms; the other of five. But (according to Ramus)
both of them be simple, because their band is a verb. Neither of them a
compound; for their Conjunction ties not the parts of the proposition together;
for, it neither affirms, nor inferres truth, or falsehood. It tyeth one part of
the Axiom together, and makes it one by the knitting together of diverse parts,
and no more. If we take a veiw of them as they lie, we shall see all these
things plainly.

In the first instance, Christ is the subject, death, and resurrection, are
made the predicate: both of these are joined together by the word And: and
thereby they are made one; that is, not one thing: but one truth together. This
one predicate, is referred unto that subject, by the verb that is included in
them both, in the truth of the thing, the first contains two axioms. Christ
dyed, Christ did rise from death, and we find the same truth in them both,
being taken apart, that we do, when both the predicates are put together into
one axiom. The same is the case with the second, when it stands in due form,
thus: Whoremongers, I dolaters, Liars, etc. have no right to heaven.

In the truth of the thing, this is a simple axiom, as the former was: the
predicate damnation, is referred to the subject Whoremongers, etc. by a verb:
the subject consists of diverse parts, distinct between themselves,
Whoremongers, I delaters, etc. all those parts are made one by the word And. I
say one, not in themselves: but in the truth of this proposition, so as, if we
refer damnation to them all jointly, it contains a certain truth. If that
predicate be referred unto Whoremongers alone, Liars alone, etc. each one of
them do contain a truth, no less certain, and undoubted.

A Contradiction is made to this kind of axiom, by denying the word And: for,
thereby we say, all the parts united together, do not agree unto the other
part, to which they are referred. This precept is made evident, Christ suffered
not death; I put an express Contradiction to them both, if these be true,
those be false. If they be true, these be false: but, this Contradiction is the
same with simple axioms: for, one, and the same predicate, is denied of one,
and the same singular subject: therefore we may conclude, these sentences are
compound Copulative propositions in their present form; but simple
propositions in the truth of the thing. If you take them, as men do speak
them, then they are co^pound: if you take them as men ought to speak, then
they are simple. And this shall suffice for Copulative axioms.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of connexe Axioms.
A Connext axiom comes next: the nature whereof may be thus set out.

An axiom, Ramus.
is then Connex when a Connexiue Conjunction is the band thereof. This kind of
Compound axiom,

1. If in this life we enjoy all our happiness, then we only are miserable.
2. If righteousness be by the law, then Christ dyed in vain.
These propositions are compound (according to Aristole and Ramus too) for, of
simple Axioms. In the first, we have these two: first, All our happiness is in
this life. Secondly, We only are miserable. In the second we have the like.
First, Justice is by the Law. Secondly, Christ dyed in vain. Lastly, these 2
simple Axioms are made one proposition, by the conjunction; If, and Then, I
say they are one, not by mixture but by voice: that pronounces the latter
certainly to be, where the former is.

These compound axioms, Conditional, in the common phrase of the Schools;
because, the first part is put Conditionally, not absolutely: but (I think)
the term of Connex, is more fit: because, the latter part is inferred from the
former, and therefore it is made to have a being together with the former: and
consequently, it is annexed, and knit unto the former.

The parts knit together in this kind of axioms, are named Antecedent,
Consequent: and they are so in themselves: for, the first in place, is the
first in nature, and our apprehension: else it could have no force to infer
the second. The second follows the first, and receives its being therefrom:
All arguments may be disposed in this axiom, that have place in a simple
axiom: because, this serves to conclude all questions, that may be concluded
by a simple axiom: so also they may be disposed in the same manner in this,
that they may in a simple, (that is) Consenting arguments affirmatively, and
Disenting negatiuely.

The truth of this axiom depends upon the Connection of the parts; so as, if
the one does follow upon the other, then the axiom is true; otherwise it is
false, therefore, if the one does necessarily infer the other, then the truth
of it is also necessary. If the one does infer the other Contingently, then
it contains but opinion only: or a Contingent truth. The inference, that this
rule contains, is most certain, and undoubted: The antecedent part of it, is
agreed upon in the Schools. I will avow it by two Authors of Credit, and they
shall be in stead of all. The first of them is Gregory de Arim lib. 1. did.
42 q. 2. art. 1. in aecisio questionis. Conditional speeches may be true, and
their parts false. These are his words, and they imply, that, the truth of
Condition all speeches, depends upon their connection, not their parts. The
second is Alvarez. de Auxilijs, disp. 72. no. 5. ad 3m, There is required unto
the truth of a Conditional proposition, that the Consequent follow upon the
Autecedent. Whether the Antecedent be the adaequate Cause of the Consequent, or
an effect thereof, or a Condition presupposing another Cause. It is enough, if
the Consequent follows by virtue of that Condition. Thus far his words; and
they are so plain, and so full, that, we can require no more authority for
this question: yet that I may conceal nothing, that may give light unto this
maine, and important rule, I will proceed a little further.

We must understand: The Illation or Consequence of a Connexe, or Condstionall
proposition, is either formal, or material. The sentences alleged out of
Gregory and Alvarez, are understood of formal Illation. Now, in such there is
always a necessary truth, and no contingency. A material Illation is, when
the consequent goes with the Antecedent: yet so as it follows the same, not by
force thereof. We find these propositions in conditional promises, and in the
judgments that we give of future things, that depend upon the liberty of
man's will. These Illations being pronounced by God, have always a necessary
verity: for, he cannot deny himself: therefore he keeps his word Justly.
Man's will is subjected to Gods dominion, therefore he will determine it to one.
His power is infinite, therefore he cannot be defeated: but these propositions
being pronounced by man, do contain (at the best) but opinion, contingent,
and coniecturall knowledge. Thus much out of Alvarez de Auxilijs disp. 7. no.
7. etc. And Suarez, opusc. 2. lib. 2. cap. 5. no. 8. etc. Where the Reader
shall find these things proved, and unfolded to the full.

A contradiction is then made to this axiom, when the Illation, or consequence
is denied: and we do that, by saying, although the first be true, yet the
later is not true: but more plainly, and directly, when we say, the later
follows not upon the former. This precept is very needful, for thereby we
know how to apply an answer for the refutation, and disproofe of such a
proposition. By this also, we know what we must prove, when we would avow a
connext axiom: namely, not the parts themselves; but the following of the
later upon the former. If this opposition to a connex axiom may with reason be
called a contradictio^ in any sense, then in this art it may go for a
Contradiction indeed: but I doubt whether in reason it may be so called or no:
because, the whole band that ties the parts of this axiom together, is not
denied: and Consequently, there is not an opposition made of one proposition
unto the same proposition: for one thing is not severed from that subject, unto
which it was joined: but only the same thing is denied to follow, which was
once affirmed to follow: and these things may suffice to set out the nature of
a connext axiom.

Before I make a full end of this precept, I must show what affinity, or
rather foundation, a connexe axiom has with a simple. I may truly say, a
simple axiom, and this compound differ nothing but in the manner of
pronouncing. Men usually speak in a connexe form, because the manner is more
familiar in many things: but they should speak in the form of a simple
axiom, in the exactnes of art: therefore, we may resolve these into them: as I
will show by the instances alleged.

The first example of a connexe axiom, viz. If in this life only etc. may be
reduced unto a simple axiom in every man's judgment: because, it has but three
terms in it: but in truth, it is somewhat difficult whether it may be so
reduced or no: because, it pronounces of some kind of men, not universally of
all: yet it may be done truly, and plainly, if we first know, that the
antecedent part ought to be set down in these words: They that have no
happiness but in this life, and here they have (...). I say, these last words
must be added: because, the Connext axiom does suppose them, and thereupon
inferres the Consequent: which otherwise it could not do. Those words being
added, we may bring this Connext axiom, and the Apostles whole disputation
therefrom, into this simple form.

They that have no happiness but in this life, and here, they have name, they
only are miserable.

But we only are not miserable.

Therefore we have some happiness which is not in this life.

The other Connext proposition, viz. If righteousness be by the etc. is yet more
difficult: yea so difficult, that, if we take it as it lies, it is not to be
reduced unto a simple for me: for it contains two propositions every way
distinct: and therefore, it has four terms, viz. 1. Righteousness. 2. Law. 3.
Christ. 4. Vain: but if we take the Apostles whole disputation together, and
frame it according to art, it will easily make a simple form: for thus the
Apostle disputes.

They that maintain this sentence, Justice comes by the Law, they must
maintain this sentence also, Christ dyed in vain.

But no man may say, Christ dyed in vain.

Therefore no man may say, Justice comes by the Law.

To conclude this point of Connext axioms; I hope it does now appear, that,
they are fundamentally, and indeed no other but simple. Therefore whatsoever
belongs unto them, it is due first unto simple axioms, and Consequently, they
derive the same from them. They differ only in manner of pronouncing, and not
otherwise. It is now time that I proceed to a Discrete Axiom.

CHAP. XLV. Of a discrete Axiom.
THe nature of a discrete Axiom is opened in these words.

That Axiom is discrete, that has a discrete Conjunction for the band
thereof. The Axiom now defined, place in Art. We shall understand it the
better, if we put an instance or two. There be different kinds of this also;
I will propound one of each, that we may be the better able to judge of them,
as occasion serves.

1 Though I walk in the vale of death, yet I will not fear ill. Psalm. 23.4.
2. Although thou heldest fast my name in the time of persecution, yet thou art
guilty of many faults. Revel. 2.13.14.
These are compound Axioms in the judgment, Ramus and Aristotle: for in them,
two simple Axioms are joined together by a conjunction; and thereby each of
them is one entire sentence. I say one sentence, in their voice of pronouncing,
though the conjunction does thrust the parts one from another: for these
propositions do say, he that has the first may be with out the second: and
thereby pronounce but one thing.

In these Axioms,

The conjunction which ties the parts together, is called discrete: not fearing
of ill; is denied to him that walks in the vale of death: not simply and
absolutely, as if no man could so walk, and fear ill; but as a thing which
was severed for that time only; or that did arise upon that occasion. In the
second example, there seems some difficulty: because it consists only of
consenting arguments: for a constant profession of faith, and guiltines of a
fault, are attributed to one subject: The second example, is like the first, if
we frame it exactly according to Art, it will have these words.

Although thou did well in these, yet thou did not well in some other
things. In this proposition; ill doing in some things, is attributed unto a
well doer in some other things: but these two differ only in respect of the
present time, and those parties, they differ not of their own nature. For
these that did ill in some things, might have done well in all.

A discrete Axiom is judged to be true, Ramus.
if both parts be true; and good, if both parts be diverse. [Good] That is in
respect of the form. not as opposites. This rule must be understood of such
Axioms, as are most agreeable to Art, and in that sense it is most true. If it
be understood universally, it is not true. If I shall say, although I am rich
yet I am not poor. I shall frame my discretiue Axiom according to Art: for I
sever poverty from riches, not simply, and every way: but only as proceeding
from, or bearing company with riches: and that is enough to make it a formal
discrete Axiom: because this serves for no other end, but to take away an
illation, and to sever a thing falsely inferred, from the thing that did infer
the same. Such an Axiom is ridiculous I grant, but in him that would have
riches, and poverty go together, not in him that denies their going together.

[Both parts true] This rule holds in every discretiue Axiom whatsoever. The
Axiom is false, Axioms it is so indeed, and in the thing: but in some other
it is so in courtesy only: not in the thing. The second part must always be
true, otherwise it denies not the inference opposed thereby: and therefore it
pronounces not as the thing is. The examples formerly aleadged, will make the
matter plain. In the first, David presumes, that, he did walk through the
vale of death; and so he did indeed: yet he denies, that thereby he was made
to fear ill. If he had feared ill, then he had pronounced falsely. If neither
himself, nor any other had presumed, that, he did walk in the vale of death;
then (for that also) he had pronounced falsely, for in both these cases, he
had pronounced otherwise then the thing was indeed. The Apostle Paul 2. Cor.
11 6. is content to yield his accusers, that, he was rude in speech: yet he
denies that he is so in knowledge. The first is true by concession only; not
in the thing: for his speech was excellent, both for Logic, and Rethoricke,
as his disputation and exhortations do witness. The second is true indeed,
otherwise he had made no answer to them that argued him slender in knowledge:
because he was rude in speech.

Hitherto I have opened the nature of discretiue Axioms, David had said,
walking through the vale of death, and the fear of ill, do not always go
together. In the same sort, Paul answers to his accusers: Rude speech and
slender knowledge, are not companions. Hereupon we may conclude: discretiue
Axioms, are compounded as they are pronounced: but they are simple as they
ought to be resolved: therefore whatsoever belongs to a simple Axiom,
appertains to them also.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Disiunct Axioms.
IN the last place we must come to the precepts of a disjunct axiom: and that
may be thus defined.

That axiom is disiunct, Ramus.
whose band is a disjunctive Conjunction. These axioms are seldom in use,

Either Saul shall live for ever, or dye by Gods hand, or the enemies sword, or
the course of nature. 1. Sam. 26.10. This sentence is a compound axiom, both
according to Ramus, and Aristotle: for diverse single propositions are tied
together, and made one by a Conjunction.

This sentence alleged, is a disjunct axiom: for the band that ties the parts
together, is disjunctiue. Perpetual life, and death at last, are attributed to
Saul: one of them certainly, neither of them distinctly, but both disjoynedly.

Opposites only have place in this axiom: for none may be disioyned,

The truth of these propositions, is measured according to the opposites
disposed in them; if they contain such as one of them must be in the subject,
(and are also) without a third thing to come between them, then the
proposition is necessary, thorough the opposition of the parts: the example now
alleged is of this kind; Perpetual life, or death at l^st; one of them (I
say) must needs befall Saul, these two have no third to come between them,
therefore it cannot be avoided: but he must either live perpetually, or dye at
last. If we will Contradict this proposition, we must say; Saul shall neither
live for ever, nor dye once: this is necessarily false: because, the other is
necessarily true.

If a disjunctiue proposition contain such opposites, action is either
supernaturally good, or supernaturally evil, or naturally good, or naturally
evil. Here we have a necessary truth, because every action of man is either
good, or evil: and there is no other thing comes between supernatural good,
and supernatural evil, but natural good, or natural evil. The
Contradiction of this disjunction is made, when we say, there is some other
thing that comes between supernatural good, and supernatural evil: besides
natural good, and natural evil.

If I make a disjunctive proposition thus: Socrates, is either, a Father, then
this proposition contains a conjecture, or opinion, no necessary truth: for it
might come to pass, that he was no father, because he has no child; nor no
child, because he has no father. Thus (I hope) the nature of disjunct
axioms, is made plain enough.

These axioms do savor no less of them that be simple, He that must once
dye, shall not live for ever. That action, that is supernaturally good, is
neither naturally good, nor naturally evil, nor supernaturally evil.
Whereupon we may conclude, whatsoever belongs to a simple Axiom, containing
these arguments, the same belongs to disjunct axioms. Now at the last, we are
come to an end of all Logical precepts, that concern the making of axioms.

CHAP. XLVII. Of a Syllegisme.
IN this place we must come to the precepts, which teach us, to dispose
arguments in a Syllogism, and to judge of them, when they are disposed:

A Syllogism is a discourse, Ramus.
wherein the question, is so disposed with the Argument, that if the Antecedent
be granted, it must necessarily be concluded. This definition is set down by
Aristotle, thus says he; A Syllogism is a speech, wherein some things being
placed, another thing differing from them, does necessarity follow, from them
that are so placed. Top. lib. 1. cap. 1. Prior lib. 1. cap. 1. Elench. cap. 1.

[A Syllogisme] This term is borrowed, either from accounts,

[Discourse] This word sets out the general nature of the thing defined.
Aristotle calls it a speech: and both of them do mean the same thing: namely,
many axioms so placed together, that one is drawn out of another. I say
Aristotle meant thus; because, the rest of his definition sorts with it. And he
calls the precepts of a Syllogism, Dianoeticall Doctrine. Post. lib. 1. cap. 1.

[Question] A question (then) is always disposed in a Syllogism. By question
is meant, a doubtful axiom: so as, the office of a Syllogism is to determine
a doubtful sentence. Aristotle does afford us the same precept: for (according
to him) every proposition ought not to be called into question: but those
only, that may be doubted of. Top. lib. 1. cap. 11. yea he accounts them mad
that take that for a principle, that no man grants, or put that for a question
that all men grants: seeing this is without doubt, and that is confessed by
none. Top. lib. 1. cap. 10.

[Disposed] Aristotle says, placed or put: but both of them mean one thing,
namely, ordered, framed, or fitted.

[Argument] By argument is meant (here) a third argument: Aristotle. A
Syllogism proves one thing, of another, by a medium. Post. lib. 2. cap. 4.
There can be no Syllogism to prove one thing of another, unless some medium
be brought, which is referred by a certain attribution to both extremes.
Prior. lib. 1. cap. 23. From whence it follows, that, in every Syllogism
there are three terms, and no more. If there be any other part besides these
three, it is called a prosyllogisme. Aristotle teaches the samething. It is
manifest (in his judgment) that, every Syllogism is made by three terms, and
no more: if there be more third arguments then one, there are more Syllogismes
then one. Prior. lib. 1. cap. 25. Post. lib. 1. cap. 19.

[Antecedent] This signifies the two first propositions in a Syllogism,
Aristotle also: It is plain that a Syllogism consists of two propositions,
and not of more: for, the three terms do make those two propositions. Prior.
lib. 1. cap. 25.

The first, is called the proposition, because, it contains at least the
predicate, or Consequent part of the question. The second, is called the
assumption; because, it is taken out of the first. According to Aristotle, the
first, has the name of Mayor, because, it contains the predicate part of the
question: the second, the title of Minor, because, the subject part of the
question is disposed in it. Prior. lib. 1. cap. 14. They vary in words, but not
in the thing. Only Ramus speaks of all Syllogismes in general, as well
compound, as simple. Aristotle of simple only, but we shall resolve this
difficulty, when we come to compound Syllogismes.

[Granted] The inferring of the conclusion follows the granting of the
antecedent, Aristotle means the same, when he says in his definition: A
different thing does follow from those that are put. By put he can mean no
other but granted.

[Necessarily concluded] Aristotle says, does necessarily follow from them
that are put (that is) there is nothing required more to infer the
Conclusion, then the terms themselves that are disposed. Prior. lib. 1. cap. 1.

Now the definition is unfolded, we will enter upon the particular things
contained under it.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of a simple Syllogism.
A Syllogism, is Simple. Ramus.
Compound.


Simple, where the consequent part of the question, is placed in the
proposition; the antecedent in the assumption.

THus a Syllogism is divided, Aristotle does divide a Syllogism into
Ostensiue, and Hypotheticall: and therefore heagrees with Ramus wholly. Prior.
lib. 1. cap. 23. I do not find, that he defines a simple or ostensiue
Syllogism in any one sentence: yet, this definition is wholly taken out of him,
as we shall see when we unfold the parts of it.

[Simple] This word is given to a Syllogism,

[Consequent part, These words show wherein a Syllogism is simple, and how the
same ought to be framed. It is simple, because one term of the question, and
the third argument makes each proposition: and these two propositions infer a
third, which is a simple axiom also. The predicate part of the question, must
be framed with the third argument, in the proposition: and the subject part
with the third argument in the assumption; not so much because, men have said
so: but because nature will have it so: this example will show it. One says,
Socrates is virtuous: another doubts of it: if I would prove it to be true, a
third argument must be brought, that shall tie the predicate and subject of
that proposition together. Now then, for that end I bring the term Iuflice. If
this term be disposed in a Syllogism, it must be framed after this sort; He
that is Just, is virtuous: but Socrates is Just. Therefore he is virtuous. I
say nature appoints this frame; because, Justice is a special virtue,
therefore where Justice is, virtue needs must be. Therefore Aristotle was a
true follower of nature, when he appointed to dispose arguments on this manner.
Prior. lib. 1. cap. 4. To conclude, from hence it is manifest, that, the
Conclusion inferred, by every true simple Syllogism, must be gathered out of
the proposition, and assumption after this manner, viz. The antecedent, or
subject part of the conclusion, out of the assumption; and the consequent, or
predicate part, out of the proposition: and where this is not found, the
Syllogism is false, and concludes nothing.

As we found in a simple axiom, affirmation, and negation: generality, and
specialitie.

Affirmative, Ramus.
when all the parts are affirmative. Negative, when either part of the
Antecedent, and the Conclusion are negative.

Gener all, when the proposition, and assumption are general. Special when
either of them is special. Proper, when both are proper. Every Syllogism
(says Aristotle) is either affirmative, 1. cap. 23. Universal is that which
consists of all universal terms; particular consists of terms, as well
particular as universal. Wherefore, if the Conclusion be universal, the
terms must be universal. But the terms may be universal, and yet the
conclusion not universal. In every Syllogism, either both or one of the
propolitions must be like the conclusion. Affirmative, or negative, necessary,
or Contingent. And thus always the terms in a Syllogism must be affected:
otherwise it is not simply a true one. Prior. lib. 1. cap. 24.

From hence Aristotle infers further (in the place last alleged) that, In
every Syllogism there must be one term universal, and one affirmative:
because, without a universal it is not a Syllogism, or belongs not to the
thing in hand, or begs the question. Thus far he. We may say the like of that
Syllogism, that consists of all negatiues.

It may seem by this, Aristotle does not acknowledge any Syllogism that
consists of proper propositions. And indeed, it is doubtful what his
judgment is in the matter: yet, in all likelihood he does acknowl^dge them no
less then Ramus, as shall appear when I come unto the particular kind^s;
where this whole precept will be made more certain, and clear to our
understanding.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Aristotle's three figures.
ARistotle delivers the form of Syllogismes: Prior. lib. 1. cap. 4.5. and 6.
and cap. 32. and divides them into three figures, or assigns the making of
them three manner of ways. In the first place alleged, he speaks of them so
universally, that he comprehends false or unprofitable Syllogismes, as well as
true: but in the latter, he speaks of true Syllogismes precisely, on this
manner.

1. If the last extreme be affirmed of the middle term, and the muddle term
of the first extreme, or the last extreme be denied of the middle term, and
the middle term affirmed of the first extreme; then it is the first figure.
2. If the middle term be both affirmed, and denied of both the extremes: then
it is the second figure. 3. If the last extreme be affirmed, or denied of the
middle term and the first extreme be affirmed of the middle term: then, it
is the third figure. And after this manner, the middle term ought to be
disposed in each figure. So far he. cap. 32.
Every universal affirmative question, is proved by the first figure only:
and that after one manner of way.

Every negatine universal question is proved, both by the first, and second
figure: by the first one way, by the second two ways.

Every particular affirmative question is proved, by the first, and third
figures: one way, by the first; three ways by the third.

A negative particular, is proved in all the figures, one way in the first, two
ways in the second, and three ways in the third. Prior. lib. 1. cap. 26.

Thus far Aristotle does give us rules for the framing of a Syllogism, kind
of questions by them. I esteemed it the best way to set down all his precepts
together; because they are the easier to be remembered. In the next place, I
will set down what Ramus has delivered, and compare them together, that we
may the better see their agreement, and thereby we shall the better understand,
then by either of them apart.

CHAP. L. Of Ramus contract Syllogism.
Ramus does dispose his precepts, Aristotle; I will report them as I find them
in him, and apply Aristotle to him. Thus then he begins:

A simple Syllogism has the parts contracted, Ramus.
or explicated.

A contract Syllogism, is when the argument, brought as an example, is so
applied to the particular question, that it is the antecedent in both parts:
and the assumption affirmed.

This form of Syllogism is Aristotle's third figure, reported in the Chapter
going before: and contains nothing more then we find in him, only they
differ in the name.

[Contract] This word gives the name unto this form.

[Argument brought etc.] by four properties, whereof this is the first namely,
that the third argument, (or middle term which is used to prove, that the
latter part of the question is rightly joined unto, or severed from the former
part) is put for an example, or an instance assigning the thing wherein the
question concluded is true: as we shall see anon in the Syllogism it self.

In this all the Logic Schools do agree. Expository Syllogism only,
because the third argument is as it were an exposition, or commentary to unfold
the truth of the question concluded: or else, because the argument does expose
the indeterminate subject part of the question, unto one certain, and singular
thing: as we shall see when we come to give instance of this precept.
Secondly; The Authors of best credit do expressly teach the same thing with
Ramus, An expositery Syllogism (says Aliaco 1 sent. q. 5. lit. Z.) is then
good, when the middle term imports one thing, and no more. If it comprebend
many distinct things, it is naught. According to Aristotle, this form
concludes particular questions only, as has been showed, cap. 49. therefore
in his judgment the third argument must be put for an example, for such
questions cannot be proved by any other.

[Particular question] This is the second property of this form, Aristotle in
the chapter going before, and he adds, that, they are concluded three ways by
it. If therefore any question that is general, or proper; be concluded in this
figure, then the Syllogism is false, and proves nothing.

[Antecedent in both parts] This is the third property of this form,
Aristotle has the same thing expressly in the 49. Chapter: The middle term
(say the Jesuits, in their commentary upon Aristotle: Prior. lib. 1. cap. 6.)
is subjected to both parts of the extreme in the third figure.

[Assumption affirmed] This is the last property of this figure. Aristotle
requires the same thing too: namely, that, the first extreme be affirmed of
the middle term, therefore the assumption is affirmed: for (according to him)
the first extreme is always disposed in the assumption: and the Jesuits in
the place last alleged do expressly teach, that, in the third figure the Minor
must always be affirmative.

We have an instance of this figure in this brief Discourse.

Some confidence is a virtue: as constancy. Here we find a particular question
concluded. viz. Constancy, and this is put as an example, or singular instance;
reducing the indeterminate subject part of the question unto one determinate
thing: and thereby expounding, or unfolding that which was dark, by that which
is clear, and exposing uncertainty to a certainty. This form is contracted,
because it contains no more expressly but the question, and the third argument:
The affirmative assumption, and conclusion are both wanting: if they be
supplied it will stand in this form.

Constancy is a virtue. Constancy is a Confidence. Therefore some Confidence is
a virtue.
By Aristotle's rule the proposition of this figure may be negative, Ramus
agrees with him when he debarres the assumption only from negation. In a
Contract form we have this figure, in this example.

Some confidence is not a virtue: as audaciousnesse. If we do explicate this
contracted form, we shall have it stand thus.

No audaciousnesse is a virtue. All audaciousnesse is confidence. Therefore
some confidence is not a virtue.
We learn from ARistotle. 48. that, the proposition and assumption may be
universal, yet the conclusion not universal: here we see it avowd. More
examples are requisite to illustrate this precept, wherefore I will add some
others.

Some man is prudent: as Socrates. Some man is not fortunate: as Hector.
Both these examples may be thus unfolded.

Socrates is prudent. Socrates is a man. Therefore some man is prudent. Hector
is not fortunate. Hector is a man. Therefore some man is not fortunate.
Aristotle requires (as we have set down cap. 48.) every Syllogism must have
one proposition universal. It seems, either that rule holds not always, or
else he does not acknowledge that such Syllogismes as these be, to be true: but
(if I may say what I think) I believe neither of them; for, the nature of the
things themselves will avow this kind of disputing. No conclusion can be
inferred, unless there be one proposition universal: for nothing can be
deduced out of mere singulars.

If any demand which proposition in these two last arguments are universal?

I answer, that is a universal, where the predicate is attributed unto all, or
the whole subject; so as, to attribute unto all, and unto the whole subject, is
one and the same thing (in the judgment of Aristotle) Prior. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Now, the term man, is attributed to Socrates, and Hector wholly: so as, there
is no part of Socrates, unto which that term does not belong. If any object,
that Socrates is an individual, and therefore that term cannot be subjected
in a universal proposition. I answer, If that term did import no more but an
individual, then I grant the argument to be good, but in this place it does
not import a mere individual: for then we must say: This Socrates, etc. which
we may not, yea although we might say so, yet that term imports more then an
individual; for he is spoken of as a man, and therefore as a species, not as
this, or that individual body, or numericall subsistency. If this be true,
then Aristotle's rule is universal; else it comes too short; and he has omitted
one kind of Syllogism out of his Logic, which I dare not grant.

I suppose, that, this precept is made clear enough, therefore I pass to the
next.

CHAP. LI. Of an explicate Syllogism in general.
A Syllogism is then explicate, Ramus.
when the proposition, assumption, and conclusion, are orderly framed together.

In this kind the proposition is always general, or proper, and the
conclusion like the proposition, and assumption, or the weaker of them.

ARistotle has not showed us the difference of explicate and contracted
Syllogismes expressly; Logic, and that is as much as if he had said so: for
nature commands, that, some Syllogismes be explicate, and not contract: because
no third argument, that serves to prove a question that is universal or
proper, can be put as an example of either of them; therefore there must be
some Syllogismes explicate, that cannot be contracted: and there may be some
contracted, that need not be explicated; and consequently (according to nature)
some Syllogismes may be explicate, and some contract.

The proposition is always general, if the conclusion be universal, or
particular, if the conclusion be proper, then the proposition is proper also.
Now, this law follows the disposing of the third argument, with the question:
not the will or device of man (as we shall see by the particular instances;)
The conclusion must be like the proposition, and assumption, when both of them
are universal, and affirmative, or proper, and affirmative, then the
conclusion must be so too, when the assumptionis particular, and negative, or
proper and negative, or the proposition negative, then the conclusion must be
accordingly; therefore, whenever an explicate Syllogism varies from any of
these rules, it is false, and concludes nothing: nature says it must be thus,
therefore when it is otherwise, nature is perverted, and we err from truth.
These rules, and no more but these, belong to an explicate Syllogism in common.

CHAP. LII. Of the first kind of an explicate Syllogism.
There are two kinds of an explicate Syllogism: Ramus.
The first is where the argument always follows, and one part is denied. The
one, that the third argument always follows (that is) it is the predicate, or
consequent part, in the proposition, and assumption. The second property is,
that either the proposition, or assumption, is always denied. I say, either;
because sometime the proposition is denied, and sometimes the assumption
indifferently; as the question and third argument require. If one be negative,
it is enough. Therefore, in this figure negative questions (only) are
concluded. I say negative, either universal, particular, or proper.

Aristotle's second figure: as the Reader may see, reported cap. 49. therefore I
need not repeat it here. I will allege some instances to show the practice of
this rule.

1. Every wise man does use his reason well.

He that is overcome with passion, does not use his reason well.

Therefore he that is overcome with passion, is not a wise man.

In this argument the proposition is an universal affirmative, the assumption,
and conclusion is universal negative.

2. They that knew the wisdom of God, did not crucify Christ.

The princes of the world crucified Christ.

Therefore the princes of the world knew not the wisdom of God.



3. Judas that writ the Epistle, was the brother of James.

Judas Iscariot, was not the brother of James.

Therefore Judas Iscariot, writ not the Epistle.

In this example, the proposition is affirmative proper; the assumption and
conclusion is negative proper These three are sufficient to show us the use of
this rule; therefore I will content my self with them, and pass to the next.

CHAP. LIII. Of the second kind of an Explicate Syllogism.
The second kind is, Ramus.
when the argument goes before, in the proposition: and follows affirmed, in
the assumption. the argument goes before in the proposition (that is) it is
subjected and thereby it has the first place. In the second property, the
argument follows in the assumption. (that is) it is predicated in the
assumption; and the assumption is affirmed, or affirmative: as if it were said,
the argument is predicated affirmatively in the assumption.

Aristotle made this law, and calls it his first figure: as his own words do
show, related Cap. 49.

It may be doubted, Aristotle or Ramus has kept best order in placing the
figures of a Syllogism. I answer, it is not material, whether of them be
first, or last: for, no one of them does give light, or knowledge to the other:
neither does it further our use of them, when this is set before that, or that
before this: Aristotle preferred the one, because all questions might be
concluded in it: Ramus preferred another, because the argument is disposed with
the question after a more single, or simple manner: therefore both did well so
far as they had reason, neither of them did better, because (as I said) their
order does neither profit, nor hinder their use, therefore I have said enough
to satisfy the doubt, and will go on to show how this rule may be used.

Whosoever is borne of God, overcommeth the World.

He that believes on Christ, is borne of God.

Therefore he that believes on Christ has overcome the World.

In this example, will show another.

He that is a murderer, has not eternal life abiding in him.

He that hates his brother, is a murderer.

Therefore he that hates his brother, has not eternal life abiding in him.

Here we have the proposition, and conclusion universally negative, and the
assumption universally affirmative. In the like sort, this rule is useful, in
all other questions that are concluded.

Aristotle, this only is the form or figure of a perfect Syllogism: because,
every question may be proved by this, and both the other may be referred unto
this, therefore they are made perfect by it. Prior. lib. 1. Cap. 4. Thus much
must be granted, and so far it is perfect; yea and the only perfect figure.
The second, and third figures, are no less agreeable to Aristotle's definition
of a Syllogism, then the first; as he shall see that will examine them
thereby: therefore they want nothing of that essential perfection, that is in
the first, what can have greater perfection then that, which every way agrees
to the definition thereof; and consequently, they infer their conclusions as
necessarily as the first. The first figure only has perfection, essential,
and accidental. The second, and third have perfection essential, but not
accidental, and this is the difference between them. By these things that are
past, we have finished all those precepts, which teach us, how to frame
arguments together in a simple Syllogism. In the next place, we must come to a
compound Syllogism, if we look no further then Ramus, but we must look
further; else we shall make our art defective: for Logic does teach us to
judge, as well as to dispose. If we must judge, then we must look for truth,
or falsehood, and consequently for precepts that shall teach us how to find out
truth, and the several kinds of it: For this, we must consult with
Aristotle, therefore in the next Chapter, I will report his precepts, with as
much brevitie as I can.

CHAP. LIIII. Of a Demonstratiue Syllogism.
IN the first place, Science: for, that is first in nature, time, excellency,
and our apprehension, of that Aristotle says thus.

Science is Indemonstrable. Demonstratiue. Post. lib. 1. Cap. 3.


We have delivered the precepts of Indemonstrable Science, in the matter of a
definition, and distribution, we must now come to the precepts of
Demonstratiue science: and first to the definition thereof.

But for as much as, viz: To understand what, or wherefore a thing is, and
secondly, That a thing is, Poster. lib. 1. Cap. 13. therefore, both of them are
defined by this one sentence.

Demonstratiue science, is that, which we have by a demonstration. Poster. lib.
1. Cap 4. lib. 2. cap. 3. Huius etc. This sentence is obscure in it self,
therefore he does unfold it in these words.

A demonstration,

Wherefore whatsoever a man knows by Demonstration, both, it must be
necessary, and the medium also of the Demonstration must be necessary;
Otherwise we neither know what a thing is, nor that a thing is necessarily: but
either we think we know, and do not, or think we know not at all. Poster.
lib. 1. cap. 6. Quoniam igitur etc.

Thus far the nature of demonstratiue science, is set out in common.

The proper nature of that science whereby we understand what or wherefore a
thing is;

The medium is then necessary, when it consists of things true, first,
immediate, better known, preceding, and cause of the conclusion.

Those are first, and true, which have force to argue, not from others, but of
themselves.

They ought to be true, because that which is not, cannot be known: they must
be first, because they ought to be indemonstrable, and consist of their own
proper principles, we must not inquire of the principles of Science, wherefore
they are so: but every one of them, even by it self, ought to be worthy of
credit.

The medium must contain the causes of the conclusion, seeing we know nothing
unless we understand the causes. The medium ought to consist of things
preceding the conclusion; both in nature, and our knowledge: therefore the
principium of ad monstration is an immediate proposition, viz. that has none
before it. Poster. lib. 1. cap. 4. and 6. Top. lib. 1. cap. 1. whereupon,
demonstrations are made by definitions. Poster. lib. 1. cap. 33. and, they are
the principles thereof. Poster. lib. 2. cap. 3. for a definition can no ways
be proved Poster. lib. 2. cap 4.5 6. and 7. lib. 1. cap 9.

By this whole discourse we have rules to know, Aristotle does show us what
causes these be, and how they concur; In these words: For as much as, we do
then know, when we understand the causes, and these be four. 1. the form. 2.
the matter. 3. the efficient: and 4. the end.

Then the conclusion has a necessary truth, when one of these causes is taken,
and placed as a medium in two propositions with that Conclusion. And by Causes
is meant, not only the causes of those things that are, but also of those
things that have been, or shall be hereafter. Post. lib. 2. cap. 11. and 12.



Now we do fully understand, Aristotle does distribute a demonstration after
this manner.

A demonstration, is Universal. Particular. Affirmative. Negative. Poster.
lib. 1. cap 24.


A demonstration universal, excells a particular: and an affirmative is better
then a negative. cap. 24.25.

This distribution follows the nature of a Syllogism, every demonstration is
a syllogism, though every syllogism be not a demonstration. Poster. lib. 1.
cap. 2. and is very useful to give us knowledge where to find this necessary
truth, and the degrees of it. To conclude, this matter of demonstratiue
science, he says: The first figure is fittest for a demonstration, yea,
chiefly proper unto this science, and it is to be sought out, only by that.
Poster. lib. 1. cap. 14.

Some perhaps will look, should give instances, to open the use of these
precepts: and it may seem the more needful, because some are of opinion,
that, no example can be given answerable to this rule.

I answer; this conceit is very vain: for, cannot any of the causes, or all of
them together, serve to prove a sentence that is called into question? or
cannot the causes be disposed with a question into two propositions? Without
doubt they may. Also, it is most certain, that, every proposition comprehends
a necessary truth, wherein the effect is argued by the causes; for the effect
is no more, but a comprehension of all the causes: and when the causes do
argue the effect, the effect is resolved into the causes; therefore when we
know the causes we cannot but know the effect. And consequently, such
propositions are necessary; and what they are, such the conclusion must be,
that is lawfully inferred from them.

If there may be premises, and conclusion answerable to this rule, then no
doubt, there be examples of it, and we may show them if need were, but I will
save that labor for this time, for diverse reasons. 1. Aristotle has done that
already, Poster. lib. 2. cap. 11. so as, he that will, may make use of them.
2. This kind of knowledge cannot easily be discerned, seeing it is very hard
for us to understand those principles of a thing that are true, first, and of
the same kind: as Aristotle does admonish, Poster. lib. 1. cap. 9. Difficile
autem etc. 3. By a man's own practice, and observation, he shall find them,
and their use in natural things: and in them only: for in matters divine, and
spiritual, such arguments can have no place. In them we understand by faith,
not by sense, and faith has Gods authority for the principle thereof, not the
nature or causes of the things themselves. I say, a man may find them by
practice, because by sense we get memory, by the remembering the doing of the
same thing often, we get experience, by our many times remembering, our
experience is one: amongst all these that we do remember, there is one thing
wherein man's mind does rest satisfied above many: that which is one, and the
same amongst the rest, becomes a principium of science, if it belong unto a
thing that is. Thus much we learn from Aristotle, Poster. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Exsensu, etc.

The medium of a demonstration, that a thing is, consists in some of these that
follow.

1. Of the causes, but not the first, or immediate. 2. Of things mediate, and
no cause: but such as are reciprocated, or mutually referred to each other. 3.
Of a demonstration that shows what a thing is. 4. Of things that are not
reciprocated, yet it is better known, and yet no cause. 5. Of a superior
science; as Geometry is to the Optics, and Arithmoticke to music. 6. Of
other sciences whereof one is not placed under another, as Surgery, is unto
Geometry; To know that a wound is healed sooner, or later, belongs to the
Surgeon: but to know the cause why it is healed sooner or latter, belongs to
Geometry. 7. In a demonstration that shows what a thing is, sometimes also
the medium is placed without the extremes, as when we say, why does not the
wall breath? We answer, because it is not a living creature: and these
Syllogismes are always made in the second figure; after this sort: whatsoever
does breath, is a living creature: But a wall is not a living creature.
Therefore a wall does not breath. Poster. lib. 1. cap. 13. Thus far go
Aristotle's precepts, to show us what Syllogismes contain necessary truth; and
the degrees thereof. If any expect examples of these last: I answer, they may
be given; because we may have examples of the former, as I have already
proved. They may be given with more ease then the former; because the things
contained in them are nearer to our understanding: but I will save that labor,
least I make my discourse over long, and the Reader too idle. We use that rule
with most profit, which we understand and practice together.

CHAP. LV. Of Syllogismes containing conjecturall truth.
IN the former Chapter, Aristotle's precepts that concern this kind of truth,
are these underwritten.

That Axiom is probable which seems so to all, to many, or them that are
wise, by certain frequent notes, and cleerenes. Top. lib. 1. cap. 1.

Those Accidents which agree to the subject by themselves, in the wanner
aforesaid: but in such fort as they may be, and not be attributed thereunto,
they (I say) cannot be a medium in a Demonstration: because they cannot infer
a conclusion that contains a necessary truth. Poster. lib. 1. Cap. 6.

These two precepts are all that I can find in Aristotle,

From hence we may infer that thing we seek for on this manner:

If Adjuncts or Accidents make a conjecturall truth, and no more, then a
Syllogism consisting of Adjuncts or Accidents, does contain a conjecturall
truth only.

But we have the first from Aristotle, in the places alleged, for he excludes
Accidents from a Demonstration, and esteems them no more, but clear notes,
making an Axiom seem probable, therefore (according to him) Syllogismes
consisting of accidents infer but conjecturall truth.

To conclude this point, Aristotle gives us rules of such Syllogismes, as he
calls Contentions, and a Paralogisme: his deed was good, because it does some
ways serve to give us understanding, in the precepts of Syllogismes aforesaid:
but I will omit the said rules, because they tend to show us precepts by
privation or negation only. Aristotle did well, because from him we have the
first formal Art of Logic. I must omit them, in as much as all things that
might explicate a precept, fit not my present purpose, therefore here I will
put a final end to this matter.

CHAP. LVI. Of the first kind of connex Syllogismes.
HItherto I have supplied the oversight of Ramus, Ramus does define them all in
this one short sentence.

A Syllogism, is then compound, Ramus.
when the whole question makes one part of the proposition, affirmed, and
compounded, and the argument makes the other part. Aristotle does acknowledge
compound Syllogismes, Cap. 48. But he does not define them at all, (for any
thing that I find) neither is it greatly needful, for their nature will
appear well enough, when we come to each special kind.

In simple Syllogismes,

A compound Syllogism, Ramus.
is Connexe. Dsiunct.


A Syllogism is then Connexe, when the proposition thereof is connexe, and it
is of two sorts.

The first sort of connex Syllogismes, assumeth the untecedent, and concludes
the consequent.

Aristotle does call all compound Syllogismes by the name of Hypotheticall,
they infer the conclusion upon the supposition of some part thereof: and does
divide them into such as conclude according unto transumption: and quality,
(that is as Pacius understands it) when the minor is taken out of the mayor; as
in this example. If a man, then a living creature. But a man, therefore a
living creature. And when it concludes by force of the quality of things
disioyned: as in this example; It is either day, or night. But it is day.
Therefore it is not night. He brings this at large Prior. lib. 1. cap. 23. and
29. If we understand Aristotle thus, he agrees wholly with Ramus, and in all
reason we should so understand him. In the last place alleged, he does promise
to explicate how many ways a Syllogism is made Hypothetically: but (as Pacius
truly says) the place where he does it, is not to be found. And I am of
opinion, that, he did willingly neglect it, because he does suppose, that,
every question, and argument may be framed, and concluded in a simple
Syllogism: and thus himself teaches, prior. lib. 1. cap. 23.

The parts of the proposition, antecedent, and consequent; and that very fitly:
for the one goes before, in place, and nature, the other follows accordingly;
the one inferres, and the other is inferred.

The antecedent is ass^med, when the words of it are barely repeated in the
second proposition, or assumption. If affirmative, or negative there, then they
are affirmative, or negative here.

The consequent is concluded, when the latter part of the proposition, is
barely repeated in the Conclusion. We have examples of this kind very frequent.

If God spared not the natural branches,

But God spared not the naturalibranches.

Therefore he will not spare thee.

In this example, the former part of the proposition, is barely repeated in the
assumption: and the latter part, in the conclusion. And thus the question, and
the third argument, is always disposed in this kind of Connexe Syllogismes:
sometimes the proof of the antecedent is assumed, not the antecedent it self:
In that case, it must be reduced unto this form; an example of this is laid
out in Moses words, Numb. 12.14.

If her Father had spit in her face, she must be shut out.

But she is leprous.

Therefore she must be shut out.

This example assumes not the antecedent, but the proof thereof, arguing the
same from the greater to the less, thus. Her Father did it, because God did
it. Her face is defiled with spittle: for it is Leprous.

This sort of Connexe Syllogismes,

He that spared not the natural branches, has no reason to spare thee.

But God spared not the natural branches.

Therefore he has no reason to spare thee.

In the 1 Cor. 15.12. If Christ be risen, then other men shall rise.

But Christ is risen: so I have preached, and you believe.

Therefore the bodies of men shall rise.



I say, this example is more difficult then the former: for, the proposition
has two entire, and distinct simple axioms in it: but it may be reduced, and
brought into this form.

They that say, that Christ is risen, must say, that men shall rise.

But you believe, and say, that Christ is risen: because I have preached it.

Therefore you must say also, that men shall rise.

And this is wholly agreeable to the Apostles disputation: for he argues
against them that denied the last: but in his judgment they might not do so;
because they did confess the first. I hope I have made this clear enough to
our understandings: therefore I will pass to the next.

CHAP. LVII. Of the second kind of Connexe Syllogismes.
The second sort of a connex Syllogism takes away the consequent, Ramus.
that it may take away the antecedent. TO take away (in this place) imports,
so as, the Contradictory to the latter part of the proposition, makes the
assumption, and the Contradictory unto the former part of the proposition,
makes the Conclusion. The Apostle Gal. 3.18. gives us an instance of this
precept.

If the inheritance be of the Law, it is not of promise.

But it is of promise.

Therefore it is not of the Law.

The assumption in this argument, is Contradictory, to the latter part of the
proposition, That says, the inheritance is not of promise. The assumption
says, the inheritance i^ of promise. In the like sort, the Conclusion is
contradictory to the first part of the proposition. The one says, the
inheritance is of the Law. The other says, the inheritance is not of the Law.
This kind, is easily (also) brought into a simple, thus: Whatsoever is by the
Law, is not of promise.

But the inheritance is of promise.

Therefore the inheritance is not of the Law.



This kind of Conn^xe has but three terms in it, viz. 1 Inheritance. 2.
Promise. 3. Law. And the first is repeated, or twice subjected in the
proposition, whereupon this kind is easily turned from compound to simple.

We have an example Gal. 2.21.

If Justice be by the Law, Christ is dead in vain.

But Christ is not dead in vain.

Therefore Justice is not by the Law.

I have propounded this Syllogism cap. 44 and have there showed, how it may be
made into a simple form: therefore it is needless to repeat it here. The
truth contained in these Syllogismes, is to be judged of, according to the
precepts of a connexe axiom: if we take them as they are Connex. But if we
take them as simple syllogismes, then their truth must be judged of, according
to the precepts of a simple syllogism. Therefore we have said enough touching
their natural use.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the first kind of a Disjunct Syllogism.
A compound Syllogism is then disiunct, Ramus.
when the proposition thereof is a disiunct axiom.

There are two sorts: The first does take away the one, and conclude the other.

BY taking away, is here understood Contradicting and repeating, in the same
sort as I have showed, cap. 56. and 57. Aristotle calls these Hypotheticall;
and so he well may: for the principal all foundation of them, is a
supposition: for one thing is taken for granted, and that must be granted, or
else they can conclude nothing.

By the word [one] is meant, one, is not understood indifferently of either
part of the opposition: for then, the co^tradicting of any one single term,
must infer the concluding of all others that oppose that one: but that may
not be: for only one of them at once, can agree to the same subject, in the
same respect, part, and time. Therefore it is understood of all the single
terms that are disioyned, except one: because from thence, that one that is
not Contradicted, may well be Concluded: but where one single term is opposed
unto another single term, there the Contradicting of either of them
indifferently, does infer the Concluding of the other.

By this precept the proposition may be negative in some part,

1. You must say, he is or he is not.
But you may not say, he is not.
Therefore you must say he is.
The second term opposed in the proposition is negative, and that is
Contradicted in the assumption: the first term in the proposition is
affirmative, and that is concluded or repeated in the Conclusion.

We have another instance of this. Sam. 24.13.

I must sustain, either seven years famine, or three months pursuit, or
three days pestilence

But I will not sustain, seven years famine, nor three months pursuit.

Therefore I will sustain three days pestilence.

This argument does presume, that David must undergo one of these three, and
no more, but that one. If that be granted, it does infer the Conclusion
necessarily. If that be denied, it has no force to Conclude. In the
assumption, two branches of the disjunction (comprehended in the proposition)
are Contradicted: The third branch (untouched in the assumption) is barely
repeated in the Conclusion. We may bring this argument into a simple
Syllogism, in this sort.

He that may escape the famine, and sword, must endure the pestilence.

But David has liberty to escape the famine and sword.

Therefore David must endure the pestilence.

The proposition presumes, that one of the three must be endured, and no more
but one of them. If that be granted, the whole argument is good, if that be
denied, it has no force to prove.

I will add one example more,

Socrates, is either just, or unjust.
But he is not just.
Therefore he is unjust.
Here is supposed, that every man has one of these two, and but one of these:
and thereupon, it inferres the conclusion necessarily: otherwise not. Wherein
it agrees with the two former; It has two single terms only, opposed each to
other; and it is indifferent whether of them two had been Contradicted in the
assumption, and concluded, or barely repeated in the Conclusion: for the form
of Syllogism, and force of truth, is the same in both: and this does make it
differ from the two former. If we desire to see it made a simple syllogism, we
must frame it thus.

He that is not just, is unjust.
Socrates is not just.
Therefore he is unjust.
This precept is now made plain enough, therefore I proceed to the second sort
of a disjunct Syllogism.

CHAP. LIX. Of the second kind of Disjunct Syllogismes.
A disjunct Syllogism of the second sort, is, Ramus.
when the proposition is affirmative in all the parts: one is assumed in the
assumption, and the rest taken away in the Conclusion. BY assuming,

In this second kind of disjunct Syllogism: there are three properties.
First, The proposition is who^y affirmative. Secondly, One single term only
of the opposition, is repeated in the assumption. Thirdly, The other part is
contradicted in the conclusion therefore this form does really differ from the
former. That concludes affirmatiues, and no negatiues: this concludes
negatiues, and no affirmatiues. Gal. Cap: 3 ver: 2.3. does yield us an argument
of this kind.

Ye received the spirit, either by the Law, or the Gospel.

But ye received it by the Gospel.

Therefore ye received it not by the Law.

things: first, They had the spirit. Secondly, one of these two, the law, or
the Gospel gave it them (not both together.) Those two things being granted
the argument cannot be denied. If either of them might be denied, the argument
may not be granted. The assumption does barely repeat the second term
opposed: and the conclusion does contradict the first, I will add this second
instance.

This action, is either supernaturally good, or supernaturally evil, or
naturally good, or naturally evil.

But it is supernaturally good.

Therefore it is, neither supernaturally evil, nor naturally good, nor
naturally evil.

Here we find first, the conclusion; Fifthly, A supposition that every action
has one of these properties, and no more but one of them.

The reason why one opposite term only, is assumed; and the rest
contradicted, is: because but one opposite, can be in the subject at once, and
the presence of that, does enforce the absence of the rest.

We may bring these into simple Syllogismes, after this sort.

That act which is supernaturally good, is not supernaturally evil; nor
naturally good, nor naturally evil.

But this act is supernaturally good.

Therefore it is, neither supernaturally evil, nor naturally good, nor
naturally evil.

I doubt not, otherwise then as disjunctive axioms do. If we take them as
simple, then they must be referred unto simple Syllogismes: therefore in the
precepts of them, we shall know what truth is contained in these. I might also
allege the reason why Ramus does prosecute all the precepts of Compound
Syllogismes; and thereby justify him. And for what cause Aristotle did but
name them, and not prosecute them; and so justify him also; but (I think) I
have done that sufficiently in the matter of Compound Axioms. Cap. 42. they,
and these, draw in one, and the same line: therefore I refer the Reader unto
that place. Repetitions are but lost labor.

Now we are come to an end of all the precepts of Logic: so as, Ramus, for he
brings another member of this art, and calls it Method: but I omit the same of
purpose; for diverse reasons. 1. No precepts of Logic can teach it, because
even (according to him) Method is no more, but the orderly placing of sentences
together. But the precepts of Logic cannot teach that, it being no more, but
the general nature of art, as we have already found Cap. 1. (I say of art
simply, abstracted from all particulars, and not applied to Rhetoric, Logic,
or any other; as we do when we say Rhetoric is an art etc.) 2. If any
precepts of Logic, have power to teach the orderly framing of sentences
together, then they must be, either some that are past, or some that are yet to
come: if we must have recourse to these, then their Authors, and places must be
named. But that is impossible. If the precedent precepts do teach it, then we
have done enough already, and can do no more, except we will repeat the same
things again. 3. If we define, and distribute according to the precepts of a
definition and distribution, Cap. 34. etc. We cannot place definitions, and
distributions, nor any other sentences that depend upon them, unduly and out of
order; for then the most general will come first, and the most special will
come last: and this is all the Method Ramus required. 4. He alleges Aristotle's
authority for method; but altogether without cause; for he alleges no place,
nor words, and I am sure he cannot. Aristotle calls all the precepts of Logic
a Method, whereby we come to know, how to discuss. Top. lib. 1. cap. 2. lib
8. cap. 12. prior. lib. 1. cap. 31. therefore he did never mean to make Method,
one member of his Art, distinct from the rest: seeing therefore we have nothing
to say touching Method, I must here put an end to the whole Work.

FINIS.

