A Cloud of VVitnesses: AND THEY THE HOLY GENEALOGIES OF THE SACRED SCRIPTVRES.

Confirming unto us the truth of the Histories in Gods most holy word, and the
Humanity of Christ Jesus.

The second Addition.

MATTHEW. 22. 45.

If David then call him Lord, how is he his Son?

By Io. Speed.

LONDON, Printed by John Beale.

To the most reverend Father in God, George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate and Metrapolitan of all England, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.
THe manifold favors that your GRACE has extended to me, even from before I
was known unto you by face, and ever since has continued them abundantly
without any my deserts: has imboldened me (most reverend Father in God) to
Dedicate unto your GRACE, and gracious protection, these my last labors in
this cloud of witnesses of Gods truth. An argument it is unto some, of some
seeming difficulty, and a rough path unto many unusual trod in, and
therefore requires a far more able means to smooth the way then either my
wit, or weak ability can any ways aford. That the Scriptures Genealogies are
vain: some that follow their own vain in preferring zeal before knowledge,
would have the Apostle to pronounce. Others (besides their authority, for that
they are penned by Gods Spirit) account them vselesse and empty, either to be
known or taught. To meet with both, my self of many thousands the least,
have assaid, first, in drawing the lineall descents of all the Tribes, and of
every family from first to last, to illustrate the text: and especially theirs
of Iudahs, that lead unto Christ. And now in this small treatise do endeavor
to show their uses, both in the holy stories, to whom they are stays, and in
confirmation of Gods promises, to whom they are a great cloud of witnesses. But
for my refuge against the oposers of this my so weak a performance, to whom
shall I fly, but only to your Grace, whom God and his Majesty has appointed
to the helm of Christ's ship in these British seas. And who formerly was one
of those reverend Commissioners that approved and authorized the publication of
my draughts of the Scriptures Genealogies unto the world. That I am not a
Leuite I confess, and far unworthy to offer, or to come near unto the Altar,
I acknowledge; yet am I not thereby quite exempted from service, but am
enjoined (as all others are) to labor, and to lay hand to the forwarding of
Gods work. For not only the Levites ministered to the provision of the first
Tabernacle, but every one of them also (that were numbered from twenty years old
and above, among six hundred thousand, three thousand five hundred and fifty
men) did offer his half shekell for the setting forward of the Sanctuary. And
for the increase of Gods treasury, the poor widow did minister as well as
the rich Pharisee. The servant that had but one Talent in charge, for hiding
that one was condemned, and the frutlesse fig tree withered in one night. The
very heathen man could say; That man is not borne only for himself, and we
know that all must labor in the Lords vineyard, and not stand idle all the
day. And sure I am that your GRACE, as another Moses, wishes that all the
people in the Host could prophecy with Eldad and Medad: and as Gods high
Priest, continually shakes the Censer of sweet prayers, for the wealth of his
Zion, and peace of our Church: in whose hand I pray that Aarons rod may long
bud, and that from your forehead may long shine Holiness to the Lord. That God
therefore who has endued your GRACE with many blessed graces in this mortal
life, continue them long to his glory, your own comfort, and our consolation:
and after your Pilgrimage in this vale of tears, crown you in the life of
immortality, to reign with his Christ, and as a star to shine among his
elect and chosen children for ever.

Your Graces in all most humble and dutiful seruises to be commanded, JOHN
SPEED.

To the Christian Reader, Grace and Peace.
THe holy ascents mounting into those sacred buildings, which are laid upon the
foundations of the Prophets and Apostles, (Christ Jesus himself being the
Corner stone) are the Times, the Persons, and the Places of the Scriptures
Records, which are as strong stays, to mount into the historical sight of the
sacred Scriptures, as were the steps (though supported with twelve Lions) that
led into Salomons Throne. Any of which either so laid or mistaken, hinders the
eye of some perfect obiest, that otherwise from them lie open to the sight: so
no man can deny, but that in all humane descriptions, these are the Sinews of
the narration; and in the sacred Text, these also are the Cement that cover
together the well squared Stones in the Lords building, without noise or
stroke, either of Axe or Hammer: And do still make known, how sure by Text,
the holy Spirit utters a uniform truth. For the event of Prophecies, falling
in any Age, upon any Person, People, or Place, and meeting in the Center of a
perfect performance; declares the constant accomplishment of Gods determined
decrees, whether it be in his Justice upon the sons of reiection and death, or
in his mercy upon the children of Election and life, and are to the mind of the
thirsting searcher, as the watersprings were to David's heart: and more to be
desired then the gold refined in the fire seven times. The discents of the
persons, the Genealogies annexed to the new translated Bible do show; and what
part they bear for illustration of Scriptures, this present Treatise in some
part does witness; which, had it been written with a more learned pen, would
have given (I know) far more satisfaction, especially to such as think their
doctrine condemned by the Apostle; or atleast, of less use then other studies
of Scripture. Upon which occasion, and the desire of others more moderatly
minded, these pains were undertaken and gone: wherein I have rather chosen to
confirm their uses in a continual discourse, then to rippe up the assertions
of an ignorant zeal: lest in opening the objection, the opinion proposed prove
little less then blasphemy: as Solon in his laws forbear to mention the
punishment for the murderers of Parents, lest in naming the Fact, the thoughts
of the children might be corrupted. And albeit I have not curiously carved, but
rather rough hewn the stones to this work (as the least labourer, and in the
last hour of the day) yet the foundation being laid upon the sacred sure Text,
cannot be tempestshaken, howsoever for manner and style, it may be found
faulty, in the searching eyes of this learned age. And the thing especially
aimed, How God became Man, and how the Immanuel Jesus was the Messiah of the
world, and King of the Jews, beside the ho^y Prophets many testimonies) the
Jewish (Rabb^ins themselves apparently grant: whose own reports in their many
Talmuds (as they are collected from the skillful in that tongue) are here laid
down, without any fainings or falsifyings of their Text.

Some Chapters in this second Edition are added unto the first, and the
Chapters of the first somewhat enlarged with matters of like kind. The purpose
of all is, to show that God in Christ, Col. 1. 20
reconciled the world to himself. And that Christ is Genesis 3.
the seed in whom the world shall be saved. In former ages revealed 1 Cor 13
a far off, as in a glass darkly, and through 2 Cor. 3. 13. (...)
the vale of Moses. But in these Heb. 1.
last times is seen of us Gentiles in his humanity face to face: where the
veil of the old is withdrawn in the new The search of both, in both is
commanded, for therein says God, Josh. 1. 8.
stands thy life, and all must be meditated, for therein says Moses, is not
a Deu. 32. 47.
vain word. And Christ gives the testimony, that Ma. 5. 18
Heaven and earth shall pass, but not a jot or tittle of the word perish. It
was Timothies commendations, that he had been studious in the holy Scriptures
of a child. And the men of Act. 17. (...)
Berea are named noble, for examining Paul's doctrine by the Scriptures. Let not
then a fore-staled opinion of their hardness diswade thee from reading nor a
secured conceit, that many things in them do not concern thee, (the brand of
that Iron that searches the conscience) for man lives not by bread only, but
by every Deu. 8. 3.
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. And in their learning (says the
Apostle) Tim. 4. 16
thou shall save both thy self, and them that ^e are thee. Of which learning,
the Primative Saints were so careful, as Hieron in Psalm. 133.
Saint Hierom records: that even seely women contended which of them should
learn most of the holy Scriptures without book by heart. And that * Tailors,
Smiths, Weauers, Semsters, Deluers and Neatheards, were so skillful in the
sacred Texts, as Theodorat writes, that the most secret mysteries therein
contained, were familiarly known unto them. But not any so great as is the
my^rie, that God became man nor more behoouefull to be known, then is his
Humanity, in whose righteousness the Law is satisfied, and in his fufferings,
the world reconciled. Unto him therefore, the chief corner stone of this our
building, be as^bed all s Praise, glory, wisdom, honor, and might: for whose
coming in power to make all perfect, let us with the wise Virgins, attend to
enter the chamber of our Bridegroom Christ, in whom I rest ever thine,

JOHN SPEED.

The Sum of the Chapters contained in this Treatise.
Chap. 1. THat the holy Genealogies of the sacred Scriptures, are of great use,
and being penned by Gods holy Spirit, ought of all to be known. Chap. 2. That
the names of the Fathers and Patriarks in the Scriptures Genealogies, do lead
unto Christ. Chap. 3. That the Scriptures Genealogies, are the Scriptures
stays for Chronology. Chap 4. That the Scriptures Genealogies, do limit
Daniels seuens, not to exceed 490 years. Chap. 5. Some difficult places of the
Scriptures Genealogies explaned. The difference of Saint Luke in the Greek
from Moses in the Hebrew. And Saint Mathews omission of four Kings in his
Catalogue examined, and resolved. Chap 6. That God became man, and from what
men descended, the Scriptures Genealogies do evidently show. Chap. 7. That
Christ Jesus descended only of Judah, and took no part of his Humanity from
Leui, neither by his Fathers nor Mothers. Chap. 8. That Salomons house was
rent, and all his posterity utterly extinct long before the coming of Christ
in his flesh, and that neither from Solomon, nor any of his successors, (the
Kings of Judah) Christ Jesus took any part of his Humanity. Chap. 9. How the
Evangelists Saint Matthew, and Saint Luke do agree, in recording Christ Jesus
to be the Son of Solomon by Law, and the Son of Nathan, by Nature Chap. 10.
That Christ Jesus, by his natural descent, was the only immediate, and
lawful King of the Jews, and that none other had any claim or title
thereunto. Chap. 11. A touch of some Jewish and vain Genealogies, which hinder
Truth, against which Saint Paul warns, with an answer unto Master Liuelies
Jewish objections. Chap. 12. That according to the Scriptures of God, Christ
came at the fullness of time in his flesh. And that in him all Genealogies of
the sacred Scriptures are ended.
Errata.
Page, 11. for do. read, did. p. 18. f. proceated, r. procreated. p. 59 in
the margin. f. 830. years, r. 83. years. p. 59. f. fasciulus, r. fassiculus.
p. 59. f. achab, r. Rachab. p. 76. f. and r. nor. p. 78. f. translater, r.
translators. p. 124. f. faithful, r. faithless. p. 2^6. f. they do, r. they
do it not. p. 230. f. speeches, r. speaks. p. 234. f. no other, r another. p.
250 f. the fair. r. they feign. 241. f. has bin. r. had bin.

A CLOVD OF WITNESSES.
CHAP. I.
That the holy Genealogies of the sacred Scriptures are of great use, and being
penned by Gods holy Spirit, ought of all to be known.

THat this subject of the Scriptures sacred Genealogies may appear to be both
holy and useful: before we enter into the particulars, let us view the frame
of the whole; how that from the Genes. 3. 15.
seed of the woman in Paradise, where the first promise was made of our
salvation, they lead us to the Son of a Mat. 2. 1.
Virgin in Bethlehem, where the first appearance ^n our flesh was of him that
wrought our salvation.

Betwixt which persons and times God himself was the Recorder, and with that
Ex. 31. 18
finger that first writ the Law, led the hand of Moses to name from Genes. 5.
father to son, the persons produced: even from Adam, that fell from a
pleasurable Garden of rest, unto Ioshuah, that led and set the people in a
pleasurable Ios. 13. 1.
land of rest; being thirty generations in a direct line, besides their
collaterals.

In all which, the promises of God appeared, that was made to man in his
Christ: In Ge. 5. 29.
Noah, the comfort that the world in him should enjoy. In Ge. 17. 4. Genesis 12. 3.
Abraham, the Promise, that the world in him should be blessed. And in 2. Sam.
7. 13.
David, the son, and King, that should reign everlastingly.

All which things the Genealogies do testify, and we know that their
testimony is true: and how carefully their pedegrees have been kept, we see
still recorded by the holy Ghosts writ.

In Moses, all of them even unto himself; and where Moses left, the Writer of
Rut. 4. 20
Ruth does continue the^ unto David. And David's sons likewise, both Kings and
collaterals, are most exactly registered, and for the most part, with their
matches, and mothers, out of several Tribes named, whilst that stem of kings
bare any branches.

And the care of preserving the holy Genealogies, the holy Ghosts pen has well
showed in the first 1. Cor. 1. etc.
book of the Chronicles, where the first nine Chapters does afford in a
manner no other matter, besides the rehearsal of the generations from Adam to
those times. As the like is done for the present, by the books of the
Chronicles, of Kings and the Prophets, until the Captivity of Babylon cut off
their Kings, and the glory of Judah became thereby eclipsed.

Notwithstanding, in the times of the later Prophets, the like providence is
continued, by preserving the Lights of the holy Genealogies a^iue, when the
holy Spirit in the pens of Ezra 1. 2.
Ezra the Scribe, and of Nehemiah the Prince, their memorials and pedegrees
were recorded unto Nehe. 7. etc.
Iaddua the High Priest, in the days of great Nehem. 12. 11.
Alexander; where ended the Story of the old Testament.

And in the New, the holy Genealogies are set even in the frontispice thereof,
and the first text read in the Gospel is, Mat. 1. 1
The Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of
Abraham.

Which well considered, if nothing else could move a reverend desire to study
them, yet at leastwise should it move a trembling fear to despise them; seeing
that Christ is the subject of that divine text, the Apo. 1. 8.
Alpha and Omega, through Romans 11. 36.
whom they were writ; and the Mat. 21. 24.
Stone that bruseth his contemners to powder.

Genealogies then, being the first step laid in the new Testament, are for use
the first step that mounteth from earth unto heaven, as Genesis 28. 12.
Jacobs Ladder did reach, by which the great Archangell Christ from the top
descended, unto the lowest staff, the Tabernacle of our flesh.

In them we see the dispercions of Families in the peopleing of the World, and
in them the government of the World when it was peopled. In them the state of
the holy and sincere worshippers of God; and in them the wicked Idolaters and
profaners of all his ways. Briefly, in them we see both the builders and
pullers down of the walls of Sion; Gods mercy ever extended upon his chosen,
the blessed; and his wrath ever severe upon the rejected, the cursed.

For from Cain to Lamech, his severity Genesis 4. 11.
continued; through Genesis 9. 25
Ham, Canaan, Genesis 10. 9
Nimrod, Exodus 17. 6.
Amelek, Ge. 16 12
Ismael and Heb. 12. 17.
Esau, it followed; which last found no repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears: and Acts 26. 28.
Agrippa his last, was but almost persuaded to become a Christian.

Whereas contrariwise, the elect were led by Gods Angel through Canaan, Exodus
23 20.
Egypt, the Red Sea, and the Wilderness, unto Canaan their rest; where Psalm.
78. 68.
Sion became the Lords delight, Jerusalem his chosen 2. Chron. 6. 6.
City, and the Lords Temple, the very gate of heaven.

Unto which, without respect of Country, Person, or Tribe, whether Jew or
Gentile, they that looked with the eye of favor, were again of God favored;
as 1. King. 8.
Solomon prayed for.

Such were 1. Ki. 5. 7.
Hiram king of Tyrus, that forwarded the building of the Temple: the Lu. 11. 31
Queen of Sheba. that came from the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon: Ier. 38. 7.
Ebedmelech the Black-more, that pitied Jeremiah, and drew him out of the
Dungeon. Esa. 45. 1.
Cyrus the Lords anointed, that released 2. Chron. 36. 22.
Babylons Captivity: and Ezra 6. 1.
Darius, King of Persia, that favored and forwarded the work of the second
Temple. Again, the healed 2. King. 5. 14.
Naaman was a Syrian. the Luke 4. 26
Widow of Sarepta was a Sidonian, the supplicant Mar 7. 26
woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician: Act. 8. 27.
Candaces Eunuch was an Ethiopian: the cleansed Luke 17. 16:
Leper was a Samaritan; and Acts 10. 4.
Cornelius was Captain of the Italian Band. And this made Peter to confess
and say, that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he that
fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.

Search then the Ioh. 5. 39
Scriptures, for they testify of Christ; and as he is sought for, so is he
found: but no where more fully, then in the sacred Genealogies; which through
seventy five generations show him to be the seed promised to subdue Satan: the
just age of Ge. 12. 4
Abraham's life when he received the promise of seed, in whom the World should
be saved.

He is the Ioh. 1. 9
Light and Life of the World: let us seek him therefore whilst it is day, for
the night comes when no man can work Ioh. 1. 18
.

Saul in seeking 1. Sam. 9.
Asses, found a Crown; and we in seeking the Messiah, shall find an immortal
Kingdom. Happy are they that so seek, and so find: for God is a rewarder of
them that seek him Heb. 11. 6
.

CHAP. II.
That the Names of the Fathers and Patriarchs in the Scriptures Genealogies,
do lead unto Christ.

MOses ready to go the way of all flesh, in his last Book, and leauetaking of
his brethren the Israelites, among many other documents to them delivered, gave
this precept continually to be followed; Deuteronomy. 4. 32
That the children should ask their fathers concerning the Lords Covenants,
even since the day Moses his precept touching Gods covenant.
that man was created upon the earth. And the disputer in Job, from the same
text gives the reason; Job 8. 8.
For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because (says he) our days
are a shadow upon the earth.

If then from the wise, wisdom is to be had, what truer can be gotten, then
from the ancient Patriarchs, Fathers, and high Saints, both before and after
the flood; they being the Parents True wisdom gathered srom the first Fathers.
of Christ, and the patterns of all true holiness. The former for length of
days, and holy conuersations are best able to instruct us, and ought chiefly
to be known of us, for the parents of all Nations upon the earth.

Whose Religion and service to their God Jehovah, their sacrificing declares,
and the prophetical naming of their sons sufficiently shows, what hope
they had of the other, and how vain they held this transitory world.

For Adam no sooner had Genesis 4.
Cain, a possession, but forthwith was borne to him Abel a vanity, and
therefore his third son in name was Seth, a settled foundation upon the Rock
Christ. And Seth knowing the sins that should be wrought by the Sons of the
holy Stem, when they for beauties The Fathers were faithful, and all of them
Pro phets.
sake should match with the profane (but fair) daughters of Cains race, named
his son Enos the sorrowful, as foreseeing the heavy relapse in religion,
and Jude 1.
the turning of the grace of God into wantonness: as upon the like stumbling
block the Israelites fell, when Numb. 25 1. 9.
twenty four thousand fell under the plague of death, for the like wantonness
with the daughters of Moab.

Unto Enos was borne Cainan the Contrite; and unto him Mahalaleel the
praise-God; whose son was Iared the lowly, and his son Enoch The
resurrection figured.
the Consecrated; a figure of the resurrection, by the translation of his
earthly body into heaven from the society of men, and the world. His son was
Methuselah the spearedeath; and his, Lamech the heartwounded: who foreseeing
the general deluge, named his son Noah the Comforter, that should restore
the earth which God had cursed, and re-people the world, which for sin was
drowned.

And the like appellations had the Fathers after the Flood, when the years of
their lives were cut shorter by the half: for Sem the second son of Noah, was
named Renown, who in his name Melchizedek is renowned indeed, being the first
King and Melchisedech the first King and Priest in the world.
Priest mentioned in the world, and the figure of Christ in them both. His
son Arphaxad was a Healer, and his son Sale, a spoiler; his son Heber, a
Pilgrim, and his son Peleg a Division, and so consequently of all the rest.

Where, by the very names of these Patriarchs and Fathers, an hystoricall All
the Fathers lead unto Christ.
narration may be made unto the Messiah himself, who was Jesus the Savior,
and the Emanuel, God with us.

Then let us not think, that these names of Christ his Parents (or others upon
occasions given or changed) fell from the mouths of these Patriarchs, as lots
fall from the lap; but rather do those Prophets foreseeing Christ to come,
All the Fathers by faith saw Christ.
met him with their thankful remembrances, and saw his days a far off, and
rejoiced.

These Etymologies then lead us unto the Messiah, as the Star did the
Wisemen unto Christ; wherein if our dull apprehensions fall too short (as who
can comprehend the full mystery that God would become man in the flesh) where
we understand, let us rejoice and be thankful; and where we understand not,
let us pray for his Spirit, that 2 Cor. 4. 6.
our darkness may be made light in Christ.

CHAP. III.
That the Scriptures Genealogies are the Scriptures stays for Chronology.

AS then the names of these Fathers afford great light to the sacred stories,
and heavenly moisture to the thirsting Searcher: So are their days the bounds
of the year, and their lives, the measure of time and of the Suns course:
for neither by the motions of the Planets, nor circle of the The motions of the
heavens known only by the lives of the Fathers.
Moon, the Sun was observed to pass the twelve Signs in the Zodiake: for
two thousand eighty three years continuance; but only and altogether by the
lives of those first Patriarchs for many generations successively. This glory
God gave to parents of his Son, that so long as they held him for their God
Jehovah, and The holy Patriarks glory in the former ages.
with true worship honored him aright, so long that most excellent creature
the Sun (the beauty of the heavens, and the delight of the world) gave place
for his measurings to these earthly men. For no otherwise was the world
calculated, The worlds calculation only by the Fathers.
then by this threefolde accounts of begettings, ages, and deaths of the first
nineteen Fathers before, and after the flood: which account is of such
strength, as the Eccles. 4. 12.
threefold cord of Solomon is not so strong.

As for example, Adam at an hundred and thirty years of his life begat Seth,
and lived after his birth The tripple accounts of the Patriarchs.
eight hundred, and died aged nine hundred and thirty years. Seth at an
hundred and five, begot Enos, he lived after his birth eight hundred and seven,
and died aged nine hundred and twelve years. Enos lived ninety years, and
begot Cainan, and lived after he had begot Cainan eight hundred and fifteen
years: so (...) days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and so of all
the rest unto Terah the Father of Abraham.

But Josh. 24. 2.
Terah falling to Idolatry with the rest of the profane beyond the River,
besides that note of infamy, to be the first of the holy Line that served
strange gods; was the last The glory of the worlds computation taken from the
Fathers.
of that Line that measured the Suns course, and had that honor for
computation taken from him, as one unworthy to direct the light of the world,
being fallen into dark Idolatry himself: and God from that time tied the
sum of times in holier bands; as from the promise to the Gal. 3 17
Law, from the Law to the building of the 1 Kings 6. 1.
Temple, from thence to the Kingdoms division 1 Kings 11. 42.
, and their continuance, by Ezekiels Ezech. 4 2. 5.
siege and sleep, to the destruction of the Temple: thence to the end of Ier.
25. 11.
Babels captivity: and lastly thence, to the eternal liberty bought with the
blood and death of our Dan. 9. 24.
Messiah Christ.

But God in Justice ever remembering mercy, has not so eclipsed these holy
Fathers renown, as to stand naked for use in the computations following; but
has rather set them for Stones in times buildings, to give the luster of truth
in the Theological Chronicle of his sacred decrees, and has made them Judges,
how the times set by himself, fell in number, weight, and measure.

For in the sweet promises to Abraham, that Genesis 15. 13.
his seed should inherit the Land of Canaan, this pill of bitter digestion came
in; that they Genesis 15. 13.
should be afflicted in a strange Land, the space of four hundred years, and
those expired, in the fourth generation they should be delivered. Now the most
noted affliction, was the thraldom of Egypt, under the burdens of brick and
clay; and the delivery from that The promise for deliverance accomplished in
the fourth generation.
Iron furnace, was as faithfully accomplished, and as mightily performed in the
fourth generation of Isreal's sons. For of Iudahs tribe, Hezron was one that
went down into Egypt, and Nahshon the fourth in desent, was a Prince in the
Wilderness. So likewise of Leui, Kohath was one of the seauentie souls: and
his fourth Eleazer divided the Land.

Again, the Exodus 12
dwelling of the children of Israel in Egypt (as Moses to some seems to
auerre) was four Moses his meaning expounded.
hundred and thirty years. But the Apostle Saint Paul, who wrote by the same
spirit, to prove grace before works, makes the number no more betwixt Gal. 3.
17
the promise and the Law: now we know that the Law was given immediately upon
the The promise 4 o years before the Law.
departure of Israel out of Egypt, in the wilderness of Sinai: as also that
the half of those years were fully expired, before that Israel came to dwell
in Egypt.

For Abraham at Genesis 12. 4.
seventy five received the promise, and at an hundred of his life (which was
twenty five years after) Isaac Genesis 21. 5.
was borne: Isaac at sixty Genesis 25. 26.
begot Jacob, and Jacob was an Genesis 47. 9.
^o. when he came before Pharaoh all which added together, make but half the
number, even Polichro. lib. 2. cap. 12.
two hundred and fifteen.

Thus then by the sacred Genealogies (the sure foundations of holy stories
Half the years of the promise was spent before the Israelites went into Egypt.
) we are taught how to read Moses with understanding, who in these four
hundred and thirty years, does include the peregrinations, afflictions, and
dwellings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Land of Canaan, with the
Israelites soiourning in Egypt.

And so the Septuagints do interpret the Text: The dwelling (say they) The
Septuagints exposition of Moses.
of the children of Israel which dwelt in Egypt, and in the Land of Canaan,
both ^hey and their Fathers, was four hundred and thirty years. And in the
same words does Aug. quest. 47. in Exodu^.
Augustine expound it, as Joseph. Antiq. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Josephus likewise before him had done.

The mistaking of this, has been Gordius knot unto many, and has ^oubled
Genebrard not a little to vn^ose, who to defend the Latin bad ^anslation,
rather will have Moses (...) omit some of his own Ancestors (...) his Text,
then that their Text ^ould therein be faulty.

But never any Hebrew, Greek, or ^atine, ever set Moses further from Abraham,
then the seventh; nor is ^is objection of greater force of the impossibility,
that from seventy persons only, six hundred thousand men, besides women and
children, should be proceated within the compass of two hundred and fifteen
years.

For if we consider the wonderful increase of Israel in Egypt, who abundantly
multiplied, and waxed exceeding many, so that the Land (says the Text) was
filled with them: and that from seauenty persons, all of them able, and apt for
generation, we shall find it nothing so strange.

But stranger had it been, if Isreal's abode had been in Egypt, fully four
hundred and thirty years, with no greater increase, God promising to multiply
that seed of Abraham as the stars of Heaven, and the dust of the earth. Genesis
22. 17.


For in the like space of four hundred and thirty years, the World from the
flood was replenished only by three persons, Iaphet, Sem, and Ham, with far
greater increase. For in Abraham's story we read, of the preparation of nine
Kings, and Genesis 14.
of six Nations in Canaan, and the Countries adjacent.

And that the earth was peopled and replenished both continent, and Islands long
before, we see, by the dispersions of Noah's sons through the world; neither
does the Text being advisedly read, enforce any such continuance in Egypt: for
thus does Moses write, and our last translation read: The soiourning of the
children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred Exodus 12. 40.
and thirty years.

But that the Israelites dwelt not The Israelites dwelt not in Egypt 430 years.
in Egypt four hundred and thirty years, as Genebrard understands Moses, a
second foundation by the holy Genealogies is laid: for Genesis 46. 11.
Kohath accompanied Jacob into Egypt, and his son was Exodus 6. 18. 20.
Amram, and his son Moses.

Then seeing Kohath is the enterer, and Moses the departer, the time cannot
extend to four hundred and thirty years: for Kohath lived but one hundred
thirty three years: Exodus 6. 20.
Amram his son, but one hundred thirty seven; and Moses his son was eighty at
the departure. All which added together, make but three hundred and fifty, and
yet some of them also must be deducted where they lived together. These ages
therefore are so sure and true witnesses of Moses his meaning, that Genebrard
mistaking it, affirms some betwixt Kohath and Moses to be omitted. To such
extremity Genealogies enforces.

And yet further to illustrate the text for story, a weak woman may Iochebed
the daughter of Leui, and mother of Moses.
serve to support the truth: namely, Iochebed the mother of Moses, who was the
immediate daughter of Leui, borne unto him in Egypt, by Elishebah his wife:
Nom. 26. 59. Now the life of Leui extended but to one hundred thirty seven
years; Exodus 6. 16. whereof forty three were spent before he came into Egypt,
which thus may be collected.

Leui was borne of Leah, in the third year of the second seven, of Leui his
age gathered by Joseph's.
Jacobs service with Laban; in the end of which seven, Joseph also was borne:
Genesis 30. 25. and Chap. 31. 41. So that Joseph is but four years younger then
Leui. Now Joseph's age at his expounding of Pharoahs dream, was thirty: Genesis
41. 46. And thence the seven years of plenty, and the two of famine were
expired; Genesis 45. 6. So that Joseph was aged when his Father and brethren came
into Egypt, thirty nine years, and Leui his elder, was at that Leui his age
when he came into Egypt.
time forty three: whose continuance then in Egypt must be ninety four years;
for ninety four added to forty three, make one hundred thirty seven, his
whole age to his death: before which time it is manifest Iochebed (his
daughter) must be borne, or be begotten.

Now if the abode in Egypt were fully four hundred and thirty years, then
three hundred thirty six years after Leui his death, must be the departure
thence; but so long a time by Iochebeds age cannot be granted: for she being
borne but ninety four years after the first entrance, and living to bear a
son, but eighty years before the departure; the time betwixt the death of her
father, and the birth of her son, must be the age of her own life: for had
she been borne the day of her fathers Iochebeds age disanulleth the 430
years abode in Egypt.
death, which is not likely, and had died the day of her sons birth, which
we know is contrary, yet must she have been two hundred fifty and six
years old when she bare Moses. A time by much too long for weomen to
conceive, and her age far unfit to give suck, or to be chosen a fit nurse
for a Kings daughters son.

And therefore it is certainly gathered by these holy Genealogies, that The
Peregrinations of the Patriarks, and the abode in Egypt together, make 430
years.
the peregrinations of the Patriarks, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for the space
of two hundred and fifteen years, must be accounted with the time of the
continuance in Egypt, both which together make the sum of four hundred and
thirty.

What lights therefore Genealogies are for history, let these here alleged
stand for witnesses, wherein I appeal to the gaine-sayers themselves, whether
any text be forced contrary to the true meaning.

CHAP. IIII.
That the Scriptures Genealogies do limit Daniels Seuens not to exceed 490
years.

THE like use and vtility shall we find in the succeeding times of the sacred
Records: and most especially in that which concerns us most; namely, ^he time
mentioned in Daniel, which ^oreshewed the death of the true Lamb Christ, unto
whom all the sacrifices of the Law pointed, and in whom all the Leuiticall
rites ended, ^e being our high Priest, far above Aarons order.

Now among many other male^ictions threatened for the breach of ^he Law, this
was one, Leuit. 26 34.
that the Land should lie waste to pay her Sabbaths of rest. Which time of
waste, ^he Prophet Jeremy affirms to have been seventy years, and does
begin their account in Ier. 25. 1. 11.
the first year of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, from whence Ier. 27. 7.
all nations should serve him, his son, and sons son, the space of
seventy years: which expired in the third of Belshazzar, and first year of
King Cyrus, when the reign of the Kingdom of Persia began, as it is in 2.
Chron. 36. 20. 22.

Upon which Text of Jeremy, Daniel took his occasion of Prayer for Daniel his
prayer upon occasion of Ieremies prophecy.
their deliverance, and the Lord was as ready to accomplish his promise, who
sending his Angel even in the same moment, certified him, that whilst his
supplications were in making, Dan. 9. 24.
the Decree of deliverance was in determining; and that not only from Babels
seventy years captivity: but also thence after seventy times seven should be
a full deliverance from spiritual thraldom, by the doctrine and death of the
Messiah.

These seventy seuens Gabriel divides Daniels seuens divided into three parts.
into 3. parts, as follows. 1. To the rebuilding of the City, and building
the second Temple, seven seuens. Secondly, Sixty two seuens, wherein a silence
for Prophecy, the want of fire from heaven, and the Vrim and Thummim should be
had. And thirdly, one seven, in the half whereof Christ should confirm the
Covenant for many, and in the end thereof, should seal up man's redemption by
his death and passion.

Notwithstanding, this tripple account, and plainness of Chronology (which
the Angel aims at, as to the true period of times fullness) has been
troubled with the uncertain computations both of Jews and Christians, who
have both shrunk and tentered them from the just number of four hundred and
Daniels seuens miscast
ninety years; which seventy seuens make in their own propriety.

For some will have them to contain no fixed certain time at all, D. R. in M.
S.
but rather think they were spoken unto Daniel; as Christ spoke unto Peter in
forgiving his brothers offenses; Mat. 18. 22.
I say not unto thee unto seven times, but unto seventy times seven times: or
as his, that does begin them fifty years before Babels fall, and ends them
toward the dissolution of the world, Hierom upon Dan. 9.
as Hierome cites Hypolitus to have done: or if any certainty be in them, yet
such it is, as may rather dazell the eye unto dimmer darkness, then
illuminate the understanding Daniels seuens mistaken.
with brighter knowledge, if we will lend our ears unto Origin; who
understands these weeks, not to be weeks of seven years, but of ten times
seven, Origin hom. 29. upon Mat:
for every year taking ten, and does begin their reckoning from the
beginning of the world; so that seventy weeks should make four thousand nine
hundred years from the creation unto Christ: and some begin them at the
nativity of Christ, and continues them unto the end of the World, as
Apollianus has done.

Others that allow their certainty and propriety of the Angels speech, yet do
differ in assigning their beginnings and endings; because three other edicts
are mentioned in Ezra and Nehemiah, besides that of Cyrus: Ezra 6. 1. Ezra 7.
12. Nehem. 2.
and yet wheresoever they begin them, they still bring their endings, ^ther
at the birth of Christ in the ^me of Herod. or at the death of Christ, in the
reign of Tiberius; as * True Religion, chap. ^9.
Lord Plessie has well observed.

That they began when Babels Kingdom ended, is most manifest Daniels seuens
began in the first year of Cyrus.
^y Jeremiah the Prophet, where he ^ith; Ier. 29. 10
Thus says the Lord, after sea^nty years be accomplished at Babel, I ^ill
visit you, and perform my good pro^ises toward you, and cause you to re^rne
to this place. And by the last Chapter of the second of Chronicles, where it is
said; 2 Chapter 36. 22. 23.
In the first year ^f Cyrus, King of Persia, (when the word ^f the Lord spoken
by the mouth of Jeremiah was finished) the Lord stirred up the ^irit of Cyrus,
King of Persia, and he ^ade a Proclamation through, all his Kingdom, and also
by writing, saying; Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, all the Kingdoms of the
Earth has the Lord God of Heaven given me, and he has ^mmanded me to build
him a house in Jerusalem, that is, in Judah: who is among you of all his
people, with whom the Lord his God is, let him go up.

And the other Edicts made by Darius, The Edicts of Cyrus successors, but
confirmations of his.
and Artaxerxes, successors t^ Cyrus; are but confirmations of thi^ his Edict,
and not new Edicts made from which these seuens might hau^ their beginnings:
for so the Ezra 6. 1
Record laid up in the Library at Babel, and searched at the command of Darius
does signify, where in a volume i^ was thus written as a memorial: In the
first year of King Cyrus, King Cyrus made a decree for the house of God in
Jerusalem, etc.

And that they ended at the death of Christ, when sins were sealed up and
iniquity reconciled by the anointing Daniels seuens ended at Christ's death.
of the holy of Holies, is manifest both by a definite and certain number in
themselves assigned, namely, seventy seuens: as also by a definite number
multiplied from other Seuens thus. Jeremiah had showed the seventy years
captivity, wherein they were Ier. 27. 7.
to serve the King of Babel, his son, and his sons son; which exactly
fell so, and were expired at Daniels prayer; and thence, being multiplied ten
times more, do bring us to the certain time of Christ's death, and make four
hundred and Ninety years.

Again, those multiplied years ^eing divided into parts definite, ^pproue the
whole certain; and the ^rst, and last falling accordingly, ^ake that time, to
point out his ^ime, for whom time was ordained.

For the first Seven. The Jews ob^ction against Christ, that forty six ^eers
the Temple was in building; Ioh. 2. ^0. and the three of hinderance since Syrus
his Edict, make that number Four Passeouers mentioned in John. The first in
cha. 2. 13. the second in chap. 5. 1. the third in chap. 6. 4. the fourth in
chapters 11. and 13. and 18.
^ertaine, even seven Seuens, or forty Nine years, whereof more hereafter. And
that the last were as exactly ^ccomplished from the baptism of Christ unto his
death, even half a se^en of years, by the four Passeouers ^lebrated by
himself (in the last whereof he died) is apparent by ^e Evangelists records,
and by the ^ncient affirmed to be the three ^eers and a half of Christ his
prea^ing to confirm the covenant; vn^ the which time Reu. 12. 14.
the Time, Times, ^d half a Time in the Apocalips is alluded unto by many
Interprete^ And had those seventy seuens, or yee^ of the Angels predicted for
Chr^ his preaching and death, been v^ certain, the Jews had not bee^ so
justly taxed for more neglige^ obseruer^ of time, then were t^ Esaias 1. 3.
Ox, or the Ass, the Ier. 8. 7.
Storke, t^ Turtle, the Crane, or the Swallo^ neither had been so blame-worth
of times ignorance for their ow^ visitations.

Moreover, had these Seventy S^uens been uncertain, then the a^ceptable year
of Iubile had not b^ so certainly expected, as in Luke 19 11.
Lu^ we see it was: neither had any ce^taine Chronology continued from t^ old,
unto the new Testament. A^ Daniels Seuens the only Chronicle to the new
Testament.
what should move the holy Gh^ so carefully to keep and contin^ a true
Chronology of ^uery partic^lar story, from the first creation, v^ to the first
year of Cyrus, and the^ break it off; especially considerin^ that all times
led unto Christ, Romans 13. 36.
whom, through whom, and for who^ were all things writ that were writ, whom be
glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Thus much being spoken of their beginnings and endings, let us now come to the
accounts therein contained, and for the better understanding, follow the years
of the Kingdoms In what Monarchies Daniels Seuens fell.
wherein they fell, beginning at the last, and ascending to the first, in
which, and whose reigns the most doubts fall.

The Roman Writers set Christ's death in the eighteenth of the Emperor
Tiberius, and his birth in the Clem. Alex. strom. 1.
forty two of Augustus, whose whole reign was fifty six years: so that by
them Christ his age is made to be upon thirty three years. And both Romans and
Greeks reckon betwixt the first of Augustus, and the last of Alexanders death
280. years before Augustus his reign.
Alexander, two hundred and eighty years; namely, seventy Olympiads: for
Alexander died in the 114. Olympiad, and Augustus began his reign in the 184.
The Gre^ an Monarchy began at the slaughter of Darius.


But the Grecian Monarchy began six years before the death of Alexander, by
the slaughter of Darius, as all Authors acknowledge, and ended with the death
of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, being the last of his successors, in the
fourteenth year of Augustus; as by the reigns of the Ptolomies are generally
gathered. Which number six before Alexanders death, and fourteen likewise
after Augustus his beginning, being added to 280. make the number The Grecian
Monarchy continued 300. years.
to be complete three hundred years: the whole and exact time of the Grecian
Monarchy.

And the Romans reign from the fourteenth of Augustus, unto the death of
Christ the Messiah, (where the last Seven of the Seventy ended) by the
remainder of Augustus his reign (which was forty two years more) and
eighteen likewise expired under Tiberius, is most apparent that sixty years
of the Roman government Romans 60 490 Grecians 300 Persians 130


were spent; which being added to the three hundred of the Grecians, both
together make three hundred and sixty. So that one hundred and thirty for the
Persians time must remain, to fill up the number of Seventy Seuens, or four
hundred and ninety years predicted in Da^iel.

Which time of the Persians, both The Persians ragne most trouble Daniels
accounts.
^n the division for those first Seuens, wherein the City was built, and their
whole continuance unto their and, has bred the greatest distur^ance of Daniels
propriety.

That their Monarchy began when ^he word Dan. 5. 30.
MEAN was double writ upon the Palace wall, and Babels ^ingdome ended by the
slaughter of ^elshazzar, the texts both of Daniel and the 2. Chro. 36. 22.
Chronicles do show, and that it continued unto Darius, whom ^e surnameth the
Nehem. 12. 22.
Persian, Nehemiah ^oth record, betwixt whom is no ^reater disagreements for
the num^er of their Kings, and their names, ^en there is of years for their
^aignes and continuance: not any ^ne of them from first to last, but ^ath a
differing number assigned, even by their best recorders. The number of the
Persian Kings not agreed upon.


For the number of their Kings, ^ab. Saadah will have them but ^hree, Aben Ezra
says, they were four, and Rab. Moses allows Tertul. lib. aduers. Iudaeos.
Isidor lib. 5. Etimol.
them five: of Christian Writers, Tertullian, Isidor and Annius Viterbiensis
accounts them eight, Joseph Scaliger will have them nine, Bullenger ten,
Beroaldus eleven, and Hierome with the ordinary Gloss, no less then
fourteen: and as in the men, so for number of years they disagree.

For the Jews generally to cross the time, lest it should meet Christ to be
their Messia, give the Persians from the first unto the last of their Rab. Zota.
government but only 52. years; though Aben Ezra is content to allow them
nin. more. Of Christians, Pererius extends their time to 23 2. Lyra to 230.
years Clem. Alexandrinus The reigns of the Persian Kings uncertain.
gives them 215. Dyonisius Hallicarnassis 200. Lucidus 190. Isidor^ 180.
Beroaldus, Broughton, and other late Writers 130: differing in their totals, no
less then 182 years.

Whereby we may see, how the Esaias 8. 6.
smooth running waters of Shiloh are become a troubled Ocean unto many, over
which gulf of disagreeing accounts, were not the holy The Genealogies give
passage to Daniels propriety.
Genealogies the bridge, it were impossible for us to pass.

For in their first number, from the first year of Cyrus unto the finishing of
the Temple, in the Ezra 6. 15
sixth of Darius, are added unto the propriety of those Seven Seuens, fifty
seven years, making of forty nine, (which they properly import) no less then
Iunius in his annotation upon that text of Haggai in his last edition.
an hundred and six years. And in the like manner the time from that work,
unto the end of the Persians reign, is likewise ouerstretched to be above
fourscore years, more then the Sun ever measured.

The maine cause of whose differences, are the variable accounts of the
Heathen, and the uncertain computations of the uncertain Olympiads. And
therefore to direct these times, the holy Genealogies are as the Reed in the
Angels hand, that measured the Apoc. 11. 1.
Temple and Altar of the holy City, and the men then living, a cloud of
witnesses to confirm the Times certenty unto us.

For, seeing that the sacred Scriptures (for story) at the rebuilding of
Jerusalem and second Temple did cease: the disagreements of profane No account
to be made of profane Writers for Daniels Seuens.
Writers, in Times computation so manifestly apparent, and the ever erring
Olympiads (the only Chronicle of the Heathen) so uncertain of beginning, and
neglect for continuance, no sure foundation can be laid upon so sandy or soft a
ground.

Nor may those profane authorities be held fit pillars to support The cause
too weighty for the he athen to witness
the weight, of the waightiest speech of times measure, and promise of man's
Redemption, revealed in the old testament of God: but are to be rejected in
this holy computation, as the unmeasured Court was to be cast out and given to
the Gentiles. Apo. 11. 12
And yet we deny not, but where the Gentiles agree with Gabriels account, The
Heathen Writers may serve as handmaids to the Scriptures text.
they may be brought as witnesses to the truth, and God by them justified in
his promises, when he is judged. Therefore to approve the propriety of Daniels
Seuens, let us trauerse them by the Scriptures allowance, both in the ages and
lives of men.

That the first division of Gabriels Seuens (which was from the going forth of
the Edict, to the Dan. 9. 25.
rebuilding of Jerusalem) fell accordingly, and were forty nine years to the
finishing of the work, the answer of the Jews to our Savior Christ, does so
A certenty in the first division of Daniels Seuens.
much import, when demanding by what authority he drove the market out of the
Temple, and what signs he showed to testify his authority, Destroy (said
he) Ioh. 2. 18
this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up: speaking of the Temple of
his body. But they ignorant of his meaning, replied thus: Forty six years
this Temple was in building, and will thou rear it up in three days.

And whereas Bullinger. and Scaliger.
some are of opinion that the Jews vnpremeditated made this answer, as they
did of Christ's age, Thou art not yet fifty, and have thou seen Abraham: yet
seeing the account falls according to the assignement, we may well think they
spoke upon an Historical knowledge: for three years added thereunto, which
were the years from Cyrus his Edict, unto the hindrance of that Ezra 4. 24.
work by his successors, and for which Daniel mourned three weeks of days,
Chapter 10. 2. make the number to be forty nine, even seven times seven
years; unto which certenty some are so confident, that they avouch these forty
six years did forefigure Christ his age upon the earth, and do draw the
years of his life, unto the like number of Alleged by D. Willet upon Dan. 9.
fol. 304.
forty six, because as they imagine, the body should answer the shadow, the
substance the figure, and the true Temple the material in every degree; albeit
herein they are much deceived: for that the days of Christ upon earth, came
not fully to thirty three years, as by the years of his birth and death under
the reigns of the Roman Emperors Augustus and Tiberius is seen.

But that fifty seven more should be added, and the years tentured unto an
hundred and six, betwixt the first of King Cyrus, and the building of the
Temple, the ages of diverse men in those days will not permit; and therefore by
the holy Scriptures let us see how the holy Genealogies stay them from rouing
too far.

First it is manifest that Zerubabel Zerubbabel of years sufficient to govern
the returned.
of Judah, was a Prince of years and actiuenesse, fit to lead and command the
people in their return from captivity, in the first year of Cyrus: and so
he is ever named in the catalogue amongst the returned, and that in the Ezra
3. 8
second year and second month after their coming to Jerusalem, he began to
set forward the work of the house of the Lord, Zerubbabel laid the Temples
foundation.
and to lay the foundation of the Temple, is by Ezra recorded, and as
manifestly was it promised, that he should see that his work finished, for
said Zechariah from the Lord, Zech. 3. 9
Zerubbabel laid the foundation of this house, and his hands shall finish it.
What age Zerubbabel was of when he underwent that Government, we know not, but
must conjecture, he was of years fit for that charge: but to live from that
age, to an hundred and six years more, is more then without warrant can be
credited, and yet for any thing known The Scriptures must warrant, where we
must credit.
to the contrary, he might live long after the work was finished.

Another witness we have as aged (if not more) as Zerubbabel, and a
principal man also, who with him Nehem. 12. 1.
returned from Babylon in the first year of Cyrus, even Ezra the Scribe, the
son of Seraiah the high Priest, whose ancestors both in the seventh chapter
of his book, and in the first book of the 1. Chro. 6.
Chronicles are reckoned up unto Aaron. Now the same Seraiah father to Ezra 2.
King. 25. 8. 18.
was carried to Riblah, in the land of Hamah, and there slain, by
Nebuehadnezzar King of Babel in the nineteenth year of his reign. So that had
Ezra been begot but the Ezra borne before the nineteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzar.
day of his fathers death (which is not likely) yet must he have been fifty
years aged at the return from captivity in the first year of Cyrus: since
when, had there been one hundred and six years, as some account, to there
building of the Temple, then must Ezra have been at that time, one hundred
fifty six years old, an age by much too long to retain actiuenesse, or to
stand (as he did) Nehem. 8. 3.
from morning till midday, to read, and expound the Law to the people.

But to live a long time after, as it is said he did, even to the end of the
Ezra his age will not admit the Persians reign a boue 130. years.
Persians reign, which was eighty years more, his life must have seen more
years then that shortened age of man's life could attain unto. And therefore
the uncertain accounts of the Heathen must be measured by those men, whom the
scriptures have made their measuring ^eedes.

And seeing God has ordained, that Deuteronomy. 9. 15.
by the mouth and testimony of two ^r three witnesses, the truth shall be
established: Let Mordecai, an eminent man of Benjamin stand for another. This
Ester 2. 5
Mordecai was carried away captive into Babylon with Ieconiah King of Judah, in
the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar, and nourished Est. 3. 7.
Ester in the days of Ahashuerosh, King of Persia, unto the twelfth year of
his reign.

And that this Ahashuerosh was Darius Histaspis holden to be Ahashuerosh.
Darius Histaspis, besides Lyra and others ancient, the modern Writers,
Beroaldus, Broughten, Willet, More, the Geneuian Annotation, and many more
affirm: and Herod. lib. 3.
Herodotus in his third book names Atossa to be the wife of Hystaspis,
sounding so near to Adassa (the other name of Ester is called Atossa.
Ester) as without prejudice we may call Ester his Queen. And the rather, for
that the said Author reports she could prevail in any thing with the King
her husband: which the Scripture confirms, even Est. 7. 3.
to the half of his Kingdom.

And likewise Hellanicus.
Hellanicus another Heathen Author reports, that Atossa Queen of Persia, was
the first inuenter of Epistles, which undoubtedly was ministered upon the
Letters by her procured, and sent unto one hundred and twenty seven Provinces,
for the saving of her people, whom Ahashuerosh had condemned at the suit of
Est. 8. 9.
wicked Haman.

But that this Ahashuerosh could be Xerxes, and he eighty four years after
Cyrus, as he has been set; the Mordecai his age will not admit so many years
from the return.
age of Mordecai may not admit: for had Mordecai been but eight years of age,
when he was carried away captive with Ieconiah in the eight year of
Nebuchadnezzar, yet must he have been seventy at the return from Babylon, but
to add almost a hundred years more, neither humanity could require his so
aged knees to bow, nor nature afford his body to be of such agilitie as it was
for State affairs: man's term of life, as Solon told Croesus (men of the same
Herod. l. 1
time) to be only threescore and ten years.

I am not ignorant, that some will have the relative (which) to be referred to
the antecedent Kish: which (say they) the text does import in these words:
Mordecai, the son of Est. 2. 5. Joseph. Scalliger de men. tem. lib. 6.
Iair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish: and this Kish they will have the
man that had been carried captive unto Babylon with Ieconiah.

But if the words of Esters Apocrypha may be herd, it was not Kish, but
Mordecai; for there Mordecai, a Noble man that dwelt in Susis, and bare office
in the Kings Court, was he that had the dream, and was the man which
Nebuchadnezzar brought captive from Jerusalem, as Chap. 2. 4. Which Esters
Apocrypha.
book, though not Canonical, yet is it ancient, and may well be a witness in
a well known history.

Besides, we see that the intent of that story is not to relate of Kish his
captivity (if any such had been, the miseries of those times now ouerblowne)
but rather the means that God then wrought to save his Church by this his
instrument Mordecai, that had seen the deliverance both of himself and others
from that Captivity of Babylon, and now was an acter to blunt the edge of
wicked Hamans sword:

And that the time could extend to those years thus enlarged betwixt Cyrus his
Edict, and the building of the City, Nehemiah does bring a whole Jury of
witnesses against it, who in his catalogue of twenty two men that returned with
him, and Zerubbabel from Chaldea unto Iewrie, ^ameth twelve of them to be
living ^n the days of his government, after that the walls of Jerusalem were
finished; which were, Seraiah, Amaziah, Twelve witnesses against the ouerlong
reigns of the Persians.
Malluch, Hattush, Sebaniah, Ha^im, Merimoth, Ginnethon, Abbiiah, Miiamin,
Bilgai, and Shemaiah, as in the tenth and twelfth Chapters of Nehemiah
apparently is seen. But from these particulars let us come to the generals.

That many of the same persons Many of the returned, alive at the Temples
building.
which had been carried captive unto Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, were returned
and alive at the building of the second Temple, in the second year of Darius,
is manifest by this speech of Haggai, Hag. 2. 4. 10.
who is left (says ^e) among you that saw this house in her first glory, and
how do you see it now, is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?
Whereby it is apparent, that many of the returned, had seen the great beauty
of Salomons Temple, and were seated again in Jerusalem according to the Vision
of the goo^ figs seen by Jeremy, concernin^ the captivity of Ieconiah, whom
the Lord had promised to bring again to Judah, Ier. 24.
to build them, and not destro^ them; to plant them, and not to root the^ out.

And albeit that Zecariah told the^ that Zach. 8. 4.
old men, and old women should walk the streets of Jerusalem upon the^ staves
through decrepit age; ye^ such exceeding old age could not b^ retained in that
age of the world: for had an hundred and six years bee^ expired from the
first year of Cyrus to the rebuilding of Jerusalem, an^ the Temple, then
should the returne^ each of them have been at that tim^ an hundred sixty seven
years aged had they been but ten when Salomons Temple was destroyed; an^ ten
years is the least age that ca^ be allowed to retain memory, o^ observation
of the Temples curiou^ building and passing great beauty.

Wherefore those tentured time^ of Daniels Seuens, must be again shrunk unto
the staple of the sacred The Persians scantelized almost to half their time.
accounts, and the Persians reign shortened unto half the number (almost) that
some ouer-lauishly have given them. For the chain of Chronology linked
together by the lives of the holy line, and sacred stories assigned, even from
the first creation, unto the first year of the first Persian Monarch, are as
strong for continuance, and as glorious for accounts, as was the 1. King. 6. 21.
golden chain that Solomon drew before the door of the holy Oracle. But in the
link of the The holy Genealogies is a chain as glorious as Salomons.
Persians time is so broken a sunder by the uncertain records of uncertain
authorities, as it may rather seem a vexing of the truth, then to lead us to
the true time of Christ his sufferings: therefore to measure the stone by the
square, and the Persians whole continuance by the limits of life, let us see
yet further how the sacred Scriptures do direct us therein. Nehemiah saw both
the beginning and ending of the Persian Monarchy.


Nehemiah, a Captain in Judah, famous in his book canonical, saw both the
beginning and ending of the Persians Monarchy, as the text apparently shows,
for in the first year of Cyrus, among the sons of the province that went up
out of captivity (according to the Edict) this Nehemiah is said to accompany
Ezra 2. 2
Zerubbabel the Prince, together with Ieshuah, Seraiah, Mordecai, and others.
And that this was the same Nehemiah, who with large grants from King Nehem. 2.
1.
Artaxerxes came again to Jerusalem in the twentieth year of his reign, is
further confirmed by himself, where he says; I Nehem. 7. 5.
found a book of the Genealogies of them which came up at the first with
Zerubbabel, Ieshua, Nehemiah, Mordecai, and others.

And again, the same man returned to Nehem. 13. 6.
Jerusalem, in the two and thirtieth year of the said Kings reign: whereby we
see, that this Nehemiah was in the first year of Cyrus, and thirty two of
Artaxerxes. For to admit (as Petrus Galatinus has done) Petrus Gal. contra
Iud. lib. 7. c. 12.
two Nehemiahs, two Zerubbabels, and two Mordecaies, seeing the Scriptures
approve them not, were to make two Moses, two Samuels, and two David's.

And that Nehemiah lived to see the end of the Persians reign, appears by
his mentioning of the high Priest Iaddua, and of Darius the Persian.

And that this was the same Darius whom Alexander overcame, and the same Iaddua
before whom Alexander fell down to worship that God, whose name he saw
engraven in the golden plate of his High Priests Mite^ (besides many Christian
Writers) Josephus the Jew in his eleventh Joseph. Ant. lib. 11
book of their Antiquities, does evidently declare, whereby the supposed long
continuance of the Persians time is bounded within the limits of one man's life,
and some part of that also spent, before they aspired to their Imperial Crown.

But against this, some object, that Nehemiah in his old age might live ^o see
Iaddua borne heir to the high Priesthood, and so record him. And that Iaddua
likewise might be very ^ld, when he met and told Alexander, that Josephus
antiq. Jude. lib. 11. cap. 8.
he was the man of whom Daniel their Prophet prophesied, that should destroy
the estate of the Persians.

But to the contrary we see by Nehemiah himself, who in the thirteenth Chapter,
and twenty eight verse of his book says, that one of the sons of Ioiada the
son of Eliashib, the High Priest, was son in Law to Sanballat the Horonite,
whom he chased from him.

And who that son was, Josephus in the foresaid eleventh book of Antiquities,
tells us to be Manasses brother unto Iaddua the High Priest, who had married
Nicazo the daughter of Sanballat; for which marriage (says he) he was expulsed
by his brother from the Altar. Whereby we see, that Nehemiah saw not only
Iaddua of years capable for the dignity of High Priesthood; but also his
younger brother Manasses, a man married, and of years sufficient to serve at
the Altar, which must be twenty five at the least, as the law for the Leuit
enjoined: Numb. chap. eight, verse. twenty four.

And that Sanballat likewise (though Psalm. 55. 23.
the wicked come not to half their days) might see both the beginning and
ending of the Persians reign is apparent; for he being of policy both able to
hinder the Neh. 4. 1.
work of of Ierusalems building, and to Chap. 6.
entrap Nehemiah the builder, must be of age answerable to his designs, and
therefore of like years unto him.

And the same Sanballat lived to assist Alexander in his surprise of Gaza,
after he had overthrown Darius in the last battle. And that Nehemiah and
Sanballat were of like age and equal years, the said Joseph. antiq. Iud. bell.
lib. 11. cap. 5. and cap 8.
Josephus seems to auerre, testifying of Nehemiah, that he was laden with
age, and that Sanballat two years after the taking of Gaza died, being very
old.

But to conclude, that no longer continuance then four hundred and nintie
years, may in these seventy seuens be granted, let us measure them from the
first to the last, by the lives of the high Saints mentioned by the Evangelist
Saint Matthew: where we ^ind Joseph, the husband of Mary, to Matthew. 1.
be the tenth in descent from Zerubbabel, a Prince of Judah, in the first year
of Cyrus: and that Joseph lived to the Luke 2. 24
twelfth year of Christ as apparent, yea, to the thirtieth by the testimony of
Suidas; who says, that Joseph was but newly deceased, when Jesus was chosen a
Priest in the Temple.

The many years then, and the few successions therein contained, enforce the
times continuance no longer then four hundred and ninety years. For even in
that number, each of these ten generations must successively have their Sons
borne unto them at fifty years of age, or not much less.

Now in like manner, the like Genealogies in the new Testament do confirm the
time by the old.
number of years (even four hundred and ninety, by the Scriptures sure
account) were expired betwixt the government of Samuel. and the captivity of
Ieconiah. in the eight of Nebuchadnezzar, Babels King. And in those years we
find recorded by our Evangelist Luke 3.
Saint Luke, twenty generations from Nathan, the son of David, unto Neri, the
father of Salathiel in the days of Ieconiah, King of Judah: but to give these
latter ten generations, more years by many, then the former twenty did pass
through in their lives, stands neither with course of nature, nor has
example in those last times of closing up the Scriptures records:

These ten Fathers therefore so enforce Daniels seventy Seuens limitation, that
some (who extend them to more years) have thought the Evangelist Saint Matthew
has omitted certain discents in his record. And In his tree-like Genealogy,
printed in Anno 1555.
Tilemanus Stella aduentureth to feign five men more into that Catalogue, whom
he names Hananias, Phaltias, Iesseiah, Raphaia, and Arnaim, only to draw
those years to a longer account. But we must not admit any such fainings,
lest in giving that liberty against the sacred Record, the authority thereof
be infringed, and the literal text turned to serve any turn.

Thus then the holy Genealogies, The use of the holy Genealogies.
are as the key of David to open the truth of Story: and as Salomons pillar to
support the weight of times proceeding, without which it is impossible to read
the Scriptures with true understanding.

Let this then suffice for their uses in the sacred Chronicle: wherein I urge
them no further, then the Text it self does enforce; and again appeal to the
consciences of their opposers, whether any of these, are the vain Genealogies,
whom Saint Paul condemns, and so proceed forward to their further uses.

CHAP. 5.
Some difficult places of the Scriptures Genealogies explaned: The difference
of Saint Luke in the Greek, from Moses in the Hebrew, and Saint Matthewes
omission of four Kings in his Catalogue, examined, and resolved.

IT is the saying of an ancient Father, that the Scriptures are a Sea, wherein
the Gregory in Preface in Job.
Lamb may wade, and the Elephant swim: God so ordering his word, as it is
made sufficient for all; For unto the humble and meek, therein is meat given
to feed unto life, and unto the wise, wisdom to understand. But to the high
conceited, and natural man, for reach is so deep, as he hardly can comprehend
Psalm. 10. 5.
what a spiritual motion is, according to the demand of In his answer to
Hiero King of Syracusa. Tul. lib. 1 de nature. Deor.
Symonides, who still doubled the time to make answer what God was.

How plain, or profound soever, this is commanded, that the Josh. 1. 8
book of the Law, be meditated day and night, and the John 5. 39.
Scriptures searched to find eternal life; for God in sluggards takes no
delight.

Among the search then of the sacred Word, none seems more plain, then does
the frequent succession, or natural generation of man: and yet in them such
profound deepenesse is found, as may make us with the Apostle to cry out and
say; Romans 11. 33.
O the depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out. I mean not
only in that mystery, that God would become man in the flesh, and be Heb. 2.
14.
made like unto us, and cap. 4. 15.
sin only excepted: but in them also, which were procreated according to
natural course, and breathed their beings as all others did.

For if we look into the Kingly line of Christ, or into the other collaterals
of Iudahs and other Tribes, Profound deepenesse in the sacred Genealogies.
we shall find such diversities of Father-hoods, as may cause us with Job, to
Job 21. 5
lay our hands on our mouths, and admire the purpose whereunto God works.

Not to mention then the first age or long life of man, wherein some saw five
hundred years before they were Fathers (though the peopling of the World stood
then more upon necessity) Judah is the person of eminent note: who in the space
of forty three years saw himself (after a sort) a great Grandfather in his
fourth descent. The fathers from Judah to Hezron, allowing Shelah mariageable,
were not above (...) 3. years old when they were Fathers, accounting the
birthes of Er, Onan, and Hezron.


For Phares might have been the son of Shelah, as is seen by Thamars
discontent, for that she was not made his wife, he then being of years
sufficient for marriage. And Phares we know was the Father of Hezron, who was
one of the seventy that went with Jacob into Egypt: and from the year of
Iudahs birth unto this of the descending into Egypt, were no more then forty
three, as before is proved by Joseph's age; accounting two years more for the
births of Genesis 38.
Er and Onan, that died in their sins. A matter strange, and yet is again
exemplified in For so by their births and reigns may be gathered.
Solomon, Achaz, and Amon, Kings of Judah, each of them fathers at as young
years.

But let us observe the next generations following, namely, Hezron, Aram,
Aminadab, and Naasson, the Hezron, Aram, Aminadab, and Naasso^, saw each of
them threescore years before they were Fathers.
last three of these being borne in Egypt, and the time no less then two
hundred and fifteen years, by which account, they could not be fathers,
before each one of them attained unto threescore years of age, though Naasson,
(as truth is) was above twenty at his coming out of Egypt: Number. 1. 3. 7. And
that he died in the Wilderness, is manifest by the Text, where it is said;
Number. 26. 64.
Among them that were to enter Canaan, there was not a man of them whom Moses
and Aaron numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the Wilderness
of Sinai: for the Lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
Wilderness.

Now from Naasson let us continue Salmon, Boaz Obed, and less were each of them
an hundred years old before they were Fathers.
the succession through Salmon, Boaz, Obed, and Iesse, all of them Fathers, not
much younger then Abraham was when Isaac was borne, and Broughton in his
consent so places Ra chab, as she is 830 years aged at Boaz his birth.
Rachabs breast as dry to give suck, as were Saraes when she bare her son.

For from the first year in the Wilderness, unto Salomons Temple, were years
four hundred and eighty: 1 Kings 6. 1. And David was borne but seventy four
before the foundation thereof was laid: for he 2 Samuel 5. 4
was thirty when he began to reign, and reigned forty. And in 1 King. 6. 1.
Salmon was borne in the wilderness, for in Egypt he could not, all dying that
came thence: nor could he be born in Canaan, for he married Rachab in the
first year of their entrance, and Rachab marriageble then, must be an old
mother when she bare her son.
the fourth year of Solomon that work was begun; by which Texts, these four
were each of them Fathers at an hundred years old: for among these four,
four hundred years were run.

Which so long a time, and but four generations betwixt, has moved Fasciulus
Temporum, to imagine that Saint Matthew has made a leap of two hundred
seauenty two years, betwixt Boaz and Obed; and Lyra to think that there were
more Boazes then one: the Grandfather, the Father, and the Son, in Ruth. cap.
4.

Gods purposes therefore touching The purpose of God in these unusual
begettings must be considered.
the unusual courses of begettings in these ten generations, must be admired,
and the depths of Scriptures therein searched, according to the precept of Ioh.
5. 39
Christ, who affirms, that Mat. 5. 18.
Heaven and Earth shall pass, but not a jot of his Word ever perish.

In the search whereof many learned have diligently labored to unfold the
mysteries in the sacred Genealogies, as Jacob did to uncover the Genesis 29. 10.
well in Haran; and do make these (as all others are) a means to withdraw the
Exodus 34. 33.
veil from before Moses 2 Cor. 3. 13.
his face, that Christ in them may be seen a Son of promise, above all
natural No apparent promise was made of Christ to any father betwixt Judah and
David.
means or hope.

For none of the Fathers betwixt Judah and David, received such pregnant
promises of the Messiah, as the former Patriarchs before them had done: neither
was there any of Christ his Parents, either Prince, Captain, or Judge, in that
first established government, that might allure expectation: whereby the world
might perceive a far greater glory was to proceed through them, then either
worldly pomp, or means of natural procreation could beget. The mothers of
Christ commended.


Which thing also was not more manifested in these his Fathers, then it was
made apparent in most of his Mothers according to the flesh; who beyond
expectation, received their fruit, and Genesis 32. 26.
wrestled (as Jacob did) to obtain that blessing.

Such were Lea and Rachel, who Genesis 30. 15.
strove for their husband, for no wanton dalliance doubtless, but Rab. Simeon
cited by D. Willet upon Genesis 38.
to be faithful Mothers of that blessed Seed. So likewise S. Ambrose of these
mothers says, They only desired to have issue by that chosen Family.
Ruth left her Country, and abandoned her kinreds, to be a Mother of the
Messiah. And in the rest, we may see nature (as it were) both oppressed, and
quite dissolved: for did not the dry wombes of Genesis 17. 17.
Sara and Rachab (as hopeless of conception) force nature? the acts of Genesis
38. 14.
Thamar, and 2 Samuel 11. 2.
Bersheba (as they were committed) offend Nature forced offen ded, and broken.
nature? And the conception of the most blessed Luke 1. 31.
Virgin, wholly dissolve and break nature when her most happy womb was made
the Tabernacle of GOD, and Cradle of Christ?

Upon whose conception and birth, learned Erasmus paraphraseth thus; As Christ
in the first time was promised The Virgins Euah and Mary compared.
to the Virgin Euah in Paradise: so Christ in the fullness of time was borne of
the Virgin Mary in Beth-lechem: which signifies the house of bread. And that
he was the Ioh. 6.
bread of life, that came down from Heaven, himself declares, and was broken
for our sins, the whole Scriptures shows: Lord therefore give us belief,
that we may eat with him in his kingdom of glory.

Again, in the line of Judah, and Catalogue of the Fathers of Christ, arises
a weighty consideration, and no greater then is needful of a considerate
resolution: namely, that in the new Testament, by Saint Luke is Luke 3. 36.
added, a man more then the old, or Moses has.

For in the Greek, and third of his A Cainan more then Moses has.
Gospel, a Cainan is set betwixt Arphaxad, and Sala, contrary to the original
Hebrew by Moses, who names Sala, to be the immediate son of Arphaxad,
without all mention of any such man.

And albeit Iansenius, and Genebrard, Genebrard in 1 Chro. 3.
do account this disagreement but a small slip in History, and Mercerus but a
matter of Genealogies, not much to be stood upon; yet shall we see an
insufferable absurdity follow, had Moses omitted any generation in his
Catalogue: for so both the successions of the Fathers of Christ's humanity had
been uncertain, and the chain of Chronology broken asunder, the Worlds
computation of those times, being only calculated by the ages of those Fathers.

But that Moses is free from any omission, Moses does not omit.
we must confess; for who can supply, if he do omit. And that the Evangelist
writ by the same spirit, we must acknowledge, for that both Testaments were
breathed from one, and the same God.

The resolution then of this question, rests upon the certainty of the
Septuagint now extant, whether it be the same that the seauenty two Doctors of
the Jews translated into Greek, or no.

That it is not the same, the testimony of Josephus (who wrote after most of
the new Testament was writ) does strongly enduce: for approving the truth of
that, their translation says, that it was most agreeable to the original Text
of Moses: for (says he) It being finished, and openly read in the audience of
the learned Priests and Elders of the Jews, was Joseph. antic. lib. 12. cap. 2.
found to be so exact in all points, as they desired it might be enacted, that
the said Translation should never be altered, nor in one jot changed, but
continue inuioalable for ever.

But the said Josephus himself, in his rehearsal of the Fathers, from
Arphaxad, Josephus follows a true Copy.
unto Abraham, does name no such Cainan in the said Catalogue; whereby it
appears, that the first and true Septuagint which he followed, had no such
man. And the Chalde paraphrast, (of all comments the most antientest) gathered
by Jonathan of the Apostles times, upon that Text of Moses, names no other son
to Arphaxad, then Sala, nor no other father to Sala, then Arphaxad, without all
mention of any such Cainan, which he would never have done, had the first
Septuagint inserted that man.

Nay, that Translation it self, in the first Book of Chronicles, where every
particular Father is rehearsed from Adam, to Jacobs Tribes, and in all agreeing
with Moses; of this last Cainan, no mention at all is made. And yet there want
not some, that will have Moses to omit this Cainan, Lippoma^. Canus, li. 2. de
loc. Theo. cap. 18.
only to make the number of the later Patriarchs (from Sem unto Abraham) to be
equal to the ten Fathers before the flood.

Nauclerus, and Lucidus, to carry an even hand betwixt both Testaments, will
not have two several, but only one man to be meant, affirming The opinions of
the learned.
that the said Cainan, bare the names both of Cainan, and Sala, unto whom the
Tables formerly annexed to our largest Bibles seem to leave. Others, with the
like reverence to both, think that Cainan and Sala, were brethren, and that
Cainan the elder died issulesse; and therefore is by Moses left out, and Sala
the younger, (in whose loins Christ as then lay, is recorded, as in like case
Pedaiah (a Father of Christ) is by Saint Luke omitted.

Lyra is of opinion, that Cainan was Nichol. Lyra upon S. Lukes Gospel.
a legal or an adoptiue Father unto Sala, but that Arphaxad was his natural
begetter, for which cause he says, the Septuagint did record them both. And
Engubinus the Romanist, goes further, and charge both the Septuagint with
error, in inserting of Cainan, and Saint Luke with remissness in giving way to
the time, lest in departing from their Translation, in great esteem with the
Gentiles, the credit of his Gospel would be hindered. And learned Iunius
(though not approving the error) somewhat inclines that way: in saying it was
a faultlesse confession in respect of the time, and not a slip or fault of
memory, as some would have it.

Unto all these allegations, sufficient answers might be made: but not any so
fully as Saint Augustine, Beroaldus, and Beza, have made. Saint Augustine, in
saying, that the error was August. ciui Dei. lib. 15. ca 13.
committed in transcribing the copy from Ptolomies Library. Beroaldus, that
some Jewish impostor put Cainan into the Text of the Septuagint, to deprave the
new Testament of truth, in varying from Moses. And Beza says, that Cainan was
put into the Text of Saint Lukes Gospel, by the ignorance of some, that took
upon them to correct it according to the Septuagint: for among many Greek
Copies, he found an ancient manuscript of his Gospel, that had not the man
Cainan inserted; upon which authority, he also leaves him out, in the new
Testament published by himself.

Yet do I wish that a tender regard, and a reverend respect be had of those
sacred Texts, lest in our too curious searching, we sin, in entering into the
hid things that appertain Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
unto God: but rather in beholding the glorious order of that book, laid in the
Chest, where Cherubins attend, we cover our feet and faces (the imperfections
of our apprehensions and judgments) as did Isaiahs Seraphins, and with the
wings Esaias 6. 2.
of the body with reverence and fear, fly betwixt the Texts of both
Testaments, ever crying as they did, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the
whole Earth is full of his glory.

Another hard knot, upon the sacred Seventy five for seventy.
Genealogies is cast, betwixt the speech of Moses in the Hebrew, and Saint
Stephen in the Greek, touching the number of souls that descended into Egypt:
for whereas Moses in the old Testament, writes that seauenty souls with
Jacobs, went into Egypt, and expressly names every particular person, proceeded
from his four wives; Saint Luke in the new, does Acts 7. 14.
thereunto add five more, saying, that Joseph caused his Father to be brought
into Egypt, and all his kindred, even threescore and fifteen souls. This
addition as the former, rests only upon the credit of the Septuagint
Translation: and therefore let us here further examine their truths and
certainties, without prejudice I hope either of persons, or cause.

Their time was in the days of Ptolomy the second, surnamed Philadelphus,
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 8.
King of Egypt, who to grace his famous Library in Alexandria, sent to the
Jews for sufficient men to translate their Laws into the Greek tongue,
whereupon seventy two persons, which were six the best learned of every Tribe
were sent.

These coming to Alexandria, The Bible translated.
entered upon the Translation, taking each of them a part of the old Testament,
amounting about fourteen chapters (as we now distinguish them) for a man, as
says the learned Hebrecian, Master Broughton. But In his Epistle to the
Nobility.
well knowing the Kings desire was more to adorn his famous Library, then any
devotion he had to their Laws, they many times hid their minds in
translating: and being among themselves different in gifts, left the relish of
their veins in a differing degree, as by their parts in translating does
evidently appear.

For the Translaters of Moses were very eloquent, so were they who The
Septuagint Translaters.
dealt with the stories, and they that translated the Psalms and Proverbs. The
Grecian on Job (says he, was a Poet reader, and cared not to yield every
saying strictly, but what might be to Greeks familiar: The Translaters of
Ecclesiastes, was younger in Hebrew then in Greek: he of Amos not the best; he
of Ezekiel very learned: so that the diversities of The gifts of the Septuagint.
their gifts tells us, that all, did not all.

Oftentimes they rather abridge, then translate, as on Hester, and infinitely
in the Prophets: and sometimes they enlarge the Text, more like free
commenters, then bound Translaters. In mysteries and hard phrases, often they
deal exceeding well, but their now hitting, and now missing, shows, that they
followed copies, which were neither vowelled, nor accented, which without
exceeding great skill and pains, could not be truly translated nor
understood: and the neerenesse in form of many of the Hebrew Characters, might
cause a mistaking, especially in them, that saw no reason of exact care, when
their labor was required only for a brave Library.

Besides, Jesus the son of Syrac Syra in the Prologue of his Book.
(who was a child when these Docters translated) tells how hard it is to
translate Hebrew into another Language, whose words (says he) carry another
force in themselves, then when they are translated. But we must acknowledge,
that never since their time, any age afforded so learned, through all the
Prophets Emblemes, Hebrew subtilties and None more learned the^ the Translaters.
Greek elegancy, as these seauenty two Translaters were: notwithstanding, they
lived in those disquiet times of the poor Jews oppressions, and the Hebrew
tongue for daily use lost five hundred years before.

But how this narration of their ouerslips and variances do agree with
Josephus, for their exactness unto Moses, I see not; only do I say, though
an error be admitted, to have been committed by these Septuagints: yet in the
holy Evangelist can be none, the Spirit of truth being the only inditer: Or
that these Hebrew Doctors should mistake the Hebrew Characters, they being so
learned, is not like; either so godless, as to alter, and add unto Moses,
knowing it death so to do. Why Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
then may we not rather with Austin think, that the first Septuagint has
been corrupted, both in matter and meaning, seeing they have been so
infinitely maimed by the Translations of Aquilas, Symmachus, Theodotion, and
the namelesse interpretet Paginne Isag. ca. 9. The Septuagint much maimed.
Hierome in Ezekiel. chap. 5.
called the fifth Edition, with them of Origens, named the Octaplun.

Yea, and Hierome thinks, these seventy two Doctors translated but only the
five books of Moses: which howsoever had been approved before his time, yet in
his time stood far differing, and was much corrupted from the Hebrew phrase,
and therefore not like to be theirs.

Again, in those books of Moses, we see that translation to differ in it
self: for albeit both in Genesis and in Exodus it accounts seventy Genesis 46.
Exodus 1.
five persons to descend into Egypt; yet does it in Deuteronomy reckon Deuteronomy 10.
22.
but seventy, saying, Thy fathers went down into Egypt with seventy persons,
and now the Lord thy God has made thee as the Stars of the heaven in
multitude.

And again, their departing from Moses his text, is apparent: for whereas he
records by name all the seed of Rachel, and rekoneth the number to be
fourteen, they translate them to be eighteen: and for the two souls borne
unto Joseph in Egypt, they translate five: and not as bound Translaters, but as
free Commenters, from the first book of the Chronicles, add Shuthelah, and
Tahan, the 1. Chro. 7.
sons of Ephraim, and Eden his nephew; Five persons added from the book of
Chronicles.
and Machir, the son of Manasseh, and Gilead his nephew, to be the five
persons that filled the number of seventy five that descended into Egypt.

And surely this moved Saint Austin to conceive some great and hid misery to
be contained therein: for so reverend an opinion he has of the first
Septuagint, as he holds firmly, that the same Spirit that spoke Aug. ciuit.
Dei. lib. 18 cap. 43.
in the former Prophets, spoke also in these Translators: and where they
dissent from the Hebrew, we must (says he) hold it their Prophetical depth:
for that which was not originally in the Hebrew, it pleased God in them to
supply. But he might have done well to have added this saying withal; 1. Cor.
7. 12.
It is I that so speak, and not the Lord, who has so perfited his Word, that
it is eternal death to add, or to diminish Apoc. 22 18.
.

Of the like opinion is Joseph Ben Gorion, who will have these Septuagints
likewise endued with the Spirit of the Prophets: For (says d he) they Ben-gor.
in estate of the Maccabes.
being separated into diverse chambers apart, and not permitted to see each
others copies; notwithstanding agreed exactly in phrase and in words, and in
thirteen places of Scripture, of purpose altered the text with so uniform
consent, as if it had been done by one man and one pen.

Unto the which likewise S. Chrysostom and Saint Augustine do agree, but Saint
Hierome nothing at all. Nor the famous Josephus Ben-Matthias Hier. praefat. in
Pentateuth.
makes no such miracle, unless it be in saying, that the translation was
finished in 72. days according to the Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 2.
number of the Translaters. But touching the number descending into Egypt, he
says, they were seventy souls, and accounting Jacobs seed by his four
wives, summeth up each particular, as Moses has done.

Which is a great inducement unto me to think, that the first Septuagint was
not corrupted before Josephus The First Septuagint not corrupted.
wrote, nor that the Evangelist Saint Luke followed the faulty, but the
faithful copy of those learned Rabbis done in the days of Phyladelphus King
of Egypt: yet will I not herein prejudice any opinion of the learned Fathers,
ancient and modern, who have diligently labored to unclasp this great doubt.

Some thinking, as Augustine and Pererius, that the Septuagint (and S. Stephen
The diverse opinions of the learned.
speaking from them) are inno error, but that the five thereunto added (being
borne in Egypt while Joseph lived) are added by way of anticipation. And
Eugubinus the Romanist will admit no fault in the original, but that it was
rather corrupted by some ignorant penman in translating the copy. And so Beza
the Protestant coniectureth, that the word Pantes (all) by the ignorance of the
transcriber was writ pente (five) contrary to the Text of Moses.

Iunius judges, that Jacobs four wives, and Iudahs two sons, Er and Onan
(Jacob himself being deducted) make the number to be seventy five: but
Rachel, Er and Onan were dead before, and Jacob Genesis 46. 8
is included in that account. Master Brought. consent.
Broughton will have the corruption purposely done by the first Translaters
themselves, who knowing that Ptolomies intent was no further, but to furnish
his stately Library with choice and cost, to prevent his flouts and fury (lest
in pretext of Religion he should surprise them, as his Father Lagi had done)
altered their text both in Chronology and Genealogy, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12.
cap. 1.
(the two special pillars of truth and of knowledge) and observing this
caveat, Cast not holy things unto dogs; hid their divine mysteries from his
profane Egyptians, whom they held accursed.

And long before him was Saint Hierom of the same mind, who says, that these
seventy Translaters to conceal Hieroms opinion not to be aprooued.
the secrets of their faith from the Heathen, did omit the special principals
of faith unto the Egyptians, whom they held to be a cursed Nation, and not
worthy of their sacred Laws. But hereunto may be answered, that these
reverend Translaters were religious, and knew by the Prophets, that the
Gentiles should be called, and the means of their calling to be the Word of
God; which had they hid or altered, then had they been resisters of God in his
ordinary course of salvation. From which they are so free, as in many places
they add to the texts of their callings, more then the originals have; as in
Fsay, where it is said, The root of Ishai shall stand up Isai. 11. 10
for a sign unto the people, the Nations shall seek unto it, and his rest
shall be glorious, they add this saying, And in his Name shall the Gentiles
trust: whom Paul in that text follows; To. 15. 12.
and in many others, both he and the holy Evangelists do: which must move an
holy opinion of those reverend men.

But Caietan has a further conceit, Caietan. in Genesis 11
namely, that the Jews envying to have their holy laws made known to the
Gentiles by a transcript into another A meero conceit without show of truth.
tongue: did of set purpose alter diverse things in their translation; so that
the Hebrew (says he) has the defect, but the Septuagint the truth. Unto whom,
and whose opinion, let Saint Austin give answer, though he has allowed those
translater to rank with the Prophets.

Whether does it seem more probable (says he) that the Jews, so large an
nation, and their books so far dispersed Aug. ciuit. Dei. lib 15 cap. 13.
through the whole world, could falsify theirs; or that the Translators being
but seventy, and in one place assembled; themselves also Jews, and envying
that the Gentiles should enjoy their Scriptures: did put in these errors by a
common assent, and which is easier to effect, who sees not. But God forbid
(says he) that any wise man should think, that either the Jews of purpose
corrupted their books, or the translators with assent concealed the truth from
the Gentiles: one may easier believe, that the error was committed in the
transcription of the copy from Ptolomies Augustines answer to the conceit.
Liberary, and that to have a successiue propagation through all copies
dispersed. And thereupon concludes.

That it was neither the corruption of the original, nor the oversight of the
Translators, but rather the Transcribers error, that copied it first from
Ptolomies Liberary. But howsoever (says he) seeing both cannot be true, it is
better to believe The original is safest to trust too.
the original, then the translation.

A like (if not a more difficult) knot, is cast upon the Genealogies, recorded
by Saint Matthew: who in casting his Catalogue into three fourteen Saint
Matthewes three fourteen generations.
generations: in the second does omit certain descents of Iudahs Kings; and in
the last does differ from the number that himself assigns: which here we
will assay to unloose, not preiudising any former opinion, nor enforcing ours
further then the Word will allow.

It is Austins opinion, that the numbers set in the holy Scriptures (though to
Ciuit. Dei.
some they seem barren, or of little use) are most fruitful, and to singular
purposes penned, containing in them many both excellent and divine matters.

If this be thus observed of the general, then is this particular of a Abraham
the first of Promise, and David the first King by Covenant.
special regard; that from Abraham the first father that had promise of a King
and Kingdom, unto David, who was the first King that had his succession
established by God, the Evangelist records them that were produced betwixt.

And David's heirs likewise, by Solomon, through his natural line unto
Ieconiah the last, and his legal Line unto Joseph, the supposed father of
Jesus, who was the most lawful, and last King of the Jews, he continues the
succession: and for the The double use of Saint Matthew his Catalogue.
more ease of memory and state of the matter, divides them into three
fourteen generations, amounting to forty two persons of that Kingly Line, from
Abraham unto Christ. Of which divisions and number, many coniecturs have made,
and many of them fetched far beyond likelihood or reason.

In the search of which seeming vnsoundable depth, think not that I derogate
from others, when I dissent from them in their diverse and many expositions: for
every man's sacrifice 1. Cor. 3. 13.
must be tried by the fire of Gods Altar. Neither that I affect singularity
in mine own: for I know that a threefold cord is strong, and a woe is to
Ecclesi. 4. 10.
him that is alone: but rather by the sacred text it self, do approve the
Truth respects no persons.
most pregnant and nearest the truth. And yet do not so urge what I write, as
to force a consent, without the freedom of thy further examination; and if
better be found, do cleave to the best.

First then, for the number two and forty inclusiuely gathered, but not so
named by the holy Evangelist, the Ethiopian translation (therein ouerbold) does
ad a sentence more to his text, then he ever wrote, in saying, that all the
generations from Abraham Ethiopian Translation in Mat. 1. Gloss ordinary upon
Matthew 1.
to Christ were two and forty.

Which number the ordinary gloss will have to be mystically set in the
entrance of the Cospell, for a remembrance of the two and forty Stations in the
Wilderness, before the entrance into Canaan. And that as six seuens were
nearly spent, under the leading of Moses, and under Ioshuah a Sabbath, when he
set the people in rest, so these six seven generations were the Stations of
hope, till Christ, the true Sabbath, by his death brought his, into his
eternal rest.

Which allusion is more tolerable, then the Gloser has made upon the numbers
assigned in the divisions: for by those three, he will have the Trinity
signified: who as they are three in one, so this number is made three of one.
And as mystical is this; that as ten and four, make the sum to be
fourteen; so the Law in the ten commandments, and The mystical applications
of the ordinary Gloss.
the Gospel in the four Evangelists, are tipically showed in each of these
fourteen generations.

And of the like kind is that which Johannes Ferus, and others conceiteth,
namely, that by these fourteen John Ferus in Mat 1.
generations, the state of the world from the creation through all generations
succeeding are contained. And Piscator will have them to signify the
generations before the Law, under the Law, and in the time of grace.

And to the like purpose Marlorat speaks, that will have them mean, the
political estate of the Jews common wealth unto Christ. Whereof the first,
from Abraham to David were under the government of Judges; the second from
David Three estates of the Jews.
unto the captivity were under the subjection of Kings; and the third were
ruled by the power and policy of the High Priests: not observing in this his
second number, says he, a lineall succession of Kings, as they were produced
and reigned; but rather accounting it sufficient, to set the order of that
fourteen, from the beginning unto the end of that Kingdom.

Unto the former, or Ferus his opinion, we see no reason to answer, seeing
there is no reason so to conjecture; neither unto Marlorat, the later, wherein
no resemblance can be made betwixt the political estate of the Jews, and the
numbers assigned: the one being a succession of Patriarchs and Princes, and the
other an estate often broken, and no face of a Commonwealth many times seen.

And to what purpose should holy Matthew remember those dead times of sin,
seeing his pen was set upon Mat. 6. 16.
another subject, and his text the forbidding of worldly state, pomp, and
vain riches, to the attaining of that Kingdom which Christ came to preach.
But the same Author from others alleges, that Saint Matthew Augustine
Marlorat upon Matthew 1.
in his days followed an order and manner of bringing and placing genealogies
and pedegrees, which now is unknown unto The text entangled with vain
conceits.
us: and records in his Catalogue diverse men by other names, and yet they the
same that Saint Luke has in his.

And others more intolerable, to affirm, that the Evangelist by oblivion A
dangerous assertion, and not to be granted.
omitteth those, that elsewhere are named in the books of the Kings and the
Chronicles; grounding their conjecture upon the many, and far more
generations, recorded in the catalogue of S. Luke, then S. Matthew has in his.

For Luke from Zorubbabel unto Marie the Virgin, has ten more in his role,
then Saint Matthew from Zorubbabel unto Joseph her husband Differences in
families.
has laid down: whereby they judge, that some men by him are omitted, and
account it neither sin, nor absurdity to reckon less of the legal, as
Saint Matthew does, then of the natural, as Saint Luke in following the
lineall has done: the one of them taking liberty of omission A liberty
assumed without warrant.
(say they) to cast his fourteenes into equal numbers: but the other tied by a
requisite order, to record the natural successors to their natural parents.

To the first and difficult order of the Evangelist, we answer; it is so far
from all likelihood, that we evidently see the contrary by Saint Matthew
himself: for from Abraham Saint Matthew most plain in setting down his
pedegrees.
to David, and from Salathiel to Joseph, his manner and order is so plain, as
nothing can be more. And so far are the double names from meaning the same
persons, that not any one of them in either of the Evangelists are one and the
same, excepting only Salathiel, Zorobbabel, and Joseph the husband of Marie.

And to the second we say, it is so Saint Matthew is more frequent in alleging
the Prophets, then any other of the Evangelists.
far from oblivion or ignorance in the Evangelist, as that he confirms by
other Scriptures what himself writes; and is most frequent in applying the
Prophets to the purpose of his text, both in the Parents and person of Christ.

As Isaiah Esaias 7.
for his stem, and son of a Virgin; Micah Micah. 5. 2.
for his Tribe, and place of his birth. Hoshea Hosh. 11. 1.
for his calling out of Egypt. Zachari Zach. 9. 9
for his lowlines and contempt. David Psalm. 22.
for the manner of his death: and Jonas Ion. 1. 17
in the Whale, for a sign of his grave and burial: and all of them concurring
to that Babe in his text.

And that it is not unusual in the holy Scriptures for generations in Some
families exceed others in long life.
some families to exceed others in numbers, we see: for not only Sem lived
through ten generations, even to the fiftieth year of Isaac, but also in other
ages following, great differences do appear.

For the Patriarch Judah saw himself in a sort, a great grandfather in his
fourth descent, when as Leui his brother was but an immediate father in his
first. In the Priests line 1 Kin. 2. 27
likewise, from Abiathar, whom Solomon expulsed, unto Seraih, whom
Nebuchadnezzar slew, were but 2 Chr. 25. 18.
twelve generations: whereas in the Kings from Solomon to Ieconiah, whom
Nebuchadnezzar captiuated, there were twenty.

Nay, what more is; five only of Five of Iudahs, saw seventeen of Leui.
Iudahs Tribe, namely, from Naasson in the wilderness, unto Iesse the Father
of David, lived and saw no less then seventeen of Leui his Tribe, that is,
from Korah that perished in Number. 16. 1 Samuel 16.
the Wilderness, unto Samuel the Prophet, that anointed David. Thus then the
objection of the inequality of Families is taken away by the text of
Scriptures that allow the like, or more, in more places then one. But from
these generals, let us come to the parts, and consider the divisions by Saint
Matthew assigned, of fourteen, fourteen, and fourteen generations.

The first whereof we find by Moses, and by the writer of the Book of Ruth,
both in number, and in Ruth, 4. 18.
names to be most exact, and therefore thereof we need not to speak: But of
the second we are to examine.

First, how many there be, and who they are that are omitted, and the How many,
and who they are that are omitted.
reasons or causes of their omissions. And in the last, to consider by whom,
and how the number fourteen is made complete, when as but thirteen are
nominated by the Evangelist himself.

For the number that are omitted in Saint Mathewes second division, some
account them to be three, and some to be four, according to the How many Saint
Matthew omitteth.
diverse readings found in the Greek Copies, either including or excluding
Iacim the last. But if it may be determined by most voices, then has Iacim no
place in that holy catalogue. For Robert Stephens, that most learned Printer,
in the sixteen several Copies, which he conferred for the edition of the
Greek Testament, only one (of his number the fourteenth) has Iacim: but in
all the rest, no such man is found.

Again, of forty several editions since conferred, and most of them printed in
Paris, Geneua, Basil, London, Antwerpe, Leyden, and Rome; only eight of them
have Iacim, whereof six of that number have been printed in London: so that
but two of forty impressions, have recorded his name, howsoever he has been
insreted in ours. And how Saint Mathewes Only two of forty Editio^s have Iacim.
Text is translated into diverse languages, see here as follows.

And Josias begat Iechonias, and his Greek.
brethren in the captivity of Babylon.

Iusia begat Iuchonia, and his brethren, Syriac.
in the captivity of Babel.

Iuschia begat Iuchonia, and his brethren, Arabic.
in the captivity of Babell.

Ioshia begat Iuchoniah, and his brethren, Persian.
in the captivity of Babell.

Josias begat Iechonias, and his brethren, Saxon.
in the captivity of Babylon.

Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren, Latin.
in the transmigration of Babylon.

And Josias begat Iechonias and his Our Kings Bible.
brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon.

So has Hierom, Augustine, and the None almost has Iacim.
ancient: so has Mountanus, Beza, and the modern, and indeed so have all that
have their names prefixed to any Impression (those former excepted) without any
mention of Iacim at all.

Concerning then the persons omitted, we see they were four Kings of Iudahs
Throne. Three of Four kings omitted by S. Matthew
them in a direct line of succession, and the fourth, nine discents following:
which were Ahaziah, Ioash, and Amaziah: and the last Iacim, the son of Josiah.

For whereas Saint Matthew says, that Ioram the son of Iehoshaphat, begat
Ozias, it is most manifest by the Books of the Kings, and of the Chronicles,
that Ioram begat Ahaziah, and not Uzziah: and Ahaziah begat Ioash, and Ioash
begat Amaziah, and Amaziah Vzziah, 68 years after the death of King Ioram.

But why these four particular persons above the rest should be omitted, is
questionable: some thinking that it was the mistaking of St Matthew, in writing
Ozias for Uz. ziah, A dangerous opinion.
and by oblivion left that line of Ioram unto his third descent, which in no
case may be admitted.

For God forbid that the first writer of the new Testament should be ignorant
of that which the old wrote, whose pen though his, and he a man, yet was the
Inditer the Spirit of Truth, and far from all imperfections of men.

Some likewise allege, that for the Jews weakness, Christ would not have his
holy publican Matthew, to name In an Epistle sent for that defense.
the wicked Ahaziah, the Cain-Ioash, the foolish Amaziah, nor the Atheist
Iehoiakim, in that catalogue unto which himself was the only heir, but as
the scumme of the World, unworthy of remembrance, leaves them unnamed, as
though they had never been.

And some again judge these four to be omitted for their many impieties, both
in their lives and reigns: and for their evil ruling, to be left out of that
holy Text, as worthless of names, or remembrance.

Whereunto we answer, that the Jews were not weak in the Texts of their
stories, we see by their many Comments, though in the applications The
weakness of the Jews no immediate cause.
many times they missed: but especially in the line of their Kings were most
ready, from whom they expected their potent Messiah. And had they been
ignorant, yet Christ the truth, would not have smothered the truth, in regard
of their follies.

Neither does their silence for bad The wickedness of the Kings not the only
cause.
life and evil ruling only, satisfy: for many other Kings as wicked, or
more, are notwithstanding by the Evangelist recorded: as Ioram that compelled
Judah unto Idolatry, for which his guts by peece-meale daily fell out, and his
life so loathed, as it is said of him; He lived, not being desired. 2 Chr. 21.
20.


Ahaz, that shut up the doors of the Lords House, and made him Altars in every
corner of Jerusalem, and high places in every City of Judah, to burn incense
unto other gods, and to sacrifice unto the gods of Aram. 2 Chr. 28.


The perjured Zedekiah, whose eyes were plucked out, himself bound 2 King. 25.
in chains, and carried to Babel, where he died a naughty fig, as Jeremiah
calls him. And Ieconiah so Ier. 24.
naught, that he is called a despised Idol, a vessel wherein was no pleasure,
and the Signet plucked off from Gods right Ier. 22. 24.
hand.

Saint Augustine in his questions, Quest. 85.
why of seventeen Kings, three are left out, answers; It may be thought
(says he) that the Evangelist followed the meaning St Augustines opinion of
the three Kings omissions.
of the Law, and therefore not unworthily were they taken from the number of
the rest: for their iniquities so continued that it had no intermission, for
the wickedness beginning in ^oram, so continued in Ochozios and the rest, so
that none of these, either for any respect due to themselves, or for any good
desert of their fathers, ought to be accounted in the number of the Kings.

To this may be answered, as Ezekiel does the proverb: The Fathers Ezekiel. 18.
have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge As I live
says the Lord, all souls are mine, both the soul of The answer
the father, and the soul of the son, and that soul that sins, that
soul shall die, the sinner for his own sins, and not for his fathers.

And the Gospel preaching salvation in Christ, regards the sins neither of
Father nor son, though never The persons not respected.
so many: but begins with the salvation of sinners, in such of the Mothers
as were most tainted with sin. And if the goodness of the Father be regarded
in the Son, why was not wicked Iehoiakim the son recorded for his fathers
sake good Iosiahs. And therefore we may think some other cause moved the
Evangelist to omit their names.

Saint Jerome likewise from the letter of the Law does gather the reason of the
thre^ first omissio^s, namely, from the threats therein contained against
Idolatrous posterities, where it is said; The Lord is a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers Exodus 20. 4
upon the children, unto the third, and fourth generation.

And these (says he), being the seed of most wicked Parents, unto the fourth
St Hieromes opinion of omission.
generation, are omitted by the holy Pen of Grace. For Ioram King of Judah, had
to wife Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab, King of Israel, and of Idolatrous
Iezebel, the Zidonian worshipper of Baal. And of Athaliah, was borne Ahaziah,
who begat Ioash and he Amaziah, the fourth in descent from that wicked bed of
marriage.

To this collection of Jerome I could well assent, if it did likewise include
the fourth man Iehoiakim. But he being the twelfth in descent of the blood of
Iezebel, is notwithstanding omitted; whereas nine betwixt them, and Iechoniah
after him, are in Saint Mathewes Catalogue recorded, and therefore this his
observation fitteth not well: for the same cause that moved their omissions,
moved his, but that did not, therefore that was not the cause.

Nevertheless, we know Ahabs seed by Iezebel, had a manifest curse of utter
destruction, that his house should be swept from the earth, as dung 1 Kin. 21.
21.
from the dunghill, (as were the Houses of Jeroboam, and of Baasha) till all 1
Kin. 14. 20.
were gone.

If then these exceptions may be justly taken against these diverse expositions,
by diverse men alleged, let us yet hear further what may be said was the
cause, though not urging consent without further examination.

It is most apparent, that the Evangelist Saint Matthew to answer this demand
of the Wisemen, Where is he that is borne King of the Jews: Math. 2 2
shows the babe Jesus of Judah, David and Bethlehem to be the said King*
confirming his assertion by his tribe, The cause that moved S. Matthew to omit
four Kings.
parents, and place of birth, from the Prophets that spoke it, and the most
lawful right he had, unto Iudahs Kingdom, from those lawful Kings that
without debar of title, or exceptions of the people, had sat upon Indahs
throne.

And that the affections of the people, is to join with his title at a Kings
inauguration, the most learned King of all the Worlds Kings, our Sovereign
Lord King James, has set it for a special observation in his Majesty's
Dedicated to Prince Charles his royal Son.
Book so entitled: for says he, though Monarchies, or hereditary kingdoms
cannot justly be denied to the lawful successor, whatsoever the affections of
the people be: yet it is a great sign of the blessing of God, when he enters
in it with the willing applause of his subjects, and reigns by the love and
acknowledgement of his people.

But it seems so had not Ahaziah, The four that are omitted.
Ioash, Amaziah, nor Iehoiakim done, but had exceptions against, either in
their own titles, or in the affections of the people, or both: and therefore
Saint Matthew spares to record them among the Catalogue of Salomons other
successors, that so the title of Jesus to the Kingdom might stand firm,
without any debar or exceptions howsoever.

First then of Ahaziah the first, it is said that he was the youngest son of
Exceptions against Ahaziah.
his father: for the Philistines and Arabians that were neighbors to the
Ethiopians, had carried away King Iorams 2 Chapter 22. 1.
wives, and his other sons; so that there was not a son left him* saving
Ahaziah the youngest: 2 Chro. 21. 17. And albeit in the next Chapter it be
said, that the Philistines with the Arabians had slain all the eldest sons;
yet before their slaughter, which was in Ethiopia, (for thither they were
brought) the Inhabitants of Jerusalem had made Ahaziah the youngest son King:
contrary to the Law ordained Deuteronomy. 21. 16.
in Deuteronomy, which gives the royalty always to the eldest. And Ahaziah
himself being as wicked 2 Chro. 22. 3. 7.
as any, walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother Athalia
counseled him to do wickedly; for which and his other defects, he was lastly
slain by Iehu King of Israel, when he executed Gods threats upon the House of
Ahab.

Ioash the second in Saint Mathews Exceptions against Ioash.
omission, after the slaughter of Ahaziah his father, and of other his kinsmen
the Princes of Judah, of himself 2 Chr. 22. 8. 9.
was unable, says the Text, to retain the Kingdom, and for six years space
was neither acknowledged King, nor vulgarly known to be alive.

For in the rage and usurpation of 2 King 11.
Athaliah, he was hid in the Temple by his Aunt Iehoshabeath: and lastly,
preferred to the Throne by Iehoiada her Husband, which kindness he requited
with the slaughter of Zechariah 2 Chr. 24. 21.
their son, slain at his commandment in the Court of the Lords house: for
which, and for the blood he had spilt, his servants conspired against him in
his house at Millo, and slew him, his body not permitted to have the honor of
burial in the Sepulchers of the Kings, and therefore unworthy of name, or of
future remembrance.

Amaziah the third, was not a preserver Exceptions against Amaziah.
of the Commonwealths state (as Kings ought to be) but rather the destroyer of
state and Kingdom, as by his reign is seen.

For besides his Idolatry to the Idols of Edom, and the provoking thereby of
Gods wrath; in his headstrong rashness he provoked Ioash, King of Israel, to
fight against Judah: 2 Chr. 25. 17.
wherein himself was taken, the treasures of the Temple and of the Kings house
carried away, and the wall of Jerusalem broken down, in length four hundred
cubits, and afterward he lived in dislike without love: in so much as his
people pursued him from Jerusalem unto Amaziahs death unrevenged.
Lachish, and there slew him, his death not revenged, but his murderers
escaping all condign punishments.

And after his death, for the hatred the people bare him, his Crown for
Broughto^ in Consent.
an eleven years space was held from Vzziah his son, and an interregnum in
Judah betwixt the death of the father, and the reign of the son so long: for
by the parerellizing reigns of the Kings of Judah and Israel, Amaziahs death
fell in the fifteenth of Jeroboam, King of 2 Kin. 14. 1 2 Kin. 15. 1
Israel, and Uzziah began not to reign, til the twenty seven year of the
same King. These things considered, might well move an omission of his name by
Saint Matthew.

And in Iehoiakim the last, some disliked defects were known: for that the
people of the Land rejected him for their King, and anointed Iehoahaz his
younger brother by two years in his stead, contrary to the usual custom of
succession.

And Iehoiakim himself being made King by Necho King of Egypt, his title
stands litigious, for the Law commanded by Moses, thus speaks: From among
thy brethren Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
shall thou make a King over thee; thou shall not set a stranger over thee,
which is not thy brother.

If then a stranger must not be permitted Exceptions against Iehoiakim.
a King to reign over Gods people, then by the same Law a stranger could not
impose his substitute over them, as Iehoiakim was. And Iehoiakims title it
self seems to stand in a double defect.

The one is, that he did assume the title and authority of King, his brother
alive, anointed, and established: whereas David, though chosen of God, and
anointed by Samuel, acknowledged Saul for his Sovereign; neither seeking to
shorten 1 Samuel 16. 13.
his life, nor disquiet his reign. And the other is, the unlawful means he
had to the Crown, which was by the strong hand of Necho of the cursed
Egyptians, the ancient enemies to Israel Gods people.

And Iehoiakims life as wicked as any, in cutting of Ieremiahs Role, was cut
off by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel; and his carcass cast out of the gate of
Jerusalem, to the heat of Ier. 36. 30
the day, and frost of the night, was lastly, unlamented, buried as an Ass
Ier. 22. 19.
is buried; so contemptible was his life, death, and burial.

These I assume were the causes of The cause of the four Kings omissions.
these four Kings omissions, that is to say, the first and last, not lawfully
succeeding in the Throne, were omitted; and the other, the one of them not able
to attain the Crown for the space of six years after his fathers death, did
not reign King; and the son of the other, for the space of eleven years
after his fathers death, was not admitted to be King: so unwilling were the
people that his issue should reign.

It is Augustines observation, that August. Quest. 85.
Solomon was reckoned for David his fathers sake, and that Rehoboam was
recorded for Assa his sons sake. If so in them such respect was had for the
goodness of the father and the son, then in these such contempt was had for
the badnesse both of father and son, as they are omitted and unnamed: and
themselves slain by their servants and subjects, does confirm the cause of
their omissions more strongly.

And albeit that bad Ammon, and Ammon and Josiah slain, and yet are recorded.
good Josiah were likewise slain, the one by his servants, and the other by
Necho King of Egypt: and that Zedekiah by Nebuchadnezzar a stranger, was
likewise made King, and all of them notwithstanding recorded by Saint Matthew;
yet are not their estates alike.

For Ammons death was revenged 2 Kin. 21. 24.
by the people of the Land, and Iosiahs death lamented both by the people, 2
Chr. 35. 24.
and the Prophet, neither of which the other were.

And Nebuchadnezzar made the great Ier. 27. 6
Monarch of the World, even by Dan. 2. 37.
God himself, had thereby a lawful power, both to set up, and to depose
Kings, which Necho had not; and therefore Zedekiah his title is not to be
called in question as Iehoiakims is.

Whereupon we conclude, that the Evangelist Saint Matthew, to show the right
that Jesus had unto Iudahs Crown, records his title only from those Kings
that were without all exceptions estated unto Iudahs. Throne: and omitteth
those, Christ's title without exceptions.
against whom any exceptions are found, that so Christ who came to fulfill all
Laws, might have a lawful succession unto that Kingdom whereunto he was
borne: for other material reason of omission we find none. And this being said
of the second, we come to the third.

The third and last division of the The third division of S. Matthew.
Evangelist, is from the captivity of Babylon, unto Jesus Christ, wherein only
thirteen generations and no more, (Jesus himself being also included) are
nominated, though in the sum they are accounted to be fourteen.

To fill up which number. 1. Some 1.
will have two Iechoniahs, and them to be the father and son. 2. Some 2.
but one Iechoniah, and he to be twice accounted. 3. Some that the Virgin 3.
Mary is to be reckoned for a generation among them. 4. And some that the Text
is therein faulty, which 4.
assertion is most insufferable.

That there were two Iechoniahs, is the opinion of Isidore, who will 1. Isidors
opinion.
have the one in the end of the second division, and the other in the beginning
of the third: and that they were the father and the son, Rabanus affirms;
the father and son (says he) both of them bearing one and the same name,
you have the one in the end of the second, and the other in the first of the
third division. And with him Epiphanius agrees, who says, that Ioachim Epiph.
Cont. Here Is. lib. 1.
the son of King Ioachim, had the same name that his son Iechoniah had: and
checketh them for ouerbold and unlearned, that put out his name in the second
place. Unto them both let Jerome answer, who has very well observed, and
noted, that the father is every where written Iehoiakim, with The father and
the sons names differing in Character.
K and M. but the son Iehoiachin, with C H and N.

That Iechoniah must be twice accounted, is the collections of our later 2.
Augus marl. upon Matthew 1.
Writers, who know not how to make up the number to be fourteen, except
Iechoniah should be put twice, that so in him (say they) the head of the third
generation might be appointed. But there is no reason so to imagine, seeing no
honor from him any wise accrued unto them, to be the head of that holy
generation, himself being a cast-off Signet from Gods right hand.

It is Augustines saying also, as that S. Augustine
which is bowed in a corner ends, on the one side, and begins on the other:
so is Iechoniah put in the end of the former, and in the beginning of the last;
wherein the ordinary Gloss Gloss. ordin. Matthew 1.
understands a great mystery.

For by the one, which was his transmigration into Babylon, he will have
signified the transmigration of A mystical interpretation.
the Apostles among the Gentiles, and by the other, in writing him the first
after the captivity, The resurrection of our Lord unto life: and in them both,
a figure of Christ, who is the corner stone of the building, the resurrection
and life. But that is over far fetched, and forced to an unfit application:
for never is Christ figured by a castaway, Ier. 2^. ^4
as Iechoniah is called a Signet plucked from Gods finger.

The third, is the opinion that Marie 3.
the Virgin for her sanctity, is of her self to be accounted a generation
among her holy Fathers: But against The Virgin Mary is not in account among the
generations.
that the whole streams of generations do flow, who are ever accounted from
the man, and never from the woman. And Jesus himself, who was to fulfill all
Scriptures, we see in the catalogue of both the Evangelists, to be brought
from Joseph the man: and Joseph to be of Nazeret, of Bethlehem, of Judah, and
of the lineage of David, all the adjuncts attributed unto Christ.

And Mary joined with Joseph in Joseph and Mary make but one generation.
marriage, both together make but one generation: for man and wife are one
house, one family, and one flesh; and therefore not two generations, else had
the former foureteenes been each of them twenty eight, for each of them had
his wife.

But that the blessed Virgin had no enumeration of family among those Fathers
of Christ, is apparent: for that she has neither place of birth, tribe, nor
family distinctly named, otherwise then the wife of Joseph: that so Jesus her
son might come in the flesh, and be heir of all righteousness, as all other
heirs for inheritances from the man had been ever accounted.

Lastly, that the Text is faulty, is the collection of Marlorat from others 4.
A dangerous position.
upon Matthew 1. verse. 8. where they say: Where as in some Books thirteen are
only read, it is likely that it came to pass by the fault and negligence of
the writer of the Book. Which in no wise may be granted, for to charge the
sacred writ with any imperfections, is to open a way to any interpretation,
against which the Massorites Massorites preseruers of the text.
have most diligently labored in preserving every letter in the body of the
holy text, so that not any one can be missing, much less any word or sentence.

If then neither Ieconiah, nor the Virgin Marie be contained in this last
fourteen generations, how shall the number thereof be made complete, and the
Evangelist Matthew to agree in his own account. The answer is:

Howsoever men have failed in their many conjectures, and dissented in their
diverse opinions; yet in this last division are fourteen generations found to
be full and complete; beginning in Salathiel the first of this last, and
ending in Christ the Omega of the Scriptures Genealogies. For apparent it is by
the first of the Chronicles, Chapter the third, and ninteenth verse, that
Pedaiah was by nature the son of Salathiel, and the father of Zorobabel, and
is to Pedaiah supplieth the number of fourteen.
be verily accounted among the natural fathers of Christ. Yet because he was
borne, and died obscurely in Babylon, before his father Salathiel was declared
the childlesse Ieconiahs successor, he is ever in all other texts of both
Testaments omitted. And where Zorobabel is named from his parant, he is ever
called the son of Salathiel, as heir unto him, that was made heir unto the
Crown, and not of Pedaiah that was never interested therein.

If then the old Testament be silent for Pedaiah (excepting his once naming in
the Catalogue of Iudahs Genealogies) Saint Matthew in the New, was to omit his
name in the Catalogue of them that stood estated Pedaiah had no estate in the
Crown.
for the Crown: but not his number among his generations produced: that man
then being included, makes this last division to be exactly fourteen
generations, according to the Evangelists words and account. And how these are
and may be reckoned, see here their divisions, as the holy Ghost has assigned.

1 2 3 1. Abraham. 1. Solomon. 1. Salathiel. 2. Isaac. 2. Roboam. 2. Pedaiah.
3. Jacob. 3. Abia. 3. Zorobabel. 4. Judas. 4. Asa. 4. Abiud. 5. Phares. 5.
Iosaphat. 5. Eliakim. 6. Esrom. 6. Ioram. 6. Azor. 7. Aram. 7. Ozias. 7. Sadoc.
8. Aminadab. 8. Ioatham. 8. Achim. 9. Naasson. 9. Achas. 9. Eliud. 10. Salmon.
10. Ezekias. 10. Eleazer. 11. Boos. 11. Manasses. 11. Matthan. 12. Obed. 12.
Amon. 12. Jacob. 13. Iesse. 13. Josias. 13. Joseph. 14. David. 14. Iechonias.
14. Christ.

Thus then Pedaiah being (as most apparent it is) a father of Christ, must be
in numeration among the fathers of Christ, though not to be named a successor
unto Salomons throne: nor is the Evangelists omission of him, The cause of
Pedaiahs omission.
more against order, then was the omission of the three former, in the former
division of three Kings, in a direct line: and all to show (as is said) the
lawful succession that Jesus had unto Iudahs Crown.

This last collection I see not how to be excepted against, it having so sure a
warrant by the holy Scripture it self: for heaven and earth shall pass, ere
the word perish, Salathiel Luke 16. 17 1 Chro. 3. 17, etc.
his Son Pedaiah, and the son of Pedaiah Zorobabel.

But why Pedaiah is not recorded for a natural father of Christ, in the
Catalogue of his natural fathers by the Evangelist Saint Luke, where all unto
Adam are nominated; is hid from me: and therefore with Nazianzen will I say,
Where I understand I will thankefully praise thee; and where I understand not,
I will fall down and admire thee. And with David pray, Psalm. 119. 105.
that thy word may be a lantern unto our feet. And with Paul, that our
darkness may be made light in Christ.

Another meditation arises in other families of Iudahs tribe, so deep and
doubtful, that Hugo de S. vict.
Hugo de Saint Victor, thinks it a question vndissoluable, and without
further search so leaves it; which is, how Caleb of Hezron at forty years
old, could be either great Grandfather unto Bezaleel the skillful workmen in
the Tabernacle, or the searcher of the Land at the same year and time: He
being the fifth in an equal equipage pararellising Bezaleel; and both of them
borne in Egypt from Hezron of Judah, and active men together in the
wilderness: the one in ordering the curious works from the pattern showed by
God himself unto Moses, and the other a Captain that descried the riches of
Canaan by his own travail: whose dissents for more plainness I have here set
down to sight.

The Descents of Caleb and Bezaleel.
How Caleb and Bezaleel were active men together; though differing in their
descents.

The Sercher of the Land of Canaan.

Both active men in one age.

The skilful workman in the Tabernacle.



In this descent then, whether the first Caleb, the son of Hezron, and great
Grandfather unto Bezaleel, or the last Caleb, paralelising Bezaleel through so
many degrees; were the Lands-searcher, both of them come from the same Hezron,
and active men together at one time in the wilderness, has been much
controuersed, and many opinions maintained with variable judgments.

That the Lands-searcher was the The unwarrantable reconciliation of the
Rabbis.
great Grandfather unto Bezaleel, Rabbi Salom, a great Doctor of the Jews,
brings a strange and vnexemplified descent unto Bezaleel: for (says he)
Rabbi Solomoh cited by D. Willet upon Exodus chap. 31.
Caleb at eight years old married his first wife Azuba, who died the first year
of her marriage, and in his ninth, he took Ephrath, otherwise called Miriam, the
sister of Moses, for his second wife; of whom in his tenth year was borne Hur:
and Hur in the tenth year of his own life begot Vri, when Caleb was twenty
one years old: and Vri in his ninth begat Bezaleel, Caleb then being thirty,
and Bezaleelten, when he began to frame the Tabernacle; at which time Caleb
was forty years old.

But how many ouersights are in these his sayings, is soon perceived: first,
that Caleb should have (not a The Rabbis opinion confuted.
child, but) children, as he is said to have by Azuba, 1. Chron. 2. 18. he
being but eight years old, is incredible: secondly, that Azuba should be a
mother of children, she dying the first year of her marriage, unless they
were twins, which is not apparent, is impossible: thirdly, that Caleb, aged
but nine, should take to wife Miriam the sister of Moses, she being about
nintie, is not agreeable: for she was elder then Moses, and of discretion to
call her mother for his nurse, when the Her name was Thermuthis, says
Josephus. Ant. lib. 2. ca. 5.
daughter of Pharaoh found him in the Arc of Bull-rushes; since when, we know
fourscore and one years to be fully expired. To make her then a mother at
ninty, and to bear a Son in that age of her life, is so unlikely, that
Joseph. Anti. lib. 2 cap. 2.
Josephus will have her not to be the mother of Hur, but the wife of Hur, and
mother unto Vri, his son, which is far more probable, their years agreeable,
and fit for marriage.

For Hur was in the same degree Miriam the wife, and not the mother of Hur.
from Hezron of Judah, who went with Jacob into Egypt, as Miriam was from
Kohath of Leui, one of the seventy that descended also: for Kohath begot Amram,
and Amram, Miriam; so Hezron begot Caleb, and Caleb, Hur.

Fourthly, that Hur and Vri should be either of them Fathers at ten years
of age, is vnexemplified in Scripture, though Genebrard allow, that Haran might
be father unto Sara at eight.

And lastly, that Bezaleel should have the advantage of Christ by two years,
to be as skillful at ten in the work of the Tabernacle; as Luke 2. 46.
Christ was at twelve to build the true Temple, when with admiration he
opposed the Doctors, and expounded the Law.

These impossibilities therefore our ancient Lyra well perceived, but in
seeking to redress them, he fell into as great an error himself; in saying,
that these men, Hur, Vri, and Bezaleel, mentioned in the first of Chronicles,
chap. 2. 20. were not the same that were spoken of in Exodus chap. 31. but Lyra
herein not to be followed.
were other men of the same name, and of the same tribe. But so to expound the
text, is dangerous, lest a liking liberty loose thereby the joints of the holy
scriptures frame, and to give the water that passage, the breach will be great.

Vatab. Anotat. upon 1. Chr. 4. 15.
Vatablus in his annotations, and Cumanus Flinspach in his Arca Dei, do take
Hezron to be Iephunneh, and so consequently, the first Caleb the son of
Hezron, to be the same Caleb the son of Iephunneh, and the great Grandfather
unto Bezaleel. But therein then must be followed all Rabbi Solomoh his
errors, for Calebs forty years age will enforce it so.

But that Hezron could be either Iephunneh, or the Father of Caleb the
Lands-surueyour, is by the text manifestly contradicted: for Hezron was borne
unto Phares before that Jacob went down into Egypt; and in Egypt, Hezron begot
his son the first Caleb, when he was threescore years of age, as 1. Chron. 2.
21. by which account, The first Caleb could not be the Lands searcher.
that Caleb must needs have been an hundred fifty five years old in the
first year of the wilderness: for in Egypt the abode was two hundred and
fifteen, as before we have showed. But 1. Chron. 2. 18.
Caleb, the son of Iephunneh, the lands-searcher, was then but Josh. 14. 7
forty years old; whereby it is evident, these Calebs could not be one and the
same, but two several men.

Now as it is impossible for the first Caleb, the great Grandfather unto
Bezaleel, to be the lands-searcher; so the last Caleb being the seventh in
descent from him, and the fifth in degree after Bezaleel, ministers matter of
much seeming difficulty; for that both of them at one time were employed in
most serious affairs.

As touching Calebs successors, I know there are many doubts made, Tostatus.
some making but two Calebs, some three, and some four: and the first and
last, having either of them a daughter called A^hsah, does no whit lessen the
doubt.

Again, whether Ezer mentioned in this pedigree, was the immediate son Doubts
made in the pedigree of Hezron.
of the second Caleb, or the immediate father unto the third, may seem
doubtful: As also Kenaz having no such pregnant testimony, either of
predecessor, or successor, as may enforce (it may be objected) there is no
certain descents betwixt the Lands searcher, and the equalizing of the
skillful workman Bezaleel.

To which may be answered, that although Ezer be not so precisely Doubts
answered in the pedegeee of Hezron. 1. Chron. 4. 4.
named a son, as some others are, yet is he said to be of the sons of Hur,
in the first of the Chronicles, the fourth Chapter, and the fourth verse, and
nearer to him by any of his sons he cannot be, then of Caleb, who was his
eldest son, as verse fifty: so that the many descents, in so short a time,
will warrant him to be Calebs son.

And for the other objection of doubt, thus I answer: If the Kene* zite, Numb.
32. verse. 12. be not the immediate son of Caleb, and the immediate father
unto Iephuneh, then more of his families must come betwixt, and so the last
Caleb should be further removed from Bezaleel, and a more impossibility
imagined.

But to unloose this seeming hard knot, and to approve the truth of a continued
succession, let it be allowed to suppose the ages of these men when they were
fathers, and especially of him upon whom rests the greatestdoubt; so shall
we force neither breach of succession, nor find such impossibilities as have
bin alleged.

Admit then Hur to be twenty years old when he begot Caleb, and Caleb twenty
when he begot Ezer; Ezer twenty when he begot Caleb, Caleb twenty when he begot
Kenaz, Kenaz twenty when he begot Iephuneh; Iephuneh twenty when he begot
Caleb; and Caleb we know was Josh. 14 7
forty, when he searched the land; all which years being added together, make
one hundred and sixty.

Return to Hur in his other issue, and admit Hur to be seventy when he begot
Vri, Vri to be sixty when when he begot Bezaleel, and Bezaleel thirty when he
wrought upon the Tabernacle: which years likewise being summed together, come
also to one hundred and sixty.

Thus then you see this rough way made smooth, and nature no whit How Caleb and
Bezaleel were men in one age.
forced in neither line; for that sons were begotten both at younger, and elder
years through many descents in those times, as we have already seen. And
that Bezaleel should be thirty, is most agreeable to the Law of the Levites,
who at Number. 4. 3
thirty were chosen for services in the Tabernacle; and therefore most likely
that at those years he was chosen to work in the Tabernacle.

Now seeing we have the true Hob. 8. 2
Tabernacle which is not made with hands, and are heirs of that Canaan whose
rest is perpetual; let us study to enter therein, and with thanks offer our
sacrifices unto him who is the first, and the last, in every leaf and line of
the Law. For Romans 11. 36.
of him, and through him, and for him, are all things that are written, to whom
be all glory for ever. Amen.

CHAP. 6.
That God became Man, and from what men descended, the Scriptures Genealogies
do evidently show.

IT rests now to show, that through these holy God beca^e man.
Genealogies, GOD became Man, and that Christ (the word before all things) was
in man's loins enclosed, till the Galat. 4. 4.
fullness of time came, that God sent his Son to be made of a Woman.

This blessed fruit therefore in whom our election was sealed, Ephesians. 1. 4.
before the foundation of the world, was first promised to our first parents in
Paradise, after their taste of the forbidden fruit of death, when likewise the
Serpents malice was quailed by this sentence, Gen 3. Was promised to the
fathers.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed. He shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. And that this
her seed then promised, was the very Messiah to come, both Jews and Gentiles
have acknowledged, the ^athers looked for, and the Patriarchs believed in.

The Scriptures thus beginning Reueiled in the Scriptures.
with a Messiah, the only Alpha of al our happiness, aims at no other mark
besides him, the only Omega of all our hopes. For leaving the state-affaires
of the world, as the breeding of Kingdoms, Principalities, and the like, they
directly lead us to the birth and offspring of Abraham, whereof Christ was to
be borne: and unto him eight several times was promise made, that in his seed
all the nations of the earth should be blessed And unto Isaac his son the
same promise was confirmed in the same words.

Unto Jacob he was the Number. 24 17. 19.
star that should have dominion; and unto Judah the Genesis 49. 10.
Lion that should weld the Scepter; to David, he was the Son that was his Ps.
100. 1
Lord; and to Esaias the Isay 9.
child upon whose shoulders the government was laid: To faithful Ahaz he was
the Isay 28. 16.
son of a Virgin; and to the backe-sliding Jews a sign that Iere. 31. 22.
a woman should compass a man. Brifely, unto his elect, he was, and is the
Rock of Salvation, and unto his Zion the 1 Pet. 2. 6.
the corner stone tried and precious. These and infinite more promises of the
Messiah, are most frequent in the Scriptures of God, which were all
accomplished in Christ the Immanuel with us, whose natural fathers were as
great a cloud, and as many witnesses Being innu^ber. 74. Luke 10. 1.
to show the truth of his humanity, as were the Evangelists and Disciples that
wrote, and were sent to preach his Deity, being fitted forthat work, as was
the golden crownework upon the edges of the incense Alter, and lead our paths
into that way of truth, as the fiery Pillar did light the Israelites remouings.

But our overmuch negligence in these holy Genealogies, as also in the
Ignorance in the sacred Genealogies, has hurt the cause of Christianity
double discents legal and natural; of Jesus our Lord and Messiah, has
greatly hurt both our own cause, and hindered the Jews from embracing the
Gospel.

Our hurt in bringing him naturally from Solomon, whose line was ended long
before: their hinderance by our entangling the text of the old Testament in
Ioash, and Ieconiah, and in the new, in Jacob, Joseph, and Eli; whereby they
daily object, that we are not able by Scriptures to reconcile our own
Evangelists, Saint Matthew and Saint Luke.

That he is of David, both they and we agree, but whether by Solomon or Wherein
the Jews and Christians differ touching Christ's nature, and his right to the
Kingdom.
Nathan rests the question. They hold him from Solomon by birth and natural
succession: we naturally from Nathan, and by a legal right, the next heir to
Salomons Kingdom, his own posterity being utterly extinct.

But this not observed, that Saint Matthew records Christ's legal descent S.
Matthew records the legal, and S. Luke the natural parents of Christ.
from Solomon, whereby he was the lawful King of the Jews; and that Saint
Luke brings his natural line from Nathan, thereby to show him to be the Seed
of the promise, has bred many intricate (and some of them dangerous)
expositions.

In the mentioning whereof, let it be far from me to blot with the It is no
blemish to the godly to have their errors reformed.
least imputation, the fair remembrances of any paineful father gone before us
in the Scriptures explanation, from whose bright torches we must confess our
dim candles have been much enlightened, and by whose labors our studies are
enriched, both with Arts and wisdom; but rather with the Be, let us work the
honey out of every flower, and according to the precept of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3
13.
try the work by the fire of Gods word. The Romanist John Lucidus, deceived by
a forged Philo and Ni^ cholas Lyra, our Countryman, corrupted by study of
malicious Rabbis, together with Annius, Eusebius, Africanus, and many others,
have in Glosses very much entangled the truth of these pedegrees.

For Lucidus allowing that Vtopian Lib. breui^ ariae. A wrong received opinion,
that Salomons house ended in Ochozias.
Hebrician, from him does end the line of Solomon in Ochozias, otherwise called
Achaztah, the seventh King succeeding, and unto Ieconiah the last King of
Judah, does name all the Kings mentioned by Saint Matthew, to be the same men
whom S: Aug. Marlorat: upon Mat. 1. 12.
Luke records from Nathan, whose words thus follow.

S. MATTHEW. S. LVKE. Ioas, The foundation not firm, a ruin must follow: for
Kings never left their names to be called as subjects, no occasion so forcing.
otherwise Simeon. Amasia, Leui. Ozias, Matthat. Iotham, Iorim, Achas, Eliezar.
Ezechias, Iose. Manasses, Er. Amon, Elmodam. Josias, Cosam. Iehoahaz, Addi.
Iehoiachim, Melchi. Ieconiah, Neri.

The like fainings of double names, he continues from Zorobabel through the
line of Rhesa unto Eli, the father of Mary, though to little purpose, and less
explanation.

Eusebius likewise, citing the Epistle Africanus ad Aristide^ Epistola.
of Africanus to Aristides, as ancient as Origin, in these descents of Christ
his parents, both by legal marriages, and in double venters of sons, Inventions
trouble the truth.
so troubles the truth with unwarrantable inventions, as may dazell the eyes
of the best sighted searcher; his words somewhat abridged, I will here insert.

The Eus Eccl hist. l. 1. c. 8
kindred (says he) of Solomon and of Nathan is so knit together, by reviving
of the deceased without issue, by second marriages by raising of seed, so that
not without cause, the same persons are posted over to diverse fathers, whereof
some were imagined, and some others were their fathers indeed, both the
allegations being properly true, though in Joseph diversely, yet exactly by
descent determined. And that that which I go about to prove, may plainly
appear, I will declare the orderly succession of this Genealogy, making a
recital from David to Solomon. The third from the end is Matthan Math 1. Luke
3.
found, which begat Jacob, the father of Joseph, but from Nathan the son of
David, decending according to the Gospel of Luke, the third from the end is
Melchi, whose son is Hely, the father of Joseph. For Joseph is the son of
Hely, the son of Melchi. Joseph being the proposed mark to shoot at, we
must show how either is termed his father deriuing the pedigree of Jacob from
Solomon, of Heli from Nathan. And first how Jacob and Heli, being two brethren,
then their fathers, Matthan and Melchi, borne of diverse kindreds, may be
proved grandfathers to Joseph. Matthan therefore and Melchi, marrying the same
wife, begat brethren by the same mother, the law not forbidding a Widow either
dismissed from her Husband, or after the death of her husband, to be coupelled
unto another man. First, therefore, Not so, for Solomon has none of his race
so named, and Muttha^ was of Abiud, as Melchi also was, and both of the^ of
Zorobabell from Nathan.
Matthan descending from Solomon, begat Jacob of Estha, for that is said to be
her name. After the death of Matthan, Melchi (which is said to have descended
from Nathan) being of the same Tribe, but of another race, having married this
widow to his wife, begat Hely his son. Thus do we find Jacob and Heli of a
different race, but by the same mother to have bin brethren. Of the which,
Jacob taking to wife his sister the wife of Heli, his brother being deceased
without issue, begat on her the third, to wit, Joseph: by nature and the order
of generation unto himself, whereupon it is written, Jacob begat Joseph, by
the law unto his brother Heli deceased, whose son Joseph was. For Jacob being
his brother, raised seed unto him: wherefore, neither that Genealogy which
concerns him, is to be abolished, the which Matthew the Auangelist reciting;
Jacob (says he) begat Joseph: and Luke of the other side; which was the son
(says he) as it was supposed (adding this withal) of Joseph, which was the
son of Heli, which was the son of Melchi. And the word of begetting he
over skipped with silence unto the end, with such a recital of sons, making
relation unto Adam, which was of God: nor is this hard to prove, or to small
purpose proposed.

In this tedious speech of Eusebius, you may see how Joseph is forced to be
naturally from Solomon, and adoptiuely from Nathan, but by imagined fathers, as
himself confesses. and Mary, whose parentage concerns Christ's humanity
most, not once spoken of in this Epistle: how weak a reconciliation therefore
is made of our holy Evangelists, let the unsatisfied Christian judge; and yet
in these fainings, he has been followed In the Bibles of the largest vollume
in English.
in the labors of those that otherwise have done well; which their pedegrees to
show the present defect, is here from them presented to thy sight.



In this intricate Labirinth who can but lament; where neither Scripture is
followed, nor propagation allowed: and how far from truth Eusebius has
straied in this his pretended reconciliation, is evidently seen; namely, in
making Melchi to be the immediate father of Heli, and the third from the end in
S. Contrarieties.
Lukes catalogue; when by the said Evangelist it is most apparent that he was
the fifth from the end; and not the father, but the great grandfather of Heli:
for Melchi begat Leui, and Leui begat Matthat, and Matthat begat Heli, whose
son in law Joseph was.

Then could not Melchi be the natural and next immediate father of Heli, two
generations coming betwixt, howsoever Eusebius understands his rank from
the end.

Nor could the issues of double marriages so begot and borne, be brothers of
one venture, twines: as Jacob and Heli are said to be by the A Conceit without
example.
said Estha, and by two several men, Matthan and Melchi; a thing strange in
nature, and the like in Scripture never seen.

And though Lyra from Africanus and Hierome allow of the double marriages, for
the raising of seed to the issulesse deceased, yet he joins Matthat and not
Melchi unto Estha, for her second husband, and makes Heli her son by the
same man.

But in following these Rabbis too nearly, that bring Christ from Solomon:
Nicolas Lyra in his annotations both upon the first book of Chronicles, and
the Gospel of Saint Matthew, ouerrunneth the truth into a most dangerous error.

For he would have Nathan to be but the adopted son of David, and the
natural son of Vriah the Hittite, borne unto him by Bathsheba his wife,
before David took her for his. For upon David's sons borne in Jerusalem, and
1 Chro. 3. 5. thus he commenteth. Only Solomon was David's Lyra annotation upon
1 Chr. 3. 5 and in Mat. 1.
natural son, the other three were Vriahs, whom David made his by adoption.
So our Lord should come, and take flesh, not of blessed Sem, and beloved David,
as by the Prophets was promised; but of cursed Cham, and irreligious Heth,
without all warrant of the sacred Text.

But unto these their assertions, let us assay further the answer, to clear
our Evangelists from the least touch of disagreement.

First then, though Lucidus be greatly deceived in the ending of Salomons line
in Ahaziah, yet touching The opinions examined, with their resolutions.
Nathans right and families, he has spoken well, in bringing Joseph, Mary,
Zorobabel, and Salathiel, from Nathan, and Nathans issue to be successors unto
Salomons Crown.

But in following his forged Philo, he erreth exceedingly, in saving John Luci
dus deceived by a forged Philo.
that the Kings of Judah, recorded by S. Matthew, are the same men whom Saint
Luke recorded by other names. But that Kings should lose the Majesty of their
names known at their coronation, and afterward be called by other names of
their inferior subjects, no necessity constraining, as Lucidus affirms
twelve of Iudahs Kings to have done, is not again exemplified in the world,
and is so far from credit, that neither Turk nor Jew will believe the Texts of
the old Testament are so to be understood.

But to increase the error, he goes further, and ends Salomons line in
Ahaziah or Ochoziah, without any apparent show of truth: For hardly shall be
found in Scripture a son oftener named from his father then Ioash in every
text where he is named, is called the son of Ochozias. Salomons house did not
end in Ochozias.
Ioash is from Ahaziah, as these six several Texts approve. 2 Kings 11. 2 2
Kings 13. 1. 2 Kings 14. 13. 1 Chro. 3. 11. 2 Chro. 22. 11. 2 Chro. 23. 3.

The dissolution then of Salomons house was not at Ahaziah, in the seventh
generation, as Philo and his followers dream, but continued unto the
eighteenth, to Ieconiah the childlesse, as the Prophet pronounces him, whose
pedigree from Solomon to himself, both in the books of the Kings, and also of
the Chronicles is apparently laid down.

Neither has any Jew the most diligent searchers of the Kingly line, ended
that of Salomons, in the said Ahaziah: but rather have assaied to continue it
long after the birth of Jesus, lest our Christ should be their King.

That Solomon sinned, we know by his story, and that his successors were
wicked, we see by their acts, but that God will bring his house sosoone to a
period, is not manifested either Gods property is to warn before he does
strike.
by speech or by prophecy. And the property of God is, to warn the punishment
before he does strike: for so says Amos; Amos 3. 7.
the Lord will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret unto his servants the
Prophets. But where was heard the sound of that threat, that Salomons issue in
Ahaziah should end; and the glory of his kingdom should be given to Simeon, a
poor subject, and of another family?

And why should it end in Ahaziah, rather then in Ioram his father, who sought
the utter destruction thereof, by murdering his six brethren, 2. Chro. 21. 4.
all the sons of Iehoshaphat King of Judah: and many other Princes of
Israel, and was himself so diseased in his bowels, as to man's seeming his
natural fecundity was altogether hindered.

Again, this is a general observation, that when God for sin takes Gods
manner of dealings.
his blessings from the offender, he does bestow them upon the more worthy, as
he did the birthright from profane Genesis 27.
Esau, and gave it to Jacob that prevailed with God: when he rejected
disobedient 1. Sam. 15. 28.
Saul, he chose David a man after his own heart, and when the rebel 1. Kings
2. 35.
Abiathar was put from the Priesthood, the faithful subject Zadock was set in
his place.

But in this change of state and of persons, we find no such differences: For
Ioash, whom they feign from Nathan, continued the like wickedness, as they from
Solomon had done; and with Cain is compared in shedding (as he had Abels) Mat.
23. 35.
the blood of Zachariah between the Temple and the Altar, even the blood of
him* 2. Chro. 24 21.
whose father had both preserved his life, and raised him to his Kingly estate;
which his sin, the Rabbis amplify (in the Treatise of Penance) in this
manner.

In seven In Ie^usaleme Treat. of penance alleged by M. Broghton.
transgressions Israel sinned that day, they killed a ^riest (...) a Prophet,
and a Judge, and she^ (...) blood, and polluted the (...) betwee^ the Temple
and the Altar upon the ex^ation day; and when Nabuzaradan came thither, he saw
the blood upon the pauement, and asked whose it was: they said; the blood of a
sacrificer, a Prophet, and a Judge which prophesied against us, all that thou
have done unto us, and we stood up against him, and killed him, Then he caused
eighty thousand you^hs of the sacrificers race, to be slaughtered for him. A
wicked beginning verily to be brought into good Nathans line, and no better
continued in most of the Kings following.

For did not u Amaziah set up the Idols of Seir for his God? King 2 Chr. 28
Ahaz made molten Images for Baalim, and after the abo^ation of the Heathen,
burnt his children (...) the valley of Hinnon, and sacrificed unto the Gods of
Damascus. Wicked Manasses built high places for all the host of Heaven, even in
the Court of the house of the Lord, caused his children to pass through the
fire, and shed much innocent blood 2 Chr. 33
, whose sins so provoked the Lords wrath, that they are remembered for
destruction, unto his fourth generation, 2. Kings 24. 3.
Amon sacrificed unto the carved Images, that his father Manasses had made, and
2 Chr. 33 22.
augmented his sins daily more and more.

Iehoahaz 2. Kings 23. 34.
was evil the short time of his reign, and by Necho was carried prisoner into
Egypt, where he died. Perjured Ier. 36. 23.
Iehoiakim burned Jeremy his Roll, was captiuated by Nebuchadnezzar, drawn
and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem, and buried with the burial of an
2. Chro 36. 6.
Ass. Ieconiah, a despised and Ier. 22. 19.
broken Idol, was kept 2. Kings 24.
prisoner in Babell all his life, and by a solemn proclamation was pronounced
Iere. 22. 30.
childlesse, as the last of that race that should bear rule in Judah. A wicked
generation surely for him that Psalm. 45. 7.
hated wickedness, to proceed from, or the Scepter of his righteousness to bud
from such roots.

For albeit that Christ came of sinners (as from Adam he could not otherwise
do) yet he honored his Christ came of sinners, to save sinners
earthly fathers with such notes of graces (especially such of them as were
noted with outward imperfections) as that their saluations are manifestly seen.

For Genesis 3. 20
Adam was faithful, and believed the Promise; Genesis 8. 21.
Noah was righteous, and his sacrifices accepted; Genesis 11. 31.
Terah removed with Abraham from Idolatrous Vr; Jacob was blessed, Judah
praised, and David beloved; and from Nathan to Mary not any one blamed of any
impiety, neither from Abiud to Joseph in that line, but are all called the Da^.
7. 22 The Mothers of Christ, all blessed vessels. In the Gospel none of the
weomen are taken into Christ's Genealogy, but those whom the Scriptures do
reprehend, to show that he came to save sinners, being himself borne of
sinners, says Aug.
high Saints of God, that should possess a Kingdom for ever.

And the like we may affirm of those his mothers, which are set even in the
frontispice of his Gospel, where, not any one of the unblameable are named, as
the believing Euah; the obedient Sara, the faithful Rebecca, nor the loving
Leah; for these were graced by text sufficient in the old Testament: but even
they whose conuersations were marked with some touch of infirmity, as Thamar in
deceiving, Rachab in incontinency, Ruth from incestuous Moab, and Bathsheba
with w^onging Vriah his bed.

And yet these also lest their lives should stain the holy line, are noted by
the pen of grace unto salvation: For Thamar by Judah his own testimony, was m^e
righteous then Marlorat. upon Mat. 1. 6.
himself* Rahab acknowledged the God of Israel, to be the Josh. 2. 11.
God of Heaven above, and of the Earth beneath. Ruth (as Abraham) forsook
kindred and Country, protest^ng that Ruth. 1. 16.
Isreal's people should be her people, and Is raels God her God. And that pen
which wrote the last of the Proverbs, makes Bathsheba a mirror of weomen, and
a worthy Pro. 31.
Counselor to Solomon the wise.

Thus through these bright Clouds, we see the Son of righteousness shine unto
the world, and from this holy stem the Ier. 23. 5
Branch of David to grow in beauty as the Hos. 14. 7
Olive tree, and in smell like unto Lebanon, and spices of Salomo^ Can. 3. 6
: set us Lord under the Cant. 2. 3
shadow these sweet leaves, and let us eat of this tree of life, in the Garden
and Paradise of God.

Now seeing that this beautiful Esa. 11. 1
Rod of Iesse (as Isaiah calls him) took no sap from the bitter roots of
Iudahs Kings, we must bring the growth thereof from another Stem Christ cam^
not of Salo mon, but of Nathan.
unto David, even from the branch Nathan, as our Evangelist Luke has recorded.
But upon this Stone the Jews have stumbled, and have made it Esaias 8. 14.
the rock of offense, the ginne and snare to both the houses of Israel, as
their Isaiah has prophesied, and our 1. Pet. 2. 8.
Peter has spoken.

For they seely men in reading the old Testament, have their minds blinded,
and the 2. Cor. 3. 14.
vale of Moses untaken away from before their hearts even unto this day,
dreaming of a pompous kingdom, which they think to possess, and of a potent
Messiah Tal. in Treat. Sa^hedrim. ca. Helec.
, that should triumph and make subject unto them the Gentiles on every side,
and promise to themselves as much voluptuous pleasure under that earthly
Monarch, as the Turks do after death in dalliances with Virgins, and great
eyed weomen in Paradise; and that this their daily Alcaron.
expected Messiah should come of Solomon, they hold it for a principal article
of their faith, and accurse them that affirm the contrary: for thus stands
the twelth Article of their Creed.

A man must believe that Christ the King shall have Rab. Asser upon Sanedrim
Arti. 12. cited by Ma. Bro.
excellency, and dignity, and glory, above all the Kings that ever have been,
as of him is prophesied of all the Prophets from Moses, and who so doubts of
him, or holds his honor small, denies the law: for so it testifies of him
in the meaning of Balaams prophecy, and in the meaning of this section; You
stand all here this day before the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 29. 10. and cap. 30.
And this is a rule of foundation, that Israel shall have no King but of the
house of David, and of the seed of Solomon; and who so makes a schism
touching that family, denies God, even the blessed God, and the words of his
Prophets.

And upon this opinion of rule and government, Christians also have been
overmuch affectionated, when they bring Christ naturally from those Kings that
governed of Salomons line, and make Rhesa the younger son of Zorobabell, and
his successors to govern (when al government was taken from those Holy In a
Table by some prefixed before the new Testament.
High Saints) the space of two hundred ninety six years: and this no doubt
wrought deeply in Lyra to speak as he did of David's sons.

For he being by nation a Jew, though by birth English and baptized, stood
much upon the outward letter for the glory of his nation. And Nathan, obscure
in comparison of Solomon, he makes more obscure to come from Vriah, as his note
has thus gone upon the 1. Chroni^. 3. 5. A dangerous annotation.
Only Solomon was David's natural Son, the other three were the sons of
^riah, whom David made his by adoption. His reason is taken from the fourth of
the Proverbs, where Solomon says; Prou. 4. 3.
I was my Fathers son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my Mother:
which thing I take was rather spoken of Salomons election to the kingdom, whom
God had chosen, and David to Bersheba had 1 Kin. 1. 29.
sworn, that Solomon her Son should succeed him in the

Lyra thus infected with malicious Jews studies, and partly following
Christians that brought Christ from Solomon, held the Jewish Article touching
the Crown: but otherwise in most of his pains spent in commenting upon all the
books of both Testaments, he was an excellent Organe, sounding alowd the
verity of Lyra commended.
Christian Religion, against the erring opinions of the Rabbis, in whose
Schools he had so profited (by the testimony of Tritemeus) as that he had the
Hebrew language ad vnguem.

But that Christ should come from David by Nathan, and his obscure successors,
whereof never any bare rule, but only Zerubbabel, and he no longer then the
Temple was in building, he could not conceive: neither that Ieconiah should
beget Salathiel, but for his successor, seeing he is called his 1. Chro. 3. 17.
son indeed, he could not easily yield unto, the Rabbines so expounding it,
and their Creed so enforcing it; and being a friar Minor, and living in none of
the cleerest days of the Gospel, the man is the more to Lyra excused.
be borne with, whose pains were spent (as Bale has it in his Centuria) when
the unfortunate, our second Edward Bale* Centur. 5. fol. 391.
ware the English Crown. Ano. 1327.

And now the assertions of Africanus, Africanus and Eusebius their opinions.
cited by Eusebius, (which are, that Joseph, the husband of Mary, was naturally
descended from Solomon, and by intricate marriages, made the legal son of
Nathan) remains to be answered. I call them intricate, for that Jacob and Eli
are made brethren, and In a Table once printed with the great Bible.
twins of one venture by Estha, wife unto Matthan of Solomon, and unto Melchi
of Nathan: and those half brethren likewise marying one woman, Jacob by her is
said to raise up seed unto Eli deceased, whereby Joseph was son unto both.

A strange invention truly, to bring Joseph from Ieconiah and Solomon; who with
less pains, and more truth, might have been found from Zerubbabel, Neri, and
Nathan: and stranger it seems, that such search should be made, to show how
Christ by nature is the son of David: and yet never to make known his
natural Parents from David: neither can I perceive what necessity constrains
Joseph to be the proposed mark of Joseph can be no proposed mark for Christ's
humanity, seeing he took not flesh of him
that aim, seeing he is but the supposed father of Christ, unto whom
(excepting his title to the kingdom) his humanity no whit appertains.

Either to bring Joseph's natural decent from Solomon, and his legal from
Nathan, seeing he enjoyed no possessions appertaining to Salomons Crown, nor
Mary his wife an inheritrix of any patrimony in Judea. For which end only, that
law of marying the brothers wife was ordained, and at this aimed, that no Deu:
25. 5, 6.
family should be extinguished in Israel.

It was the case of the Number. 27 Iptahs daughter not burned in sacrifice, but
made a Vestall.
Daughters of Zelophehad; and the debar of marriage, and not the death of the
daughter of Iphtah, was the cause of the Judge. 11.
yearly lamentations of the David Kimchi in Thanah.
Virgins of Israel, that a family was to fail by her in the Tribe of Manasses.

But for brethren by the Mothers side only, no such law was either ordained,
No law for brethren only, by the mother to inherit. Baba Batra.
or practiced; for the son by the man, and not by the woman, ever succeeded in
the inheritance, and in the name of the family (excepting such as inherited by
the line of the mother, as 1. Chron. 2. 22.
Iair did twenty two cities in Gilead), and therefore Jacobs son by that law
could not be the son of Eli.

Howsoever* then Eusebius favors that reconciliation, and wishes others to
prefer the same for the agreement of our Evangelists, yet seeing it stands
upon no firmer ground than that himself has built upon, we may without
prejudice mistrust the foundation. For (says he) Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 1.
ca. 8. Herod burned the Jews records.
Herod the son of Antipater, pricked in mind for the baseness of his birth,
burned the ancient Records of the Jews Genealogies, supposing thereby to
derive himself of noble parentage. But certain men of the affinity and
kindred of our Savior traveling from Nazarites and Cochoba (castles of the
Jews) into other Regions, expounded the foresaid Genealogies out of books of
Chronicles, as far as they extended.

But who those travelers and expounders were, or what authentike warrant those
books bare, he names not, and therefore such testimonies suffice not. Where,
to manifest Joseph's sonneship unto Eli, let us insert the sayings of Rabbi
Haccanas, the son of Ne^umiah, a Doctor of great esteem among the Jews.

The testimony of the Rabbis touching Mary's parentage. How Joseph the son
of Jacob is made the son of Eli.
There was a Maid (says he) in Bethlem of Judah, whose name was Mary, the
daughter of Heli, of the kindred of Zerubbabel, the son of Salathiel, of the
tribe of Judah, who was betrothed to Joseph of the same kindred and tribe. Where
by him we see, that the virgin Mary was the daughter of Eli, and by her Joseph
is his son; and not by a second marriage, or seed raised to the deceased,
but rather by the law of matrimony, as Exo. 3. 1.
Moses of Leui, was the son of Iethro the Madianite, and 1. Sam. 24. 17.
David of Judah, was son to Saul of Benjamin.

And the same law that made Joseph How Jesus is made the son of Joseph.
to be the son of Eli, made Jesus likewise to be the son of Joseph; and
that he was so reputed and taken, let the testimony of the latter Jews
witness, whereof Suidas reports in a conference happening betwixt Theodosius
an eminent Jew, and one Philip a Christian Merchant, in the days of Justinian
the Emperor, whose words to this effect are thus:

Suidas upon the word Jesus.
In the Temple of Jerusalem (quoth the Jew) therewere two and twenty ordinary
Priests: and as soon as any of them died, the residue chose another in his
place. Now it happened that JESUS for his singular godliness and doctrine, was
chosen by them: and to the intent they might know the name of his father and
mother, and inregister it according to the custom, they sent for them; and
Mary came thither alone, because her husband Joseph was then dead. And she
being asked the name of the father of Jesus, answered upon her oath, that she
had conceived him by the holy Ghost, and reported to them the words of the
Angel. Moreover, she told them the names of the women that came to her labor
unlooked for: and upon due inquisition thereof, when all things were found to
fall out true, they registered his name in the Register of the Priests in these
words, JESUS THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD, AND OF THE VIRGIN MARIE. Which
Register was saved at the sacking of Jerusalem, and was afterward kept in the
City Tiberias, and I being one of the chief among the Jews (says
Theodosius) have there seen it: so that it is not ignorance that holds me
in the Jewish Religion, but the honor I have among my Countrymen.

By which, and others their own testimonies, is evident how Joseph was the
son of Eli, by the marriage of his daughter; and how Jesus was the son of
Joseph by the marriage of his mother: both which were according to the law, and
not by any natural descent.

CHAP. VII.
That Christ Jesus descended only of Judah, and took no part of his humanity
from L^i, neither by his fathers, nor by his mothers.

THat Christ took any of his blood or humane nature, Christ took no flesh
from Leui.
either by father or mother from Leui, is more then the Scriptures do warrant,
God so distinctly seperating the Genealogies of Judah and Leui, for the Crown
and the Miter, that not any could claim both, by any due descent. Yet Ranul.
Cestrensis in Policron* lib: 3 cap. 44.
some without proof have imagined, that Anna the mother of the virgin Marie,
was the daughter of a Leuite, whereby CHRIST JESUS (as they affirm) was both
King and Priest, in a lineal descent from either Tribe. In which opinion,
Suidas is so confident, that Suidas faulty in his opinion.
he says: Christ in the right of Leui, was chosen a Priest into the service of
the Temple, and that he, by that authority in the Sinagogue at Luke 4. 16
Nazareth, expounded the Prophecy of Isaiah, and at Luke 19: 47.
Jerusalem taught daily in the Temple. Therein following those, that think
Marie by the mothers side of Leui, because Elizabet the wife of Zachary, was
of the daughters of Aaron, and by the Angels testimony, Luke 5. 34. 36.
cousin unto Marie. But that Marie therefore should be of Leui, it proves hot.

For albeit that daughters which Why the law of marrying into their own tribes
was ordained.
were inheriters, were to bestow themselves upon men of the same Tribes, lest
their Numb. 36. 8.
possessions should be transferred, or in the year of Iubile reuerted unto the
inheritance of others; yet in others, and especially those of the Kings and
Priests line, we find the practice contrary, and that virtuous women, without
breach of this law, did marry into other tribes.

For so did Exodus 6. 23.
Elisheba of Judah, match with Aaron of Leui; and Miriam of Leui, with Hur of
Judah: 1. Chron. 2. 21.
Hezron of Judah, matched in the tribe of Manasses, and 1. Sam. 18. 27.
David took Michal the daughter of Saul to wife. The mother of Hiram, a
daughter of 2. Chron. 2 ^4.
Dan, married her second husband out of the tribe of 1. King. 7. 14.
Naphtali* and Iehoiada the high Priest, of Leui, married 2. Chron. 22. 11.
^ehoshabeah, the daughter of King Iehoram o^ Judah: which thing ha^ it been
unlawful, these godly persons would never have done it. And the oath had been
needless which the Israelites made in Mixpah, that Judge. 21. 1.
none of them should give their daughters to marry with the Beniaminnites, if
the law of God had debarred tribes from mixtures before.

Upon this warrant therefore Elisabet must be held a branch from Judah,
Elizabet was from Iud^, and not Mary from Leui.
and not the blessed Marie to be a bud from Leui: whose parents were all of
them known to be from Z^rubbabel, David, and Judah by the Rabbis own
testimonies.

And albeit that Tribes matched into Tribes, and Iudahs many times into that of
Leuies, yet so distinctly has the holy Ghost separated Judah from Leui, in the
catalogue of Christ, that of those mothers, whereof he came and took flesh,
none are recorded to come from Leui, nor indeed from any other tribe known of,
then from Iudahs. Excepting Thamar, Rahab and Ruth, who were of Canaan and Moab.

And they by divine providence into Iudahs Tribe were conjoined, that so by
them the Gentiles might have interest with the Jews in the Humanity of Christ,
who is the spiritual Temple, as they had been interested in the material
Temple, whose foundation was laid in the threshing floor of Ornan the Iebusite
a Canaanite. 2. Chron. 3. 1.


The Scepter and Censer thus being severally separated, that Christ from Judah
might be certainly known; his immediate parents are accordingly recorded from
David and Bethlehem, the one of them in express words by the Evangelist; and
the other so acknowledged by the Jews themselves; and lastly, the Apostle so
confirms it, when he says, that he of whom these things are spoken,
appertained to another Heb. 7. 13.
tribe, whereof no man served at the Altar Neither did the Pharisees, who daily
waited occasions against Christ, ever cavil at his kindred or trib^, otherwise
then calling him the son of a Carpenter, a Seducer, and Matthew. 11. 19.
a friend to publicans and sinners.

But to satisfy Suidas, and such as think that by his grand-mothers line he
might supply the office of a Leuite in the Temple, let us hear what Rambam
Rambam a converted Jew unto Christianity.
writes concerning their Customs, who records the Canons that the Jews
observed in their Synagogues thus: 1. Only a The Customs of the Jews
recorded in their Canons.
Leuite must offer the Sacrifice. 2. But any of Israel might expound the law.
3. The expounder must be an eminent man, and of great estimation. 4. He that
expounded, might not lean upon any pillar, deske, or board. 5. Neither must
any read, until the Master of the Sinagogue had commanded him. 6. He that was
to read, was to open the book, to read the text, and to roll up the book
again. These obseruances done, the people with silence attended the
exposition; upon which customs doubtless, Saint James spoke, when he said,
Acts 15. 21.
that Moses of old time had in every city them that preached him, being read in
the Sinagogue every Sabbath day. And according to that custom Saint Luke
records the actions of our Savior in these words:

Luke 4. 16.
And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and as his custom was
he went into the Sinagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. And
there was delivered unto him the book of the Prophet Esaias: and when he had
opened the book he found the place where it was written: The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor,
he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised. To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And he closed the book,
and he gave it again to the Minister, and sat down: and the ^yes of all them
that were in the Sinagogue were fastened on him. And he began to say unto them;
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. And all bare him witness,
and wondered at the gracio^ words which proceeded out of his mouth: And said, is
not this Joseph's son?

Note here how many things of the Hebrews traditions our Lord then observed;
he stood up to read; the book was delivered to him; he opened the book, and
found the place; he closed the book; and the eyes of all that were in the
Sinagogue Christ according to the Canons, read in the Synagogue, as any
Israelite might read.
were fastened on him. Thus we see by many circumstances that our Lord read, as
any of Israel might, as well as Leui. So Paul and Barnabas, the one doubtless
of Benjamin, though the other were of Leui, both at Antioch, and neither of
them known for Apostolic calling, were desired by the Acts 13. 15.
Rulers of the Synagogue to speak words of exhortation after the reading of
the Law.

If Suidas then had observed this text, or had known this practice in the
Jews Sinagogue, he would never have thought that a man by the line of his
mother, might be accounted a Leuite, or by that right, use the function on of
a Priest. And whether Hismeria the mother of Elisabet, that bare the Baptist,
and Anna the mother of the blessed Uirgin, that bare Christ, were Sisters; and
both of them the daughters of Issachar a Leuite, (as Ranulphus C^strensis in
Polychro. lib. 3. c. 44.
some affirm) is not canonical and therefore I hold it no Article of faith.

For Christ, that was to fulfill all righteousness, so came, and carried
himself in his office and actions, as in that searching age John 14. 30.
the Prince of the world could find nothing amiss in him; and the severe
punishments showed upon them, that assaied to bear both the Scepter and Censer
in one hand, might have stayed their pens, that make this Prince of Judah to
be a sacrificer from Leui.

For see we not the death of 2. Sa. 6. 6
Uzzah, only for touching the Arc; and the leprosy of 2. Chro. 26. 19.
Vzziah for attempting to burn incense; both of them of Judah, and not
consecrated to minister before the Lord, as they of Aaron were. And
contrariwise, when the Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 13. and 14. and 15.
Levites Machabees lastly usurped the Scepter of Judah, and set his Crown upon
their own mitred heads; they not only made way by emulations and slaughters
each of others, unto an Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 1. ca. 15
Idumean Herod, to obtain the Kingdom; but also became Saduces themselves in
Religion, which Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 18. cap. 2.
Sect (...) ^he Resurrection of the b^y* (...) that the souls of men perished
w^h their bodies, and that there was neither Act. 23. 8
Angel nor Spirit.

But that Christ was a Priest, we deny not; yea, our great high Priest, which
1. John
made a reconciliation for the sins of the whole world, we acknowledge him;
yet after another order then Aarons was, and of another Tribe, then that of
Leui, even of the Tribe of Judah, and order of Heb. 7.
Melchisedeck: for it is evident, says the Apostle to the Hebrews; that our
Lord sprang out of Judah, concerning which Tribe Heb. 7. 14.
Moses spoke nothing touching the Priesthood: In which his office he
continues a Priest for ever, and in whom likewise the government of his peace
was prefigured: so as in his person alone is accomplished the attributes that
Isaiah and David give, the one prophesying of his Priesthood, and the other of
his Kingdom thus:

Touching his Priesthood, says Isaiah; Esaias 61. 1
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach
good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to
proclaim liberty to the Captives and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound. And of his Kingdom, says David; Ps 45. 6.
Thy throne O God, is for ever and ever: the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
Scepter; thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness: Therefore God* thy
God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows: Lord
seal them both by thy Spirit in our hearts, that with thee we may reign Apo.
1. 6
Kings and Priests, as himself the true witness, has promised.

CHAP. VIII.
That Salomons House was rent, and all his posterity utterly extinct, long
before the coming of Christ in his flesh; and that neither from Solomon, nor
any of his successors (the Kings of Judah) Christ Jesus took any part of his
humanity.

WHen David was fully established upon his Throne, had brought up the Arc to
the prepared Tabernacle, and intended to have built that more fair and
convenient: this message was brought him by the Prophet Nathan from the Lotd.

1. Chro. 22. 8.
Thou shall not build a house for me to dwell in; for thou have shed much
blood, and have made great wars. But when David forbidden to build Gods
Temple.
thy days shall be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers: I will
set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy Bowels: He shall
build an house for my name; and I will establish the throne of his Kingdom for
ever. 2. Sam. 7. 14.
I will be his father, and he shall be my son; if he sin, I will chasten
him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men: but my
mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away
before thee.

And albeit this house and Kingdom Christ the spir^tuall Temple.
in their spiritual meaning, were built, and established in, and by Christ;
yet literally they were performed in Solomon, whose works were so glorious,
and peace so famous, as they were figures of the true substances following.

But that Solomon sinned, is manifested He had 700. wives, and 300. concubines.
by his story: for his 1. King. 11. 3.
wives turned away his heart after other gods; when he suffered the
worshipping of Ashteroth the Goddess of the Zidonians, Milcom, the abomination
of the Amorites, Chemo^h, the Idol of Moab, and Molech the Devil of the
children of Ammon. For which cause God did chastise him, by the rebellions of
1. King. 11. 14.
Hadad the Edomite, of 1. King. 11. 23.
Rezon King of Damascus, and of his servant 1. King. 12. 16.
Jeroboam, that rent his Kingdom after him, and carried away ten Tribes.

These in part were the Rods in Gods hand, that corrected his offenses, but his
2. Sam. 7. 15.
mercy he took not from him, as he had promised; whose salvation,
notwithstanding these his Solomon saved, notwithstanding his great sins.
great sins, is confirmed by these many, and more testimonies of Scriptures:
He loved the Lord: 1 King. 3: 3: and is likewise called, the Lords beloved:
Nehe. 13. 26. His Iedidiah: 2 Samuel 12. 25. He pleased the Lord: 1 Kings (...).
10. was a true Prophet: 1 Kings 8. 48. a figure of Christ: Luke 11. 31. and a
repentant King, as his Book Ecclesiastes sufficiently shows.

His sons after him for the most Salomons posterity extremely wicked.
part were extremely wicked; for of nineteen Kings of Iudahs throne, from his
loins descended, twelve are noted to be extremely impious, who often
provoked, and lastly procured, the utter subversion of that glorious Kingdom,
which whilst it stood, was the glory of the earth, and a figure of the
Celestial that is to come. The want of issue then which failed in Ieconiah,
was the Rod of Salomons line, wherewith God scourged him and his Kingdom: and
how that fell out, let us see the several rents that therein were made.

The first rent of Salomons Kingdom, may be said to begin in his own life
time, when Ahijah the Shilonite rent the new garment that 1. Kings 12. 30.
Jeroboam wore into twelve pieces, retaining only two, and delivered him
ten: by which was signified, the ten Tribes that God would take from
Salomons Throne and Son, Salomons kingdom rent by his servant.
and give them unto this Ephrathite, the Son of Nebat.

Who no sooner was made King, but that he set up two golden Calves, the one at
Dan, and the other at Bethel, for his people to worship; lest in returning to
Jerusalem, 1. Kings 12. 27.
their hearts should return to the Lord, and their subjection unto Rehoboam.
With this his sin all the Kings of Israel were All the Kings of Israel
infected with Ieroboams sins. August. in ciui. Dei l. 17. cap. 23
polluted, only Shallum, and Hosheah excepted; for with that sin they are
not charged, though otherwise they were as wicked as the rest. And this was the
cause that moved the Prophet Hosheah to say; Hosea 8. 3*
Thy Calfe, O Samaria has cast thee off.

Another rent was threatened to The second rent of Samons kingdom.
Salomons issue and Kingdom, when his house joined with Om^ies in Ioram, the
son of Iehoshaphat, King of Judah; and in 2. Chro. 21. 6.
Athalia, the daughter of Ahab, King of Israel.

For Ahabs whole house (that is, both male and female) must 2. King. 9. 8.
utterly perish, according to the threats of the Lord by Elijah the Prophet: 1.
King. 21. 21.
Behold (says he) I will bring evil upon thee; and will take away thy
posterity, and will cut off from Ahab, him that pisseth against the wall, as
well him that is shut up as him that is left in Israel. And I will make thy
house 1. King. 15. 29.
like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha,
the son of Ahiiah, for the prouocations wherewith thou have provoked, and made
Israel to sin. The dogs shall eat him of Ahabs stock that dies in the
City, and he that dies in the fields, shall the Fowls of the air eat.

And that the whole houses of Jeroboam, and of Baasha, were both of them
extinct, and their remnant 1. King. 14. 10.
swept away as dung from the dunghill, and all gone; is most apparent by the
holy Text: and so must the whole house of Ahab be, having the like threats of
destruction from the same Spirit that did not repent: which presently began
in Ahab, and Iezebel themselves.

He wounded to death 2. King. 22. 34.
at Ramath Gilead, by the King of Syria: and she thrown out of her window, 2
King. 9. 33.
was dashed to death in Iezreel by her Eunuchs: Ahaziah their first son, was
2. King. 1. 2.
bruised to death by a fall through his lettice window in Samariah: And Ioram
their second, with all his brethren 2 King. 10. 11.
the sons of Ahab, and his Kinsmen, were all slain in Iezreel by Iehu, until
he left none remaining (says the Text) of the whole House of Ahab.

And as Gods wrath followed Ahab in his sons unto destruction, so did it in
his daughter Athalia, the mother of most of the Kings of Judah, and most of
them following her sins, were also swept away till they were all gone.

For the three first Kings that succeeded of her descent, were all of them
slain 2. Chro. 22. 9. 2. Chron. 24. 25. 2. Chron. 25. 27.
in battle, and in conspiracy: And Vzziah the fourth, put from the peoples
presence, died a leaper. Bad Ahaz distressed by 2. Kin. 16.
Rezin of Syria and Pekah of Israel, made himself servant to Tiglah Pileser,
King of Ashur, who carried his treasures away unto Damascus: And good Hezektah
was told Esaias 39. 6.
that his substance and seed (foreshewing his treasures) should be carried
captive unto Babel.

The blood shed Ier. 15. 4
by Manasseh called (as Abels) for Babylons punishments; and Amon 2. Chro. 33.
23.
for serving strange gods, was slain by his servants. The godly Josiah was
told of captivity, curse, and destruction of people and place, which yet was
deferred all his own life, because 2. King. 22. 26.
his heart melted at the words of the then found Book of the Law: but his
sons succeeding soon, pulled those plagues (by his life kept back) upon
themselves and Iudahs estate.

For Iehoahaz, the first inthroned, was captiuated 2. Kings 23. 34.
by Necho, carried to Egypt, and there died; and Iehoiakim his successor made
subject to 2. King. 24. 1.
Nebuchadnezzar, was for his rebellion slain, and his carcass left unburied
to the heat of the day, and the frost of the night. Zedekiah was made blind,
chained, and carried to Babel, where he died, the City Jerusalem sacked, the
Temple t burned, the Priests u slain, the people, pillars, and holy vessels
transported to Babylon, and all of them polluted and subjected to the
Chaldeans, that bitter, furious, and terrible Nation, as by the Prophets they
are termed.

For Joel says Joel 1. 6.
, that their teeth were like the teeth of Lions, and that they had the jaws of
a great Lion; and Jeremy calls them a mighty and very strong Nation, Ier. 5. 16
whose quiver was an open sepulcher. Ezekiel saw the tops Ezekiel. 17 3.
of the Cedars of L^banon broken off, and carried into the Land of Merchants by
the Eagle of Babel: and Daniel Dan. 7. 4
(...) Babels King like a Lion with wings, being himself carried thither
captive, in the first captivity, with perjured Iehoiakim.

But the last and greatest rent of Salomons Kingdom was, when the earth was
commanded to take knowledge, that his successor and son Ieconiah should die
childlesse, and that none of his seed should sit upon Salomons Throne any
more, as by Jeremy was proclaimed, and to Iechoniah told: I will give thee
(says he) Ier. 22. 25.
into the hand of them that seek thy life, and into the hand of them, whose
face thou fear, even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babel, and
into the hand of the Chaldeans: And I will cause them to carry thee away, and
thy mother that bare thee, into another country, where ye were not borne, and
there shall ye die. But to the I and whereunto they desire to return, thither
they shall not return. Is not this man Coniah as a despised and broken Idol,
or as a vessel wherein is no pleasure? wherefore they are cast out into a Land
which they know not. Thrice is the earth named, to warn attention that
Ieconiah should die childlesse.
O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord; thus says the Lord, write
this man childlesse, a man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of
his seed shall prosper, to sit upon the Throne of David, or to bear rule any
more in Judah.

Of whose successor, Crown, and Kingdom, the Prophet Ezechiel further
speaks, when Nebuchad nezzar (after he had captiuated Ie coniah in Babylon)
had set his Uncle Zedekiah upon Iudahs throne. Ezech. 21. 25.
Thou Prince of Israel (says he) polluted and wicked, whose day is come when
iniquity shall have an end; Thus says the Lord Thrice is proclaimed the
ouerturning of Salomons Crown, and reuersing it to another family.
God, I will take away the Diadem, and take off the Crown: this shall be no
more the same: I will exalt the humble, and will abase him that is hie. I will
ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne it, and it shall be no more, until he come
whose right it is, and I will give it him.

And for the reuersing of that Crown into another Family, the words of the
Prophet Jeremy, and Haggai do witness. The one speaking thus: Ier. 22. 24.
As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son of Iehoiakim King of Judah,
were the signet of my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence: i^ not this
man Coniah, as a despised and broken Idol? And the other thus, Hagg. 2. 23.
In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, I will take thee O Zerubbabel my
servant, the son of Salathiel, says the Lord, and I will make thee as a
Signet: for I have chosen thee says the Lord of Hosts.

If seven thunders of wrath should sound the period of any posterity, how could
they be louder or plainer, then these universal speeches pronounced against
Ieconiah; O Nothing plainer then the speeches of the ending of Salomons
posterity.
Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord, write this man childlesse: Or
the change of state in any Kingdom, then this of Zedekiahs crown; I will
ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne it, it shall be no more the same. Or what could
be more distinctly said, who should be cast off, then this of Iechoniah by
name, a vessel without pleasure: and who chosen Gods Signet, then Zerubbabel,
that built the Lords Temple, and brought forth the head Zach. 4. 7
stone thereof with shouts, crying, grace, grace. Let us then that have ears
to hear, hear what the Spirit has spoken of Iudahs temporal Crown; and
speaks of him unto whom it spiritually belongs.

Ier. 23. 5.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, I will raise unto David a righteous
Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and
justice in the Earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely: and this is the name whereby he shall be called; THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Which speech of Jeremy is far milder, then that which was thundered out
before, and not much unlike unto the still voice that spoke to 1. King. 19. 11.
Elijah, after the tempest of wind, earthquake, and fire, had rent the rocks
and mountains in pieces.

This righteous Branch then, must Iudahs Kings from Solomon, had no promise
that Christ should come of them, much less Isreal's wicked Kings, as Achab and
his wife I^zabel that spiritual fornicatrix.
not be brought from Salomons Stem of wicked Kings, nor from the half blood of
Achab, by his daughter Athaliah that died in their sins, seeing that both
root and branch were cut off in Iechoniah, and all threats of destruction, as
well to the house of Israel as Judah, accomplished, when the want of issue in
him was declared to the World.

But against this proclamation of Jeremy, the Jews have their answer; namely,
that these words are not meant for a childlesse posterity, but for a Seed that
should not inherit the fathers possession: for thus David Kimchi comments upon
this Text; Write him childlesse: If Ieconiah had sons (says he) they died in
his lifetime; The Rabbis se^ke starting holes to avoid the text.
if he had none, then should he have none to govern: for not Salathiel his
son, but Zerubbabel his Nephew, ruled in Judah after him.

And the threats in the Law of a childlesse posterity, they expound in the same
sense: for where it is said; Leui^. 20. 20.
He that lies with his Ant, or with his brothers wife, to uncover their
nakedness, shall di^ childlesse. That is meant (say they) that a seed so
begot shall not inherit the patrimony: whereas in truth it infor^th a far
greater defect.

For (...) in the Hebrew, from the root (...) is (...) which * In Genesis 15. 2.
and Leuit. ^0. 20. and Leuit. 20. 21. and Ier. 22. 30.
word is used some times in the old Testament, and signifies one rooted up, o^
one who has not in himself a root for heirs of his own body. A dee per
signification by much, then the want only of an heir for inheritance; as in
the answer of Abraham to God is apparent; Ge. 15. 2 Abraham's complaint was the
want of issue of his body, ^d not for want of an heir to succeed him.
What will thou give me (says he) seeing (...) go (...) childlesse? and the
Steward of mine house is this Eliezer of Damascus: behold, to me thou have
given no seed; and lo, one borne in my house is mine heir. Here it is most
manifest, that his speech was a complaint for want of issue from his body, and
not for want of an heir, which we see he had ordained and provided; and so
must (...) in Jeremy, be taken against Ieconiah, that childlesse man.

And no otherwise can the malicious Jews force it, but by forcing a gloss
upon Gods decree, saying: that Ieconiahs repentanc^, altered Gods purpose and
oath: for in their Gemera or Babylonian Talmud, thus they write; (...) makes
reconciliation for three things spoken of by Ier. 21. 9.
Jeremy, Rabbi Iochanan cited by M. Broghton in manuscript
the sword, hunger, and plague, which they that abode in the City should
suffer: but he that did yield to the Caldeans, should have his life for a
prey. Na^, says Rabbi Iochanan; (...) makes reconciliation for all things;
for though it be written: Write Ieconiah childlesse, yet was it afterward
written, the son of Ieconiah was Salathiel, and his son Zerubbabel a Signet
upon Gods finger.

Ex ^od. ^th.
Rambam also in his Treatise of Repentance, brings in Ieconiah for an
example, who (says he) was a Signet plucked off, and in Zerubbabell was a
Signet placed again. And Kimchi the Spanish Jew* is so far from having him
die childlesse, that he will have the word Assir in 1. Chro. 3. 17. to be the
propper name of a man, and that man Ieconiahs son.

But let us see how Esaias 9. 21.
Ephraim herein fights against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim: for
this was a principal point held of the Rabbin against Rabbin.
ancient Rabbis, that repentance could not put back a decree made with an
oath. And the Babylonian Thalmud in Sanedrim, expounds Assir for an adjective
bound up, or hard kept, restraint or prisoner, and not for the proper name of a
man. Moreover, their Sedar olam zuta, affirms, that it was but the Rabbis
report, that Salathiel was the natural son of Ieconiah. And Kimchi, with
Salomoh Iarchi, upon the twelfth of Zachary, confess, that Nathan there
named, was the son of David, who should not have been mentioned as a
principal man to Zerubbabel, unless he were of his family.

But as touching, that it could not put back a decree made by oath; Did that
of Zedekiah, and them that were carried away with him, make them the Ier. 24. 8.
bad figs that could not be eaten, any better? Could that of Deuteronomy. 3. 26.
Moses (notwithstanding his earnest prayer, prevail for his entrance into
Canaan? or the Israelites, whereof no doubt many were repentants, to enter the
Rest, when God had sworn the contrary? Nay, if Ezekiel. 14. 20.
Noah, Daniel and Job, should not be heard against Gods decree, of famine,
pestilence and sword, shall we think that Ieconiah (whose repentance is not
read of, and whose captivity remained thirty seven years in Babylon, even all
his life long) could alter Gods oath, as touching posterity? And yet these
miserable God alters not his oath.
men seek to continue a succession from this childlesse man.

For Aben Ezra in his preface to Salomons Song, calls the Messiah, Solomon,
because (says he) he should be the son of Solomon, as from David he is
called Ezekiel. 37. 25.
David, the Prince everlasting. But had that Rabin considered, that no such
promises were spoken concerning Salomons sons, nor that Prince David there
named, was named before that Salomons House failed in Ieconiah: he might have
known how Christ had been Salomons son. His son he was indeed, as a King
and Successor, but not as a man; as his heir to his crown, but not of his
loins.

And I could have wished, that For Augustine Marlorat says, that Assir,
Salathiel, Melchiram, Ph^daia, Senneser, ^echinas, Ho^amia, and Nadabia, were
the sons of Ieconiah in Mat. 1. 12. The word begeting, in S. Matthew, urged
somewhat too naturally.
Christians also had not been so forward in following the Rabbis herein, and
in urging the text of Saint Matthew in Ieconiahs begetting of Salathiel,
somewhat too naturally; as Lyra, Lucidus, (...), Messeus, and many others have
done: who lean so waightily upon the outward phrase of begetting, that the
maine prop of Divinity is thereby ouerburdened.

For they by Saint Matthew, and the first book of Chronicles, would make a
line all and natural succession from Ieconiah to Salathiel* as the Rabbis
have done; and would continue Salomons line unto Joseph, the husband of the
virgin Marie, without breach of succession The words of either texts are these,
in the Chronicles thus; And the sons of Ieconiah, Assir, Salathiel h^ son
1. Chron. 3. 17. And in Saint Matthew thus; And after they were brought into
Babylon, Ieconiah begat Salathiel. Matthew. 1. 12.

But if speeches here spoken must be taken in a procreating sense, then was
Zedekiah, as well as Salathiel, son unto Ieconiah: for in the first of
Chronicles, chap. 3. verse. 16. thus it it stands; And the sons of ^oakim,
Ieconiah his son, Zedekiah his son. Which Zedekiah in the verse immediately
before, is said (as truth is) to be the Ier. 37. 1.
son of Josiah. But in the secon^ of Chronicles he is called the brother of
Ieconiah Chap. ^6. 10. And yet in the second of the book of Kings* he is said
to be the brother of Ieconiah his father* 2. Kings 24. 17. So that by these
places, h^ is both uncle, brother* and son to Ieconiah, and yet all of them
true, either in nature inheritance, or succession. And if these seem not
strange in him, nor that line, why should Salathiels sonneship be so naturally
urged in Matthew, whom Saint Luke clears to be the Son of Neri: and so does
Zachariah in naming Zach. 12. 11.
Nathan for a chief family of David.

And that Saint Matthew meant The purpose where unto Saint Matthew drives,
^ust be considered.
no otherwise of begetting then of heirs to Salomons Crown, appears by
himself, who in recording his successors, follows neither a natural
succession, nor an exact descent. For he makes Ioram to beget Ozias, whereas
the Chronicles tells us, that Ozias was the immediate son of Amaziah, and was
four descents after Ioram, his great Grandfather, who died 69. years before
Ozias was borne.

So likewise he says, that Josias begat Ieconias; who notwithstanding was his
Grandchild, and son unto Iehoiakim, the second son of Josiah.

Whereby we see no natural succession urged by the Evangelist, but rather such
as makes a Successor, a son to the childlesse, or an heir of what
consanguinitie soever, to be a son to the issulesse possessor. So Iose^.
Antiq. lib 2. cap. 5. Deuteronomy. 3. 14
Moses was meant the son of Pharaohs daughter. So Iair of Judah was the son
of Manasseh. And so 2. Kings 20. 34.
Baasha was father unto Ahab, though saving the Throne, he was no kin unto him:
for Baashas house ended in his son Elah. So that another intent moved Saint
Matthew to continue a continual succession from Ieconiah unto Salathiel.

And that the Evangelist spoke of the heirs of the Crown, and not of the
kindreds in blood, it further appears, in that he ascends by the S. Matthew
ascends no higher then Abraham, who first had promise of the kingdom. But S.
Luke up to Adam, unto whom the promise of Christ was made.
legal line, through Joseph, Abiud, Ieconiah, and Solomon, no higher then unto
Abraham, who first of the Fathers had promise either of King or Kingdom:
whereas Saint Luke, our other Fuangelist, in the natural line, by Marie, Eli,
Rhesa, and Nathan, ascends up unto Adam the first man, to whom the promise
was made of Christ his humanity.

And how from Adam (to omit the other collaterals, that in another kind lead
unto Christ) let us here insert, that so the whole generations of his Manhood
may fully appear: so carefully recorded in all former ages by the holy Ghost
himself: and in the later time continued by the same Spirit of truth in his
Instrument Saint Luke our holy Evangelist, unto his Mother the Virgin Marie her
self.

The first Table ends at David as the Writer of Ruth does. And the other from
David (by Solomon) to Ieconiah are recorded, by the books of the Chronicles,
and where they end, are again continued by the same spirit unto Joseph the
Husband of Marie by the Evangelist Saint Matthew. Both which their descents
from David downward, that the eiemay witness, what the purpose of the holy
Ghosts pen was in the hands of these Scribes, is here in this ensuing Table
expressed to sight so plain, and for truth so strong, that a man running may
read, and embrace it with faith. Hab. 2. 2.


A general Table of the Ancesters of Christ.
ADAM. Seth. Enos. Cainan. Mahalaleel. Iared, Enoch. Methuselah. Lamech. Noah.
Sem. Arphaxad. Salah. Eber. Peleg. Reu. Serug. Nahor. Terah. Abram. Isaac.
Jacob. Judah. Pharez. Hezron. Aram. Aminadab. Naasson. Salmon. Booz. Obed.
Iesse.
Jesus Christ by law is heir unto these,
DAVID. Solomon. Roboam. Abia. Asa. Josaphat. Ioram. These with Joakim are
omitted by S. Matthew
Achaziah. Joash. Amaziah.
Ozias. Ioatham. Achaz. Ezechias. Manasseh. Auion. Josia^ Ioakim. Jeconiah,
dying child Jesse, his son is, Write this man CONIAM, childlesse Jere. 22.30.
Salathiel In these two only the Evangelists agree.
Pedaiah. Zerobabel Jesus Christ supposed, and by law, is son unto these, The
Saints of the most High, Dan. 7
Abiud. Eliakim. Azor. Sadoc. Achim. Elihud. Eliazar. Matthan. Jacob.
Joseph the husband of Mary. JESUS CHRIST,
Jesus Christ by nature came of these,
DAVID. Nathan. Matthathi. Menan. Melea. Eliahim. Ionan. Joseph. Judah. Simeon.
Leui. Matthat. Jorim. Eliezer. Jose. Er. Elmodan. Cosam. Addi. Melchi. Neri.
Salathiel In these two only the Evangelists agree.
Pedaiah. Zerobabel Jesus Christ by nature is Son unto these The holy Seed, the
Substance, Esa.6.
Rhesa. Ioanna. Judah. Joseph. Semel. Matthathias. Maath. Nagge. Essi. Naum.
Amos. Matthathias Joseph. Ianna. Melchi. Leui. Matthat. Heli.
Joseph the husband of Mary. JESUS CHRIST,
CHAP. IX.
How the Evangelists Saint Matthew and Saint Luke do agree, in recording
Christ Jesus to be the son of Solomon by Law, and the son of Nathan by
Nature.

SAlomons House ending in Ieconiah, according to the Christ his right to
Salomons Crown is diversely inserted.
Prophets, and Zerobbabel of Nathans family made Prince of Judah, the right
that Christ had to David's Throne, is diversely from them, by our holy
Evangelists inserted: for Mat. 1.
Saint Matthew from Solomon, Ieconiah, Abiud and Joseph, legally interesteth
Jesus unto David's Crown: but Saint Luke naturally from Marie, Eli, Rhesa, and
Nathan, as^ndeth to the first man Adam, to show him the Immanuel according to
the promise of God in Paradise: both of them breathing from one and the same
spirit, that Christ is David's son, and Iudahs King. And with No d^sgreement
betwixt our Euange^sts.
the former Prophets agreeing, that in his person alone met all the promises
that Go^ had made for his son Christ: and so carry themselves in making him
heir of all; as no discord is heard in their heavenly sounds.

But that the 1. Cor. 14. 32.
spirits of the Prophets may be subject to the Prophets, and the text not
forced to a 2. Pet. 1. 20.
pr^uate interpretation; let us see how Salathiel is brought to be a son to
Ieconiah by law, and by Saint Matthew; whom Saint Luke mak^th to be, by nature,
the son of Neri: upon which seeming disagreement, rests the supposed
difference betwixt our Evangelists.

The affirmation of Saint Matthew is, (taking his record out of the first book
of the 1. Chron. 3. 17.
Chronicles) that Mat. 1. 12
I^coniah begat Salathiel, with this addition annexed, After they were brought
into Babylon. In which place, as Ier. 52. 31
Jeremy tells us, Ieconiah living, Ass^r a captive the space of thi^tie seven
years, even to the last of Nebucadnezzar, was in the first of Euilmerodach,
King of Babel taken out of prison placed amongst his Princes, and maintained in
Kingly estate to the day of h^ death.

When having no issue of his own body begot, Salathiel his nearest kinsman
must needs be his heir, as the law required: for thus by Moses it stands
written; Numb. 27 8.
If a man d^e and have no son, then ye shall turn his inheritance unto his
daughter; and if he have no daughter, ^ee shall give his inh^ritance unto his
brethren; and if he have no brethren, ye shall give h^ inheritance The next of
kin must inherit by the Law.
unto his fathers brethren; and if his father have no brethren, ^e shall giu^
his inheritance unto h^s kinsman, that is next to him of his family: and this
shall be unto the children of ^srael a statu^e of i^dgement.

In this state then stoo^ Ieconiah, without son, without daughter, without
brother, without uncle, or fathers brother: and (...) by (...) was pro claimed
a childles man. When, according to the prescript of the law, Salathiel his
nearest kinsman was declared successor, and in that sense is he called his
son, who was by nature the son of Neri, as Saint Luke in recording the
natural line has laid down.

Salathiel thus made a son in succession, his own successor likewise is said
to be his son: which was Zerubbabel his grandchild, the son of Pedaiah, as
1. Chron. 3. 19. But the said Pedaiah dying in Babylon before his fathers
adoption; and Zerubbabel Pedaiah omitted in most texts.
made Prince over the people returned, he is therefore called the son of
Salathiel: and in the books of Ezra, Nehemiah and Haggai, where the government
is touched, Pedaiah is ever omitted, and with the like silence, for that cause
is ouerpassed by both the Evangelists. Lyra upon Mat. c. 1
Lyra upon Matthew judges, that his mention was smothered with the roles of
Genealogies which Herod consumed, Du Plessie in very. Christ. Relig. cap. 29.
citing his sayings from Phylo.
when he burnt all the princely pedegrees of the Kings of Judah, intending
thereby to derive himself of some great parentage; as (says he) by the same
combustions, the old Testament is silent from Abiud to Joseph, either for names
or actions: only the books of the Macchabees are some stay for stories of
those times.

This silence then ouershadowing Abiud and Rhesa, by those names unknown in
the old Testaments record, are notwithstanding by the learned, judged to be 1.
Chro. 3. 19.
Meshullam and Hananiah the sons of Zerubabel therein mentioned, whose
Genealogies, as now they stand in our Evangelists, The Catalogues by which
Matthew and Luke wrote, saved from Herod's flames of destruction.
escaping the flames of Herod's destruction, were preserved, they think, by
some faithful Jew, or else were received from God by holy revelation, as many
other things were at the coming of Christ. Which later opinion likes some
well, who make a symptom betwixt the first age, and this last, thus; As the
first Fathers were revealed by Gods own oracle unto Moses, without president
of writ: so the last Fathers, by the same Spirit, were revealed unto the
Evangelists, without any prescrit of record: which notwithstanding seems
rather a shadow then any show of truth.

But by what warrant soever A sin in Christians to doubt of that, which the
enemies Jews have granted.
they w^ot, this is most certain, that their Records were never contradicted by
any Pharise, Scribe, or Priest, then living, who daily waited occasions to
impugn their Doctrines: which thing in that age then yielded unto by the most
malicious Jews, may not now with out offense be called in question among us
the believing Christians.

And that the sons of Zerubbabell continued a race of posterities, the
Rabbis themselves do auerre; who in their Commentaries (as some have
observed) avouch that David Aug. Mar orat. upon Mat. cap. 1.
(in case of succession) ordained, if Salomons issue failed then the posterity
of Nathan, his other son by Bersheba should succeed; which in Salathiel it did:
and those great Doctors, daily expecting their King that should come with such
power, undoubtedly kept the Du Plessie in true Relig. c. 29.
Genealogies as carefully for the times following, as they had been diligent
obseruers of the families before. But to the purposes of the Evangelists.

Saint Matthew recording the heirs of Iudahs Crown, ascends, as is said, no
higher then Abraham, unto whom the first promise either of King or Kingdom was
given: for when God meant to make him the glory of men, and had Genesis 17. 8.
called him from Vr of the Chaldeans, had showed and given him the Land of
Canaan, this further he assured, that his Seed should be in number to the Genesis
15. 5
stars of heaven, and in multitude as the dust Genesis 13. 16.
of the earth: and that Kings should proceed out of his loins, and Sara his
wife should be a mother to kings of people. Now, as in Rom 9. 7
Isaac the seed was called, so in Genesis 49. 10.
Judah the Scepter was established, which whilst it stood upright with God, was
the glory of the Earth, and their Temple the very gate of Heaven.

But when all Religion was turned to an outward worship, and Salomons Throne
made a Mat. 21. 13.
den of thieves, look what was done to Iere. 7. 14.
Shilo, must be done to Jerusalem: for Christ his John 18. 36.
kingdom was not of this world. And therefore under Nebuthadnezzer (the
Caldean Daniel 7
Lion) the glory and majesty thereof fell. From Zerubabell, Gods signet (by the
Persian Bear) the right was retained; and the high Saints the Esa 6. 13.
holy Seed (the only substance of the downe-cast government) by the Grecian
Leopard, and double-king'd Of Syria and Egypt.
monster (all fuel for Esaias 30. 33.
Tophet) were so afflicted, as none were left to stand for the Crown, save
only Joseph a poor Carpenter, and Jesus his supposed Son, whilst an
Armachanus says, that Christ did work with his hands under Joseph his father
in law, in lib. Defensorium Curatorum.
Idumean stranger usurped their rights.

To this purpose then Saint Matthew wrote, that the King promised to Abraham,
and found of the Wisemen, was JESUS, of Beth-lehem, of Judah, and David; the
son of Solomon touching succession, but taking no flesh of his impious
successors:

But the drift of S. Luke, our other Evangelist, was to show that God became
man in Jesus the Immanuel, according The purposes and drifts of the two
Evangelists.
to the promise made of him in Paradise, believed in, and looked for of all the
Fathers, figured in the law, prophesied of by the Prophets, and now in the last
time, even in the Gal. 4. 4.
fullness of time, was made man of a woman.

The Scriptures are full of a promised How Christ was revealed unto the
Prophets.
Messiah, and as fully speak that from Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, and
David he should come: To Genesis 3.
Adam he was promised the Seed of life; to Abraham, the Ge^. 15. 4.
heir of the Covenant; to Isaac, Ge^. 26. 4
the Seed in whom all should be blessed; to Jacob, the Number. 24
Star and Scepter of Israel; to Judah, the Ge^. 49. 9
Lion that none might stir up; and to David, the Psa. 45. 2
Son that was fairer then the children of men.

His offices were figured in the person of Heb. 7.
Melchisedec: of him Moses meant, when he spoke of the Deu. 18. 15.
Prophet, and Job 19. 25.
Job acknowledged him for his Redeemer; Ioshuah saw him a Joshua 5
Captain of the Lords Host; Gideon, the Judge. 6. 14.
Angel that promised deliverance; and unto Samuel, 1. Sam. 3. 21.
he revealed himself: and in all the ensuing Prophets is so cleereiy
foreshewed, as the Sun shows no greater brightness in his greatest strength:
Unto whom (says Peter) 2. Pet. 1. 19.
We do well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day dawne, and the day star arise in our hearts. Therefore let us
here behold, how God has revealed his Christ unto them, and how they have
revealed him unto us, the frame of Salvation standing so ioynted, as Heb. 11.
40.
they without us cannot be made perfect.

First then, Isaiah saw him the Em* manuel, and Esa. 7. 14
Son of a Virgin Efay 53.
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, upon whom the
chastisement of our peace was laid, and by whose stripes we are healed.

Jeremiah calls him the Ier. 52. 5.
Lord our Righteousness, the King that should execute justice, and the
Righteous Branch raised to David.

And Ezekiel terms him the Ezekiel. 34. 23.
Shepherd that should feed, and the Prince that should reign, even the
servant David.

Daniel saw him a Dan. 2. 34.
Stone cut without hands, a finisher of sins, a Dan. 9. 24.
maker of reconciliation, a bringer of everlasting righteousness, and a Sealer
up of vision and prophecy; and expressly names him Messiah, Prince most holy.

Hosheah calls him Hos. 3. 5
David their King, whom Israel should seek, and should find his goodness in
the latter days.

Joel shows, That the Io. 2. 23.
Spirit in his days should be powered out upon all flesh, that their sons and
their daughters should prophecy, their old men should dream dreams, and their
young men should see visions.

Amos prophesied, that in the days of this Messiah, the Amos 9. 11.
Tabernacle of David that was falen down, should be raised up, and the
Breaches thereof built, as in the days of old.

Obadiah tells us that Oba. 1. 21.
They who shall be saved, shall come to Mount Zion, and that the Kingdom shall be
the Lords.

And Jonas in the Whale, was a sign of Io. 1. 17.
Christ in the Grave.

Micah foreshewed whence the Mi. 5. 2.
Ruler of Israel should come, whose goings forth had been from the beginning,
and from everlasting.

Nahum bids us behold upon the Mountain Nah. 1. 15.
the feet of him that publishes peace.

Habakkuk tells us, that Hab. 3. 3 13.
Salvation came by the Anointed whose glory covers the Heavens, and the
Earth is full of his praise.

Zephaniah says, that he Zeph. (...). 11.
shall starve all the I dols of the Earth; and every man shall worship him from
his place, even all the Isles of the Heathen; and with pure language they shall
call Chap 3. 9.
upon his Name, and shall serve him with one consent.

Haggai shows, that the Hag. 2. 8 10.
Lord would fill his last house with greater glory then the first: wherein
should be peace; and unto whom the desire of all Nations should come.

Zechariah shows Zech. 9. 9
Christ's triumphs to be poor, riding upon a Co^t, the foale of an Ass: and
his chap. 11 12, 13.
wages as poor, even thirty pieces of silver: a goodly price (says he) to be
valued at by them* for him whom they had pierced, and for whom every family
should mourn apart, as one that mourns for his only Son.

And Malachi the last Prophet, closes up the Old Testament for Christ with
this saying; Mal. 4. 5
Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and
fearful day of the Lord. And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to
their children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers, le^t I come
and smite the earth with c^rsing.

And with this Elias the Evangelists The Evangelists begin where Malachi
leaves.
do begin the New Testament in the birth of the Baptist, whose office was
fore-shewed by the Ange^ before his birth, that in the spirit and power of
Elias he should go before, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

Which in the fifteenth of the Emperor Tiberius, Pilat, Herod, Philip, and
Lysanias being Governors, and Luke 1. 17
Annas and Caiph as high Priests, accordingly he did: when in preaching the
Baptism of Repentance, his voice (from Isaiah) Esaias. 40. (...).
cried in the wilderness, prepar^ ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight: every valley shall be filled, and every mountain shall be brought
low, the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made
smooth, and al flesh shall see the salvation of God.

And that this Baptist was the Elijah John Baptist the Elijah.
there meant, Christ himself witnesses, that the Mat. 11. 14.
Law and the Prophets spoke unto John, and that John was the Elias which was to
come. Who more to manifest his function in many things resembled the former
Elijah.

Their 1. King. 17. 6.
Diets were strange, and both in the Mat. 3. 4.
wilderness; their 2 Kings 18.
Garments hairie, and their Mat. 1. 6
Girdles of Leather; their 1. Kin. 18
reprehensions free, without respect of Mat. 14. 4.
person; and 1. Kings 19. 8.
both con firmed by Math. 3. 16.
voice from Heaven.

This Ambassador John then, beginning his function at the Baptism of Christ,
declares him to be the John 1. 29.
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. Testifying of
himself, that he was the forerunner unto him, that should Baptize them with
the Luke 3. 16.
holy Ghost, and with fire.

And with this Lamb of God, John the Evangelist begins his Gospel: showing
him to be the Ioh. 1. 1.
Word, that was with God in the beginning, by which the World was made, and
without which, Christ began his function at his Bap tisme.
was made nothing that was made. In it was Life, and the Life was the light of
men. This Word (says he) was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the
glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of
grace and truth.

This Son of God, Saint Lukes pen shows to be Jesus, the Seed promised in
Paradise* to the espoused Virgin Eua, and borne at Beth-lehem of the betrothed
virgin Mary, according to the Prophets, recording betweeene them, all his
natural Fathers, from Eli to Adam, whom he calls the Son of God. By which
term Son, through them all, he proves that Jesus was the Christ of whom
Moses wrote, and the Prophets spoke.

The purposes therefore of the The reconciliation of S. Matthew and S. Luke
two Evangelists being thus observed, their reconciliation is easy; namely,
that Saint Matthew, following the right that Jesus had by law unto Salomons
Crown, records his title thereunto from such Kings and persons, as (excepting
his legal right of succession) he in no wise took flesh of, or by nature
came: and in that sense of Succession, brings Christ to be the son of
Solomon. But Saint Luke, purposing to prove Christ h^ humanity, registreth his
natural descent from every particular Father, and among them, brings him by
Nature from Nathan, the brother of Solomon.

Saint Matthew by a legal right, brings Christ from twelve as wicked Kings
as the Earth bare, when they ware Iudahs Crown. But Saint Luke, by his natural
parentage, deriueth him from the Esaias 6. 13.
holy seed, and Dan. 7. 18.
high Saints of God, that should possess Gods Kingdom for ever.

Saint Matthew, in his legal right of Succession, brings Christ from
Ieconiah, that never had child, nor any of his seed ever sat upon Iudahs
Throne. But Saint Luke, by his Natural fathers deriueth him from Zorobabell,
made the Ruler of Judah, and Signet upon Gods finger.

Saint Matthew brings Joseph the son of Jacob, to be the lawful heir of
Iudahs Crown, from Abiud the eldest son of Zorobabell. And Saint Luke
records Mary the daughter of Heli, to descend from Rhesa, a younger son of
Zorobabell, who joining in marriage Of Zorobabel^ sons, came both the father and
mother of Christ.
with Joseph, he became the supposed (but indeed was) the legal father of
Jesus, and Mary was made blessed among women, when her virgins womb was made
blessed, and the Word was incarnate in that sanctified Tabernacle.

Thus our two Evangelists, uncovering the Arc wherein this Manna was kept, by
showing the Messiah in his Nature and Office, look face to face, as did the
two Exo. 25. 20.
Cherubins upon the Heb. 9. 5
Mercy seat of the holy Oracle, both of them sounding the same thing, that
Jesus was the Immanuel: and with their well tuned Apo. 5. 8
Harps (set to the strain of the Patriarks and Prophets) show Christ to be the
Lamb of God slain, to take away the sins of the world; and the Lion of
Judah, Cant 3. 11.
crowned with Salomons Crown: who has obtained a more excellent ministry,
then that of the Tabernacle, by how much he is the Mediator of a better
Covenant. Heb. 8. 6.

Great therefore is the 1. Tim. 3 16.
mystery of Salvation, That God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit* s^ne of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and
received up into glory. Psalm. (...). 12.
Happy are they that believe in him: And blessed are they that are not Luke 7.
23.
offended in him.

CHAP. X.
That Christ Jesus, by his natural descent, was the only imediate, and
lawful King of the Jews, and that none other had any claim or title
thereunto.

Having thus by Gods most gracious assistance, showed Christ Jesus to be the
true son of David, and from the Evangelists declared his parentage, natural
and in common reputation; it remains now to prove, that the same Jesus, the
son of the Uirgine, both from Joseph, and Mary, was the only heir of David's
terrestiall kingdom of Canaan: and in that right, is ever called King of the
Jews: to manifest which, shall be observed:

First, That it was an earthly kingdom that was promised to Abraham, and by
his seed possessed.

Secondly, That the general expectation of the Jews, was set upon a
terrestiall, and powerful King and Kingdom.

Thridly, That none other by any descent, kindred or estate, had any right,
title* or claim to the kingdom of Judah.

Fourthly, That Christ Jesus alone, and none but he, was the lawful King of
the Jews, the seed and son of David that sits upon his Throne, for ever.
Prepare my heart O Lord, Psalm. 45.
to indite this good matter, and make my hand the pen of a ready writer, to
proclaim that King which is fairer then the children of men.

For the first, That it was an earthly Kingdom, we will begin with the
promise made to Abraham, and lay that as the foundation of a terrestrial,
before we build upon the mystical, as Solomon did the materials 1 King. 1.
of his Temple, whose beauty was a figure of that which is to come.

The beginning then of this earthly kingdom, was, when God began to make
Canaan a Kingdom, which was at his calling of Abraham from Mesopotamia, unto
the plain of mount Moreh, where he bad him lift up his eyes, and look
Northward and southward, eastward and westward, Ge^. 13. 14.
and to walk through the breadth and length of the land: All which he would
give unto him, and to his seed after him to inherit; with promise, that Kings
from his loins proceeding, should rule and possess Ge^. 17. 8.
all the land, from the River of Egypt unto the great River Euphrates. Here we
see the foundation of a terestricall kingdom laid, whereof Abraham had the
promise, and his seed after him the possession.

Of whose state and continuance, old Jacob prophesied, that the Scepter should
not depart from Judah, nor a Ge^ 49. 10.
lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo should come, and unto him the
people should be obedient.

That by the Scepter is meant an earthly government, or a regal authority,
both the Septuagint, and the Chalde paraphrase do avouch; and that Jesus
Christ, was the Shiloh from the womb of the Virgin, the Talm. Senad. in cap
Rabbis themselves confess, and the success shows, because at the coming
of this Shiloh, or birth of Christ Jesus, the government of Judah M^lec.
was taken clean from them, and their Crown worn by Herod an Idumean
stranger.

Until which time, the line of the lawful Kings of the Tribe of Judah had
been exactly and distinctly recorded and kept. But in one generation
following, were so confounded, scattered and shufled together among other
Tribes, and the Tribes each amongst others so mixed, as to this day there is
not a Jew known De Ples. in verit. Chist. Relig. cap. 29
in the world, that can distinctly show of what tribe he is descended: And
their fair Dominions with such desolations ouerrunne, that all hope is lost of
any recovery: and for the obedience prophesied unto him, the preaching of the
Gospel, has gotten that through the world.

It was the fair land that Moses from mount Nebo did behold, that Deuteronomy. 32. 49.
Ioshuah from mount Hermon, to mount Hor, did conquer; At first divided among
the twelve Tribes, and after established a kingdom under Saul, of whom the
spiritual could not be intended, neither was it in him figured: And that
kingdom possessed, and crown worn by him, was taken from Benjamin, and given
to Judah; and in David settled with promise, that a son out of his loins
should sit upon the throne thereof, and should reign King for ever and ever,
which none ever did or could do, but only his Son Jesus, the Prince
Messiah; to whom be praise for ever and ever: and that he alone is the heir
unto that right, is witnessed by the sacred Texts, and shall be our pains
here to declare.

First then, this terrestrial Kingdom was seated (as says the Prophet Ezekiel.
5. 5.
) in the midst of nations; and did contain the Provinces of Jury, Samaria, and
Gallely: the Land of Gilead also without Jordan, was a portion of the twelve
Tribes. The Number. 32. 1
whole so rich in earthly blessings, as it is often in Scriptures called, A
Land flowing with milk and honey: and so pleasant for situation, as of some it
is held, to have been Adams Paradise.

And as the Kingdom was glorious, so were many of her Kings, such were David,
Solomon, Asa, Iohoshaphat, and others godly, that ruled well their own, and
ouer-ruled others; till their successors became godless, and provoked the
ruin of both; as when Nebuchadnezzer King of Babell captiuated the Land, and
led away Ieconias prisoner, who was the last man that wore that glorious Crown.
After whom, the Persians withheld it from Zorobabel, the most lawful heir
thereof. And the Grecians and Syra-Grecians, from Abiud, and his successors,
unto Joseph the husband of Mary.

These being as four beasts, took this earthly Kingdom, (for the heavenly
Dan. 7.
they could not) from those the high Saints of God, that should possess a
Kingdom for ever and ever, with such desolation of that goodly Land, till
lastly the Romans made conquest of all, and placed the Idumean Herod upon
Iudahs throne, Genesis 49.
where Jacobs prophecy had the full event. And thus we see no temporal Crown
worn of any of Judah from the captivity of Babylon, till Christ Jesus with
thorns was crowned, showed, and acknowledged King of the Jews; the
abomination of desolation, set in the holy place, and the place never called
holy after Christ's death.

And thus much of the earthly Kingdom promised to Abraham; and the first
point: the second follows.

That the expectation of the Jews, was set upon an earthly The 2. Observation.
Kingdom, and powerful King, we may see by the practice of the common
multitude: who having fed upon the five barley Loves, and two small fishes,
acknowledged Jesus to be the Prophet expected, Ioh. 6. 14
but withal presently assaied to have him their King.

Again, when he told them, that the son of man was come to seek Luke 19. 10.
and to save that which was lost, their apprehension was of a temporal
restoration of their down-cast estate. The expectation of the Jews, set upon
an earthly Kingdom.


And upon that opinion the Apostles themselves as it seems were set, when
they demanded whether Act. 1. 6.
at that time Christ would restore the Kingdom of Israel. And again, we
trusted that it had been he, that Luke 24. 21.
should have delivered Israel.

And to the same purpose were the answers of the ignorant women of Samaria,
Ioh. 4.
touching the Messiah; and the learned Nicodemus of Gallile John 3.
touching man's new birth, both of them aiming as we see only at outward things.

And indeed so general was the opinion of an earthly and powerful Monarchy,
as that even the common people expected it, and had a A prophecy of a potent
king
prophecy touching the same among them, which was, That a King out of Jury,
should Sueton. in vit. Aug.
rule the whole world

Which so terrified the Romans (included in that prophecy) as that they denied
aid to their supplicant Ptolomie King of Egypt, and so troubled The Romans
durst not place a King in Egypt.
the assembly of the elders in Jerusalem, that their high Priest Caiaphas, gave
counsel to kill Jesus, lest the Ioh. 11. 49.
Romans should come and take away their Kingdom, which was none otherwise
meant then of the temporal.

And a temporal King, and terrestrial kingdom it was, that Herod Herod feared
a temporal King.
so feared and sought to retain, when Christ Math. 2.
was sought after, by the style of King of the Jews.

And of that earthly kingdom likewise, Pilat gave Jesus the Ioh 19. 19.
title, though to the prejudice of Caesar his Emperor. Neither meant the
Scribes and Pharisees more then of the temporal, when themselves expounded
Moses without all spiritual use, the chief Priests so ignorant, that they
knew not whether the Baptism of John was from Heaven or of men Mat. 21. 25.
: nor none of them, how David's son could be David's Luke 20. 42.
Lord: And the Sadduces taught that there was no Resurrection of the body,
neither Angel, nor spirit, so far were they The Saddu ces acknow ledged
nei-Angell nor Spirit.
from that which is eternal.

Finally, all of them apply every Text in the Prophets, touching the calling of
the Gentiles, of Christ, and The Rabbis applications.
his Kingdom, to be meant of a powerful, terrestrial Monarch and Monarchy,
and promise themselves conquests attendance, and pleasures, as in another
earthly Paradise, all Nations yielding them service and obedience. And now we
come to speak of Christ, his title unto Iudahs Crown; the third point.

Jesus legally descending from The 3. Observation.
Iechoniah, and lineally from Zorobabel, by his ancestor Salathiel, (who was
made a son to a childlesse man) is borne the next in blood and Jesus his
right to the kingdom.
succession, to sit upon David's throne, and by that right is often Jesus his
right to the Kingdom.
called by each of the Evangelists, King of the Jews.

For the right of Zorobabel, resting in Joseph the husband of Mary, and (he
dying issulesse) in Mary her self; Christ Jesus their Son, then must be
heir unto both, and by Father and Mother have the just title to Iudahs Crown.

That Joseph then in his days, was the next successor to Salomons Jesus the
next in succession unto Solomon.
Throne, is apparent by Saint Matthew, in whose Catalogue (without any
colaterall) he is brought down from Solomon, among his successors. And by
Saint Luke, is recorded to be of Judah, of Bethlehem, Luk 2. 4
of the house and lineage of David: unto which Tribe and person, the Crown was
intaled even by God himself: neither was there any before him besides, or with
him, that could be No competitor with Ies^ss.
his competitor in that right; though himself was no King, but a poor
Carpenter: nor had he any after him from his lovnes descended, or of his
kindred, that could debar Jesus to be his heir.

The opinion therefore of one Eusebius l. 5. cap. 8.
Iraeneus and others, is not to be approved, Ieraen. lib. 3 cap. 25.
who suppose that Joseph had children of his own body begot and will have
James, and Ioses, Judah, and Simon, to be the natural brethren of Christ,
either by Father, or Mother, or both.

And Heluidius the Heretic, with the Ebionites, urges that Jesus was not the
only son of Mary his Mother, because (says he) his brethren Mat. 13. 55.
and sisters are so particularly named in the Evangelists.

Others, from the words of the Apostle Saint Paul, Gal. 1. 19
who calls S. James the Lords brother, do take James to be the brother of
Jesus indeed: and do judge him to be borne unto Joseph, by a former wife.

Unto which conceit Eusebius Eusebius. eccle. hist. l. 2. c. 1.
seems to lean, and Polich. l. 3. c. 44. James not the natural brother of
Christ.
Cestrenfis alleges, but not allows, for then had James the eldest son,
both by birthright and parantage been King of the Jews, and the title usurped
and impropper to Jesus, who was but the Legal son of Joseph, by whom the
claim came.

For the right resting in Abiud, the eldest of Zorobabels sons, must likewise
descend to Joseph's eldest son, otherwise the Deu. 21. 17.
Law debarreth the claim: and Christ was to accomplish every jot of the law.
And how the law intaled it to his person alone, let us hear the Evangelists
for his title speak: where we shall find three Mary's Three Mary's are
mothers.
recorded to be Mothers unto Christ and his Apostles; which were, Mary the
Uirgin Mat. 1. 18
, Mary surnamed, Mar. 15. 40.
Salo^e, and John. 19. 25.
Mary Cleopas; for other Mary's not to this purpose, of purpose we omit.

Mary the Virgin and Mother of Christ, neither by Saint Matthew, nor by Saint
Luke, has her Parents expressly Why mary's parents are not directly set down
recorded. For the Euange lists setting down the Lineage of our Savior, they
do not by the line of Mary from whom he took flesh, but from Joseph, by whom
he was to derive the Kingdom.

Therefore it is consequent that the Evangelists in that point, did principally
intend to set forth our Saviors Kingly right.

That so Christ might be accounted from the man, and not from the woman,
according to the usual manner of the Scriptures: for which cause, Joseph is
called the son both of Jacob his begetter, and of Eli her Joseph is called
both the son of Jacob and of Eli
father, by the marriage of her his daughter.

And that she was the daughter of Eli, the Rabbis themselves do acknowledge,
and so term her; and do bring her from David, from Rab Hacanas the son of
Nehumia.
Judah, and from the Town Bethlehem, as the Evangelists have done Joseph her
husband: neither have we The Rabbis prove what we desire.
Christians ever seen any contrary record, and so it must be.

For Christ could not truly be the seed of David, unless Mary (whose seed he
was immediately) were truly the seed of David: But Christ was truly the seed
of David; therefore Mary (whose seed he was immediately) was truly the seed of
David.

This Mary then the daughter and sole heir of Eli her father, has her fathers
right in the title of Judah, for so says the Law, If a Number. 27
man have no son, his daughter shall inherit: And by matching with Joseph,
The Law makes a woman capable of inheritance.
in whom the right lay from Abiud the eldest of Zorobabels sons, after his
decease, is also his heir.

For she being descended from Rhesa, the younger brother, and Abiuds house
failing in Joseph her husband, Abiuds house ended ^n Joseph.
Abiuds inheritance was to descend unto Rhesa his line, and Mary then of Rhesa,
was heir unto Abiud, for so does the same law establish; that if a man have
neither son nor daughter, as Joseph had not the nearest of his kindred shall
inherit.

And Mary the nearest by any record, (though many descents passed betwixt) must
be the only heir Mary is heir unto Eli her father; and Joseph her husband.
of Joseph her husband, he dying issulesse as he did: and of Eli her Father,
he having no other child to in* herit. And none suruiunig either Joseph or Mary
in that royal line. Christ Jesus, who was known and Jesus his right unto
Iudahs Crown.
reputed to be the only son of them both, by that double right, and most
inst title, is styled and called King of the Jews.

Mary surnamed Salome* in Mark 15. 40. by In Arcano dei Tabula. 18. Mary
Salome is not the sister of Joseph.
(...) Flinspachio, in his draughts of the Scriptures Genealo*gies, is set to
be the daughter of Jacob, and the sister of Joseph the Carpenter, but without
any proof for his so doing alleged, or warrant of any before him. And so to
admit ^er were to entitle both her self and sons, to be next heirs unto
Iudahs Crown.

For Joseph's title standing from Abiud, and dying (...) as he did: had she
been his sister, and from the same stem, she then had been inheretri^ unto
Joseph her brother Mary Salome was not heir to unto Joseph.
deceased; and must have inioyed his rights, by the same law before alleged.
And so her sons, James and John, had stood in estate before Jesus: and the
Evangelists too far ouerseene, to annihilate them the next in blood; and ^uer
to entitle Jesus, King of the Jews.

But antiquity has brought this Mary Salome from whom descended.
Mary Salome, from Anna the mother of the blessed virgin Mary: and how from
Anna, let me here insert, from Authors worthy of credit Saint S. Hiero^. upon
Saint Matthew.
Hierom, and others besides him affirm, that this Anna had three husbands, and
by each of them, had a daughter, and each of the daughters An^a had three
husbands, and three daughters.
named Mary.

The first Mary say they, was borne by Anna unto Ioachim or E^ her first
husband, who was of the Tribe of Iadah, and lineage of David Mary the virgin,
daughter of Eli.
and this his daughter, a wife, and a virgin, was made most blessed in bearing
of Christ.

Annaes second husband was Salome, of whom, or from whence is Mary Salome the
second daugh ter.
no where recorded that I have seen. Unto him she bare the second Mary, for so
in the vulgar translation she is named: but by the later, is called only
Salome, and is as it seems, so called from Salome her father.

This Mary was the wife of Zebedee, as is inferred by Saint Matthew, Mary
Salome the wife of Zebedees.
chap. 27. 56. where she is cal^ed the mother of Zebedees sons: and those
were Mat. 4. 21.
John and James, the beloved Apostles of our Lord, who for their zeal were
called the Mark. 3. 17.
sons This John, writ the Apocalips.
of thunder: and may well be accounted the kins-men of Christ, but ^o wise
interested unto David's Crown.

The third and last Mary, is cal^ed Mary Cleopas, being borne unto Mary Cleopas
the 3. Daughter.
Cleopas, the third and last husband of Anna. But of this Mary's sur^ame
rests some doubt: for some ^o call her from her father and birth, and some
from her husband and marriage.

That she had the surname Cleo^as, from her father, Saint Hierom, Her surname
doubfull.
and many ancient manuscripts of the Scriptures Genealogies so affirm: but the
text in John, Chap. 19. 25. as it is translated, does call her the wife of Ioh.
19. 25.
Cleopas, and so by consequence, she should from her husband bear that
surname: But whether from father or husband, most certain it is, by the
Evangelist John, she was the sister of Mary Mary Cleopas, was sister to Mary
the virgin.
the Virgin, and that by the mother, and not by the father.

And that she had either been, or then was, the wife of Alpheus, S. Mary
Cleopas was the wife of Alpheus.
Matthew does infer, Chap. 10. 3. for Alpheus was the father, and she the
mother of Mar. 15 40:
James the less, as also of Ioses,. Math. 27. 56. unto whom Judah was brother;
Luke 6. 16. and Simon is reckoned a brother among them: Mat. 13. 55.

But this Simon the son of this Mary, and Bishop of Jerusalem (says
Aegesippus.
Aegesippus) was of the kindred and lineage of David, for which and for his
Christianity, he was accused unto Traian the Emperor, and patiently Simon
Bishop of Jerusalem, saffred under Atticus.
suffered death under Atticus the Consul, as likewise many others of Iudahs
Tribe for the same occasion of kindred under him, and other Emperors did, and
had done. So as (it may be objected) Jesus stood Object.
not sole heir unto David's Crown, but that this Simon, and others also were
interested therein.

But thereunto may be answered, Answ.
that albeit these and many others in those days, also were of Iudahs Tribe,
and David's kindred, yet that proves not they were of the children, either of
Abiud or Rhesa, the sons of Zorobabel, from who^ the right is derived by both
the Evangelists.

Nor were these men Zebedee, and Zebede; Alpheus, Cleopas, unknown to be of
Judah.
Alpheus, (the husbands of these Mary's) nor Cleopas, whether husband or son,
known to be of David's line, or of Iudahs Tribe, by any apparancy of text: and
therefore, neither themselves nor sons could be heirs unto David's throne,
and Iudahs Kingdom.

But Christ being the son of the first borne Mary, and himself the Col. i. 15
first borne of every Creature, is therefore before any of these Sons or
parents in title to the Crown; the law having established Deuteronomy. 21 17.
the first borne to inherit.

For if in all things he was to have the Col. i. 18
prehemine^ce, then most especially in that of Iudahs Crown, it being reserved
for him, unto Ezekiel. 21 27.
whom it most rightfully belonged, and he the only rightful heir unto
David, as we have said.

Neither had Mary Cleopas, the mother of James, Ioses, Judah and Simon, been a
former wife unto Joseph the Carpenter, as consequently she must, had Joseph
been father to any of these her borne sons.

For it is evident, that she lived after the death of Joseph the Carpenter,
for with Mary her John 19. 25.
sister she beheld Christ upon the Cross, whereby is most manifest, that with
Mary Cleopas, could not be wife unto Joseph, her sister being alive.
Mary her sister she could not have been a wife unto Joseph, nor Joseph have
been a just man (as Saint Matthew records him) had he enjoyed two sisters at
once, but rather a transgressour of the law which says, Le. 18. 18
Thou shall not take a wife with her sister, during her life to vex her.

And that James the less, the son of this Mary, was the son of Alpheus,
James the less, was not the natural brother of Jesus.
we have showed, and how he and the rest were called the brethren of Jesus,
we may soon perceive, if we consider that the usual custom of the Jews
was, to call not only any of their kindred brethren, but them also of their
Country and Tribe, as Moses, did the Act. 7. 26
Striuers; and as they of 1. King. 12 24.
Israel were brethren to them of Judah: And in that sense did the Jews call
them the brethren of Jesus? when seeing his person, his wisdom, and works,
and knowing his parents, kindred, and education in the trade of a poor
Carpenter, with great admiration they objected and said, Mar. 6. 3.
Whence has he this learning? is not this the Carpenter Mary's son? the
brother of James and Ioses, and Judah and Simon? and are not his sisters here
with us?

And James the less, being the son of Mary, who was the sister Ioh 19. 25.
of Mary the Virgin, was then the Cosengerman (as we speak) unto Jesus, even
his Ants son: and from that Jesus and James were Cosen-germans.
his near consanguinity, was called the Lords brother; and not from Joseph by
a former wife, as some have imagined, nor any similituder likeness, that he
had unto Jesus, as Lyra says, he was of, both in face * Lyr. annota upon Gal.
1. 19.
and lineaments of body.

But much more propperly was Jesus ever taken, and reputed to be Jesus brought
up under Joseph the space of twenty nine years.
the son of Joseph, for that Joseph was his bringer up in the trade of a
Carpenter, and his maintainer of liuelihood the space of twenty nine years.
And having no father upon earth amonst men, but Joseph the Carpenter, is
therefore commonly called Mat. 13. 55. Ioh. 6. 42.
the son of Joseph the Carpenter.

And Joseph likewise for the foresaid causes, is often reputed, and called the
father of Jesus: and so Joseph is commonly called the father of Jesus.
does Mary her self call him, when finding Jesus among the Doctors in the
Temple disputing, she said, Luke 2. 46.
Son, why have thou thus dealt with us, behold thy Father, and I have sought
thee sorrowing.

And upon the same ground that Joseph had no issue of himself begot, is built
the Perpetuity of Mary's Mary's perpetual virginity confirmed.
Virginity: who being blessed above women, doubtless had not been subject to
the curse of barrenness, had Joseph ever known her as his wife.

And the child so begot and ^er virginity proved by consequence.
borne, had been heir to Iudahs Kingdom in the right of the Father; Jesus
being but son to the mother (nor she any wise interrested unto Salomons
Crown) whilst Joseph her husband lived, or any child from him.

But Joseph being a just man, and believing the Angel that told him his wives
conception was by the holy Ghost, forbear to touch by marriage Why Joseph
forbear the bed of matrimony.
knowledge, that her Virgins blessed womb, wherein the Son of righteousness
had been incarnate.

For as the outward Eastgate of Eze. 44. 2.
Ezekiels glorious Temple, was commanded to stand shut, and no more to be
opened, and no man to enter in by it, because the Lord God of Israel had
entered in that way: so that sanctified Virgins * blessed body remained See * S.
Hierom and Lyra upon Exeliel. chap. 4.
unknown by man for ever, because the Prince of Princes Christ Jesus her
Son, had entered the passage unto his humanity, through that holy gate of his
Tabernacle Mary, of all weomen the most blessed.

And as the Exo. 30. 37.
Spices confection compounded in the f^st Tabernacle, was only to be employed
upon, and in the first Tabernacle, where God did make his Covenant with Moses,
so the sweet composition Ma^ies womb the holy Tabernacle.
of the eternal deity, with the then assumed hamanity, in the wo^b of that
Ca^t. 2. 1.
Ros^ or Lilly of Zion, was no more to be attempted in that sanctified
Tabernacle, wherein Gods covenant was performed in becoming the Immanuel, for
the salvation of man; which wrought no doubt in Joseph the husband a reverend
for bearance, though He. 13. 4
the bed of marriage be holy and undefiled.

These things being so, as by the Scriptures we find them not otherwise; Jesus
his title stands firm for Iudahs Crown; for he having neither Jesus solely
heir unto David's Crown by his double line.
brother nor sister, uncle nor kinsman by any descent, either from Abiud, or
from Rhesa, any kindred at all; is himself then the only immeate and next
heir unto them both, both by Joseph his father, and by Mary his mother: And by
that do^ble line is by Saint Matthew, and Saint Luke, derived from Abraham,
Judah, and David; and by the four Jesus is twenty eight times styled and
called king of the Jews
Evangelists in that his double right, is (...) times four times recordded,
styled, and called King of the Jews.

An^ thus much of the third point. Now remains the last in the acknowledgment
The 4. Observation.
of that title, to rest only in the person of Jesus, the expected son of
David, whose reign does continue for ever.

The first acknowledgment then of this promised King, was observed by the
Gentiles, when by his The Gentiles first sought after Christ.
Star they were led unto the newborn Babe, King of the Jews* which was in
the forty two year of Luke 2. 2.
Augustus Caesar, when Cere^ius was Governor of Syria: and when in Avniuersal
Peace, w^e Christ was borne.
token of a universal peace, the Temple of Ianus stood shut in Room.

Which peace was so famous, as the mostfamous among the heathen Writers, found
matter enough to enlarge their wits upon: as Virgil in his Virg. Aeneid. sib.
1. Christ's coming in the flesh, observed by the heathen.
Aeneidos, and speech of Jupiter, does make him a Prophet, to foreshew the
peace, that should be enjoyed, when as Mars his Temple should be neglected,
and his hands bound in chains of brass. And in his Eclog speeches, of Eclog.
4.
an unspotted Maid, a blessed Babe, and of golden days.

And Marcus Tullius Cicero (as himself reports) saw in his dream, A Child
of an engenius and beautiful countenance, let down from Heaven by a golden
chain. And In vit. Aug. Sec. 94.
Suetonius after him, from Julius Marathus observed, that even then, Nature was
about to bring forth a King, that should reign over the whole World.

And albeit these men in their flatteries, did appropriate these their
speeches, either to the Emprour Augustus himself, or unto The Scriptures
confirms what the heathen spoke.
some of his favorites, yet Micah tells us, that in these days the weapons of
War should be made the instruments of Peace; for says he, in the last days
Mich. 4. 3, and 4.
Swords shall be broken into mattockes, and spears into Sithes, and that
every one should sit under his own Vine, and under his Fig Tree, and none
should make them afraid.

And Isaiah speaking to the same purpose, particularly applies it unto Christ:
for (says he) Esa. 9. 6. The attrubuites of Christ.
Unto us a Child is borne; unto us a Son is given, the government is upon
his shoulder, and his Name is wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

Which Peace was declared to the world by the Angels from Heaven, in this last
age of the Jews common wealth, when the Dan. 2. 41. When the gouernme^ts fell
of which Daniel spoke. Daniels prophecy written in Chaldea, was the cause that
the Chaldeans first sought after the king of Jews.
Stone cut without hands, fell upon Daniels Image, that then stood but upon his
toe of Clay.

Even then and at that time, the wisemen of the East coming from Chaldea (in
whose language Daniels vision was writ) followed his Star into Jury, and in
Jerusalem inquired for him, that was borne x King of Mat. 2.
the Jews.

Which title was acknowledged without any contradiction, and confirmed by the
Priests and Scribes themselves, both in affirming the place of his birth, and
in acknowledging his office, to be a Ruler in Israel.

And the malicious Jews to hinder his right to that kingdom, could name none,
but Ioh. 19. 15.
Caesar a stranger, and that contrary to their own law enjoined by Moses; which
said, Deu. 17. 15.
Thou shall not set a stranger, which is not thy brother, to be King over thee.

And that Jesus was the acknowledged King of the Jews, these speeches and
demands of Pilat the Governor does manifestly show; Ioh. 19. 14.
Behold Jesus acknowledged to be king of the Jews.
your King: Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews? Mar. 15. 9.
12.
What shall I do unto him whom ye call King of the Jews? Shall I crucify
your King? and the like.

Yea, and the holy Ghost enforced his own wicked hand, to subscribe his most
just title thus: Ioh. 19. 15. 22.
JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS, which he wrote in Hebrew, Pilat forced
to testify the truth.
Greek and Latin, that all might read, and fixed it over his head upon the
Cross, and that all might see, as himself had said, behold your King.

And being admonished, by the Jews Statesmen to alter the in scription, as
too much derogatory unto Caesar's title, and no less then a matter of high
treason in himself, answered: What I have written, I Pilat his resolution of
what he had writ. Christ acknowled ged himself a King.
have written, even to the danger of his own life.

And Christ himself that needs no testimony of men, answered Pilat to his
question, Ioh. 18. 37.
Art thou a King? thou say that I am a King: To this end was I borne, and
for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear witness unto the
truth, and every one that is of the truth, hears my voice.

And the same opinion of his kingly title after his resurrection, it seems
the Jews in Thessalonica had; when they accused Jason before the Rulers, that
against the decree of Caesar, he subborned them that taught, there was no
other King, even one Jesus.

Thus then we conclude, that this Jesus the Son of the Virgin, was the Act.
17. 7.
expected King of the terrestrial Kingdom; the real King without any
Competitor to that Crown. And the acknowledged King of the Jews; both by the
Gentiles, and by the Jews themselves.

But because in David and in the rest, there was a figure of a Priestly or
spiritual King and Kingdom, as well as of a real and earthly. Some have
thought, the figured only (and not the real) did belong unto Christ, for that
himself disclaimed all regal authority upon earth.

But if we well consider that he alone is the Apo. (...). 8.
Alpha, and Omega Romans 11 36.
, Christ is heir of al.
through whom, and for whom, all that is writ, was writ; and in whom, all the
2. Cor. 1 20.
promises of God, are vea, and Amen: we must then include as much unto him the
substance, as was propper unto Abraham, and Christ the substance in nothing
inferior to his figures.
his other figures, else was not Christ the heir of all, and the first among
Brethren.

Therefore as we began in Abraham for the Terrestrial, let us likewise begin
in him for the Celestial: who in his days was both a King, and a Priest, and
in them both a true figure of him, his seed that was to come.

That Abraham was a King, his kingly authority, in his leagues ofensiue,
Abraham a King in power.
and defensive, made with the Kings of the Canaanites, does sufficiently show:
For as a King he bare himself among those his con^ederates, both in the
victory, and division of the spoils, gotten and taken at Genesis 14.
Sodom in the recovery of his brother Lot.

And a Priest likewise he was, for Abraham a Priest in sacrificing.
he built Altars, and sacrificed unto the Lord; and would have done his own
son Isaac, had not his hand been stayed by Genesis 22. 11.
an Angel from heaven: so that in both, he was really a King of that earthly
Canaan, and personally a Priest in Abraham was both King and Priest.
his ministerial Sacrificings; and in them both, was tipically a true figure
of Christ.

To both these functions, Isaac was his heir, Jacob his, and Judah his; for
the three brethren Ruben, Simeon, and Leui, were disinerited both of kingly
Priesthood, and Lay Kingdom upon their Genesis 35. 22.
trespasses against Jacobs bed, and in Genesis 34. 25.
Sh^chems slaughter.

But the ministerial settled upon 1. Chro. 23. 13.
Leui Judah possessed not, for these were separated when Moses wa^ the
messenger, and Aaron the mouth, to work and denounce great Exo. 4. 14.
plagues unto Pharaoh, and were never turned and joined again.

But the state standing in a settled policy in David's days, Daui^ stood in
state both of King an David in state, both a King and a Priest.
Priest, from his fathers Abraham, I saac, and Jacob; and was both a kingly
Priest, and a priestly King in the land: for the Scepter of Judah he bare,
whereunto all were obedient* and the Levites of Aaron, he ordered for their
(...). Chro. 14.
* services in the Temple, (though the ministerial still lay in Leui.)

So did Solomon in assembling the Salomo^ in state both of king and priest.
Priests, to bring the things of the Tabernacle into the Temple, and (...).
King. 8. 2.
in praying for, and blessing the people.

This kingly authority and priestly dealings, to remove the defects of Church
and commonweal, we see in Ezekiah, by the reforming the land of their Groves,
and graven Images; Ezekiah in state of a king and priest.
and in breaking to pieces the 2. King. 8. 4.
Brazen Serpent that Moses had set up, when the people thereunto burned
incense, and committed Idolatry.

And by the young king (...). King. 2^.
Josiah, in his care for the Temple, and continuance of the Passover, which
he commanded to be kept. Josiah in state of king and priest.


And this power of Scepter and Censer, made the whole throne of David, wherein
Christ the true substance Christ was the sub^ce of these his figures.
was to sit for ever, as had been promised to David of Judah, that he ^e 33. 17
should not want one to sway the Scepter, nor Leui a Sacri^cer to stand and
minister before the Lord for ever, which none could do, but Jesus the son,
who lives blessed for ever and ever.

And that Jesus in these things Christ Jesus the heir in all things unto these
his foregoers.
was heir to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: to David, Solomon, Ezekiah and Josiah;
and in truth to all the Patriarchs and Promises in the law, is witnessed by the
Apostle, who calls him the Heb. 1. 2 Romans 4. 13
Heir of all things, the Heir of the World.

And in the person of Melchizedek proves his function, both of Christ figured
in Mel chizedeck.
King and Priest. A King of Peace, without beginning of days, or end of time;
and a Heb. 7. 3 16.
Priest, not made after the Law, but after the power of the endless life, that
continues for ever.

David's Psa. 110. 1
Lord he is called by David himself, greater then Mat. 12. 42.
Solomon in his wisdom and works: and for zeal to the Lords house, exceeded
both Ezekiah and Josiah, cleansing the Temple of profane Luke 19. 45.
marchandizings, and instituting for the Pasouer, the Mark. 14 22.
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and for the Lamb of the Law, (the figure) his
own body (the substance) The Ioh. 1. 29
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: and reigns after
death, David's Lord for ever.

But the date of that earthly policy, now nearly expired, Christ The end of
Christ's coming.
came not to continue it further, but as a better Ioshuah, to bring the people
into a better rest, then that transitory Canaan was: even into that kingdom of
glory, which was appointed unto him by his Father, and which himself Luke 22.
29.
appointed to his Apostles: where they should sit upon Mat. 19 28.
twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Christ's refusal of Ma
gistracy, no impediment to his authority. Why Christ refused Magistracy


And therefore to draw their minds from the one, and to fix them on the other,
he used neither worldly pomp, nor worldly power; but refused al offers of
magistracy, yet to no prejudice of his right, but rather as impedime^ts to his
function.

For surely had he executed any te^porall authority among them, then temporal
strength had bin imputed to his spiritual actions, so forward were the people
to outward things.

For prevention whereof, we see all outward means failing. His father was a
poor Mat. 13. 55.
Catpenter, and of small esteem (read of) among the people: his mother noted
by Christ Parents poor.
the pen of the Evangelist, to be of the meanest estate, as appears by the
offering for her purification, which was but a Luke 2. 24.
pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigions; the oblation enjoined for the
poorest sort of weomen, as the Law had said: Leuit. 12. 8.
If she be not able to bring a Lamb, she shall bring two Turtle Doves, or
two young pigions, unto the Priest, which Mary did.

And in the person of Jesus himself, all outward appearance were Christ's
poverty.
likewise prevented: For his first entertainment was poor, his birth Chamber
Luke 2. 7
a Stable, and his Cradle a Crach, for there was no room for his Parents in
the Inn: The provision for his liuely-hood, were scanter then the world
affoorded unto unreasonable Creatures, for the Mat. 8. 20.
Foxes had holes, and the birds nests, but the Son of man, no place to lay
his head.

And in the short passage of his kingly triumph, when with concourse he was
followed, and with shouts of Luke 19. 42.
Hosanna, saluted King of Israel; his rejoicing was tears, with sighs for
Jerusalem, that knew Christ's triumphs was tears.
not of that her visitation.

Neither after his death had he the pre-eminence (as most of them had) to be
buried in the graves of Christ poor after death
their fathers, but was laid in the Mat. 27. 60.
Sepulcher of another man, and at another man's charge intombed: such favors
the world affoorded unto this great king.

And therefore as it has been of him prophesied, that he Isay. 53.
should be a man despised, without form or beauty, meek, and lowly, as a
Sheep to the slaughter, Christ's appearance according to the Prophets.
a just and a poor King; so was it expedient that all these parts, in the
person of Jesus should be fulfilled. And so himself taught in the way to
Emaus, when he Luke 24. 27.
began at Moses and all the Prophets, and by them proved, that Christ ought so
to have lived, and so to have suffered as he did.

And therefore the objection made by Julian and others, that had Christ been
really king of the Jews, than had he exercised the authority really of King of
the Jews; deserves no answer.

For as he was called, and verily Christ caled the son of man, yet had no man
to his father.
was the Son of Man, although he had no immediate father among men upon the
earth: so was he called, and verily was, king of the Jews, though he used no
kingly authority among men on the earth.

And why should that be objected more against Jesus, then against all his
Ancestors the high Saints, The ancestors of Christ kept from the crown, which
Christ came not to recover.
from Abiud to Joseph, who by birth, were the undoubted heirs to that Crown,
which notwithstanding was usurped upon by the Gentiles, above the space of 400.
years.

Neither had they any promise, that they should ever recover that that
terrestrial kingdom; but rather, that they should possess the eternal,
which Da^. 7. 17
none could take from them.

And that Christ Jesus was King of that Kingdom promised: and that Son, that
should sit upon 2. Sam. 7. 16.
David's Throne for ever: (which none besides him could ever do, we may
further prove by his life after death.

For as he assumed the flesh of David, and in the same flesh was the undoubted
heir of David to the Christ had the title of King of the Jews in his death.
very instant of his death; and in his death also had the same title devulged
to the open view of all, which he carried with him to his grave; so after his
sleep (for his death was but a sleep unto him) in his person only it
remained as before, and in his person only shall remain for ever.

For the same humane body that was borne King of the Jews, (so called Christ
body resuming life, had the same faculties as before.
and acknowledged) living after death; the same humane body (though being also
glorified) had the same faculties, pre-eminence, and prerogatives of life, and
rights thereunto belonging, as before in his body was subsisting.

For death having no Act. 2. 24.
power to retain him in the grave, his humane body after his resurrection, was
again verily a humane man among men upon earth the space of forty days. In
which at sundry times he was seen both (says the Apostle) of the Apostles;
and at one time, 1. Cor. 15 6.
of above five hundred brethren at once: All of them being faithful witnesses
of his presence in the flesh, for The many witnesses of Christ's reresurrection.
of the unfaithful after his resurrection, he was never seen in his flesh.

And now David's Kingdom come to the full period, and Ephesians. 2. 14.
the wall of separation between Jew and Gentile pulled down, when the Mat. 27.
51.
veil of the Temple was rent assunder, Christ Jesus then that was heir of of
all, before all beginnings, is thenceforth King over all, unto all Christ the
accomplisher of what was foretold.
eternities. For being the Seed, the Shiloh, and the Son promised, to sit on
David's throne for ever: Acccordingly came of Abraham, of Judah, David, and of
Mary, in the town Bethlehem, as the Prophets had told; and by the title of
King of the Jews, was sought for, acknowledged, and so styled, as the only
next heir to Salomons Crown, as we have showed.

But that earthly Canaan usurped by Herod, and the Caesar's; he came Christ
came not to disturb peace.
not by strength to recover, the term of that tennor so nearly expired; but
rather taught that Luke 20. 25.
Caesar should have Caesar's, paid tribute as a subject, though himself the
Mat. 17 26.
Son was free, and would not Ioh. 8. 11
give judgment of death for Adultery, when it was not lawful for the Jews
(his nation) to Ioh. 18. 31.
put any man to death.

For his coming as the Angel told Daniel, was to a far more heavenly
intent, namely, to expiat sin, to abolish Dan. 9. 24.
iniquity, to establish righteonsnesse, to seal up vision and prophecy, and
to anoint the most holy: But of the earthly he showed, that both City and
Sanctuary should be Saint Steven Angellike, spoke the words of an Angel.
destroyed. And so much Sain Stephen (whose face shone Angel-like) affirmed
unto the chief Priest of the Jews, when he said, that Jesus of Nazareth
should destroy that place, and change the Act. 6. 14.
ordinances that Moses had given them.

Which most manifestly he did, when his body the true Ioh. 3. 14
Serpent, was lifted up betwixt Heaven and Earth, to make an Attonment betwixt
Col. 2. 14.
heaven and earth: his blood, as the Lambs sprinkled upon the Altar of his
Cross, making H^. 9. 13
clean the conscience of the offender: and lastly, his voice uttering this
last Period of people and state, it Ioh. 19. 30.
is finished, when ended the Ceremonies and holiness of the place?

And having conquered Satan, Sin and the Grave, is entered into his Kingdom
of glory, is set in Majesty and power at the right hand of God his Father, and
Heb. 1. 13
his enemies made his footstool for ever.

O thou that have the Key of David, that opens and no man shuts, open our
hearts to believe in thee the King of glory, and the Gates of thy Kingdom,
that we may enter in the day of thy Marriage, and behold thee our King, crowned
Cant. 3. 11.
with Salamons Crown.

CHAP. XI.
A touch of some Jewish and vain Genealogies, which hinder truth: Against
which Saint Paul warns, with answer to Master Liuelies Jewish objections.

Having thus showed some principal uses of the sacred Genealogies, for Story,
for Christ, and for his Kingdom; and therein haueing urged no more then the
Scriptures enforce: it follows by order and desired satisfaction, that
somewhat be spoken of their forced abuses, falling under the check of the
holy Ghosts pen.

That there are G^nealogis endless, which with fables breed questions, Vain
Genealogies.
rather then godly edifying, the Apostle she^eth: and among foolish 1. Tim. 1 4.
Questions, Contentions, and Wranglings about the Law, ranketh Tit. 3. 9.
Genealogies that are unprofitable and vain. And upon these texts some presume
so far, as they think themselves freed from the search of all Genealogies:
and others demand, whether salvation consists upon their pregnant knowledge,
or damnation upon the ignorance therein.

That we are not freed from the search, the commandment of Christ does
enforce, who enioyneth the Ioh. 5. 39
search of the Scriptures, and the The Genealogies of the Scriptures not forbid.
reading of Moses, in whose writ, and whose pen, we find all the Patriarks
recorded from Adam in Paradise, to Joshua the Captain that placed the Tribes
in the Land. Genealogies recorded through the whole scriptures.
Whence the writers of the Chronicles, of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Ruth, continue
their memorials unto Zorobabel: and thence likewise by the same Spirit, they
are recorded to Joseph and Mary, and even unto Christ Jesus himself.

That Paul therefore should contradict Moses, being brought up in his laws
Act. 22. 3
at the feet of Gamaliel, S. Paul di^ not contradict Moses
and should condeme those for foolish, which he makes the pillars of his
stories, may not be consented unto; neither that in his Apostleship, he
should account the search and knowledge, how Christ was come in the flesh, for
vain: seeing among the many graces of the Jews, for Romans 9. 4
Adoption, Glory, Covenants* the Law, service of God, and the promises,
himself she weth, that Christ from those Fathers Romans 1. 3
came and took flesh, urging the doctrine of his humanity in most of his
Epistles, and putting his Disciple Timothy in mind, To remember that Jesus
Christ was made of the 2. Tim. 2 8.
Seed of David.

And that the Scriptures are of an equal esteem, the Rabbis (in that thing
only commendable) affirm, who hold these words in Genesis, Ge^. 10. 6.
The sons of Cham were Cush and Mizraim, with the like wisdom from God, as
these words in Deuteronomie, Deu. 5. 6. Each text of Scripturs of equal
authority.
Hear Israel, Jehovah our God, Jehovah is one; being both of them breathed
from the same Spirit. And Rambam witnesses, that Manasses was of old time
condemned, because he held, that the Families of Rambam cited by H. Bro. M. S.
Ishmael, Esau, and such like, had not the like use for histories, as the
others had; and therefore he forbade the reading of Moses, as books not
penned by the wisdom of God.

But how true so ever this accusation is of Manasses, most certain it is, that
the Rabbis, and others their like, have fained many and so false The Rabbis
feinings too too gross.
Genealogies, as might very well move the Apostle to forbid their abuse.

For unto our first Parents, the fair four children to be begotten and borne
of Adam and Eve, in the Joseph. lib 1. cap. 4.
first day of their Creation. And in the first world they say that Giants were
begotten, by the fallen Angels upon the fair daughters of men. Noah the
righteous, they make unrighteous, in faining him to take to wife Naamah, the
daughter of the double wiued Lamech, and sister to Tubalcain: so should that
holy Patriarch, not only sin with the Genesis 6. 2
Sons of God, in choosing a wife of the daughters of men, but the latter
world also, should be replenished from a branch of that cursed root, Cain.

Dinah the daughter of Jacob, having Dinah.
no husband in the Scriptures record, they Baba. Batra. H. B. in consent
places Jobs afflictions at Moses birth.
marry to Job, the great man in the East, though she was elder then his
afflictions by an hundred and seventy years.

And more obsurdly they marry her to Simeon her brother, naming her the
Canaanit and mother of Saul. Jacob, they feign to have had a twin daughter
borne with every of his sons, as Adam by them is fained to have had. And good
Thamar that Thamar.
got Judah unto her bed, they make to be the daughter of Melchisedeck king of
Salem, who died ninty seven years before Judah was borne.

So likewise Ruth the Moabite, having Ruth.
no father named in Scripture, nor Eglon king of Moab any daughter, Rabbi
Iarchi and others, feign Ruth therefore to be daughter to King Eglon.

Keturah likewise, the second wife Keturah.
of Abraham, the Rabbis will have to be the same Hagar that had b^ him
Ishmael, Says Polycro. lib. 2 c. 11.
lest incontinency should be imputed unto him, for marrying another woman,
having known Hagar before. And from the sons of the said Keturah, they bring
both Balaam the Gentile Prophet, and 1. King. 10
Queen Sheba, that came to hear the wisdom of Solomon.

As also doubtless from the Rabbis, the Christians, Origin and Chrysostom,
Balaam.
from the said Balaam do bring the Lege histor. mag. Colonia.
wise men, that from the East followed the Star unto Christ: and so Dorotheus
and Epiphanius, make Jonas the Prophet to be the Jonas.
widows son of Sarepta, whom Elias raised from death.

In like sort, when some great personages are but once named in the Scriptures,
they make them to be some other famous men, by other names. So Ethan the
Ezrathite, the Author of the 89. Psalm, Kimchi and Iarchi, affirm to be
Abraham, because Abraham.
that Psalm goes before the Psalm of Moses the man of God; and because
Ezrathite may be translated Oriental.

So 1. King. 4. 31.
Chalcol and Darda, whose wisdom Solomon is commended to exceed, they feine
to be H. B. in M. S.
Moses and Aaron: Elihu the Buzite, to be Balaam; Ibsan to be Boos: and
Moles. Aaron.
Putiel to be Iethro. So likewise the forenamed Rabbis, Kimchi and Iarchi,
Iethro. Vriah.
make Uriah mentioned in Esa. 8. 2
Esaias, to be the same man that Iere. 26. 23.
Iehoiakim slew, though there were an hundred and twenty years betwixt. And
Zechariah mentioned in the same Prophet, to be the same Zechariah that with
Haggai prophesied after the return from Babylon, betwixt whom were above two
hundred years.

But the writer of the Book Tobit, falls into far greater sins,
Zachariah Tobits Raphel made a man.
in making an Angel to be of the seed of man; as he affirms Raphael to
acknowledge his kindred from Tob. 5. 12. 13.
Azarias and Ananias, men well known unto Tobit; contrary to the Doctrine of
the whole Scriptures, which teach, that Christ Jesus, the great Archangel, Heb.
2. 6.
took only man's nature upon him; and that the Luke 24. 39.
Angels have neither flesh nor bones, but are ministering Spirits, to attend his
Elect.

Which blasphemy, the blasphemous Rabbis further teach, in affirming, that
there should come two Rab. Moses upon Judges, cited by De ^lessio in true Reli.
chap. 30. The Turks Alcaron. A dangerous position.
Christ's, the one of David, and the other of Joseph: upon which ground they
build, who say, that He whom the Jews crucified, was not the same man that
had been borne of the virgin Mary; but another in his similitude and likeness.

In the contrary extremity, I would to God Christians had not offended, in
denying Christ to be the Messiah mentioned in Daniel the ninth, a text most
pregnant, showing his office of Redemption, in abolishing Sin, and the
effecacie of his Death, in ending Sacrifice and oblation in the place once holy.

For whereas the Angel Gabriel in the first year of Cyrus, and last of Babels
seventy, was sent unto Dan. 9. 24
Daniel to declare the present liberty for his people decreed, and to assure a
future, and fuller by the death of the Messiah determined, after the expiration
of seventy times seven years: they deny the words to be meant of Jesus the
son of Mary, and Daniels text wronged.
^abbinically apply the text to other purposes and persons; whereby a stumbling
block is laid before the blind Jews, and an unchristianlike testimony left
of Christian Iuda^sme. For more to show conte^tion, ^hen truth or Religion, in
a book of that kind, thus it stands written.

Lively in Persian Monarch. page 236.
Of all the places in the old Testament, touching the coming of Christ,
whereof there is great store, that verse (...) Daniel, (meaning the 24. of the
ninth Chapter) is most excellent and ^leere: yet withal, I deny (says the
Author) that by the Name of Messiah in the verses following, Christ our Savior
A strange assertion verily.
is understood; for neither the true account of years will suffer it, nor page
230
the text of holy Scriptures bear it.

Two strong supporters verily if the foundation be sure; but seeing he sets
the one upon the uncertain Olympicks, and the other upon a private and
unchristian interpretation, we may safely deny what he does affirm.

Concerning the first then, or credit of the Olympiads to the disabling of
other Chronologies, the judgment of Marcus varro. touching the certenty of
Olympiads. In Censuerinus de die natali.
Marcus Varro, the learned Roman is brought: who will have all uncertain before
the first Olympiad: for from the beginning of men to the first flood, for the
ignorance of things therein happening, he calls obcure or unknown. From the
first flood to the first Olympiad, for the vain tales contained therein, he
calls false or fabulous. But from the first Olympiad to his own age, for the
truth and certenty of things therein recorded, he calls Historical, provided
always by master Lively, that ye seek them no higher then Lively in his
Persian. mon. page 31.
Iphitus their restorer.

And these Olympicks, does that holy tongues reader make the only computators
of the Suns course, in incirculating the earth, for the space of 530. years:
and by them does order that time, which is of most moment in the Scriptures of
God.

For by them he will have the Angels speech (for the death of Olympiads
vainly made the stay of Chronology
Christ) accounted: by them the reigns and years of the Persian Kings, from
Cyrus to Alexander numbered; and by them the time from the rebuilding of
Jerusalem by ^he returned, to the final destruction thereof by Titus the
Roman, cal^ulated.

Affirming them to be of a sure Bulwark for Chronology, warran^ed by the page
70.
mouth of Heaven it self ^y the Astronomicall eclipses ther^ happening, and the
only page 82.
Key to A very widemouth of him the speaker.
^nlocke the shut and hid meaning ^f Daniels oracles, without which page 36.
^y Scriptures alone (says he) can ^euer be opened: whereunto we ^nswere.
Varro never read Moses as it seems, else would he not have said as he did.


That Varro was a heathen, and ^ad not read Moses, who sees not? whose
writings notwithstanding were extant of things done from the first Creation,
unto the entrance into Canaan, nor the sacred Histories from his death, by
others continued unto Nebuchadnezzar the great King (else would he not have
made these times obscure, that are most plain, nor that the plainest, which is
most obscure.

And if we shall thoroughly examine those his so highly commended The one half
of them are fabulous, as Du. Plessie. from Diodorus has observed.
Olimpicks either of beginning continuance, restoration or agreements; we
shall find them to be but a Babel of confusions, an^ the truth of time by them
as har^ to be trased, as Pro. 30. 19.
is the way of a She in the waves of the Sea, or the flight (...) an Eagle in
the air, the tract of neither can neither be followed nor found.

For their beginning is but roue^ at, from Hercules that aimeless^ mark: their
neglect remained t^ Olimpiads uncertain of beginning.
the days of Licurgus, the tenth from the founder, their restoration was by
Iphitus of Elis (but set the centers in the circles of these time^ where ye
can find them) and their celebration superstitiously begun in honor of the
Idol of Jupiter Olympius; and again, restored to cease (...) contagious
pestilence, (if not to ^fect the world with their pestife^ous accounts)

Their counselor was Appollo, Olimpiads why begun, and their reward.
^e instrument of Satan; there prise ^as a Garland of a Spiders Web, ^ouen
in the boughs of a wild ^liue and fruitless tree; and their ^ownes the
crown of vainglory, and not that of immortality, for which the Apostle
councelleth the Corinthians to strive) may well be ^mpared to the houses of
Job 8. i4
Spiders, in 1 Cor. 9 25.
, wherein was no confidence, and to ^e Isa. 59 9
Webbes in Isaiah, that made no ^arments to cover from cold.

Are these gaimes (then the in^ntion Profane heathen no fit witnesses of
Christ's death.
of Satan) fit linkes to li^it an Angels speech and account, ^r the saddest
action that the ^orld ever saw? and shall more cre^t be given them for the
time of ^e Suns course in the heavens? then unto the heavenly Oracle of an
Angel from God, for the time of his Sons death on earth.

Or shall those men, whose charge is to teach all Nations that Luke 10 9
the Kingdom of God is come in his Christ, take their authority for the time
of his coming from such hea then recorders as neither knew God, nor were Act.
17.
regarded of God, in the time of their ignorance as the Apostle witnesses?

The Apo. i1. i
City and holy Altar (we see) were measured by the reed that the Angel gave
unto John, and by the same reed (the direction o^ God) did Daniel from Dan. 9.
2
Jeremy measure the years of captivity, and from their expiration was taught
by an Angel from God, the time o^ Divine Chronology needs no profane helps.
Christ's sufferings, without all help of any secular learning, or accoun^ of
heathenish Olimpicks, but rather by far more holier bands, tied with the
accounts of three mo^ certain events, as of seven seuens, sixt^ two seuens, and
one seven in the half whereof Christ should die.

And whereof Gabriel confesses that he was sent from God, Da. 9. 22.
to teach Daniel the certain knowledge: and Daniel himself acknowledged that
^he understood the thing, and had Dan. i0. 1
understanding of the vsion: which was unlocked unto him by no key of ^huma^e
litterature, but by the Da. 10. 21
Scriptures of truth, as the angel affirmed.

Neither Saint Paul the greatest humanist among the Apostles, Act. 22. 3.
brought up at the feet of Gamaleel, and spoke 1. Cor. 14. 18.
more Languages then all ^is opposers, ever relied upon the Olimpicks, or other
secular learning, touching the knowledge of Christ and his passion: But
contrariwise confessed, that he had 1. Cor. 15. 3.
delivered unto the Corinthians, that which he had received; which was, That
Christ died for our sins, that he was buried, and The Scriptures only teach
Christ to be the Messiah.
rose the third day: and that he did according to the Scriptures of God,
without other helps of Olimipcks, or secular learning.

And as touching humane litterature (that any wise were oposit to the Gospel)
he admonishes his Disciple Timothy 1. Tim 6. 20.
to avoid profane oppositions of Sciences falsely called, which while some
profess, they have erred concerning the Faith.

And commends him for his knowledge in the holy 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Scriptures, which are able to make him wise, being given by inspiration of
God, and are sufficiently profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to
instruct, that the man of God may be absolute.

And that 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Light which Saint Peter wills us to guide our steps by, is the sure word of
the Prophets: to The divine Scriptures is the only light to guide our Faith by.
the which (says he) ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your
hearts.

But that the Olimpicks could be the Light to lead to that Star, or to
enlighten the sacred stories by their accounts, is so far from effect, as
they rather much darken the Olimpiads falsify the true Chronoligie of
Scripture.
true Chronology of the one, and confound the mutual agreements of the other:
nor have they any assured truth for time in themselves.

For Phlegon for their beginning in pisus, Pelops, and Hercules, appoints no
time. Pausanias, says he; must record, but will not credit them. and Plutarke
in the life of Numa, condemns all gatherings of time from the Olimpiads. And
such are The variable beginnings of the Olimpiads.
their disagreements in Thalu^s, Castor, Phlegon, Plutarke, Dionisius, and
others in assigning their accounts, as the supporters of that tottering
foundation, must bear as great a weight (if nor greater) as Ovid. Metam. lib.
2.
Atlas is fained to do, in supporting the world.

To give an assay then, how their accou^ts agree with the holy Scriptures of
God, we will but touch two among many, that by them the credit of the rest may
be judged.

Master Lively sets King Cyrus Liu. pers. mon. page 47. and p. 155.
in the fifty five Olimpiad: And Titus the Emperor, in the and hundred and
twelfth: betwixt whom he accounts no less then six hundred twenty nine
years and odd months: more by one hundred then the Sun ever measured.

But that Cyrus his first, could meet with the Olimpiad 55, the diverse See D.
Willets Hexapla in Dan. chap. 9. quest. 36.
beginnings of them by diverse men assigned, does make very doubtful: for
Bibliander does begin them in the thirteenth of Iotham King of Judah, and
Paulus Phrygio in his twelfth: but Africanus, Bullinger, and Functius, set them
in the second year of Iotham the same King.

Glarean^, will have the first Oimpiad to be in the fiftieth year of Azariah
king of Judah, and Eusebius in his forty nine; but Pererius begins them in the
eight of King Ahaz, which is twenty five years after. So that the first year
of Cyrus The fifty five Olympiad cannot be the first of King Cyrus.
(most certainly fixed in the divine Chronology, as the pole is in the North)
cannot fit the fifty five Olimpiad, for their diverse beginnings.

The other proof is taken from the destruction of Ierusalems Temple which
Stro. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus says, happened in the last of the forty seventh
Olimpiad. Now we know by the holy Text, that the destruction of the Temple was
in the 2. King. 25. 8.
nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzer King of Babell, from whence to the end of
the captivity, or first of Cyrus, fifty one years more were to ensue, to make
up the Ie. 25. 11
seventy of the captivity.

But from the last year of the forty seventh Olympiad, to the first of the
fifty five, are but twenty nine years: whereunto add nineteen more from
Nebuchadnezzers first year, in the which the Ier. 25.
captivity began, unto the Temples destruction in his ninteenth; and yet there
will want of the seue^ty, twenty two years to the end of the captivity. Whereby
we see, that the first year of Cyrus Cyrus his first year cannot be in the
fifty five Olimpiad.
must be pulled back, and set in the fiftieth, and not the fifty five
Olympiad: so far differing are these profane Olympiads, from the sacred
Chronology of the holy text.

That a most certain and exact Chronology was registered from Adam the first
man, unto the first year of King Ezr. 1. 1.
Cyrus, the holy Scriptures plainly declare: and that all that is writ, was
writ, to and for Christ To. 11. 36.
, the Apostle does affirm.

But how shall that fullness of time be known, for the ending of the
Ceremonies by the death of the Messiah, (which was then taught to the beloved
Daniel, and now much behooves all men to know) if from Cyrus downward, the
chain of Chronology in Daniels seuens, be broken off, for the space of 144.
years, Table Olimpiad. 89.
as Lively does them in his Olympicks table.

Where from the fifty five, to the eighty nine Olympiad, (in which, and not
before he begins to account Daniels weeks) a Vacuety is left for so long a
time. Whereas contrariwise we see that Daniel began his Dan 9. 1 v. 20. and
23 Daniels
prayer for their deliverance immediately at the expiration of the seventy
years captivity: and at Prayer was at the expiration of the seue^ty years of
captivity, and thence to Christ's death were 77.
the beginning of Daniels prayer, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God, to show
him, that the Commandment for the deliverance of the people was come forth;
and from that coming forth of the Commandment, to the death of the Messiah
seventy seuens, were determined for a full delivery from the captivity of
sin, by the sacrifice of the Messiah, Christ the Lamb figured in the Law.

And that this Commandment came forth in the first year of Cyrus, the writers
of the Chronicles and the book of Ezra do plainly declare; both of them
affirming and saying, that in the 2 Chr. 36 22.
first year of Cyrus, when the Word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of
Jeremiah was finished, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia,
and he made a proclamation through all his kingdom, and also by writing,
saying:

Thus says Ezr. 1. 2.
Cyrus King of Persia, all the kingdoms of the earth, has the Lord God of
heaven given me, and he has commanded me to build him a house in Cyrus his
decree for the Jews deliverance.
Jerusalem, that is in Judah. Who is among you of all his people, with wbom the
Lord his God is? let him go up.

And of this commandment made by Cyrus, for the return of the Jews, to build
their City and Temple, the Prophet Isaiah foretold above an hundred years
before Cyrus was borne; for says he, Isa. 44. 28.
He says to Cyrus, thou art my Shepherd and he shall perform all my desire:
saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built* and to the Temple, thy foundation
shall be surely laid: By which words of the Prophets we conclude; That not a
link of the sacred chain of Chronology, is either broken or opened, betwixt
the commandment given by Cyrus the Lords Shepherd, and the death of Christ
the great Shepherd, when he gave his Ioh. 10. 11.
life for his Flock.

For as time is chained link unto link from Adam to Cyrus; so is it chained
link unto link from Cyrus, to the death of Christ by the speech of an Angel,
without al helps of the disagreeing Olympicks: who in The Olimpiads cannot let
Christ to be Christ.
this divine Chronology, do but trouble the waters of Shiloh, and can be no
let for time, but that the Messiah in Daniels text, is Christ Jesus, our Lord
and Savior.

And therefore let us measure unto him the true Temple and Altar, with the Apo.
1. 1
Reed of Gabriel, as John did the Temple and Altar with the Reed of the Angel;
and in this case cast out the accou^ts of the heathenish Olympiads, as John did
cast out and not measure the Court, for that was given to the Gentiles. And so
come we to his other Assertion, which is, that the text of holy Scrip ture in
Daniel, will not Lively in Pers. mon. page 203.
permit the name Messiah to be referred unto Christ Jesus our Savior.

That Christ Jesus (says he) could The second assertion.
be the Messiah mentioned in Daniel, the hebrew word, (...) does not prove, it
being an attribute given to page 169
King, Priest, and Prophet, must there be so taken, and not appropriated to any
one particular person, which the text will not bear.

So that the word Messiah in Daniels text, he will have, not to be mea^t of
Christ, as it is in Ioh. 1. 41
John's Gospel, and in the second Psa. 2. 2.
Psalm; but rather a succession of governors both Jews and Romans, that ruled
in Jerusalem, from the rebuilding thereof by Nehemiah; until the final
destruction both of City and Temple by Titus the Emprour.

And those that refer the word Messiah in that place unto Christ Jesus (says
he) cannot so do page 201.
without Lively Persian Monarch.
straining or wresting of the text, which they who so understand it are driven
unto. For as the Chronology here fitteth not for Messiah to be understood of
Christ our Lord, so the very text it self is against it.

And therefore, he page 170
pitieth that the Message of an holy Angel containing a most excellent
prophecy from Gods own mouth, should be so perverted I pity that the vale of
Iudaisme is so drawn before a Christians heart.
and depraved, as it has been by those that pick out that sense.

But is it not a greater pity, that learning should thus turn edge upon
Divinity, to deprave us of one of the most pregnant prophecy, for Christ his
passion revealed in the The matter is too sad to be thus da^ied with.
whole Scriptures of God? or that this most holy message of the Angel, should
be appropriated only unto profane Governors, people, and place, whose period
had been prophesied, and whose tennor was shortly to be determined; rather
then unto him, who by that his foreshewed death, was to bring an estate of
everlasting life, and whose Kingdom should never have end.

Therefore to free the text from any such interpretation, let us take the
consent of all almost, those malicious Jews excepted, that either speak
against their own knowledge and conscience, or have the The best learned
Rabbis acknowledge the Messiah in that text of Daniel.
veil of Moses as yet vndrawne from before their hearts.

But the best approved Docters among them, as Rabbi Saadias, Rabbi Nahman, and
Rabbi Hadarson, expounding that text of Daniel, agree rhat the Messiah there
spoken of, is Christ, the very anointed of God: so far are they from
attributing that name to any other besides him, though God has given them the
spi rit of slumber, not to insee what themselves say:

And of Christian expositers, we take the testimony, even of the adversary
himself who says, that Liu. Pers. Mon.
the most part, and best learned of those who have labored for the
understanding of this Prophecy, have understood page 201 and 179.
the Messiah here spoken of, to be Jesus Christ. Very good witnesses against a
novel opinion.


And how generally true that opinion is, and has been, the worthy instrument
of Gods truth, the learned Du. Plessie, in his trueness of Christian Religion
does testify, where he says, Du Ples. in true. of Christian Relig. c. 29.
That this text is meant of the Messiah (Christ) is so evident and absolute,
that it is a stark shame to deny it.

And Lyra our Countryman, against the resisting Jews, from the adiunct given
unto the Messiah, frames this argument, Nicholas Lyra his argument for Christ.
The Messiah in Daniel (says he) is called Messiah Prince, for so the word
(...) does signify; but none is called Messiah the prince but only Christ;
therefore is Christ the very Messiah spoken of in Dvniel.

Neither does that Prophet speak of many, but of one and the same Messiah, and
he to be slain to confirm the Covenant, and to take away Sin, which none
did nor could do, but only Christ by his death, and therefore Christ is the
Messiah there slain.

And surely the efficacy of his death does very strongly confirm the same,
both in sealing his covenant of mercy in each believing heart, through the
power of his Gospel, and in ending the Act. 6. 14
ceremonies of the place once holy.

And therefore we conclude, that in this text of Daniel (as Phillip did in Ioh.
2. 45
John's) we have found the Messiah, of whom Moses wrote, and the Prophets spoke.
And that Christ Jesus alone, unto whom all the scriptures lead), was the only
accomplisher of that divine Prophecy, who in half the last seven, that is,
after his baptism; in preaching and in miracles confirmed the Covenant for
many: and lastly in the end of the last seven, and year of of Iubile by his
death and passion, finished wickedness, restrained sin, reconciled iniquity,
and sealed up Vision and Prophecy, unto who^ be ascribed our salvation, and
his glory for ever. Amen.

But against this opinion of Lyra, Lively is confident, and will have the
appellatiue, Gouerner, Captain, or Prince, to be of no force in argument
against his exposition: but rather by the word Nagid it self, would prove the
contrary, and makes it wholly a supporter of his conceited opinion of a double
government, and no whit to appertain unto Christ the Messiah. For (says he)
the Hebrew word (...) signifying any Ruler or Governor, is used sometime of
Kings, as Saul is called the Governor of the Lords inheritance, 1. Samuel 10.
1. David is called the Ruler of Gods people, 2. Sam. 7. 8. And King Hezekiah is
called, the Captain of the Lords people, 2. Kings 20. 5.

And sometime it is given to other inferior Rulers or Governors, such as
Rehoboam placed in his strong holds, 2. Chron. 11. 11. and Iehoshaphat over the
House of Judah, 2. Chro. 19. 11. in all which places the word Nagid is used.
And therefore (faith he) Liuel. in Pers. Mo. page 170.
there is no let by the force and signification of the word, but that it may be
well referred to the chief Ruler of the Jews commonwealth in Jerusalem, after
the building thereof. And to that purpose does apply the word, in his Coment
upon the Come Governor.

Page 175
A come Governor (says he) I call Presidem aduenam, a Deputy stranger called
here in the original (...) a Ruler which is to come. For in the times before
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans; there were two Rulers of the City,
one of their own people, a Jew by profession and birth, after their manner
anointed to the government of the Commonwealth among them, here named in the
verse before going (...) the anointed Prince; the It can never be proved, that
all the Governors of the people were anointed.
other a stranger appointed deputy by the Romans Emperor called (...) a Ruler
not borne in the Country, or one of the same Nation, but a stranger come from
another place.

Into which opinion he says, he was both led and confirmed by ancient
Eusebius, who held, that the anointed governor in that text of Daniel is none
other, but a succession of High Priests, which after this prophecy, and the
Jews return from Babylon, governed the people; among whom he names Judas
Macchabeus, his brethren, and their posterity.

And Master Lively himself does somewhat more Page 205
largely attribute the word Governor, unto other Rulers and Kings of the Jews
Commonwealth, which as he affirms (but without proof) were after their
manner Page 175
anointed, utterly exempting Christ Jesus out of that Text of Daniel.
Whereunto we answer.

First as touching the word (Nagid) indifferently given to dives men of diverse
degrees, we say, that albeit those by him cited, and more besides, had that
title appropriated, for the more dignity to their persons and places: yet in
none of those texts by him alleged, nor in any other, is to be found the
apposition Nagid joined with the primarie word Messiah, saving only in that
text of Daniel, much less then to any succeeding Governor, many of The
usurping Leuits and the uncircumcised Romans, are not worthy of that most
sacred name ^essiah.
them usurping (as those of the Levites did) upon Iudahs right, and some of
them uncircumcised Gentiles (the Romans) far unworthy of the name Messiah, or
to be called the (Nagid) Governor of the Lords people.

Next that, Eusebius held a succession of Priests we see in his works; Eusebius,
in lib de Demon. Euangelica.
but withal we say it is very likely that Eusebius called back his error
himself, seeing he makes the half of the last Seven to belong unto Christ:
for (says he) the Greek Church has rightly observed four Paschals from the
Lords Baptism unto his Death. Howsoever, an error dying H. B. in Aduert.
with the man, should not again be quickened, if nothing but Antiquity did
excuse him.

And though we should allow a Succession of Priests, and Princes, that ruled
in Judea from Iaddua downward, The Romans meddled not with the Jews before
Pompeys time.
yet I think it will be hard to prove, that the Romans had any stroke in that
Country, before Gabinius was made Lieutenant of Siria, which was but fifteen
years before the reign of Octauian Augustus.

And harder, that all the former Governors (much less the later) were ever
anointed, as he affirms: for we do not read; that either Moses, Ioshuah,
Zorubbabel, or Nehemiah, all of them Princes and Governors of the people, were
anointed; nor indeed any King of Iudahs Throne, excepting such as No
anointing used but on the first, or upon strife.
were the first, or after the first, stood either upon change of Families, or
else upon strife.

So 1. Sam. 10. 1.
Saul the first King was anointed: So 1. Sam. 16. 13.
David of another Tribe upon his reiection was anointed. So Solomon (...).
King. 1. 39.
in the conspiracies of Adoniah, was anointed. So Ioash 2. King. 11. 12.
in the usurpations of Athaliah, was anointed: and so Iehoahaz 2. King. 23. 30.
the younger brother to Iehoiakim was anointed: and besides these, we find
none of those Not any anointed after the return from Babylon.
Kings anointed nor any at all under the second Temple, as Du Plessie has
well observed.

Lastly, that the word Nagid, the Prince, is an attribute and note of
excellency unto the Messiah spoken of in Daniel, the Rabbis of them-Iewes
confess, and among them Rabbi Judah commenting upon that text, says, that
this Messiah was the hope of Israel, and the Commander of Nations: alleging
for his proof this text of Esaias; Isai. 55. 4
I have given him for a witness to the people, a Prince, and a Commander to
the people. And all almost consent, that the title Nagid, Captain, or Prince,
is particularly given unto Christ, the anointed of God.

And that no stranger was meant in the Hebrew word Haba, the learned Iunius
affirms, who interprets Iunius upon Dan. 9
He the Prince, to be the Messiah Christ Jesus: For (says he) He that is the
Messiah the Prince, shall destroy the people of the Prince, his own people
which shall come, that is, which shall be then.

And the great Hebrecian H. B. In Aduert. of corrupt.
is confident, that the word Ba, used by the Angel, is, to come, and is never
used for a Stranger, but in men the age following; and so (says he) the Angel
meant, that Christ in the age following would destroy the Jews, his own
kindred, the unbelieving. Unto which opinion Tremelius likewise consents.

And these Expositers that by the word, Haba Nagid, the Prince to come, will
have the Romans meant, yet mean not (as master Lively does) for joint
Governors with the Jews in Ierusalems estate, but rather for destroyers of
that Commonwealth to fulfill Gods wrath upon the place, as under Titus, the
son of Uespasian, they did, to an utter desolation both of City and
Sanctuary as with a flood.

To make then this most plain text of holy Scripture concerning Christ his
sealing of man's redemption, to be but a Government established betwixt the
Gentile Roman, and the faithless Jew, is to add darkness to night, and to make
the ignorant more ignorant still.

But as the day cannot be separated from the Sun, nor mount Sions situation
from Psa. 125. 1
before Jerusalem; so the text in Daniel; to finish wickedness, to abolish
sins, to make reconciliation for (...) to bring righteousness everlasting,
to seal up ^ion and Prophet, and to show Christ the holy of holies; cannot be
separated from that, Daniels speech not to be separated.
which immediately in the next verses do follow, namely, that the Messiah
should be killed, to make a sure covenant for many, and to end sacrifice and
oblation.

The one being so linked into the other with such glory and strength, as the go
d^n Exodus 2^ 22.
Chains that bound the Breast Plate unto the Ephod upon Aarons breast, was
nothing so glorious or strong.

But as Master Liuelies conceit has been touching Daniels Messiah, in making
that holy name to import none other, then a joint government of Jews and
Romans ruling together in the new erected estate under the second Temple: so is
his conceit likewise, touching the ceasing of Daniels Sacrifices, who will in
no wise admit them to end in Christ Jesus, when he offered himself the most
acceptable sacrifice upon the Altar the Cross at his death; but will have them
to con tinue forty years after, even to the siege and sacking of Jerusalem:
for Lively Persian Monarch. page 219. and 220.
(says he) when Uespasian was come into Judea, and wasted the Country, then
the unruly Rebels abolished the lawful custom of sacrificing, and the Priests
being slain by them, for want of men there was no oblation any more. And
therefore not without cause (says he) in my judgment, may those words of
Daniel touching the sacrifice ceasing in the midst of the last week, be
referred unto these times of this war: wherein by means thereof, the
sacrifices of the Lords house were hindered so many ways: some were quite
abolished, and others done either not by those to whom they pertained, or not
so safely and freely as thy ought.

In which his sayings, who sees, not only Iudaisme maintained, but also the
very soul of Christianity offended, in shaking these maine principles of
eternal salvation? For if the paschall Sacrifice did not end in Christ, then
did not Christ at his death Act. 6. 14
change the ordinances which Moses had given, as Stephen said he should, nor
Dan. 9. 24.
sealed up sins, vision, and prophecy, as the Angel had foreshewed: and
then as Saint Paul in another case said, 1. Cor. 15. 17.
We are yet in our sins: and the Jews have exceptions, that our Jesus of
Marie, is not the saving Messiah.

It is by Moses forbidden, not to Leuit. 19. 14.
lay a stumbling block before the blind, nor to suffer a beast to Exo. 23. 5
lie under his burden: But what blocks are here laid before the blind Jews,
and what burdens upon the weak Christians, by these interpretations; who can
read without grief, wherein the straight ways to the Lords holy Temple are
made crooked, and the Cross of Christ, not the altar whereon the Lamb (that
took away the sins of the world) was sacrificed, if sacrificing after his
death was a 1. Ioh. 2. 2
reconciliation for sins?

But that the Curtains are still vndrawne before the Arc and Mercie-seate of
Gods covenants, unto the unbelieving Jews, and the 2. Cor. 3. 14.
veil of Moses in reading the Law and the Prophets untaken from before their
fleshie hearts, with grief of heart we see, when after the most manifest
breaking down the Ephesians. 2. 14
stop of the partition wall, and the living way laid open into the holiest of
holies, by the renting Heb. 10. 20.
his flesh, as the earth and veil did at Christ's death, they still continue
separates, and do strain all their strengths to divert these texts from Jesus
our Immanuell, and to attribute the name Messiah to any other, rather then unto
him.

Some making the Messiah there The Rabbis opinions touching the Messiah.
mentioned, to be King Cyrus, the deliverer of Gods people, as Rabbi Solomoh
from Isai. 45.
Isaiah does: and some will have him to be Zorobbabel, the builder of the Lords
Temple, as the Hebrew Scholiasts generally do.

Some think him to be Ioshuah the High Priest, that accompanied the Returned
to build again Jerusalem, of which opinion is Rabbi Leui ben Gershon: and some
hold him to be Nehemiah, that finished the walls of Jerusalem, of which mind
is the envious Jew Aben Ezra.

Some will have the Messiah to be none other then a Succession of Priests and
Macchabees governing the Common wealth of Judea; as the converted Jew Paulus
Burgensis thinks: and some will have him to be Agrippa, the last Governor
of that state in the time of their miserable calamities, unto which conceit
some later have inclined.

And all of them almost in their infidelity attribute the title Messiah
(Nagid) unto any, rather then unto Jesus our Savior, the true Anointed indeed.

Had not then the Apostle just cause to account these Rabinicall Genealogies,
both vain and foolish, and to forewarne his Disciples Timothy and Titus, not
to 1. Ti. 1. 4.
give heed to such unprofitable questions, fables and contentions Tit. 3. 9.
as breed strife, and not godly edifying? For albeit that most of these
Governors were nursing Fathers to the Jews, then Gods only people, in the
time of their lives, yet by their No death valuable but the death of Christ.
deaths (for death was the set mark or Seal of Redemption) no benefit accrued
to the meanest Jew read of.

And Cyrus the first of them, dying long before the last seven, and Agrip pa
the last of them, living after the destruction of the City, meet not their
accomplishments in the last seven, and year of Iubilee, as the death of Jesus
the true Messiah did: where ended the ceremonies, and policy of the place.

For when the gold of the Temple was become greater then the Temple it self,
righteousness urged in circumcision and the Law, Moses expounded no further
then the literal sense led, the Jews boasting of Ioh. 8. 33
Abraham, and a continued succession: then look what was done unto Shiloh, as
Ier. 26. 6
Jeremy had threatened, must be done to Jerusalem, and with such desolation,
that a Mark. 13 2.
stone must not be left standing upon a stone; but as in the destruction of
Sodom, all cast down: For the 2. Chron. 6. 5.
chosen City, the Royal Ps. 122. 5
Seat of the King, and place of f holy worship, now being Ier. 3. 17.
become the Ier. 19. 6.
valley of slaughter, and Chapter 7. 11.
Den of the eues, grew toward her period, when Christ the great Prophet,
weeping, pronounced this judgment, Luke 19. 43.
Behold, the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee shall besiege, and lay thee even with the ground.

But so far was her fall from the peoples conceit, and so incredulous was the
date of their policy, predicted by the Angel, as when Saint Stephen (whose
face was like his, and words the very same) touched the string to that sound,
Act. 7. 54
their hearts were cut for anger, and they stoned him to death as a blasphemer.

For, holding themselves the only and peculiar people of God (though for a
time now made subject to the Romans) they daily attempted to The Jews
expectations.
free their estates; and under pretext of the Law commanded by Moses, that
Deuteronomy. 17 15.
a Stranger should not rule over them; as also an opinion rife in those days,
that the Luke 19. 11.
kingdom of God would immediately appear (which the proud-hearted took to
be their potent, and conquering Messiah) they were ever ready, upon the least
occasion given or gotten, to cast off subjection unto the Romans. As under
Tiberius they did, by the Their rebellions.
leading of Act. 5. 36
Theudas, with whom four hundred Jews perished: and after him arose up Iadus
of Galile, in the days of the tribute, and drew away much people. Under the
government of Felix, an Egyptian Sorcerer seduced them to rebel. And under
Ios. antiq. li. 20. c. 7.
Festus, a certain Enchanter promised them liberty. Under Joseph. bell. Iud.
lib. 2. c. 7. and 17
Coponius, Simon of Gallile revolted. Under Florus, Eleazer the son of the
high Priest raised sedition; and Manahemus among them made himself King.

But nothing moved more their Their motive to rebel.
many rebellions, then did a prediction rife in the mouths both of Jews and
Gentiles, namely, that about that time there should come out of ^urie, Joseph.
bell. Iud. li. 7. ca. 12. Sueton. in vita Vespasian sect. 4.
he that should be Lord of the whole world: as Suetonius in the life of
Vespatian has written.

Upon which expectation and constant opinion, the Jews made their powers
against the Romans; and in a head of rebellion, slew Suetonium. Ibidem.
Sabinus the President, and put to flight, Gallus, Lieutenant of Syria, that
came to his aid, taking from him the maine standard, the Eagle, the chiefest
Ensign borne in their battles.

To recover whose subiections, Uespatian, the only man of repute for military
affairs was sent; who with his son Titus, so accomplished the Deu. 28. 53.
threats of the Law, and the Luke 19: 43.
woes that Christ pronounced against Jerusalem, as is most lamentable to be
read.

For from the death of Christ, to the subversion there of, Josephus their own
story writer records Joseph. bell. Iud. l. 3. c. 19. and lib. 7. c. 17.
nine hundred seauentie five thousand, three hundred fifty one to have
perished, whereof eighty seven thousand died at times in the City, and forty
one thousand four hundred in those wars sold for slaves.

The hunger in the City so raging, as the Ios. bell. Iud. l. 7. c. 8. etc. 16.
tender women were forced to eat the flesh of their own children, as Deu. 28.
53 Iere. 19. 9.
Moses had said, and Josephus then saw. The sword so keen unto slaughter, that
the streams of blood were employed to quench the flames of the City, breaches
made up with the bodies of the dead, and so many Jews crucified, as (to use
the words of the Writer) there wanted Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 6. cap. 12.
Crosses for more executions, and space sufficient to set up more crosses. And
not only men, but the heavens also, in Ios. bell. Iud. l. 4. c. 3 and cap. 7.
whirlewinds, thunders, and earthquakes, fought against the place and
policy, that now must end.

And the sword of Gods wrath still unsheathed against them, in the reigns of
the following Emperors, Domitian and Traian, that their slaughter under them
is noted to be the greatest in the world. And under Dion. Cassi.
Hadrian their subjection so engraven, that Aristion Pellaeus, cited by Eus.
eccle. hist. l. 4. c. 6
a Sow was set over the West gate toward Beth-lehem, and by an Edict, he made
it death for any Jew, to look back toward Jerusalem, or to behold it through
the chinke of a door.

For, as themselves had refused Ioh. 19. 15.
Christ for Caesar, and required his Mat. 27. 25.
blood upon their heads and childrens; so by their Caesar's cruelties, and their
own seditions, they were consumed, and their children made vagabonds upon the
earth. Their City laid waste, as the destruction of Sodom, the walls removed,
mount Sion excluded, and the name thereof changed from Jerusalem into Aelia.

When also such search was made, to root out the whole race of David and
Judah, as that themselves did manifestly corrupt their own pedegrees for the
safeguard of their lives: insomuch as at this time, there is not a Jew known
in the world that can truly say he has his Du. Ples. trunesse of Christ.
Rel. cap. 29.
Genealogy certain, or can show any conjecture that he is of David or Iudahs
Tribe; but all of them to this day remain without King, without Governor,
without Priest, without Judge, without Genealogy, and without succession, and
are a scattered and a contemptible Nation throughout the whole earth.

And yet their later Rabbis, fill their Talmuds with so many pedegrees, and
fair seeming Genealogies, so certain and true, as they hold it a sin to
examine them further: for of their Rabbis thus they write;

Talmud Ierusal. in Megila, cited by H B in M. S.
Rabby Iannai (say they) descended from Eli; Ben Kalba Shabuah from Caleb of
Judah. Rabbi Hillel, from David, Rabbi Hakkados, or S. Rabbin, from Shephatiah,
the son of Abitall, David's wife. Rabbi Iesse, of the sons of Ionadah Ben
Rechab. Rabbi Nehemiah, from Nehemiah the Tirshethite; and others, by many
years later, from Zorobabel, Ezra, and David. Yea, and many Proselites likewise
they bring from the children of Senacherib King of Ashur. With these and the
like Abraham Zakuto is full; and all to pretend, that their Scepter is not yet
taken away, but that the Lawgiver is between Iudahs feet still.

CHAP. XII.
That according to the Scriptures of God, Christ came at the fullness of time
in his flesh. And that in him all Genealogies of the sacred Scriptures are
ended.

Isaiah. 49. 6. I will give thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou may
be my Salvation unto the end of the World.
THus has God given them the Spirit of Esa. 6. 9.
slumber, eyes that will not see, and ears that will not hear until this day:
for having the veil in the reading of 1. Cor. 3. 14.
Moses and the old Testament, as yet vndrawn from before their hearts, they
stumble upon the 1. Pet. 2. 8
Stone of offense, and grope after a great Messiah, that shall gather again
the dispersed of Israel.

But seeing that 1 Timothy 2. 4
God in Christ would have all men saved, and has reserved to himself a To. 11.
5.
remnant through the election of Grace; our duty is to De. 32. 21
provoke them to Christ, (as the Apostle applies the speech of Moses unto us
Gentiles, who have Esa. 65. 1
found him whom we sought not after, and with them are now made Hos. (...). 23.
the people of God;) for if by their fall To. 11. 12
salvation comes to the Gentiles, and their casting off, was the reconciling
of the world what shall their receiving be, but life from the dead?

That they are beloved for their To. 11. 28
fathers sake is testified, were credited with the Romans 3. 2
Oracles of God is manifest, and honored with the To. 9. 5.
humanity of Christ, the Scriptures every where declare: for which causes, and
for whose salvation, their Paul was so zealous, as he wished himself Romans 9. 3.
separated from Christ: and we the wild Olive graffed in, and now made
partaker of the same root, ought to feed their dead branches, with our living
sap; by opening unto them, that Jesus, Ze. 12. 10.
whose side they pierced, was the Ioh. 1. 19.
Lamb slain for the sins of the world, and the substance of the Sacrifices
commanded in the Law.

Among many other things in the old Testament, showed in the Ex. 23. 20
Angel, in Exo. 28. 4
Aaron, the Ge. 49. 10
Scepter, and Nu^. 21. 9.
brazen Serpent: and in the new, seen in his humanity, Doctrine, miracles and
death; both of them in every line, either speaking of, or pointing unto the
Messiah, the anointed of God, and agreeing in his person, parantage and place
of birth, meet each other, as the wings of the 1. King. 6. 27.
Cherubins did upon the Mercy seat in Salomons Temple: the one affirming, and
the other confirming, that he was the Esa. 7. 14
Son of a Virgin, his birth in Mic. 5. 2.
Beth-lehem, his kindred of Ier. 23. 5
David, and Tribe Ge. 49. 8
Judah.

Hls infancy answering the types of the old Testament, was seen a Number. 24 17.
Star unto the Gentile Prophet Balaam, and was found by a Star of the
Gentiles that sought him. In Ie. 31. 15
Rama was weeping, as Jeremy had heard; out of Ho. 11. 1.
Egypt he was called, as Hosheah had said, was brought vpin Nazaret to fulfill
the Prophets; and for wisdom at twelve years of age, as much admired among
the Doctors, as 1. King. 3 16.
Solomon was in deciding the strife of the harlots.

His life was unreprovable, fulfilling all righteousness, in whom the Ioh.
14. 30.
Prince of this world could find nothing amiss.

His doctrine was as the Ps. 133. 3.
dew of Hermon, preaching comfort to all that Esa. 61. 2. 3.
mourn in Zion; and was a Esa. 49. 6
light of salvation given unto the Gentiles unto the end of the world.

His Miracles were so many and manifest, as testified his Godhead, by curing
the blind, healing the diseased, clensing of Lepers, casting out Devils, and
raising the dead.

In transfiguration he was more glorious then Moses; in feeding the hungry with
fewer loaves, he exceeded 2. King. 4. 43.
Elisha, and had more power to command Angels, then 1. King. 17. 1.
Elias had to shut heaven for rain, or to open it for 2. King. 1 12.
fire.

And the parts of his passion were as effectually acted, as in the old
Testament they had been predicted; and all accomplished as had been
prescribed: For Zachariah saw the Zech. 13 7.
Shepherd, the Lords fellow, smitten, and the sheep scattered; sold for
thirty pieces of Zech. 11. 21.
silver, and them the purchase of the potters field. David told that his Ps.
22. 16
hands and feet should be pierced, his garments divided, and lots cast for his
vesture. And Daniel saw him slain, to Da. 9. 24.
confirm the Covenant, and to seal up vision and Prophet. His bones were not
broken, to answer the John 19. 33.
Law of the Lamb: his side pierced, to assure his Za. 12. 10
death.

And his death done amongst Esaias 53.
Malefactors, with such signs from Heaven, in the earth, and in the renting of
the veil, as his Luke 23. 48.
be holders smiting their breasts, confessed he was the Son of God.

But to gather al in one, and from thatone, against whom the Jews dare not
speak, even Esaias the Prophet, and of their Blood royal; let us lay down his
text, as it lies in his words, whose preface unto his speech begins thus;

Who Esaias 53.
will believe our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? 2. But
he shall grow up before him as a 2
Branch, and as a root out of a dry ground: he has neither form nor
beauty: when we shall see him, there shall be no form that we should desire
him. 3. He is despised and rejected of men: he is a 3
man full of sorrows, and has experience of infirmities: we hid as it were
our faces from him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not. 4. Surely he
has 4
borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we did judge him, as
plagued and smitten of God, and humbled. 5. But 5
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. 6.
All we 6
like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way and
the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. 7. He was oppressed, and
he was* 7
afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth: he is brought as a sheep to the
slaughter and as a sheep before her shearer is dum, so he ope^ed not his
mouth. 8. He 8
was taken out from prison, and from judgment: and who shall declare his age?
for he was cut out of the Land of the living: for the transgression of my
people was he plagued. 9. And he made 9
his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done
no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his mouth. 10. Yet the Lord would
break him, and make him subject to infirmities: 10
when he shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed,
and shall prolong his days, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, 11
and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many: for he shall bear their iniquities.

Herein I appeal to your selves, O ye children of the Prophets: what have our
Evangelists written, that this your Prophet did not write before: for substance
so much, and for words so agreeing, as they seem to fall from his pen, who saw
the passion himself, and bears record Ioh. 19. 35.
that his sayings are true? or to what other person can his text be applied,
then unto Jesus, so borne, so living, so despised, and so crucified; that to
fulfill all, his death was done without the He. 13. 11
gate, as the Le. 6. 12.
Bullock was burnt without the Camp.

And that the times drawn the actions only to that age, hear how the
Scriptures are loud. Jacob told Judah, that the d Scepter should not depart e
Ge. ^9. 10
from his Tribe until Shiloh came: and how Iudahs government ended by the
cruelty of Herod, in slaughtering their Sanhedrin, Phylo. Iud. in his book of
Time.
Phylo a man of their own, does declare. And their Rabbis likewife, in their
Talmud Seder olam, thus cry out, Tal. Ierusal. ca. Sanhedrin
Woe unto us, for the Scepter is now taken away from Judah, and the Lawgiver
from between his feet.

Which things happened immediately before the birth of Christ, when that
Joseph. antique ^b. 14. cap. 26.
Idumean tyrant, by the favor of Antonius, had first set, and after by
Agustus, surer settled Iudahs crown upon his own head; whose fair luster made
him so to persecute the lawful heir thereof, as lest he should escape, he
slaughtered all the male Infants in those coasts of Iewry, and among them his
own son, as Macrobius reports.

The Macrobius lib. 2. In the Iubilee year, God dwelling in our Tabernacle will
be remission, redemption, and ending of Sabbath to Israel. Zba r upon Leu. 25.
Iubile likewise for freedom, the only Feast in the year; and that year
appointed to be every fiftieth, must have an end in the substance, as all
other Ceremonies had. Which great year, that the people did expect it, our
Luke declares, for in his time they thought that Lu. 19. 11.
the Kingdom of God should shortly appear and that then Jesus from their Esa.
61. 1
Isaiah at Luke 4 16
Nazaret did preach it, they bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious
words that came out of his mouth.

And surely, if we begin to account them (as we must) from the seventh year
of Ioshuah, when the Lands full conquest was accomplished; we shall find twenty
eight fiftieths unto that of the Passion, where al freedom was purchased: when
Christ in his last words upon the Cross, cried, Ioh. 19. 30.
It is finished.

Besides these agreements of figure and substance, the Prophet Daniel declaring
the change of states by the metaline Image, showed to Nebuchadnezzar, gives
limits to the kingdoms therein contained, till a Stone cut without hands from
the mountain, should fall upon, and break to powder, the Gold, the Silver,
the Dan. 2. 45.
Brass, the Iron, and the Clay: al which should be blown away, as the chafe
of the Summer flowers; but the Stone that so fell, should fill the whole earth.

Now, that the event was according, is evidently seen; for Cleopatra, the
proud and lascivious Queen of Egypt, the last successor, or Toe of the Image,
for the death of Antonius, stung herfelfe to death with a Serpent; what time
Egypt, the one leg by Octauian was made a Province to Rome, as Syria the
other by Pompey before had been.

And that a full dissolution of every part of the Image upon her death
happened, the taxing of the world then laid by Augustus, does testify; when
the Roman Monarchi, with acknowledged subjection first began: and upon which
occasion Christ was borne in Beth-lehem, two Beda says that Christ was borne
in the thirty one year of King Herod, whose reign was thirty seven year.
years before the death of Herod.

And that this Stone was Christ, all almost acknowledged; neither does the
event fall in any other, the Gospel being the Mountain that spread his
kingdom over the face of the whole earth. And what that Stone signified,
Daniel told Nebuchadnezzar, Beda. lib. 6 de Etatibus.
as Josephus writes: which though himself thought not fit in that his Joseph.
antique lib. 10. cap. 15
discourse there to express, yet afterward in the com motions of the Jews
against Pilat, he speaks both of John Baptist, slaughtered by Herod, and of
Jesus condemned to the Cross, in these venerable words.

Joseph. his opinion of Christ. Joseph. Antique lib. 18. c. 4. and 7
At that time (says he) was Jesus a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a
man. For he was the performer of diverse admirable works, and the instructor of
those, who willingly entertain the truth: and he drew unto him diverse Jews
and Greeks to be his followers. This was Christ; who being accused by the
Princes of our Nation before Pilat, and afterward condemned to the Cross by
him; yet did not those who followed him from the beginning, forbear to love
him for the ignominy of his death. For he appeared unto them alive the third
day after, according as the divine Prophets had before testified the same; and
diverse other wonderful things of him: and from that time for, ward, the race
of the Christians, who have derived their Name from him has never ceased.

What testimony can be greater then this, so agreeing with the Miracles,
death, and resurrection of Christ; especially from his pen, who wrote the
History of the Jews, from Moses, the first, unto the destruction of Jerusalem,
and last times of their estate: being as all men know, by birth a Jew himself,
and in his young years might have seen the same Jesus, of whom he gives such
commendable reports.

But to confirm the fall of the Image, which Daniel had affirmed by the fall
of the Stone, is the testimony of the Angel sent unto him, to show the times
that were to succeed. For the Prophet praying for a present releasement from
Babels captivity, was answered by Gabriel above Dan. 9. 24.
his request: namely, that after seventy seuens of years, a perfect
deliverance should be wrought by the death of the Messiah, which should end
Sin, and the Ceremonies of the place, and should bring an everlasting
freedom to all that believe.

And that these years so predicted, fell in number, weight, and measure, even
490. we have showed before, and now further affirm, that the very hours by a
skifull Arithmetician may be exactly calculated, from the message of the Angel
delivered at the time of the evening oblation, unto the voice vtte^ed by Christ
upon the Cross, at the ninth hour of the day, when he cried aloud and Mar.
15. 34.
gave up the ghost.

Another mark set forth for the time of Christ's coming, is gathe^ed by the
graces that should be ^euealed under the standing or con^inuance of the second
Temple, which was built by b Zerubbabel, after the return from Babylon* which
work, though later and lesser then that of Salomons, had notwithstanding a
promise from GOD to Hag. 2. 10
exceed Salomons.

But how glorious his was, the building, guilding, riches, and beauty does
evidently declare: and the 1. King. 8 11.
cloud of Gods glory so filling the house, as the Priest could not minister,
does manifestly show.

Whereas contrariwise, this second was so inferior, as the old men that had
seen the former, Ezra 3. 12.
wept exceedingly at the laying of the foundation: neither was it filled with
any such glorious Clowd, nor had the like Patterns of Gods divine presence, as
Salomons had.

For in this second Temple, as the Rabbis have observed, these five great
blessings were wanting. 1: The fire from heaven to consume the Sacrifices, the
visible sign of Gods favorable acceptance. 2. The Vrim and Exo. 28. 30.
Thummim, most sacred monuments put in the pectorall or Breast Plate of Aaron.
3. The 1. King. 8 6, 9.
Arc of the Covenant, wherein the Tables of Stone, Exo. 17. 10.
Arons Rod, and Exo. 16. 33.
pot of Manna were kept. 4. The Mercy seat and Cherubins, from whom the
oracles of God were revealed. 5. And the manifest breathing of the holy Ghost
upon the Prophets: all which Salomons Temple had.

Contrariwise, before the days of Christ, this later Temple was polluted and
defiled by Antiochus, Pompey, and Crassus; and after the death of Christ,
utterly destroyed by Titus, Domitian, Hadrian, and other Roman Emperors. And
being assaied again to be built by Julian Amia. Marcel. lib. 23. ca. 1
the Apostata, was with earthquakes and fire from heaven so hindered, as the
foundations of the first Temple, left in the former destructions, were so
shaken asunder, that a stone was not left standing upon astone; and Socrates
lib. 3. c. 17.
the workmen by fire from heaven forced to leave off the attempt. Since which
time, in seeking to rebuild that, which Christ had so accursed, more Christian
blood has been spilt, then was in those wars of destruction which Iosephas
writes of and saw. Wherein then was the glory of this second Temple greater
then Salomons, or what should Hag. 2. 8.
move the desire of all nations to come thereunto.

Surely, it was the Lord whom they sought, and the Messenger of the Mal. 3. 1
Covenant whom they desired to behold, that should come to this his Temple,
even the Messiah, promised to restore the desolations of Israel, and that
should be given for a light of Esa. 49. 6
salvation unto the Gentiles: which was accomplished only in the person of
Christ Jesus, who with his presence filled this later house with greater glory
then the clowd did that of Salomons.

When in this Temple he taught that his Body was the true Temple indeed; and
that the Ioh. 2. 19
Father and he were all one: urging the search of Scriptures, that testified so
much of him, Ioh. 5. 35 39. 46.
their credit unto Moses that wrote concerning him, and the witness of that
burning Candle (the Baptist) who pointed, and preached him to be the Ioh. 1. 29
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.

He then was the Zach. 6. 12.
Branch that should build the Lords Temple, the Crown Esa. 62. 3
of glory, and royal Diadem in the hand of his God. More worthy of Heb 3. 3
glory then Moses, more Ps. 110. 1
excellent then David, and Math. 12 41.
greater then Jonas or Solomon.

And that this his coming, was the acceptable time, and year of the Lord,
Esa. 49. 8
whereunto Solomon in his Song had the relation, when he alludeth unto the
time of the true Turtles sacrifice, in his heavenly hymn, wherein most
sweetly he sings thus; When the Can. 2. 11
winter was past, and the rain gone away, the flowers appeared, and the
singing of birds was come, then the voice of this Turtle was heard in the land
For when the frozen dregs of sin lay both in the inward heart, and outward
action, then he that Esa. 66. 3
offered a Bullock, was as if he had slain a man: and he that sacrificed a
sheep, as if he had cut off a dogs neck: then were the oblations as the
offerings of Swines blood, and the remembrance of incense, as the blessing of
an Idol. So that when sacrifice and offerings were not desired, burnt offering
and sin offerings not required, then said he Psalm. 40. 6.
Lo, I come; for in the roll of the book it is written of me, I desired to do
thy will, O my God.

And as touching the abrogation of the old, thus says Jeremy, They Ie. 3. 16.
shall say no more the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it come
in mind, neither shall they visit it, neither shall it be magnified. But I
will plant says the Lord by that Prophet, my Ie. 31. 33
Law within them, and in their hearts I will write it, I will be their God, and
they shall be my people. And by Joel he cries, Joel 2. 28
In those days I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy; your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see visions, and upon your servants and handmaides, I will pour out my
Spirit. Ie. 31. 34
They shall allknow the Lord, from the least of them, to the greatest of them:
and the Esa. 19. 18.
Cities in Egypt shall speak the pure language of Canaan. And of this
knowledge, it seems the woman of Samaria spoke, when to our Savior she
said, I know well that Messiah shall come, which is called Ioh. 4. 25.
Christ, when he is come, he will tell us all things. These, and infinite more
speeches concerning Christ's coming, his Gospel and grace, are so frequent in
the Prophets, as both Esaias and Jeremy do urge the observation by the examples
of the unreasonable Creatures, the Beasts and Birds; for the Esa. 1. 3.
Ox (says Esaias) knows his owner and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel
does not know, my people does not consider. Yea, the Storke in the heaven
(says Jeremy) knowethher appointed times, the Iere. 8. 7*
Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow abserue the times of their coming, but my
people know not the judgment of the Lord. And the complaint in Hosea is, My
^ose. 4. 6.
people perish for lack of knowledge.

But for the close of all, let us urge the same precept to these stamering
Jews, that themselves urge unto their Disciples, namely, To give ear The
Rabbi^s good cou^ll.
to the Prophets, so far as they speak, and where they cease, to bow down
their ^ares to the sayings of Wisemen: whereof themselves tell us of a ce^ten
succession, which should not fail till the coming of the Messiah. And from
Hillel their holy Rabb^n, bring a continuation of Disciples, unto Simeon,
surnamed the Righteous, in whom they say, the spirit of the great Synagogue did
utterly cease Consider then well, O ye lisping Jews, what ye have said, and
read what our Luke writes concerning this Simeon.

There Lu. 2. 25.
was a man (says he) in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon: this ^an was just,
and feared God, and ^ted for the consolation of Israel, and the holy Ghost was
upon him 26. And (...) 26
was given him by the holy Ghost that he should not see death, before he had
seen the Lord Christ. 27. 27
And he came by the motion of the spirit into the Temple* and when the Parents
brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the Law, 28.
then (...) 28.
took him in his arms, and praised God* and said: 29. Lord ^ow let thou
thy servant depart inp^, according to thy 29.
Word; 20. For mine eyes have see^ thy 30.
salvation, 21. which thou have prepared 31
before the face of all people, 32. A Light 32
to be (...) to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

Which was likewise witnessed by a Prophetess of your own, even Anna the
daughter of Phanuel, of the (...) of A^r, a widow of great years, who went not
out of the Temple, but Lu. 2. 37.
served God with fasting and pray^rs (...) and day. She coming upon them,
confessed likewise the Lord, and spoke of him to all that looked for the
redemption of Jerusalem.

Does not then our Evangelist confirm that, which your Doctors have told: and
Si^on himself witness what they have said: namely, that his eyes the^ saw the
Messiah, the glory of Israel, and the light of the Gentiles? And Zachary, your
Priest of the course of A^ia, when his tongue was loosed, speak of the Lu. 1.
69.
borne of salvation, that should shortly be raised in the house of David; and
that the babe his son then newborn, should be his messenger to go before
him, to prepare his ways. Of which messenger, hear Josephus your own
Historian, how with our Evangelist he agrees.

John Joseph. A^e lib. 1^ cap. 7.
surnamed the Baptist (says he) replenished with all virtue, exhorted the
Jews to adict themselves to execute Justice toward men, and pity toward
God; and to be Baptized and to renounce since. Unto whom so many resorted,
that Herod fearing a revolt (for it seemed they would subscribe in all things
to his advice) caused him to be put to death in the Castle Macheron: for which
deed (says he) the Jews were of opinion, that in revenge of this so grievous
a sin, Herod's Army, against whom God was displeased, had been subjected to
their utter ruin and overthrow.

I will not urge the sayings of Esdras, in naming 2. (...) 7 28, 29,
my son Jesus, and my son Christ, four hundred years before Christ's death;
because the Book is not Canonical: neither the testimonies of the Sybils,
whereof Erithraea, more ancient then Romulus, composed verses, whose first
letters being only taken, make this sentence, JESUS CHRIST, SON OF GOD, THE
SAVIOVR: These I say I will not urge, because they are Gentiles; but this I
note, that in all her verses, she has not one word tending to Idolatry, as
other Gentile Writers have: but all against the false Gods and their
worshippings: so that Aug. Cin. Dei. lib. 18 cap. 23.
she seems to me to have been a Citizen of the City of God, says Saint
Augustine in his book so entitled.

Now, that these Sybils were ancient, we see in Homer, of Ezekiah his time,
six hundred thirty six years before the birth of Christ, who inserteth many
of their verses in his Rapsodie, as Viues in his annotations upon S. Augustins
Ciuitate Dei notes. And also respective, for that the Romans made doubt to
assist King Ptolomy to recover his Kingdom of Egypt, because the Sybils
Suet^n. in vi^a Ve^pas. Sci. 4
had prophesied, that At what time the Romans should set a King in Egypt, then
should be borne the King of the whole world. Which Oracle Cicero writing to
Lentulus (who sued to have that charge) alleges.

And Tacitus tells us, Tacit. Anal. ^in. 6 cap. 3.
that whereas many vain predictions were published of the Fate of Rome, under
the names of the Sybils, Augustus Caesar (after that the Capitol was burnt in
the civil wars) caused their prophecies to be sought for, in Samum, Illium,
Erthrum, through Africa, Sicilia, and the Colonies of Italy: and to be brought
to Rome to the Cities Praetor by a day assigned and to be examined by the
Priests, to distingush the true from the false, as near as might be, by the
judgment of man: and those allowed of, referred again to a second examination
of the Fifteen.

In which business, Suetonius affirms Sueton. in vitae Aug. c. 31.
no less then two thousand books to have been committed to the fire: but the
approved prophecies of the Sybils (says he) at the Emperors commandment were
laid up, and kept under lock, in two golden Chests, at the foot of the Image
of Apolle, in mount Palatine in Rome. Where they remained (says Amianus) in
the Amia. Marcel. lib 23 cap 2.
days of Julian the Apostata: and whence Stillico took L. Vi^s anno^at. upon
Aug. cjuit. Dei. lib. 18. c. 23
and burnt them, when he intended treason toward his double son in law
Honorius the Emperor, lest in moving the people against him, their prophecies
should hinder his designs, as Cla^dian in his verses thus writes; ^


He burnt the Fat^ of the Sybils helps.
Whereby we see, both the great The renere^d regard of the Sibils
antiquity of these received Sybils, and the reverend regard that was had of
their writings: but chiefly the end of all prophecies, both divine and humane
concerning Christ Jesus, in whom all the types of the Law ended, and in whose
person al Genealogies ceased, that from Adam had been continued unto him the
blessed seed, and Son of God: and to force them further, either for Story,
or distinction of Tribes, Marriages or Issues, is to fall into that sin which S.
Paul 1. Tim. 1. 4
condemns, seeing those Stars did all set, at the bright rising of that
brightest Sun.

Neither does the new Testament, The new Testament prosecuteth no other
Genealogy then Christ.
from the first of Saint Matthew, to the last of the Apocalypse, prosecute any
Genealogies, no not from the degree of a Grandfather (besides them appertaining
to the person of Christ) though many books therein be hystorical, and might
have required the stays of Genealogies, as most of them in the old Testament
have done. For only Luke 1. 5.
Zacharias from his priestly course, Elisabet from Aaron, Luke 2. 36
Anna from Ashur, Phil. 3. 5.
Paul from Benjamin, and Act. 4. 36
Barnabas from Leui are declared; in all the rest a still silence is seen: and
all to show, that the use of Geneologies, ended in Jesus the seed of the
promise, and that thenceforth, the world should not look for another.

The Jews we have seen blinded in their own affections, affecting an earthly
tranquillity under their daily expected Monarch from Solomon, and Hierom. in
Math. 1. Christians accused by the Jews.
with Julian the Apostata, do vehemently accuse us Christians, that agree not
in the Parents of his person, whom we make our Messiah, whether Nathan or
Solomon.

But I would to God we had not followed their Rabbis too far in the line of
Solomon, and that we were more exercised in these kinds of Studies, so
maturely touching the humanity of Christ; for by Peter we are commanded to 1.
Pet. 3. 15.
be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks a reason of the
hope we hold. And by Moses are ordained to (...) 2. 21 (...) 10. ^9.
provoke them to the Gospel; neither of which we can do, but by showing that
God is become man, and that man, come according to the Scriptures of God. For
in this consists Ioh. 17. (...).
life everlasting, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent. This Christ then we Christians worship, and Ioh. 4 (...).
know what we worship, even the son of David, that is, David's Lord, whom all
must Psa 2. 12.
kiss, or else perish, and all made blessed that trust in him.

O then ye Sons of the Act 3. 2^
Covenant, be not as David's Psa. (...) 4
deaf Adder that stops her ear, and will not harken to the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely; nor with your questioning Elders answer
Mat. 11. 33.
we cannot tell. For you have had Abraham your father, pointing at Christ the
seed of the promise, in whom all the Nations of the earth are made blessed
Moses your Lawgiver, showing the Deu 18. 18.
Prophet that the Lord would raise from among your brethren, unto whom ye
should harken. Hos. 12. 10
And the Prophets your Charmers both multiplying visions, and using
similitudes, with Esa. 28. 10.
precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little, and there a little, have
declared the Esa. 7. 14
Virgins son to be the Immanuel, the Esa. 9. 6.
wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, and Prince of
peace. Christ himself, teaching himself to be the Ioh. 14. 6
way the truth, and the life, and the spiritual rock and Ioh. 6. 31
Manna sent down from heaven. The Evangelists, Apostles, Disciples and
Proselites, all of them clouds of witnesses unto you, of his Life, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension. And lastly, we Gentiles, of the uncircumcision
(though with Esa. 28. 11
stamering lips, and another tongue) tell you, That in these last days ^eb. 1.
2.
God has spoken by his Son, who is heir of all things, by whom he made the
world, and in whom he that Ioh. 5. 16
believes, shall not perish, but have life everlasting. That a promise was
made unto David you know, that he should never want a Ier. 33. 17.
Successor to sit upon his Throne: nor that Leui should ever want a Sacrificer
to minister before the Lord: But that there is, and has long time been wants
of both, cannot be denied. And therefore, that is not spoken of a temporal,
but spiritual King and Kingdom; and of that Priesthood and order of
Melchisedec which continues for ever: Which is Jesus, who is gone before us
into the holy place, the most holiest.

To day then if you y will hear his Psalm. 95. 8
voice, harden not your hearts, as your fathers 2. Chapter 7. 18
did in the wilderness: for, Gal. 6. 7.
be not deceived God is not mocked, but is Deu. 4. 24
a ielous God, and a consuming fire. His Psalm. 45, 5
arrows (you read) are sharp, that stick in the hearts of the Kings enemies;
and his blood (you know) has been heavy upon the Mat. 27. 25.
heads of your children; who to-this day are a despised and a dispersed Nation
through the world: without Hos. 3. 4.
King, without Prince, without Priest, without Statue, without Ephod, and
without Teraphim, as Israel aforetime was threatened, and you too As long a time
(almost) for the Jews conversion, as the world stood in the first age.
long a time have now felt. For as many years have been spent in your vain
expectations (if forty more were expired) as the first age saw from the first
Creation to the flood: and yet are you as frustrate of your hoped Messiah, as
when you first refused Christ Ioh. 19. 15.
for your King.

The Lord for his Anointed sake withdraw the Ex. 26. 33
veil from before your hearts, that with us you may see the Lu. 23. 45
veylerent, and the way open into the holy of holies; and the same made only
by his entrance, who is the Great Heb. 9.
High Priest of our calling. Figured by him, that bare the Ex. 28. 29
names of your remembrance upon his breast, in the engraven stones of his
brestplat: but has himself Heb. 12. 23.
written both yours, and ours, with the Lu. 23. 33
blood of his own heart, when from the Cross, and mount Caluary, his veins
streamed Salvation, with greater increase into the world, then did those waters
of life, that issued from Ezekiel. 47
Ierusalems Temple. For whose coming to make all perfect, let us with patience
attend; and expect his appearance in the clouds, and in majesty, when both Jew
and Gentile with visible eyes shall see him (as he is) the Col. 1. 15.
Image of the invisible God, Heb. 1. 3.
the bright nesse of his glory, and the engraven form of his person. Before
whose Throne, in his holy Jerusalem, the Ezekiel. 58. 35.
Jehovah Shammah, the Sealed of Israel, and the Saved of Nations, with Crowns,
Harps, and Psalms, shall sing Hosannah, to him the Apoc. 1. 5
Lamb, that has washed us in his blood, and lives for evermore. Unto whom
with God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, three in persons, but of one
substance and vndiuidable Deity, be ascribed all glory, power, majesty, and
might, for ever and ever, Amen. O thou whom my Soul loves, come. Come Lord
JESUS.

FINIS.
A ALPHABETICAL TABLE FOR THE READY FINDING OF any name contained in the
Genealogies prefixed before the Bibles of the New Translation.

Serving for four several Editions.

DEVT. 37. 7.

Ask thy father, and he will show thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.

JOB 8. 8.

For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thy self to the
search of their fathers.

By I. S.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. 1620.

To the Christian Reader.
TO forward thy study and knowledge in the holy Genealogies of the sacred
Scriptures, I have (Christian Reader) in this following Table, directed thee to
the ready finding of any person or name contained in the draughts of those that
are printed with the new Bible of the last Translation, which do serve alike
for four several volumes, with one and the same directions. And whereas in
some of them, the Scriptures cotations could not be inserted, in this they are
all supplied both for Chapter and verse. Wherein observe, that the most noted
among them of any Nation, Kindred and Tribe, upon whom the chiefest stories in
Scriptures depend, are noted by a differing letter, and by the like letters in
the Margent set against them, are known of what degrees or estate they were.

Our Lords line is noted by the letter -- -- L All Kings in general by this
letter -- -- K All Queens by -- -- -- -- -- Q Kings of Judah are noted by --
-- KI Kings of Israel by -- -- -- Dukes in general by -- -- -- D Judges by --
-- -- -- I Prophers by -- -- -- -- P High Sacrificers by -- -- -- S David's
Worthies by -- -- -- W
And lastly, for the ready finding of all, observe this easy direction by the
page following; first, imagine every page of the Scriptures Genealogies to be
so divided, and the letters A. B. C. and D. so placed as thou see; vntowhich
the like letters direct the name, and may easily be found in the same Section.

As for example, Aaron, page 14. sect. a. David, page 22. sect. b. Abraham,
page 6. sect. c. Marie, page 34. sect. d. and so of all the rest.

The Lord forward thy desire, and guide thee in thy search, to make thy
darkness light in Christ.



An Alphabeticall Table for the ready finding of any name mentioned in the
Genealogies printed with the Bibles, with the cotations of the Scriptures
thereunto belonging.
A
Aron, 14 a. and 16 S
a. and 22 a. Exodus 6. 20, 23. Abdi, 13 d. 1 Chr. 6. 44 Abdiel, 24 a. 1 Chronicles.
5. 15 Abdon, 28 a. 1 Chronicles. 9. 36 Abdon, 29 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 23 Abdon, 32 d.
Judge. 12. 13 I
Abel, 1 a. Genesis 4 2 Abelmeholah. 32 b. Abi, see Abiiah, 33 b. Abiah, see
Abiiah, 16 d. Abiah, 15 d. 2 Samuel 8. 2 Abiah, 18 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 24. Abiah, 27
d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 8 Abiasaph, 15 a. Exodus 6. 24 Abiathar, 14 b. 1 Samuel 22 6 S
and 16 b. 1 King. 2. 26 Abida, 7 c Genesis 25. 4 Abidan, 30 b. Number. 1. 11 Abiel,
28. a. (...) Sam 9. 1 or, Ner, Chron. 8. 33 Abiezer, 16 a. S
Abiezer, 30 c. 2 Samuel 23. 2^ (...)
Abiezer, 31 b. 1 Chro. 7. 18 Abiezer, see Ieezer, 31 b. Abigail, 22 b. 2 Samuel
3. 3 Q
Abigail, 22 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 17 Abihail, 13 d. Numb. 3. 35 Abihail, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 29 Abihail, 22 b. and 33 a. 2 Q
Chron. 11. 18 Abihail, 24, b. 1 Chro. 5. 14 Abihail, 28 b. Est. 2. 15 Abihu,
14 c. Exodus 6. 23 Abihud, 27 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 3 Abijah, 16 d. 1 Chro 24. 10 or
Abia, Luke 1. 5 Abiiah, 32 b. 1 King. 14. 1 Abijah, 33 a. 2 Chronicles. 13. 1 KI
or Abijam, 1 King. 14. 31 Abijah, 33 b. 2 Chro 29, 1 Q
Abimail, 3 d. Genesis 10. 28 Abimelech, 4 c. Genesis 20. 2 K
Abimelech, see Achish 4 d. K
Abimelech, 31 c. Judge. 8. 31 I
Abinadab, 20 b 1 Samuel 7. 1 Abinadab, 22 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 13 Abinadab, see Ishui
28 a. Abinoam, 23 d Judge. 4. 6 Abiram, 11 c. Numb. 26. 9 Abiram, 30 c. 1 Kin.
16. 34 Abishag, 26 a. 1 King. 1. 3 Abishai, 22 d. 2 Samuel 2. 18 Abishua, 14 a.
and 16 a. 1. S
Chron. 6. 4 Abishua, 27 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 4 Abishur, 18 b. 1 Chro. 2. 28 Abital,
22 b. 2 Samuel 3. 4 Q
Abiud, 34 a. Mat. 1. 13 KI
Abner, 28 c. 1 Samuel 14. 50 ABRAHAM, 3 b. and 6 c. and 7 a L
Absalom, 22 d. 1 Chronicles. 3. 2 Absalom, 29 a. 2 Chr. 11. 20 or Vriel, 2 Chronicles.
13. 2 Achan, 7 d. Josh. 7. 1. or Achar, 1 Chronicles. 2. 7. or Achor, Judge. 7. 24
Achbor, 9 c. Gen 36. 38 Achim, 34 a. Matthew. 1. 14 KI
Achish, 4 d. 1 Samuel 27. 2. or K
Abimelech in the title of Psalm. 34 Achsah, 19 d. 1 Chronicles. 2. 49 Achsah, 21 b.
and 21 b. Judge. 1. 12. Josh. 15. 17 Adah, 1 b. Genesis 4. 19 Adah, 9 c. Genesis 36.
2. or Bashemath, Genesis 26. 34 Adaiah, see Iddo, 13 a. Adaiah, 17 d. Nehem. 11. 5
Adaiah, 29 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 21 Adaliah, 9 b. Est. 9. 8 ADAM, 1 a. Gen 2. 19 L
Adbeel, 6 b. Genesis 25. 13 Addar, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 3 or Ard, Numb. 26. 40 ADDI,
33 d. Luke 3. 28 L
Ader, 29 d. 1 Chronicles. 8 15 Adiel, 12 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 36 Adina, 11 d. 1 Chronicles.
11. 42 Adino, see Iashobeam, 17 b. Adnah, 19 d. 2 Chro. 17. 14 Adnah, 31 b. 1
Chro. 12. 20 Adonibezek, 5 b. Judge. 1. 5 K
Adoniiah, 22 b. 2 Samuel 3. 4 Adonizedek, 5 d. Josh. 10. 3 K
Adramelec^, 3 b. 1 K. 19. 37 Adriel, 28 c. 1 Samuel 18, 19 Agag, 9 b. 1 Samuel 15.
20 K
Agrippa, 9 d. K
Ahab, 26 b. and 5 a. 1 Kings KS
16. 29. 30 Aharah, 27 a. 1 Chronicles. 8. 1 or Ehi, Genesis 46. 21, or Ahiram, Numb.
26. 38 Aharhel, 18 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 8 Ahashuerosh, 3 a. Hest. 1. 1 K
or Assuerus, or Darius Hystaspis, he hindered the Temple. Ahashtari, 18 d. 1
Chro. 4. 6 Ahaz, 28 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 35. 8 Ahaz, 33 b. 1 King. 15. 38 KI
Ahaziah, 26 d. 1. Kin. 22. 40 KS
Ahaziah, 33 a. 2 King. 8. 24 KI
or Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 22. 6 or Iehoahaz, 2. Chr. 21. 17 Ahban, 18 b. 1 Chronicles.
2. 29 Ahi, 24 a. 1 Chronicles. 5. 15 Ahi, 25 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 34 Ahiah, 14 b and 16 b.
1 Samuel S
143 Ahiah, 27 b. 1 Chronicles 8. 7 Ahian, 31 d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 19 Ahiezer, 13 b. Numb.
1. 12 Ahiezer, 30 a. 1 Chro. 12. 3 Ahihud, 25 c. Number. 34. 27 Ahihud, 27 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 7 Ahiiah, 18 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 25 Ahiiah, 26 a. 1 Kin. 15. 27 Ahiiah, 32
b 1 Chro. 11. 36 Ahijah, 32 d. 1 King 11 29 P
Ahiman, 4 c. Number. 13. 22 Ahiman, 15 d. 1 Chro. 9. 17 Ahimaaz, 14 b. and 16 a. S
1 Chronicles. 6. 8 Ahimaaz, 23 d. and 33 c. 1 King. 4. 15 Ahimelech, 5 a. 1 Sa. 26.
6 Ahimelech, 14 b. and 16 b. S
1. Sam. 1. 21 Ahimelech, 14 b. 2 Sa. 8. 17 Ahimoth, 15 b. 1 Chro. 6. 25
Ahinoam, 22 d. 1 Chro. 3. 1 Ahinoam, 28 a. 1 Sa. 14. 50 Q
Ahio, 20 d. 2 Samuel 6. 3 Ahio, 28 c. 1 Chronicles 9. 37 Ahio, 29 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 14
Ahira, 23 d. Number. 1. 15 Ahiram, see Aharah, 27 a. Ahisamach, 23 b. Exo. 31. 6
Ahishahar, 27 b. 1 Chapter 7. 10 Ahitophel, 19 b. 1 S. 15. 12 Ahitub, 14 a. and 16
b. 1. S
Chron. 6. 7 Ahitub, 14 b, and 16 b. 1. S
Sam 14. 3. and 22. 11 Ahitub, 14 d. and 16 b. 1. S
Chron. 6. 11 Ahitub, 27 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 11 Ahlai, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 31 Ahoah,
27 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 4 Aholiab, 23 b. Exodus 31. 6 Aholibamah, 5 d. and 9. c. Genesis
36. 2. 25 Aholibamah. 9 b. Genesis 36 D
41 Ahumai, 20 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 2 Ahusam, 18 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 6 Ahuzzath, 4 d. Genesis
26. 26 Aiah, 5 d. Genesis 36. 24 Aialon, 29 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 13 Akan, 5 b. Genesis 36.
27. or Iakan, 1 Chronicles. 1. 42. Akkub, 15 b. 1. Chro. 9. 17 Akkub, 34 b. 1 Chronicles.
3. 34 Alameth, 27 d. 1. Chapter 7. 8 Alcimus, 16 b. S
Alemeth, 28 b. 1 Chapter 8. 36 Alexander. 16 d. S
Alexander, 16 d. S
Alian, see Aluan, 5 b. Allon, 12 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 37 Almodad, 3 b. Ge. 10. 26
Alpheus, 34 d. Luke 6. 5 Aluah, 9 b. Genesis 26. 40. or Aliah, 1. Chron. 1. 51 D
Aluan, 5 b. Genesis 36. 23. or Alian; 1. Chron. 1. 40. Amal, 25 d. 1 Chro. 7. 35
Amalek, 9 a. Exo. 17. 14 Amalekites, 9 b. Amariah, 14 a. and 16 b. S
1 Chronicles. 6. 7 Amariah, 14 c. and 16 b. S
1 Chronicles. 6. 11 Amariah 15 a. 1. Chapter 23. 19 Amariah, 17 b. Neh. 11. 4 Amariah,
19 d. Zeph. 1. 1 Amasa, 22 d. 1. Chron. 2. 17 Amasa, 32 c. 2 Chr. 28. 12
Amasal, 15 d. 1 Chro. 6. 15 Amasiah, 19 c. 1. Chapter 17. 16 Amashiah, 12 a. 1 Chapter
4. 34 Amaziah, 13 d. 1. Chr. 6. 45 Amaziah, 33 c. 2 King. 14. 1 KI
Amihud, 17 d. 1 Chr. 9. 4 Amittai, 26 d. Ion. 1. 1 Amizabab, 14 d. 1 Chapter 47. 6
Ammedatha, 9 b. Est. 3. 10 or, Hanmedatha, 8. 5. Ammiel, 23 b. Number. 13. 12
Ammiel, 31 d. 2 Sa. 17. 27. Amminadab, see Izhar. 14 c. Amminadab, 15 c. 1 Chronicles. 15. 10 AMMINADAB, 18 c. and 22 a 1 Chronicles. 2. 20. L
Ammihud, 4 d. 2 Sa. 13. 37 Ammihud, 12 c. Nu. 34. 31 Ammihud, 23 d. Nu. 34. 28
Ammihud. 32 a. Nu. 1. 10 Ammishaddai, 23 a. Numb. 1. 12 Ammonites, 8 c. Amnon,
21 d 1 Chr. 4. 20 Amnon, 22 d. 1 Chronicles. 3. 1 Amon, 33 d 2 Ki. 21. 18 KI
Amorites, 5 c. Amos, 18 d. P
Amos, 33 b. Esaias 1. 1 AMOS, 34 c. Luke 3. 25 L
Amram, see Hendan, 5 d. Amram, 14 d. Exodus 6. 18 Amraphel, 4 a. Genesis 14. 1 K
Amzi, 13 c. 1 Chro. 6. 46 Anah, 5 d. Genes. 36. 20 D
Anah, 5 d. Genes. 36. 24 Anak, 4 c. Numb. 13. 22 Anamin, 4 c. Genesis 10. 13
Ananelus, 16 c. S
Anani, 34 d. 1 Chronicles. 3. 24 Ananias, 12 b. Ananus, 16 d. Anathoth, 27 d. 1
Chr. 7. 8 S
Aner, 5 d. Genesis 14 13 Aniam, 21 d. 1 Chr. 7. 19 Anna, 25 c. Luke 2. 36
Antigonus, 16 d. Antipater, 9 d. S
Antipater, 9 d. Antothiiah, 29 d. 1 C. 8. 24 Antothite, 30 c. Anub. 18. d. 1
Chro. 4. 8 Aphiah, 28 a. 1 Samuel 9. 1 Aphses, 16 c. 1 Chro. 24. 15 Appiam 18 b.
1 Chronicles. 2. 30 Ara, 25 d 1. Chron. 7. 38 Arad, 5 a. Numb. 21. 1 K
Arad, 29 b. 1. Chron. 8. 15 Aram, 3 c. Genes 10. 22 Aramites, 3 c. Aram, 6 b.
Genes. 22. 21 ARAM, see RAM, 18 c. L
Aram, 25 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 34 Aran, 5 d. Genes. 36. 28 Araunah, see Ornan, 5 c.
Archelaus, 9 d. Matthew. 2. 22 K
Archite, 32 b. Ard, 27 c. Genes. 46. 21 Ard, see Addar, 27 b. Ardon, 19 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 18 Areli, 24 c. Genes. 46. 16 Aridai, 9 d. Ester 9. 9 Aridatha, 9 b
Ester 9. 8 Arioch, 4 d. Daniel 2. 14 Arisai, 9 b. Ester 9. 9 Aristobulus 9 d.
Aristobulus, 16 c. S
Aristobulus 16 c. S
Aristobulus, 16 d. S
Arkites, 5 a. Genes. 10 17 Armoni, 20 d. 2 Samuel 21 8 Arnan, 34 a. 1 Chronicles. 3.
21 Arodi, 24 c. Genes. 46. 16 or Arad. Numb. 26. 17 Arorites, 11 b. 1 Chr. 11.
44 ARPHAXAD, 3 a. Genes. 10 L
Artaxerxes, 3 a. Ezra 4. or K
Artaxashta; and (by Heathen) Cambyses the son of Cyrus: he hindered the
Temple. Artaxerxes, 3 a or, Artaxasta, K
Ezra 7. 1. Nehem. 2. 1. or, Darius, Ezra 4. 24. the son of Assuerus by
Hester: he built the Temple. Aruadites, 5 d. Genesis 10. 18 Asa. 33 a. 1 Kings 15.
8 KI
Asahel, 22 d. 2. Sam. 2. 18 W
and 23, 24. Asaiah, 12 b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 36 Asaiah, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 6. 30 Asaiah,
17 d. 1 Chronicles. 9. 5 Asaph, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 6. 39 sa reel, 21 c. 1 Chronicles. 4. 16
Asarelah, or, Iesharelah, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 25. 2. 14 Asarhaddon, 3 b. 2 Ki. 19.
37 K
Asenah, 4 b. and 10 a. Genesis 41. 45 Atossa, see Ester, 28 b. Q
Ashbel, 27 a. Genesis 46. 21. or Iediahel, 1 Chronicles. 7. 6 Ashbea, 17 b. 1 Chronicles. 4
21 Asher, 10 b. and 25 a. Genesis 30. 13 Ashkenaz, 2 b. Genesis 10. 3 Ashpenaz, 4 a.
Dan. 1. 3 Ashuath, 25 d. 1 Chro. 7. 33 Ashur, 3 a. Genesis 10. 22 Ashur, 18 c. 1 Chronicles 2. 24 Ashurim, 7 b. Genesis 25. 3 Asiel, 12 a. 1 Chronicles. 4. 35 Asmaueth, 28
b. 1 Chr. 8. 36 Aspatha, 9 b. Est. 9. 7 Asriel, 31 d. Numb 26. 31 Assir, 15 a.
Exodus 6. 24 Assir, 15 b. 1 Chronicles. 6. 23 Assirians, 3 a. Athaliah, 26 d. and 33
a. 2. Q
Kings 8. 26 Atthaliah, 29 b. 1 Chr. 8. 26 Athaiah, 17 b. Nehem. 11. 4 Attai,
18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 35 Attarah, 18 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 26 Atthai, 33 a. 2 Chro. 11. 20
Atthai, 24 d. 1 Chronicles. 12. 11 Azah, 11 c. 1 Chro. 5. 8 Azariah, 13 d. 2 Chr.
29. 12 Azariah, 14 b. and 16 a. S
1 Chronicles. 6. 9 Azariah, see Zadok, 16 b. Azariah, 14 b. and 16 b. S
1 Chronicles. 6. 13 Azariah, 14 c. and 16 a. the S
son of Iehoiada, 1. Chr. 6. 10 and he that executed the Priests office upon
a King, Leu. 13. 46. 2 K. 15 5. and 2 Chro. 26. 16 Azariah, see Vzziah, 15 b. 1
Chro. 6. 24. 36 Azariah, 17 c. 1 Chro. 2. 8 Azariah, 18 b. 1 Chro. 2. 38
Azariah, 32 a. 2 Chro. 28. 12 Azariah, see Ahaziah, 33 a. KI
Azariah, 33 a. 2 Chro. 21. 2 Azariah, or Abednego, 33 b. Dan. 1. 7 Azariah, 33
c. 2 Chro. 21. 2 Azariah, 33 d. 2 King. 14. 21 KI
or Vzziah, 2 Chro. 26. 1 Azariel, 23 b. 1 Chro. 27. 22 Azariel, 30 c. 1 Chro.
12. 6 Azazziah, 32 a. 1 Chapter 27. 20 Azel, 28 b. 1 Chr. 8. 37 Azmaueth, 30 b. 1
Chapter 12. 3 W
1 Samuel 23. 31 Azor, 34 a. Matthew. 1. 13. A KI
King by right. Azriel, 23 d. 1 Chr. 27. 10 Azriel, 31 d. 1 Chro. 5. 24
Azrikam, 13 d. 1 Chr. 9. 14 Azrikam, 28 b. 1 Chr. 8. 38 Azrikam, 34 b. 1 Chr.
3. 23 Azubah, 19 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 18 Azubah, 33 a. 1 Kin. 22 42 Q
Azur, 28 c. Ier. 28. 1 Azzan, 26 a. Numb. 34. 26
B
Baal, 11 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 5 Baal, 28 a. 1 Chronicles. 8. 39 Baalhanan, 9 c. Genesis 36
38 Baalhanan, 30 a. 1 C. 27. 28 Baalis, 8 d. Ier. 40. 14 K
Baanah, 20 d. 2 Samuel 23. 29 Baanah, 25 c. 1 King. 4. 16 Baanah, 29 a. 2 Samuel 4.
2 Baara, 27 a. or Hodesh, 1. Chron. 8. 8 9 Baasiah, 13 b. 1 Chro. 6. 40 Baasha,
26 b. 1. King. 15. 33 KS
Bak^akkar, 13 d. 1 Chapter 9. 15 Balaam, 3 c. Deuteronomy. 23. 4 P
Baladan, 4 a. 2 King. 10. 12 K
Balak, 8 a. Numb 22. 2. K
Bani, 13 c. 1 Chronicles. 6. 46 Bani, 14 c. Nehem 3. 17 Bani, 17 c. 1 Chronicles. 9. 4 W
Bani, 24 a. 2 Samuel 23. 36 Barrachel, 6 b. Job 32. 2 Barachias, see Iohanan, 14
b. S
Barak, 23 d Judge. 4. 6 I
Bariah, 34 d. 1 Chronicles. 3. 22 Baruch, 17 d. Nehem. 11. 5 Baazillai, 31 b. 2 Sa.
19. 31 Bashemah, 9 c. Ge. 36. 3. or Mahala, 6 d. Genesis 28. 9 Bashemath, 5 c.
Genesis 26. 34 or Adah, 9 a. Genesis 36. 2 Basmath, 33 c. 1 King. 4. 15 Basheba, 22
d. 2 Samuel 11. 27 Q
or Bathshua, 1 Chronicles. 3. 5 Bealiath, 30 a. 1 Chro. 12. 5 Becher, 27 c. Genesis
46. 21. or Nohah, 1 Chronicles. 8. 2 Bechorah, 28 a. 1 Samuel 9. 1 Bedad, 9 a. Genesis
36. 35 Bedan, see Sampson, 23 b. I
Bedan, 31 a. 1 Chronicles 7. 17 Beleliada, see Eliada, 22 d Beera, 25 d. 1 Chronicles.
7. 37 Beerah, 11 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 5 Beeri, 5 a. Genesis 26. 44 Beeri, 26 a. Hosea,
1. 1 Beeroth, 29 a. 2 Samuel 4. 1 Bela, 9 a. Genesis 36. 32 K
Belah, 11 d. 1 Chr. 5 8 Belah, 27 a. Genesis 46. 21 Belshazar, 4 b. Dan. 5. 1 K
Benaiah, 12 d. 1 Chro. 4. 36 Benaiah, 13 b. 2 Cho. 20. 14 Benaiah, 14 d: 1
Chro. 27 5 W
1 Samuel 23. 20 Benaiah, 32 d. 1 Chronicles. 27 W
14. 2 Samuel 23 30 Benammi, 8 c. Genes 19 38 and also in page 6 c. Benhadad, 3
d. 1 Kin. 15. 14 K
Benhadad, 3 d. 1 Kin 20. 33 K
Benhadad, 3 d. 2 King. 13. 3 K
Benhanan, 21 d. 1 Ch 4. 20 Benjamin, 10 c. Genesis 35. 18 or Iemini. 1 Samuel 9. 4
Benjamin, 27 a. 1 Chr. 7. 10 Beno, 13 d. 1 Chr. 24. 27 Benzoheth, 21 c. 1 Chapter
4. 20 Beor, 3 c. Number. 22. 5, or Bosor, 2 Pet. 2. 15 Beor, 9 a. Genesis 36. 32
Bera, 5 b. Genesis ^4. 2 Berachah, 30 c. 1 Chapter 12. 3 K
Berachiah, 13 b. 1 Chapter 6. 39 Beraiah, 29 d. 1 Chr. 8. 21 Berechiah, 32 c. 2
Chapter 28. 12 Berechiah, 34 a. 1 Chr. 3. 20 Bered, 32 a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 20 or Becher,
1 Chronicles. 7. 10 Berenice, 9 d. Beri, 25 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 36 Beriah, 13 b. 1 Chro.
23. 10 Beriah, 25 a. Genesis 46. 17 Beriah, 29 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 13 Beriah, 32 a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 23 Berodach balladan, 4 a. 2 K
King. 24. 12. or Merodach Balladan. Esaias 39 1 Bethgader, 1 Chronicles. 2. 51, or
Gedor, 1 Chronicles. 4. 4. 20 d. Bethleem City, 20 a. Bethrapha, 21 b. 1 Cor.
(...). 12 Bethuel, 6 d. Genesis 22. 22 Bethzur, 19 b. 1 Chronicles. (...). 45 Bezaleel,
20 c. Exodus 31. 2 Bezer, 25 d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 37 Bichri, 30 d. 2 Samuel 20. 1
Bildad, 7 c. ^ob 2. 11 Bilgah, 16 c. 1 Chronicles. 24. 14 Bisha, 10 c. and 23 a. Ge.
30. 4 Bilhan, 5 b. Genesis 36 and 27 Bilhan, 27 a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 10 Bimhal, 25 d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 37 Binea, 28 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 37 Birsha, 5 b. Genesis 14. 2 K
Birzauith, 25 a. (...) Chr. 7. 31 Bithiah, 21 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 18 A Blasphemer,
23 b. Leuit. 24. 10 Boaz, 22 c. and 8 d. 1 Chronicles. 2 11, and Ruth 4. 13 Bocheru,
28 b. 1 Chro. 8. 38 Bohan, 11 b. Josh 15. 6 Bukki, 14 b. and 16 a. 1 Chapter 6. 5 S
Bukki, 23 b. Numb. 34. 22 Bukkiah, 15 b. 1 Chro. 25. 4 Bunah, 18 a. 1 Chronicles.
2. 25 Buz, 6 b. Genesis 22. 21 Buz, 24 a. 1 Chronicles. 5. 14 Buzi, 14 d. Ezech. 1. 2
Buzi, 16 a. S

C.
Cain, 1 a. Genesis 4. 1 CAINAN, 1 c. Genesis 5. 9 L
Caiaphas, 16 d. Io^. 11. 49 S
Calcol. 17 d. 1 Chro. 2. 6, and 1 King. 4. 31 Caldeans 4 a. Caleb, 18 a. and
19 c. 1 Chr. 2. 18, or Chelubai, 1 Chronicles. 2. 9, or Carmi, 1 Chronicles. 4. 1 Caleb,
20 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 50 Caleb, 21 b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 15 Cambyses, see Artaxerxes, K
3 a. Canaan, 4 c. and 5 a. Ge. 10. 6 Cananites, 5 a. Candaces, 4 b. Acts 8. 27
Q
Caphtorim, 4 c. Genesis 10. 14 Carmi, 11 c. Genesis 46. 9 Carmi, 17 c. ^os. 7. 1
Carmi, see Caleb, 18 a. Casluhim, 4 c. Genesis 10. 14 Chedorlaomer, 3 a. Genesis 14.
1 K
Chelub, 20 b. and 21 a. 1. Chron. 4. 11 Chelubai, see Caleb, 18 a. Chenaanah,
27 a. 1 C. 7. 10 Chenania, 15 a. 1 Chapter 26. 29 Cheran, 5 d. Genesis 36. 26 Chezed,
6 b. Genesis 22. 22 Chileab, 22 b. 2 Samuel 3. 3 or Daniel, 1 Chronicles. 3. 1 Chilion, 8
b. and 22 a. Kut. 1. 2. 5 Chimham, 31 b. 2 S. 19. 37 Chizlon, 30 b. Number. 34. 21
Chozebea, 17 b. 1 Chr. 4. 22 Chusan, 3 c. Judge. 3. 8 K
Cleophas, 34 d. Judge. 19. 25 Colhozeth, 17 d. Nu. 11. 5 Coniah, see
Iehoiachin, 33 b. KI
COSAM, 33 d. Luke 3. 28 L
Coz, 18 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 8 Cozbi, 7 a. Numb. 25. 15 C^sh* 4 a. Genesis ^0. 6 Cushi,
19 d. Zeph. 1. 1 Cyrus, 3 a. ^s. 45. 1 Ezr. 1. 1 K

D
Dalphan 9 b. Est. 9. 7 Dan. 10 d. and 23 a. Ge. 30. 6 Daniel, see Chileab, 22
b. Daniel, 33 b. or Bel^shazar. P
Dan. 1. 6* 7 Darda, 17 d. 1 Kings 4. 31 or Dara. 1 Chro. 2. (...) Darius, 2 a.
Dan. 5. 31, fellow K
in government with Cyrus. Darius, see Artaxerxes, 3 a. Darius, 3 a. Nehe. 12.
22. the K
last King of the Persian K
Kingdom. Dathan, 11 a. Number. 26. 9 David, 22 b. 1 Chr. 2. 15. and KI
4 d. and 28 a. and 33 a. KS
2 Sa. 3. 3. and (...). Sam. 18. 27 Debir, 5 d. Ios. 10. 3 Debo^ah, 32 b. Judge.
4. 4 K
Dedan, 4 a. Genesis 10. 7 P
Dedan, 7 a. Genesis 25. 3 Delaiah, 16 d. 1 Chr. 24. 18 Delaiah, 34 d. 1 Chro. 3.
24 Delilah, 4 d. Iud. 16. 4 Deuel, 24 a. or Revel. Nu. 1. 1^, and 2. 14 Dibri,
23 a. Leuit. 24. 11 Dikla^, 3 b. Genesis ^0. 27 Dinah, 10 a. Genesis 30. 21 Dishan* 5
d. Genesis 36. 21 D
Dishon, 5 d. Genesis 36. 25 D
Dishon. 5 d. Genesis ^6. 25 Dodanim, 2 d. or Rodanim, Genesis 10. 4 Dodauah, 17 b. 2
Chapter 20. 37 Dodo, 20 b. 2 Samuel 23. 24 Dodo, 26. a. Judge. 10. 1 Doeg, 9. c. 1 Samuel: 22. 9 Drulilla, 9. d. Dumah, 6. b. Genesis 25. 14
E
Ebal, 5: b. Genesis 36. 23 Ebedmelech, 4. b. Ier. 38. 7 EBER, 3. a. Genesis 10. 28 L
Eber, 27. b. 1 Chr. 8. 12 Eden, 13 a. 2 Chapter 29. 12. or Iddo, 1 Chro. 6. 21
Eder, 13. c. 1 Chro. 23. 23 Egla^, 22. b, 2 Samuel 3. 5 Q
Egyptians. 4. c. Ehi, see Aharah, 27. a Ehud, 27. a. 1 Chr. 7. 10 I
Ehud, 30. d. Iud. 3. 15 Ekar. 18. a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 27 Eladah, 32. a. 1 Chro. 7.
22 Elah, 9. b. Genesis 36. 41 D
Elah, 21. b. 1 Chro 4 15 Elah. 26. b. 1 King. 16. 8 KS
Elah. 30. d. 1 Chronicles. 9 8 Elah. 30. d. 1 King. 4. 18 Elah. 32. b. 2 King. 17.
1 Elam, 3. a Genesis 10 22 Elam, 15. b. 1 Chro. 26. 3 Elam, 29 d. 1 Chronicles 8. 24
Elasa, 28. b. 1 Chro. 8. 37 Eldaah, 7. c. Genesis 25. 4 Elead, 32. d. 1 Chronicles 7.
21 Eleasah, 18. b. 1 Chr. 2. 39 Eleazar, 13. c. 1 Chr. 23. 21 Eleazar, 14. a
and 16 a. S
Exo. 6. 23 Eleazar, 16. b. S
Eleazar, 16. c. S
Eleazar, 16. d. S
Eleazar, 20. b. 1 Samuel 7. 1 Eleazar, 34. b. Mat. 1. 15 KI
A King by right to Iudahs kingdom; so all of Abiuds house, from Zorobabell to
Joseph the husband of Mary. Eluzai, 30. a. 1 Chro. 12 5 Elhanan, 20. b. 2 Samuel
21, W
19. and 23, 24 Elhanan, 20. b. 1 Chapter 11. 26 Eli, 14. a. and 16. b. 1 Sa. 1. 9 S
Eli, 16. a. S
ELI, 34: d Luke 3. 23 Eliab, 11. a: Number. 26. 8 Eliab, 12. a. Eliab, 15. c. 1
Chro. 6. 27. or Elihu, 1 Samuel 1. 1. or Eliel, 1 Chr. 6. 38 Eliab, 22. a. 1 Chr.
2. 13. or Elihu, 1 Chr. 27. 18 Eliab. 24. c. 1 Chr. 12. 9 Eliab, 26. c. Number. 1.
9 ELIACHI^, 33. c. Lu. 3. 30 L
Eliacim, 34. a. Mat. 1. 13, A KI
King by right. Eliada, 22. d. 1 Chro. 3. 8, or Beeliada, 1. Chr. 14. 7.
Eliada, 3. d. 1 King. 11. 23 Eliada, 29. c. 2 Chr. 17. 17 Eliah, 29. d. 1 Chr.
8. 27 Eliakim, 33, b. or Iohoiakim KI
2 King. 23. 34. or Ioakim, 1 Chronicles. 3. 15 Eliam, 19. b. 2 Samuel 23. 34 W
Eliasaph, 13: a. Number. 3. 24 Eliasaph, ^3. b. Number: 1. 14 Eliashib, 14. b. and
16. a Ne. S
12. 10. Eliashib, 16. d. 1 Chr. 24. 12 Eliashib, 34. b. 1 Chr. 3. 24 Eliatha,
15. d. 1 Chr. 25. 4 Elidad, 30, d. Number. 34. 21 Eliel, 15. a. 1 Chro. 15. 9
Eliel. see Eliab, 15. c. Eliel, 24. b. 1 Chro. 12. 11 Eliel. 29. b. 1 Chro. 8.
22 Eliel, 29. d. 1 Chr. 8. 20 Eliel, 31. d. 1 Chronicles. 5. 24 Elienai, 29. b. 1
Chr. 8. 20 Eliezer, 3. c. Genesis 15. 2 Eliezer, 11. d. 1 Chr. 27. 16 Eliezer, 14.
c. Exo. 18. 4 Eliezer, 17. b. 2 Chro. 20. 37 Eliezer, 27. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 8
ELIEZER, 33. d. Luke 3. 29 L
Elihu, 6. b. Job 32. 2 Elihu, 12. a. Elihu, see Eliab, 22. a: Elihu, 31. d. 1
Chro. 12. 20 Elijah, 24. b. 1 King. 17. 1 P
Elimelech, 22. a Rut. 1. 2 Elioena, 12. c. 1 Chr. 4. 36 Elioenai, 15. b. 1
Chr. 26. 3 Elioenai, 27. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 8 Elioenai, 34. b. 1 Chro. 3. 23
Eliphaz, 9. a. Genesis 36. (...) W
Eliphaz, 9. a. Job 4. 1 Eliphelet, the Maachathite, 2 Samuel 23. 34 Eliphelet,
22. d. 1 Chro. 36 Eliphelet, 28. b. 1 Chr. 8 39 Elishah, 2. c. Genesis 10. 4 P
Elishah, 32. b. 1 Kin. 19. 16 Elishama, 18. d. 1 Chr. 2. 41 Elishama, 22, b. 1
Chro. 3. 6 or Elishua, 2 Samuel 5. 15 Elishama, 22. d. 1 Chro 3. 8 Elishama, 32.
b. Nu. 1. 10 Elishebah, 22. c. and ^4. a. Exo. 6. 23 Elisua, see Elishama, 22.
b. Eliud, 34. a. Mat. 1. 14. A King by right. KI
Elizabete. 16. d. Luke 1. 5 Elizaphan, 15. c Number. 3. 30 Elizaphan, 26. e. Nu.
34. 25 Elizur, 11. b. Number. 1. 5 Elkana, 15. a. Ex. 6. 24 Elkana, 15. c. 1 Chr.
6. 25 Elkana, 15. c. or Mahath, 1 Chro. 6. 26 35 Elkana, 15. d. 1 Chr. 6. 26
Elkana, 15. d. 1 Samuel 1. 1 Elkana, 30. c. 1 Chro. 12. 6 ELMODAM, 33. d. Luke
(...). 28 Elon. 5. c. Genesis 26. 34 L
Elon, 26. c. Genesis 46. 14 Elon, 26. d. Iud. 12. 11 J
Elpaal, 27. d. 1 Chro. 8. 11 Elpaal, 29 b. 1 Chronicles 8. 18 Elzabad, 24 d. (...)
Chr. 12. 12 Emorite (or Amorite) 5 c. Genesis 10. 16 Enan, 23 c. Number. 1. 15 Enoch,
1 a. Genesis 4. 17 ENOCH, 1 d. Genesis 5. 18 L
ENOS, 1 c. Genesis 4. 26 L
Ephah, 7 a. Genesis 25. 4 Ephah, 19 c. (...) Chron. 2. 46 Ephah, 19 d. (...)
Chron. 2. 47 Ephai, 20 d. Ier. 40. 8 Epher, 7 a. Genesis 25. 4 Epher, 21 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 17 Epher, 31 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 24 Ephlal, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 37 Ephod, 31
c. Numb. 34. 23 Ephraim, 10 c. and 32 a. Genesis 41. 52 Ephrath, 19 a. 1 Chro. 2.
19 Ephron, 5 c. Genesis 23. a Er, 17 a. Genesis ^8. 3 Er, 17 a. 1 Chronicles. 4. 21 ER, 33
d. Luke 3. 28 L
Eri, 24 c. Genesis 46. 16 Esua, 5 a. and 6 d. and 9 a. Genesis 25. 25. 26. 34
Eshbaal, see Ishbosheth, 28 c KS
Eshban, 5 d. Genesis 36. 26 Echcol, 5 d. Genesis 14. 13 Esh^k, 28 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 39
Eshtemoanites, 21 d. Eshtemon, 21 d. Eshton, 21 b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 11 ESLI, 34 c.
Luke 3. 25 L
Ester, 28 b. and 3 a. or Hadassa Q
or (after Heathen) Atossa, Hest. 2. 17 Etam, 20 a. 1 Chronicles. 4. 3 Ethan, 1^ a.
see Ioah. Ethan, or Ieduthun 13 d. 1 Chr. 16. 44, and 2^. 3 Ethan, 17 c. (...)
Chapter 2. 6. (...) K. 4. 3^ P
Ethbaal, 5 a. 1 King. 16. 31 K
Ethiopians, 4 a. Ethnan, 18 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 7 Ethni, see Ieaterai, 13 b. EVE, 1
c. Ge. 2. 22. and 3. 20 L
Eui, 7 b. Numb. 31. 8 Euilmerodach, 4 b. Ier. 52. 31 K
Ezbon, 24 c. Genesis 46. 16, or Ozni, Numb. 26. 16 Ezbon, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 7
Ezekiel, 14 d. P
Ezer, 5 b. Genesis 36. 21 (...)
Ezer, 20 a. 1 Chronicles. 4. 4 Ezer, 24 a. 1 Chronicles. 12. 9 Ezer, 32 d. 1 Chronicles. 7.
21 Ezra, 14 d. Ezra 7. 1 Ezra, 21 c. 1 Chronicles. 4. 17
G
Gabai, 30 d. Neh. 11. 8 Gad, 10 b. Genesis 30. 11. Gaddi, 31 c. Numb. 13. 14
Gadi, 32 b. 2 King. 15. 14 Gaddiel, 26 c. Number. 13. 10 Gaham, 6 b. Genesis 2^. 24
Galal, 13 d. 1 Chronicles. 9. 16 Gamaliel, 31 a. Numb. 2. 10 Gamul, 16 d. 1 Chro.
24. 17 Garam, 9 a. Genesis 36. 11 Gazez, 19 c. 1 Chronicles. (...). 46 Geba, 27 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 6 Gedaliah, 13 b. 1 Chr. 25. 3 Gedaliah, 19 d. Zeph. 1. 1 Gedeon, 12
b. Gederathite, 30 a. Gedor, see Bethgador, ^20 d. Gedor, 21 b. Gedor, 29 c. 1 Chronicles. 12. 7 Gedor, 28 c. 1 Chronicles. 9. 37 Gemalli, 23 b. Numb. 13. 12 Genubah, 9
c. 1 Kin. 11. 20 Gera, 27 a. Genesis 46. 21 Gera, 27 a. 1 Chronicles. 8. 7 Gera, 27
(...) Chron. 8. 3 Gera, 28 d. 2 Samuel 16. 5 Gera, 30 d. Judge. 3. 15 Gershom, 14
c. Ex. 2. 22 Gershon, 13 a. Genesis 46. 11 or Gershom, 1. Chr. 6. 22 Geshan, 19 d.
1 Chr. 2. 47 Gether, 3 c. Genesis 10. 23 Geuel, 24 d. Numb. 13. 16 A Giant, or
Haraphah, 4. d. 1 Chronicles. 20. vlt. Gibea, 30 a, 19 d, 1 Chronicles. 2. 49 Gibeonites,
28 a. Gideon, 31 c. Judge. 6. 11. or I
Ierubbaal, or Ierubbesheth 2 Samuel 11. 21 Gideoni, 30 b. Numb. 1. 11 Gidalti,
15 d. 1 Chronicles. 25. 4 Gilead, 24 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 14 Gilead, 31 a. Numb. 26. 29
Gileadites, 31 a. Girgasite, 5 a. Genesis 10. 16 Gog, 11 a. 1 Chronicles. 5. 4 Golia^,
4 d. 1 Samuel 17. 4 Gomer, (...) a. Genesis 10. 2 Gomer, 26 b. Hos. 1. 3 Guni, 23 c.
Genesis 46. 24
H
Habbakkuk, 19 d. P
Habazzinijah, 7 d. Ie. 35. 3 Hachaliah 22 b. Neh. 1. 1 Hadad, 9 d. Genesis 36.
35. or K
Hadai, 1 Chronicles. 1. 46 Hadad, 9 c. 1 King. 11. 14 K
Haddadezor, 3 c. 2 Samuel 8. 3 K
Hadar, 6 d. Genesis 25. 15 Hadar, 9 c. Genesis 36. 39 Hadar, see Hadad, 9 a. K
Hadoram, see ^oram, 3 d. Hadoram, 3 b. Genesis 10. 27 Hagar, 4 b. and 6 c. Genes.
16. 1, 3 Haggi, 24 a. Genesis 46. 16 Haggia, 13 b, 1 Chronicles. 6. 30 Haggith, 22 b. 2 Samuel 3. 4 Q
Hadlai, 32 c. 2 Chronicles. 28. 12 Hakkoz 16 d. 1 Chr. 24. 10 Ham, 1 d. and 4 a.
Ge. 5. 32. Haman, 9 b. Est. 3. 10 Hamathite, 5 c. Genesis 10. 18 Hammedatha, see
Ammedatha, 9 b. Hammoleketh, 31 a. 1. Chr. 7. 18 Hamor, 5. c. Genesis 34. 2
Hamuel, 12. c. 1 Chronicles. 4. 26 Hamul, 17. c. Genesis 46. 12 Hamital, 33. d. 2 Kin.
23. 31 Q
Hanan, 28. d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 31 Hanan, 29. b. 1 Chronicles. 8 23 Hanani, 15. b. 1 Chronicles. 25. 4 Hananiah, 15. b. 1 Chapter 25 4 Hananiah, 28. c. Jere. 3. 19 a false
Prophet. P
Hananiah, 29 d. 1 Chapter 8. 24 Hananiah, or Shadrach, 33 b Dan. 1. 7 Hananiah, 34
c. 1 Chapter 13. 9 Haniel, 25, b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 39 Haniel, 31. c. Number. 34. 23 Hanoch,
7. c. Genesis 25. 4 Hanoch, 11. a. Genesis 46. 9 Hannah, 15. d. 1 Samuel 1. 2 Hanun, 8.
c. 2 Samuel 10. 2 K
Haran, 6. c. Genesis 11. 26 Haran, 13. b. 1 Chronicles. 23. 9 Haran, 19. d. 1 Chronicles.
2. 46 Haraphah, see Giant. 4. d Hareph, 20 c. 1 Chronicles 2. 51 or Penuel, 1 Chronicles.
4. 4 Harim, 16. c. 1 Chronicles. 24. 8 Harnapher, 25. b. 1 C. 7, 36 Harum, 18. d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 8 Haruphite, 30. a. Hashabiah, 13. d. 1 C. 25. 3 Hashabiah, 13. d. 1
Chapter 9. 14 Hashabiah, 13. d. 1 Chapter 9. 55 Hashabiah, 14 c. 1 Chapter 27. 17
Hashabiah, 15. c. 1 C. 39. 30 Hashub, 13. d. 1 Chronicles. 9. 14 Hathah, 21. b, 1
Chr. 4. 13 Hattush, 34. d. 1 Chro. 3. 22 Hauilah, 3. d. Genesis 10. 29 Hauilah, 4.
a. Genesis 10. 7 Hazadiah, 34, d. 1 Chapter 3. 20 Hazael, 3. d. 2 King. 8. 15 K
Hazaiah, 17. d. Neh. 11. 5 Hazarmaueth, 3. b. G. 10. 26 Hazelelpoli. 20. b. 1
Chapter 4. 3 Haziel, 13. b. 1 Chro. 23. 9 Hazo, 6. d. Genesis 22. 22 Hazubah, 34. a. 1
Cor. 3. 25 Heber, 7. d. Iud. 4. 17 Heber, 21. d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 18 Heber, 24*
(...) 1 Chronicles. 5. 13 Heber. 25. d. Genesis 46. 17 Heber. 29. b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 22
Heber, 29. b 1 Chr. 8. 17 Hebron, 14. c. and 15. a. Exo. 6. 18. Hebron, 19. b.
1 Chro. 2. 42 Helah, 18. c. 1 Chronicles. 4. 5 Heldai, 21. b. 1 Chro. 27. 15 Heleb,
a worthy, 20. d. 2 Sa. W
23. 29. or Heled. 1 Chro. 13. 30. or Heldai, 1 Chr. 27. 15 Helek, 31. b. Number.
26. 30 Helek, see Likhi. 31. d. Helem, 25 b. 1 Chr. 7. 35 Helez, 18. b. 1 Chro.
2 39 Helez, 32. b. 1 Chronicles. 27. 10 W
and 11. 27. Helon, 26. c. Number. 1. 9 Hemah, 7. d. 1 Chro. 2. 55 Heman, 5. b.
Genesis 36. 22, or Homam, 1 Chronicles. 1. 39 Heman a singer, 15. b. 1 Chapter 6. 33 Heman,
17. d. 1 Chr. 2. 6. and 1 King. 4. 31, Psalm. 88. 1 Hemdan, 5. d. Genesis 36. 26 or
Amram, 1 Chro. 1. 41 Hepher, 18. d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 6 Hepher, 31. b. Number. 27. 1
Hephzibah: 33 b. 2 Ki. 21. 1 Q
Heresh, 13. d. 1 Chro. 9. 15 Herod, 9. d. K
Herod the fox. d. Lu. 13. 32 K
Herod the proud, 9. d. Acts K
12. 1 Herodias, 9. d. Herodias, 9. d. Mar. 6. 17 Heth, 5. a. Genesis 10. 15
Hezekiah, 33. b. 16. 20 K
Hezekiah, 34 b. 1 Chronicles. 3. 23 Hezion. 3. a. 1 Kings 15. 18 Hezeki, 29. b. 1 Chronicles. 8 17 Hezir, 16. c. 1 Chronicles. 24. 15 W
Hezrai the Carmelite, 2 Samuel 23. 35 Hezron, 11. c. Genesis 46. 9 HEZRON, 17 c.
and 18. a. Genesis 46. 12. L
Hiel. 30. c. 1 Kings 16. 34 Hilkiah, 13 c. 1 Chronicles. 6. 45 Hilkiah, 13. c. 1
Chro. 26. 11 Hilkiah, 14. d. and 16. b. S
1 Chr. 6. 13 Hillel, 32. d. Iud. 12. 13 Hiram, 5. a. 2 Samuel 5. 11 Hiram, 23.
d. 1 Kin. 7. 13. or K
Huram, 2 Chronicles. 4. 11 Hircanus, 16. c. S
Hircanus, 16. d S
Hittites, 5. a Hiui, 5. c. Genesis 10 17 Hizkiah, 19. d. Zeph. 1. 1 Hohab, see
Iethro, 7. c Hod, 25. d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 37 Hodaiah, 34 b. 1 Chr. 3. 24 Hodauiah,
31. d. 1 C. 5. 24 Hodesh, see Baara, 27. a. Hodia, see Iehudi a, 21. b. Hoglah,
31. b. Number. 26. 33. Hoham, 5. d. Ios. 10. 3 K
Homam, see Heman, 5. d Hophni, 14. b. 1 Samuel 1. 3 Horam, 4. d. Ios. 10. 33
Hori, 5. b. Genesis 36. 22 Hori, 12. a. Number. 13. 5 Horites, 5. c. Genesis 36. 20
Hosah, 13. c. 1 Chr. 26. 10 Hosama, 34. c. 1 Chr 3. 18 Hoshea, 32. a. 1 Chr.
27. 20 Hoshea, 32. d. 2 Kings 17. 1 KS
Hosea, 26. b. P
Hotham, 25. b. 1 Chrnicles 320. Hothan, 11. b. 1 Chr. 11. 44 Hother, 15 d. 1 Chronicles. 25. 4 Hul, 3 c. Genesis 10. 23 Huppah, 16 c. 1 Chr. 24. 13 Huppim, 27 c.
Genesis 46. 21. or Hupham, Number. 26. 39 or Huram, 1 Chronicles. 8. 5 Huppim, 27 d. 1
Chro. 7. 12 Hur, 7 b. Numb. 31. 8 K
Hur, 19 a. and 20 a. 1 Chro. 2. 19 Hur, 32 b. 1 Kings 4. 8 Huram, 5 a. 2 Chronicles. 2. 11 K
Huram, see Hiram, 23 d. Huri, 24 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 14 Hushath, 20 b. or Shuah, 1 Chronicles. 4. 4. 11 Hushai, 25 c. 1 King. 4. 16 Hushai, 32 b. 2 Samuel 15. 32 Husham,
9 a. Genesis 36. 34 K
Hushim, 23 a. Genesis 46. 23 or Shusham, Number. 26. 42 Hushim, 27 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 8
Huz, 6 b. Genesis 22. 21
I
Iaacobah, 12 b. 1 Chr. 4. 36 Iaalam, 9 c. Genesis 36. 5 Iaanai, 24 c. 1 Chronicles. 5.
12 Iaareoregim, 20 b. 2 Samuel 21. 19. or Iair, 1 Chapter 20. 5 Iaasiel, 28 c. 1
Chro. 27. 21 Iaazaniah, 7 d. Jer. 35. 3 Iaazania, 20 a. 2 Kings, 25. 23
Iaaziah, 13 d. 1 Chro. 24. 26 Iabal, 1 b. Genesis 4. 20 Iabesh, 32 b. 2 King. 15.
10 Iabez, 18 d. 1 Chr. 4. 9 Iabin, 5 b. Ios. 11. 1 K
Iachan, 24 d. 1 Chronicles. 5. 13 Iachin, 12 c. Genesis 46. 10. or Iarib, 1 Chronicles. 4.
24 Iachin, 16 d. 1 Chronicles. 24. 17. JACOB 6 d. and 10 a. Ge. 25. 26 L
Jacob, 34 b. Matthew. 1. 15. a K
King by right. Iada, 18 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 28 Iaddua, 14 b. and 16 a. Neh. S
12. 11 Iael, 7 d. Judge. 4. 17 Iahaleel, 13 d. 2 Chr. 29. 12 Iahath, 13 a. 1 Chronicles. 6. 20 Iahath, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 23. 10 Iahath, 13 d. 2 Chronicles. 34. 12
Iahath. 15 a. 1 Chronicles. 24. 22 Iahath, 20 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 2 Iahaziel, 13 b. 2
Chr. 20. 14 Iahaziel, 15 c. 1 Chr. 23. 19 Iahaziel, 30 a. 1 Chro. 12. 4 Iahdai,
19 d. 1 Chronicles. 2. 47 Iahdiel, 31 d. 1 Chronicles. 5. 24 Iahdo 24 a. 1 Chronicles. 5. 14
Iahleel, 26 c Genesis 46 14 Iahmai, 26 b. 1. Chron. 7. 2 Iahzeel, 23 c. Genesis 46.
24 Iair, 18 b. 1 Chronicles 2. 22 Iair, see Iaareoregim, 20 b. Iair, 28 b. Est. 2 5
Iair, 31 b. Judge. 10. 3 I
Iair, 31 c. Deuteronomy 3. 14 Iakim, 16 d. 1 Chronicles. 24. 12 Iakim, 29. b. 1. Chr. 8.
19. Jason, 21. d. 1. Chron. 4. 17. James, 34. b. Mat 4. 21. James, 34. b. Mat.
27. 56. and 10. 3. Iamin, 12. a. Genesis 46. 10. Iamin, 18. a. 1. Chron. 2. 27.
Iamlech, 12, a. 1. Chr. 4 34. IANNA, 34. d. Luke 3. 24, L
Iapheth, 1. d. Genesis 5. 32. Iaphiah, 5. d. Ios. 10. 3. K
Iaphiah, 22. d. 1. Chr. 3. 7. Iaphlet; 25. d. 1. Chron. 7. 32 Jareb, 3. b.
Hos. 5. 13 K
IARED, 1. d. Genesis 5. 15 L
Iaresiah, 29 b. 1. Chr 8 27 Iarha, 4. d. and 18. b. 1 C. 2. 35 Iarib. see
Iachin, 12. c. Ioroah, 24. b 1. Chr. 5. 14 Iashobeam, 17. b. 1. Chapter 11. 11 W
and 27. 2. or Adino, 2. S. 23. 8 Iashobeam, 30. c. 1. Ch 12. 6 Iashub, see
^ob, 26. a. Iathniel, 15. b. 1. 26. 2. Iauan, 2. c. Genesis 10 2 Ibhar, 22. b. 1.
Chr. 3. 6 Ibneiah, 30. d. Chr. 1. 9. 8 Ibnijah, 30. d. 1 Chr. 9. 8 Ibri, 13. d.
1 Chr. 24. 27 Ibsan, 20. b. Iud. 12. 8 J
Ichabod, 14. b. 1. Sam. 4. 21 Idbash, 20. b. 1. Chr. 4, 3 Iddo, 13. a. 1 Chr.
6. 21. or Adaiah, verse 41. or Eden, 2 Chr. 29. 12 Iddo, 31. c. 1 Chr. 27. 21
Idumeans, 9. d. Icaterai, 13. b or Ethni, 1 Chr. 6. 21. 41. Iebusi, 5. c. Genesis
10. 16 Iechamiah, 34. c. 1 C. 3. 18 Iecholiah, 33. c. 2 Chr. 26. 3 Q
Iechoniah, see Iehoiachin. KI
33. b. Iedaiah, 12. d. 1 Chr. 4. 37 Iedaiah, 16. c. 1 Chr. 24. 7 Iedeiah, 14.
a. 1 Chr. 24. 20 Iediael, 15. c. 1 Chr. 26. 2 Iediael, see Ashbel, 27. a.
Iedidah, 33. d. 2 King. 22. 1 Q
Iedidiah, see Solomon, 22. d KI
Iediel, 31. d. 1 Chr. 12. 20. Ieduthun, see Ethan, 13. d Ieezer, 31. b. Number*
26. 30 or Abiezer, Ios. 17. 2 Iehaleel, 21. a. 1 Chr. 4. 16 Iehezekel, 16. d. 1
C. 24. 16 Iehiel, 11 d. 1 Chr. 11. 44. Iehiel, 13 a. 1 Chr. 23* 8 Iehiel, 13, b
2 Chr. 20. 14. Iehiel, 15. c. 2 Chr. 29. 13 Iehiel, 28. a. 1 Chr. 9. 35 Iehiel,
33. a. 2 Chr 21. 2 Iehizkiah, 32. c. 2 Chapter 28. 12 Iehoaddan, 33. b. 2 Ki. 14. 2
Q
Iehoahaz 24. d. 2 Ki. 10. 35 Iehoahaz. see Ahaziah, 33. a KS
Iehoahaz, 33. d. 2 Ki. 23. 30 KI
or Iohanan, 1 Chro. 3. 15 KI
or Shallum, Ier. 22. 11 Jehoash, see Ioash, 24. d KS
Iehohanan, 15. b. 1 Chapter 26. 3 Iehohanan, 19. a. 2 Chapter 23. 1 Iehoiada, se
Iohana^, 14. b. Iehoiada, 14. d. 1 Chr. 27. 5 Iehoadah, 28. d 1 Chapter 8. 36
Iehoiachin, 33. b. 2 Ki. 24. 6 KI
or Coniah, 22. 24. or Jechonias, Mat. 1. 11. or Iechoniah, 1 Chr. 3. 16
Jehoiakim, 33. b KS
Iehoiarib, 16. c. 1 Chapter 24. 7 Iehoram, 26. d. or Ioram, 2 KS
King. 3. 12. Chr. 22. 5 Jehoram, 33. a. 1 Kin: 22. 50 KI
or Ioram. Iehoshabad, 29. a. 2 C. 17. 18 Iehoshabeath. 33. a. 2 Chr. 22. 11.
or Iehosheba, 2 Kings 11. 2 Iehoshaphat, 24. c. 2 K. 9 2 Iehoshaphat, 33. a. 1
K. 15. 24 KI
or Iosaphat* Mat, 1. 8 Iehoshua, ot Joshua, 14. b. and S
16. a. ^ac. 3. 1. or Joshua, Neh, 12. 1 Iehoshua, or Joshua, who settled the
people in rest 32. b. Ios. 1. 1. 1 Chapter 7 27 Iehozabad. 8. b. 2 C. 24. 26
Iehozadak, or Iesedech, 14 S
b and 16. b. 1 Chr. 6. 14. Iehu, 12. b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 35 Iehu, 18. b. 1 Chronicles.
2. 38 Iehu. 24. d. 2 King. 9. 2 KS
Iehu. 30. c. 1 Chronicles. 12. 3 Iehubbah, 25. b. 1 Chr. 7. 34 Iehudijuh, 21. b. or
Hodia^ 1 Chronicles. 4. 18. 19 Iehush, 27. b. 1 Chr. 8. 39 Ieiel, 11. d. 1 Chr. 5. 7
Iekamiah, 18. d. 1 Chr. 2. 41 Iekamiam, 15. c. 1 C. 23. 19 Iekuthiel, 21. d. 1
Chr. 4. 18 Iemimah, 7. b. Job 42. 14 Iemini, see Benjamin, 10. 6. Iemuel, 12.
a. Genesis 46. 10 or Nemuel, 1 Chapter 4. 24 Iephunneth, 21. h. 32. 12 Iephunneth, 25.
b. 1 C. 7. 37 Iephtah 31 b. Iud. 11. 1 I
Ierah, 3. b. Genesis 10. 26 Ierahmeel, 13. c. 1 C. 24. 29 Ierahmeel, 18. a. 1
Chr. 2. 9 Iered, 21. b. Chr. 4. 18 Jeremiah, 7. d. Ier. 35. 3 Jeremiah, 24. b.
1 C. 12. 13 Jeremiah. 24. b. 1 Chapter 12. 10 Jeremiah, 30. a. 1 Chapter 12. 4
Jeremiah, 31. d. 1 Chapter 5. 24 Jeremiah the Prophet, of P
Leui, and town of Anathoth, in Benjamin. Ieremias, Mat. 27. 9. or Zechariah, P
a Prophet, Zech, 1. 12. Mat. 27. 9 Ieriah, 15. a. 1 Chro. 23. 19 Ierico a
City, 30. c. Ieriel, 26. b. 1 chr. 7. 2 Ierijah, 15. c. 1 Chapter 26. 31 Ierimoth,
13. c 1 Chapter 23. 23 Ierimoth, 15. b. 1 Chr. 25. 4 Ierimoth, 22. d. 2 Chronicles. 11.
18. Ierimoth, 23. d. 1 Chapter 27. 19 Ierimoth, 27. b. 1 Chr. 7. 7 Ierimoth, 27. d.
1 Chr. 7. 8 Ierimoth, 29. b. 1 Chr. 8. 14 Ierimoth, 30. a. 1 Chapter 12. 5 Ierioth,
19 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 18 Ieroam, 29. c. 1 Chronicles. 12. 7 Jeroboam, 24. d. 2 Kings KS
14. 16 Jeroboam the son of Nebat, KS
32. d. 1 Kin. 11. 26 Ieroham, 23. b. 1 Chr. 27. 22 Ieroham, 29. a. 1 Chapter 8. 27
Ieroham, 30 d. 1 Chapter 9. 8 Ierubbaal, or Ierubesheth, I
see Gedeon, 31. c Jerusalem, a City, 29. c Q
Ierusha, 33. d. 2 Kin. 15. 33 Iesaiah. 30. a. Ne. 11. 7 Iesaiah, 34. c. 1 Chronicles. 3. 21 Ieshaiah, 13. d. 1 Chr. 25. 3 Ieshaiah, 14. d. 1 Chr. 25. 26
Iesarelah, see Asarelah, 13. b. Ieshebeab, 16. c. 1 C. 24. 13 Iesher. 19 a 1 Chronicles. 2. 18 Ieshishai, 24. a 1 Chr. 5. 14 Ieshua, fee Ieh oshua, 14. b Iesua,
16. d. 1 Chronicles. 24. 11 Iesiah, 30. c. 1 Chronicles. 12. 6 Iesimiel, 12. d. 1 Chro.
4. 36. Iehosaiah, 12. b. 1. Chr. 4. 36 IESSE, or Ishai, 22. c. 1 Chr. 2. 12
JESUS CHRIST, 34. Lu. 3. or MESSIAH. Dan. 9. L
25. Ioh. 1. 41. and 4. 25. born King of the Jews. Mat. 2. 2 Jesus, 16. d S
Jesus, 16. c S
Jesus, or Jason, 16. b Iether, 18. d. 1 chronicles. 2. 32 Iether, 21. d. 1 Chronicles.
4. 17. Iether, 22, c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 17 or Iether, 2 Samuel 17. 25 Iether, see
Iethran. 25. b Iether, 31. c. Iud. 8. 20 Ietheth, 9. b. Genesis 36. 40 Iethro, 7.
c. Ex 18. 1. or Hobab. Number. 10. 29 Ietur, 6. d. Genesis 25. 15 Ieush, 9. c. Genesis
36. 5 Ieush, 13. b. 1 Chronicles. 23. 10 Ieush, 27. a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 10 Ieush, 33. c.
2 Chronicles. 11. 19 Ieuz, 27. d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 10 Iezabel, 5 a. and 26. d 1 King, 16.
31 Q
Iezer, 23. c. Genesis 46. 24 Iezreel, 20. b. 1 Chro. 4. 3 Iezreel, see Izreel,
26. d. Hos. 1. 4 Ieziel, 30. b. 1 Chronicles. 12. 3 Iezliah, 29. d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 18
Igal, 26. b. Number. 13. 7. Igeal, 34. d. 1 Chro. 3. 22. Iibsam, 26. b. 1 Chronicles. 7
2. Iidlaph, 6. d. Genesis 22. 22 Iimnah, 25. a. Genesis 46. 17 Ikkesh, 18 d 2 Samuel
23. 26 Immer, 16. c. 1 Chro. 24. 14 Imna, 25. b 1 Chro. 7. 35 Jmrah 25. b. 1
Chr. 8. 36 Imri, 17. d. 1 Chronicles. 9. 4 Ioab, 22. d. 2 Samuel 2. 18 Ioah, 13. a. or
Ethan, 1 Chr. 6. 21, 42 Ioakim, see Eliakim, 33 b. IOANNA, 34. c. Luke 3. 27 KI
Ioash, 17. a. 1 Chro. 4. 22 Ioash, 24. d. or Iehoash, 2 Kin. 13 9, 10. Ioash,
26. d. 1 King. 22 26 KS
Ioash, 27. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 8 Ioash, 30. a. 1 Chr. 12. 3 Ioash, 31. c. Iud 6. 11
Ioash, 33. b. 2 King. 11. 2 Job, 7. a. Job. 1. 1 KI
Job, 26. a. Genesis 46. 13. or Iashub. 1 Chronicles. 7. 1 Iobab, 3. d Genesis 10. 23
Iabab, 5. a* Ios. 11. 1 Iobab, 9. a. Genesis 36. 33 K
Iobab, 27. b 1. Chron. 8 9 Iobab, 29. d^ Chron. 8. 18 Iochebed, 13. c. and 14.
a. Exodus 6. 20 Ioed, 30. b. Neh. 11. 7 Joel, 11. a. 1 Chro. 5. 4 Joel, 11. c. 1 Chronicles 5. 8 Joel, 11. b P
Joel, 12. c. 1 Chronicles. 4 35 Joel, 13. a. 1 Chr. 23. 8 Joel, see Shaul, 15 b.
Joel, 15. d. 1 Samuel 8. 2. or Vashni, 1 Chronicles. (...). 28 Joel, 24. a 1 Chro. 5.
^2 Joel, 26. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 3 Joel, 30. b. Nehe 11 9 Joel, 31. c. 1 Chr 27. 20
Ioelah, ^9 c. 1 Chr 12. 2 Ioezer, 30. c. 1 Chronicles. 12. 6 Iogli, 23. b. Number. 34.
22 Ioha, 29. d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 16 John Bap. 16. d. Luke (...). ^0 S
John Evangelist, 34. b. Mat. 4. 21 Iohanan, 14. b. and 16. a. and 33. a. 1
Chr. 6 9. or Ieho iada, 2 Kin. 11. 4. or Bara^hias, Math. 23. 35 Johanan, 24.
b. 1 Chapter 12. 12 Iohanan, 30. a. 1 Chr. 12. 4 ^ohanan, 32. a. 2 Chapter 28. 12
Iohanan, 34. d. 1 Chr. 3. 24 Johannes, 16. c S
^oiada 14. b. 16. a. N. 12. 10 S
Joiakim, 14. b. and 16. a. Ne S
12. 10 Ioiarib, 17. d. Neh. 11. 5 Iokim, 17. a. 1 Chapter 4. 22 Ioshan. 7. a. Genesis
25. 2 Ioktan, 3. c. Genesis 10. 25 Jonadab, 7 d. Ier. 3. 56 Ionadab, 22. b. 2 Samuel
13. 3. Jonah, 26. d IONAN, 33. c Luke 3. 30 Jonathan, 14. b. and 16. a Nehe.
12. 11 Jonathan 14. b. 2 Sa. 15. 27 Jonathan, 14. d. Iu. 18. 30 Jonathan, 16. c
^onathan, 18. d. 1 Chr. 2. 32 S
Jonathan, 22. b. 1 Chr. 20. 7 Ionatha^, 28. a. 1 Sa. 1^. 49 Iorai, 24. b. 1
Chr. 5. 13 Ioram, 14. d. 1 Chr. 26. 25 Ioram, 3 d. 2 Samuel 8. 10. or Hadoram, 1
Chr. 18. 10 Ioram, see Iehoram, 26. d. KS
2. Kings 3. 1 IORIM, 33 d. Luke (...). 29 L
^orkoam, 19. b. 1 Chr. 2. 44 osabad, 30. a. 1 Chr. 12. 4 Iosaphat, see
Ichoshaphat, 33 a. 1 Kin. 15. 24 KI
Iosedeth, se Iehozadak, 14. b IOSE, 33. d. Luke 3 29 S
Ioses, 34. d. Mar. 63 L
Joseph, 10. a. Genesis 30. 24. Joseph, 13. b. 1 Chr. 25. 2 Joseph, 26. a. Number.
13. 7 JOSEPH, 33. c. Luke 3. 30 Joseph, 34. b. the Husband L
of Mary, Matthew. 1. 16. a KI
King by right, as all his Predecessors were. JOSEPH, 34. c. Luke 3. 26 L
JOSEPH, Luke 3. 24 L
Ioshah, 12. b. 1 Chr. 4. 34 Ioshbekashah, 15. d. 1 Chr. 25. 4 Joshua, see
Iehoshua, 14. b. S
Agg. 1. 1 Joshua, see Iehoshuah, 32. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 27 Josiah, 33. b. (...)
King. 21. 26 KI
Iosibiah. 12. b 1 Chr. 4. 35 Iotham. 19. b. 1 Chr. 2. 47 Iotham, 31. c. Iud.
9. 5 Iotham. 33. d. 2 King. 15. 7 KI
Iozabad, 31. b. 1 Chr. 12. 20 Iozabad, 31. d. 1 Chr. 12. 20 Iozarus, ^6. c
Iozarus, 16. d S
Iphedi^ah, 29. d. 1 Chapter 8. 25. S
Ira. 18. 2 Samuel 2^. ^6 W
Irad, (...). a. Genesis 4. 18 Iram, 9 d. Genesis 36. 43 Iri, ^7. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 7 D
Irnahash, 21 b. Ir^. 21. b. 1 Chr. 4. 15 ISAAC, 6. d Genesis 21. 3 Isaiah, 33. b L
Ishbosheth, 28. c* or ^shbaal, P
2 Samuel (...). 8, 9. 1 C. 8. 33 KS
Ishad, 31. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 18 Ishbah, 21. d. 1 Chro. 4. 17 Ishback, 7. b. Gen
25. 2 Ishbibenoh, 4. d 2 Sa. 21. 16 Ishi, 12. b. 1 Chronicles. 4 42 Ishi, 18. b. 1
Chro. 2, 31 Ishi, 12. a. 1 Chro 4. ^0 Ishi. 31. b. 1 Chorn. 5. 24 Ishiah, 15.
c. 1 Chronicles. 24. 25 Ishiah, 26. b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 3 Ishma, 20. b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 3
Ishmael, 6. c. Gen 16. 11 Ishmael, 13. d. Ier. 41. 1 Ishmael, 19. a. 2 Chro.
23. 1 Ishmael, 28. d. 1 Chr. 8. 38 Ishmaiah, 26. d. 1 Chapter 27. 19 Ishmaiah, 28.
c. 1 Chro. 12. 4 Ishmarai, 29. d. 1 Chro. 8. 18 Ishpah, 29. d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 16
Ishpan, 26. b. 1 Chr. 8. 22 Ishuah, 25. a. Genesis 46. 17 Ishuj, 28. a. 1 Samuel 14.
49 or Abinadab, 1 Chapter 8. 33 Ishui, 25, c. Genesis 46. 27 Isacbar, 10. c. and 26.
a. Ge. 30. 18 Ismael, 16. d Ithamar, 14. a. and 16. a. Ex. S
6. 23 Ithiel, 30. b. Neh. 11. 7 Ithma, 8. b. 1 Chronicles. 11. 46 Ithra, see
Iether, 22. c Ithran, 5. d. Genesis 36. 26 Ithran, 25. b. or Iether, 1 Chronicles. 37.
38 Jthream, 22. b. 2 Samuel 3. 5 Ittai, 4. d. 2 Samuel 15. 19 Ittai, 30. a. 2 Samuel
23. 29 W
Iubal, 1. b. Genesis 4. 21 IVDA, 10. c. and 17. a. Genesis L
29. 35 Judah, 30. b. Neh. 11. 9. IVDAH, 33. c. Luke 3. 30 L
IVDAH, 34. c. Luke 3. 26 L
Judas Iscariot, 12. d. John 13. 2 Judas Maccabeus. 16. c S
Judas, 34. d. Luke 6. 16 Judith, 5. a. and 9. a. Genesis 26. 34 Judith, 12. b
Iushabheseb, 34. a. 1 Chronicles. 3. 20 Izhar, 14. c. and 15. a. Exo. 6. 18. or
Izahar, or Aminadab, 1 Chr. 6. 2, 22 Izrahiah, 26. b. 1 Chro. 7. 3 Izreel; 26.
d. or Iezreel. Hos. 1. 4 Izri, see Zeri, 13. d
K
Kedar, 6. b. Genesis 25. 13 Kedemah, 6. d. Genesis 25. 15 Kemuel, 6. b. 14. c. Ge.
22. 21 Kemuel, 14. c. 1 Chr. 27. 17 Kemuel, 32. a. Number. 34. 24 Kenaz, 9. a.
Genesis 36. 11 Kenaz, 9. d. Gen, 36. 42 Kenaz, 21. a. 1 Chr. 4. 13 D
Kenaz, 21. b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 15 Kerenhappuch, 7. d. John 42. 14 Keturah, 7. c.
Genesis 25. 1 Keziah, 7. b. Job 42. 14 Kiriathic^rim, 20. b. Kings of Esau, 9
Kish, 13. c. 1 Chronicles. 23. 21 Kish, 28. a. 1 Chronicles. 8. 33 Kish. 28. a. 1 Chronicles.
9. 36 Kishi, 13. d. 1 Chronicles. 6. 44. or Kushaiah. 1 Chr. 15. 17 Kittim, 2. c.
Genesis 10. 4 Kohath, 13. a. and 14. a. Genesis 46. 11 Kolaiah, 13. b. Nehe. 11. 7
Korah, 9. a. Genesis 36. 16 Korah, 9. c. Genesis 36. 5 Korah, 15. a. Ex. 6. 21. Number.
16. or Core, Jude 11. verse. Korah, 19. b. 1 Cbron. 2. 43 Kore, 15. b. 1 Chronicles.
9. 19 Korehites, 30. c. Kushaiah, see Kishi, 13. d
L
Laadah, 17. a. 1 Chr. 4. 21 Laadan, see Libni, 13. a Laadan, 32. a. 1 Chr. 7.
26 Laban, 6. d. Genesis 24. 29 Lael, 13. a. Number. 3. 24 Lahad, 20. d. 1 Chro. 4. 2
Lahmi, 4. d. 1 Chronicles. 20. 5 Lamech, 1. b. Genesis 4. 18 LAMECH, 1. d. Genesis 5. 25
Lapidoth, 32. b. Iud. 4. 4 L
LEAN, 9. b. and 10. a. and L
26. a. Genesis 29. 16 Lecah, 17. a 1 Chapter 4. 21 Lehahim, 4. c. Genesis 10. 13 Lehem,
17. b. 1 chr. 4. 22 Letushim. 7. b. Genesis 25. 3 Leui, 10. a. and 13. a. Genesis 29.
34 LEVI, 33. d. Luke 3. 29 L
LEVI, 34. d. Luke 3. 29 L
Leummim. 7. b. Genesis 25. 3 Libni, 13. a. 1 Chronicles. 6. 29 Libni, 13. a. Ex. 6.
17, or Laadan, 1 Chronicles. 23: 8 Likhi, 31. d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 19 or Helek, Number. 26.
30 Loammi. 26. d Hos. 1. 6 Loruhamah, 26. d. Hos. 1. 9 Lot, 6. a. and 8 a. Ge.
11. 31 Lotan, 5. b. Genesis 36. 20 D
Lud, 3. c. Genesis 10. 22
M
Maachah, 4. d. 2 Samuel 3. 3 and 22. d. Q
Maachah, 6. b. Genesis 22. ^4 Maachah, 1 (...). 1 Chapter 27. 16 Maacha, 19. c. 1
Chr. 2. 48 Maacha, 28. c. 1 Chr. 9. 35 Maachah, 29. a. and 33. a Q
2 Chro. 11. 20. or Michaiah, 2 Chronicles. 13. 2 Maachah, 31. a. 1 Chr. 7. 16
Maachathite, 20. a Maaseiah, 17. d. Nehe. 11. 5 Maaseiah, 30, b. Neh. 11. 7
MAATH, 34. c. Luke 3. 26 L
Maaz, 18. a. 1 Chr. 2. 27 Maaziah, 16. d. 1 Chapter 24. 18 Machbanai, 24. d. 1 Chronicles. 12. 13 Machbenah, 19. d. 1 C. 2. 49 Machi, 24. c. Number. 13. 15 Machir,
31. a. Number. 27. 1 Machir, 31. d. 2 Samuel 17. 27 Madai, 2. a. Genesis 10. 2.
Madmannah, 19. b. 1. Chro. 2. 49. Magdiel, 9 d. Genesis 36. 43 D
Magog, 2. a. Genesis 10. Mahalah, 31, b. 1 Chr. 7. 18 MAHALALEEL, 1. c. Genesis 5.
12 Mahalaleel, 17. a. Neh. 11. 4 Mahalath, 6. d. and 9. c. Genesis 28. 9. or
Bashemath. Genesis 26. 34 Mahalath, 22. b. and 33. a. Q
2 Chr 11. 18. Mahali* 23. c. Exo. 6. 19. Maharai, 20. d. 1 Sa. 23. 28
Mahazioth, 15. d. 1 C. 25. 4 W
Mahershalalhashbaz, 33. b Esai. 8. 3. Mahlah, 31. b. Number. 26. 33. Mahli, 13.
c. 1 Chro 23. 23 Mahlon, 22. a. and 8. b. ^u 1. 2 Mahol, 17. c. 1 Kin. 4. 31
MAINAN, 33. c. Luk 3. 31. Malcham, 27. b. 1 Chro. 8 9 L
Malchiel, 25. a. Ge. 46. 17. Malchijah, 16. c. 1 Chapter 24. 9 Malchiram, 34. a. 1
C. 3. 18 Mallothi, 15. d. 1 Chr. 25. 4 Malluch. 13. d. 1 Chr. 6. 44 Mamre, d.
5. Genesis 14. 13 Manasseh, 10. a. and 13. a. Genesis 41. 51. Manasses, 16. b
Manahath, 5 b. Genesis 36. 23 Manahath, 27. a. Manoah, 2^. b. Iud. 1^. 2 Maoch, 4
c. 1 Samuel 27. 2 K
Maon, 19. b 1 Chro. 245 Maresha, 17. a. 1 Chro. 4. 21 Maresha, 19. a. 1 Chro.
2. ^2 MARY, 34. d. Luk 1. 27. L
Mary, 34. d. ohn 19 25. ^ash, 3. c Genesis 10. 23. Mashmanah, 24. b. 1 C. 12.
Massa, 6. b. Genesis 25. 14. Mattithiah, 13. d. 1 C. 25. 3 Matsaniah, 13. b 1 chr:
9. 15 Mattaniah, 15. b. 1 Ch 25 4 Mattaniah, see Zedekiah, KI
33. d MATTATHA, 33 c. Luke 3. 31 L
MATTATHIAS, 34. c. L. 3. 26 L
Matthan, 34. b. Mat. 1. 15. KI
by right a King of Judah MATTHAT, 33. d. Luke 3. 29 L
Mattithia, 15. b. 1 Chapter 9. 31 Mebunnai, ^0. b. 2 Samuel 23. W
27. or Sibbecai. 1 Chronicles. 11. 29. Medan, 7. a. Genesis 25 2 Medes, 2. a Mehir,
21. a. 1 Chro. 4. 11 Mehuiael, 1 b. Genesis 4. 18. Melathiah, 28. c. Neh. 3. 7
MELCHI, 34. d. Luke 3. 25 L
Melchiah, 13. b. 1 C. 66. 40 MELCHISEDEC, or SEM, 1. d K
Gen, 9. 27. and 14. 28. L
Melchishuah, 28. a. 1. Sam. S
14. 49. MELEA, 33. c. Luke (...). 31 L
Melech, 28. b. 1 Chro. 8. 35 Melzar, 4 a. Dan. 1. 11 Menahem, 32. d. 2 Ki. 15.
14 KS
Meonothai, 21. b. 1 Chapter 4. 14 Mephibosheth, 28. d. 2 Sa. 21. 8 Mephibosheth,
or Meribaal, 28 b. 2 Samu. 9. 6. 1 Chro. 8. 34 Merab, 28 c 1 Samuel 14. 49
Meraroth, 14 b. and 16 b. S
1 Chronicles. 6. 6. Merari, 13 c. Genesis 46. 11 Mered, 21 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 17 Meribaal,
see Mephibosheth, 28 b. Merodach, see Berodach, 4 b. Mesha, 8 b. 2 King. 3. 4 K
Mesha, 19 a. 1 Chronicles. 2 42 Mesha, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 9 Meshech, 2 c. Genesis 10 2
Meshelemiah, 15 b. 1 Chr. 26. 2 Meshillemoth, 32 c. 2 Chr. 28. 12 Meshobab, 12
b. 1 Chr. 4 34 Meshullam, see Shallum, 16 b. Meshullam. 24 b. 1 Chapter 5. 13
Meshullam, 29 b. 1 Chapter 8. 17 Meshullam, 30 b. Neh. 11 17 Meshullam, 30 d. 1
Chr. 9. 8 Meshullam, 34 a. 1 C. 3. 19 Meshullemeth, 33 d. 2 Kin. Q
21. 19 Methusael, 1 b. Genesis 4. 18 METHVSELAM, 1 d. Ge. 5. 21* L
Mibsam, 6 b Genesis 25. 13 Mibsam, 12 c. 1 Chro. 4. 25 Mibzir, 9 d. Genesis 36. 42 D
Micah, 11 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 5 Micah, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 9. 15 Micah, 17 b. P
Micah, 28 b. 1 Chronicles. 8 35 Micah, 32 d. Judge. 17. 1 Micah, 15 c. 1 Chro. 23.
20 Michael, 13 b. 1 Chro. 6. 40 Michael, 24 b. 1 Chr. 5. 13 Michael* 24 b. 1
Chro. 5. 14 Michael, 25 c. Number. 13. 13 Michael, 26 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 3 Michael, 29
d. 1 Chro. 8. 16 Michael, 31 d. 1 Chr. 12. 20 Michael, 33 c. 2 Chro. 21. 2
Michaiah, see Maachah. Q
29 a. Michal, 22 d. and 18 a. 1 Sa. Q
18. 27 Michri, 30 d. 1 Chronicles 9. 8 Midian, 7 a. Genesis 25. 2 Midianites, 7 a.
Miiamin, 16 c. 1 Chro. 24. 9 Mikloth, 28 c. 1 Chronicles. 9. 37 Milcah, 6 a. Genesis
11. 29 Milcah, 31 d. Numb. 26. 33 Miriam, 14 a. Exodus 15. 20 Miriam, 21 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 1^ Miriam, 21 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 17 Mirma, 27 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 10 Mishael,
15 c. Leuit. 10. 4 Mishael, 33 b. Dan. 1. 6 Misham, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 12
Mishma, 6 b. Genesis 25. 14 Mishma, 12 c. 1 Chronicles. 4. 25 Mizraim, 4 c. Genesis 10. 6
Mizzah, 9 c. Genes. 36. 13 Moab, 8 a. Genes. 19. 37 Moabites, 8 a. Molid, 18 b.
1 Chronicles. 2. 29 Mordecai, 28 b. Ester 2. 5 Moses, 14 c. Exodus 6. 20 P
Mount Ephraim, 32 b. Moza, 19 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 46 Moza, 28 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 36
Mushi, 13 c. Exodus 6. 19 Muppim, 27 c. Genesis 46. 21 or, Shephuphan, 1. Chapter 8. 5.
or, Shuphan, Numb. 26. 39
N
Naam, 21 b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 15 Naaman, 3 d. 2 King. 15. 1 Naaman, 27 a. Genesis 46.
21 Naaman, 27 a. 1 Chronicles. 8. 7 Naaman, 27 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 4 Naamah, 1 b. Genes.
4. 22 Naamah, 8 d. and 33 a. 1 King. 14. 21 Q
Naarah, 18 c. 1 Chronicles. 4. 5 NAHSHON, 22 a. 1. Chapter 2. 10 or NAASSON, Mat. 1. 4 L
Nabal, 19 c. 1. Sam. 25 3 Naboth, 26 c. 1 King. 21. 1 Nadab, 14 c. Exodus 6.
23. Leuit. 10. 1 Nadab, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 28 Nadab, 28 c. 1 Chronicles. 9. 36 Nadab.
32 d. 1 King. 15. 25 K S
NAGGE, 34 c. Luke 3. 25 L
Naharai, of Beroth in Benjamin, W
2 Samuel 23. 37 Nahash, 8 c. 2 Samuel 17. 27 K
Nahash, 8 c. 2 Samuel 10. 2 K
Nahash, 22 a. 2 Samuel 17. 25 Nahath, 9 c. Genesis 36. 13 Nahath, 15 d. 1 Chronicles. 6.
26 or Cohu, 1 Samuel 11. or Coach, 1 Chronicles. 6. 34 Nahbi, 23 d. Numb. 13. 4 NAHOR,
3 b. Genes. 11. 22 L
Nahor, 6 a. Genesis 11. 26 Nahum, 12 b. P
Naomi, 22 a. Ruth. 1 2 Naphish, 6 d. Genesis 25. 15 Naphtali, 10 d. and 23 c.
Genes. 30. 8 Naphtuhim, 4 c. Genesis 10. 13 Nathan, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 26
NATHAN, 22 d. 1 Chronicles. 3. 5 L
and 33 d. Nathaneel, 12 a. Nathaneel, 22 a. 1 Chronicles. 2 14 Nathanael, 26 d John
21. 2 NAVM, 34 c. Luke 3. 25 L
Neariah, 12 b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 42 Neriah, 34 b. 1 Chronicles. 3. 22 Nebaioth, 6 b. Genesis
25. 13 Nebat, 32 d. 1 King. 11. 26 Nebuchadnezzar, 4 b. This K
name is written seven several ways in holy writ. Nebushazban, 4 b. Ie. 39.
13 Nebuzaradan, 4 b. Ie. 39 9 Nedabiah, 34 c. 1 Chr. 3. 18 Nehemiah, 22 b. Neh.
1. 1 Nehushta, 33 b. 2 Kin. 24. 8 Q
Nemuel, 11 a. Numb. 26. 9 Nemuel, see Iemuel, 12 a. Nepheg, 15 a. Exodus 6. 21
Nepheg. 22 b. 2 Chronicles. 3. 7 Ner, see Abiel, 28 a. Ner, 28 a. 1 Chronicles. 9. 36
Ner, 28 c. 1 Samuel 14. 50 Nergal, 4 b. Ier. 39. 3 Neregal, 4 b Ier. 39. 3 NERI,
33 c. Luke 3. 27 Nethaneel, 26 b Number. 1. 8 L
Nethaniah, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 25. 2 Nethaniah, 18 d. Ier. 41. 1 Netophathite, 20
c. Nimrod, 4 a. Genesis 10. 8 Nimshi, 24 c. 2 Kings 9. 2 NOAH, 1 d. Genesis 5. 28 L
Noah, 31 b. Numb. 26. 33 Nogah, 22 b. 1 Chronicles. 3. 7 Nohah, or Bechir, 27 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 2. Genesis 46. 21 Non, 32 b. 1 Chro. 7. 27. or Nun, Ios. 1. 1
O
Obadiah, 13 b. 1 Chro. 9. 16 Obadiah, 13 d. 2 Chr. 34. 12 Obadiah, 19 b.
Obadiah, 24 a. 1 Chr. 12: 9 P
Obadiah, 26 b. 1 Chro. 7. 3 Obadiah, 26 d. 1 Chapter 27. 19 Obadiah, 28 d. 1 Chro.
8. 38 Obadiah, 34 c. 1 Chro 3. 21 Obal, 3 d. Genesis 10. 28 Obed, 18 b. 1 Chronicles.
2. 37 OBED, 22 c. 1 Chro. 2. 12 L
Obed, 32 c. 2 Chro. 28. 9 P
Ochran, 25 c. Number. 1. 13 Og, 5 d. Number. 21. 33 K
Ohad, 12 a. Genesis 46. 10 Ohel, 34 a. 1 Chronicles. 3. 20 Omar, 9 a. Genesis 36. 11
Omri, 17 d. 1 Chronicles. 9. 4 Omri, 26 a. 1 King. 16. 16 K S
Omri, 26 b. 1 Chronicles. 27. 18 Omri, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 8 On, 11 a. Number. 16. 1
Onam, 5 b. Genesis 36. 23 Onam, 18 c. 1 Chapter 2. 26 Onan, 17 a. Genesis 38. 4 Onias the
ancient, 16 a. S
Onias the covetous, 16 b. S
Onias the holy, 16 b. S
Onias, or Menalaus, 16 b. S
Ophir, 3 d. Genesis 10. 29 Ophrah, 21 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 14 Oreb, 7 b. Judge. 7. 25 K
Oren, 18 a. 1 Chr. 2. 25 Ornan, 5 c. 1 Chro. 21. 15 Orpah, 8 b. and 22 a. Ruth
1. 4 Othoniel, 21 b. 1 Cor. 4. 13 I
Judge. 3. 9 Ozem, 12 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 15 Ozen, 18 c. 1 Chr. 2. 25 Ozi, 16 b. S
Oziel, 12 b. Ozni, see Ezbon, 24 c.
P
Pagiel, 25 c. Numb. 1. 13 Palti, 27 c. Numb. 13. 9 Paltiel, 26 b. Numb 34. 26
Parmashta, 9 b. Hester 9. 9 Parnach, 26 c. Number, 34. 25 Parshandatha, 9 b. He 9.
7 Pasach, 25 d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 33 Pasach, 21 b. 1 Chronicles. 4. 12 Pashur 16 c Ier.
20. 2 Pathrusim, 4 c. Genesis 10. 14 Paul, or Saul, 30 b. Acts. 9. Phil. 3. 5
Pedahel, 23 d. Number. 34. 28 Pedahzhur, 31 a. Nu. 1. 10 Pedaiah, 30 b. Nehe. 11.
7 Pedaiah, 31 c. 1 Chr. 27. 20 Pedaiah, 32 d. 2 Ki. 23. 36 PEDAIAH, 34 a. 1
Chro. 3. 18 L
Pekah, 32 b. 2 King. 15. 27 KS
Pekahiah, 32 b. 2 Ki. 15. 23 KS
Pelatiah, 12 b. 1 Chr. 4 42 Pelatiah, 34 b. 1 Chro. 3. 24 Pelatiah, 34 c. 1
Chro. 3. 21 PELEG, 3 a. Genesis 10. 25 L
Pelet, 19 d. 1 Chronicles. 2. 47 Pelet, 30 b. 1 Chronicles. 12. 3 Peleth, 11 a. Numb.
16. 1 Peleth, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 33 Pelonite, 32 d. Peninnah, 15 d. 1 Samuel 1. 2
Penuel, 29 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 25 Penuel, see Hareph, 20 c. Persians, 3 a. Peresh,
31 a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 16 Pethahiah, 16 d. 1 (...). 24. 16 Phallu, 11 a. Genesis 46. 9
Phalti, 1 Samuel 25. 44 Phaltiel, 28 c. 2 Samuel 3. 15 Phanuel, 25 c. Luke 2. 36
Pharaoh, 4 b. Genes. 40. 2 Pharaoh, 4 b. 1 Kings 11. 1 K
Pharaoh, 4 d. Exodus 1. 11 K
Pharaoh, 4 d. 2 King. 23. 33 K
Pharaoh, Hophra, 4 d. Ier. K
44. 30 K
Pharaohs daughter, 33 a. 1 King. 3. 1 Q
Pharohs daughter that hid Moses, 4 d. Exodus 2. 5 PHAREZ, 17 c. Genesis 38. 29 L
Phicol, 4 d. Genesis 21. 22 Phillip, 9 d. Mark 6. 17 Philistims, 4 c. Phineas,
14 a. and 16 a. S
Exodus 6. 25 Phineas, 14 a. and 16 a. 1 S
Sam. 1 Phut, 4 a. Genesis 10. 6. or Put, 1 Chronicles. 1. 8 Phuuah, 26 a. Genes. 46.
13 or Puah, 1 Chronicles. 7. 1 Pildash 6 d. Genes. 22. 22 Pinon, 9 b. Genesis 36. 41 D
Piram, 5 d. Josh. 10. 3 K
Pirathonite, 32 b. Pispa, 25 d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 38 Pithon, 28 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 35
Poratha, 9 b. Hest. 9. 8 Potiphar, 4 b. Genesis 37. 36 Potipherah, 4 b. Genesis 41.
45 Puah, see Phuuah, 26 a. Puah, 26 b. Judge. 10. 1 Pull, 3 a. 2 Kings 15. 19
Put, see Phut. 4 a. K

R
Raamah, 4 a. Genes. 10. 7 Rabmag, 4 b. Ier. 39. 3 Rabsaris, 4 b. Jer. 39. 3
Rabsaris, 3 b. 2 King. 18. 17 Rabshakeh, 3 b. 2 Ki. 18. 17 RACHAB, or RAHAB, 9
b. L
and 22 c. Josh. 2. 1. and Mat. 1. 5 Rachel, 6 d. and 10. 1 Genesis 26. 16 Raddai,
22 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 14 Raguel, see Revel, 1 c. Raham, 19 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 44 Rakem,
31 a 1 Chronicles. 7. 16 Ram, 18 a. 1 Coron. 2. 25 RAM, 18 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 9. or L
(...) ARAM, Mat. 1. 3. Rapha, 28 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 37 Rapha, or Rosh, 27 c. 1 Chapter
8. 2. Genesis 46. 21 Reaiah, 11 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 5 Reaiah, 20 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 2.
Rebah, 7 b. Numb. 31. 8 REBECCA, 6 d. Gen 22. 23 L
Rechab, 7 d. 1 Chronicles. 2. 25 Rechab, 29 a. 2 Samuel 4. 2 Regem, 19 b. 1 Chronicles. 2.
47 Rehabiah, 14 c. 1 Chapter 23. 17 Rehob, 3 c. 2 Samuel, 8. 3. K
2 Chronicles. 11. 20 Rehoboam, 29 c. and 22 b. KI
and 33 a. 1 Kings 14. 21 Rehum, 3 b. Ezr. 4 8 Rehum, 14 d. Neh. 3. 17 Rekem, 7
b. Numb. 31. 8 K
Rekem, 19 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 43 Remaliah, 32 b. 2 Ki. 15. 27 Rephah, 32 c. 1 Chronicles. 7. 25 Rephaiah, 12 d. 1 Chr. 4. 42 Rephaiah, 26 b. 1 Chr. 7. 2 Rephaiah,
34 a. 1 Chr. 3. 21 REV, 3 b. Genesis 11. 18 Revel, 7 c* Exodus 2. 18. or L
Raguel, Numb. 10. 29 Revel, 9 c. Genesis 36 4 Revel, 30 d. 1 Chronicles. 9. 8 Reuma, 6
a. Genesis 22. 24 Rezeph, 32 c. 1 Chronicles. 7. 25 Rezia, 25 d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 39 Rezin,
3 d. 2 King. 15. 37 K
Rezon, 3 d. 1 King. 11. 23 RHESA, 34 c. Luke 3. 27 L
Ribai, 30 a. 2 Samuel 23. 29 Rimmon, 29 a. 2 Samuel 4. 2 Rinnah, 21 d. 1 Chr. 4 20
Riphath, 2 a. Genes. 10. 3. or Diphath, 1 Chronicles. 1. 6 Rizpah, 28 c. 2 Samuel 3. 7
Rodanim, see Dodanim, 2 b. Roghgah, 25 a. 1 Chr. 7. 34 Romantiezer, 14 d. 1
Chr. 25. 4 Rosh, see Rapha, 27 c. Ruben, 10 a. Genesis 29. 32. and 11 a. Rumah a
City, 32 d. RVTH, 8 b. and 22 a. and 22 c. Ruth, 4. 10 L

S
Sabtah, 4 a. Genesis 10. 7 Sabrecha, 4 a. Genesis 10. 7 Sadok, 34 a. Mat. 1. 14. by
KI
right a King of Judah, Matthew. 1. 13. 14 SALAH, 3 a. Genesis 10. 24 Salasadai, 12
a. L
SALATHIEL, 33 b. 1 Chronicles. 3. 17 L
Sali, 30 d. Nehem. 11. 8 Salu, 12 a. Numb. 25. 14 Sallu, 30 b. Nehem. 11. 7
Salma, 20 a. 1 Chronicles. 2 51 SALMA, 22 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 11. L
or Salmon, Mat. 1. 4 Salmanesar, 3 a. 2 Kin. 17. 3 K
Salome, 9 d. Salome, 34 b. Mark. 16. 1 Sallum, 33 d. 1 Chronicles. 3. 15 Solomon, 8
d. and 22 d. and KI and KS
33 a, or Iedidyah, 1 Samuel 12. 25. or Kobeleth, Eccl. 1. 1. or Lemuel, Pro. 31.
1 Samaria, a City, 32 b. Samgarnebo, 4 b. Ier. 39. 3 Samlah, 9 a. Genesis 36. 36 K
Sammah, 9 c. Genesis 36. 13 Samuel, 15 d. 1 Samuel 1. 20 P
Samson, 23 b. Judge. 13. 24 J
Saph, 4 d. 2 Samuel 21. 18. or Sippai. Saphat, 34 d. 1 Chronicles. 3. 22 SARAH, 6 c.
Genesis 11. 29 L
Saraph, 17 a. 1 Chronicles. 4. 22 Sarsechim, 4 b. Ier. 39. 3 Saul, 9 c. Genesis 36. 37
Saul, 28 a. 1 Sa. 9. 2. King of K
all Israel. K
Saul, see Paul* 30. b. Seba, 4 a. Genesis 10. 7 Sechaniah, 34 c. 1 Chr. 3. 21
Segub, 8 a. 1 Chronicles. 2. 21 Segub, 30 c. 1 King. 16. 34 Seir, 5 c. Genesis 36. 20
Seled, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 30 SEM, 1 d. and 3 a. Genesis 5. 32. or MELCHISEDEC, Genesis
L
14. 18 K
Semaiah, 34 c. 1 Chro. 3: 22 S
SEMEI, 34 c. Luke 3. 26 Senacherib, 3 a. 2 Kin. 18. 13 L
Senuath, 30 b. Nehem. 11. 9 K
Serah, 25 c. Gen 46. 17 Seorim, 16 c. 1 Chro. 24. 8 Seraia, 12 b. 1 Chronicles. 4.
35 Seraiah, 14 b. 1 Chronicles. 6. 14 Seraiah, 20 b. Ier. 40. 8 Seraiah, 21 b. 1
Chro. 4. 14 Sered, 26 c. Genesis 46. 14 SERVG, 3 b. Genesis 11. 20 L
SETH, 1 d. Gen 4. 25 L
Sethur, 25 c. Number. 13. 13 Shaaph, 19 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 49 Shaaph, 19 d. 1 Chro.
2. 47 Shachiah, 27 d. 1 Chr. 8. 10 Shadrach, see Hananiah. 33 b. Shaharaim, 27
c. 1 Chr. 8 8 Shallum, 12 c. 1 Chro. 4. 25 Shallum, 15 b. 1 Chronicles. 9. 19
Shallum, 4 d. 1 Chronicles. 6. 12. 16 b. or Meshullam, 1. Chron. 9. 11 Shallum, 1
Chro. 2. 40. 18 b. Shallum, see Shillem, 23 c. Shallum, 32 b. 2 Kin. 15. 10
Shallum, 32 c. 2 Chr. 28. 12 KS
Shallum, see Iehoahaz, 33 d. KI
Shama, 11 b. 1 Chro. 11. 44 Shamariah, 33 c. 2 C. 11. 19 Shamed, 27 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 12 Shamer, 13 c. 1 Chronicles. 6. 46 Shamer, 15 c. 1 Chro. 24. 24
Shamhuth, 15 a. 1 Chapter 27. 8 Shamma* 25 d. 1 Chro. 7. 37 Shammai, 21 d. 1 Chro.
4. 17 Shammah, see Shimma, 22 a. Shammai, 18 a. 1 Chro. (...). 28 Shammai, 19
b. 1 Chr. 2. 44 Shammua, 11 b. Number. 13. 4 Shammua, see Shimea, 22 d Shamsherai,
29 b. 1 C. 8. 26 Shapham, 24 a. 1 Chr. 5. 12 Shaphat, 12 a. Numb. 13. 5
Shaphat, 24 c. 1 Chronicles. 5. 12 Shaphat, 32 b. 1 Kin 19. 16 Sharezer, 3 b 2 Kin.
19 37 Sharezer, 4 b. see Nergall. Shashak, 29 a. 1 Chronicles. 8. 25 Shashak, 29 b.
1 Chronicles. 8. 14 Shaul, 12 c. Genesis 46. 10 Shaul, 15 b. or Joel, 1 Chr. 6. 24. 36
Sheariah, 28 d. 1 Chro. 8. 38 Sheariashub, 33 b. Esaias 7. 3 Sheba, 3 d. Genesis 10.
28 Sheba, 4 a. Genesis 10. 7 Sheba, 7 a. Genesis 25. 3 Sheba, 24 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 13
Sheba, 30 d. 2 Samuel 20 1 Sheber, 19 b 1 Chronicles. 2. 48 Shebuel, 14 d. 1 Chr. 26.
24 Shebuel, 15 b. 1 Chro. 25. 4 Shecaniah, 16 d. 1 Chapter 24. 11 Shechem, 5 c.
Genesis 34. 2 Shechem, 31 d. 1 Chr. 7. 19 Shechem, 31 d. Number. 26. 31 Shedeur, 11 b
Number. 1. 5 Shehariah, 29 b. 1 Chapter 8. 26 Shelah, 17 a. Gen, 38. 5 Sheleph, 3 b.
Genesis 10. 26 Shelesh, 25 d. 1 Chronicles. 7. 35 Shelomi, 25 c. Number. 34 27 Shelomith,
13 b 1 Chapter 23. 9 Shelomith, 14 d. 1 C. 26. 25 Shelomith, 15 a. 1 C. 23. 18
Shelomith, 23 b. Le. 24. 11 Shelomith, 33 a. 2 C. 11. 20 Shelomith, 34 c. 1 Chapter
3. 19 Shelumiel, 12 c. Numb. 1. 6 Shema, 11 c. 1 Chronicles. 5. 8 Shema, 1^ b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 43 Shema, or Shimhi, 29 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 13. 21 Shemaah, 30 a. 1 Chro.
12. 3 Shemaiah, 11 a. 1 Chro. 5. 4 Shemaiah, 12 d 1 Chapter 4. 37 Shemaiah, 13 d. 1
Ch 9. 14 Shemaiah, 13 d. 1 Chapter 9. 16 Shemaiah, ^5 c. 1 Chr. 15. 8 Shemaiah, 20
d. Ier 26. 20 Shemaiah, 30 a 2 Chapter 12. 5 Shemeber, 5 b. Genesis 14. 2 K
Shemidah, 31 d. Nu. 26. 32 Shemuel, 12 c. Nu. 34. 20 Shemuel, 26 b. 1 Chro. 7.
2 Shenazar, 34 a. 1 Chapter 3. 18 Shephatiah, 12 d. 1 C. 27. 16 Shephatiah, 17 a.
Ne. 11. 4 Shephatiah, 22 b. 2 Sa. 3. 4 Shephatiah, 30 a. 1 C. 12. 5 Shephatiah,
30 d. 1 Chapter 9 8 Shephatiah, 33 c. 2 C. 21. 2 Shephi, 1 Chronicles. 1. 36. or Shepho,
5 b. Genesis 36. 23 Shephupham, see Muppim, 27 c. Sherath, 32 a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 24
Sheresh, 31 a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 16 SHESBAZZAR, see Zoraba 34 L
Sheshai, 4 c. Numb. 13. 22 Sheshan, 18 b. 1 Chro. 2. 31 Shetherboznai, 3 b.
Ez. 5. 3 Shebual, 19 d. Sheua, 19 c. 1 Chro. 2. 49 Shillem, 23 c. Genes. 46.
24. or Shallum, 1 Chro. 7. 13 Shiloni, 17 c. Nehem. 11. 5 Shil^hah, 25 d. 1
Chro. 2. 37 Shimea, 8 d. 2 Chr. 24. 26 Shimea, 13 b. 1 Chro. 6. 39 Shimea, 13
b. 1 Chronicles. 6. 30 Shimea, 22 d. 1 Chro. 3. 5. or Shammua, 2 Sa. 5. 14 Shimeam,
1 Chr. 9. 38. 28 c. Shimeathites, 1 Chro 2. 55 Shimei, 11 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 4
Shimei, 12 d. 1 Chro. 4. 26 Shimei, 13 a 1 Chr. 6. 42 Shimei, 13 a. 1 Chr. 6.
29 Shimei, 28 a. 2 Samuel 5 Shimei, 28 d. 2 Samuel 16. 5 Shimei, 30 d. 1 King. 4. 18
Shimei, 34 c. 1 Chronicles. 3. 19 Shimhi, see Shema, 29 c. Shimma, 22 a. 1 Chapter 2.
13. or Shammah, 1 Samuel 16. 9 Shimmi, 13 a. Exodus 6. 17 Shimrah, 29 d 1 Chro. 8.
21 Shimri, 12 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 37 Shimri, 15 c. 2 Chro. 29. 13 Shimrith, 8 b. 2
Chro. 24. 26 Shimron, 26 a. Genesis 46. 13 Shimshai, 3 b. Ezra 4. 8 Shinab. 5 b.
Genes. 14. 2 K
Shiphi, 12 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 37 Shiphtan, 32 a. Number. 34. 24 Shishak, 4 b. 1 King.
11. 40 K
Shiza, 11 d. 1 Chro. 11. 42 Shobab, 19 a. 1 Chronicles 2. 18 Shobab, 22 d. 1 Chronicles.
3. 5 Shobach, 3 d. 2 Samuel 10. 18 Shobal, 5 b. Genesis 36 20 D
Shobal, 20 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 50 Shobi, 8 d. 2 Samuel 17. 27 Shoham, 13 d. 1 Chr.
24. 27 Shomer, 25 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 32 Shuah, 5 b. Genesis 38. 2 Shuah, 7 c. Genesis 25.
2 Shuah, see Hushah, 20 b. Shuah, 25 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 36 Shuah, 25 d. 1 Chronicles. 7.
32 Shual, 25 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 36 Shubael, 14 a. 1 Chro. 24 20 Shuchathites, 7 c.
1 Chr. 2. 55 Shuham, see Hushim, 23 a. Shuni, 24 a. Genesis 46. 16 Shupha^, see
Muppim, 27 c. Shuppim, 27 b. 1 Chro. 7. 12 Shuthelah, 32 a. 1 Chr. 7. 20
Shuthelah, 32 d. 1 Chapter 7. 21 Sibbecai, see Mebunnai, 20 b W
Sidon, Genesis 10. 15. or Zidon 5 a. Sidonians, 5 a. Sihon, 5 d. Numb. 21. 21
Simeon, 10 a. and 12 a. Genes. K
29. 33 Simeon, 21 c. 1 Chr. 4. 20 SIMEON, 33 d. Luke 3. 30 L
Simon, 12 d. John 13. 2 Simon, 16 b. the ancient. Simon, 16 b. the just.
Simon, 16 c. Simon, 16 d. Simon, 34 d. Luke 6 15 Simri, 13 c. 1 Chronicles. 26. 10
Sinte, 5 a. Genesis 10 17 Sippai, see Saph, 4 d. Sisamai, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2. 40
Sisera, 5 b. Judge. 4. 2 Socho, 21 b. Sodi, 26 c. Numb. 13. 10 So, 4 d. 2 King.
17. 4 K
Suah, see Hushah, 20 b. Susi, 31 a. Number. 13. 11
T
Tabrimon, 3 d. 1 Ki. 15. 18 Tahan, 32 c. 1 Chronicles. (...). 25 K
Tahath, 15 b. 1 Chronicles. 6. 24 Tahath, 32 a. 1 Chr. 7. 20 Talmai, 4 c. Numb. 13.
22 Talmai, 4 d. 2 Samuel 3. 3 Talmon, 15 b. 1 Chr. 9. 17 Tamar, 22 d. 2 Samuel 13.
2 Tamar, 22 d. 2 Samuel 14. 27 Tanhumeth, 20 b. Ier 40. 8 Taphath, 33 c. 1 King.
4 11 Tappuah, 19 b. 1 Chro. 2. 43 Tareah, 28 d. 2 Chro. 8. 35 Tarshish, 2 c.
Genesis 10. 4 Tartan, 3 b. 2 Kin. 18. 17 Tatnai, 3 b. Ezra 5. 3 Tebah, 6 b. Genesis
22. 24 Tebaliah, 13 c. 1 Chr. 26. 11 Tehinnah, 21 b. 1 Chr. 4. 12 Tekoa, 18 c.
Telah, 32 c. 1 Chro. 7. 25 Tema, 6 d. Genesis 25 Teman, 9 c Gen 36. 11 D
Teman, 9 d Genesis 3^. 42 Temeni, 18 d 1 Chro. 4* 6 TERAH, 3 b. and 6. a. G. 11.
24 L
Thahash, 6 b. Genesis 22. 24 THAMAR, 17 c. Matthew. 1 3 L
Genesis 38. 24 Tharshish, 27 c. 1 Chr. 7. 10 Tidal, 5 a. Genesis 14. 1 K
Tiglathpilesar, 3 a. 2 Kings K
15: 29 Tilon, 21 d. 1 Chro. 4 20 Timna, 5 b. Genesis 36. 22 Timna, 9 a. Genesis 36.
12 Timnah. 9 b. Genesis 36. 40 D
Tiras, 2 c. Genesis 10. 2 Tirbaka, 4 b. 2 King. 19. 9 K
Tirhanah, 19 d. 1 Chr. 2. 48 Tirathites, 7 d. 1 Chronic. 2. 55 Tiria, 21 c. 1 Chronicles. 4. 16 Tirza, 31 d Number. 26. 33 Toah, see Nahath, 15 d. Tobiah, 8 d.
Nehem. 2. 19 Togarma, 2 a Gen 10. 3 K
Tohu, see Nahath, 15 d. Toi, 3 d. 2 Samuel 8. 9 K
Tola, 26 a Genesis 46. 13 Tola, 26 b. Judge. 10. 1 I
Tubal, 2 a. Genesis 10. 2 Tubalkain, 1 b. Genesis 4 22
V
Vaiczatha, 9 d. Hest. 9. 9 Vashni, see Joel, 15 d. Uash^i, 3 a. Hest. 1. 9
Vlam, 28 b. 1 Chro. 8. 39 Q
Vlam, 31 a. 1 Chronicles. 7. 16 Vlla, 25 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 39 Vophsi, ^3 d. Number. 13.
14 Vri, 20 c. Exodus 31. 2 Vriah, 5 a. 2 Samuel 23. 39 Vriel, 15 a. or Zephaniah, W
1 Chr. 6. 24. 36 Vriel, see Absalom, 29 a. Vriiah, 20 d. Ier. 26. 20 Vthai, 17
d. 1 Chro. 9 4 P
Vz, 3 c. Genesis 10. 23 Vz, 5 d Genesis 36. 28. Vzal, 3 b Genesis 10. 27 Vzza, 13 a. 1 Chronicles. 6. 29 Vzza, 20 b. 2 Samuel 6. 3 Vzza, 27 c. 1 Chronicles. 8. 7 Vzzi, 14 b. 1 Chronicles. 6. 5. and 16 b. S
Vzzi, 26 b. 1. Chron. 7. 2 Vzzi, 27 b. 1 Chronicles 7. 7 Vzzi, 30 d. 1 Chronicles. 9. 8
Vzziah. 17 b: Nehem. 11. 4 Vzziah, or Azariah, 15 b. Vzziah, or Azariah, 33 d.
Vzziel, 12 d. 1 Chronic. 4 K
42 Vzziel, 14 c. Exodus 6. 18 Vzziel, 15 b. 1 Chronicles. 25. 4 Vzziel, 15 c. Exodus
6. 18 Vzziel, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 7
X
Xerxes, 3 a. the son of K
Assuerus.
Z
Zaauan, 5 b. Genesis 36. 27 Zabad, 8 b. 2 Chronicles. 24. 26 Zabad, 18 b. 1 Chronicles. 2.
36 Zabad, 32 c. 1 Chronicles. 7. 21 Zabdi, see Zimri, 17 c. Zabdi, 29 b. 1 Chro. 8.
19 Zabdiel, 17 a. 1 Chronicles. 27. 2 Zaccur, 11 b. Numb. 13. 4 Zaccur, 12 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 26 Zaccur, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 5. 22 Zaccur, 13 d. 1 Chro. 24. 27
Zachariah, 24 d. 2 Ki. 14 29 Zacharias, 16 d. Luke. 1. 5 KS
Zacheus, 30 c. Luke 19. 2 Zadok, 24 b. and 16 a. 1 C. 6. 8 Zadok. 14 d. and 16
b. 1 Chro. S
6. 12. or Azariah, 2 C. 31, 10 Zaham, 33 c. 2 Chr. 11. 19 Zalmunah, 7 b. Judge.
8. 5 Zanoah, 21 d. K
Zarah, 17 c. Genesis 38. 30 Zaza, 18 d. 1 Chronicles. 2. 33 Zebah, 7 b. Judge. 8. 5 K
Zebadiah, 15 b. 1 Chro. 26. 2 Zebadiah, 19 b. 2 Chapter 19. 11 Zebadiah, 22 d. 1
Chr. 27. 7 Zebadiah, 29 b. 1 Chr. 8. 17 Zebadiah, 29 b. 1 Chr. 8. 15 Zebedeus,
34 b. Mat. 27. 56 Z^budah, 32 d. 2 Kin. 23. 36 Q
Zabulon, 10 c. and 26 c. or Zebulun, Genesis 30. 20 Zechariah, 11 d. 1 Chro. 5. 7
Zechariah, 13 b. 1 C. 20. 14 Zechariah, 13 c. 1 C. 26. 11 Zechariah, 15 b. 1
Chapter 26. 2 Zechariah the Prophet, P
called also Ieremias, Matthew. 27. 9 Zechariah, 15 c. 1 C. 24. 25 Zechariah, 16
b. or Zerahiah, 1 Chronicles. 6 Zechariah, 17 b. Nehe. 11. 4 Zechariah, 17 d. Nehe.
11. 5 Zechariah, 28 c. 1 Chr. 9. 37 Zechariah, 31 c. 1 Chapter 27. 21 Zechariah, 33
c. 2 Chr. 21. 2 Zedekiah, 33 d. or Mattaniah, 2 Ki. 24. 17. 1 C. 3. 15 KI
Zeeb, 7 b. Judge. 7. 25 Zelek, 8 d. 2 Samuel 23. 37 K
Zelophehad, 31 b. Nu. 27. 1 W
Zemarile, 5 c. Genesis 10. 18 Zemira, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 7. 8. Zephaniah, see Vriel,
15 a. Zephaniah, 19 d. P
Zephi, or Zepho, 9 a. Genesis 36. 11. 1 Chronicles. 1. 36 Zephon, see Ziphion, 24 a.
Zerah, 4 b. 2 Chronicles. 14. 9 Zerah, 9 a Genesis 36. 33 Zerah, see Zohar, 12 c.
Zerah, 13 b. 1 1 Chro. 6 21 Zerahiah, 14 b. Chron. 6. 6 Zereda, 32 d. a city.
Zeresh, 9 b Hest. 5. 10 Zereth, 18 d. 1 Chronicles. 4. 7 Zeri, 13 d. 1 Chro. 25. 33.
11 or, Izri. Zeror, 28 a. 1 Samuel 9. 1 Zeruah, 32 d. 1 Kin. 11. 26 ZERVBBABEL,
or Zorobabel, 34 a. 1 Chronicles. 3. 19 Zeruiah, 22 c. 1 Chro. 2. 16 Zethan, 13 a. 1 Chronicles. 23. 8 Zethan, 27 c. 1 Chronicles. 7. 10 Zia, 24 d 1 Chronicles. 5. 13 Zibeon, 5 d.
Genesis 36. 20 Zibia, 27 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 9 Zibia, 33 a. 2 King. 12. 1 Q
Zichri, 11 d. 1 Chro. 27. 16 Zichri, 13 b. 1 Chronicles. 9. 15 Zichri, 14 d. 1 Chronicles. 26. 25 Zichri, 15 a. Exodus 6. 21 Zichri, 19 c. 2 Chronicles. 17. 16 Zichri,
29 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 27 Zichri, 29 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 23 Zichri, 29 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 19
Zichri, 30 b. Nehem. 11. 9 Zichri, 32 a. 2 Chronicles. 28. 7 Zidon, 5 a. or Sido^,
G. 10. 15 Zilla^, 1 b. Genesis 4. 19 Zilthai, 29 b. 1 Chronicles. 8. 20 Zilthai, 31 d.
1 Chro. 12. 20 Zilpah, 10 a. Genesis ^0. 9 Zimmah, 13 a. 1 Chro. 6. 20 Zimram, 7
a. Genesis 25. 2 Zimri, 12 a. Number. 25. 14 Zimri, 17 c. 1 Chronicles. 2. 6. or Zaodi,
Ios. 7. 1 Zimri, 26 c. 1 King. 16. 9 KS
Zimri, 28 d. 1 Chronicles. 8. 26 Zina, or Ziza, 13 b. 1 Chro. 23. 10. 11 Ziph, 19
b. Ziph, 21 a. 1 Chro. 4. 16 Ziphath, 21 a. 1 Chro. 4. 16 Ziphion, 24 a. Genesis
46. 16. or Zephon, Number. 26. 15 Zippor, 8 a. Numb. 22. 2 Zipporah, 7 d. Exodus 2.
21 Zithri, 15 c. Exodus 6. 22 Ziza, 12 d. 1 Chronicles 4. 37 Ziza, see Zina, 13 b.
Ziza, 33 a. 2 Chronicles. 11. 20 Zibebah, 18 d. 1 Chro 4. 8 Zoar, 18 d. 1 Chronicles. 4.
7 Zophar, 5 c. Genesis 23. 8 Zohar, 12 c. Genesis 46. 10. or Zerah, Numb. 26. 13
Zoheth, 21 a. 1 Chronicles. 4. 20 Zophah, 25 b. 1 Chro. 7. 35 Zophai, 1 c. 1 Chr.
26. 15. or Zuph, 1 Samuel 1. 1 ZOROBABEL, 24 a. Mat. 1. 12 L
or ZERVBBABEL, 1 Chronicles. 3. 19. or Sheshbazzar. Ezra 1. vlt. Zuar, 26 a. Numb.
1. 8 Zuph, see Zophai, 15 b. Zur, 7 a. Numb. 25. 15 Zur, 28 a. 1 Chronicles. 9. 36
Zuriel, 13 d. Number. 3. 35 Zurishaddai, 12 c. Nu. 1. 6
FINIS.

