THE HIGH WAY TO HEAVEN BY the clear light of the Gospel cleansed of a
number of most dangerous stumbling stones thereinto thrown by Bellarmine and
others.

IN A Treatise made upon the 37.38. and 39. verses of the 7. of John: wherein
is so handled the most sweet and comfortable doctrine of the true union and
communion of Christ and his Church, and the contrary is so confuted, as that
not only thereby also summarilie and briefly, and yet plainly all men may
learn rightly to receive the sacrament of Christ's blessed body and blood, but
also how to believe and to live to salvation. And therefore entitled The high
way to Heaven.

By Thomas Spark Doctor of Divinity.

Printed by R. R. for Robert Dexter. 1597.

To the Right Honorable and most reverend Father, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable
privy Council, his very good Lord; Thomas Spark wishes all health,
happiness, and prosperity to his own hearts good contentation and comfort.
Many and sundry favors and kindnesses (Right Honorable and right reverend
in the Lord) for these twenty years space that I have known you, received at
your Graces hands, have always made me not only to love and reverence you;
but also to think my self unfeignedly so much bound and beholden unto your
Grace, as that I have a long time been of this mind, that it is not
sufficient to discharge me of unthankfulness, by bare words (though never so
full of kindness and thankfulness) both in your absence and presence to
testify the same, (whereof yet ever since I first knew you I have been
careful and mindful) and therefore I have long ago resolved my self
(having no better means to do it by,) by dedicating some part of my poor
labors unto you, to give you and all others, to whom the sight thereof shall
come, some public and assured testimony of my duetifull and thankful heart
toward you. Whereupon having at the earnest and importunate suit and request
of diverse of my worshipful and good friends, not long since committed to
writing the Treatise following (which in effect they first heard me from point
to point in this manner deliver unto them in certain sermons) I have now
thought it good in this sort somewhat enlarged to publish it, the better to
satisfy their desires: and to the end aforesaid, I have made bold to dedicate
the same unto your Grace, beseeching you to accept thereof rather according to
the mind of the offerer (which I protest unto you is full of love and
reverence toward you,) than to the simplicity and meanness of the thing it
self, which I must needs confess in respect of the handling, is much
unworthy of such an Honorable patron as your self is. As for the matter, it
is (I am persuaded) answerable to the title that I have given it, which is, The
high way to Heaven. For therein first is showed how the law is our
schoolemaister to Christ, by causing us to know our sins, and to feel the
weight and burden thereof to make us weary of the same, and therefore to
hunger and thirst after him: and then what Christ is in person and office, and
how he is to be apprehended and fed on to salvation by a true and lively says
in him, is largely and plainly declared: and lastly also, herein such as are
and have been first duly thrown down by the law, and after truly raised
up again by the Gospel, in Christ, are taught how they are to live and spend
the rest of their days in holiness and righteousness. Which I am sure is the
old ancient beaten way throughout all the whole course of the old and new
Testament, and in all sound antiquity, that the saints and servants of God
have taken to be the only saife and sure wace, whereby they have sought to
come to the kingdom of heaven. Your Grace therefore being one (as I fully
persuade my self you are) that seek to come thither by this only way, and
therefore one also that is very desirous that all others should walk
thitherwards in an eauen and straight course thereunto; in respect of the matter
therein handled, my good hope is, you will not be ashamed or think much at
all, that it seeks thus to come abroad under your countenance and protection.
For though the way be never so well known already and be beaten and trod
out by many before this, and that perhaps more exactly and substantially than
it is herein in by me: yet seeing many are still to go this same way, and all
cannot hit of the same guids, and still Satan will be busy by his accomplices
either to keep men from finding it, or by one slight or other to turn them
out of it. I trust that after so many that have gone before me in guiding men
into and keeping them in this way, this my proffered service to that end, may
and will be yet profitable unto many. Now these 24. years at the least it has
pleased the Lord to use my poor ministry, and that, his name be blessed for
it, in great peace and quietness, and yet I have therein always been of this
mind, and am and will be still, not to esteem or know any thing, but even this
way through Jesus Christ and him crucified. 1. Cor. 2.2. And sure I am I find
and I persuade my self I shall still, though I continued therein twice as long
more, this to be a matter so necessary and of that importance beyond all
other, to be insisted in and dwelt upon, that I should never have either
leisure or pleasure to trouble either press or pulpit with any thing without
the very bonds and strict limits hereof. For (alas) every where, yea even
where most pains has been taken and yet is by catechizing of and conference
with the people, yea by view of their lives, there is either such gross
ignorance hereof, or erring or halting herein to be found and seen amongst
the^, that if all the ministers of England had the tongues both of men and
Angels, they should find work enough thoroughly to employ themselves in, only
about the reformation hereof. I would to God therefore, that all controversies,
whereof men may be ignorant without danger either of not finding, or of not
leasing this heavenly way, might either be kept and reserved only to brotherly
and friendly conferences among the godly learned, or else that for ever they
might be fair dead and buried amongst us; and that so, that all of us as one
man with one heart and with one mind, might and would join all our forces
together to lead men aright into this way, and to keep them on straight in
the same, what subtlety and cunning soever Satan and his instruments should
at any time use to the contrary. For we may be sure, so that he any way can
get men to miss or to lease this way whiles we are busying our own heads
and the peoples with other matters of far less importance, though therein we
show never so much zeal and learning, he has the very thing he desires. For
that doubtless has been and is still a dangerous stratageme or policy of
his, when he finds he cannot as he would prevail by keeping men in ignorance
and careless security, then to do what he can, that they may spend their
learning and zeal about matters of the least moment; that in the mean time he
may the more quietly by their silence in matters of greatest weight, by the
other contrary way, as it were paue the way to Atheism: yea I fear much (to
speak plainly what I think) that lack of due consideration hereof in time,
in some has not only been one of the next causes of the fantastical
sects of the Brownistes, and Familistes, but also of too shameful increase,
in so great light of the Gospel, both of Papists and Atheistes amongst us.
Wherefore my hearts desire and prayer to God for England is and ever shall be,
and for all the Churches of Christ wheresoever in the wide world, that this
subtlety of Satan may both here and every where be thoroughly well looked
unto, and the mischief thence ensuing be as carefully prevented as possibly
may be: for otherwise it may grow intolerable and incurable. And J beseech
the Lord heartily to give your Grace and all the rest of the reverend Fathers
the Bishops of this land, and all others that be in authority with you in the
same, both skill and will, power and might by the assistance of his holy
spirit speedily and effectually to cleanse and purge these Churches of
England and Ireland so, of all these four kinds of dangerous adversaries,
that without their stopping of us at the first, or seducing of us afterward
either of the right hand or of the left, all the rest of us as brethren and
heirs of the kingdom of heaven may both happily get into this way thither,
and also most steadfastly and constantly persevere therein even unto the very
end.

Thus presuming (as you see) of your Graces courteous and friendly acceptance
both of this my travel in pointing out this way, and also of this my bold
dedicating the same unto you: J will not cease to pray unto God to requite and
recompense seauen-folde into your bosom both this and all your great and
undeserved former favors toward me. And thus beseeching him also long to
preserve you in health and honor to his glory, the Churches good, and to your
own everlasting comfort now and ever; craving also pardon for this my boldness,
and hoping thereof, I most humbly take my leave. From Blechlie in Buckingham
shire. 1596.

Your Graces always most ready and willing to be at your commandment. Thomas
Sparks.

The high way to Heaven.
John. 7. verse. 37.38.39. Now in the last and great day of the feast, Jesus
stood and cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.

He that believes in me, as says the scripture, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of waters of life.

This spoke be of the spirit, which they that believed in him should receive.
For the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.


IN these words (well-beloved in our Lord and Savior) the holy Evangelist
Saint John has set down the sum and effect of a famous sermon made by Christ
himself, the very consideration whereof, ought both to stir up me to open
the same the more reverently, and also to prove you, to listen thereunto the
more religiously and attentively. Herein, The method.
the method that he has followed, and that therefore likewise I must, is this;
First, he notes certain circumstances thereof, then the substance of the
sermon it self. The circumstances he expresses in these words, Now in the
last and great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried saying: and the sermon
in the rest: and that in this order. First he notes to whom he directed it,
and his speech therein, saying that he began it thus, If any man thirst: then
in the rest, what it was that he spoke unto such: Now the sum of his
speeches (as he has here recorded it) consisted of two points: first of a
commandment that he gave to them to whom he spoke, and then of a promise
that he made them, obeying that commandment of his. The commandment the
Evangelist says, was this, Let him come to me and drink: and the promise was
this, he that believes in me as says the scripture, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of waters of life. So that he commanded two things: first a
coming unto him, and then a drinking of him: and forasmuch as the promise was
thus delivered in a figurative and metaphorical kind of phrase, the
Evangelist directed by the spiritte of God, of a care he had to lead men to
the right understanding of Christ's meaning therein, and to preserve them from
mistaking of the same, tells us plainly, that by the rivers of waters of
life, that Christ spoke of in this promise of his, he understood, the spiritte
which they that believed in him, should receive, adding withal, that that was
not in such measure yet powered upon such, as it should be afterward, for that
Jesus was not yet glorified; for so his words, the holy Ghost was not yet,
must be understood as I shall show, The circumstances.
when I come unto them. Wherefore now to prosecute these things in order as
they lie, as they shall offer themselves unto us in the text. First we have to
consider what he has said concerning the circircumstances of this sermon.
Touching which, now in the last and great day of the feast, Jesus stood and
cried (says the Evangelist:) for the better understanding of which words, if
we peruse the former part of this Chapter, it will evidently appear unto us,
that when Christ made this sermon, he was at Jerusalem, and in the temple
there, by occasion of the feast of tabernacles, which then there they kept and
solemnized; where and when the Jews sought to take him, and therefore purposely
the pharisees, and high priests sent officers thither, and that to the end
that so he being taken, they might kill him, whereof Christ was not ignorant.
For there before this, at this very feast, teaching openly out of the
scriptures, to the astonishment of all his enemies, that heard him, he says
slatly unto them, verse. 19. Why go ye about to kill me? Now the last day of
this feast as we may see. Leuit. 23. verse. 36 was the eight day when by Gods
ordinance they were to have an holy convocation, and a solemn assembly: upon
which day Jesus stood up, and made this sermon, with a loud and crying
voice, that so the better he might be heard throughout that great assembly
and concourse of people. All these things therefore laid together, show us
plainly thus much, that Jesus was the preacher of the sermon, and where, when,
and in what manner it was preached by him: namely, that it was preached at
Jerusalem, even in the temple, at and in the feast of tabernacles, and upon
the last and most solemn day thereof, and that in the midst of most bloody,
and malicious enemies; most confidently, stoutly, and boldly, for he uttered it
standing and crying, thereby showing that he was neither afraid to be heard
nor seen: yea, thereby making it most manifest, that he desired nothing more,
then that they should thoroughly both see and know his person, and understand
and believe his doctrine. And yet for all this, how desirous soever his
enemies were, then to have taken him, yet no man had power to lay hands on
him, as it is noted: Verse. 44. yea they that were sent to that end, returned,
and gave this reason of their not touching him, that never man spoke as he did,
verse. 46. The noting thus of these circumstances, by the Evangelist, we must
not think was needless, but to very good purpose: yea, we ought always to
assure our selves, howsoever in humane writings and speeches, there may often
be found many idle and superfluous words, that it is neuor so in the
Canonical scriptures. For they being as they are, all enspired of God, 2.
Tim. 3. verse. 16, and the holy writers thereof, speaking and writing therein
only, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, as Peter testifies of them, 2.
Pet. verse. 21. we may be sure they have not uttered or set down any word in
vain therein. And if we do but a little weigh and consider of those
circumstances, thus set down here by saint John how slight soever the use
thereof seem to us at the first we shall soon perceive, that there is both
much and very good use to be made thereof. For first notwithstanding the
corruptions of those times, in that Christ would come to Jerusalem, to the
feast of tabernacles, we may learn, not only Christ's obedience to Gods
ceremonial law, as then yet standing in force and not abrogated, to teach us
always to be obedient to his perpetual laws: But also, that it is not
lawful, scismaticallie (as Anabaptists, Brownistes, and they of the family
of love and others do) to shun public assemblies, and the exercises of true
religion therein, for every small corruption and superstitious fashion, either
but seeming to such so to be, or indeed which are so to be found therein.
Because that then both in the priests and in their additions and detractions
from the law of God, the corruptions were many, gross and evident, as the
Evangelists and stories of those times, make it most manifest, and yet as we
may see by this, Christ shunned not the temple and their assemblies there. And
in that Christ there among the greatest and spitefullest enemies that he had,
preached and taught thus boldly: Further there by his example he has given us
to learn, that having a lawful calling, and a good cause as he had, neither
daungerousnesse of the time, place, or persons, that we hau^ to deal withal,
ought to make us shrink from execution and urging of the same. His choice of
this day rather then an other to make this sermon in, his standing to utter it,
and his uttering it, crying, argue that he had a care, and an earnest desire,
that it both might be heard of as many as might be, and also be well
understood and carried away, for then was it likely the audience was the
greatest, and that which they heard last (as Chrysostom very well observes
upon this place in his fiftith Homily of Saint John,) especially uttered in
this sort, was also likely best to be regarded and marked of them: which may
very well teach us in all our actions and deeds, both wisely to make a
choice of our time, to do them, when there is most likelihood to do good
thereby to most, and also in the business of the Lord to deal faithfully and
confidentlie, and in no case boldly, but zealously and earnestly. And the
better to encourage us therein, to follow our Lord and Savior, it is worthy
the noting, that for all his thus dealing, and the set purpose of his enemies
then to take him, that yet he departed thence safe, without any trouble; for
until the time appointed of our heavenly father be come; we may see by this,
we may and shall safely proceed on, in the discharging the duties of our
vocation, what dangers soever otherwise in the mean time, seem to lie in the
way to stop us, or to cut us off. And lastly this earnestness of Christ about
the delivery of this doctrine, showed both in his standing and uttering of it,
crying, may teach us that he saw of the one side, the matter was worth the
hearing, and of the other side, that there was in his hearers such dullness,
notwithstanding to listen as they should thereunto, that all this would be
little enough: the consideration whereof ought to move you, that be hearers,
to rowse up your spirittes, to listen thereunto more attentively: and
straightly it urges me to be as earnest and vehement as I can, in the opening
the same unto you: and so consequently may and ought to stand in stead of a
most forcible place, both to me and you, to bid us, both in speaking and
hearing hereof, every way, to behave our selves righteously.

Wherefore thus by these circumstances and the use thereof, we being (I hope)
prepared to do: let us now go on as it follows. If any man thirst, says
Christ, To whom he spoke.
whereby it appears, that he directs his speech, although to all that
thirsted, without exception, whatsoever they had been before, yet to none but
to such, for he knew well enough that none but such would either regard his
commandment or had any right unto, or portion in, the promise that he me^t to
make. In the very same sense says Esaias, in the person of God. Cap. 55.1. Ho,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, etc. and the same prophet,
Cap. 44. verse. 2. and 3. brings in the Lord, saying, Fear not o Jacob my
servant, and thou righteous whom I have chosen: for I will power water upon the
thirsty, and floudes upon the dry ground, etc. Likewise of the same kind of
men spoke Christ, Math. 5.6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for
righteousness, for they shall be filled. And in the chapter going before this,
whence I have my text, where Christ teaches, that, He is the bread of life,
and that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, he says,
he that comes unto him shall never hunger, and he that believes in him,
shall never thirst. verse. 35. By all which places laid together we may see that
it is an usual thing with the Lord, by thirstinesse to describe them, to whom
with any hope to do good he speaks, and to whom he uses to make his
gracious promises: and that though sometimes he name thirstinesse only, that
yet he sometimes also requires both hunger and thirst expressly; thereby
teaching us, that when the one is only named to understand the other also.
Now for as much as the meat and drink talked of in any of these places, to
satisfy the hungry and thirsty, is neither earthly nor such as we use to take
in by the mouth and other instruments of the body, but altogether heavenly,
and such as must be eaten and drunken by the mouth of our souls: therefore we
may be sure that herein there is a metaphor used, and that in this phrase and
speech, by a similitude betwixt the hunger and thirst of the body and the
affections of the soul, by those terms the Lord means, the like passions
and affections of the soul before toward the meare and drink prepared
therefore, as is found in the body after meat and drink mee^e and fit for
it. What it is to thirst.
Seeing then that the ground and foundation of such metaphors is always the
analogy and resemblance betwixt the metaphorical words, and the things for
the expressing whereof they are used, we shall the better understand what is
meant hereby by the hunger and thirst of the soul, if we do but consider that
bodily hunger is an earnest longing after meat for the body proceeding from a
sensible feeling of emptines and want thereof: and that bodily thirst, is an
earnest longing after moisture to remove the heat and dryness that for lack
thereof troubles the body, for what is this spiritual hunger and thirst else,
but an earnest longing for salvation only in Christ Jesus, proceeding from an
effectual feeling of nothing but damnation to be due unto us, in respect of
our selves? And therefore the soul that is inwardly tormented, vexed,
troubled and disquieted with a due sight and feeling of the own emptiness,
to justify or save it self: yea, that naturally finds it self promised
with nothing else, but with the scorching heat of sin, and drought of all
goodness, doubtless will so hunger and thirst, that is, so earnestly and
vnfamedly long and desire to be delivered from this state and condition, that
in truth, without all hypocrisy it will be ready to say with Daeuid, that as
the Heart brareth after the rivers of matters, so it does after the living God.
Psalm. 42. verse. 1. and 2. But to put it out of all doubt, that here by the
hungry and thirsty, are meant only such: compare here with the very like
speech of Christ, Math. 11. verse. 28. where he said: Come unto me, all ye that
are weary and laden, and I will case you. For even there as here, he first
describes them, to whom he spoke, secondly he tells them what he would have
them to do, and lastly, he gives them a sweet promise, which they should
enjoy if they would so do. So that though there be some difference betwixt the
words of Christ there and here, in sound, yet little or none is there in
sense: wherefore in steed of the hungry and thirsty here in this place, he
there places the weary and laden: whereby he understands them, that being
heavy laden with sin, (as we are all) are grown also to be weary thereof,
which no man may or can think himself to be, as long as he continues
securely, in going on in sin, so adding sin to sin. For he that is weary of
his burden, has a desire to be eased thereof, and in the mean time, until he
can get quite to be discharged of it, he himself rather daily seeks to
lessen it, then to increase it. The broken and contrite heart therefore under
the burden of sin, and that groneth, and is inwardly disquieted in his very
soul, with the feeling and smarte thereof, is the man that will hunger and
thirst after Christ, that so in him, and by him, he may be eased and delivered:
and theresore such are the only men to whom Christ here speaks. At this
point was David Psalm. 6. when he wrote, verse. 2. and 3. Have mercy upon me
(O Lord) for I am weak, O Lord) heal me, for my bones are vexed, and my soul
is also soretroubled, etc. But being again in the same case, (as it appears,
Psa. 51.) he comfort himself with this, ver. 17 That the sacrifices of God
were a contritespirit, and that a contrite spirit and broken heart, he would not
despise. And good reason has every man to be of his mind. For Esaias. 61 1.2.3.
(for so Christ himself has taught us to apply it) it is said of Christ, that
the spiritte of the Lord was upon him, and that therefore he had anointed
him, and sent him to preach good tidinges unto the poor, to bind up the
broken hearted, to preach liberty to the captives, and to them that are
bound, the openinge of the prison, etc. And therefore after in the person of
GOD, says the prophet: to him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of
a contrite spiritte, and trembles at my words, wherefore hear the word of
the Lord, ye that tremble at his words, Esaias. 66. verse. 6. and even to this
Christ had an eye, Matthew. 5.3.4.5. saying, Blessed are the poor in spiritte,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth,
etc.

And hence came it, that the proud pharisie puffed up with a conceit of his
own righteousness, went home unjustified, and the poor publican thrown
down and humbled before GOD, in the sight of his own sins, and therefore
crying, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner, went home more justified, Luke.
18.9. etc. for as Christ said, Mat. 9.12.13. so it is most true, the whole
need not the physician, but they that are sick, and he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And always it has been the Lords
fashion, to resist the proud, and to give grace unto the humble, 1. Pet. 5.5.
And therefore the blessed virgin observes that, in her song, that as he
scattered the proud, in the imagination of their hearts, and put the mighty
down from their seats, and sends away the rich empty, so he exalts them
of low degree, and fills the hungry with good things, Luke. 151. etc. This
was the very reason why Christ was so courteous to publicans and sinners,
Matthew. 9.10. and so bitter to the scribes and pharisees as he was, Matthew. 23.
verse. 11. etc. And this made him say to the chief priests and elders of the
Jews, verily, verily, the publicans and harlotes go before you into the
kingdom of God. Matthew. 21.31.13. And hereunto (I take it) he had an eye, when
he said, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force. For whereas they that are not broken and contrite hearted for their
sins, but either live in them in security, or are puffed up with a swelling
conceit of their own merittes, make no haste to Christ, they that are
thoroughly and duly humbled in and under their sins, are glad to hear of him,
and to press withal have unto him, for forgiveness of them. And this we see
most clearly in the examples of Zacheus, and Marie Magdalen: whereof the one
(as we read in Luke. 19.) Ran up into a wild fig tree, that he might
satisfy himself with seeing Christ, and no sooner heard Christ say unto him,
Come down at once, but he came down hastily, and received him joyfully.
verse. 5. and 6. And the other, hearing of Christ, to testify her unfeigned
sorrow for her sins, and her love to Christ, for that she hoped by him to
have them forgiven her, (as the same evangelist shows, Cap. 7.37.38. pressed
after Christ, into a Pharifies house, as he sat at meat, bringing with her a
box of ointment, to bestow upon him: whither when she came, she stood at his
feet, behind him weeping, and washed his feet with tears, and wiped them
with the heir of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with
oil. In all the story of the new testament, where have we more hearty
affection and earnest hunger, and thirst after Christ showed, then in these two
great sinners, when once the Lord had made them to feel their sins, and to
be weary of them. Nay this I dare and do boldly affirm, that if we peruse
the whole book of God through we shall never find that either God the Father,
or Christ his only son, ever comforted any before they were discomforted, or
healed any either of bodily or spiritual disease before they saw their
disease, felt it, were weary of it; and therefore sued for help and
deliverance. For why should pearls be cast before swine, or health be offered
to those that find not want of it, or meat and drink be set before those
that neither hunger nor thirst? Out of al question therefore we must thus first
hunger and thirst, before we can be of the number of those, to whom Christ
will offer himself either to be meat or drink: and unless we feel our
spiritual sickness of sin, and the danger thereof without him, he will be
no physician of ours, and unless we have good stomachs and appetites to and
after the notable cheer, that already is prepared for us, in the marriage of
the Kings son, (whereof (...) we read, Matthew. 22.1. (...). it is but in
vain to have bidders sent unto us, to bid us come, for let them do what
they can, either we will not come at all, or else we will make light of
coming, or come to the purpose. This our most merciful and wife God
foreseeing as he has in his son Christ Jesus, provided both meat indeed,
and drink indeed, for our hungrye and thirsty souls sufficiently to feed
upon to eternal life, without which he knows we can no more live before him
at all, then we see by experience this life can long be maintained and
continued without meat and drink fit for it; so has he left unto us most
notable and effectual means to breed in us the hunger and thirst, that is
meet to be had after this food of the soul, for he is not only like a
liberal housekeeper, that when he has provided good cheer for his friends,
would have them bring good stomachs with them, that they might well feed
thereon, but also least his provision should be lost, or ill bestowed upon
such as care little for it, he provides for all those that he will allow for
his guestes, ways and means to procure them before they come hunger and
thirst indeed after his dainties. Ways and means to drive us to Christ.
And these ways and means of his are these, his law, his judgments
threatened, and his judgments executed upon others, and especially on the
person of our savior. For by the law rightly understood, comes the
knowledge of sinner Romans 7. verse. 7. yea, thereby as most notably the Apostle
shows in that place, the power and tyranny of sin over us, is most plainly
described: in respect of which office of the law, the law is said to be our
schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. for whiles it makes us see our selves to
be sinners, and that great and dangerous sinners, it causes us to despair of
heaven at all, by our own merits, yea, it drives us either to make no other
reckoning, but to go to hell, whether by our sins we have descrued to go,
or else to seek out of our selves quite, by faith in Christ Jesus, to be
justified, and so to come to heaven by him. But this it cannot do, unless we
muse and meditate thereon aright, and unless we understand it aright: for
though it be set before us of the Lord as a glass to discover and lay before
us on the one side, what we owe unto him, and had been abie to pay him, if we
had continued in the state wherein he created us; and of the other side to show
us that now by our ownfal we are become such bankrupts, that when we ow gold we
are not able to pay copper, yea, where we owe him thousands we are not able to
answer him one of a thousand, yet unless the lord open our eyes rightly to
understand this his law, it cannot nor will not stand us in this steed; for as
the best glass being looked into without light, directs us nothing, but
when by the light it is looked upon, it does the office, even so is it in this
case. And therefore to this purpose we are to understand with David, that the
law of God is perfect, and in that respect (as gold is tried seven times in
the fire,) Psalm. 19.7. etc. Wherefore we may be sure it stretches, (rightly
understood) to the condemnation of all sin whatsoever, and to the
commendation of all virtue likewise whatsoever; Insomuch as it contains an
absolute and most perfect rule of righteousness, and holiness: from which as
often as we decline, either to the right hand, or to the left, in heart, word,
deed, or countenance, either in omitting things therein commanded, or in
committing things therein forbidden, so often it pronounces us to be
transgressors thereof. Whereupon consequently it must needs be true, that if
we judge our own selves but according to the law, we shall find it as
impossible for us to number our sins, as either it is to number the stars
of heaven, or the sand of the sea shore; the consideration whereof, seeing that
the promise of the law is only this, Do this and live, Leuit. 18.13. and he
that fails in one point is guilty of al. Iam. 2.10. may first make us see
that heaven being the Lords, and therefore none being worthy, but he to set
the price thereof, or covenant with man upon what condition he shall have it,
that it is set at a price, and offered upon condition of such perfection in
works as infinitely passes our reach: and therefore that way none but they
that either understand not the law, or are so foolish, that they think they
can have heaven at their own price, or that God will measure the price
thereof, not according to the worthiness thereof, but according to men's
purses: will ever seek to get heaven. And further seeing that the law is the
law of God, who for that, he made us able at the first to keep it, may by
good right still call for the keeping of it at our hands; though before he
call for it, he knows now that such is our corruption of the one side, and
the perfection of it of the other side, that we can not keep it, thereby we
are to learn to fall down before him, and with the tears of our souls to
confess our debt, that therein he demands indeed to be due debt unto him,
in regard of the state wherein he created us, but that by our own fault we are
grown now utterly unable to pay it, and therefore that there is now no other
way for us to escape the danger of his infinite justice, but by flying to the
throne of his mercy in his son Christ Jesus. O if we would, break up the
fallowe lands of our hearts, (as we are counseled to do, Iere. 4.4.) by
causing this sharp plowe of the law to make deep forrowes in it. For then so
much good feed of the gospel, as is, would not daily be spilt and lost upon
us, for that our hearts for lack hereof, are either like the high way, or
like to stony or thorny ground. But finding that the hardness of our hearts is
such that this plough alone will not pearce deep enough to break them up, let
us add thereunto the weight of Gods threatened judgments against the
transgressors of the law. Entering into which meditation, we shall find,
first generally Gods curse denounced against all those that do not observe and
keep all the words of the law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. And to go no further, then to
that Chapter and the next in particular, we shall find so many most fearful
judgments threatened to all transgressors of the law, as that thereby we
may easelie perceive, that to all transgressors thereof, the Lord would have
us to understand, that infinite and most intolerable are the plagues both in
this life and that which is to come, that be threatened and due. And in very
reason we must needs see it must be so, for sin or transgression of the
law being as it is, an offense against the almighty, and so a means
directly to deserve the severity of his justice, to be showed against the
same, who is so simple but he must needs see, that all miseries in this life,
and eternal death and damnation in the life to come, are but iusty threatened
against all that break the law? Now these things thus being, may we think
that those being both due and threatened, that the infinite justice of GOD is
such that it will not inflict or execute the same, when or upon whom he list?
To what end tend all the fearful examples of Gods vengeance executed upon
men, that we read of in the scriptures and in other books, and daily seeby
experience, but to teach us that God is not a bare threatner, but that he both
can and will be as severe as his threatenings come unto, if there be not a just
and sufficient stop to stay the fierceness of his just wrath from breaking out
against all the generation of mankind? If all this will not serve to make us
have broken and contrite hearts for our sins, and so to hunger and thirst
after Christ, let us further yet behold the ugliness of our sins, and the
extreme danger that we were in, by the means of them; in this that God has
not spared his only begotten son, to give him to us, to be borne and to live
and die for us, as he did. For herein, as the love and bountifulness of our
God toward man, has most gloriously appeared, (as Paul notes, Titus 3.4.)
so therein, and thereof we may say with the Psalmist, that mercy and justice
have most notably met and kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10. for doubtless such
was the love of the father toward the son, that if in his wisdom any
other physician, or any other means, could or would have served to have
recovered and cured us of our sins, he would never have so far debased his
son, as being God, to appoint him to become man, and in his manhood to have
endured, living, and dying for us, that which he did. O then in that the office
of a savior was committed unto him, in that he taking upon him to go through
therewith as he did, being as he was in person, not man only, but God also,
yet found it so heavy and difficult a thing; we have most just cause to see
and behold, that it is a thing of the greatest difficulty that may be, to
satisfy the just wrath of God for sin; In him (we know) there was no sin,
and in his mouth there was no guile, Esaias. 53.9. 1. Pet. 2.22. for such an high
priest, it became us to have, that was separate from sumers, and needed not as
the priests of the old Testament, first to offer for his own sins, and
then for the peoples. Hebr. 7.26.27. And yet in that, he bare our infirmities,
he was surely driven to carry our sorrows, insomuch that he was debased as he
was, and wounded and broken as he was, for our transgressions and iniquities,
Esaias 53.3.4.5. In that therefore his pure and holy manhood, though it had
personally united unto it a Godhead, to enable it to go through with that which
it had to do and suffer, going under the burden, but of our sins, was
driven into those bloody sweates and agonies, that it was in the garden, Luke.
22:44. and both there and after upon the cross, before he could say, all is
finished, John 19.30. to say Father if it be possible let this cup pass from
me, my soul is heavy unto death, Math. 26.39. and 38. and my God my God why
have thou forsaken me. Mathewe 27.40. it was made manifest unto the whole
world, that infinite is the severity of Gods justice against fin, and that
none but such an one was ever able to have borne the burden thereof, and to
have got from under it again, to triumph over it, as he has proved that he
did, by his most glorious and comfortable resurrection and ascension into
heaven after his death and passion when thus the justice of GOD and his wrath
against sin was manifested in his suffering, through astonishmente thereat,
from the sixte hour unto the ninthe, there was darkness over the whole earth,
the veil of the temple rent, from the top to the bottom, the earth did
quake and the stones were cloven and the graves did open themselves Math 27
45.51, 52. if these then and all the former laid together will not or cannot
so astonishe or amaze us, at the sight of our sins, and of all Gods wrath due
unto us, and most surely ready we cannot tell how soon, to destroy us, if it
be not stayed by this our mediator Jesus Christ, as that hereby our hearts
break and rent a sunder for sorrow, we make evident demonstration, that we
are more blockish and senseless, than these senseless creatures, and so we
shall prove that we are none of those to whom Christ here speaks. But if here
by as Joel has taught us Cap. 2. ver. 13. we take occasion to rent our hearts
and not our garments, and so to hunger and thirst aright for comfort from
Christ, then whatsoever we have been before, of Christ it has been said unto
us, both for good direction herein, and everlasting comfort, A bruised reed
shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, Esaie 42.3. when
the Lord therefore by reading or preaching of his word, or by any other
means that it shall please him to use to that purpose, brings all these, or
any of these, to our remembrance, then we are to make our reckoning, that of
his good grace and favor thereby he gives us just occasion so to see our sins,
that in the sight and feeling of the burden thereof, we should thus hunger and
thirst after him, that through him we might be delivered from them. And the
more and better we dwell upon the mediation of these four things, the Lord
withal opening our eyes and hearts rightly to understand them, and the use
thereof to this end, the more forcible we shall find them to work this
effect. But the truth is, through our original sin, we have brought with us
into the world, such a general forwardness to all evil, and backwardness to
all good, joined with such gross blindness in things spiritual, and by
actual sins daily flowing from this bitter fountain in us, we have al of
us, so hardened our own hearts, that though the Lord by sounding these things
outwardly in our ears, may make us without all excuse, if hereby we take no
occasion thus to be humbled before him, yet most certain is it that the
hearing of these things never so often outwardly beaten upon, will never
prove forcible and effectual inwardly to breed in us, this true spiritual
hunger and thirst, until the Lord himself of his special favor and grace,
both open the eyes of our minds, and mollify and soften our hard hearts, and
so indeed himself by his own hand and power, hereby work this in us. This
taught Moses the Jews, saying, yet the Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. Deuteronomy. 29.4. And
yet this is in deed the Lords special work, he shows the same people
again by his prophet Ezechiell, saying, I will put a new spirit within their
bowels, I will take away the stony heart out of their bodies, and will give
them an heart of flesh. Cap. 11.19. when therefore we find that neither the
meditation of the law, nor yet of the judgments threatened, nor executed
against the breakers thereof, nor the hearing nor thinking of Christ's passion,
with the cause thereof, can breed or provoke this to be in our hearts, we cry
unto God with Ephraim, Ier. 31.18. Convert thou me and I shall be converted, for
thou art the Lord my God: and with David, Psalm. 119.18. open mine eyes that I
may see the wunders of thy law. And so in his good time, if we be his,
doubtless we shall find all these so work together, to the breaking of our
hard hearts, with remorse for our sins, that even in respect thereof, we may
say with him also, Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord heal me,
for my bones are vexed, my soul is sore troubled, I fainted in my mourning, I
cause my bed every night to swim, and water my couch with my tears, Psalm:
6.2. etc. yea with a good conscience, without all dissembling, we shall be able
to say with him, as the heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my
soul after thee O God, even for the living God. Psalm. 42.1.16.2. For when we
have the due sense and feeling in deed of our sins, that we ought to have
before ever we will seek after Christ as we should; we will and must (as I have
showed before) be undoubtedly weary thereof, and desirous to be easd of the
most heavy burden of them. And let us not think, that it is enough, thus to
be once in all our life, namelywhen first we come to Christ, and turn unto him
aright. For though then it be most necessary, in respect both of our original
and actual sins wherein perhaps we have lived a long while before (thus to
be affected) when we seek first pardon and remision thereof in him: yet for as
much as after we be come unto him, and have put him on though thenceforth sin
shall reign no more in our mortal bodies, it will yet, do what we can, be
found so cleaving unto us and dwelling in us, that if we should say we have no
sin, we should deceive our selves 1. Ihon 1.8. For that when by experience,
we are enforced, the best of us, with James. 3.2. to confeste, that in many
things we sin all: we are still from time to time, as long as we live, so to
look into the glass of the law, and to meditate upon the rest, as that
thereby, we may take occasion, continually to nourish earnest hunger and thirst
after Christ, that for our new and daily sins we may more and more seek
unto him, and apply him daily afresh unto us. For both David and Paul long
before they wrote, the one, the 51. Psalm, the other the 7. to the Romans,
were in the state of grace, and the favor of God, the former by faith in the
messiah to come, the other by faith in him already come, and yet as it is
evident in both those places, both these conferring the pure and spiritual
law of God with their own lives, take occasion thereby, not only to see and
confess their own sins but also in a spiritual manner to hunger and thirst
after forgiveness thereof, and therefore to fly to God in the person and
mediation of Christ Jesus, for that they were persuaded, that if he took in
hand the washing of them in his precious bloodshed, they shoud be whiter then
snow, and be cleandeliuered from the sinful body of the flesh. Let us therefore
first and last, and when souer we would come unto Christ, which we shall have
need to do continually as long as we live here, this way that I have showed
you, both seek to begin and still to continue this spiritual hunger and
thirst in us after him.

Satan our malicious old and subtle enemy knows full well all this to be
most true, Satan's devises take us from thirsting. First showed and then
confuted.
and therefore whereas he was too weak to stay God, from providing us thus in
his son meat and drink to satisfy our hungry and thirsty souls withal,
and to seed on to salvation, we may be sure yet that he will do what he can to
keep us from this hunger and thirst, proceeding from a deep and due feeling
of our sins, and the grieuousnesse thereof; that so either lothing this
heavenly food, or not sufficiently finding our need and want thereof, through
our own fault, we may be never the better for it. And the means whereby he
most prevails herein, be, ignorance, security, and error. By ignorance, he
prevails with all those, be they Jews, Turks, Papists, or whatsoever, whom
by any cunning he can keep in ignorance, either of the law, person, or office
of Christ, of which sort wonderful many be. By security he prevails, not
only also with the former, but likewise shamfully with the carnal gospellers,
beguiling their hearts being as yet indeed, for all their fair outward show
in words, quite void of al true love and delight, either in the law or
gospel, through the deceitfulnes of sin, and by teaching of them to turn
the grace of God into wantonness, and most lewdly to abuse the mercies of God in
Christ, by presuming thereby to have their sins forgiven them, when and how
they list: though they as long as they list continue therein. By error also
he prevails mightily with very many, and now a days wonderfully amongst
the papists. For as though directly they had conspired with fathan to keep
men from euerhauing that hunger and thirst after Christ that I have proved to
be most necessary (notwithstanding the great light that shines in the world
and discovers and detecteth their dealing herin to be too too bad) they have
set abroach, and defend a number of opinions, which can lead to no better, or
other end, but toblunt and to dull the edge (very greatly at the least), of
alsuch hungring and thirsting after Christ. For to what other, or better end
serves, either their refusing to join with us, or their teaching as they do,
in the doctrines of original sin, and man's free will in things spiritual and
good? with us they will not hold, that original sin, is such an universal
inbred and inborne corruption, and priuitie in man where by, not only it is
evident that Adams sin, is imputed unto him, and that the guiltines thereof
therefore is his, withal the other bad fruits, and consequentes thereof, but
also amongst all other, this, that naturally, even by the force and power
thereof he is altogether in all the powers both of his body and soul corrupted
and prone to all evil, and backward, to every thing that is good: but to the
full constitution of the nature thereof, they hold, that it is enough to say it
is either a want of original righteousness, which, ought to be in us, or an
habitual auersion from God, which they hold to be but such, as that therewith
may and does in some yet stand, man's free will to good, and that it is so quite
taken away and abolished in the baptism of every one, that thenceforth there
remains not, (though concupiscence remain still) any relics thereof at
all, or cause why man should be grieved either at or with the feeling thereof as
at, or with sin. And such frewil is it which they hold man has after his fall,
even to and in that which is spiritual and good, as that man in his first
conversion to God, having but the outward means thereof sufficiently offered
unto him, that even that grace is sufficient to convert him, if he would
himself, which they hold he might, if he list: and being once converted, that
is (as they take it) the outward means being once so fully and effectually
proferred him, as whereby he takes occasion rightly to use his frewill, in
accepting of grace so offered: then they hold by the means of grace there upon
bestowed upon him (which they count and call the habit of charity) he can will
freely, and work any good thing. Whereas we (as we have often showed)
enforced both by the scriptures, fathers, reason, and all experience, confess
and teach, that by the fall of Adam, our freewill to and in that which is good
indeed, is so lost as that, what good means so ever, at any time be outwardly
presented unto us, yet thereby we shall never be able to will well, by any
power left in us, nor ever shall indeed unless GOD inwardly, by his spirit
withal, first create and frame in every one of us a new heart and will, to
choose that which is good, and then always after assist, strenthen and guide
the same therein. Who may not therefore, even hereby plainly see, that fathan
mightily prevails by their doctrine to hold men back from hungring and
thirstinge after Christ, as they should? For if original sin bring no
deeper nor vniuersaller corruption with it then they teach it does, into the
nature of man, and may and is so quickly and utterly abolished out of the same
again by baptism, and man has in him self remaining such a free will to
good, that before his conversion, upon the offering of the outward means
thereof sufficiently he may be converted, if he will himself, and that after he
needs no daily or further supply of the spirit to lead his will always
thereunto, but that which he received in his first conversion, to work
together with the native or hereditarie free will that was before in man: then
surely what is there left, either by the consideration of our original sin,
or by the view of our lack of free will to good, an inseparable companion
thereof, to make us to long and to thirst after Christ? For by their doctrine,
if we be but baptized, we are quite rid and freede from the former, and as for
the latter we have it naturally so, as yet it is not quite taken from us by
Adams fall, but only by our sins original and actual, so settred and
hindered that either upon sufficient means, but outwardly offered, we may use
it again, even to the accepting thereof, to our conversion, or after, but by
virtue of grace received at once in our conversion, for ever then use and show
it free to the working out of our own salvation. After baptism then you see,
they hold it needless for a man to trouble: his conscience with original
sin, or any part thereof, and to deliver the other out of captivity, where
into it is brought by sin, that so (as some of them speak) they may go with
the own foot thereof, and fly with the own wings and feathers thereof,
which it had before, though it could not use them; there is no more in effect
to do, but to have the outward means sufficiently proffered, for that even
thereupon, if man will use his free will, (as they say he may do, if he will)
all the rest touching the full freedom there of, will follow. Their doctrine
also of satisfying for our sins, by our selves and others, of the force and
validity of indulgences masses, and such like things purchased for us,
likewise either by our selves, or others, either whiles we are alive or dead,
and their conceptes of purgatory, and the relief of souls there, by a number
of things, which they seek to make men believe, will serve well, to that end,
of the overplus merits, and satisfactions of others to be communicated to such
as lack, either through the common force of the communion of saints, or by
the special intention of the doer and sufferrer of them, or of the ordinary
disposer thereof at his pleasure (which they hold to be the pope) and of their
mediation and intercession of saints and Angels, for their devout worshippers
and callers upon: are as it were so many strong cables, to hold men back
either altogether, or in great part, from longing and thirsting at all after
Christ. Lastly their doctrine has been and is such, to blunt the edge and
force of the law, which God has left, as I have showed, righthe understood, to
drive men herunto, that in very deed they have left it, as it is and must be
understood, by their gloses and additions, and detractions about the same,
without any force at all in effect, to this purpose. For first at their
pleasure they leave out the second commandment, and to make yet up the
number of 10. they divide the last into two:: secondly though David never so
much magnify the perfection thereof as we have heard, Psalm: 19.7. yet it shall
be so imperfect with them, as that there are 5. commandments more, which they
call the commaun lements of the church, beside infinite other traditions, for
the observing whereof often times, they make the commandments of God of noe
effect, as the pharisees did for theirs, which must needs be observed, say they,
or else a man cannot lead such a holy christian life, as he should: thirdly
they are so confident and resolute, that it is possible for man to keep the
law of God, that they have cursed all that hold the contrary, they teach a man
may do that and more also, and that God were a very tirant, if man could not
keep and fulfill his law. Yea herm they have gone so far as that not only they
hold, that a man may in every point so exactly keep it, that he can neither be
charged with tra^sgressio^ of any comma^dment therein contained, nor yet in
justice be debarred from the wages and reward of salvation which by perfect
keeping thereof, he has merited and deserved. Which whiles they teach and do,
first they make some negligent and careless, in studying and meditating of the
law to the purpose aforesaid, seeing by them they are occasioned, to think
that man may add thereunto, and take from thence at his pleasure, and so by
this means the law stands these in no steed, to this end: and secondly by their
last kind of doctrine hereof, whereas both the nature of the law it self, and
all the circumstances used by God in the first promulgation thereof, plainly
show, that by Gods ordinance it was and is appointed to make man to tremble and
quake, at the sight of his manifold and great sins and imperfections thereby
made known unto him, that so thereby he might take occasion, the sooner and the
more earnestly to seek to be made righteous by Christ, and to have that
unrighteousness of his own, pardoned and covered, they have quite tra^sformed
and altered the use thereof, as though it were given of God of purpose strongly
to lead man, to a strong conceit of his own ablenes to keep and fulfill the
same, and so consequently thereby to an opinion, that either Christ is not very
much to be thirsted for at al, or else, that one may very quickly have done
with him. Their rule, (...), borrowed from Plutarch, that is, laws must be
made according to man's ability to keep them, will not bear out and justify
this their opinion of man's ableness now to keep the law. For it is
sufficient for clearing of God of all blame herein, as I have showed before,
that man as he created him at the first, was able to keep this law, which now
both plain and plentiful experience, and the express scripture it self,
says it is impossible for him to do, through the weakness of the flesh, Romans
8.3. For what reason is there, seeing man is fallen from his ability, by his
own folly, either that God therefore should fall, or alter in his rule of
righteousness, or that he may not challenge that at his hands, that in
respect of his creation, and otherwise he owes him, though he know well enough
before hand, that he is not able to pay him one of a thousand? Especially,
seeing man may make this most notable and profitable use thereof, even thereby
to take occasion to see from what he is fallen, and to what, that so he may
give over, ever trusting to come to heaven, by keeping of the law, whereof he
is so great a breaker, that he may seek and trust only to come thither, by
believing the gospel of Jesus Christ. To maintain yet the fancy of man's
ability and possibility to keep the law, they have devised a number of
shifts, all which also tend to the quenching of spiritual hunger and thirst
after Christ. For to this end some of them have taught, that the precise, full,
and perfect sense of the law, is not for us here in the way to our country,
but when we come there, and that here we may be said to have kept it, though
in an inferior and imperfecter sense: other some think, and have written,
that man may be said to be a keeper and fulfiller of the law, when for the
most part he does so, but others misliking of both these, as not pregnant
enough to advance man's ability, and the facility or easines of the law, teach
plainly that the justified man, or man in the state of grace finds the law
of GOD, in his most perfect sense, an easy yooke for him to bear and to
undergo, for that by grace his is enabled perfectly to keep and fulfill it
all, in every point, even here. And yet in deed these lusty lads, for all
this, for that by experience they find that saying of James. In many things we
sin all. Cha. 3.2. verified in them, even when they think themselves to be
in that state, and for that they find likewise, that Saint Paul in that state
in deed, yet complains of concupiscence, which he found in himself, by
comparing himself with the law, that was and is spiritual, holy, and good,
and shows that most gladly he would be rid thereof. Romans 7.7. etc. Are
feign to help out this their position, with this, that those sins whereof
James speaks, and others, of men in that case, are but venial sins, and
that the first motions to sin, or concupiscence found in the regenerate
after baptism, are not sin. And the better yet to make this untempered
mortar to cleave, though Christ have toulde us, that an account is to be
given for every idle word. Math. 12.36. Yet these venial sins of theirs
amongst which I am sure they bring idle words, must be pardonable, even for
the littlenes thereof, must not be accounted contra legem, that is contrary to
the law, but only praeter legem, that is to say, besides the law, and such as
may be washed and done away, by knocking of the breaste, by holy water by
saying the Lords prayer, by fasting a day, by an alms giving, by general
confession of sins, or by a Bishops blessing, yea, as one says, though these
be done without any inward good motion at all: Yea, if all these will not
serve, their great Bellarmine will not yet be put, or driven from this
position, of the ableness of man to keep the law: For after he had tried,
with other of his fellows, what these could do, to wipe away the objections
made against the same, pressing Paul's experience to the contrary. Romans 7.
though it be there never so plain, that by the law even then he found himself
a breaker of the law, and therefore no perfect keeper thereof, yet for that
Paul there, to comfort him self with all, confesses that in his mind, or
inward man he delighted in the law, allowed of that which was good, and
condemned the contrary, he says that in so saying Paul proves and shows,
that he was, for all the law in his members, which likewise he says rebelled
against the law of his mind, and led him captive unto the law of sin, a
perfect keeper even then of the law. For the law says he, is not given to
the sense or flesh, but to the mind and spirit of man, wherein Paul kept the
law, though in the other respect he had such cause to complain. And whereas
he knew that such as they count no venial, but deadly sins have been
found, and may be again, even in the regenerate, yet such he will defend, may
be counted perfect keepers of the law, when they have risen again by
repentance, and have had those their sins forgiven in Christ. Yea though he
be enforced by a place out of Saint Augustines first book of his retractions,
Cap. 19. to confess, that there is aduouched by him, some imperfection in the
best men's keeping of the law, yet to do the best that he could, to cover and
cure the wound that, that saying had given his cause, he would make his reader
believe, that the imperfection that he finds therein, is but Carentia
perfectionis, the want of perfection, and not the transgression of any one
commandment, which he resembled to the omitting of one letter, in writing of
much. If this be learnedlie to defend a position, or the maintenance thereof
not only to fall into so many absurdities, as these be, and then besides to
be driven to use such a sort of frivolous, and fruitles shifts as these be,
what position can possible to be foolish, and false, but that a man of any wit
may defend it? And who can be so simple and blind, but he must needs
perceive, that in all this gear, whether they see it or not, that Satan
directly by their mouths and pens, laboreth and sweateth most egerly, and
directly, to make men so drunken and full with a conceit of their own
perfection, or at least small imperfection, that they hunger nor thirst after
Christ, as they have cause in deed to do, Who but men bewitched with an
opinion, that whatsoever their Romain prelates allow for current and found
doctrine, how contrary so ever it be in deed to scriptures, fathers, reason,
and all, would ever hold, either al or any of these? For most plentifully, by
all these, a number of times we have showed them, their vanity and folly, in
all of these, and to this day they neither have, nor ever will be able to
answer us to the purpose herein. And assure thyselfe that herein I have
charged them with nothing, but with that, which I find, in the best and most
famous writers of their side, as namely in Andradius, Osorious, Canisius Vega,
Fransciscus de victoria, the censure of Colen, their Rhemish notes of the new
testament, and in Bellarmine. But, howsoever, therefore they may stand ressolute
herein, yet I hope even the bare recital hereof, makes thee Christian reader,
to see the very gross absurdity thereof also. If there were noe more to
cause thee to see it, but this, that the rest of all these their doctrines
plainelye tendes and is, as I have showed, to drive man either to think his
souls sickness through sin, not to be so dangerous and grievous as it is
indeed, and therefore as we teach it to be, or for his recovery thereof to
trust to other physic or Physicians, then to the only physician of our souls
Christ Jesus even that surely were and is sufficient. For how can that
doctrine be any way found or good, that naturally brings forth or breeds
either of these cursed fruits, so daingerous to man's salvation, or so
injurious to the honor and glory of Christ Jesus? Yet that thou may not be
without thy particular counterpoyson in a readiness, against every one of these
their poisons, to Justify our doctrine, and to confute theirs: touching
original sin and free will, remember that with us, against them it is written
touching the former thus; The imagination of man's heart is only cuil, even from
youth. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. the natural man perceives not the things of the
spiritte of God, neither can he know them. 1. Cor. 2.4. Yea that before our
conversion, we are said to have hard and stony hearts, Ezech. 11.19. Romans
2.5. but also to be darkness. Ephesians. 5.8. and dead by sin. Ephesians. 2.5. and
that touching the other, Paul has most plainly taught the Saints at
Phillippis, that it was God that wrought in them, both the will and the work,
and that of his own good pleasure, Cap. 2.13. and that Christ himself most
plainly has said, that no man can come unto him but whom the father draws.
Ioh. 6.44. and that without him we can do nothing. John. 15.5. And their next
three are sufficiently confuted, even in that we read, and we know it is most
certain that our Christ is able perfectly to save al them that come unto God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Heb. 7.25. and
has offered himself once for all to take away the sins of many, Cap. 9.28
yea with that one offering, has consecrated for ever them that are sanctified,
10.14. especially it being also most plainly written as it is, that as there
is but one God, so there is but one mediator betwixt God and man the man
Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 2.5. and that there is no other allowed door, whereby at
all to enter into Gods sheepefolde, but only the same Christ Jesus, John.
10.1.9. etc. For these places are most pregnant to cut the throat for ever of
all those devises, and may satisfy, and will any, that are not wilfully
disposed to wrestle, for the aduauncing of the creature and his own found
devise, though to the darkening and obscuring of the creator, our blessed God
and savior for ever. Now lasthe, in as few words as I can, to arm thee,
that thou take no harm by that which they teach touching the law, and the
keeping thereof. First to overthrow their maine ground therein, remember and
mark well that Peter in the first famous council at Jerusalem speaking of
the law, openly and confidentlie pronounces it to be a burden, which neither
they nor their forefathers were able to bear. Act. 15.10. and that the refore
Paul has proved that no man can be justified, by his keeping of the law,
because it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things,
which are written in the book of the law, to do them, Gal. 3.16. For these
places will stand in force, for all Bellarmines, and his fellows cauilling,
and seeking by their Romish sophistry to wipe away the same, to the full and
direct confutation of this their opinion, that it is possible, and also found
true by experience (for otherwise they say nothing, for we dispute not, as
Augustine said in this case, Lib. 2. cap. 6. de pectatorum meritis.
what God can do, but what he does) that a regenerate man, should perfectly
keep the law. For neither was the question that they had in hand in that
council, only of the keeping of the ceremonial and judicial law of Moses,
but of keeping therewith also the whole law, as it appears by the setting
down of the same, and the circumstances thereof, Verse. 5. neither was the
law, nor is it, any other way a yooke or burden, which neither they nor
their fathers were able to bear, but as therein especially is comprised the
law moral, which rightly understood, man's weakness considered, is infinite
harder to keep for man, then both the other. And for Paul in the other place,
to have granted only this, that no man by his own strength without faith and
grace can keep the whole law, would not, nor could not, have serned his
turn, to any purpose to confute those that he dealt withal. For neither were
the false Apostles so foolish to teach, or the Galathians once so silly or
simple, as to be but in danger to believe, that any such works of the law, so
done, were at all to be trusted unto, to erne or merit their salvation by. And
therefore as it cannot be denied, but that he speaks there of the law in
general (as his words, continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of the law, do show) so may it not, nor cannot, without wilful
cauilling, that the proposition, that he assumeth, as granted, and such as
might not be denied was this, that certain it is, no man continues in all the
things that are written in the law, to do them, whosoever he be. For
thereupon it must and does only follow, that such as these were that he
reasoned against, that put trust and confidence in the works of the law, which
they did after faith, and in grace, could not be justified thereby: because
the law found them yet in some things breakers thereof, and therefore was so
far of from justifying of them, for keeping it in part, that he pronounced
them accursed for not keeping it, in whole and in enery point. And yet
Bellarmine seems to persuade himself, that he has clenlie shilted of the
former place, by telling us that Peter so spoke of the law, in respect of the
ceremonies thereof, and the iudicialles thereunto appertayning only, and that
also he has quite rid his hands of the other, by assuming a proposition
about such works of the law, as were yet never in question there, betwixt him
and any of his adversaries. Thus then the pillar of theirs thrown down and
laid in the dust, with it are all the rest that depend thereon, overthrown
also. Notwithstanding, briefly let us take a view of them, the better to
understand the vanity and impiety therein set down. That the perfect and
exact sense of the law is rather for men in heaven then in earth, how can it
be, seeing most of the commandments are such, as concern only this life?
our Sabbath is perpetual, and not one day in the seven, and what distinction
of degrees amongst us are to be imagined there, that we should read the fifth
commandment? Yea what need shall then be there to have any of the other
prescribed us, where there is no danger at all, or fear to be had of loss of
life, honesty, goods, or name? As for the next gloss wherbysom would have men
to be counted keepers and fulfillers of the law, for keeping it in the most
part, James has most planily taught, saying, whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. Cap. 2. Ver. 10. Now
other of them say that grace makes the whole easy to be kept, it is easier
said, then any way proved to be so, for that all experience of such as have
had grace, in as good measure, as any again can hope to have it, has been
ever yet most flat to the contrary. Yet we easily grant, that to men in grace,
it is far easier then to any other, yea and that it is easy to them in this
respect, that they unfeignedly studying and endeavoring to keep it, though
sometimes they fail and com short thereof, yet thereby taking occasion to
repent, and so by faith, to seek to the fountain of grace, Christ Jesus, for
pardon, they find him most able and willing to account their purpose and care
to have kept it, even insteede of the fulfilling thereof indeed, to pardon and
purge them of all their a berrations from the same. But where is all this, to
prove man any time, to be so full and perfect a keeper thereof, that he neither
may be charged with the transgression of any one commandment, nor in justice
debarred from the wages of heaven which he has merited and deserved thereby?
And yet thus far they go in this point, though quite without warrent or
ground. For though this were granted them, that after regeneration, some thus
could and did keep the law, yet where find they that God has bound
himself by any promise, to give heaven to any for keeping his law, only in
some part, or for some piece of his life. Doubtless the promise that God has
made of life, or reward to the keepers of his law, is, if they, during their
whole life wholly, observe the same, otherwise he has promised them nothing,
but a curse, as we have heard before. But to let this pass, and to proceed,
their next helps and refuges are, that which they hold of venial sins, and
of concupiscence, and of the first motions to sin not consented unto: wherein
they ere many ways. For first it is great boldness in them to say where James
or any other say, in mancy things we sin al, that there they mean only their
venial sins: Where experience told daily shows and proves that very many
of those also very great and gross sins, and that oftentimes have overtaken,
and yet do the better sort of men and they themselves, hold venial sins, not
to be sins simply, but improperlie. Whereupon it should follow by their
construction, that James should speak, but in this sense, in many things we
sin all, not simply but improperlie. And counting such a number of sins
venial as they do, I wonder they are not ashamed yet to bold, that they are
not contrary to the law, but besi^s it. For what perfection were there in the
rule of righteousness prescribed therein, if it left such a number of sins
unchecked, and incountred? That they all should be but at the omitting of a
letter in writing of much, or as some others have said, but as a few small
motes in a fair garment, and therefore to be pardoned, either for their own
littlenes, or to be wiped clean away by such trifling means, as they to that
end, say will serve it is strange that any that have any knowledge of God, or
his justice, or of his written word, should either so say or think. For who
knows not, that God requires the whole heart, and soul of man, and that all the faculties and powers, both of body and soul, should wholly serve him,
and that as he himself is purity it self, so his justice is so infinite
pure, that it can abide nothing, that has any imputitie in it? And who can
read Christ's exposition, but of these two commandments thou shall not kill,
thou shall not commit adultery, and of that part of the third, thou shall not
forswear thyself. Mat. 5.12. etc. but he shall even thereby plainly perceive,
that Christ there, has taught us that a number of those which they count their
venial sins, are grievous sins before God, directly forbidden in his law,
and such, as if the Lord should but enter into judgment with us for, we were
never able to abide it. For there to be angry unadvisedly, to say to another
^aca, to call one fool, to look on a woman to lust after her, to swear
vainly at all, by the smallest thing that is, are there expresselye forbidden
by Christ as contrary to these laws, and as sinners every one of them worthy
of grievous and heavy punishment. And yet many of these, if not all, they must
needs confess, be such as they count but venial smnes. Let not any man
therefore, liften unto these men, thus seeking to extenuate the vileness and
heaviness of any sin, how small soever: but rather let every one learn of
Christ to account the smalest sin that he falls into, in thought, word, or
countenance, damnable enough of it own nature, if God lay it to the charge of
the committer thereof. That concupiscence or the first motions to sin,
arising in our mind, are not sin, may, I would think, appear sufficiently
to be false, in that Paul so complains thereof, as he does, and would so
saine be rid of it, as we read Romans. 7.7.17.24. and that expressly it is
forbid in the last commaundement^ thou shall not lust after, or desior any
thing that is thy neighbors. Which to be so by this it is enident, that by
Christ's own oxposition (as we have heard) lust confented unto but secretly in
thought, is condemned and forbid in the former commandementes. For there is no
probability, that the Lord of purpose setting down the sum of his law, so
breeflie as he does in these 10 commandments of his, and distinguishing it
into 10. expressly, as he does, Deuteronomy: 4.10. that either he would forbid one
thing often, or confound one commandment, and the matter thereof with an
oother, which of necessity must be granted yet to be so, unless for the
distinction of this last commandment from the former we say, that therein bare
and naked vnlawfullust or concupiscence, though not consented unto, is expressly
condemned, and in the other, the same yealded and consented unto. And thus it
seems, Paul took it, and understood it, in saying he had not known lust,
(meaning that it is sin) but that the law says, thou shall not lust: Romans
7.7. and there upon doubtless he is driven to acknowledge as he does there,
the law to be spiritual, and himself unable to answer in his flesh the
perfection thereof. And God requiring, as I said before, and as we are taught
by the sum an abridgement of the law, often repeated in the scriptures, that
we should love him with our whole heart, and our neighbor as our self, how
can our hearts be wholly his, when there are but these first filthy motions
to sin, never so little a while flying up and down there. Wherefore if sin
be as John has defined it, the transgression of the law, 3.4. and hereby the
very life of the law and the substance thereof be broken, as doubtless it
is, how can it be, but that bare lust, and the first evil motions to sin,
though by and by resisted, are sin, and that simply and properly* Now as
for the last fillie shifts of Bellermine, to say that the law was not given to
the sense, but to the mind, and therefore that Paul obeying the law in his
mind, was no breaker thereof, though he found that in his members which led him
to the contrary, what is it else, but to say, so we serve God in our mind, it
makes no matter, how we behave our selves in our bodies or flesh, as though
the same God, that created the soul, created not the body also, and therefore
required not as well that the one part of man, as the other, (though first he
would have the soul) should serve him. Who therefore of any wisdom or
learning, would have thought that such a beggarly and fond answer as this,
would have served, to have clean dashed and answered, such an invincible
argument, as he takes upon him to answer herewith? And as for his other 2.
they are very ridiculous. For what is it to prove, that the keeping of the
law, is possible to the regenerate, to say, that if they fall into any mortal
sin, repenting thereof, and having the same forgiven, then they are counted
still as keepers thereof? For this is not by their meritte and perfect keeping
of the law, but by the grace of the gospel, which offers pardon to these that
repent, though they have trasgressed the law. And as forth last, which as his
answer to Augustines place 1. retract. Cap. 19. that thereby indeed is
confessed a want of perfection in man's keeping of the law, and not a
transgression of any commandment, how can it stand, seeing, as it is clear in
deed in Augustine, and he himself is therefore enforced to confess it; that
his answer is there, that the perfection required by the law cannot be found
in man in this life, otherwise, then whiles all things therein commanded, are
accounted as done, when whatsoever is not done, is pardoned? And as in deed,
in other poor lahours of mine already in print, I have showed, the ancient
fathers are most plain and pregnant in this, to show, that the perfection of
our righteousness, lies rather in the sight of our own manifold
unrighteousness, to urge us to thirst after the making of us righteous, through
the righteousness of Christ Jesus, the^ in any finding at any time, of any
perfect inherent righteousness, in our selves. Wherefore these things
considered, I trust you will rather use the means before laid before you by
me, according to Gods word, to breed in you true hunger and thirst after
Christ, the^ that you will end any ear at al, to these subtilties of Satan, to
hold you there from such therefore, hopping that by those means, either God
has heretofore made you, or at this present has or will, let us proceed.

The next thing beer to be considered of, The command meant. which contains
2. things. b. what it is to come unto Christ.
is the commandementes here given by Christ, unto such as I have spoken of and
have labored to make all you wherein as I said in the beginning, he requires
of all such, two things, namely that they should come unto him and then
drink of him, where by coming unto him, we have not, as Augustine has noted
in his 26. and 32 tractes upon John, to understand a coming unto him by the
feet of the body. For so many came unto him, touched him, and througed him,
and yet were never the better. Mat. 5.31. but a coming unto him, by the
direction of the eyes of the soul, by the feet of sound knowledge of him,
what he is in person, and what he is in office. When this word is used alone
as Mat: 11.28. in those words of his, come unto me, all ye that be weary and
heavy laden, and I will ease you, then thereby doubtless we have not only to
understand, thus much, but that thereby further is required of us, faith in him,
grounded upon this our knowledge of him, as upon the foundation thereof. But
where it is coupled with other words, that either expressly, or in effect call
for faith, as it is here, then thus as I have said, it is to be taken, as John.
6.40. compared with this place makes it evident. For there instead of coming
unto him, he says he that sees the son, not understanding thereby, the
seeing of him, with bodily eyes, but with spiritual: and then he goes on,
saying, and believes in him, shall have everlasting life. Wherefore, until by
the light of the gospel, men have so profited, through the inward working of
Gods holy spirit in them, that they know and acknowledge Christ aright, both
in person and office they have neither eyes not feet in Christ's sense, here,
to come unto him by or withal. Pray we therefore for this light, and the
countenance thereof amongst us. For certainly the natural man perceiues not
the things of God, neither can he, because they are spiritual. 1. Cor.
2.11.14. etc. But they that have the light of the gospel shinning amongst
them, though before they sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, yet (if
the fault be not in them selves), they may see a great light, and life is
risen up to them, in this behalf. Mat. 4.16. Peter by this light directing him
and shinning unto him, showed that with these feet he was come to Christ
Matthew. 16.16. confessing Christ to be the son of the living God, and
therefore to his great comfort, and to encourage others so to come unto him
also, Christ answered him and said. Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas,
for flesh and blood has not reuealled this unto thee, but my father which is
in heaven. Mat: 16.17. Surely we here in England, Gods name be blessed for it,
have had now this great while the light clearly shining amongst us, to
direct us in our coming to Christ, to make straight steps unto our feet, least
that which is halting be turned out of the way, as we are councelled, Heb. 12
13. And yet I fear there is such bad and small coming to Christ, sound
amongst us, that he in respect of most of us, has too too just cause to say
unto us, as he did to the Jews in his time, This is the comdemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men love darkness better then light because
their deeds are evil. Io. 3.19. where for we have cause to think, that also,
which in an other place, he said unto some of them, even to be spoken of us
all: yet a little while, is the light with you: walk whiles ye have light
least the darkness come upon you, for he that walks in the dark knows not
whither he goes, and therefore while ye have light, believe in the light, that
ye may be the children of the light. John. 12.31.36. But that this his advise
and counsel may be in time, and that effectually taken to heart, and followed
of us, in this case in walking aright unto Christ by the direction of this
light, whiles it shines amongst us, we are seeing our own unableness other
wise so to do at all to be as it is, to pray him according to his promise made
to his disciples, that he would also pray his father to bestow upon us even
the spirit of truth, to teach us all things. John. 14.16.17.26. and to lead
us unto all truth. 16.13. For if ever we attain by this light, to the sound
and perfect knowledge of Jesus Christ, wherein even the wisdom of God in a
mystery, as Paul speaks, is contained. 1. Cor: 2.7. doubtless we shall
have cause with him to say further, as he does there also Ver: 10.11. God then
has renealed it unto us by his spirit, for that searches all things, even
the deep things of God. For what man knows the things of a man save the
spirit of man, which is in him? even so the things of God knows no man, but
the spirit of God.

Seeing then that Christ commands us here to come unto him and to come unto
him is nothing else, but according to the light of the gospel, directing us
therein, by his spirit to be enabled, rightly to know him, acknowledge and
confess him, it stan death us upon diligently to mark and to consider, how
therein he is described and set forth unto us. Which if we do, we shall soon
find, What Christ is in person.
that the sum and substance of all set before us therein tends, either to
set out what he is in person, or in office: let us therefore before we proceed
any further, the better to teach us and to enable us to do, as Christ here
bids us, a little consider what in these two respects it has taught us.
Touching the former, what he is in person, therein thus much we may learn,
that whereas most certain it is, as our catholic says teaches us, and the
whole course of the scriptures, proves, that there is but one eternal, true
and almighty God, the maker and gouenour of all the world, and yet in the
unity of Godhead, that there are 3. distinct persons, the father, the son, and
the holy ghost, coequal and coeternall: the light of the gospel makes it most
clear and evident, that the 2. persons in this trinity, having been from
everlasting, and then also being true and very God, when the fulness of time was
come, he took unto him self the full and whole nature of man in the womb of
the blessed virgin Marie, that by the power of the holy ghost shadowing her,
she both conceived and bare a son, (remaining still a virgin) that was and is
very God and man also, and yet not two persons bur one. The history of this
his incarnation, conception, and birth, most agreeably to all ancient
prophesies given before of the coming of the Messiah in respect of all the
circumstances thereof, of whom he should descend according to the flesh, at
what time he should come, where he should be borne, and in what manner, is set
forth most plainly by Mat. 10. and by Luke, 1. and 2. In which also, so much as
I hauesaid, touching his person, is taught, for therein we find him termed the
son of the almighty and Emanuel, that is, God with us: and to prove that he was
conceived and born of the virgin his mother, a very man, there his petegree is
derived even down from Adam to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David and the rest,
whereby also it appear th, that he is indeed that seed of the woman and of
those descended that should tread down the serpents head and in whom all the
nations of the world should be blessed. And yet in this history he is still
spoken of, neither as of one, by the co^mixtion or coniunctio^ of two natures,
made a third, nor yet by the consociation or associatio^ of two natures,
remaining still two persons, but as he became, and so still remains one only
person consisting of these two natures, so therein is he set before us. This
mystery also is most notably, in my opinion opened unto us by saint Paul,
Phillip: 2. verse. 5.6.7. and 8. in these words, let the same mind be in you
that was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no robery
to be equal with god, but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the
form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shap as a man.
For her in if the words be well marked he has most profou^dly, set down, what
he was before his incarnation, and what he became then: what he was before, he
sheeweth in these, being in the form of God, he thought it no roberie to be
equal with God: and what he became after in the rest, and even these few
words show first thabefore his incarnation, he was one that had a true being
and existence, to confute Ebion and Ceri^^^^, and all their folowers, who hold
that he took all his being and existence of the virgin, and that therefore he
was only man: and Seruetus also hereby is confuted, who fant astically and
blasphemously taught, that the word was nothing before, that had a being and
existence, but that it was but the decree in Gods mind of the making and
creating of this man, and of replenishing him with his godhead. For he is said
to have been (...) that is, one existing and being in the form of God: and
after it is added, that even this same took unto himself the form of a
servant. To this same purpose says John, in the beginning was the word, Io:
1.1. and Christ him self said, before Abraham was I am, Io. 8.58. and Paul he
himself took the seed of Abraham. Heb: 2.16. Secondly by form of God
understanding here the nature of God, as after the form of a servant we must
understand the very nature of man, as al sound interpreters both old and new
ever have done, in that it is said that he was (...), that is, being in the the
form of God, and further that being in the form he thought it no robery to be
equal with god, al these things be further taught, that this being of his which
he had before, was the being of a very true God, and that yet he was a distinct
person in the Godhead from the father, though equal to and with the father. For
as his being in the form of man, proved, that he was a very man, and yet a
distinct person in that nature from other men, equal with them in the common
nature: so his being in the form of God, and his just and lawful thinking
(which doubtless it was, or else it could not have been incident to such an
one) that it was no wrong, or robery to be equal with God, proves most
substantially, that he was before his incarnation by nature very God, and equal
to his father as touching his Godhead, though a distinct person from his
father. For who can be in the form of God, but very God, and who can think it
no robery and that rightly, to be equal to God, but he that indeed is coequal
to and with God, and yet how can these things be said, and said truly, as
certainly they be here, of the son of God, but they must needs prove, that
though father, son, and holy ghost, be all but one God, and have but one
essence, and that most perfectly one, that yet the same is a distinct person
from the person of the father? For one and self same person cannot be said to
be equal to it self: he therefore that thinks it no robery to be equal, must
needs be one person, and he to whom he accounts himself equal, an other. So
that with this one short sentence, and with these very few words, as it were
with one blow, all these heretics, Arrius, Photinus, Carpocrates, Seruetus,
Sabellius, Praxeas, the Tritheits, and Gentilis, and their scholars, are laid
for dead, and therefore are meet for ever to be buried in the graves of
infamous, and blasphemous heretics. For Arrius, though he granted that Christ
had a being before his incarnation, yet he could never be brought to confess,
that in that being, he was God, from everlasting, coeternal, and coessentiall
with the father. Photinus and Seruetus, with their crew, held he was God, and
the son of God, and so might be called, but not by nature, but by grace, and
office. Carpocrates likewise acknowledged in Christ, besides his manhood a
celestial and divine nature, but yet he would not yield that it was of the
same essence that his fathers was. Sabellius and Praxeas would have there to
be but one person, named with three names, and the Tritheits and gentilis
conte^ded for the destinctio^ of the 3. persons, that they would have the^ to
have 3 distinct essences, and so consequently, to be 3 Gods. These here sies of
Arrius, Photinus, Sernetus and Carpocrates, have all their deathswound, in that
expressly, he is said to have bin in the form of God, it being most certain that
there by God the father, is meant and by his form no accidental form, for that
God the father has none such, but his very essence, and substance. And this
his being in the same form with his father, likewise cuts the throat of
Gentilis, and of al Tritheites, for it most strongly shows one form or
essence to be one and self same, most perfectly, to distinct persons therein:
and lastly the co^pariso^ and equality, betwixt him and his father, set down in
the other words (for as much as such comparion could not be, if he and his
father were but one person, named only by diverse names) is as pregnant, for
ever to confound, Sabellius and Praxeas. But the lords name be blessed and
praised for it, if these words wernot plain enough to prove this doctrine of
the son of God, to be most clear against these heretics, we have else where
in the scriptures, the same most plentifully and plainly taught. For what can
be plainer to this purpose, then these words of John? Cap. 1.1. and 2. In the
beginning, was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God: For
the first clause shows his existence, and being from everlasting, the second
his distinct existence, and being in person, from his fathers, and that last
his unity in essence with him. Plain also to this end is that which we read,
Heb. 1.2.3. For there the Apostle calls him the son of God, whom his heavenly
father has made heir of all things, and by whom he made the world, and he
terms him the brightness of his glory, and the ingraued form of his person,
bearing up all things by his mighty word. For herein, his being before the
world was, the distinction his of person from his fathers, and yet the unity
of effence betwixt them, in most forceable words is aduouched: let these
therefore be sufficient for this point.

Now if we would know what he became, and is by his incarnation, in person
further, as I said before, the rest of the words of faint Paul before
alleged out of his 2. Chapter to the Philliplans, most notably lay that also
down before us. For the Apostles purpose being to show the Phillippians, how
Christ humbled and abased himself, for the good of his Church, that he does in
showing them how first he did it, by taking upon him the form of a servant,
and by being made like unto men, and by being found in shape of a man, so
setting down the mystery of his incarnation; and after by telling them how
being so become man, he humbled himself to be obedient even unto the death
for them, to purchase their redemption. Note therefore diligently (well-beloved)
and mark religiously, the words of the Apostle before alleged, to express
the mystery of his incarnation. First he faith, (...), which we english, but
he abased himself, and made himself of no reputation: which words teach us,
that though it be most true that we have heard of him before, that voluntarily
yet to show his obedience to the will of his father, and his love toward his
Church, when the time appointed of his father was come, he was content, though
not to cease to be that, which he had always been before which was
impossible, yet so to have the glory and shining brightness wherein always
thither unto he had been in with his father, for a time darkened, obscured and
hid, as that in comparison thereof, he might be said and thought, even much to
have abased himself, yea to have made himself of no reputation. Now to show
us more particularly and specially wherein this abasing of himself, lay, and
how he did it, the Apostle says he did thus, even himself abase himself, by
taking the form of a servant, etc. thereby understanding, the very nature of
man, withal the properties and natural infirmities thereof, sin only
excepted, as we are taught to understand it, Heb. 2.17. and 7.26. where the
Apostle most plainly teaches that in all things, he in his manhood was made
like unto his brethren, but that he was without sin. And these three words
form, shape, and similitude, used by the Apostle here himself, make it
evident, that he had a purpose as substantially as might be, to express as
much. Yea the word servant shows further that voluntarily also he became
amongst men, to deliver men from servitude, even the common servant of men to
serve under the burden of their sins, as one in whom there was neither form
nor beauty, and who was rejected and despised of men, as in that respect, the
prophet Isayah discribs him, 53.2.3.54. The Apostles meaning is therefore
hereby to teach, that Christ being from everlasting very God with his father,
though a distinct person from his father, that at he was not thus abased
against his will, for that being so, he thought it no robery to be equal to his
father but that he himself most freely and willingly was content thus to strip
himself, or to empty himself, of that glory and equality which he had naturally
with his father, in taking unto himself, as he was and is in the second person
in the trinity, the whole nature of man with all the sinles, harmles, and
natural properties thereof, both in body and soul, and in uniting the same
immediately in the creation thereof, yea in the very same instant and moment,
with himself, as he was the son of God, personally, that so, as he was
before in that he was the son of God, almighty, infinite, incomprehensible,
and eternal, so he might be, as he was the soune of man, weak, finite,
comprehended, and mortal. The better yet once again to make you see, that the
Apostles meaning in these his words, stretch thus far, besides that which I
have noted already therein, observe and mark further, that he says not the
form of God, either abased it self, took the form of a servant or was made
in the likelihoode or similitude of men, but he the which was in the form, he
made himself of no reputation, and was made so, and found also in the shape of
a man, to teach us, if we will speak like the Apostle, and so accordingly
believe, we must not say nor believe that nature took nature, but the person
of the son took unto himself the nature of man, and so, that as he was
created, so it was immediately united unto that person to have together, with
that person, a personal union, and never to have first any existence or being
a part, by, or in it self. For then the Apostle would have said as well that
the thing assumed, was he that was in the form of a servant, as he had said
that the assumer was he that was and had a being in the form of God, which he
does not. The assumer thefore was the second person in the trinity the son of
God, and neither father, nor holy Ghost, nor yet the bare essence of God but
as in it this second person had his existence and being; and the assumed, was
not a person of a man first being and existing a part, but the nature with all
the assentiall and inseparable harmless properties thereof, of a true and
very man both in respect of his body and soul. That by this form of a
servant, he meant not any other created nature, but the nature of man, he
sufficiently she weth, by adding that he was made in the similitude of man, and
in shape found as a man. For Marcion and other heretics here upon gathering,
that he assumed not the very nature of man, but the show and phantasme of a
man, they do most wilfully but cavil, and foolishlie seek to darken a most
manifest truth. For besides that all the story of his conception, birth, life,
and death, and most plain speeches and phrases continually used of him in the
scriptures, prove that he was a very true and perfect man, both in body and
soul, these words give them no ground to build any such conclusion upon. For
Adam is said to have begot Seth according to his own image or likeness, Genesis
5.3. and yet we might justly count them very fond, that therefore would
infer, that Seth had not the very nature of a man, that Adam had, but a bare
shadow or similitude thereof. The words (...), et (...) commonly englished,
taking and made, well understood, made it most clear, that the second person
took unto it self personally, the nature of man so that he united so verily
and personally with him self, as he was the son of God, and the second
person in the trinity, that nature of man that he assumed, that John might
justly say, the word was made flesh, Cap. 1.14 and that we may most safely
believe that he that before subsisted only in the form of God, now also
subsistes in the form of a servant, and that as in respect of the one nature
he is the very son of God, equal to his father; so also in respect of the
other, he is the very son of his mother, and very man, and so lesser and
inferior to his father. In the old testament, we read he appeared in diverse
forms unto men, but yet we never can say that then he made him self of no
reputation by taking such forms upon him, neither therefore was he made the
things he appeared to be, because he never assumed the^ so to himself, that
he personally united himself unto them. And hereby also we may further
learn, in that the assumer, and thing assumed, are thus both described here,
the one to be that, that had his being in the form of God before, and in this
work remained still himself: and the other to be the form of a servant,
accompanied or invested with the likeness and shape of a servant: that both
these, notwithstanding this personal union, are entire and perfect in their
own nature, without any abolishing of either nature, or confounding of other
in themselves, or in the properties with the other in Christ. Lastly these
words are plain and forcible to make us see, that notwithstanding the assumer
of the form of a servant unto himself, thereby is made in the likeness of a
man, and found in shape as a man, that yet he is but one person now
subsisting, both in the true form of God, and in the very nature or form of
man. For as of one person, after the finishing of this his incarnation, both
here and else where always the gospel speaks of him. Dream therefore we
may not, that this union of the nature of man personally with the son of God is
either in the commixtion of the two natures, or by the inhabitation of the one,
in the other, or by the adioining of the one unto the other, or by the
assisting of one the other, neither yet by the real communication of the
properties of the one with the other so, as that the one nature, may simply and
properly be said, to be of the same properties, that the other is. For though
water and wine be mixed in one cup, the spirit of God dwell in the servants of
God, and God adioyn him self unto the^ and assist the^ most apara^tly every
where, yet cannot wine, the spirit, or God, be said to have so taken unto
themselves water, the hearts of men, or the servants of God, that therefore wine
is made water, the spirit of God, or God, the hearts of men, or the servants
of God themselves; as we here see him that has been always in the form of
God, said to have been made in the form of man, by his taking unto himself
the form of a servant. And though most certain it be, and therefore most
usual in the scriptures also (the better to note the true, real, essential,
and personal union, betwixt the son of God, and the nature of man) to hear
those things that properly appertain to the manhood to be affirmed of our
blessed God and Savior, and also those things that properly belong unto him
only as he is God, spoken of the man Christ: yet to make it evident, that as
it is heretical, to confound the one nature with the other, that so it is also,
and has been ever so accounted of all those who by the motion of Gods spirit,
and not of their own, have written the scriptures to communicate properly the
special properties of the one unto the other, they have never so spoken or
writ, but speaking of these two natures in the concrete, that is, as the words
used to signify the same not the person subsisting in the essence and never
speaking thereof in the abstract, as the schoolmen speak, that is, as the
words used, note the naked and simple essence in it self. And therefore for
this true essential, and personal union of the son of God, with the form
of a servant, we say according to the truth, and to the scriptures, that
Christ is God and man, but we use not to say, he is Godhead and manheade, and
we say, they crucified the Lord of glory, so noting that person that was and
is the Lord of glory, and understanding this of his person, not in respect of
that nature whereby he was so the Lord of glory, but in respect of the other
nature personally united thereunto, wherein he was passible and might be
crucified. And so likewise speaking of his person in respect of the other
nature, we may say, and say truly, the man Christ is almighty, every where
and infinite, because he is so in that respect, that he is the son of God,
but we may not say that his manhood is so. For we must understand and always
remember, that whenever any thing is affirmed of Christ, in respect of the
one nature that properly belonges unto a^^ther, that the meaning thereof never
is to inuest the one nature, with the properties that are peculiar to the
other, but that so we speak, to show the personal union of both in one
person. We may see a pretty good image hereof in a man, as he consistes of
body and soul: for, because of the concurring but of those two natures
together, to the constitution of a man as they do, though infinitely it come
short of the reaching to the excellency of this mystery that we now speak
of, may truly be said in diverse respects, to be a heavenly creature, and an
earthly; mortal and immortal: heavenly and immortal, in respect of his
soul, and earthly and mortal, in regard of his body: and diverse things
that are proper to the body, are yet said of the soul, and contrary they
which are special to the soul, are affirmed of the body; as for example, we
say sometimes the soul of man awaketh or sleeps, which are properly said of
the body, and we say the body hears, sees, or understands, when as in
deed, the body can do none of these, but by the soul: and yet as we think
they destroy the nature of man, that either for the union or coupling of these
two together, to make a man, or for any of these phrases, would either turn
the one of these into the other, confound one of these with the other, or
inuest the one nature reallie with the properties that be special and peculiar
unto the other, so hold we it most firmly in this case, that it is, plainly
heretical to do the like. These things therefore thus weied and considered, we
have just cause to say and think with the Apostle, That great is the mystery
of Godliness, namely even this, that God is manifested in the flesh, and yet
justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto gentiles, believed on
in the world, and received up into glory, 1. Tim. 3.16. And by these things
we may so clearly see our Christ in person to be very God, and very man, and
yet for all that, but one person, as that both with the Apostle Paul, we may
call him, The mighty and blessed God for ever. 2. Tim. 2.13. and the man
Christ Jesus, 1.2.5 and yet still speak of him, as but of the one person, as
he does in both these places. And to conclude this point, hereby also even
sufficiently, we may see and hear all the heretics, and their heresies
confuted, that ever yet have set themselves against any point or part of
the truth of this doctrine of his person. For hereby against Ebion
Cerinthus, and Photinus, denying his Godheade that has been a duouched, and
against Marcion confessing that, and denying the truth of his manhood, that
has been likewise plainly proved: and consequently Arrius that held rightly
of neither, affirming that in respect of the one, he was but a created spirit,
and in regard of the other, a body only, without any other soul then his
created Godhead, and Apollinaris that denied that he had the mind or
reasonable soul of a man, howsoever he granted him the sensitive and growing
soul, are confounded also; especially remembering further, that Christ
himself, as plainly to teach them by his words that he had a very soul of
a man, as by experience they saw and found he had the very body of a man, said
not only, that his soul was heavy unto death, Math. 26.38. but dying, as Luke
reports 23.46. cried with a loud voice, Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit. And Nestorius that held the two natures in him only to be united by
consociation and assistance, and that therefore he had still a Godhead and a
manhood, not only distinct in their natures, but also so, that in him the
son of God was one, and the son of the virgin an other, as he was condemned
in the counsel of Ephesus, for one that was led by the spirit of Antichrist,
for his so loosing or dissoluing of Jesus, so has the Apostle directly
confuted him in this place to the Phillipians, and John also as I have showed,
in setting down plainly, that he that was in the form of God, whom John
called the word, so took unto himself the form of a servant, that he was
made very man, or flesh. Eutiches also, who to overthrow Nestorius, taught
that the two naturs are so united, after the incarnation, that howsoever they
were two before, after they are but one, cannot stand with the apparent
distinction that Paul has made betwixt the assumer, and assumed nature, both
before, in, and after the assuming of the one by the other unto himself. And
whereas, if this opinion of his were true, it should thereupon follow that then
either the Godhead should be turned into the manhood, or the manhood into
the Godhead, for that of the commixtion of both, a third thing should grow.
Every one of these absurd consequentes, Paul has refelled also, by teaching
us both to remain, without either turning of the one into the other, or
confounding one of them, by any commixtion or otherwise, one with an other, as
we have heard. And consequently hereby both the Lutherans and Papists, who
for the maintenance of their gross real presence, and mouth eating of Christ,
both God and man do most eagerly strive and contend, to entitle the manhood
of Christ, with the peculiar properties of the Godheade, as to be muisible,
incircumscriptible etc. are most plainly proved, to teach herein heretical
and damned doctrine, for that thus confounding the properties, with Eutiches in
deed, and truth, they confound the natures themselves, and therefore let
them (as they may justly) take the condemnation of Eutiches, in the council of
Calcedon, to be also directly their condemnation. Under this same condemnation
come the heretics, (...), so called, because Eutiches being condemned, they
durst not say whom they followed, though with him they hold but one nature
after the incarnation to remain, and the (...), that thought the divine nature
was turned into the human, and that therefore they might say, that it
suffered, and the (...) also, which holding that there was nothing left but
the divine nature, and that the other was absorpte of that, yet held that that
nature was ignoraunte of many things, and the Aphterdoxitae, who held that
the human nature was impassible, for the coniunxion that it had with the
divine, and also the Monothelites, who therefore taught, that there was but
only will in the person of Christ. For all these stumbled and fell with
Eutiches in urging so the union, of the two natures, that they in effect, one
way or other, ere they had done, either by confounding the natures or the
properties left but one in effect. Let us therefore, whatsoever heretics,
either old or new, have thought, or do, or shall think to the contrary,
most constantly hold this, as the very rock and foundation, whereupon if
we be builte and stand fast, the very gates of hell shall never prevail
against us, that Christ Jesus in person, is very GOD, the second person in
the trinity, and also very man the son of the blessed virgin Marie, and
therefore, that both these two are so personally united in him, that he is one
person, and that without any conversion of the one nature into the other, or
confusion either of the natures themselves, or of the several and special
properties, the one with the other. For most necessary it is that in every
respect he should be such an one, or else he neither can be an able, nor fit
person, to be our Jesus. For though the sin of man, there being grown of
Gods part such just cause of enimitie against man, of man's, such alienation
and auersion of mind from God; as there is, it was first most meet, that he
that should be the attonement-maker twixt these, should first in himself have
the two natures at unity and one. And then seeing the order of Gods justice
required, that as man had offended it, man again should appease it, by
undergoing the burden of the sins of man, to satisfy fully the same for
them, as it was necessary, that he that would be man's savior, should
therefore be a very man: so likewise because no nature but that which is of
power infinite, and therefore none but very God, could ever have been able to
have enabled the nature of man to undertake, and effectually to go through
with this most great and hard work, to satisfy fully the infinite justice of
God for the sins of the world, it was as needful, that he should be true
and very God. Yea for these causes it was most requisite that these two, very
God and the nature of man, should be so united, as that thereof should
consist but only one person, as I have said, that so the passible nature might
bear, as Esaias speaks, the chastisment of our peace. Esaias, 53.5. and that the
other which is impassible, by the power and dignity thereof, having it so
personally, subsisting in and with it self, might fit it for that purpose, not
only contributing unto it power and strength, sufficient therefore, but also,
communicating unto the things done and suffered to that end, by that nature,
though in number, and for the time of the accomplishing the same fruit, an
infinite dignity and worthynesse, to satisfy the infinite justice of God, for
the purchassing and compassing of man's salvation. For otherwise, if that
nature, by this means had not been the manhood of one that was and is very God
also, it might well have entered into this work, but doubtless in wrestling
under the burden of our sins, against hell, death, and devil, to satisfy
the infinite justice and wrath of God for the same, it might well have been
swallowed up of death, and of the sorrows of hell but it neither should nor
could ever have valiently and triumphantly overcome all these, and nailed as
it were out sins, and the hand writing that was against us for the same, to his
cross (as Paul speaks Colos. 2.14.10. Begote us again unto a lively hope,
that is, to assure us, that he had gone through the work, that he took in
hand, as now through the power thereof, by rising again, the third day from
death to life, and by ascending visibly as a conqueror into heaven forty days
after, and by sitting ever since at the right hand of his father, in the
heavenly places) most evidently he has. For it is the spirit that, quickneth,
and without that so united unto it as it was, His flesh could have profited
nothing. Io: 6.63. Therefore verse divinely says the apostle, that by his
eternal spirit it was (thereby understanding plainly his Godhead) that he
offered himself without spot to God, to purge our consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God. Heb. 9.14. And hence is it, as the former
saying of Christ shows plainly enough, that he says, my flesh, is meat
indeed: and my blood is drink indeed: Ioh. 6.55. and again 53.54. except
ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you: but whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For how can it be otherwise,
but that he being as he is God and man in one person, by the means of this
most high union of his Godhead with his manhood, but that from the same
Godhead, there must needs proceed and flow through his manhood, infinite
power to quicken and save all those, that be partakers thereof? And how can it
be possible, but that the heavenly father, must needs account this his
well-beloved son, in whom he is well pleased, a fit and most sufficient means
to make him also to be well pleased, with all these, that confess and
acknowledge him to be in person as he is, and confidently repose their
redemption, and salvation. Whatsoever therefore others have done, or yet do,
let us learn by thus knowing and acknowledging Christ to be in person, to come
unto him.

Now concerning his office, the same light of the gospel will most clearly
direct us what also to hold and to believe touching that, What Christ is in
office. and first in general.
both in general, and in particulare. In general, it sets him before us to be
the Christ, the Messiah, the savior of the world. And this it does also in
such sort, as that it teaches as solie and wholly, sullie and freely, to
account him so to be. For most plainly we read, (as we cannot hear too often,
that saint Peter most confidently to the faces of his stowtest enemies, has
aduouched, that there is noe salvation in any other, for amongst men there is
given no other name under heaven, whereby salvation comes but his, Act: 4.12.
And therefore in this respect he is called, The author and finisher of our
faith, Heb: 12.2. and and ^. the beginning and the ending. Reave. 1.8. Besides
he himself, that best knew himself what he was and is, tells us plainly to
this purpose, that he is the way, the truth, and the life. Io. 14.6. yea that
he is so the door of the sheepfold, that whosoever he be that climmeth up and
seeks to get in by any other way, he is a thief and a murderer, Ioh: 10.
verse. 1. and 7. again Mat. 22. comparing the kingdom of heaven to a marriage
that a king made unto his son, and the true ministers of God to the bidders,
unto that marriage, he shows that his heavenly father, to illure his guestes
to come thereunto, has willed them to say unto them, all things are prepared
already, verse. 4. thereby showing that in that, that this marriage is so
consummat betwixt him the son of the heavenly king, and our nature, as by the
personal union thereof, we have heard it is, we may be sure, that if now we
will come, and feed of the heavenly cheer, that in and by this marriage is
provided for us, that even therein we shall find all things necessary to
feed us to eternal life so sufficiently provided for us before hand already,
that we need speak no further. And this he had an eye unto when he said to the
woman of Samaria, Ioh: 4.14. whosoever drincketh of the water that I shall give
him, shall be no more a thirst, but it shall be in him a well of water that
springs up to eternal life. It is good listining therefore to Esays
proclamation in this respect, to every one that thirsts come ye to the
waters, yea, ye that have no silver come buie and eat, I say buy wine and
milk without silver and without money. 55.1. For doubtless they that hereby
will learn to come unto him by faith, for the food of their souls, and so
give over laying out their silver or laboring for that which will not prove
bread to satisfy them (which al they do which are at never so much pains and
cost by any other means to satisfy their hungry and thirsty souls) they as
they are further taught there, though they be utterly unable of them selves to
give any recompense unto him, for the same, yet in him they shall find both
meat and drink sufficient, not only to refresh their souls, but even to
delight them with fatness. When people therefore, for all this will not trust
only to this all sufficient savior of their souls, but besides him, devise
unto themselves other persons and things in that respect to be trusted unto:
what do they else but give GOD occasion to complain of them, as Jeremy he
did of the Jews, and therefore to say: O ye heavens be astonished at this, be
afraid, and utterly confounded says the Lord. For my people have committed
two evils, they have forsaken the fountain of living waters, to dig them pits,
even broken pittes, that can hold no water. Iere: 2.12.13. And yet as plain
as these things be, the Church of Rome has, does and will still most grossly
and openly commit these 2. great evils, whatsoever either God or man can say
to, the contrary, as we shall see most plainly ere I have done, howsoever, let
them do thus as long as they list, let us only seek and trust unto the
fountain of living waters, Christ Jesus our Lord and savior.

How be it the better and the more, The^ more particular ly, that by him we
have full remission of our sins.
to occasion us so to do indeed, as we ought from point to point, and in
all respects let us see more particularly how this office of our savior is
set sorth in the Gospel unto us. For it contenteth not it self with this
summarilye telling us, that he is the full and perfect savior of the world
but because he that is such an one indeed must first then purchase for us
full remission of our sin, for which otherwise all Gods curses and judgments
both in this life and in that which is to come, must come upon us, and also he
must provide for us (we never having nor ever being able to have any such of
our own) a perfect righteousness answerable even to Gods most perfect rule of
righteousness, whereby we may be made righteous before him, and have just and
right title to the kingdom of heaven, into which being as it is the throne of
the most pure God, no impure and unclean thing or person can or may enter. Yea
because to the full compassing of this for us, and to the making us indeed
partakers and possessors hereof, which is our Saviors office to do, it is
necessary that he should then be a king, to conquer our enemies and to
govern and keep us, a prophet to teach and guide us by his word, and a priest
to redeem us, and to make continual intercession for us, the gospel most
notably does in all these respects describe Christ unto us to be such an one,
as the savior of the world should be, and as we have need of. But first let
us hear what it says touching the two former, and after we will come to the
view also of the other. Touching the first of which, that is, full remission of
our sins, as it was promised at the first by God to Adam and Eve. Gen: 3.15.
That he should tread down the serpents head: and after was more plainly
reueiled to Daniel, that when Messiah the prince should come he should
confirm the covenant, and not only cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease,
but also finish the wickedness of his people, seal up their sins, and
reconcile their iniquity. 9.27. and 24. and therefore by Isaiah plainly
foretold, that he should be so wounded for our transgressions, and broken for
our iniquities that the chastisment of our peace should be upon him, and that
by his stripes we should be healed: 53.5. so in the new testament we read,
that an Angel from heaven told Joseph most plainly, shortly after his
conception, That his name should be called Ihesus, because he should save his
people from their sins. Mat: 1.21. And therefore ere yet he was borne old
father Zachary by the inspiration of the holy ghost prophesied that his son
John should go before his face to prepare his ways, and to given knowledge
unto his people of their salvation, by the remission of their sins. Luke:
1.16.77. which after John faithfully performed saying of him in the presence of
a great multitude he being then there also, Behold the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world. Io. 1.16. His apostles also most plainly
bear witness to his point, according to their commission, Luke. 24.47. For we
read. Act: 10.45. that Peter most confidently in presence of a great company,
said and testified, that to him all the prophets witness, that through his name
all that believe in him should have remission of their sins. And therefore in
his first epistle. Cap. 2 24. he applies so that before aleadged testimony of
Esaias to this purpose, that he says, in his own body upon the tree, he so bare
our sins, that we being delivered there from having by his stripes our selves
healed, we should live in righteousness. And John he is as plain saying, If any
man sin we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just, and he is
the reconciliation of our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the sins
of the whole world. 1. Epist. Cap 1.12. And what can be more plain and
pregnant to this end then that sweet saying of saint Paul this is a true
saying and worthy of al men to be received, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, whereof in great humility and feeling of his sins, he
acknowledges himself cheese. 1. Timo: 1.15. yea to show us that he took this
remission of sins that he looked for through Christ to be full and perfect, not
only to discharge us of all the eternal punishments due unto us, for our
sins in the world to come, but also, of the whole curse of the law, within
the compass whereof are all kind of temporary punishments in this life, as we
may see, Deu: 27. and 28, as he says, there is no condemnation to those that
are in Christ Jesus. Romans 1.8. so Galathians the third the 13. also he writes
that he became accursed for us, to deliver us from the curse of the law. And if
the forgiveness of our sins that we look for at Gods hand stretch not thus
far, how could they be said to be made, as white as snow or woole, Isay: 1.18.
when they are forgiven: or how could it be said of God when he forgiues the^,
that he would remember them no more, as it is 31.34. Heb. 10.17. Yea that then
he castes them al into the bottom of the sea, as he promises he will, Math:
7.19? And yet as necessary, comfortable, and certain as you see this doctrine
to be, the papists can not find in their hearts, to let us go away with it thus
wholly and freely. For first they directly hold that sins fallen into after
baptism, have a number of fountains of water to wash them in, and means to
purge the owners thereof, besides Christ Jesus and his merits. Their sacrament
of penance which they hold to consiste of contrition, confession and
satisfaction: and the priests absolution thereupon, in this case must serve us
as a second planke after shipwreck to fly unto, and to escape the danger of
the tempestuous seas of Gods wrath by: and if this will not serve, then Masses,
satisfactorie works done by man's own self and others extraine unction, and
lastly the enduring of the pains of purgatory, and the mediation of Saints and
Angels, all laid together, shall help them quite to be discharged from those
sins, and the punishments yet by them to be suffered for them, from which
they durst not for all this evidence that I have brought, look fully to be
delivered by the precious blood of Christ Jesus. And yet they cannot be
ignorant, that as in the institution of the sacrament of his body and blood, he
calde the cup the new testament in his blood, which should be shed for the
remission of sins. Mat. 26.28. that so when it was shed to that end, and
therefore he even ready to die: that to show that by that death of his all
meritorious suffering and satisfying for sin had an end, he said consummatum
est, that is, it is finished, Io: 19.30. And that therefore in the epistle to
the Hebrwes, the absolute sufficiency of the sacrifice offered by Christ to
purchasse us full and perfect redemption and salvation by the remission of our
sins, once for all by his own person, is so aduouched as though, the holy
Ghost therein of purpose directed the writer to prevent and to confute all
these devises, who may not see? The stone that they would seem especially to
stumble at, and whereby to fall into these conceits, is that which we read 2.
Sam. 12. that notwithstanding upon Danids repentance he told him, that God had
forgiven him his sin and put it away, verse: 13. yet he not only denounces
a judgment against him upon occasion of that his sin, but also it after
follows and is showed, how it was in deed executed upon him. For here upon,
when other shifts fail them, to countenance their antichristian ecclipsing
and defacing the full and stee remission of sins, ye of all our sins,
original and actual, before baptism and after, that any way are remissible,
they imagine yet they may hold thisfast, that howsoever by and in him, we may
have remission of the sins them selves, and release of the eternal
punishments due therefore, that yet there may and does remain some temporary
to be abid or satisfied for, by our selves, or other of our good friends,
either here in this life, or in purgatory in the life to come. But alas who
sees not, that the ground which they have from hence is to weak and sandy, to
build such a huge heap of satisfactory works and sufferings upon, as here
upon to rob Christ, and to aduatire and enrich them selves, they would feign
build? For though this and the like dealing of GOD with his servants, prove
that God may and does for just causes known unto himself, take occasion by
their sins, to chastise them and to correct them for the same though he have
before forgiven them their sins, and never mean that they shall therefore be
condemned, yet neither this, nor all the like examples ever can prove, that by
the enduring of, or satisfying for these any way or by any body, Gods meaning
ever was, that they should perfect the work of the remission of their sins.
For doubtless his son having undertaken the purchasing of this for us at his
hands, and there lacking in him neither skill nor power nor affection, to go
through with the work which he had taken in hand, without doing of him to
manifest and open wrong, in robbing of him, in taking from him that which is
his due, we must fully be persuaded that for our sins he has so fully
satisfied his heavenly father, that he will think we do him great injury,
and much stain his justice, if by any other doing or suffering we should
offer him any other price or payment again therefore. Such punishments
therefore either threatened by God or afflicted upon his children after in
Christ their sins are forgiven them, they are his fatherly chastisments, to
teach them the better to see the vileness and grieuousnesse of sin, and
serve both them and other as Gods sanctified means to warn them to take more
heed of sin thereafter, and to mortify them thereunto: but in no sort must
we be so foolish as with these kind of men to imagine, that they must either
be endured, or otherwise bought out by our own satisfactions or of others, to
make perfect or to consummate the full remission of our sins. By these
devises they set their priests and prelates a loft in the consciences of men, as
though they could absolve them, and discharge them from that, from which all
the blood shed of Christ Jesus though never so well believed in, has not yet
quitte them, and so by their devise of purgatory, and their manner of
releeuing of souls there by their pardons, masses and dirges etc: and by doing
of these, and by their absolution, extraine unction, and their taking upon them
to offer Christ again to his father for them, as though his own offering of
him self could not serve the turn, they have wonderfully enriched
themselves. What other reasons soever they may pretend hereof, if these were
not the reasons indeed that set them and held them in this way, they had long
ago, or would quicly be glad with us, to preach and to believe, full remission
of all sins, both in respect of the guiltiness and punishment also, by and
through the only sufferings and satisfaction done by Christ. For what reason in
the world can cause them but once to think that Christ has borne the burden
of our sins, but so in his own body upon the tree, that he should, when he
had done, return the same again upon us in some forte to bear and to suffer
for? Or if they would needs hold this to be thus, how can they tell how
much Christ has suffered and how much he has left to be suffered by us, or
when they have suffered all that either for quantity or quality, is meet to
make the remission plenarie, complet and full. But thus in the just judgment
of God it is fit, that they should entangle themselves with gross and
intricate absurdities, that leave the only true way to heaven, Christ Jesus,
and thus seek out biepathes of their own invention to bring them thither. Let
us therefore (good brethren) give no care unto them, but as we have been most
plainly taught out of the canonical scriptures, be fully persuaded that
there is full and absolute remission of all our sins unto us if we repent
thereof aright and believe in Christ Jesus.

And as plainly doubtless do the same scriptures, And a derfect
righteousness by imputation.
and the gospel therein contained, show us that in the same Christ Jesus we
are by faith to seek to be made righteous, not by any righteousness of our
own doing, but by a righteousness in Christ Jesus. And yet I am not ignorant,
that the papists are at such opposition also to this, that their learned
divines of Louan most impudently and shamefully have written, that it is as
absurd to say that we can be made righteous by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, as it is for a man to be counted an ass by the imputating unto
him the form of an ass; the rather therefore and the more diligently let us
mark what therein we are taught of this point also; Paul doubtless so
speaking of that rightiousnesse, whereof to this end GOD is an allower and a
liker, says flatly, That it is on all, and upon all that believe in him.
Romans 3.22. For he is made unto us of God, not only our wisdom, sanctification
and redemption, but also our righteousness, as the same Apostle writes, 1.
Cor. 1.30. And lest with the papists we should think, that this
righteousness, is that inchoated inherent righteousness, which is found in
the regenerate, taught them by the law, and wrought in them by the spirit of
God, received by believing the Gospel, which indeed the scriptures call
sanctification, and the fruits of the spiritte in such, he says in the first
to the Romans. 17. That this righteousness of God, is revealed by the
Gospel, from faith to faith: and that as he adds, without the law. Romans
3.21. which may well and truly be said of the righteousness that is most
perfect and absolute in Christ Jesus, to the knowledge whereof we come by the
Gospel, and not by the law, and whereof more and more according to the
increasinges of our faith, we find our selves possessed. For this
righteousness of God, is by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all
that believe, as he speaks in the very next verse: but this we cannot say of
the foresaid inherent righteousness in any of our selves: for the law
rightly understood, reueales unto us a perfect rule of holiness and
righteousness, yea perfecter, then through the weakness of the flesh, it is
possible for us to answer and keep, as long as we live here. Romans 8.3. and
therefore, because without such a righteousness as is perfect in the eyes of
GOD himself, we can have no entrance into the most righteous kingdom of God,
he has, as there we are taught, sent his son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh, That we that walk not after the flesh,
but after the spiritte, in him, yet might have the righteousness of the law
fulfilled in us. 3. and 4. verse. For Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes. Romans 10.4. And therefore this same
Paul, Gallat. 2.16. (though I dare be bold to say he had then as much
inherent righteousness of his own, as ever had any merit-munger in the world,
writes thus. We that are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,
know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith of
Jesus Christ: even we I say have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law, because by the
works of the law no flesh shall be justified. And yet more plainly to show
that he made no reckoning of any inherent righteousness of his own, either
before his conversion or after to justify himself by before God at all, but
only to this purpose, of Christ's righteousness to be imputed unto the
believer in him, most notably (to the shame and just consutation and confusion
of all that will not submit themselves to this righteousness of God, but
through a blind and an ignorant zeal, will still seek to establish their
own righteousness, for all the fearful warning that they have of the
reiection of the Jews, even for this very fault, as most clearly they are
taught, Romans 10.2.3.) in this Epistle to the Philippians, Cap. 3, verse. 7.8.9.
he has set down these words: The things that were vantage unto me I
counted loss, for Christ's sake, yea doubtless I think all things but
loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of Jesus Christ my Lord. For whom I
have counted all things but loss, and do judge them to be dunge, that I
might win Christ, and might be found in him, not haning mine own
righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith. Whose example
herein, he there also sets before all that minded to be perfect to follow,
verse. 14.15. etc. If notwithstanding any should be sound that would not, he
has told them most confidentlie that whey might trust to. Gal. 5.4. saying,
ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever is justified by the law, ye are fallen
from grace. All which proofs laid together make it most clear, that Jesus
Christ in office is so the savior of the world, that he is so, so wholly and
solie, fully and freely, that without sacrilegious robbing of him of that
honor and glory that is due unto him alone, and that most justly, in that
high office of saving men's souls, as the meritorious cause thereof, he may
neither have Saint nor Angel in heaven, nor man, merit nor any thing else in
earth joined or coupled with him at all.

Let not the papists therefore once think that their new found distinction
of former and latter justification or that their telling us that by the works
of the law, Paul understood the works only done before grace, by the bare
light of the letter of the law, or that in this article when he so often
teaches us that we are justified by grace, he meant thereby the infused grace
or habit of charity, or that their going about to hide and shadow their
robbing of Christ of justifying the believer in him, thorowlie in and by his
own self, in teaching their latter justification to be by man's own merits and
satisfactions, not so much for the worthiness of the things done or suffered
by men, as for that, they are done of men formally justified before with God by
the infused grace of charity, and that they are therefore grown to that
efficacy, by the blood and merits of Christ, for which believed but on, as
they teach, God has justified them, by infusing the gift of charity into
their souls and minds: let them not once think or dream, I say, that any or
all of these their sophistical and cunning sleights or shifts, either can or
shall, once darken or blemish the plain evidence and clear light of this
doctrine of justification, redemption and full salvation, freely and
effectually by faith in Christ Jesus. For as for the first of these, they
cannot be ignorant, that whenever the question is in hand, how and whereby
man is to be justified before God, the scriptures throughout, as plainly teach
us, that there is but one justification or way thereunto, as they teach us
that there is but one God. Indeed they show sometimes, that there is a
proceeding and growing forward ^^eerein, from virtue to virtue, from faith to
faith, and so from strength to strength, in applying unto us, (according to the
increasings of our knowledge more and more of our own wantes, and of Christ's
person and office, and according to our proceeding in the strength, virtue, and
power of our faith grounded thereupon) Christ Jesus and his merits: and
sometimes they speak of justification in a larger or in another signification,
and therefore then they may and do urge him that is justified to be yet more
justified, but hereupon to build, that therefore there are two distinct
kinds of justification of man before the tribunal seat of GOD, is both to
build without ground and foundation and wilfully in a most serious cause, to
play, and seek by dallying with ambiguitie of words, to deceive the simple.
Now as for their second shift, the vanity and falshoode thereof, will soon
appear to any that with any indifferency will but consider Paul's words, when
in handling of this point he shuts out works of the law from having any
thing to do in the office of justifying. For writing as he did always when he
handled this question, not to Jews, that indeed through ignorance both of
Christ and of the true meaning and use of the law, used to seek by the works
of the law, in their sense, that is, by works taught by the law and done
before grace, to be justified, but to converted and believing Gentiles: to what
purpose had it been to labor so often and so earnestly to drive them from
seeking justification by such works of the law, whereof they could never
make any such reckoning, in that before their conversion, they were not so
much as once acquainted with the law. If therefore we must think, (as we are
bound) that Paul wrote and spoke to the purpose, and aptly to those that he
had to deal withal, out of all question we must needs be of that judgment,
that he taught even the converted and believing gentiles, in what measure
soever the spirit of grace enabled them to have, and to perform, never so
many good works of the law, yet when they were never so full of them to
trust perfectly, freely to be justified by the grace of God, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, and not at all by the works of the law.
Alas who is so simple as to think, that the false Apostles sought to persuade
the Galathians, whom Paul had left settled in seeking their justification
freely by faith in Christ, to seek many so to be justified in part, or in
whole, by works of the law done without or before grace? and yet if this
popish gloss must stand, Paul in his Epistle written of purpose to persuade
the Galathians, not to listen to these, teaching them to seek any way to be
justified before God by the works of the law, therein either disputes to no
purpose, and fightes but with his own shadow, or else it must be granted that
these were the works of the law, that they were taught by them to put some
trust and confidence in, which to imagine were most gross and absurd, for
there is no likelihoode therein at all. His reasons that he used to shut out
the works of the law, from the office of justifying, are these, for by the
law, comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 3.20. For that our rejoicing is in
this case excluded not by the law of works, but by the law of faith, verse.
27. For that if Abraham were justified by works he has wherein to rejoice,
but not with God, for that the wages is counted to him that works, not of
favor (as he takes it for granted it was to Abraham and must be to all the
children of Abraham, in this case) but of debt, which likewise he assumeth as
granted to be in this point absurd. Romans 4.2.4. For if they which are of the
law be heirs, faith is made void and the promise is of none effect. For the
law causes wrath. 14.15. therefore it is by faith, that it might come by
grace, and the promise might be sure to all the seeds. 16. As mante as are of
the works of the law are under the curse. For it is written, cursed is every
one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the
law to do them: No man is justified by the law in the sight of God it is
evident, for the just shall live by faith: and to Abraham and his seed were
the promises made: he says not, and to thy seeds, as speaking of many but
and to thy seed, as of one which is Christ. Gal. 3.10.11.16. Every and all of
which arguments, make and serve strongly, not only to debar woorks done
before grace, according to the outward letter of the law, from all office and
power to justify, but also all works done after grace, effectually if man's
own free will in such sort concur to the working of them as they teach. For
even therein and when they are done, the law finds such imperfection in the
doer, as we may see by Paul's own confession. Romans 7.24. that he has cause to
cry: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin
and death, and to acknowledge even in such a one as then he himself was (who
doubtless was then in the state of grace, that the law is such a reuealer of
sin yet to be in him, and therefore also of wrath, that he is so far off from
having any cause by his own works done after grace, to think that he deserves
to be justified or saved in any respect, that thereby he may justly with him
take occasion to confess, that though the law be spiritual yet he is carnal,
and so sold under sin, that in his flesh there dwells no good thing, for
though to will is present with him, and that he allow not the evil he does,
because in his inner man he consents unto the law that it is holy and good,
yet he does sometimes the evil that he hates and finds no means, as he
should, to perform that which is good, Verse. 14. etc. And by works done
after grace, flowing (as they say) from our own freewill in great part, if
justification should come at all, how then could we be excluded from all
reioyeing in that respect in our selves? how could our justification come
freely and of savor, and not at all of debt, as Paul teaches it must? how
could it be but in some sort we should be heirs by the law, and not only
by faith and the virtue of the promise, neither of which can be sure and
certain, if they rested upon the condition of the works that we at any time
can do, which we can never be sure that we have attained unto, either in that
measure or manner (as they themselves are driven to confess) as is required of
us. Yea if thereby at all, our justification could come, why then was not the
promise made unto us in the plural number, in seeds, and not in seed, to
warrant us, as especially to look for the benefitte thereof by the merits of
the seed of the woman, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, so partly and secondarily
at least, by our selves, and our own merits or works joined with his? But to
end this point, what can be more clear to put us out of all doubt, that Paul
shuts not from this office of justifying, only works of the law done before
grace, but also the best works done in grace, then that he himself in the
third of the Philippians (as we heard before) in this respect, does not only
in the time past disable his own good works done according to the law before
his conversion unreprovable, but also in the very present time when he wrote
that Epistle, which was not long before his death, his works or righteousness
which he then had, as dung, that so he might be justified by another
righteousness, to be found and attained unto, by faith in Christ. In that
also, 1. Cor. 4.4. First he confesses, that he knew nothing by himself,
(speaking then of himself as he was in the state of grace) and then by and by
he adds, that he was not thereby justified, he plainly showed that though he
had lived so in the execution of his Apostleship, that his conscience accused
him not of transgression therein any way (within the compass whereof lay
most of the works that he had done in grace) yet he thought not thereby to be
justified at all. Wherefore from whom soever these our adversaries have sucked
or learned this gloss or interpretation of Paul's words, evidently hereby it
appears, that it is a cursed gloss, for that it so directly corrupts the
text, and therefore upon whom soever they would father it, to put the envy and
shame thereof from themselves, both of them must give us leave, rather to
forsake them herein, then the plain evidence of the scriptures themselves,
which I am fully persuaded though they hardly or never will be brought unto,
they ha^^e so vowed themselves obstinately to resist the truth, that yet the
ancient writers in whose writings sometimes they find something that sounds
too much this way, if either they were in these times, or when they lived had
heard but half so much, as they have to the contrary, they would most readily
and willingly have retracted and recanted the same. For so we find they were
willing to do, when either by their own further reading or learning, or by
the information of others, they had cause given them to see, wherein for lack
of further advise, they have erred: and never did any of these by far thus
interpret Paul's words to advance man's merits, and to darken and obscure the
glory of Christ, as they do, yea if they could have but foreseen that ever
after any would have come after them, thus to abuse their words, to drive men
from seeking at all to be justified by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness to the believer in him, that then they might trust to their own
righteousness inherent in themselves, inhabit, as to the formal cause of
their justification, and in work wrought, as to the meritorious cause of
another justification, even of salvation it self: I dare be bold to say they
would never by any means have been drawn, to have left one syllable behind
them in their writings sounding that way. And this sufficiently may appear
to any that has but red their works, therein they are elsewhere so plain,
full and pregnant, to aduouch justification freely by faith in Christ, through
the imputation of his merits and righteousness unto men, as in sundry places
of an answer of mine in printe to John de Albine, I have at large showed,
whereunto I therefore now refer the Christian Reader. And whereas by grace,
whereby Paul's faith we are justified, they would bear men in hand, that there
by grace is not to be understood the free savor of God toward man in Christ
Jesus, but that special gift of that grace, the habit of charity infused or
powered into them that believe, all the reasons and places used to confute the
former shift of theirs, serve also as pregnantly to overthrow this. And hereof
also, as of the other, their only ground is sophistry, taking advantage by
the diverse acceptions and significations of the word grace, here to teach men
to understand thereby an effect of grace, whereas in deed the very fountain
it self of all these effects, which is the free favor of God toward man in
Christ, is meant in deed. To discern their iugling and treachery herein, let
a man but in steed of grace, used by the Apostle in this argument in these
few places following, place but the habitte of charity, and then again weye
what a violence thereby is offered, both to his words and sense. We are
justified freely by his grace, that is, by his infused habit of charity,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: Romans 3.24. By grace are you
saved through faith, that is, by the habit of charity infused, through says,
and not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man
should bost him self. Ephesians. 2.8.9. to the praise of the glory of his grace
wherewith he made us accepted in his beloved, that is, to the praise of the
glory of his infused habitte of charity etc. who sees not both the absurdnes
and ridiculousnesse of this interplation of grace? and withal perceives not
indeed nothing else in these places can be understood by grace, but the free
favor of God, had toward his elect in Christ Jesus, before the foundations of
the world were laid? Which grace as it was grounded before all times, only
upon the person and office of the son of God our fauiour, so to show us,
that in the revealing of the same unto us, and communicating the same, unto
his, he respects not any desert or merit of man, but only the deserts and
merits of his said son, by faith through imputation, made to the believers
therein, the Apostle says, as he does, not only that we are justified by
grace, but also adds freely, not of our selves, it is the gift of God, not of
works, least any man should boast himself. How it is possible if God should
have studied of purpose, to cross and to prevent for ever all these popish
gloses and tricks, that he should have spoken more plainly or pregnantly to
aduouch justification freely and only by faith in Christ Jesus, and not for the
worthiness or merit of any thing in our selves first or last? And who be so
simple, that has any thing had his spirit, exercised in the word of God and
knowledge of Christ Jesus, as by any means to be brought to think, that Christ
coming to be the meritorious and satisfactorie cause of man's salvation, as he
did, that yet so far off is it, that he has gone quite through with this
work, in, and by himself, that in very deed by the things accomplished in
his own person, he has enabled and dignified things to be found in man, and
to be done and suffered him, at the least to finish up and perfect by the
meritorious and satisfactorie cause of man's salvation? For this were not only
to leave the work of man's justification and salvation to be imperfect, for all
that has been done by him in his own person, but also most uncertain,
whether ever it should be finished or no, because if the matter be thus to be
divided betwixt Christ and man's own self, howsoever man might be sure that
Christ has done his part, he could never be sure that he has or shall hit in
just manner and measure of all that is left for him to do, to perfect the
same. Yea if this were thus, that amongst otherendes that Christ had in his
merits and sufferinges, he had this, thereby so to die our doings and
sufferings therewith, that they now shall be meritorious of, and satisfactorie
for our own salvation, (though by thus saying they would seem to attribute
unto Christ's merits more then we do, in that we deny them this effect) in
deed and truth in thus dealing, they with Judas give him fair words, saying
unto him, hail master, when in secret cunningly, they most unkindly and
wickedlie seek to betraye him. Heretofore when they taught this doctrine of
man's merits, bluntly, and flatly without this new color of their so doing, we
justly charged themselves to be the sacrilegious robbers of Christ, of that
chief and special honor that appertains unto him: but now whiles they have
sought, to avoid and to put from themselves the grieuousnes of this charge, by
this their new devise, in steed of making Christ some restitution and amends
for the wrong they did him, they now are flatly come to this, obstinately to
continue in the doing of him the same old wrong still, but now they will no
longer be the only doers thereof them selves, but he himself must be, if not
the plain and full principal, yet at the least an open and notorious
accessory, and helper forward of them, in this their robbing of him. But
whatsoever they say or do herein, let us with the apostle believe, that he is
able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them, and has an everlasting priesthood. Heb. 7.24.25.
For as we have often heard before, an other of them writes, his own self
bare our finnes in his body upon the tree, and so, that thereby we are both
delivered from sin, and so healed thereof, that thenceforth we should live
in righteousness. 1. Pet: 1.2.4. And with all our hearts let us shun and
detest all these their popish demses, tending as we see all more or less, to
the robbing of Christ of this special honor, to be a full and a perfect
savior in, That he is King Friest and Prophet
of, and by him self.

To proceed therefore, as thus in these two points particularly, you have
heard, how the gospel shows you this to be his office, so for the rest
before mentioned, if we look into it, it will teach us, that in this his
office, he is our Christ, that is, our anointed and appointed king, priest,
and prophet, in and for his Church King to rule, govern, and to protect it,
from all the enemies and dangers there of: priest, to redeem it, and to make
full and perfect atonement and reconsiliation through his eternal
intercession, betwixt God and it: and prophet to teach and instruct it, by his
word from time to time. So that he has of his Church a priestly kingdom,
which he has purchased, not with gold or silver, but with his own preticus
blood, as Peter speaks. 1. epist: 1.19. which he governs and orders by
the scepter of his word, and perfecteth by the power of his spirit. Of the
title and right of his kingrick, Paul Heb. 4.8. understands that, Psalm:
45.6. and 7. as spoken of David, through the spirit: thy throne is for ever and
ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness, thou have
loved righteousness and hated iniquity, wherefore cuen God thy God, has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness, above thy fellows. And touching his
priesthood to prove him to be a far more excellent priest then ever was any,
of the tribe of Leui. Cap. 7.12. he says that he was made priest with an oath,
by him that said unto him, as it is written. Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn
and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever, according to the order of
Melchizedech. And lastly concerning his office of a prophet and teacher of his
Church, Matthew shows us, that when he was transfigured in the mount, this
voice was heard from heaven uttered of him, (doubtless by his heavenly
father) to establish him herein: This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear him. Cap. 17.5. And to teach us that all doctors and
teachers must always stoop to him, and learn that first of him, which they
teach others, he says, be not called doctors, for one is your doctor, even
Christ. Math. 23.10. thereby not forbidding the title, but the abuse thereof,
which is, when any dare take upon them as doctors and teachers only of truth,
to urge that for truth upon the Church, or to Gods people, which they cannot
warrant so to be, by the undoubted voice and word of Christ. His kingdom is not
of this world: for so he himself told Pilate. John. 18.36. and yet he is such
a king, as that he is king of kings, and Lord of Lords, Reave. 19.16. And as
king he is lawgiuer unto his people in whose power it is to save and destroy.
Iam. 4.12. As king he governs and guides his Church, both here and in
heaven, as the head thereof, Ephe. 1.22. As king he liberally bestows
thereupon from time to time, those rich graces and gifts, which as priest he
has obtained for it, Ephe. 4.8. And as king he defends and protecteth it
from all the enemies thereof, Luke. 1.17 78. And of this kingdom of his there
is no end, Luke. 1.33. Now as he is priest, he has offered once for all, such
a sacrifice for the redemption of his Church, that he needs not any other
priest to succeed him, either to offer any other, or that again: and thus
having obtained for us eternal redemption, and ascending into the heavens,
there he sits at the right hand of the father, and appearing continually in his
sight, he makes such continual intercession for us, that he is able perfectly
to sane those that come unto God by him. Heb. 7.23.25. and 10. verse. 12. and
9.24. Finally as prophet and teacher of his Church: Whatsoever be has heard of
his father, coming from his bosom, he has declared unto us, Ioh. 1, 18.8.26.
And this has he done most sufficiently (as we have often in our writings
already in print most plentifully proved, in directing by his spirit, as he
has done, the writers of the canonical scriptures, therein to set down al
necessary doctrine for our salvation. And therefore besides, or contrary to
that, nothing is to be urged upon his Church, or to be received thereby, as
necessary to salvation. All these things now rightly understood, and
accordingly confessed and acknowledged to be true of Christ, and thus to
appertain unto him, then and not before is he come unto, as here in my text
is required and commanded. This doctrine of the person and office of Christ, is
the very rock and foundation whereupon the Church of Christ is built, and
whereupon it being built, the gates of hell shall never prevail against it,
Math. 16.18. An other foundation can no man lay, but even this, Jesus Christ,
1. Cor. 3.11. Yea this Jesus Christ, is the foundation of the Apostles and
prophets (namely which they laid) and the chief corner stone, in whom all the
building coupled together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord, as Paul
speaks to the Ephesians, Cap. 2.20.21. Hereby then it is evident, that not
only Turks, and Jews, and all such as are open enemies to Christ, and to
this doctrine of him, but also all those that would seem to receive him, and
yet will not thus in tertain him in their hearts and judgments, as yet stand
aloof from him, and dare not so much as come unto him. Amongst which latter
sort we must needs muster our domestical and next adversaries the papists.
For not only as I have already showed, for the maintenance of their own
devises, have they been justly found guilty, and therefore condemned, of
crossing the doctrine both of Christ's person and office, both generally and
particularly in all the former branches thereof, but also in the three last
spoken of, may they likewise be charged and adjudged, and that most justly. For
there is neither his kingricke, priesthood, nor prophetship, that they can
find in their hearts to leave whole and entire unto him. For to the laws and
orders appointed by him as king, for the good government of his Church, they
add, detract and alter at their pleasures, so that a man might easily make a
huge and large book of nothing else but a bare recital of their additions
thereunto, takinges therefrom, and alterations thereof, as any man by comparing
the records of the scriptures, wherein his are set down, with their doctrine
and practice, may easily and soon perceive. And what can they worse abide,
then to allow Christ to be such a priest of the new Testament, as the gospel
has before described here to be. For then their shaven priesthood and the
offering of Christ again to his father, as a propitiatory sacrifice for the
sins of quick and dead, and for what purpose soever they for their gain list
to intend it, and their invocation and mediation of Saints and Angels, should
all lie in the dust, whereby they chiefly maintain both their credit and
wealth. And their writing many treatises and large books to argue the
canonical scriptures of obscurity (to discourage the simple from reading of
them or caring to have them red) and of insufficiency (to establish their
unwritten word of their own traditions, as the undoubted word of God,) to what
end else tendes it, then most openly to thrust Christ from his office of
being the doctor and prophet of his Church, by opening his mouth so
plentifully therein, as he has, for the sufficient direction thereof: that
they taking that office upon them, under the title of the Churches practice and
tradition, may warrant all their fooleries and errors, for the which the best
of them sometimes have confessed, their chief ground comes from thence. You
may therefore most plainly see that howsoever in words they would seem to give
him his due titles of God, and man, Christ, Messiah, Jesus, Savior of the
world, King, Priest, and Prophet, by their deeds in their ordinary doctrine
and practice, they pull from him the force and power of the same again. For
such a God and man he must be to serve their turn, as under their host can
and will lie hid so quietly, that every receiver may eat him with his
mouth, how sinful and faithless soever he be: and such an one in his office
for all his titles they give him, he must be content to be, as will suffer all
the things and persons which they have imagined will serve to that purpose, to
join with him in that high and glorious work of meriting and deserving,
procuring and perfecting the work of our salvation: let him tell them never so
plainly, that his name is the Lord, and that he is as his name is, and that
therefore he will not give his honor, either to any other person or thing.
Isa. 42.8. Doubtless if any of the things they talk of in this case, might
join with him and his merits, in this great and high work of meriting or
deserving for man the kingdom of heaven, good and holy works done in grace
and faith, are most likely to be they that might partake with him therein. But
so far off even their great champion Bellarmine found it to be, do what he
could, to entitle these heereunto, that when he had striuen with all the
cunning and power he had to the end, and so would feign show how man to that
purpose might thereupon ground his trust and confidence, he is driven to
confess, when all comes to all, that the confidence that man can have, either
by means of them or any way else of his salvation, is but humane, moral and
coniecturall, and no way such as certainty of faith requires, but as may and
will have with it, still fear, least it deceive them in the end. Yea after he
has a little wrestled with our objection against justification and coming to
salvation by an inherent righteousness of our own, howsoever before he seemed
to himself to run away with it, as a matter most clear, that that might be
trusted to, to work and to procure these effects: he is so cooled, that he
concludes the matter but thus, that he allows confidence to be put in good
works indeed, so that pride therein be avoided: but yet for that, that pride is
so hardly avoided in this case as it is, and we are always so uncertain as we
must needs be, whether we have attained to that measure and manner of
righteousness, that to this purpose is necessary, he thinks it most safe,
when we have done all the good works we have or can, that yet we put all our
trust and confidence, in the only mercy and goodness of God. Which what is it
else, but when he has done his worst, against the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, to make the believer in him righteous by, for the establishing
of this their own inherent righteousness in the romphe thereof, even then to cast
us the bucklets, and for shame to take his heels, and to run away from his
cause, and to leave us both the field and the victory. But always great is the
truth, and it will prevail. Wherefore howsoever they think of themselves, we
may plainly enough see, that their case is pitiful and lamentable, in their
striving thus, to darke^ and to obscure the glory of Christ, for the
maintenance and setting up of themselves and their own devises in his romphe,
and yet when all comes to all, to be enforced thus in effect to confess, that
all the while they have but kicked against the prickts, and for that, whereunto
they dare not trust in conclusion. God of his mercy make them to see their
gross errors herein, and in the mean time let us run by the light of the
gospel, this way be Christ, by acknowledging him, both in person and office to
be such an one as I have thereby proved and manifested him to be: which when
we have done, then we have made a good beginning to obey Christ's commandment
here, but yet the chief is behind, for he further adds, and drink.

By this drinking, Christ must be caten and drunken and there fore there must
be had a true communion with him.
he doubtless understood drinking of himself, thereby implying eating of
himself also: for as he said in the former chapter, Except ye drink his
blood, so withal he says, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, ye
have no life in you, and whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day, verse. 53. and 54. By
which figurative and metaphorical kind of speech, he would teach us, that as
it is not enough for him that is hungry and thirsty to come where meat and
drink is, to see and behold them, yea perfectly to know them, and be able to
say what every thing is, and to what use it serves, but if he would have his
hunger and thirst satisfied, he must thereof both eat and drink: even so is
it in this case. For it is not enough to come unto Christ, though we come from
point to point as I have showed, unless that done, we go further, yea so
far as that we as surely and verily take him unto us, and into us, and so
make him as certainly our own, as meat and drink received in and well
digested, may be said to be our own. Whereby it most clearly appears, that
as no benefit can arise to the maintenance of this present life by meat and
drink, unless they be eaten upon and drunken, and as neither the sap, and
juice that is in the meat, nor the power nor force of the drink can be made
ours to nourish and strengthen our bodies, unless we eat and drink the meat
and drink themselves, wherein they are lodged and contained: even so is it
betwixt Christ and us. And therefore, Though he be the bread of life, and his
flesh meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, as we are plainly taught by him
they are in the former chap. ver. 53 55. yet we can be never the nearer thereby,
to the maintenance of our spiritual life before God, unless by an eating and
drinking of him, fit for that purpose, we feed upon him, and cat and drink
himself, and so co^seque^tly by making him wholly God and man our very own, and
so growing into union and communion with him, we attain unto all those good
things, that are prepared for us in him. And to put us out of al doubt hereof,
Saint John in his first Epistle, Cap. 1.3. shows us that the whole scope of
his ministry and of his fellow Apostles was, that there by this communion and
fellowship with Christ might be attained, saying, That which we have seen and
heard, declare we unto you, that ye may also have fellowship with us, and that
our fellowship may be with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ. Again
most plain it is to this purpose, that he writes, Cap. 5. of that Epistle,
verse. 11.12. where he says That God has given us eternal life, he that has
the son, has life, and he that has not the son, has not life. For heerby
most plainly, first we are taught that the chief use that we are to make of
the ministry, is, thereby to attain to have communion with Christ, and then
as clearly he shows us (the better to provoke us to strive to make that use
thereof indeed) that God in his mercy having provided eternal life for us,
which we by the fall of Adam and our own sins had lost, in his son Christ
Jesus, that yet he would have the case so stand with us in respect thereof,
that we can never have that, unless we have the son himself, in whom it is
treasured and coffered up for us. Whereby questionless the Lord in his
wisdom, even of love toward us, has so ordered the matter, for our very
best. For when Adam and Eve had life in their own hands in paradise, we have
found by experience they very quickly lost it. God therefore having so costly
and dearly compassed it again for us, by the death and passion of his own
welbe loved son, he saw it in his wisdom neither good nor safe for us,
living in this dangerous world, to trust it any more in our own hands: and
therefore he that is the author and purchaser thereof for us, as he has the
best right thereunto, by his appointment, has it still lodged for us in
himself, and that so surely and inseparably, that none ever shall or can be
partaker thereof, but by the communication of his very self first, and so
once being sure of him, then also he may withal be assured of the other. For
these two now by Gods ordinance go always so together, that where Christ is
had, there the party in him is sure of everlasting life, and where he is not
had, there can be no assurance thereof. The blessed sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ was Instituted by him, even of purpose, not only to keep
still fresh in our remembrance his precious death, with all the fruits
thereof, both generally and particularly, but also without all doubt, to offer
to deliver and to feale the doliuery, to as many as rightly as they should
receive the same, a most certain union and communion with whole and full
Christ himself. And to teach us plainly so much, Paul says 1. Cor. 10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? As certainly therefore as by bodily eating and drinking, in that
sacrament, or elsewhere, the eater and drinker of bread and wine, makes
himself partaker of all the force and goodness therein, by making themselves
first his own, to the chearing and strengthening of this life in the body: so
by such eating and drinking of the body broken, and blood shed for him of
Christ (which are the things in this sacrament signified and offered unto him)
as is fit to make such food his own by, as verily the worthy and right
receiver in soul feeds upon, and is nourished to eternal life, with the
broken body, and bloodshed of Christ Jesus. And to assure al such of this by
Christ, the bread is faid to be his body broken, and the wine his blood shed,
for the remission of their fins: and both so termed and called by his ordinance
broken and powered forth, are particularly to be given to every such
communicant, and they are likewise to receive them: and therefore doubtless
thereby taught, not only by that which they see and he are in the
administration hereof; with thankful and penitent hearts to remember his death,
(and sonowe therein, his body was broken, and his blood shed and severed from
his body, and that therefore these so handled, are the heavenly and spiritual
food prepared for the maintenance of their spiritual life before God,) but
also by that which further is delivered, and they receive, that they are to
assure themselves, every one in particular, that Christ died for them, and
therefore shall nourish and feed them to eternal life, by uniting himself
most certainly unto them, to that end and purpose. Further yet to teach us,
that this most certain and real union with Christ is for the whole Church,
and for the salvation thereof, most necessary, those other metaphors also
serve; whereby be is compated to the head and husband of the Church, as of his
body and wife, Ephesians. 1.12. and Cap. 5.32. or to the vine stock, whereinto
his heavenly father engrasteth all those branches, that ever shall being forth
much fruit, that he may be glorified, Io. 15.5.6.7.8. For hereby we are
taught, that as it is with these, head, husband, and stock, in respect of the
body, wife, and branches, so is it betwixt Christ, and all those that shall be
saved. As therefore unless the head, really grow and be united to the body,
yea though there can but a hair go betwixt the one and the other, the body
can have no life from the head: and as marriage being consummate, it makes
them that were strangers before, one body, one flesh, yea one self fame.
Ephesians. 5.28.29. and that otherwise unperfected, it has no such effect: and
lastly, as it is not enough for the branches to touch the vine stock, yea
nothing to have life from thence, unless they so grow therein, that it and
they be as it were one: even so is it in this case, betwixt Christ and all
those that would be saved by him. And therefore to express as much, Paul
says, That such as are his they are members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones. Ephe. 5.30. yea, 1. Cor. 1.13. he makes the Church and Christ but
as one perfect man, whereof Christ is the head, and the Church his body: in
so much as, Ephesians. 1.23. he calls the Church his fullness: to show that such
love there is betwixt Christ and his Church, and that there is also such a
perfect union betwixt them, that though he be he that fills all things, and
is the perfection thereof, that he accounts himself as a head without a
body, without the true union and connection of the Church with him. And
therefore, John. 17.23. he was an earnest suter unto his father, that he might
be in his, as he his father was in him, that so they might be made perfect in
one, and herein he knew he was so heard, that he accounts the affliction of
any sound member of his Church as the persecution of his own self, and
therefore when Saul persecuted such, he said unto him, Saul Saul why
persecutest thou me. Act. 6.4. And yet better to assure them thereof, he also
reckons his own joys to be theirs as well as their sorrows to be his that
will open unto him, and be his, and therefore to encourage such so to do and
be, he said unto them. Reave. 3.22. that to such he would give to sit with him,
upon his throne, and that he would sup with them, and that they likewise
should sup with him. The cuidence of this doctrine being most strong and
apparent as you he are, and the papists themselves, not seeming to doubt
thereof at all, (but that theiudgements of God are unsearchable, and that they
have deserved for their wilful seeking to darken the light of the gospel, will
they nill they shining amongst them, to be made drunk and so quite to be
carried away, in the most just judgment of God, by a strong dilusion of the
enchanted cup, full of formications proffered unto them and vged upon them, by
the garish whore of Babylon) it is a wonder that withal they are not enforced,
to see and to perceive the most of the absurdities and heresies they hold, tou
ching the article of justification and salvation. For how can it otherwise be,
but that they that are thus united to Christ and he to them must needs most
certainly, and as it were sensi bly understand it so to be, by the wonderful
alteration that thereupon thorowout both in body and soul will grow in the^, by
the inseparable graces of the spirit, always acco^panying his union with his?
And therefore in him there being also, as always there is, full and certain
remission of sins prepared for all them that be so nilie his, and he never going
without his perfect righteousness; and being as he is the very fountain of al
Gods favors and mercies toward man, how is it possible that he should be a
man's own, and he know it also, but that he may and must, without any wavering
or doubting thereof, fully and firmly be assured, that his sins are forgiven
him, that his righteousness is his, and that therefore he may have a most
special assurance and confidence of the mercy of God, to his most perfect
faluation? For these graces and favors of God are never severed from the
person of Christ, and therefore whereas he is once really and truly possessed,
there also the possessour may be assured that with him he possesses all those
things also. And yet these men, no not their Bellarmine can abide any of these:
but it shall be enough with them and him also, to believe there is remission of
sins, accompanying baptism, and to be had by him, and in him in the Church,
that there is such a mercy of God, that is able to save, and that the
righteousness of Christ, may be as he is our head, ours in such a sort, that
it may be the efficient cause of an inherent righteousness in our selves, able
to earne heaven by: but particularly, especially for us to believe that we
shall without all doubt have all our sins forgiven us, that we are sure of
this mercy, and have this righteousness of his imputed unto us as our own,
whereby we shall and may be righteous before God, at no hand they can abide. As
though he that sticks not to give us his son God and man to be our very
own, so that we are his, and he ours, would not, or could not together with
him give us these things also? Yea how can he withold them, giving us his
son, seeing these and he go always together.

But to proceed, This vnio^ is not carnal, but spiritual.
this union of ours and communion with Christ, though it must be certain,
real, and true, in refpect of the things to be united, yet in regard of the
manner of uniting them, we must not imagine it to be any gross or earthly
commixtion or conjunction with him, such as is with us, the mingling or joining
together of any creatures that in themselves are diverse, but that it is
altogether, in respect of the manner, spiritual, and supernatural, and yet
nevertheless true and certain, though it be both unsearchable and
unutterable. For let a man fearch all the scriptures through, and an other
communion and fellowship with Christ, whereupon salvation comes, then that
which is spiritual, he shall nether find either promised, expected, or
performed. In deed it was both promised, and thereupon expected, and
performed, that Godhead and manhood should be united together in one person,
that so man (who by sin had lost his union, communion, and fellowship with
God) might recover the same again in and by that person, and by that which he
should accomplish in those two natures for him. But as the personal union of
these two natures in one Christ, (as by our Catholic faith we are persuaded)
is real, certain and sure, so we find it, yet by human sense and reason,
incomprehensible, and yet by the power of the eternal spirit, by the same
faith, we are taught undoubtedly to believe, it was so verily effected, for our
everlasting good. A communicating of the merits of this Christ, God and man,
unto those that belezue in him, by imputation there is, we know: For the
righteousness of God is on all, and upon all that beleene in him. Romans 3.22.
which is a righteousness that such attain unto by faith in him, not made
manifest by the law (as the inherent righteousness of our own merits, if
there were any such, as men know is) as both in that verse, and that which
goes before, is showed. But without the inhabitation of the spirit of God
proceeding both from the Father and the Son (the work whereof faith is.
John. 6.29. and Gal. 5.22.) we cannot attain heereunto. Howbeit here we talk
not either of the union of the two natures in the person of one Christ, nor yet
of his communicating of his merits unto us by imputation, nor of his dwelling
in us by his spirit: but of his own uniting and communicating of himself both
God and man unto us. For consisting of those two natures, here in my text he
bids us to come unto him, and as I have showed, to drink of him: which if
once we duly perform, then we withal even thereby, are sure of all the
benefits necessary to our salvation, that by any of these we may look for. Now
Paul when he spoke most plainly of this, saying, We are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. to assure us that it is real and
essential, yea and most certain in respect of the things to be united,
Christ and his members: yet within two verses after he confesses and says,
that it is a great mystery that he speaks of, thereby also showing, that in
respect of the manner of uniting of them, it is supernatural and unsearchable
by human sen^se and reason: howbeit this is our comfort, that though we
cannot conceive it whiles we are here; and our knowledge is imperfect; that
yet Christ our savior to our unspeakable consolation has told us, that the
day shall come when his shall know, By the spirit it is obtained.
That he is to the father, they in him, and he in them. Io. 14.20. In the mean
time thus much it has pleased him to reveal unto us by the word, that it is
the holy Ghost the vertie spirit of God, without which this cannot be, and by
the means whereof this union and communion is made betwixt Christ and us. For
it is written, as uttered by Christ himself. Io. 3.5. Except a man be borne
again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. And
Paul most plainly says Romans 8.9. If any man have not the spirit of Christ,
the same is none of his. And likewise Saint John. 1. Epist. cap. 4. verse. 13.
writes, that by this we know that Christ is in us, by his spirit that he has
given us. Paul also to this purpose very notably says, by one spirit, we
are all baptized into one body, and have been all made to drink into one
spirit. 1. Cor. 12.13. And therefore upon very good ground has the ancient
father Irenaeus (who lived in the next age to the Apostles) in his third book
and 19. chapter against the heresies of the Valentinians and others, written
most sweetly and profoundly: Sicut de arido tritico massa vna fierinon
potest, neque vnus panis; ita nec nos multi, vnum fieri in Christo Jesus
poteramus, sine aqua, qnae de coelo est: and sicut arida terra, si non
percipiat humorem non fruclificat; sic and nos lignum aridum existentes primum,
nunquam fructificaremus vitam sine superna voluntaria pluuia: that is, As of
dry wheat, neither one lump of dowe, nor one loaf can be made; so neither
we being many, could ever have been made one in Christ Jesus, without water
from heaven: and as the dry earth fructifieth not without moisture, so we
being first but dry wood, could never have had our fruit to be eternal life
without voluntary rain from above. Which in the same place he interprets to
be the spirit of God, which God bestows upon his. Which Chrisosiom in his
Homily at Pentecost of the holy spirit, calls the coupling or band of the
union betwixt Christ and his. Further, to proone this our union with Christ to
be spiritual, and not any gross or carnal mingling or conioyning of him and
us together, it very well serves, that Christ him self in the fixed of John,
has both absolutely, and most confidently said, verily verily I say unto you,
except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
noe life in you. verse. 53. And also a little after, that he is the bread of
life that came down from heaven, and his flesh is meat indeed, and his
blood is drink indeed, whereof whosoever eats and drinks, has eternal
life. Verse. 51.54.55.56. For this being thus, he might well say to all that
would be saved, from the beginning of the world, to the end thereof, as we
read he said to his. Ioh. 15.4.5.6. Abide in me, and I in you: as the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in
me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me can ye
doenothing. etc. For as it has from the beginning been a most certain truth,
that to the beginning of the being and life of man, and to the continuance of
the same, his body and soul must be united together, so has it always
been, is, and ever willbee, to make whole man to have any acceptable being
before God, or life in his sight, that he must have a true union and communion
with Christ both God and man. For as there is but one God, so the Apostle has
taught us, There is but one mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus. 1. Tim. 2.5. neither is there salvation in any other: for amongst men,
there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved: as Peter
most stoutly aduoucheth. Act. 4.12. Whereupon it must needs follow, that either
there was none saved before Christ was God and man, which was not before the
world was 4000. year old and more (which once to imagine were most absurd, and
notoriously injurious to all the godly Patriarchs, Prophets and others that
lived in the time of the old Testament) or else that it is most certain and
true that Paul has taught (as it is indeed of such) that they did all not
only eat sacramental bread, and drink sacramental drink as we do: but that
they did eat the same spiritual meat and drink the same spiritual drink which
was Christ, that we do. 1. Cor. 10.3.4. etc. Christ therefore than having no
manhood really, but only in the purpose and promise of God, it could not be,
that otherwise then by the work and means of the spirit of God they fed upon
him, and were united unto him God and man, which yet then was necessary for
their salvation. Though therefore now he be come and gone again, in his manhood
hoode out of the world unto his father, in the highest heavens, which also
shall contain him unto the restitution of al things, as Peter has taught us,
Act. 3.21. yet we know also that he is of that almighty power, that as his
having not then yet taken man's nature, could not then stop the godly
Patriarchs, and Prophets from their necessary union and communion with him God
and man: so much less, he having taken it now, and having finished the work
of our redemption, being risen again ascended and set at the right hand of his
father, can the distance of place betwixt heaven and earth, hinder or let the
grouth of this union betwixt him and his. For we see the distance of place
betwixt man and wife, or father and child, does not loose the knot, or impeach
the union, that by marriage and nature was before betwixt them. And we see and
find by experience, that though the head in situation and place be much above
the feet, that yet by the means that but nature has to unite them together
there is such an vnio^ betwixt them, that from the head life is conveyed down
eue^ to the soales of the feet: likewise in the mistical body of Christ, though
the members be never so far disioyned and severed in place, yet that so
little hinders the communion of Saints, that Paul has said, we that are many,
are one bread and one body, because we al are partakers of one bread, 1. Co.
10.17

Seeing therefore, by that which I have said it sufficiently appears, that it
is the will and pleasure of God, that there should be a true and certain
union betwixt Christ and his Church, he being as he is almighty, and therefore
perfectly able to do whatsoever he will; let not the difficulty any way, or
the incomprehensiblenes of the bringing of it to pass, at all make us to
doubt of the truth of the thing. For (alas) so short is our reach in
comprehending the wonderful works of God, that though we be never so sure that
we have souls every one of us united to our bodies, yet the manner how, we
cannot conceive therefore it being now made clear and apparent, that Christ
here by saying drink, has taught us to make him our very own, and that this
must be, though most truly, yet after a spiritual manner; to proceed, it is
necessary now to learn, how thus we may eat him and drink him, and so make
him our own. To eat and drink Christ, is to believe in him aright.


And for this, we need not seek far: for whereas, if Christ should have
continued the manner of phrase that he began with all, he both easily could,
would, and should have said in the next verse, he that drinks of me: of
purpose doubtless to show us, that to drink him or of him, is nothing else
indeed but rightly to believe in him he says, he that believes in me as
says the scripture, etc. And the very same and like course, has he taken.
Verse. 35. of the former chapter. For having said, he that comes unto me
shall not hunger by and by in stead of saying, he that drinks of me, he
adds he that believes in me. And to the same end it may well be noted,
that in that chapter, the very same things, that are promised to the eater of
his flesh, and drinker of his blood, are also promised to the believer in him:
and likewise, there, the same things that are threatened against the one, are
threatened against the other, as if you compare the 45. verse with the 39. and
the 53. with the 64. ye shall soon perceive. Yea if one mark diligently
Christ's discourse in that chapter, he shall easilye find, that there, to
assure us that to eat his flesh and to drink his blood is to believe in him,
he has of set purpose stood, both upon the proposition, and assumption,
whereupon necessarily, by the rules of right reasoning, that must follow for
the conclusion. For first, there he dwells upon this, that to eat the bread
of life, is to believe in him, for that he is the bread of life Verse. 35. etc.
and then he discendeth to this, but he that eats the flesh of the son of man
and drinks his blood, eats the bread of life, verse. 54. for he shall have
eternal life: whereupon what can else follow but this, therefore to eat the
flesh of the son of man and to drink his blood, is to believe in him? But whom
these things yet ca^notperswade to be of this mind, let them further remember
that John having said, as many as receive Christ are made the sons of God, cap.
1.12. that immediately, lest we should not conceive aright, what it is to
receive him he adds, that is, even they that believe in him. And let them
also consider that Paul praying that Christ might dwell in the hearts of the
Ephesians, adds straight, to show us how that might be, by says. cap. 3.17.
For but these two places well laid together, pregna^tly prove that Christ is
both got and kept, received of us and continued in us by faith. And let not any
man think, either that this is new doctrine of late devised by us, or that true
faith is too weak thus to reach Christ, and to make him ours. For first it is
certain that Tertulian, who lived within 200. years after Christ's birth, in
his book de resurrectione carnis, cap. 29. most plainly has said: Christus
est auditu deuorandus, and intellecturuminandus, fide digerendus: that is,
Christ is to be devoured by hearing, to be chewed by understanding, to be
digested by faith. And Augustine, who flourished about the 400. year, is both
most plain and plentiful in this point. For in his 25. tract upon John, he
says. Quidparas dentem and ventre^? creed and manducasti: Why preparest thou
thy teeth and belly? believe and thou have eaten. And in the next, he writes
much to that purpose; for he says there, Ad Christu^ non ambulandocurrimus sed
credendo, non motu carnis sed voluntate cordis, that is, we run to Christ,
not by walking but by believing, not by the motion of the flesh, but by the will
of the heart. Yea in plain terms there also he says, Credere in eu^, est
manducare pane^ vinu^, to believe in him is to eat the bread of life. But in my
opinion most notably he writes to this end upon occasion of the Centurions
coming to Christ in his 33. book against Faustus the Manichee, cap. 8.
saying. Accedant ad Iesum, no^ carne sed cord; non corporis praesentia sed
fidei potentia: Let the^ come to Jesus, not with or in flesh, but with or in
heart, not by bodily presence, but by the power of faith. Now teaching the
other point also, that faith is not too weak thus to apprehend Christ, it is
as plain that he has said in his 50. tract upon John. Quomodo in coelum
manu^ mittam, vt ibi sedentem teneam? fidem mitte and tenuisti; parents tui
tenuerunt carne, tu tene cord, quoniam Christus absens etiam praesens est;
nisi praesens esset, a nobis teneri non posset, etc. that is, How shall I
stretch my hand into heaven, that I may hold him sitting there? Send thy
faith, and thou have hold of him; the fathers held him in the flesh, hold thou
him in heart: for Christ absent is also present: for unless he were present,
he could not be held of us. And how this shall be, he plainly shows, saying,
He is gone, and yet he is here, for he carried his body into heaven, but his
majesty he has not taken from the world. Chrysostom also, an other ancient
father, who lived much what about Augustines time, in his second Homily upon
these words of Esaias, Vidi Dominum, I have seen the Lord, shows that though
we cannot fly up to heaven in body, that yet in mind and cogitation we may.
For God (says he) has given that such wings that nothing can let or stop it,
if it will fly to heaven; and far more pearcing eyes, God has given it
(says he) then the body. And in his 24. Homily upon the first to the
Corinthians, remembering there that saying of Christ, Mat. 24.28. Where the
carrion is, thither will the Eagles resort, thereupon he infers, that the
Lords table is not for Iayes or Crows, that feed below, but for Eagles that
take their meat aloft: and he says, that by hat speech, Christhath taught
them that would come unto his body to fly aloft, and not to creep upon the
earth, nor yet to have any dealing therewith. It is worthy the remembering also,
that the same Father notes, touching the power and force of faith, upon Paul's
telling the Galathians, That Christ was even crucified amongst them. Cap. 3.1.
For he plainly shows that the Apostle in so saying, showed them that the
strength of faith was such, that it is able to see things though far off,
and so by the eyes of faith in the ministry of the word and sacraments which
had been amongst those Galathians, Christ's death was or might have been as
clearly seen and more clearly, then it was of many that were present at it.
And unto Bernards time, who lived above 1100 years after Christ, it seems
that this was the current and received doctrine of the Church, touching our
communion to be had and attained unto with Christ by faith. For in his 28.
Homily upon the Canticles he most plainly shows, that though Christ be
ascended, that yet he both may and will be touched, Sed affectu, non manu, voto
non oculo, fide non sensibus, but then (says he) it must be by affection, and
not by hand, by desire and not by eye, by faith and not by the senses. And
again in his 76. sermon upon the Canticles, most notable is it that he writes
to this purpose, saying, Though Christ be set at the right hand of his Father,
go to yet, follow him, seek him, and let neither his inaccessable
brightness, nor his height discourage thee from seeking, or once cause thee to
despair of finding him, if thou can believe; all things are possible to the
believer, the word is near to my mouth and heart: Creed and inuenisti, nam
credere inuenisse est, that is, Believe and thou have found him, for to believe
is to have found him. This admirable power of faith doubtless is excellently
aduouched Heb. 11.1. whiles there it is defined to be the ground of things
which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen. Wherefore
let us not once doubt, but where Christ is soundly and rightly believed in,
there by that faith the owner thereof eats his flesh, and drinks his blood
to his or her eternal salvation. Every kind of faith will not serve here:
yea none but that which is according to the scriptures.


Yet then great need and care is to be taken, that this faith of ours be sound
and right. For neither can every faith, a dead faith, or an erroneous and wrong
faith, stand us in any steed in this case: and therefore mark, it follows
in my text, as says the scripture: which words, if we refer (as they may
well, and some interpreters have) unto that which went before, then they serve
most plainly, to teach us that it is no other faith that either can or will
serve our turn in this case, but only that which is taught us, and warranted
to be sound and right in the canonical scriptures. For they are the scriptures
only without all question, that here are spoken of. But whether these words,
as says the scripture, here were added and used to this end, or rather as some
others take them as referred to the words following, to teach us to understand
the promise that follows, most certain it is that the true Christian faith,
whereby we must feed upon Christ and make him with all his merits and graces
our own, has these canonical scriptures of the old and new Testament for
the ground and sufficient rule thereof. For they only are able to make a man
wise to saluarion through the faith which is in Christ Jesus, and are given by
inspiration of God, and are profitable to teach, to convince, to correct and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute being made
perfect unto all good works, 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17. And therefore for the right
framing and settling us in this faith, these are to be studied and searched and
most diligently to be mused and meditated upon, and heard, red, and preached,
by every one that has any care of his salvation, as we may learn, Deuteronomy.
17.18.19. Joshua. 1.8. Psalm. 1.1. Io. 5.39. Act. 17.11. 2. Tim. 3.15. in that in
these places, we shall find men of all sorts taught, either by plain precept,
reason, or example thus to occupy themselves herein. And this has been the
ancient and sound judgment with one consent of the Fathers, for many hundred
years after Christ. And therefore, though Augustine confess with the
Evangelist, that Christ said and did many things which are not written, yet
(says he) those things are chosen out to be written, which seemed to be
sufficient for the salvation of them that believe, Tract. 49. upon John. and
Cap. 11. And in his 19. book of the city of God. cap. 18. to this purpose he
writes, that the city of God believes the scriptures both old and new which
we call Canonical, Vnde fides ipsa concepta est, ex qna iustus viuit, From
whence that faith whereby the just lives, is conceived: yea none of us can be
or is plainer in this point then he. For in his book of christian doctrine,
Lib. 2. cap. 9. he says there, in those things, quae aperte posita sunt in
scriptura, that is, which plainly are set down in the scriptures, all those
things are found which contains faith, and manners of living, as namely hope,
and charity. And herein he was so confident, that in his third book and sixth
chapter against Petilean, most boldly and plainly he says, if any either of
Christ, or of his Church or of any other thing whatsoever that appertains to
faith and life, I will not say we, but as Paul said, if an Angel from heaven
should tell you any thing, which you have not received in the scriptures of the
law and the Gospel, accursed be he. And he was not alone of this mind: for
Athanasius before him in an oration of his against Idolaters, had most plainly
written, that the holy scriptures enspired of God Sufficient ad omnem
instructionem veritatis, that is, are sufficient to teach all truth. And
Tertullian in his book against Hermogenes shows that he was so resolute in
this that he says there, that he did eue^ adore the sufficiency of the
scriptures. Basilius also in his sermon of the confession of faith says that
it is a plain falling from the faith and the very sin of pride, either to
refuse any thing herein written, or to bring in over and above any thing. For
Christ's sheep hear his voice, and a strangers they fly. And in his Morais,
definition 72. he says, that the very hearers must be learned in the
scriptures, that so they may try those things which are delivered the^ by their
teachers; that so they may receive those things that are consonant to the
scriptures, and reject those that are not: yea in the 80. definition, he
concludes whatsoever is without the scripture, because it cannot be of faith,
(which must come by the hearing of that which is taught in the scriptures, as
before he had proved) must needs be sin. Cyrill, Lib. ^2. in Ioannem. cap.
69. with Augustine says, that though all things be not written that Christ
did, yet those things were written which the writers thought sufficient both
for faith and manners. Hierome also says upon the 23. of Matthew, that which
has not authority from the scriptures, is as easily contemned, as allowed. And
therefore Origin upon the third of the Romans has very well noted, that the
Apostle there gives other teachers in the Church an example that those things
which they propounde to the people, they should streng then and confirm, not
with their own presumptions, but with testimonies of the scripture. For as he
says, if such an Apostle thought that the authority of his sayings was not
sufficient, unless he showed them to be written in the law and the Prophets,
how much more ought we to think so of ours? Hilarie also upon the 118. Psalm
notes it as a trick of infidels and the irreligious, to say that the
scriptures want perfection of doctrine. Seeing therefore it is most certain
and true, that Irenaeus writes in his third book and first chapter, that what
the Apostles first preached, after by the will of God they set down in their
writings to be the ground and pillar of our faith, and that in the canonical
scriptures of the old and new Testament we have, as Chrysostom aduoucheth
upon the second to the Corinthes, Homily 13. a most perfect and exact rule to
follow, set down; therefore with him and in his words immediately thereupon
inferred, I pray you all that you leave that which seems good to this man or
that, Et de his Scripturis omma inquirite, and of these Scriptures enquire all
things; that so we may all conclude with Damascene in this point, in his first
book and first chapter de fide orthodoxa of sound faith, all things that are
delivered by the law, Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, Cognoscimus,
veneramur, nihil vltra perquirentes, that is, we acknowledge and reverence,
seeking no further. These things I have the rather thus largely noted unto you,
because notwithstanding the plain evidence of this undoubted and ancient
truth, our adversaries the papists are so far off from yealding unto the
same, that to discourage men from making this use of the holy scriptures, (that
so they may at their pleasures teach us to build such a faith, as seems good
unto them, upon their unwritten word of God, which they hold to be the
traditions of their Church, yea nothing else in effect but their Popes
pleasures,) the best learned amongst them are not ashamed to bestow great
pains, to accuse the scriptures of such insufficiency and obscurity to this
purpose, as that without the help of these their traditions, the doctrine of
faith and good manners could neither certainly nor sufficiently be learned
at a^l. Yea herein they have some of them, as to their perpetual and
everlasting shame it is well known, Andridius Ecchius: Lindan. Hosius,
Canisius Censura Colon.
gone so far in their writings, as that they have not blushed to set it down
as a catholic truth, that the greatest part is left to be determined by
their traditions, that the scriptures were left rather to be under the Church,
then to have authority over her, that it were a pitiful thing if the Church
should be tied to the Canonical scriptures in every thing to be ruled and
oueruled thereby, eye that it cannot noreuer will be well with the Church as
long as the lay people are suffered to read them, or to hear them red: for
they are so obscure, and their sense is so flexible and heard to be found (say
they) that thence all heresies are sucked, and that their sense is as but a
leaden rule or a nose of wax unless it be stifned, streighted and kept even
by the help of their traditions. Wherein most expressly they resemble the
heretics that Irenaeus describes in his third book and second chapter, who
for traditions thus defaced the scriptures. What greater blasphemies can be
uttered against the majesty of God the author of these scriptures? For he
having left them unto his Church, in his good providence by his penmen for her
better direction to know his will, and then to believe and live accordingly,
(as out of all doubt he haith) how may we think without doing of him the
greatest wrong that may be, that he has left it therein no perfecter a rule
then they hold, to this end? For were not this in effect to say, that either he
could not for lack of power, skill, and wisdom, or that else he would not
for lack of love and care toward it, make it any sufficienter and certamer?
For what reason else can there be that he should undertake, begin and go
forward as he has with such a rule for the direction thereof, and yet leave it
when he has done, so maimed and so unprofitable as they would make it? Now to
have but either of these conceits of God, were it not most absurd and
injurious unto him? For how can we spoil him either of infinite wisdom, or
of infinite and most perfect love and care to wards his Church, but withal we
plainly deny him to be the true God? Wherefore let us, whatfoeuer these men
say to the contrary, learn to believe as only the canonical scriptures of God
teach us; and to that end and purpose, let us now as briefly as we ca^, take a
view what they do teach us in this respect and behalf.

Concerning this point, What faith the scripture here requires.
first it is out of doubt, whatsoever the Lord has taught or told for truth
in these canonical scriptures, we are most firmly by faith to aslent unto, to
be so, and therefore hereof, howsoever to discredit us withal the papists
would seem to the contrary, we neither make nor move any controversy with
them. Yea we most heartily wish and pray, that as they define faith to be a
firm assent to the whole revealed will of God by his word, that once it would
please God to give them but this faith, to assent in deed without wavering to
that which he has taught in his written word in the canonical scriptures: for
then all the controversies betwixt them and us would straight be at an end. But
alas they enforce such a sense upon these scriptures and so equal their
vnwritte^ word of traditions herwith, that as long as they take this course
there is no hope that ever they either can or will have this grace: wherefore to
leave them a while, grounded far more upon their own unwritten traditions,
then upon the canonical scriptures for the substance of their faith, the next
thing that we are to understand touching faith is, that when it is spoken of,
as it is here in my text, it imports more then this general assent to al
truth taught in the canonical scriptures. For that brings one no further then
credere Deo, Deum, and de Deo, that is, to believe or credit God, and to
believe that he is, and what he is, whereas here in my text expressly Christ
says, he that believes in me, thereby requiring that we should not think it
enough to believe him as a speaker always of truth, or to believe that he is
such a one in person and office, as I have showed him to be, (for both these he
has already sufficiently called for at our hands in bidding of us come unto
him) but that it is necessary for us, if we would have him to be our meat and
drink indeed, to go yet further, that is, to believe in him. Which is indeed
(the former lessons being well taken out) thereupon as upon a most sound
foundation, to ground a most certain trust and confidence, that in, for,
through, and by him, wholly and solie, freely and sullie we shall be justified
here, and saved here after. To all the former degrees of faith, the reprobate
and such as are destitute fo the graces of regeneration and sanctification yea
the very devils may come, namely to yeald that every thing is as God has said
it to be in his written word, to credit him because he is truth it self, and
to believe that he is, and that he is also such a one as he therein sets forth
himself to be, and this may therefore make them to tremble, as James says,
2.19. But this is not the faith of Gods elect, that Paul speaks of, to Titus
cap. 1. nor that, which he says works by charity. Gal. 5.6. nor that which
is said, purifieth the heart. Act. 15.9. nor that whereof it is so often and so
universally said, Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but hane
eternal life. Io. 3.15. etc. Necessary it is that Gods elect have all these
degrees and branches of faith, and the believing thus far is always found in
them before they can believe in Jesus Christ so as that through him they can
have any assurance of their salvation: but if they will have such a faith
whereby in Christ Jesus they shall be iustied, then they must nor stay in these
generalities, but they must set Christ with all his graces necessary for
either their justification or salvation before them, and by embracing and
applying him particularly unto them, and all that ever he did for man's
salvation, as even done particularly and most certainly forthe^; in him and by
him so made theirs, they are to be assured that God has freely justified the^,
and undoubtedly also will save them. For though every truth taught by God in
his word be the general object of faith, yet the proper object thereof, by
apprehensio^ where of it is so often said in the scriptures to justify, is only
Christ Jesus, who^ it is not enough for faith with her inward eyes to know and
confess to be as he is in person and office as you have before heard, but as
you may sufficiently perceive by Christ's setting of himself before the
faithful as the meat and drink of their souls, and by his requiring, that
they should hunger and thirst after him, yea eat him and drink him, and then
by his plain expounding that eating and drinking of him to be believing in
him, he is by faith to be taken and appropriated to every right believer in
him. And to put it out of doubt, that the justifying faith or faith in Christ
Jesus, must have and indeed has this effect, Paul after he had willed the
Corinthians to prove and try themselves whether they were in the faith, he
straight adds, And examine your selves, know you not your own selves that
Jesus Christ is in you, unless you be reprobates? 2. Co. 13.5. when faith thus
apprehends Christ, and so possesses her owner of him, as that he himself may
know that Christ is in him, how ca^ it be then but he that has by faith so
found and got Christ, has also in him and by him a special assurance that his
sins are forgiven him, and that undoubtedly he shall for that Christ's sake be
saved? when it does all this we deny not, but most willingly we confess that
there it brings forth by the power of the spirit of sanctification, good
works plentifully in her owner; but yet we dare not say that it justifies
either for the worthiness of it self, or for the worthiness of all the noble
train of good works inseperablie always in good measure acco^panying it, but
only for the worthiness of Jesus Christ, whom it apprehends. But that
undoubtedly faith finds in Christ Jesus full and sufficient cause and matter,
for which most certainly God will both justify and save all those that
thereby have put him on, as Paul speaks, Romans 13.14. all the places of
scripture before produced to prove him to be in, and of himself, a full and
most perfect Savior, most pregnantly and forceably scrue. Seeing therefore
brethren (as thereby sufficiently has appeared) by the blood of Jesus, We may
be bold to enter into the holy place, by the new and living way which he has
prepared for us through the veil that is his flesh, and seeing we have an high
priest which is over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart in
assurance of faith, and sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and
washed in our bodies with pure water, let us keep the profession of our hope
without wavering, for he is faithful that promised. Heb. 10.19. For faith is
the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen.
Heb. 11.1. Let us ask the^ therefore in faith of our good and gracious God, and
waver not, as James cou^selleth us, for he that wauereth is like the waters of
the sea, tossed of the wind, and carried away, neither let that man think that
he shall obtain any thing of the Lord: Iam. 2.19. And let us confidently
conclude with Saint Paul, that being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, through Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access through faith unto his
grace, wherein we stand and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, yea
with that hope, that shall never shame or confound us. Romans 5.1. etc. For
whatsoever our adversaries say or feel to the contrary in themselves, we that
can find once by faith, that we have put on Christ, that we have eaten his
flesh and drunk his blood, yea that he is even in us, and therefore have first
Gods promises often declared and made unto us, and then the same particularly,
outwardly in the sacraments, and inwardly in our souls by his spirit thus
sealed and applied unto us, dare boldly with Saint John say, that we know we
are translated from death to life. 1. Epist. 3.14. and with Saint Paul, that
we are persuaded that nothing shall ever separate us from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus. For seeing he has not spared to bestow his own son upon
us, how shall he not with him give us all things else. Romans 8.13.39. yea we are
sure it is no presumption to believe God without any wavering, thus many ways
testifying his effectual mercy and love to appertain even unto us: eye we
know it were wickedly to call the truth and faithfulness of God into
question, once to doubt when he so many ways has sought to put us out of al
doubt. No marvel though the papists can attain unto no such joy and peace or
assurance in their consciences of salvation by their faith. For first they
build as much of their faith upon the sandy foundation of their own
traditions, as upon the rock of the canonical scriptures: secondly the faith
that they talk on, leads them no further then to a general astent to all
truth revealed by God unto man in his word, whereof in particular they neither
think the knowledge of all that truth necessary, nor yet the special
application of the promises to any, contenting themselves with believing in
general, that there is in the Church remission of sins purchased by Christ,
etc. And thirdly they hold there is no such faith whereby, in, and for Christ
the owner thereof can come to any such assurance of the mercy of God, of the
forgiveness of his sins, and of life everlasting: yea that that is rather a
presumption, and a mere fiction and invention, then any faith allowed of God,
unless God give a man a special revelation, as it were telling him by name in
particular, that he shall have these in deed for Christ's sake: and that
therefore it is enough for to believe that their are these things in deed by
Christ purchased. And therefore lastly they hold that faith may be in the
reprobate, and that it is said to justify only because it is one of the first
dispositions to justification, and that it justifies not so much for
apprenending Christ the iustifier, as for that it obtains that Christ should
formally justify her owner, by pouring into him the grace of charity, whereby
he may after be able more to justify himself, and to merit the kingdom of
heaven by good works. So that in effect they hold and teach, that it justifies
not for Christ apprehended and applied to her owner, but for charity and other
good works that Christ by his grace, for the worthiness thereof, bestows upon
him quite contrary to the scriptures; which as we have heard, shut works quite
out from this office of justifying and purchasing of salvation for man. Whereas
they know further that the same scriptures put a manifest difference betwixt
this righteousness of the law that lies in doing, and that which we have to
make us righteous by, by says in Christ Jesus. Romans 10.5. etc. and Gal. 3.12.
And yet even their great Doctor Bellarmine neither is nor will be ashamed of
any of this their doctrine of faith, and in this last point, though he be
enforced to grant that we are first justified freely without works in Christ
Jesus, and that heaven also is Gods childrens by adoption and inheritance: yet
the formal cause of our justification must be with him the infused habit of
charity, and good works after done must make us to have a second right unto
the kingdom of heaven, and so to further degrees of glory there, by the way of
wages and just debt. Though for all this, when he has done his best for the
maintenance of this second title and right thereunto, he dare not teach any
with any special assurance and confidence that cannot deceive them, to trust
thereunto. Nay these things thus being most certainly held and taught by the^
touching the nature of faith quite contrary to the scriptures, I can never
marvel that by their faith there is bred no certainner hope or confidence in
them of Gods mercy, or of the forgiveness of their sins, or of any thing
else that appertains to salvation, then as when they are at the best, may
finally deceive them, and in the mean time with much fear and doubting of
their estate trouble them: yea I rather wonder, that in the just judgment of
God they are not in continual horror and terror of conscience and as it were
compassed about every hour with the very torments of hell, for that they
will not be brought to seek to come to the father only by him, but by whom,
as he himself has taught us, none can ever come unto him. Io. 14.6. For
whiles thus they plead and stand upon a wrong title, and would also bear men
in hand that a special end and use of Christ's coming was, not to procure
them sufficient title and right to the kingdom of heaven, in, and by himself
and things done and suffered by and in his own person, but to enable them by
these means to make themselves to have a second, a better and further title
thereunto, they are most worthy to loose all the comfort that they might have,
if they would stand to the right and only good title, by and for Jesus
Christ's sake alone. And doubtless as I have showed before, if they repent
not, they will one day all the pack of them, find, though too late that Paul
has pronounced sentence of them, in the like case of the Galathians Cap. 5.4.
saying, Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the law, ye
are fallen from grace. God of his mercy therefore, if it be his holy will, open
their eyes in time, that they may repent of all these their most dangerous
errors, and come with us once, to be content to believe in Christ Jesus, as
the Scriptures indeed teach us. In the mean time, let this that I have said,
be a sufficient warning to us, as the adopted sons of God through faith in
Christ, Ioh. 1.12. to look for heaven as an inheritance prepared for us by our
heavenly father before the foundations of the world were made. Matt. 25.34. and
now reserved for us, which are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. Pet. 1.4. and 5. that so heaven may be to us as it is said to be
indeed, the free gift of God ( Romans 6.23.) through Jesus Christ our Lord. And
let us let these hireling and mercenarie minded men alone, that disdain to have
heaven of Gods free alms, and therefore will have it either by their own
earninge and deserving of it, or else they will go without it, which they are
most like to do, because they will have it otherwise then God himself the
owner thereof, has couenanted and appointed that ever any shall come by it. I
know they have their colors and sophistical devises to give yet such a gloss
and fair show to this their dealing, as though for all this all were very
well of their sides: but all they can gain thereby is this, that so much the
more they prove their religion to be aptly and worthily termed by the
Apostle, the mistrie of iniquity. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. and that the proud and
pompeous whore of Babylon should have that word Mystery, set for her very
brand and mark in her forehead, and that she should yet carry al her
abominations and fornications, wherewith she should make the inhabitants of
the world drunken, in a golden cup, the sooner to entise them to drink deeply
thereof. For indeed and truth as I have showed before and elsewhere, they can
stand them in no better steed either before God or before any that are wise,
than Adam and Eues fig leaves did them to hide their nakedness from the eyes of
God. For how can they be so silly and simple, as to imagine indeed that in
this great light any can and will be so foolish as hearing what they do, so
plainly and plentifully set down every where in the doctrine of the
gospel, that Christ went through effectually in his own person with the work
of our redemption and salvation, as once to be drawn by their sophistical
persuasions, that yet what he has done, serves especially but to merit that
chantie first should be bestowed upon us: and then that thereunto, and to our
good works proceeding therefrom, should be conuaied from his merits a dignity
and power, first formally to justify us by the one, which we could not be by
the application of him and his merits unto us through faith, and then after to
earne and merit more surely for us by the other, the kingdom of heaven, then
he had done? For they may prate and brag, that whiles they thus say and teach,
they attribute more to the merits of Christ than we do, that both for our
justification and salvation trust only thereunto; but every man for all
that, under these fair words may plainly see, that in very deed they
hereby most grossly would make him, as I said before, the very principal
in the robbing of himself of that special honor that is his, to be a full and
a perfect Savior in and by himself. This faith is wrought by the spirit.
But inoug his said of this point Howbeit this further touching this faith,
whereby we eat and drink Christ and make him our own (well-beloved) I would
have you to understand, that it is not to be attained unto by any power or
strength of flesh and blood, but it is the special work and fruit of the
Spirit of God. For immediately after John had told us, that they that believe
in Christ at they that receive him, whereby they are made the sons of God, he
says that such are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God, John 1.12. and 13. And Christ has most plainly
said, John. 3.5.6. Verily verily I say unto thee, except a man be borne of
water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God that which is
borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit.
And yet more plainly to assure us of the truth of this point, Paul in
express words has taught us, that faith is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22. Ordinarily the word preached.
But yet we must not think, though the Spirit can extraordinarily work this
faith without means immediately where, when, and in whom it lists, that yet
notwithstanding, ordinarily it does it by the ministry of the word, and that
preached: For so Paul concludes, saying, Romans 10.17. Then faith is by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And therefore accordingly, 1. Cor.
1.17. he writes, That seeing the world by wisdom knew not God, in the
wisdom of God it please him, by the foolishness of preaching to save those
that believe. And therefore also he notes, it is an especial fruit and effect
of Christ's ascension. Ephesians. 4.10.11. etc. that he gave and bestowed sundry
ministries there mentioned, upon his Church for the repairing of the Saints,
for the work of the ministry and for the edification of the body of Christ.
Till we all meet together, in the unity of faith and the acknowledging of the
son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no more, children, wavering and
carried away with every wind of doctrine by the deceit of men, and craftiness
whereby they lay in wait to deceive. Saint Peter also agreeable heereunto in
his first Epistle, Cap. 1.22.23. etc. notes that our souls are purified in
obeying the truth, through the spirit, being borre again not of mortal seed but
of immortal, by the word of God, which after there he says endures for ever,
and is that which is preached amongst them. Whereupon therefore in the next
chapter he exhorts them to lay aside all malitiousnes, all guile,
dissunulation, envy, and evil speaking, and as newborn babes to desire the
sincere milk of the word, that they may grow up thereby, if it be so they had
tasted how bountiful the Lord was. Verse. 1.2.3. Whereunto we had as much need
to list^n as ever they had. For these are the days wherein we live, wherein
that prophecy of Christ is fulfilled, Mat. 34. touching the danger that should
be by false prophets and teachers, able if it were possible to seduce the very
elect. Verse 24. and wherein he may behold multitudes for lack of food and
faithful preachers and teachers, as sheep having no shepherd dispersed and
scattered; and therefore in respect whereof he may also say, Surely the harvest
is great, but the laborers are few. And by the administration of Sacraments.
I would to God therefore we could and would every one of us according to
his counsel there, Pray the Lord of the harvest to thrust out laborers into
his harvest, Matthew. 9.3.6. etc. Besides the bare preaching of the word as it
is well known and confessed of all, for the better both breading and
nourishing of this our faith as an outward good means, for the spirit to
work that effect in us by, our most gracious and loving GOD, knowing how
slow to believe we would be, has left and given unto us visible and
palpable Sacraments, thereby as it were to seal and more particularly to
apply unto us all the good promises of salvation in Christ Jesus: as namely
now, baptism and the supper of the Lord to us of the new Testament. The
first whereof offers unto us and seals the delivery to the right receiver
thereof, of his regeneration, teaching him to look for it at the hands of God
the Father, through God the Son, by the mighty working of the holy Ghost
only, in that only he is baptized in water in their names. And the other is
a Sacrament of his continual nourishment to eternal life, in and by the
broken body, and bloodeshed of Christ Jesus. And therefore as to be a man, it
is necessary but once to be borne, but yet after often to be sedde: so is it
most necessary for those that would ever grow to be perfect men in Christ
Jesus but once to be baptized, but often to receive the other Sacrament. And
it must be remembered always that both these offer and set before us one and
self same Christ: the one, that he may by his blood wash us clean from our
sins, and regenerate us that we may begin to lead a new and a holy life:
the other, that by his body broken and his blood shed for us, he may be both
meat and drink and sufficient spiritual food and nourishment unto our
hungry and thirsty souls but then withal we may understand, that the same
Christ to the same ends is offered still unto us when his Gospel is preached
unto us: only this is the difference, as I said before, that the word offers
and sets him before us in general, and these in particular and special manner
lead us unto him. And whereas the word to breed or nourish faith in us,
stricketh only the sense of our hearing; these duly ministered do not only
the better to provoke and strengthen the same, move and strike that, but also
our sight, smelling, taste and feeling. And therefore as it was noted by Paul.
He^^^. 2. that the cause why the word which the Jews heard in the wilderness
profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard it:
so is it most certain that these shall not profit us, though outwardly we be
partakers thereof neu^r so much, if we have not faith to pearse further than to
the outward elements: and if it be a fault so to harden our hearts, when the
word is but preached, that we take not occasion thereby to believe, it must
needs be a far greater fault, if these added thereunto we be still
unfaithful. And therefore, as in respect of hearing of the word the Apostle
said, Heb. 3.5. So long as it is said, to day harden not your hearts, as in
the provocation: for some when they heard, provoked him to anger, so say I unto
you, in respect of both much more. To this end never forget the examples of
Simon Magus and of Judas, whereof though the one was baptized, as we read he
was, Act. 8.18. and the other was with Christ at the institution of the other
Sacrament as it appears, Luke. 22.21. yet as it appears in both those
chapters, for that they neither of them had any sound or true faith, they were
never the better, but the worse, for that to their other sins they added in
the receiving of these, the profaning, as much as lay in them of both these. If
when the word is preached, therewith the Spirit of God so to work in your
hearts, that the eyes of your souls be opened aright to see and know Christ,
and your hearts framed accordingly to believe in him, undoubtedly even then
according to Christ's commandment here in my text you come unto him and
drink him, yea you eat his flesh and drink his blood to eternal life.
Wherefore (dear brethren) when you come but to hear, I say unto every one of
you with the wise man, Ecclesiastes 4.17. Take heed to thy foot when thou
entrest into the house of God, that so thou may follow his counsel in that
which follows, that is, to be more near to hear, tha^ to offer the
sacrifice of fools. And according to the advice of Jeremy, (by the strong plow
of repentance and faith) break up the fallow ground of your hearts when you
come to hear, that we sow not the good seed of the word amongst thorns.
Cap. 4.4. For as you may most plainly learn by the parable, Mat. 13.4. etc.
though the Lord send never so good seedsme^ amongst you, and they sow the good
seed never so faithfully, yet if your hearts be either like the high way, or
like thornie or stony ground, you shall never bring forth any good harvest to
the Lord. For only the good and honest heart furnished with patience shall do
that, as there we are taught: and therefore labor to bring such hearts. But
alas when all comes to all, most true it is that Christ says, none can come
unto him, but whom the father draws, Io. 6.44. Paul may plant, and Apollo
water, and yet all to no purpose, unless God give the increase, 1. Cor. 3.3.
And yet I say for all this, despise not prophesying, if you would take out the
former lesson quench not the spirit. 1. These. 5.19.20. For by the outward
ministry of men, the Lord inwardly by his spirit works in you a knowledge
and love of Christ, and so draws you unto him. And that has Christ himself
taught immediately saying, Ioh. 6.45. It is written in the Prophets, they shall
be all taught of God. Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of
the father comes unto me. Whereupon very well Augustine in his 26. tract upon
John notes saying, videte quomodo trahit pater, docendo delectat, non
necessitatem imponendo: that is, behold how the father draws, by teaching he
delights, not by imposing necessity or enforcing. And to the same purpose
upon the foresaid words he most sweetly observes that it being found
true in these earthly delights, that every one is drawn or carried with his
delight, that much rather Christ by teaching being manifested unto us, by his
Father will draw us unto him. Yet most certain it is, that only God it is
that first opens and enlightneth our minds to see Christ, by his ministry
set before us; and who then creates in us a new, a will to delight in him and
to embrace him, which the same Father acknowledges also saying; that we will
well, he works of himself without us, and when we so will that we do, he
works together with us: De gratia and libero arbitrto, Cap. 17.

And yet though all this be most true, Of Sacraments in general.
are not the sacraments and the use and meditation thereof needless and
superfluous unto us to this purpose. For as the word written in the canouical
Scriptures is as the written will of our heavenly Father, which we publish unto
you when we read them, and by preaching open them unto you: so the Sacraments
are as the great and auten tike seals of the Lord annexed thereunto, for the
more and better assuring us of the certainetie of those heavenly legaces that
therein are bequeathed us. Indeed God for his part is so steadfast, constant and
true in all his sayings, that though only by bare speech he should reveal
his will unto us, it were our duties most steadfastly to beleeueit. But he that
made us, knows what is in us, and by experience we find how necessary so
ever it be for us to believe the word of God, that yet though we have it (as in
the goodness of God toward us we have) both written, and thus sealed and
confirmed by his Sacraments, that all this is little enough to make us believe
it as we should. Wherefore seeing it has pleased God to stoop so low unto
us, and thus to apply himself to our capacity, let us in the name of God praise
him therefore, and most thankfully take use of all the means that he has left
us to get unto his son by. And therefore give me leave here to enlarge my
self a little unto you, that there be nothing wanting in me to show you, or
to help you forward, by the help of these Sacraments, that I speak of,
through the working of Gods spirit in your hearts withal, more and more to
come unto Christ, and to be united unto him to your everlasting salvation. And
the rather because I know as the right understanding of the nature thereof may
by Gods blessing mightily help you or ward therein; so either the ignorance
thereof, or an erroneous conceit of them may very much hinder you in the
same. Sacraments I call them, according to the ancient use, and phrase of the
Church: which name I take was at the first borrowed from an ancient fashion of
making a solemn vow and covenant betwixt the Emperor and his soldiers,
whereby he was bound to them to go in and out before them as an Emperor, and
they bound themselves unto him again to be faithful and obedient soldiers.
And therefore because in these sacred rites it was observed, that likewise
there passes a solemn covenant betwixt God and the worthy receivers thereof,
it was thought that not unfitly they might be called Sacraments. And in very
deed, whether we consider Baptism or that other of the body and blood of
Christ, we shall easily find that thereby this is done. For in Baptism, the
minister in the name of GOD offers by baptising in water, in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, unto the party baptized not only a
figure and representation of the washing away of his sins and of his
regeneration in the blood of Christ, but also a visible and sensible seal
thereof, whereby God binds himself to do all this for the party, if the
let and stop thereof be not in himself: and he likewise by receiving this
Sacrament makes open profession, that he will live and believe accordingly.
And in the other when bread and wine, called as they be, are delivered unto
the communicant, in like manner then God offers to feed that party to
eternal life, with the body broken and blood shed of his son: and he, by
taking of them, makes open confession that he so believes and therefore will
so show it in his life thereafter: and of this mutual covenant the sacrament
delivered and received is a most certain pledge and seal betwixt them. It
stands therefore every one in hand, that receive these Sacraments to have a
great care, not only to believe that GOD for his part will perform that
which thereby he binds himself unto: but also for their parts to fulfill
that, whereunto they tie themselves: otherwise sure they are no better than
dissemblers before men, and hypocrites before GOD. If the Etimologie of this
word Sacrament, be but considered, it might teach us in an^e case to deal
with these always, Sacra mente, that is, with a sacred and a holy mind. The
word is taken and used so generally often, that every outward thing by Gods
ordinance signifying a further grace or benefit, has been called a
Sacrament. And therefore John Chapp^^s in his Co^mentary upon Raymunds sum of
the Sacraments tract. 1. thought he had found in Hugo de sancto victore in his
sixth book of Sacraments, a very perfect definition of a Sacrament, when he
found that he defined it to be, Natural elementum extrinsecus oculis
suppositum, ex institutione figurans, ex similitudine repraesentans, and ex
sanctificatione aliquam gratiam inuisibilem conferens: that is, A natural
element set outwardly before the eyes, by institution figuring, by similitude
representing, and by sanctification conferring some invisible grace. And in
very deed, it somewhat well restrains the ouerlarge use of the word: and
there is nothing therein but it is true of Sacraments properly taken as I take
them now. But to make it fully to express the nature of a sacrament thus
taken, and noe more, I would thereunto add, (and I am sure it ought to be so)
that the institutor must be God himself; that sometime the outward partis not
only one element to be seen with the eyes, but more then one: and that it is
not enough that by sanctification it confer any visible grace whatsoever, but
that that grace be even Christ himself with such graces as in him re provided
for our salvation. And therefore I define a Sacrament, as now I speak thereof,
to be A visible sign or signs, ordained by Christ, to be ministered in his
Church to the^ that be his, not only to figure and represent himself and what
he has done for their salvation; but also whereby to offer himself with grace
necessary to salvation, and to deliver himself with the same, and to seal
the communication and delivery thereof, to every worthy receiver of the
outward element or elements, according to his institution. And such we find
no more now in the new Testament, but Baptism and the Lords Supper. The
other five urged as Sacrament by the Romanists of our days, howsoever in some
general and improper sense they maybe so called, in this they cannot. For some
one or other necessary thing mentioned in this definition is wanting in every
one of them. And yet there is nothing in this definition that can be omitted,
if we mind so to define or describe a Sacrament as that indeed truly, and
fully, we mean to express the nature thereof as it is common but to these
two, Baptism and the Supper. To the constitution therefore of a Sacrament by
this we may see that it is first necessary, that Chrst be the author and
institutor thereof. Secondly, that there have a commandment passed from him to
administer it in his Church. Thirdly, that it consist of such outward visible
element or elements, as he has chosen and appointed for that purpose. And
fourthly, that according to his ordinance they be taken as means to put him on
by, and to make him ours, with all such graces as in him are provided for our
salvation. So that asto the making of a perfect man there must concur body
and soul in one; and to the being of our Christ to be a fit person to be our
Messiah and Savior, Godhead and manhood: so to the full being of a Sacrament
according to Christ's ordinance, an outward element or elements, and Christ
himself and his grace fit and needful for our salvation are necessary. And
therefore as neither body and soul in man, nor Godhead and manhood in Christ
without falling into a gross error there about, can or may be said or thought
to be either confounded with the other, or annihilated or absorpted sorpted of
the other: so neither may we say or think of these two parts in a Sacrament.
When therefore we come to receive any Sacrament; as outwardly we receive the
outward element, so inwardly we must seek to receive also the heavenly thing
thereby offered unto us: or else by our default we severe those things which
we should coupple, and as much as lies in us, overthrow the nature and use of
the Sacrament.

Now to descend from the consideration of a Sacrament thus in general, Of
Baptism.
to these two particular Sacraments: In Baptism which is the first, we have
Christ's ordinance for it, and commandment also for the ministering of it.
Math. 28.19. where Christ said unto his disciples; Go and teach all nations,
baptising them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And
thereby also the word baptize signifying, as it does, to dippe in water or
therewith to sprinkle, we may see the outward element to be water. Which is
also confirmed by all the practice of the Churches in the Apostles times: as
appears both in the story of their Acts written by Saint Luke, and
elsewhere. And that the thing thereby signified, offered, and delivered is
Christ himself, and so in him remission of sins, regeneration and dying to
sin, and living again unto righteouspesse, it sufficiently appears in
these places of the Scriptures. Know ye not that all we which have been
baptized into Christ, have been baptized into his death? we are then buried
with him by Baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the
dead to the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newnes of life.
Romans 6.3.4. All ye that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Gal. 3.27.
Be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, Act. 2.38. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify it and cleanse it, by the washing of water through the word
etc. Ephe. 5.25.26. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the
new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Baptism that now is,
saves us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 3.21. They therefore
that are desirous not only to be accounted baptized with the outward Baptism
of water, must as you see according to Paul's counsel, Romans 13.14. put on the
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts of it. For if they be partakers of the other part thereof, in the blood
of Christ, they are washed and cleansed: and so must, and are bound to live as
men dead to sin and alive to righteousness. Baptism therefore Is a Sacrament
of the new Testament, wherein by being dipped in, or sprinkled upon with
water, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, we are assured
that God the Father can and will in the blood, and by the blood of his Son,
by the mighty working of the holy Ghost, wash away our sins, and so receive us
and incorporate us into his Church, that we shall be his newborn children and
enabled to be holy, because he is holy. We administer it to infants because it
succeeds Circumcision: which was by Gods ordinance appointed to be ministered
to the infants of the Jews, when they were but eight days old, Ge. 17.12.
because Christ said, Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the
kingdom of heaven. Mat. 19.13. because we read that the Apostles baptized whole
households, as Act. 16.33. amongst which sometimes it is most likely there
were some infantes: and lastly, because we find that God promised not only
to be the God of Abraham, but also of his feed after him. Genesis 17.7. and that
Saint Paul most plainly teaches, that if one of the parents be believing,
then is the seed holy. 1. Cor. 7.14. And therefore it being administered to
such, and in water, and in that manner that it is by Christ's ordinance, the
nature of water being as we know it to be; we may and ought to learn all
these lessons, that we are all borne and conceived in sin, and therewith so
defiled that we stand need of washing: that this washing and cleanseing is to
be had at God the Fathers hands, through Jesus Christ, by the working of the
holy Ghost, and no where else: that God both can and will thus wash and
cleanse us, and that therefore this Trinity in unity is only to be believed
in and trusted unto for the matter of our salvation, and to be honored in all
thankfulness for the same, by our ceasing from sin and doing of that which
is good. Whereupon we see, that they that would lead us after we have once
been thus baptized, to put our faith and confidence for any part of our
forgiveness of sins or salvation either in any other person or thing as the
common fashion is amongst papists, doubtless they would have us to revolt
from that faith wherein we were baptized, and whereunto thereby we have most
solemnly bound our selves. Hereby also we may perceive that though Baptism it
self be but once to be ministered for the reason before showed: yet as often as
ever either we find our sins ready to shake our faith, or otherwise to
trouble us, by meditation thereof we are thus to have our recourse again unto
it, to the strengthening both of our faith, and to the weakening of the power of
sin, (howsoever the papists would persuade us, that it serves only to
assure us of remission of sins before;) because we may be sure that God is
always ready, if we can believe in him, to perform unto us whatsoever he
has offered unto us therein. Which doubtless is the remission of all our
sins before or after, we believing and repenting thereof. Or else if only
thereby were offered forgiveness of sins before it; then surely the Church
would have deferred it to the last, or later then either it has or yet does.

And as for the other Sacrament, Of the other Sacrament.
if we do with any diligence but consider that which we find set down
thereof. Mat. 26.26. etc. Mar. 14.22. etc. Luke 22.19. etc. 1. Cor. 11.23. etc.
we shall there find, whatsoever appertains either generally to a Sacrament,
or particularly unto it most plainly and effectually expressed. For there it
is evident that Christ instituted it, and commanded his ministers to administer
it until his coming again: that he ordained very bread and wine to be the
outward visible elements: and his body broken for his, and his blood shed for
the remission of their sins, to be the things by the other figured, signified
and represented; yea, thereby both offered and truly delivered and
communicated to the right and worthy receiver: And therefore to assure the^ of
as much, he called the bread broken and distributed, his body broken: and the
wine powered forth and given the^ in the cup, his blood of the new Testament,
shed for many to the remission of their sins. We therefore by warrant from
hence do define this: To be a Sacrament of the new Testament, instituted by
Christ, and to administered by his ordinance, and to be received according to
the same of his faithful people, consisting not only of bread broken and wine
powered out into the cup, to be distributed and received of al worthy comers
thereunto in remembrance of his death and passion; and as undoubted tokens by
his institution (though not of their own nature) both that his body was broken,
and his blood shed for all his in general, and also particularly for the full
redemption and salvation of every right receiver hereof: but also of the very
broken body and bloodshed of Christ, for our salvation therewith all as
certainly offered to be fed on to eternal life, and fed on indeed by every
worthy communicant (though by spiritual means) as the other are offered unto
them, taken and fed on by the instruments of the body. Whereupon most
earnestly we exhort every one that would worthily come unto this table, and so
be partakers indeed to their comfort of this Sacrament, with Saint Paul in any
case to try and examine themselves first, and to judge themselves, least for
want of so doing they be here judged of the Lord by eating of this bread and
drinking of this cup unworthily to have made themselves guilty of his body
and blood, and so to eat and drink their own damnation. For though we hold
bread and wine herein still to retain their former substance and essence;
because even by the express words of the institution in the places before
quoated so much is evident, and the common nature of a Sacrament requires the
continuance of the outward element in his former nature that so it may carry
the better and apterresemblance of the thing whose name it bears: yet we know
and most willingly confess with all antiquity, that thereof here by virtue
of Christ's institution, (which does and shall remain in force still to the
worlds end always to effect the same in bread and wine according to his
ordinance set aside and used to this purpose) there is a very great change and
alteration. But that is but in name, use, and estimation. For whereas before
they were but called bread and wine, and served but to the common use of the
nourishing and cheering of the body, and therefore so only were to be
esteemed: herein they bear the names of the very body and blood of Christ,
and they serve as the Lords good means to lead and strengthen our faith to
feed thereupon indeed to our salvation: The use thereof.
and therefore we esteem of them herein, not as they are of their own nature,
but as they are by his institution, sacred signs, simbols, representations,
similitudes, pledges, and seals of those things whose names they bear. And
therefore we call upon you most earnestly, whenever you receive, in the fear
of God reverently so to take them: and so by marking what is said of them and
done with them, to take occasion, first to call effectually to your remembrance
how Christ's body was broken with sorrows and torments, and his precious blood
shed and severed in his passion from his body to satisfy the justice of God
his heavenly father for man's sins, yea even for every one of your sins; and
therefore withal heartily to sorrow for your sins that put him to al these
pains, and yet vnsainedlie also with thankful hearts to rejoice, that he
would take such pains for them that were so unworthy thereof. Which you are
notably occasioned to do, when in the administration of this Sacrament you
first see the bread broken and the wine powered forth, and both particularly
offered unto every one of you, severed and apart the one after the other, yet
bearing the names of his body broken, and blood shed for you. Secondly,
knowing the natures of bread and wine as you do, and to what use they setue
touching this life; they bearing here the names of the body broken, and blood
shed of Christ as they do, we assure you that thereby most justly we are
occasioned to believe, that in the body broken and blood shed of Christ, both
the bread and drink, that is, all the food that is necessary for the
maintenance of our spiritual life for ever before God, lies; and that
therefore there it is only to be sought. And in that these further thus called
and used, are given unto every one of you that come unto the Lords boarde, and
you take them, thereby the Lord by us his ministers particularly offers his
body broken and his blood shed unto cuery one of you, to feed and nourish
you to everlasting life: and you by taking of them in outward show, answer
both him and us, that you do most firmly and steadfastly every one of you
particularly believe, that he will do so indeed. Wherefore in any case when
you streach forth your hands and open your mouths to take bread and wine,
thus called, at our hands; take Christ's so calling of them to be a most
follemne promise to his, to assure you that if indeed then you believe that
his body was once broken for you, and his blood shed for the remission of
your sins, as the story of his passion and this Sacrament, which is a visible
commemoration thereof; show, that then undoubtedly without all question, you
do not, nor cannot more ceratinly by those instruments of your bodies, take
the bread and wine and feed thereof then by this faith of yours, the very
mouth of your soul in this case, you feed upon his broken body and blood
shed: But then I say once again, fail not but when your hands and mouths
are occupied about the taking and feeding upon the outward elements, let this
faith of yours, which is in steed of both to your soul, be fervently occupied
in believing that by the broken body and bloodshed of Christ Jesus your
salvation was and is fully purchased. These three uses thus made and taken in
the receite of this Sacrament; in that you find by experience, and know it to
be most certain, that by the force and ordinary work of nature, bread and
wine received in, and disgested are converted to fit food for our nature, and
so there grows an union betwixt our nature and them: so this Sacrament thus
received is and ought to be unto us, as a sealed covenant of Christ Jesus by
the mighty working of his Spirit, to assure us that he will find the means
most certainlye to unite himself unto us, to nourish and to feed us so with
himself, that in him we shall grow to be perfect men in his house. And
lastly, as this Sacrament serves first to these ends, and so notably to
strengthen our faith in Jesus Christ crucified: so serves it also as a most
notable mean, outwardly both before God and men, to make confession of the
same our faith by; to distinguish us as by our recognisance from others that
are not of that faith; to provoke us continually to offer unto God the
sacrifice of thanksgiving for this most sweet sacrifice of his son herein
brought fresh still to our remembrance, and so believed in and upon; and to be
a bond of love and unity amongst all the receivers thereof. For as Paul
says, We that are many are one bread and one body, because we are all
partakers of one bread. 1. Cor. 10.17. So that by the receite hereof as first,
our union and communion with Christ is sealed unto us; so also is it the seal
and bond of the communion that the Saints of God have amongst themselves.
Wherefore as it straitely binds us having received it, unless we would have
it appear that we received it unworthily, afterward to live as they that
live in, and by Christ: so it binds us also all that receive, as members knit
together in one body under one head to live together in perfect peace and
unity. Worthily therefore, all these things considered, may we say of it as
Augustine did in his time: O Sacramentum pietatis! o signum vnitatis! o
vinculum charitatis! that is, O Sacrament of piety! O sign of unity! O bond
of charity! tract. 26. upon John. Who should come unto it, and how.
And if these things were well remembered as they ought, neither should
ministers, as they do in most places without any due preparation of their
people before, admit them tag and rag one and other to this sacred table:
neither would the people so rudely, ignorantly, and profanely press thereunto
for a fashion only as to too commonly they do. For if at any time that
commandment of Christ bind us ministers, as doubtless it does or else
Christ would never have given it us, Give ye not that which is holy unto
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine. Math. 7.6. it most directly
binds us here, to do what lies in us to know that they be neither dogs
nor swine to whom we offer this blessed sacrament, before we so do. For
herein we see Christ Jesus that is the true bread of life, whose flesh is
meat indeed and whose blood is drink indeed; as he himself has assured
us John. 6.35.51.55. is offered to the right comers thereunto, and therefore
here that saying of Christ is most true, it is not good to take the childrens
bread, and to cast it to whelps, Math, 15.16. In the old Testament the Lord
has set down an express Law, that none that were uncircumcised should be
admitted to the eating of the Pasouer, Exodus 12.48. Yea, Numb. 9.6. etc. we
read that God by his express Oracle showed Moses, that they that were but
ceremonially unclean were worthily kept back; and that all such always
after, should a month after the rest eat the Passcouer, and not before, that
in the mean time they might purify themselves. Likewise, Leuit. 7.20. the Lord
says, If any do eat of the flesh of the Peace offerings that appertain unto
the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, the same person shall be cut off from
his people. And therefore the godly priest Iehoiada had such a care that these
laws should be obscrued, that to his commendation for ever it is recorded of
him, 2. Chro. 23.19. that he set Porters by the gates of the house of the Lord,
that none that was unclean in any thing should enter in. And when this is not
done the Lord complains saying, Who is there among you that would shut the
doors? etc. Mal. 10. Seeing then here by it is evident that in the old
Testament God was thus careful to have none unfit admitted to the Sacraments
thereof, we may be well assured that he has as great care for the Sacraments
of the new. Our warrant to admit children to the other, is, that they be borne
and descended of such parents as profess faith in Christ; and therefore to
whom and their seed God has made Covenant to be their God: and the other
reasons before alleged to that purpose encourage us withal to the same: but
in that Saint Paul, as we heard already, would have every one before he eat
of this bread, and drink of this cup in this Sacrament, to try, examine, and
judge himself, we may plainly learn that none but such as have discretion
and knowledge so to do, and so do indeed, are fit to be admitted to this.
Most christianly therefore it is provided that none should presume here in
England, to present himself to the Lords table, before notice thereof given
to his minister, that he may try whether he can answer his Catethisme; or
otherwise if he know him to be out of charity, or guilty of any notorious
crime, he may put him off, until he can answer it, and until he have
satisfied the congregation by the testifying of his repentance, and be
reconciled unto the party whom he has wronged. And not without great and
urgent cause is Christostome so earnest as we may read he was in his 83.
Homily upon Matthew, to persuade the ministers of his time in no case willingly
to admit any wicked person to this table, willing them that if they durst not
or could not keep back such, to tell him: for he would die rather then he
would admit either Consul, Duke, or King for any fear, that he knew to be
unfit. I would to God therefore that generally all we of the Ministry would
take better care of this, then hitherto too many of us have done. Otherwise
doubtless we shall not only before the Lord be guilty of the monstrous sin
of profaning his holy mysteries, in prostituting of them to profane and
filthy persons: but also both to the peril of our own souls and our peoples,
we shall willingly (or carelessly and negligently at the least) let them run
apparently to eat and drink their own damnation, whose salvation we are
bound to tender and to further what we may as our own. And therefore that
complainte of the Lords used in the like case. Mal. 1.6.7. will he take up and
urge against us, saying unto all such careless and negligent ministers, O
Priests that despise my name; and ye say, wherein? ye offer unclean bread
upon mine altar; and ye say, wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say
the table of the Lord is not to be regarded. Which after he proves indeed
and effect they did, whatsoever their words were, in that contrary to the
law they offered the blind, lame, and sick for sacrifice. For into this
very fault we run when we admit, as too commonly we do, unto the receiving
of this Sacrament any whom we before know not to be fit both for knowledge
and life to receive the same worthily. Howsoever (well-beloved) let the nature
and use of this Sacrament persuade you that be the people, in no case to offer
your selves unto this Sacrament, before you find in your selves an hearty
hunger and thirst after Christ Jesus therein offered unto you, as you have
heard: and so true repentance for your sins past; and then a lively faith
grounded upon Gods promises in him: and lastly both these testified unto your
own souls and consciences by the true fruits of both, dying every day more
and more to sin, and living to righteousness, to be without all hypocrisy
and dissimulation. For of these quarters and parts must the wedding garment be
made, which he must bring with him and have upon his back that, when the
master of this feast comes in to view his guestes, would be approved of him.
Otherwise let him come never so readily with the other guestes heerewith
apparrelled indeed, and then handle the matter never so cunningly to cause all
them to take him to be as worthy a guest as any of themselves; yet when this
survey your comes that searches the hearts and reins, he shall quickly be
confounded and not able to answer one word for his defense in coming so
irreuerently, and so shall hear that fearful sentence, which, will he nill
he, he must undergo, pronounced on him; Take him, and bind him hand and
foot, and let him have his place in utter darkness, where is weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Math. 22.12.13. O therefore (dear brethren) before we come
bither, let us devoutly religiously and reverently consider who we are, who it
is that has called us, whither we are called, before whom we shall appear,
and to what end; that if not these single, yet these jointly and together may
move us to come in that worthy sort that is meet. If we had but to intertaine
our Landlord, a man of worship, or noble man, we would have a care to put on
our best apparel, to deck cur houses in the best manner, and in any case to
provide that no fluttish corner be found therein where he should come to offend
him, or when we are in his presence that any irreuerent or unseemly word or
deed should pass from us: how much more ought we to have this care here,
where by our coming we make a show; that we mean to intertaine and receive
in, Christ Jesus himself our Lord and Savior for ever to dwell in us, that
all things within us then be prepared accordingly? Saint Paul has told us,
and we may trust him, that we may not take the members of Christ, and make them
the members of of an harlot^ 1. Cor. 6.15. that we cannot drink the cup of the
Lord, and the cup of Devils, be partakers of the table of the Lord and the
table of De^i^, 1. Cor. 10.20. and that as righteousness has no fellowship
with unrighteousness or light with darkness: so Christ has no concord with
Beliall, or the unbeliever, part with the believer, 2. Cor. 6.14.15. And we
find by lamentable experience in Judas, that he bringing unto this table,
though never so much show of piety, knowledge, honesty, and goodness; yet for
that he came as an hollow hearted hypocrite, in a purpose to go on with the
treason that for wages he had undertaken, the Devil immediately upon his
being there entered into him, and so he never ceased until he had accomplished
his wicked purpose, and after by desperate murdering of himself had showed
himself to be the child of perdition, as we may read most plainly in the
story of the Gospel, John. 13.27. etc. How therefore with any reason may we
think that we can come unto the Lords table, there by receiving of this
Sacrament to grow in union and communion with Christ, and yet be in such
palpable ignorance and darkness, and in such love with error and iniquity
as very many that come thither both by their lives before and after show
themselves to be? If the son and heir of our Prince at any time, though but
in his swathing clothes should be offered unto us to hold in our arms,
whatsoever we had in our hands, we would readily let fall to do that
service, and so to be honored: how much more to put on the Lord Jesus the
only begotten Son of God, the King of all kings, yea to receive him into
our very selves to be one with us, should we hastily cast away and lay aside
the world, the flesh, and the devil, and all the wicked lusts and fruits of
these? If David therefore, Psalm. 24.9. in spirit foreseeing, that the Arc,
which was but a sign and figure of Gods presence amongst the Jews, should
one day be brought in by the doors of the Temple to be placed therein, before
the Temple began to be built did cry as he did, Lift up your heads ye
gates, and lift up your selves ye everlasting doers, and the king of glory
shall come in: let me upon iuster and greater occasion cry and call upon every
one that would that Christ should enter into them receiving this Sacrament,
lift up your hearts, and be lift up your selves from all the fruits of the
flesh, that this King of glory may enter in indeed. Paul for the sects and
factions, and namely for their eating and drinking in the Idol Temples of
meat sacrificed unto them, howsoever otherwise they seemed to detest
idolatry, and for their lack of love that they showed toward the poor in
their loue-feastes in not tarrying for them: gave the Corinthians to
understand, that they did so unworthily eat of this bread and drink of this
cup, that they made themselves guilty of the body and blood of Christ, are
and drank their own damnation, and that many slept and were weak amongst
them, as by conference of the tenth and eleventh chapters together of the first
Epistle written unto them, it appears. How can we then but tremble at the
consideration of Gods judgments due unto us for our unworthy partaking
hereof; there being such contentions and varieties of opinions amongst some of
us as there be; and besides such a number of other far grosser sins
amongst us then these of the Corinthians were? Let us therefore take Paul's
remedy, that is, judge our selves for this (and do no more so) that so we may
escape the judgment of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11.31.32.

Yet I would not have you take me so, It is often to be received.
as though my drift or meaning herein were either quite to discourage you from
coming, or at least to drive you not to come but very seldom for fear of
unworthy coming. For I am not ignorant that Paul's saying, As often as ye
shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death until he
come. 1. Cor. 11.26. shows that it stands very well with the will and
pleasure of God, that men should often be partakers thereof. And therefore it
is well known it was the fashion of the Primitive Church usually every
Sabbath day to communicate. And there are great reasons which he that would be
accounted a Christian indeed, and so to have faith and knowledge fit for this
business, should not dare to refuse to receive when he may. For to be invited
unto this table ^o be bid to the marriage of the Kings Son: the refusal to
come whereunto upon what mind or pretense soever, we find so dangerous Math.
22. that both destruction here, and perpetual exclusion on shutting from the
marriage feast is threatened them, Verse. 7. etc. And every one may see, it is to
refuse a most notable means to strengthen our faith, whereof the strongest in
faith stand need, or at least it is plainly to bewray our selves to be such,
as for want of charity or for some other grievous sin that we know by our
selves, we think not our selves fit to come. So to see our sins and to judge
our selves for the same is not altogether to be condemned. But yet (dearly
beloved) you must understand that if withal we be heartily sorry for these
our sins, and purpose unfeignedly amendment, and are willing according to the
nature and quality of our sins to give unfeigned testimony thereof, either
particularly and privately if that be enough, or more publikly, if the case so
require, that is no sufficient reason to keep us from this table. For the more
we see our wants and imperfections, yea our faults and sins, if withal we
rightly repent thereof having knowledge and faith in Christ Jesus right and
sound, though weak and imperfect; yet it is very fit and necessary that we
come to this table, so to grow on in all these. For it is prepared for hungry
and thirsty souls after Christ, and not for proud Pharisees that are puffed up
with a conceit of their own righteousness and worthiness. The impenitent and
vnbeleeners eat not, nor drink the body and blood of Christ at al
Indeed they that are destitute of all sound knowledge and faith, and show it
by their continuing and going on in error and impiety, and hypocrites that
have none of the things they should have but in show, are simply unworthy to
be admitted; and they whenever they come, make themselves guilty of the
body and blood of Christ, for refusing it, or not having wherewith or whereby
totake it, and so eat the bread, and drink of the cup to their damnation. And
my speech tendes therefore either to provoke such to be repentant and to become
new creatures in Christ Jesus: or else, until indeed and truth by examining
of themselves they find themselves to be in the faith, and so thereby in Christ
Jesus, lamenting their miserable state and condition there whiles to abstain.
For as the covenant belongs not to such whiles they are such; so no more does
the feale of the covenant. For them therefore by coming to snatch at the
seal, having nothing to do with the covenant, they as much as in them lies
profane the covenant and the author thereof. As therefore we see him worthily
condemned of disloyally to the Prince her self, that offers a manifest abusage
to her coin, to her Seal, Scepter, crown, seat royal, robes of estate, or
picture: so we may be sure, much more is he to be accounted guilty of the
body and blood of Christ, and so worthy of damnation, that not discerning
aright that bread and wine are the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ,
with profane hands mouth and heart receives the same. The foolish sons of
Ely, and the army of the Israelites abused but the Arc, which was a
testimony and sign of God amongst his people, by fetching it into the camp
when they fought against the Philistines -- and we read the wrath of the Lord
bro^^^ at both against them and the whole army to their shameful overthrow
and destruction. 1. Sam. 4.4. etc. And so likewise when the Philistines
profaned it and abused it by setting it, after they had taken it, in the house
of Dagon, even therefore, 1. Sam. 5.2. etc. not only in the wrath of the Lord
their idol Dagon fell down and brake his neck, and the inhabitants of
Ashdod and of all the coasts thereof were miserably thereupon smitten with
Emerods, but also they could have no rest or ease until they restored it home
again to the people to whom it did appertain. Yea when it was come home
again, what else was the cause why the Lord with sudden death smote fifty
thousand men of Bethshemesh as we read he did, 1. Sam. 6.19. but that they to
whom it did not appertain to do so, looked into it? And why did God manifest
unto David his dislike of that fact of his, for the manner thereof, by striking
of Vzza with sudden death for laying his hand to the Arc to stay it because
the oxen did shake it; though otherwise David and Vzza had never so good
meanings, the one in bringing of it home, and the other in so staying it, but
because it was carted home, whereas the Levites should have brought it, and he
touched it that should not? 2. Sam. 6.7. Wherefore once again I say, not to
drive you from the Lords table but of a desire that when you come you may come
to your comfort, examine your selves before you come, as Paul has bidden you
1. Cor. 13. whether you be in the faith or no, and whether Christ be in you or
no. For until you be in him you are as dead men before God. For he is, The
way, the truth and the life, John. 14.6. so that whosoever lives indeed
before God, with Paul he may and must say; I live, yet not I any more, but
Christ lives in me. Gal. 2.20. and our life is hid with Christ in God, and
therefore, when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in glory. Collof. 3.2.4. Whereupon it follows, as to eat and
drink for the sustenance and maintenance of this body of ours, be actions of
one alive that has already body and soul conjoined and united: so none
indeed can eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, but he
that already lives by faith in him as Paul speaks, Gal. 2.20. and so
already has Christ dwelling in him. And therefore plainly toteach us thus
much, says Christ: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you: and then thereupon immediately adds;
whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal life, and a
little after, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and
I in him, John. 6. Whereupon most plainly Saint Augustine in his 26. tract upon
John, infers thus: Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam, and illum
biberepotum, etc. that is, This therefore is to eat that meat, and to drink
that drink, to abide in Christ, and to have Christ abide in thee. And by this
(says he) he that abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not,
without all doubt neither does he spiritually eat his flesh nor drink his
blood, though carnally and visibly, Premat dentibus Sacramentu^ corporis and
sanguinis Christi, He press with his teeth the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: but rather he eats and drinks the Sacrament of so great a
thing to his judgment, because being unclean he presumed to come to the
Sacraments of Christ. And therefore also most learnedly sundry times there in
that tract he shows, that Aliud est Saeramentum, aliud virtus Sacramenti, One
thing is the Sacrament, and an other thing is the virtue thereof: that it is he,
that Christ says shall not die but live, that eats of his flesh; that
pertaines to the virtue of the Sacrament, and not to the visible Sacrament;
which eats within and not without, which eats in heart not he whtch presses
with teeth. For he is most resolute there also, that Resipsa, cuius est
Sacramentum, est omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium, qui eius particeps
fuerit, etc. that is, That the thing of the Sacrament is to every man that is
partaker thereof to life, and to none to destruction: whereas immediately before
he had yet written, that the Sacrament thereof, De me^sa dominica quibusda^
sumitur ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium: that is, That the Sacrament thereof
might of some from the table of the Lord be received to life, and of some to
destruction. And most certain is all this, howsoever some would darken all
this clear light, and wipe away all this clear evidence, by saying that none
else but the faithful indeed can worthily eat the flesh of Christ and drink
his blood, which are the things of this Sacrament: but yet unworthily they
may. For though we read, 1. Cor. 11.27. of an unworthy eating of the bread and
drinking of the cup, that makes them guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, as we have heard: yet we never read nor shall in all the Scriptures, of
an unworthy eating of his body and drinking of his blood. For if there had
been any such, Christ neither could nor would have said so simply absolutely
and confidently as he has, John. 6.54. and as we have already heard he did,
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day. No no, it is not the taking or feeding
thereupon that can hurtany, but the not doing so, that brings the danger;
especially then when yet we would make a show to do both, and yet indeed do
nothing less. Christ is fed on, both God and man.
But all this while I urging the right commumcant in the use of this Sacrament,
to seek inwardly by faith to feed upon the body broken and blood shed of
Christ Jesus himself when outwardly he feeds upon bread and wine, I would
not be so taken as though my meaning were to teach, that faith here were to
reach no further then to the uniting of Christ's bare body and blood, and the
right communicant together. For as he both in body and soul stands need of
him to be his Savior, so it is certain, as Christ both God and man perfect
God and perfect man in one person is the head and husband of his Church and
the redeemer and Savior thereof: so here faith is to feed so upon his body
broken and blood shed, as that withal it must steadfastly conceive and believe
that it was and is the body and blood of such an one as was and is both very
God and man, and yet but one person. For thence it comes that the things done
for us by his broken body and blood shed, though in number and time wherein
they were done they were finite, are in the sight of the heavenly Father of
infinite value and dignity (as once I said before) to work our perfect
redemption and salvation, that they were done by such a man that had not only
a perfect body and soul of a man, and in them both was such an one as it
became us to have, that was separate from sinners, Heb. 7.27. but also was and
remains for ever a true and everlasting God and therefore was able thus to
dignifie the works done for us in his manhood. And to this end it is most
heavenly and divinely noted. Heb. 9. that the force that the offering that
Christ made of himself upon the cross for us, to purge our consciences from
dead works to serve the living God, comes and rises from hence, that then
by his eternal Spirit, he offered himself without fault to God for us. And
though I am not ignorant that Chrysostom to very good purpose in his 46.
Homily upon John, interpreting those words of Christ, John. 6.63. It is the
spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak
unto you are spirit and life: notes that they were spoken by Christ not to
disable his flesh altogether from being profitable, because so to think is
absurd; but to warn us that carnally we understand not his words, which by
his interpretation there we do if we take his words simply as they sound and
think no otherwise of them: for that as he says, all mysteries are to be
considered with inward eyes, that is, spiritually: yet I cannot but think with
others also, that in so saying Christ meante not only to teach us that his
words were not grossly and camally to betaken, that he had spoken of the eating
of his flesh and drinking of his blood, (as the Capernaits and such of his
hearers that believed not, then took them) but spiritually (as his believing
disciples, who notwithstanding them, tarried with him when the other murmured or
departed by occasion thereof) but that therein he had this further meaning and
purpose to show them that if his flesh and blood were as they took them but
the flesh and blood of a man, then they could not be indeed such food for
their souls, as he had taught them to be; but being, as they were, the flesh
and blood of such an one as withal was a spirit, and that an eternal creating
Spirit even very God, thence they might be sure that they, rightly fed on by
faith and the spirit, both could and would bring life. Thus therefore we teach
and exhort all men in the use of this Sacrament, to feed upon the body broken
and blood shed of our Christ and Savior. And yet thus we speak with Christ,
and according to the phrase used in the institution thereof; because as by
Christ God and man, as by our only mediator we come to the Father; so it has
pleased God in his word to reveal him unto us, that by his manhood and the
works done therein, we should grow on to faith in his Godhead united thereunto
and so shining and manifesting it self unto us therein.

Thus then I hope by this time, even by this plain and short declaration only
of our faith and judgment concerning the doctrine and nature of this
Sacrament, The conclusion of this our doctrine.
you may most clearly see and perceive that we are wonderfully wronged and
slandered, and that so also are all the Churches of our profession, by our
adversaries; whiles to discredit us withal, they would make men belecue that we
make it but a naked Supper of bread and wine, and so seek to feed our people
therein but with bare signs and figures. For you may see and hear that most
plainly and earnestly we urge our hearers therein to seek to feed to their
eternal salvation, of Christ Jesus himself both God and man: and so many
other notable uses thereof as you hear we teach, that even in respect thereof
all the names and titles that any sound antiquity has honored this Sacrament
withal, may most justly be given unto it as it is ministered and used by us. We
find it has been called the Supper of the Lord, the Table of the Lord, the
Sacrament of his body and blood, the Eucharist, a Sacrifice, and Synaxis, and
usually with us it is called the Communion. And which of these is it not with
us? It is the supper of the Lord because as we teach, at the last supper he
instuted it and it is his Table because therein he feeds his with himself: it
is the Sacrament of his body and blood, because to his it is a sacred means of
the Lord to nourish, strengthen, and exercise their faith therein: it is the
Eucharist because thereby we are so directly and forceably occasioned as we
are, to yield all hearty thanks unto God for the death and passion of Christ
lesus, whereof it is so notable a memorial; and a Sacrifice even therefore also
it may be termed: and also Synaxis it is, because it is an excellent bond of
our assemblies and meetings together to receive it and lastly, worthily we may
and do call it the Communion, be cause it is a seal first of our communion
with Christ, and then of one of us with an other in him. And yet for all this,
though this most certainly be the general doctrine held with one consent by
all the Churches that profess the Gospel with us; except of a few peevish
and wilful Lutherans our adversaries, nor these neither will not be satisfied,
but when we have said and done what we can, all is nothing with them that in
this case we say or do, unless we will with them by virtue of Christ's words
spoken by him in the institution here of, hold such a real presence of
Christ's body and blood in this Sacrament, as that by the mouths of all
comers thereunto and receivers thereof, have they true faith or no, his very
body and blood really be taken in and sed upon. Which being a doctrine so
directly contrary to that which lutherto I have taught you rouching our union
and communion with Christ by faith and his spirit only, especially, seeing
also it is to be feared that a number have been so nousled therein that the
conceit they have yet of the truth thereof will hinder them, if it be not the
better confuted, from taking any great good by all I have said hitherto: though
otherwise here I might well have ended this matter and would, yet I must crave
leave of you to take some further pains for the better backing of that which I
have said, to lay before you that which I think sufficient for the just
confutation of this gross moutheating of Christ Jesus by all communicantes
whatsoever. The things that Lutherans and papists hold in common, for their
gross real presence, confuted.


Herein I shall have to deal with two sorts of adversaries: the one sort
where of are the Lutherans which I late spok of, who to that end interpret
Christ's words spoken of the bread and wine, so, as that thereupon they infer
such a Consubstantiation, that is, such a being together of the very body
and blood of Christ with bread and wine in the use of this Sacrament, that
whosoeuerreceiues the one with his mouth, receives the other: and the other
sort are our common adversaries the Papists, who interpret the words of
Christ so, as that by the force thereof they teach the bread and wine to be
transubstantiated, that is, to be turned into the body and blood of Christ,
as some of them have held; or at least thereby, as now most of them hold, so to
be conveyed away that there remains nothing but the accidents thereof, under
which and together with which the body and blood of Christ really are so
certainly present, that every receiver thereof takes into his mouth the very
body and blood of Christ. Otherwise these two are at deadly war one with
another, and the former in most of the grounds and principles of Christian
Religion hold with us foundly against the other, and yet in this and for the
maintenance of this their carnal and gross presence, they are as vehement and
bitter against us for the denying and oppugning thereof, as the other. Orderly
therefore todeale with them both, whereas there are some things in this case
common to them both, wherein they both hold alike against us; set us consider
of them and of the grounds thereof first, and afterward we will take a view
of those things and of their grounds also wherein they differ both betwixt
themselves and also from us: least otherwise we should be driven tediously to
repeat one thing often. By their books that they have written and daily do
about this matter, it is cuident that they both hold a real presence of
Christ's body and blood together with the outward elements in the use of this
Sacrament: and likewise, that they both therefore teach, that together with the
same every receiver, have he a right faith or no, receives in by his mouth the
very real and true body and blood of Christ. And both of them ground both
these their opinions, first of Christ's words uttered of the bread and wine;
then of his almightinesse: and lastly of the state now of his glorified body.
In and about the outward elements when they come to be taken of the mouth of
the receiver, what they be and how long this their real presence of body and
blood with them continues, they could never yet agree. For the maintainers of
Consubstantiation plainly with us, notwithstanding Christ's words and all
their other grounds for their manner of his real presence, hold and teach
that they remain substantially bread and wine still, and so are taken and
eaten: and the other will have after those words are once pronounced, the
substances of bread and wine to be gone quite, (though unto this day they
could never agree to tell what was become of them) and the only accidents
thereof to supply the room always after of the outward part of this
Sacrament. The other hold their real presence continues no longer, or at
least is tied no longer to bread and wine, nor to any more of it then is
received, and the ministry thereof lasts. For Extra vsum, (as they speak)
that is, besides the use, they hold neither the bread nor the wine that
remains, to be the body and blood of Christ: whereas the other stiflie
maintain that all the hosts that they consecrate are every one of them the
body of Christ, and therefore they hang them up, which they leave, in a Pixe
under a Canopie and honor and worship them as the very bodies of their
Savior. And for the wine they take careful order for that, because they cannot
tell how so well to preserve and keep that belike sweet as the other; to
consecrate no more then their priest may quite and clean sup up at that very
time. But to let these their disagreeings alone, the things wherein they agree
herein are now to be considered of: wherein, their manner of real presence of
Christ offers it self first. Touching the which to begin withal, this I dare
be bold to say, for I know it to be most true how drunken soever they be with
a conceit to the contrary; it is contrary to all doctrine taught us in the
Scriptures, or in any ancient Father or Council for six hundred years after
Christ at the least. For with one consent all these when they speak of
Christ's presence in this Sacrament, it is real presence to the believing
communicant, for whom indeed he gave his body and blood, that they speak for,
and that they speak of: as for any such real prefence of his, either with or
under bread and wine or under the accidents thereof, as these men now plead
for, never either any writer of any of the Canonical Scriptures, nor any sound
Father or Council ever once dreamed off. And this real and true presence of
Christ to the right receiver we do not deny, but we urge and teach more
plainly and comfortablie than anic of them doc. And this is it that brings
inseperablie with it eternal life and salvation in Christ; and as for this of
theirs, the very force of truth and flat experience have driven them to
confess may be, and yet the receiver thereby never the better but the worse.
What a vain thing then is it for men to keep such a stir to the vexing and
disturbing of all Christendom for a thing so fruitless? Alas who is so simple
but that he knows or may soon know that Christ's body was broken and his
blood shed for us men, and not for bread and wine; and therefore that neither
bread nor wine, are the things that have to do with his presence nor yet
their accidents, but only we men: and then that we may have it sufficiently to
our salvation, who sees not that it is the vainest thing in the world to
strive for it, for bread and wine and their accidents? Further, seeing both of
these do confess this to be a Sacrament whereof we now entreat, and neither
of them yet could show or ever went about it, that in any other Sacrament
either of the old or new Testament there was ever any such real conjunction of
the inward and spiritual part thereof with the outward, and yet al men know for
all that, they were and are effectual Sacraments and seals of the delivery
thereof to the right receiver; what reason in the world can they have why they
should not think that this likewise may be and also is a full and effectual
Sacrament to participate the body and blood of Christ without any such
coupling of them and the outward elements thereof, as for the defense of this
their real presence here they urge? If that were here necessary, it should be
so either by the general right of all Sacraments, or by some special right
that may be showed this has thereunto. But neither of these can they or shall
they ever be able indeed to show in this case. Further Christ's own sitting
visibly severed in place without any altering of his form, or moving of his
place having uttered the words of the institution, they being doubtless as
powrefull then as ever they were since or shall be, to make him really to be
present to and with the outward elements, does most clearly overthrow this
conceit. And for the next of having him so really heerewith present and
conjoined that the receivers thereof though they have neither faith nor good
manners, yet receive him also therewith, as I have already sufficiently proved,
it is both against Scripture and sound antiquity: and the former being so
absurd, whereupon it follows and is built, as I have now showed it is, that
must also therewith fall down and be overthrown. Yet for the further mabling
of thee (well-beloved) to see yet more not only the vanity and impiety
thereof, understand that such a kind of presence of Christ shakes all the
articles touching the manhood of Christ, and in very deed leads men most
strongly so to spoil him of all the true properties of his manhood, that in
effect it leads them and most forceably teaches them to deny him indeed to
be come into the flesh, and to be the seed of the woman, of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, of Judah, Iesse, and David, according to the ancient prophesies that
are of the Messiah. And so for a bootlesse eating of him and fruitless, as
they themselves must needs confess this mouth-eating of him to be, (for that
they grant, oven to the worst sort of men that receive the outward elements,)
in the end they will leave us no true Christ at all, either for unbelievers or
believers to feed upon. I know their refuge and shift is to avoid this
withal, to say that it is by miracle as they teach, and yet Christ's manhood
and all the articles touching the same, true, sound, and whole. Indeed any man
may see that either they must say so, or else they can say nothing: and that in
truth and of absolute necessity it must be granted to be the greatest
miracle that ever was wrought, if it be as they say, and yet all these things
be vpheld sound according to the true and ancient catholic faith. For of both
these it must needs follow that Christ at one and self same time has a body
visible and invisible, palpable and impalpable, compassed in place and
vncompassed; yea that he has but one body, and yet many bodies, or that one
multiplied into many; unless contrary to manifest Scripture they wildenie him
in the heavens ( Which shall contain him, as Peter says, until the
restitution of al things. Act. 3.21.) to have, though a glorified body yet a
true body; the contrary whereof all the ancient Fathers, as they know well
enough, with us against them have taught. And they know though sundry of these
Fathers of purpose have written of the miracles of the Scripture, that yet they
have not once reckoned up this of theirs amongst them. Neither have they any
reason why to think that there is here any such. A mystery and great mystery
we willingly acknowledge it to be, that in the right use of this Sacrament,
Christ by his Spirit by the means of the faith of his, verily unites himself
unto his: but yet no miracle we count it, or call it, because it is Gods
ordinary work in other Sacraments so to communicate himself to those that
rightly use them: and because when he works a miracle there is some strange
thing done beyond nature, that the very senses can judge of; which we find
not here. For they all with one consent judge them in respect of their
substances, to be very bread and wine still in the mouths of all receivers. O
but (say they) neither sense nor reason are to be consulted withal in this
case. Indeed I grant they never are against any truth certainly taught and
warranted by the Scriptures; but when their judgment concurres and consents
therewith, then it is very lawful and good to listen thereunto: and so
always have the godly learned in all ages thought and taught. And therefore
seeing both sense and reason strive against this their devise, for the
maintenance of Christ's true manhood, and the right sense of all the articles
of our faith touching the same with us; even thereby their cause has a greater
wound than they are ever able to cure again. Besides all this, whiles they
thus teach without all warrant from Christ or her word; they are compelled,
least otherwise they should be enforced; most absurdly to say that the wicked
eat the body and blood of Christ to salvation; to separate Christ and his
saving graces the one from the other, whereas they cannot be severed. For that
must always remain an absolute truth, Whosoever eats his flesh and
drinks his blood, has eternal life. John. 6.54. and so that also, he that
has the Son has life, and he that has not the son has not life. John.
5.12: A spiritual union and communion with him they shall both find often
promised and spoken of, as I have at large already showed: but a being of his
body and blood in the very mouths of all receivers as they talk of,
otherwise then Sacramentally, that is, when the outward sacraments or signs
thereof are there, they shall never find so much as once spoken for in the
scriptures, or in any sound and ancient writer indeed. I cannot deny but that
indeed the Capernaits, John. 6. by misconceiuing of Christ's speeches there had
of the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, began to dream that he
meant some such thing: but we have heard that Chrysostom plainly shows by
the answer that he made them, that he had no such meaning; his words were
spiritually to be understood, and so should giuelife and not otherwise. And
Athanasius upon these words, Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of
man, writes that withal then Christ put them in mind of his ascension, as
indeed he did John. 6.62. to draw them from corporal and fleshly understanding
of his words. And therefore very excellently has Augustine, to prevent all
such conceits or murmuring, by occasion of that doctrine of Christ, written of
those words of his whereat they so stumbled; in his third book of christian
doctrine, Chap. 16. saying thus, That saying of Christ, except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life, etc. seems
to commend an heinous thing and a wicked: and therefore it is a figure
commanding us to be partakers of Christ's passion, and to keep in our minds
to our great comfort and profit that his flesh was crucified and wounded for
us. But I am not ignorant that these men would seem to mislike the Capernaits
opinion as much as we; and that therefore they labor to put an infinite
difference betwixt their fancy of eating his flesh and drinking his blood,
and this of theirs. For they imagined (say they) that then they should feed
upon them visiblie, and by piece-meale as they did of other their usual meat
and drink: whereas they purpose them to be fed on inuisibly and wholly. But
alas what a poor difference is this, as though it were not as much against the
law of God the law of all nations and nature also, knowing it, to eat and
drink man's flesh and blood unseen as seen, all at a morsel or at a sup, as
by many morsels and suppes? If yet they will needs urge this their real
presence and their moutheating really of Christ, how will they avoid the
danger then, that that general and universal proposition of Christ will
bring them unto, saying as we read he did Mat. 15.17: What soever enters
into the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught, etc?
Even this has caused many both as learned as any of them and far more
ancient, to understand the eating of Christ to be by the mouth of the soul,
faith; and not by the very mouth of the body. And they know, with one consent
the ancient Fathers teach that the wicked and unbelieving whiles they remain
such, cannot eat the body and blood of Christ: which they neither could nor
would have done, if they had known that there was any such real presence,
either by Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation, as now these men teach. For
either of these being granted, the other how absurd soever it be must follow
thereupon. And therefore is it, because they know that the Consequent being
absurd the Antecedent from whence it flows must needs be so also, that these
men are thus eager to defend this to be no absurdity, that all that
communicate, though they be never so bad and faithless, eat the body and
drink the blood of Christ really: for otherwise they know they cannot defend
any longer their real presence as they do. For Isee no cause else why they
should make so much a do for persons so unworthy to have such care and pains
taken for them.

But yet so wedded are these men unto their grounds that they have builded
this their fancy upon mentioned before, Christ's words prove not their
purpose.
that unless we can drive them from thence, notwithstanding all yet said
against it, it is to be feared that they will think that they both may and ought
to hold it still. Wherefore, whereas first they seem to think that the
words of Christ are plain and pregnant to prove their kind of real
presence, and mouth-eating consequently of his body and blood; doubtless if
with a single eye and without any preiudicate opinion we consider thereof, we
shall soon see that it is nothing but peevishness and wilfulness that makes
them either so to say or think. That the words of Christ are most certain
and true in the sense that he meant them when he uttered them, we never denied
nor will; no nor yet we never gave leave unto our selves so much as once to
doubt thereof. Wherefore if any of them persuade any man otherwise of us, they
do us open and manifest wrong. Neither can we think so uncharitably of them,
but that we are persuaded that they so likewise think of them. Herein then is
the difference and controversy betwixt them and us, whether we or they hit of
the right sense thereof. Which being the question indeed as it is; for the
determining hereof every reasonable man must needs confess, that whose
interpretation agrees best with the nature of the thing in hand, with the
analogy of faith and good manners, with the rest of the Scriptures and sound
antiquity, that is to be taken best to agree with Christ's meaning, and
therefore is the fense to be followed and preferred before all others. Now we
interpret the words of Christ as spoken by a Metonymie, that is, by a figure
of speech whereby one thing bears the name of the other; as here bread and
wine we say do, of the body broken and blood shed of Christ; because the one
both signifies and representes the other unto us, and also assures us rightly
receiving the one, that we are and shall be partakers also of the other. These
men cry and urge that the words are plain and without any such figure, and
yet howsoever they therefore agree that they import a real presence to the
outward clementes, and to the mouth of every receiver (as we have heard;) yet
the one sort would have them expounded to that end to infer
Consubstantiation, and the other a Transubstantiation. Judge therefore now I
beseech you by the foresaid rules, whether theirs or ours be likest to be
Christ's meaning. The matter in hand, when those words were first uttered by
him, was a Sacrament: and they know as well as we, that in all other Sacraments
when either they were instituted by God, or afterward spoken of by him; though
the very like Phrases for all the world were used of them, that are here by
Christ of these: that yet unto this day never any of themselves or others
expounded them either as they do these here, or otherwise then we do these.
Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17.10. the Lamb the Passover, Exodus
12.21. the rock that the people of Israel drank the water of in the
wilderness Christ. 1. Cor 10.4. the blood of their sacrifices, the blood of
the Covenant, Exodus 24.8. the Arc, the King of glory and Jehovah. Psalm.
24.8.10. and Baptism is called the lauer or washing of our new birth, Tit.
3.5. And yet who ever expounded these phrases either by Transubstantiation or
Consubstantiation, thereby really to make always present to every of these
outward elements the spiritual matter thereby signified and resembled? yea,
who ever understood these otherwise, then to be as the words import, only by
signification and representation, and for the assurance of the right users of
them, of the presence to them of the things thereby signified and represented
spiritually? Why therefore should Christ either speak otherwise in the
instituting of this, then had been used in all other Sacraments; or speaking
but even so, what reason is there why his speech should otherwise be understood
here then in all the rest? To say that this has a special and essential
difference from all other Sacraments, and therefore though these phrases be so
to be taken in all other, yet they cannot so be in this: though when they say
so they think they have said much to the purpose, yet indeed they have said
nothing. For who knows not that a man has an essential difference to
distinguish him from all other creatures under the same General that he is? And
yet that lets not but that whatsoever belongs to the nature of the General
is common to him with all the rest? For else he should not be defined by his
General. So if that which appertains to the nature of a Sacrament in general,
of which sort this is that now we talk of, were not common unto this with the
rest, it could not with the^ be said, to be a Sacrament as it is. If therefore
the outward elements bearing the names of the inward graces, neither enforce or
impart any such thing in any of the other, no reason is there why it should in
this. And surely the disciples being so well acquainted with such kind of
phrases in all the sacraments of the old Testament, thereby were prepared quietly
to hear Christ to use the like in this, and readily and rightly they
understood him as in the other: and therefore never once were offended or amassed
at his speech, or made any questioning with him either then or afterward about
the sense thereof. Whereas if they had taken them in any such sense, and had
thought that they did import any such matter as either of these sorts of men
imagine they did; they being so bold with him at other times always in
matters of far less importance and difficulty as to inquire his meaning,
they would also doubtless so have done in this. Which thing in some sort, and
that with some further matter very fit to cross these men's conceit,
Chrysostom in his 83. Homily upon Matthew has noted saying, even speaking of
the words of the institution now in question: Quomodo non turbati erant, cum
hoc audissent? quia multa and magna de hoc antea disseruit, etc. that is, how
came it to pass that they were not troubled (meaning his disciples) when they
heard this? because many and weighty things he had discoursed of this before
unto them. And a little after he notes, that he himself drunk thereof, least
hearing those words they should have said; what then do we drink blood and
eat his flesh? and therefore should have been troubled. For when he first
spoke hereof (says he) many were offended only for his words: least
therefore hereby that also now should have chanced, he did this first himself
that so he might with a quiet mind induce them to the participation of these
mysteries. Now as for the second rule to examine our exposition of these words
by, that which I have said already is both sufficient to justify ours, and to
condemn theirs. For in nothing ours can be said to be contrary, or but to
carry any show of contrariety either to the doctrine of good manners or to the
analogy of faith (if you should examine from point to point our judgment
hereof and of the nature and use of the whole Sacrament as I have expressed
it;) and theirs, as I lately showed in the confutation of their real presence,
both in show and in truth most directly crosses and contrarieth both. For
has not even nature a loathing to the taking in by mouth and so swallowing of
a whole man, flesh, blood, and bones at one morsel? And a man that can be so
taken in and eaten of so many communicantes as be in world at one time, who
can be persuaded that he has the true nature indeed of a man? And come to the
third, that is, by the Scriptures themselves to try this matter by, and
quickly we shall find by them our exposition warranted, and this of theirs and
the consequents thereof confuted. For first, whereas they would countenance
theirs against ours, by saying that Christ's words are plain and without
figure; look but a little upon the^, and you shall be enforced to confess, and
so they also will they nil they, that he has used in the institution of this
Sacrament, in his words sundry figures. For first he says of the one that it
was his body given for the^, as Luke says, or broken for them, as Paul
speaks: and then of the other, that it was his blood shed for them, as
Matthew, Mark and Luke report his words; so speaking of that which yet then was
not done, as it is well known, as though the^ it had been done, by an usual
figure in the Scriptures, using the time past or present for the time to come.
Again concerning the latter eleme^t, Matthew says that he said it was his
blood of the new Testament, and so does Mark: Luke sets down his words thus,
This cup is the new Testament in my blood; and so also does Paul: wherein and
whereby any man may see, that wilfully will not make himself blind, two
figurative kind of speeches besides this that we strive for. For here is the cup
co^taining, put for that which was therein contained: and whatsoever they would
have that to be, wine or his very blood; I am sure they neither yet can or will
say that either the one or the other is the new Testament it self. Seeing then
it might stand with the nature of this Sacrament and Christ's care and desire to
be therein understood to use the figurs; what lets but that we may as
lawfully think that he used the usual Metonymie used in all other Sacraments,
in giving the names of body and blood to bread and wine, that were but
representatio^s and seals of our communion with his body and blood, to our
everlasting nourishment? This variety in these, in repeating and setting down
the words of the institution as may be seen by this that I have already noted,
argues that they were not so superstitiously tied to a set sort and number of
words as these men imagine: yea that they, so they kept his very sense, thought
that it was lawful for them thus to ad or change a word or two tending only to
explain the same, hereby it is evident. For Paul's word Broken in steed of
Lukes Given, shows how his body should be given even to be broken with sorrows,
with whippings, crowning with thorn and nailing as it was to the cross: and
these two added by the^, not used by Mat. or Mar. serve to show us what body
of his it is, I mean in respect of what state thereof it is, that here by
this Sacrament we are occasioned to think upon it, and to feed on it: and by
the other change of their phrase, for Blood of the new Testament, saying, it
was the new Testament in his blood, most plainly we are taught, that
therefore called heit the blood of the new Testament because the new Testament
was ratified and so stands by the shedding of that blood to all believers in
him. But indeed though they would seem to be men that make wonderful great
conscience of the letter and words, as though it were sacrilege to go one
jot from the sound thereof: yet any man that looks but with half an eye upon
either of their interpretations which they stand upon to ground their kind of
real presence by, shall soon perceive that they are nothing the men they make
show for. For is it all one either to say, together with this is my body and
blood, or under the accidents hereof is my body and blood, and to say This
is my body and blood? And yet thus, when al is done, Christ's words must
sound or else neither will there or can there be either the Lutherans
Consubstantiation, or the popish Transubstantiation brought in thereby to uphold
their fond real presence by. Sure I am neither any Dictionarie or Grammar in
the world will allow them thus to expound this word Is. Were it not better
for them with us to retain the word, and also with us so to expound it or
understand it as not only usually always it is in all other Sacramental
phrases, but also commonly always when it is placed between two things of so
diverse natures as bread and wine, and body and blood be? The rather yet to
provoke them so to do, let them but consider whether their new found sense
thereof, or this of ours understanding it as placed for (it signifies
represents and seals unto you my body broken and blood shed to be yours to
eternal life) stand better but with these words of Christ, Do this in
remembrance of me. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24. especially so taken as it is
clear Paul took them, when thereof he infers, 1. Cor. 11.26. as often as ye
shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he
come? For according to our doctrine, by these words thus understood Christ
would teach us that this Sacrament was instituted by him of purpose to keep in
our memories his death and passion, and by the use whereof we might, until
his coming again to judgment, profess and nourish our faith in his body then
broken and blood shed for us. Here is nothing sounding in the mean time
toward any corporal presence of his to the outward elements or mouths of
the receivers whosoever: but these words In remembrance of me, and Till he come
again sound plainly to the contrary. For what need a thing to be done in
remembrance of one bodily present; or how can a thing with any good sense be
said to be done but till one come, that yet he being verily present in body is
done? We read Act. 1.11. that shortly after the institution of this Sacrament
he visibly ascended into heaven, the Apostles seeing him so to do with their
eyes: and there we read also that the Angels told them, that even so likewise
he should come again when he comes from thence: reading also as we do and
have already noted once or twice, that the heavens must contain him until
the restitution of all things. Act. 3.21. and that his coming from thence is
plainly called his second coming, Heb. 9.28. how can we but think that
Christ as well meant to forwarne us of these fellows, that by their
Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation say unto us, lo here is Christ with
this piece of bread, or under the accidents thereof, lo take him into thy very
mouth: as of those that point unto us wrong Christ's here or there, when he
said, if any should say unto you (speaking of such as should so do after he
had left the world, and was gone unto his Father) Lo here is Christ, or there
is Christ, believe him not? And how is it possible that we should believe these
places of Scripture to be true, and hold still them notwithstanding, that Christ
is really and in his full body present in every communicants mouth? May we
think with Peter, that the heavens do and shall contain him still, and that
yet upon this occasion he is always thus here? And that being so, how can it
be that his coming from thence at the last day, shall be but his second
coming, or that it is true when he comes from thence he shall come visibly, no
such thing having ever been seen here. I know they will say, all these
places are to be understood of his visible body, and that they speak of his
invisible body. Yea but then we reply, where ever learned they either in
Scripture, or in any ancient Father, that ever he had any such invisible body:
or how can they ever make it sink into any man's head that has rightly
learned in the Scriptures to know Christ's manhood, that at one and self same
time he should have a visible body and an invisible, yea one in the heavens
to come invisibly again when he pleases; and yet the same both there and
this here also multiplied into so many invisible bodies as there be receivers
mouths? If this be not with the old rotten doting and long ago condemned
Marcion to make a mere phantasme of the body of Christ, let any man judge.
But once for all by this sword of the Spirit, to pierce this monstrous
conceit of theirs to the very heart and so to leave it for dead: seeing they
stand so much upon the letter and words of the text, I would have them once
again to mark and remember that Saint Paul, that says therein That which he
received of the Lord he delivered, has upon his credit told us that the Lord
speaking of the bread called it not simply and nakedly his body, but his
body broken; and they all agree in one that he called the other his blood
shed. If therefore they will stick to the words of the text, and yet have a
real presence as they teach, of his very body and blood by virtue of the
words thereof; they see most plainly then it must be of his body broken and
of his blood shed. Unless therefore now they can find us an invisible body
broken and blood invisible shed of his, for the mouth of every receiver, they
neither say or do any thing to the purpose according to the text. But I hope
they are not so far gone, but they know that it is now a thousand and five
hundred years ago and more, since he had either his body broken or blood
shed; and that when they were so, he died so that he dies no more, as we read.
Romans 6.9. And therefore even hereby the most simple may see that though they
could show that his body alive or glorified could be invisible, infinite, and
so multipliable as their doctrine importes, which yet they can never do; that
yet all this were nothing to the real presence of the body and blood of
Christ in respect of that estate of his, when the one was broken, and the other
shed for the remission of our sins. And yet hereby it is most evident that
the body and blood of Christ, in respect of this their estate and condition,
are the body and blood of his, that expressly by the words of the institution
we are here to seek for and to feed upon. How can this then be otherwise but
as we teach, by calling hereby to our remembrance, that once most certainly
they were thus handled for us; and by believing that thereby our salvation was
wrought: which as often as we do, we are fed and nourished therewith to eternal
life. Thus then you see, the matter in hand, the Analogy of faith and good
manners, and not only other Scriptures, but the very words of the institution
lead strongly to the maintenance of our exposition of Christ's words in the
institution of this Sacrament, and to the utter overthrow of theirs. And truly
the ancient Fathers, as we have a thousand times showed the^, are wholly also
of our side, against them. It were infinite to bring all that might be found in
them to this purpose, as by large volumes written and published by us about
this matter we have made it evident. Howbeit, somewhat yet now again let us
hear what some of the chief of them have said. Christ took bread which
comfort man's heart, that he might thereby represent the truth of his body,
says Hierome upon the 26. of Matthew. Christ in his last supper, (says Cyprian
in his sermon de unction Chrismatis) with his own hands, at his table, gave
his Apostles bread and wine; but upon the cross, he gave his body to be
wounded by the hands of the soldiers, that sincere truth more secretly
imprinted in the Apostles, and the true sincerity might expound unto the
nations, how bread and wine was the body and blood, and after what sort the
causes and their effects agreed, and diverse names and kinds should be reduced
to one essence, and the things signifying and the things signified were called
with one and self same names. And Ambrose in his 4. book and 4. chapter of
Sacraments writes; that as in Baptism we receive the similitude of death, so
in this sacrament we drink the similitude of Christ's blood. And Chrysostom
most plainly says in his 11. Homily upon Matthew, that Christ his body it self
is not in the holy vessels, but the mystery and Sacrament thereof. Augustine in
his 57. question upon Leuiticus, prescribes for a rule, that the thing that
signifies is wont to bear the name of the thing which it singifieth, as Paul
said (says he) the rock was Christ, and not ti signified Christ, but eue^ as
it had been indeed; which nevertheless, was not Christ by substance, but by
signification. And in his 23. Epistle he says, that the similitude betwixt the
sign and thing signified is the very cause why the one bears the name of
the other in Sacraments: and therefore in his third book of Christian
doctrine he says, it is a miserable slavery of the soul to take the signs
for the things signified, Cap. 5. Christ honored the signs and
representations which are seen, with the names of his body and blood, says
Theodoret in his second dialogue. Gelasius against Eutiches affirms the image
and similitude of the body and blood to be celebrated in these mysteries. Bid
upon Luke. 22. writes that because bread does comfort man's heart, and wine
does make good blood in his body; therefore the bread is mystically compared
to Christ's body, and the wine to his blood. And who has not heard us an
hundred times tell them, that Tertullian in his fourth book against Marcion,
interprets This is my body, saying that it is to say, this is a figure of my
body: and that likewise Augustine against Adimantus the Manichee writes, that
Christ doubted not to say, This is my body when he gave a sign of his body:
and upon the third Psalm that he says that Christ admitted Judas to a
banquet, where he commended a figure of his body to his disciples? And what
can be plainer then these either against them, or for us? All these things
considered therefore, we may boldly conclude that they have no ground from
Christ's words for their gross real presence.

And surely as little have they either from his omnipotency, Neither his
omnipotency, nor glorified body will help them.
or from the state of his glorified body. For he will not show his
omnipotency in whatsoever we list, but in effecting whatsoever himself
pleases: and therefore they failing in the proof as they have, that it is his
pleasure to have it as they would; it is in vain for them to think that this
can or will help them out. But indeed and truth howsoever they would seem to
ground much upon his almightinesse, and to have a strong faith therein, and
seek to discredit our faith in the same: yet in this very point lot theirs
and ours be but a little indifferently compared together, and ours soon will
prove far the stronger. For I would have them tell me in good sadness
whether the Centurion Math. 8.8. that professed that he believed that though
Christ came no nearer his house then he was in respect of his bodily presence,
that yet he was persuaded that if he but spoke the word, his scruant should be
healed; or Iairus, that said come and lay thy hands on my daughter, and she
shall live, Math. 9.19. showed themselves to be better persuaded of Christ's
omnipotency. Sure I am, both reason and Christ's magnifying of the Centurions
faith ought to lead them and all men to give the preeminence to the Centurion
above the other many degrees. Why should they not then see and confess, that
we show our selves more strongly persuaded of his omnipotency then they, in
that we show by our doctrine, that we firmly believe that he can and will, even
remaining still in heaven, feed us with his body broken and blood shed, though
that were so with them, so long ago, as it has; or they, that by theirs,
seem to be persuaded, that this cannot be, unless according to their fancy,
to the shaking and crossing needlessly of so many grounds both of good ma^ners
and faith as we have heard; he convey himself into our mouths? And to what
purpose is it, for the maintenance of this their opinion, for the^ to labor as
they do, to put infinite difference betwixt his body unglorified and glorified,
and to seek to persuade men, that it may be as they say in respect of his body
now glorified, though not in respect thereof before; seeing it is most certain,
that when Christ instituted this Sacrament, his body was not glorified, and by
his words expressly, as I lately showed, he instituted this to be a Sacrament of
his body broken and blood shed? For who does not, or at least may not hereby
perceive, that we have not here any otherwise to deal with his estate
glorified, the^ thereby now the more strongly to be persuaded that indeed he is
able to feed us with his broken body and blood shed once to our eternal
salvation? For, that falling out sense, and succeeding the institution of this
Sacrament, (wherein both by audible word, and visible action, in breaking bread
and pouring forth of wine and calling them, as he did, he promised us that)
proves unto us inuincibly that whatsoever here he offered and promised us,
either by word or deed, that he has gone through with for us and so now, that
he by his resurrection, ascension, and sitting at the right hand of his Father,
has begot us again to a lively hope. But unless we would have Christ otherwise
now to be present to us and our mouths, then he was when he himself ministered
it to the disciples, and their mouths in the state and time of his passible
and unglorified body: let them never talk more of the state of his glorified
body. His words show that this was and is a Sacrament of him dying for us,
and so a memorial of his death and abasement that he undertook, to merit our
salvation by: and not of his glory and of the life that he now has therein,
and therefore is able to bestow upon his and to apply unto them whatsoever in
his former estate he deserved. The bread called his body broken, and the wine
called his blood shed, as I have said are both here set before us, severed
the one from the other, and by his commandment we are bound to take as well
the one as the other, and yet the one after the other, the more forceably
thereby to lead us to the meditation of his death and passion, and to feed
upon his body and blood so handled for us. And as his having not yet so
suffered, let not the Apostles when he first did institute it, from yet
taking occasion thereby and by his administering of it unto them, by faith from
feeding upon his broken body and blood to the confirming of their communion
with him: so no more does his having had his body broken and blood shed now
above a thousand and five hundred years ago and never since, hinder us from
feeding upon the same by faith through the mighty working of his Spirit. For
the same Christ that then could make that which was not yet done, as verelie
done to their faith, and so to be fed upon as done: the same now doubtless
is able as easily to make that which was done so long ago, present to our
faith to nourish us to eternal life. By this then you see both their real
presence that they talk of, to be fond and to too gross, and the grounds
that they hold in common for the same to be as bad. The special grounds of the
Lutherans confuted.


And to go on now to scan and examine likewise what they hold severally in
this case against us: it is notoriously known, the one sort (the fond
imitators of Luther I mean) would maintain their real presence of his body
and blood together with bread and wine in this Sacrament, when these common
grounds of theirs that they have with the papists as they fear will not
serve their turn, by the force and strength of the truth of the personal
union of the two natures in Christ. Whereupon as it appears by their books
extant and confidently published about this matter, (I speak it with grief
and compassion toward the^, because otherwise in the chiefest points of
Christian faith we account them our brethren, and fellow soldiers against the
Antichristian Synagogue of Rome) they boldly urge, aduouch, and teach, that
immediately upon this union consummate in the Virgins womb, the natures and
properties of his Godhead were and are so united unto his manhood, that as the
Godhead is eueriwhere, almighty and of infinite majesty etc. so is the manhood,
and therefore in this Sacrament, as they teach. Especially they insist upon the
being every where of his manhood, as his Godhead is, to this purpose. Suppose
the antecedent were granted them, yet they could never thereupon infer their
consequent. For when will they be able to prove that his Godhead is so present
here with bread and wine, that the receiver of the^, by his mouth always
receives the other? But indeed their antecedent is untrue, absurd, and very
hetetical: and but that I know, it is a most fearful thing before God, to have
our faith in respect of persons, contrary to the rule of the holy Ghost, Iam.
2.1. and that the Lord will therefore most severely punish it, especially when
wilfully men will set themselves to defend that which they have but received
from some person or persons whom they have in admiration, against a clearer
truth crossing the same; I should never make an end of wondering, that men,
otherwise of such learning and judgment as some of these be, ever should
dare, in these days of so great light and after so often and manifest solemn
sentences of condemnation given of this their conceit in the ancient and
primitive Churches of Christ, set abroach such an assertion. The untruth
thereof appears enough, even by that the Angels saying when he was risen, He is
risen and is not here. Math. 28.6. For seeing that cannot be understood of his
Godhead, which is every where, and always was; it must of necessity be
understood of his manhood. But besides that, we have his own saying: The poor
ye have always with you, but me ye shall not have always, John. 12.8. to
back the speech of his Angels: which as they know well enough, all the
ancient Fathers conferring with that of Math. 28.20. also, so understand; that
by this, the presence of his manhood, they show, we may not look for here,
in the earth until his second coming, after once he had left the world and
gone to his father, as he said he would. John. 16, 28. and by the other yet to
our comfort they show here we enjoy his Godhead. Let any man but read
Fulgentius his second Book to King Trasimund, Vigilius his fourth Book
against Eutiches, Chap. 4. and Augustines 57. Epistle; and there he shall find,
notwithstanding they were as soundly and truly persuaded of the union of the
two natures in Christ as any of these men be, the verity, localitie, and
circumscriptiblenes of Christ's manhood by these and otherplaces and
arguments so urged, that any man may perceive this their position was counted
very false in those days. The absurdity thereof appears in that herein
they take that to be the cause sufficient of his being every where in his
manhood, that can be no cause thereof indeed. For see we not naturally and
inseperably the Sun and light and heat to be conjoined; and yet who finds
not daily by experience that the globe of the body of the Sun remaining
still in heaven, yet we here in earth enjoy both the other? Yea, many other
things there are, which though they be united together, yet whereof one
streacheth and reaches further then the other: as the sight of the eye
reaches further then the eye it self, and the conceits and cogitations of
the mind and soul of man further then either the soul or body themselves.
What an absurd kind of reasoning is it then for to say, Christ's Godheade and
manhood are united, therefore wheresoever the Godheade is, there must the
manhood be also. And the hereticalnesse thereof is monstrous and intolerable.
For not only with Marcion, it transformes Christ's true manhood into a mere
phantasme or imagination of such a thing: but also in thus confounding the
properties of the two natures, it confoundes the natures themselves, and so
either makes Christ's Godhead or manhood with Eutiches to swallowe up the one
the other; or which is as absurd, makes Christ's person to have in it one
estentiall and true Godhead, and an other communicated unto his manhood
beginning when the personal union of these two natures begone, which savors
strongly toward Arianisme. Besides all this, if this were true that they say,
that straight upon this union of the two natures his manhood had the properties
of the Godhead, communicated unto it; then not only to the shaking, but to the
quite subuerting of all the Articles of our faith touching his manhood, we must
hold, that as soon as this union was consummate in his mothers womb, so soon
he was there and every where else; and whiles he lived, he was not only where
he was seepe and heard, but also every where: and the like we must hold to be
true, when he died, was buried, descended into hell, rose again, ascended,
sits at the right hand of the Father, and when he shall come again to
judgment: that is, that in his very manhood, at one and self same time, he
was upon the cross and not upon the cross, in his grave and not in his grave,
that he descended into hell and that yet he was not in hell, that he rose
again out of his grave and did not, ascended up into heaven and yet tarried
still below in the earth, that he sits at the right hand of his Father in
heaven and yet is elsewhere, and that he shall come from thence to judgment
and yet was never gone from hence: because at all these times, his Godhead was,
is, and shall be every where, and therefore his manhood. Yea, we must hold,
that he was at one and self same time compassed in place, and yet filled every
place; that he was passible and impassible; infinite, and finite; visible and
inuible, in respect of his manhood; the one through the natural condition
thereof, and the other through a communicated Godhead thereunto. All which
either quite raise these Articles before touched, out of the Creed, or at least
they enforce us to conceive them in such a fond sense, as neither the
Scriptures nor any ancient writer lead us unto, or encourage us in. Hereupon
it comes that in plain terms, because the Article of the ascension is most
urged against them that they are not ashamed, some of the greatest of them; to
interpret that, to be no changing at all of his place, but a becoming
invisible, whereas before he was visible. By which new kind of Divinity, we
may say, that he that was seen before in a romth is gone out of it, he that
was below is gone up into and upper romth, if he have but hid himself behind
the curteines. And seeing by the same reason they must be driven to inteprete
the rest in like manner, hereupon also it will follow, that his leaving his
mothers womb, and his rising out of the grave, and therefore his not being
found there in his body, was but a deceiving of the senses of his mother, and
of those that sought him in his grave and could not find him: for he was there
still though she thought that she was quite delivered of him, and they could not
find him there. So also by this when he was dying upon the cross visibly in
all other places, he was inuisibly in his very same manhood alive, and not
touched by his enemies. O what a ridiculous, monstrous and foolish assertion is
this, whereupon all these most gross absurdities both against reason and all
religion follow! Who can once enter but into the view thereof whose heart
withal will not tremble and quake, and for the horror thereof be extre emely
amazed and astonished? The Lords name therefore for ever be blessed that
hitherto has kept these our Churches from the infection of the poison hereof;
and I beseech him for his Christ's sake, that for ever he would vouchsafe so to
do still. Luther never sought to defend his Consubstantiation with this: yea
his best friends that he had, and amongst them that famous learned man Phillip
Melancton plainly report, that yet he was brought to see his error therein
ere he died, though he lived not to raze it out of his books. Since his
preposterous followers of a wilful eagernes to maintain that which once
herein they had undertook, being driven to see the weakness of the former
grounds that they had before common with the papists have as with the furious
tempest of contention thus run themselves upon this rock. The Land in his
mercy grant them in time to see their folly, that they may beartily repent
hereof, and of the destruction of the Churches of Christ; whereof by this
means they have been perilous authors. Amen. Amen. The special grounds and
fruits of the popish real presence, viewed and confuted.


Now thus to leave these and to come to the Papists, to view what special
grounds and conceits they have for the and intenance of their real presence,
and so whither they are grown through the good liking that they have of their
opinion truly I see I shall enter into the rauing of surely a rotten dunghill,
the favor whereof may justly offend both God and man. For by occasion of this
their opinion of real presence by retue of Transubstantiation, they have
transformed this Sacrament into a Mass which they may worthily so call, it
consists of such a mass of errors and impieties. For thereby, whereas by
Christ's institution it is a Sacrament, As first their making of it a
propitiatory sacrifice.
wherein GOD offers and gives to us his Sons broken body and blood shed
to feed on, they ^^rne it into a sacrifice whereby man should offer up again
the Son to the Father: and whereas the use of it, as Christ has left it unto
us, leads us to the only sacrifice that Christ has offered once for all in
his own person, thereupon by faith to feed to our perfect and everlasting
salvation, they in this their Mass lead us to a propitiatory sacrifice which
they say their priests therein offer both for the quick and dead, as though
quite contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Christ were
such a Priest as needed successors, as Aaron, to offer often sacrifice, for
that the once offering of it himself should no more make the comers thereunto
perfect, then the sacrifices that the priefies after the order of Aaron
offered. Heb. 7.24. etc. If they say that that which they offer is another than
that which Christ himself offered: then why and now should it be said, That
he by his own blood entered once into the holy place, and has
obtaynedeternall redemption for us. Heb. 9.12. And to say that it is the same
only repeated again by them, what need that, seeing by this by himself once
offered as we read, Hebre. 7.27.9.26. and 10.10. he has done it sufficiently
for our redemption? Whether therefore they would make it the same or an other,
which they say their priests offer, they cannot escape but that they must
imuriously go about both to rob Christ and his sacrifice of that honor and
prerogative that is due unto them. Paul takes it for granted that if Christ
himself should offer himself often, then he must often die, Hebre. 9.26. and
that thereupon it came that his offering of himself once for all, was
sufficient to proc^^^ us that by him so offered, (which he calls the new and
living way, Cap^o^ 20. ^eeke to come to heaven; first that he was a man without
sin. Heb. 7.26. and such a man as lives for ever, and so has a presthoode
that cannot pass from one to an other, 24. and then that he offered himself
without fault to GOD by the Aeternall spirit. What an absurd thing then were
i^ to imagine that a popish sinful Priest, that has no such eternal spirit
in him to dignifie his offering, can offer Christ again, or can without
attempting to pull Christ out of beauen to the cross again take upon him to
offer him to his Father. I know they say their sacrificing or offering of him
is unbloody, and so they think they can avoid these absurdities as long as
they leave only to Christ the offering of the bloody. But this will not serve
their turn one whit. For if Christ's bloody sacrifice of it self be
sufficient, as these places most strengly prove it is, what need is there of
this unbloody sacrifice of theirs? For where perfect remission of sins and
iniquities is such that God according to his conenant will remember them no
more, there is no more offering for sin (says Paul, Heb. 10.17.18.) and in
confessing theirs to be unbloody, they must confess that, howsoever they have
picked the purses of men both alive and dead with the contrary persuasion, it
is utterly vnauailable to put away the sins either of the alive or dead. For
without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb. 9.22. A sacrifice sometimes the
Fathers call is, because it is the commemoration of Christ's sacrifice, and so
that which occasioneth us to offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving; in
regard whereof they call it also the Eucharist: but a real offering again of
Christ to his Father for the sins of others alive or dead, visible or
invisible, bloody or unbloody, never any of them thought or taught i^ to be.
We have to offer our selves bodies and souls a living sacrifice to God; which
we do in serving of him according to his word. Romans 12.1. An acceptable
sacrifice to God is a broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17. and we are
willed, Heb. 13. to offer the sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the
fruit of our lip^ which confess his name (mamely in pouring forth our prayers
and pralses unto him;) and to do good and to distribute we are there also
commanded, for that with such sacrifices God is pleased Other sacrifices then
this we are not taught to offer, and offering these well we may boldly trust to
the most perfect and absolute sacrifice that Christ made once for all, which
for ever remains fresh and new in the sight of the heavenly Father to make us
acceptable unto him in his beloved. Hoc facite, do this, though Virgill help
them with his phrase, Cum faciam vitula, when I sacrifice Calves, is too
caluish a reason or ground to make them thus proud and saucie to take upon
them any way to offer Christ again to his Father for the sins of men. But
whither will not foolish man run when once he has left the beaten way of the
Lord in his word, to follow his own devise and conceit? Christ's offering of
himself, by himself, doubtless was never applied to the good of any that
whiles they were alive took not hold of it: and yet such is the impudency of
these men, that now they hold the intention of their Priest in saying of his
Mass, shall carry the benefit of this sacrifice whether he list, to live or
dead. Yea hereby seeing their credit grow as it has, and their gains come
rolling in, they have not been ashamed not yet are in this great light, to
make their sacrifice in the Mass a salve for all sores, and physic for all
diseases both of man and beast. Well yet this is not all the mischief that
their conceit of real presence by transubstantiation has brought them unto.
For besides this, hereupon they are grown even to honor and worship their
hoastes once consecrated, even as Christ himself; and therefore whereas Christ
commanded that which he eat, brake, and gave, to be eaten straight, they hoyst
it up over their heads, that all the people may gaze upon it, adore and
worship it for their Christ and Savior: and then when they have plaide with
it their fill, for the most part they eat up all themselves alone, that be the
massing priests, and if they leave any them they hang up in a Pixe over the
Altar, to serve them an other time; which all comers into the Church in the
mean time must adore and reverence, though so hanged up and hidden from their
eyes. Wherein doubtless they commit most gross idolatry. For first they
themselves many of them hold that the priest must have an intention to
consecrate; or else though he utter the words, there follows no
transubstantiation thereupon: and therefore wisdom would if they had any
care to avoid Idolatry, that they should be sure of the priests intention,
before they fell to worshippinge of the hoaste, or rather because they can
never be sure of that because no man can know a man's thought but himself, and
every one can and often does dissemble and make show to think that which he
does not, they should and would, if there were any fear of God in them,
utterly abstain therefrom. Again unto this day they cannot agree amongst
themselves of the words and means of consecration: their Schoolmen I am sure
Scotus, Petrus de Aliaco, Occam, Thomas Aquinas, Durand, and others wonderfully
have iarred about this matter, and as yet I cannot find they are fully agreed.
In the mean time therefore whiles they be, they should in all reason be better
advised what they do. But to let these reasons alone, who can or may think
that it can stand with Christ's saying, John. 4.24. God is a spirit, and they
that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth, that they should now
thus worship a wafer cake in show and taste for very Christ? I am truly
persuaded that there has been no one thing that has more hardened the hearts
either of Turks or Jews from becoming Christians, then to hear and see as
they do, these men thus to worship these wafer Chrisies of theirs; who yet
would be accounted the only good Christians. And it is certain even for this
the heathen Philosooner and Physician Auerois, (though he by traveling and
reading was acquainted with wonderful many foolish and fond kinds of
Idolatry) living and flourishing about the year of Christ no. judged
Christians to be the most foolish Idolaters in the world. And without all doubt
this has been averie God Manzim, that is, of power and riches to them. For
the people being persuaded that their priests can turn so quickly a poor
wafer into Christ their Savior, and that they can at their pleasure offer him
unto his Father for their souls health both whiles they are alive and when
they are dead they have not cared what honor and riches they have bestowed
upon them. And therefore not unfitly may that of Daniell be as well verified
of them even for this, as of them of whom he spoke most properly and
literally, That they honor the God Mauzim, a God whom their Fathers knew not,
Dan. 11.38. And yet behold if we go on but a little further, more iniquity
and impiety in their Maste then all these. For therein they have quite
contrary to Christ's institution, by absurdlie taking it to be a sacrament of
Christ's life, That they minister it but in one kind.
and so of his body and blood now together in his manhood in heaven, (whereas
he left it to be a sacrament of his death, and so of the sundring thereby of the
one from the other, as I have showed,) and by a new devise of Concomitance,
that is of the going of his body and blood now always together, robbed the
common people of the one half of the Sacrament, denying the^ the cup, and
telling them that in taking the host, they take al; for his body and blood are
and go now together. But if it were thus, why do they themselves take both; or
would they have us to think it needful for the^ to eat him once under the form
of bread, and after to drink him again under the form of wine, and that the
one is enough for the people? Evident it is in the words of the institution,
and by the practice thereof in Paul's time, 1. Cor. 11. that al were as expressly
commanded to drink of the cup, as to eat of the other. But Christ being the
wisdom of the Father, had not so much wisdom and forecast as these men
belike, to foresee that his body and blood go together, and therefore for lack
of foresight he ordained a superfluous thing. What an intolerable pride and
presumption is this that dust and ashes, and sinful man shall thus undertake
to alter and to control the ordinance of our Lord and savior? Before the
Council of Constance, which was in the year, 1414. we find not the
administering of this Sacrament under both kinds, generally and publicly
forbid the common communicant. And in the council of Basil about some 16.
years after, for all that, it was permitted to the Boemians again. De
consecratione did. 2. Gratian alleages a decree of Gelasius a Bishop of Rome a
thousand years ago, to bind all men to receive in both kinds, saying; either
let him that receives receive both, or neither, because the division of one
mystery cannot be without sacrilege. By this let them that hold their Popes
solmne sentences for Oracles, learn what manner of persons now their Popes and
priests in this point are become, that now openly profess and practice the
contrary hereunto. That their priests take it alone.
And because they have also in their Masses (as they say) so often
consecration, and yet none receive but the priest himself for the most part:
what shift will they make with that, that we find in the same distinction Cap.
Peracta: alleged there, as the solemn sentence of Pope Calixt (in the year
223. or thereaboute, consecration being done (says he) all that will not be
shut from the Church should communicate; for so the Apostles taught, and the
fashion of the Roman Church was. Lo here is both a Popes decree, and that
grounded both upon the Apostles practice and the ancient Roman Churches also,
flatly against the practice of the Roman Church that now is. And in very deed
no man can read that which Saint Paul has written of this matter 1. Cor. 11.
but he must needs most plainly see that it was then the Apostles practice not
only to administer it in both kinds, but also openly in the assemblies, and
to all that could and would try and examine themselves: and this man being
Bishop of Rome was not ignorant what the fashion of the ancient Roman Church
had been. Wherefore as in many other things so in this it appears for all
their great bragges and countenance of antiquity, that the Roman Church that
now is, Lastly their Co^substantiation is confuted.
is become an Apostata and runnagate from the ancient Apostolic Roman Church
indeed. Al these abominations and a number more in their Mass, which here
without too to much tediousness I cannot stand upon they are so many, arise
and grow from their special minion and paragon Transubstantration: and
therefore until her brains be dashed out there will never be any hoe of their
foolishness and madness in this mass and Chaos of confusion of theirs. They
would bear the world in hand that she is most ancient and yet indeed and
truth how long soever before they were in conceiving of her, yet she was never
grown ripe to the birth or borne before Innocent the thirdes time. For never
before the Laterane council, which was in his time and in the year 1211. (as
I have said before,) was this decreed to be a Catholic truth amongst
themselves. And this their own great Doctor and Bishop Tonstall in a book of
his written of this matter confesses adding, that perhaps it had been better
to have less the manner how Christ becomes present in this Sacrament, as it
was before that council. Now before this, the Greek Church was departed from
the Church of Rome, and therefore this was rather the decree of a private and
particular conuenticle then of the universal Church of God; and therefore not
only we, but still unto this day the Greeks reject both this council and
decree, though I know much tempering has been with them since to the
contrary. Scotus is not only of the same mind with Tonstall, but if you
read him, did. 11, quaest. 3. upon the 48. book of Sentences, you shall not
only find, that he brings a number of objections against this, which he
never answers to any purpose but also that in the end, he setting down his
sole determination for it, that yet most plainly he confesses, that the
principal ground of interpreting Christ's words by transubstantiation, is
this, that de sacramentis tenendum est sicat tenet sancta Ecclesia Romana: of
sacraments, we must hold as the holy Roman Church holds. For the which
axiom, or rule, in so weighty a matter, in his next words he shows, that
the best ground he had, was an Extrauagant, de haereticis, Cap. ad abolendam,
wherein some such things be determined, by a sauorite of the same. Which is as
good ouidence, as if we should ask a theoues follow, whether he be a theife,
if not worse. Gabriell Biell another great Doctor of theirs, writing upon the
Canon of the Mass, confesses that it is not expressed in the Canon of the
Bible, whether by transubstantiation, or consubstantiation, the body of Christ
be there. And John Fisher a bishop and martyr of theirs, as they count him,
writing against Luthers book of the captivity of Babylon, thinks that
every man understands that the certainty of that matter dependes not so
much of the Gospel, as it does upon the use, tradition, and custom of the
Church. And more truly and easilye in show, if it had pleased the Church might
those words of Christ otherwise have been expounded, (says Scotus in the
forefaide place). These things said together and conferred with that saying of
Christ, They worship me in vain, reaching for doctrines men's praecepts Math.
15.9. and with Peser. 1. Epist. ^. Cap. 14. Verse. 18. where he tells all them,
to whom he wrote that general Bpistle, that Christ had redeemed them from the
vain conversation which they had received by the traditions of the Fathers: we
shall soon see that it is noe rock whereupon they build this their
transubstantiation, but a very sand and a rotten foundation. Yet because they
are so confident in this matter as they are, I will not leave them thus. Will
you then know the first author that gave them any inkling or ground of
invention here of. Truly it was not Mark the Evangelist nor any such; but
yet unless I be much deceived, one Mark marked them out the way the first of
all others to find it out. This Mark that I speak of, was a samous Magition
and a damnable filthy heretic of the brood of Valentilians, a very ancient
one (I must needs confess.) For I find that he lived in the time of the
Emperor Antarinus Pius which was but 150. years after Christ. Of this wretch
writes Epiphanius in his 34. heresy, proving that which he says out of
Irenaus his 9. chapter against the heresies of the Valentinians, where indeed
it is so testified of him, that when by his enchantment or inkling he had
caused a cup of white wine to bear the color of blood, that the^ he made his
fellow believe that by his invocation over it, it was so transubstantiated
into blood, that so by his means it might be thought that the grace that is
super vniuersa that is, oner all, had instilled sanguinem suum in illud
poculum, his blood unto that cup: by which means when he had made them in
admiration of him and so desirous to drink there of, he gave them (as it is
there noted) with great solemnity of words, and so wonderfully bewitched
many. And the rather was I led and am thus to think, because the same Irenaeus
in the 8. chapter of the said book (secretly directed as I take it by the
spirit of prophecy) said that he was vere pracursor Antichristi, that is,
truly Antichrists forerunner. If therefore the former nouitie of their
transubstantiation please them not, let them hence fetch the petigree thereof,
and so let Marcus be the first conceiuer of it, and Innocentius he that bore
and brought it forth. Or if this be not to their minds, I will confess that
it may be that they learned it of the heathen, who as they imagined with
certain words and gestures could call down their Hecate, Jupiter, and Elicius
as often as they list. For never made or at this day makes any heathen man more
ado then they about this business, about the most idolatrous toy of
superstition that ever they went about. For the words must be pronounced with
one breath, and they use such crossing such bending and bowing, breathing and
haling of the words to the elements, as they make themselves very ridiculous
to any that are wise that see them and mark their doings. No iugler nor
sycophant upon a stage are more full of fond and trifling actions and gestures
then a Priest at Mass, and all to effect this their transubstantiation. Who
can be persuaded that the Lord of heaven and earth that delights in no
vanity, but altogether in sincerity and simplicity, can take delight in this
gear? Whiles they have been so busy to establish the credit of this their
devise by fond tales of diverse miracles showed here and there, and I cannot
tell where, it had been more needful for them to have labored first to
agree amongst themselves about the matter, and to clear the doubts that they
have moved themselves by occasion thereof. But this hitherto they have found
so combersome a thing to do, that I dare be bold to say by that which I have
red and could set down thereof, the varieties of their opinions and intricate
doubts hereupon moved by themselves, and unanswered and unsatisfied as yet,
would require a longer time than I have yet spent since I began to talk of
this Sacrament, to set them down in. Yea though they use and like the word
Transubstantiation never so well, yet though they know that both by the words
of the institution, and by Saint Paul's speeches had thereof, 1. Cor. 10.11.
and by the testimonies with one consent of all the ancient Fathers, as we have
often showed them, Christ called undoubtedly the bread which he brake and gave,
his body broken; and the wine in the cup his bloodshed, they cannot yet be
brought to tell us or to agree amongst themselves, what it is that should be or
is here transubstantiated and converted into his body. Nay in truth they dare
not say that either bread or wine or any thing else are the things: and yet we
must yealde to a transubstantiation though no man yet could or would tell us,
and stand to it when he has done, whereof it is. Howsoever, either they must
say it is of some thing, or not: if of any thing, then they know that thereupon
it will follow that of that thing, whatsoever it be, here Christ's body is
made; which is absurd they themselves seem to think; and to say nothing is
turned or transubstantiated into it, is quite to loose their cause. In very
deed they are enforced to see, that if they should once by the demo^stratiue
particle This that Christ used, understand the bread and wine, that then it
would most clearly follow that there is a Trope or figure in the speech of
Christ, or that else they must confess bread and wine to be turned into the
body and blood of Christ, and therefore to shune both these straites they
cannot tell what to understand by it, and so are at their wits end. By that
which they say and doc they yet are resolute that they co^uey and bannish away
the substances of bread and wine, and leave nothing but the bare accidents
thereof, under which they hold lustilie Christ to be flesh, blood and bone. And
therefore they sing merrily in their Hymn or Carrol upon Corpus Christi day,
Sub diuersis speciebus, signis tantum and non rebus, latent res eximiae, caro,
cibus, sangnis, potus, manet homo Christus totus, sub vtraque specie: a sumente
non concisus, non confractus, nec diuisus integer accipitur, etc. that is,
Under diverse kinds, signs only and not things, most excellent things lie
hid, flesh, meat, blood, drink, yea whole Christ abides under either kind:
of the taker not bruised not broken, nor divided but whole is he taken. But for
all this their stir it should seem yet that now they are persuaded they
have him rather by bannishing of bread and wine (though they cannot tell either
how, whither, or into what,) then by transubstantiation of bread and wine
thereinto or of anything else. Howsoever it were or be, that there should
remain nothing but the bare accidents or out ward forms of bread and wine
that is enough utterly to overthrow the nature of the Sacrament. For in
Sacraments always there must be an Analogy betwixt the signs and the
things signified, which cannot be betwixt bare accidents of bread and wine,
(for that they alone feed not at all) and the body and blood of Christ which
are our food to eternal life: and therefore to abolish or abandon by what
means soever bread and wine, is to destroy quite the nature of the Sacrament.
That the very substances thereof remain for all their prating, when they have
used all their art and the tricks thereof they can, both Scripture, Fathers,
and reason make it most evident. For in the words of the institution, scanne
and mark them well who list, it is most clear that Christ took very bread
and wine, and that he both gave that which he took and that they took the
same and no other, though by his institution now changed in name, use, and
estimation as I have said. And therefore Paul retains the name of the bread
and cup still, even when they come to be eaten and drunken upon, 1. Cor. 11.26.
and Christ calls it the fruit of the vine tree, and that after he had
delivered it, and they had drunken thereof. Mar. 14.25. And in all other
Sacraments as we have heard, though the like phrase of speech have been used,
yet always have they been fulland forcible Sacraments to offer, to deliver,
and to seal the delivery of the inward grace thereby intended to the right
receivers, without any such abolishing or transubstantiating of the outward
elements thereinto, as is here imagined. And if Christ had had any such
purpose, it had sure been as easy a matter with him to have uttered his mind
in and by words sounding plainly that he meant to effect some such thing (as
by saying, this is turned into my body, or let this be transubstantiated
thereinto, or let the substance of this cease, and in the romph thereof let my
body come and be) as only to have said affirmatiuelie that it was his
body. But having but said so, it is most certain it was some certain thing
that he affirmed to be so: for he would never call bare nothing or an
indiuiduum vagum, an uncertain thing, (as Gardener holds he meant by This) his
body. And therefore will they nil they, by Christ's words interpreted as they
do, either we must have Christ's body, which once was of the nature of the
Virgin his Mother (that so he might be that seed of the woman to tread down
the serpents head, and in whom all the nations of the world should be
blessed) whenever any of their priests thereby intend to consecrate (as they
speak) made of a wafer again; or at least now grown to be such an one as
that it can lie hid under the form thereof, the substance of bread being gone
to give it romph. But once again I must tell them that the words of Christ are
so far from sounding any such thing, as that if they should be taken
literally as they sound, they rather show that his body and blood were become
bread and wine or turned thereinto, then the contrary. For when Moses rod was
turned into a serpent, or when Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, if
one should have said of the one that it was Moses rod, or of the other that
it was Lots wife, would any thereby have understood that he mente that the
scrpent was transubstantiated into the rod or the pillar of salt into Lots
wife, nay would not the very sound of the words most plainly lead any man
rather to understand that his meaning was to show Moses rod was turned into the
serpent, and Lots wife into the pillar of salt? Wherefore they have not only
no ground in the Scriptures for this their opinion, but not only other
scriptures but the very words of the institution are directly against them.
And the ancient Fathers are plain that though Christ called bread and wine
his body broken and his blood shed, that yet neither by transubstantion nor
any way else the substances thereof are gone. Theodoret both in his first
Dialogue and second also, though most plainly (as I have noted already) he
confess that Christ honored bread and wine with the names of his body and
blood, most flatly says that yet he changed not their natures but added grace
to nature, and that the mystical signs after sanctification (as he pleases
to speak) go not from their nature, figure or form. And Gelasius against
Eutiches writes directly that in the Eucharist the nature of bread and wine
cease not. Ambrose also, as Gratian alleges him De consecr. did. 2. cap.
p^nis, writing de sacramentis of the Sacraments, notes that in this Sacrament
the word of Christ is so powerful, vt sint quae erant, and in aliud
commutentur, that they remain that which they were before, and yet are turned
into another thing. And if we would know in what sense and sort they are
changed into another thing remaining also still the same that they were
before, the same Gratian a little before in the chapter quia corpus, teaches
us to learn that of our selves by the change that we find in our selves by
regeneration, and that out of Eusebius Emissenus; which as he notes and we all
know is true not at all in respect of outward substance (for that is the same
in us when we are regenerate that it was before) but only of inward grace and
quality, which is that which I call here in this Sacrament an alteration of
the outward elements in name use and estimation. Bertram in a set treatise
written of this matter as it is thought in Carolus Calunus time, by many
arguments proves bread and wine still to remain. And Elfricke about the year
996. (as Fox notes) in two Saxon Epistles, which to that end he records,
therein taught bread and wine here no otherwise to be the body and blood of
Christ, then Manna and the water of the rock in the wilderness were Christ,
which all men know they were but by representation and signification, and not
really; for that then Christ was not become man. And the same man, as master
Fox notes, translated a sermon out of Latin into the Saxon tongue (which he
insertes wholly in his story also) by him then appointed to be red on Easter
day to the Saxons inhabiting then this land; which who so reads shall find
that it contains much direct matter and proof, both against
transubstantiation, and gross real presence built thereupon. In Bedes time
also, who died about the year 734. the same doctrine was continued here and
elsewhere, as it appears by that which he has written upon the institution,
as it is set down by Luke 22. where he shows (as I have noted before) not
only the likelyhoode of the use of bread and wine in nourishing and cheering
our bodies, to be the cause they bear the names of the body and blood of
Christ, which semblably nourish and feed our souls: but also he so speaks
and writes thereof, that yet he shows he took them to be bread and wine
still. And as by this you may see then that both Scriptures and Fathers are
against them herein, so questionles is all sound reason, most stronglye: which
as long as it is not controwled or crossed, either by the doctrine of faith, or
good manners taught in the Scriptures, is worth the listening unto. Now reason
and all our senses, and the experience that we have had and may have of the
sowreing of the wine, of the mouling and corrupting of the hoasts, so that
worms may and have bred thereof, and that Dogs, Battes, Rattes, and Mise,
and so not only unbelievers can feed thereof, are most sure evidence unto us,
that for all their great brags to the contrary, with all their crossing,
whispering, breathing, becking and doucking, and demure pronuncing of the
words, they cannot neither once remove the substances of bread and wine away,
nor bring Christ's body or blood into the romphs thereof. For neither can
these things that I have spoken of, all or any of the^ be incident to bare
accidents, neither yet to the most precious body and blood of Christ Jesus God
and man. For who knows not that bare accidents are not, nor can be subjects
of such accidents as these be? Neither can they be matter to nourish and feed
either man or beast withal, or to breed any such things upon. And howsoever
these men can find in their hearts to grant that the body of the Christ whom
they serve may be subject to all these things, sure I am the body of the true
Christ (that the saying of the Psalmist might be verified thereof, Thou will not
suffer thy holy one to see corruption, Psalm. 16.10.) could not possibly be
held of death until it rotte: and therefore much less will the heavenly
Father now that it is glorified, let it be either meat for such filthy vermin
or for the mouths of wicked men, or to be subject to putrefaction that worms
shall breed thereon. But I know though some of them have not been ashamed to
say that he can and may be eaten of such beasts as well as of such men
(whereof none of them now doubt;) yet generally they say when such things fall
out with the outward elements as I have spoken of, then Christ by his almighty
power conueyeth himself away, and lets the old substances come again and
join themselves with their accidents. In the mean time then I would the best
studied of them in this point could either tell us what was becomde in the
mean time of the substances, or how their accidents were kept or underpropped
without substances, and so subjects to be in. And if it were granted then that
Christ to exempt and to preserve his body from these inconveniences remoues it
away before any of these can fall out unto it, yet then they grant that the
best shift that their popish Christ has in this case is to run away or to
give place. Such a Christ may become such kind of Christians; but surely the
wise hearted Christians would be loath to trust to such a Christ for their
salvation whose best shift is thus to fly that a Mouse eat him not; and I
would advise them not to trust themselves too much to such a dastardly Christ.
I would think that they should and would rather hold that he drives all these
away, then that indeed he should be driven away of any of them: and that
therefore when any such thing seems to fall out otherwise, either the priest
consecrated not well, and so failed and came short of transubstantiation, or
that the senses are deceived in thinking any such thing in have happened. But
seeing they like better to provide for their Christ by his sudden departure,
I would have them to tell me, whether they work a greater miracle in
transubstantiating bread and wine into him, or these kind of cattle in
trasubstantiating him again into the old bread and wine; And I would be glad
once to here a substantial reason, why Christ's words should not, or did not
prove as powerful to drive the accidents away as the substance, or why they
believing, notwithstanding Christ's plain words, that accidents of bread and
wine remain, because the senses tells them so, they should not, or will not
believe the same senses, as plainly assuring them that the substances
themselves also remain, that therefore they are there also. But what should I
trouble my self by reason and sense to confute them, which as it should seem
have herein, for the maintenance of their own wilful conceit, pride, pomp and
commodity, lost both sense, reason, and religion. Notwithstanding to all such
as have these, I trust I have said sufficient, to make not only the verity of
our own doctrine, touching this Sacrament, sufficiently to appear, but also
to the full displaying and disgrasing for ever with such of the vanity of both
these our adversaries herein. Wherefore to return to my text, and so to go on
again therewith, I hope yet by this that I have said of this matter, you now
plainly perceive, that notwithstanding the doctrine and use of this Sacrament,
the union and communion that we must seek to have with Christ, though it be
true and real in respect of him and us, the persons and things to be united;
that yet it is not gross and carnal, to be attained unto by the instruments
or members of our body at all, as these our adversaries teach: but that by the
word and Sacraments, God offers him unto us, and by his Spirit communicates
him unto us, after a spiritual and mystical manner, and that we by faith
wrought and nourished in us by this his Spirit and means, feed upon to our
everlasting salvation.

Touching which faith, Conclusion of the commandment.
which thus I have made as it were the hand and mouth of our soul to take
Christ offered unto us in the word and Sacraments withal, at the hand of God
hsi spirit; let it be remembered once again, that Christ here in my text,
calling for it, to drink him by, says not simply, he that believes in me,
but with this adition, as says the Scripture. Whereby let us, to conclude this
point withal, learn that in this case, it is not enough to believe as we
list, nor as this man or that, this company or that teach us always: Yea that
we never believe aright to this purpose until we believe in Christ as the
canonical Scriptures teach us. All which (as I have before sufficiently
showed) lay him still before us to be believed in as our sole and only
meritorious cause of our salvation; with whom we may neither join any other
person or thing. And so steadfast also our confidence of salvation these teach
us ought to be in him, that thereby we may say, We have peace with God through
him, and such access to Gods grace, as that we stand therein and rejoice under
hope which shall never be confounded. Romans 5. verse. 1.2.3. etc. In so much that
having reckoned up all things that are most likely to do it, yet with Paul
all that have this faith may boldly and triumphantly say, That nothing shall
separate them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. In any case
therefore by the means that he has appointed for that purpose (which I have
now also laid before you) let us strive to attain to this faith and to
nourish it when we have once got it. For this is it that joins Christ and us
together, and so fully possesses us of him and all the treasured graces and
mercies of God provided for men's salvation in him, that therefore it brings
unto us the peace that passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. and the joy that
none can ever take from us. John. 16.22. We have the word of God and that
written, outwardly sealed in the Sacraments, and thereby, by his spirit also
inwardly offering to seal and sealing the same unto our hearts and
consciences, that God the Father in and by his son Christ Jesus, by the
mighty working of the holy Ghost both can and will save us. Whatsoever
therefore papists prate to the contrary, let us most firmly and constantly
thus believe, and not once dare call the truth of God, thus many ways
confirmed unto us, once into question. But then let us never for get that
golden saying of Cyprian, De duplicimartirio. Non credit in Deum, qui non in eo
solo collocat totius suae salut is fiducia: that is, He believes not in God at
all, that places not the whole confidence of his salvation in him alone. And
the rather for that thus to do our Creedes, our Baptism and all the
scriptures teach us. Let us not therefore by the example or doctrine of
Papists, be drawn from hence to put our confidence, as they do, both in a
number of persons and things that are not God. For that were undoubtedly
(howsoever they would persuade men to the contrary) no better than to become
plain reuolters and apostares from the ancient found Catholic faith, which
all these most plainly teach and bind us unto, and in deed to fet up unto
our selves a new Christ of our own devising, with whom none of these ever
acquainted us. Wherefore as in these respects I would wish that we took heed
of the seven of the popish faith, as of the very baine and poison of our
souls; so also beware we of their kind of faith in the use of the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ. For as you may perceive by that which I have
said already of that matter, the faith that they most call for in that business
is, a believing that Christ's very body and blood are really there under the
forms of bread and wine, and so be taken in and by the bodily mouth of every
receiver, quite contrary both to the true sense of the Scripturs in that
behalf, and to the nature of Christ. These things thus finished and concluded,
it remains now that we proceed in our text: wherein we have yet to consider
of the promise therein made by Christ to all those and to none but to those that
by right knowing him, and believing in him, come unto him, and drink of him.

This promise he vtters and expresses in these words as you have heard, The
promise.
out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life, whereunto if we refer
these words, as says the Scripture, (as many interpreters both old and new
do,) then they teach us to understand this promise, as the Scripture teaches
us ellewhere, and not otherwise. And seeing Christ has uttered the promise in
such a metaphorical phrase as he has, it may very well be that of very
purpose he placed those words as he did, not only to teach us as we have
heard already, that we come unto him and drink of him, by sound knowledge and
right faith as the Scriptures show us; but also plainly to instruct us, that
in so doing we must look to have the words of this promise fulfilled unto us,
not in any gross or literal sense, but only in such spiritual manner and
sort, as the Scriptures themselves in other places declare. Hereby then to
begin withal, Christ has given us this most notable and profitable rule,
that it is a most sound way, rightile to expound Scriptures, and so rightly
to understand them, to confer Scripture with Scripture, and to admit no
sense of figurative and dark phrases and speeches in the same, but that which
may and does stand with other more plain places, which in Gods wisdom and
providence even of purpose elsewhere are set down therein, that they may be as
a key to let us into the right sense of the hard: than which rule (howsoever
now a days our adversaries would persuade they have found a better, namely
to make the current practice of their Church; which when they have braued of
Doctors and Councelles never so much, is indeed only the very pleasure and
mutable fancy of their Popes) the ancient Fathers have esteemed and followed
this as the best and saifest. As it is evident in Augustine, De doctrina
Christiana, Lib. 3.2.6. where he defines that to be always the sense of the
hard place, which is taught in plainer; and that no sense is to be received to
be the sense of any, which cannot be proved so to be out of other places. Of
the same mind Hierome shows himself to have been in his 19. Homily upon
Esaias, noting that therefore it is the fashion of the scriptures after hard
things to join other that be plain. Origin also in his first Homily of
Hierimie, and Chrysostom in diverse places, namely writing of the holy Ghost,
and in his 12. Homtlie upon Genesis, are most pregnant in this point; the one
rejecting all senses and interpretations as of no credit without warrant from
other scriptures, and the other affirming plainly that the scriptures so
expound themselves that they suffer not the Reader to err. Whereupon no man,
no not amongst us, is more earnest to urge all sorts of men to read the
scriptures, than Chrysostom, as any man may see in his 9. Homily upon the
Collossians, and in his third upon Matthew. Let us therefore in this case take
trial of this rule, that so we may learn what we are to understand by these
rivers of water, here spoken of and promised. And for as much as when these
words were first uttered by Christ, then the Canonical scriptures only of
the old Testament were written, it shall be most fit to look into them for this
purpose. Wherein to this end very pertinent it is, that the blessed man (which
doubtless he is that comes unto Christ, and drinks of him aright) is
described in the first Psalm to be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters
that will bring forth his fruit in due season, and whose leaf shall not fade,
but whatsoever he does it shall prosper, Verse. 3. But that in the five and
fifty of the prophecy of Esaias. verse. 1. etc. in my judgment, and in my
opinion best agrees with this and appertains hereunto. For there, after that
the thirsty are solemnly (as it were) by way of proclamation, called and
allured to come to the waters, and so freely, being come, to drink wine and to
cate milk and that which was fat and good; a promise is made them if they
would so do, that they should live and enjoy the sure mercies of David. That
also, Esaias. 59.20.21. may well be as a Commentary upon this, where after that
it is said that the redeemer shall come unto Sion, it is said, that this
covenant shall be made with them that turn from iniquity in Jacob, that his
spirit and word should never depart from them, nor from their seed after
them: which couenante or promise is more fully opened, Jeremy. 31.33.34. unto
which time of the coming of the Messiah, and the performance of this promise
then, Ioell having an eye, he brings in GOD promising then, that he would
pour out his spirit upon all sorts, old and young, men and women, Cap. 2.
verse. 28. whereunto in my opinion it seems that John thought that Christ had
relation in this promise-making here, in that in plain terms he tells us
that this he spoke of the Spirit, which they should receive that believed in
him: for (says he) the holy Ghost was not yet, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. This therefore is even sufficient to teach us in what sense the
scripture would have us to understand, that rivers of waters of life shall
flow out of the bellies of such as will come unto him, drink of him and
believe in him, as we have heard; namely even of the plentiful gifts and
graces of the spirit, that undoubtedly he would bestow and continue in such.
And let it not seem strange unto any man thus to hear the spirit of God
watering and moystening the house of God, and washing and softning the hearts
of those that be in need thereof compared unto waters for it is very usual in
the scriptures. For not only, Psalm. 1.3. and Esaias. 55.1. etc. as I have noted
before, by rivers of water and waters we ca^ understand nothing so fitly as the
most plentiful and rich graces of God in Christ: but also elsewhere often,
both in the old Testament and in the new, the same or like speeches are used,
whereby we can understand nothing else. For after that God, to persuade Jacob
not to fear, had said, I will power water upon the thirsty, and floudes upon
the dry ground, to make it plain that he understood nothing else thereby,
immmediatly he adds, I will power out my spirit upon thy seed and my
blessing upon thy buddes, and they shall grow as amongst the grass, and as
the willowes by the rivers of waters: Esaias. 44.2.3.4. And what else could or
did Ezechiell understand, Cap. 47.1. etc. by the vision of waters flowing out
of the Lords house, in such a plentiful manner that they were first ancle
deep, then thigh deep, then vnpassageable: on every side whereof grow all
fruitful trees, whose leaf should not fall, and that monthly should bring
forth fruit, and that wholesome and medicinable? And we believing as we do,
that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son (as both the
scriptures and all sound confessions of the Catholic and Christian faith
teach) what can we more fitly understand, by that pure river of water of life,
clear as christ all, that John saw proceeding out of the throne of God, and
the Lamb etc. Revel. 22. Verse. 1. than the holy Ghost proceeding and flowing
from the father and the son, to cheer and to make fruitful the Citizens of
the heavenly Jerusalem. And by that water of life, which Christ taught the
woman of Samaria to ask of him, and whereof if a man drink, he said he
should never thirst again, for that it should be in him, a well of water,
springing up to everlasting life, noe doubt of it, he understood nothing else
but the Spirit, which he would bestow upon all his, to regenerate and sanctify
them effectually withal. Hereby then you may see, not only this interpretation
justified, that by rivers of water of life flowing out of the bellies of such
as come unto Christ, and rightly make him their own by drinking of him, we are
to understand the Spirit of God and the plentiful graces thereof, promised to
the faithful; but also that this is a Metaphore very fit and apt to express
the same, or else that God would never have so much delighted therein, as thus
by the often using it he shows he has done. Howbeit before we proceed any
further to confider of the ground, why this Metaphor should be counted so apt,
and so much to this purpose delighted in; we are first to understand that by
the belly, from whence these rivers of water of life should flow, is meant
the soul, heart, and good conscience by faith purified, in the believers,
Acts 15. Ver. 9. For the end of the commandment, and so the show of all the
good fruits of the Spirit in Gods children, comes from a pure conscience,
and both them from faith unfeigned, as Paul testifies 1. Tim. 1. Ver. 5. The
belly and bowels are no seat or fountain, from whence such things issue or
flow. Then whereas John says, the holy Ghost was not yet, whereof he tells
us we are to understand Christ's promises; we must take heed that we
understand not that, as spoken of the essence or being of the holy Ghost, least
we fall into the herisie of the Nacedonians, who denied the Godheade of the
holy Ghost: for so he has been from everlasting, according to our catholic
faith, God coetarnall and coequall with the Father and the Son. And therefore
the Psalmist, speakeing so thereof, says, by the word of God were the heanens
made, and by the spirit of his mouth all the powers thereof. Psalm. 33. Verse. 6.
And therefore our Creed and Baptism bind us as well to believe in the holy
Ghost, as in GOD the Father, or in GOD the Son. And when Christ was baptized,
as Math. testifies that there was a voice heard from Heaven from the Father,
This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; so he says, that
John Baptist saw the Spirit of GOD descending like a Dove and lighting upon
him. Math. 3. Verse. 16. and 17. John therefore must be understood to speak
thus, not of the essence or being of the holic Ghost, but of the gifts and
graces thereof, in some further measure, than as yet, when Christ made this
promise, they had been ordinarily given unto them that believed in him. And I
said advisedly and of purpose thus: for it is most clear and evident that
before this, all the Saints and servants of GOD, that believed in GOD, feared
him and believed in him, had the Spirit of God and the gifts and graces
thereof, in good measure, without which they could not have done so as they
did, so to do; being, as it is, the special work of the holy Ghost, as it is
known well enough to be. And of Simeon do we not read in plain terms,
before this, that the holy Ghost was upon him, and that a revelation was given
him of the holy Ghost, that he should not see death before he had seen the
Lord Christ, and that he came by the motion of the spirit into the Temple, etc.
Luke 2.25. etc? And in deed, by yielding his reason of his speech as he does,
saying for Jesus was not yet glorified, he gives us to understand, that his
speech is to be but understood by way of comparison, and not simply. And thus
both August in his 32. Tract upon John and Chrysostom in his 50. Homile upon
this place before me expound it. For Augustine there, after that he had showed
that Christ's words can neither be understood of the essence of the holy
Ghost, which has been with the Father from everlasting, nor yet simply of the
gifts thereof, for that many both in the old Testament and new, as there he
declares, had good measure thereof; his determination is, that modus futurus
erat dationis huius qui emnino antea non apparuerat, that is, that yet there
should be a manner of giving thereof, which was ueuer seen before, whereof
this is spoken, says he. And the other in the foresaid place of his, most
plainly expounds, the Rivers of water of life, largiorem spiritus gratiam,
more large grace of the Spirit than was given before. And therefore also, both
of them there show that by the Belly we are to understand, the heart and
conscience of the inward man, answerable to the inward drink and thirst
spoken of here by Christ. And so often in the old Testament, the Prophets
having an eye to the wonderful measure of Gods grace and plentifulnes of Gods
spirit, that should be powredour, upon the Church the Messiah being come,
though in very deed they speak but by comparison, and so of necessity must
be understood (for elsewhere very plainly they show that the spirit of God
was in good measure upon them selves and upon others then) yet they utter the
promises of God touching his pouring out of his Spirit then, as though it were
a new thing, that he had never done before: as you may see and behold in the
44. of Esaias, and in the 2. of Ioell in the places before alleged. And thus
also must Christ's own saying, John 16.7. of necessity be understood, it is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will
not come unto you; but if I depart I will send him unto you: for before that,
it appears they believed in him to whom he so spoke John. 6.69. For there
Peter in all their names says, we believe and know that thou art the Son of
the living God, which is a fruit of the Spirit. Gal. 5.22. And before his
ascension and glorification it was, that he breathed upon them and said,
receive ye the holy Ghost. John. 20.22: wherefore, before in some measure the
Comforter was given them. Indeed after his ascension, as we may see, he showed
himself mindful of his promise to the full, Act. 2. in furnishing them so
upon the sudden, with all gifts meet for their calling, as that they were
filled with the holy Ghost, and Spoke with other tongues as the Spirit gave
them utterance. If any be now desirous to know why this plentiful and most
powrefull furnishing of his with such gifts and graces from above, was
reserved to follow as a fruit, effect, and consequent of his ascension, and
glorification; let him understand, that in the infinite wisdom and providence
of GOD it was, that so it might be made manifest unto his Church, to begette in
the same a strong and lively hope; that as by his humiliation and abasemente
he had obtained and purchased for it eternal redemption, so now by his
exaltation and aduancemente, he was so settled at the right hand of his Father,
that he was able to pour down upon the same, all gifts and graces necessary
to the effectual applying and sealing the same thereunto. So that thenceforth
none need doubt but that he has gone through with the work of our
redemption and salvation, and that as head and husband over his Church, he can
and will guide, deck, and surnish the same with all the rich treasures of the
graces of GOD, which dwell and rest in him as in the fountain beyond all
measure, that of his ouerflowing and infinite fullnes, every member thereof
might receive enough, to bring it to perfection in him; as most notably Paul
teaches, Ephesians. 4. Verse. 9. etc. But yet neither Christ, nor John here are so
to be understood, as though this promise of Christ here were limited and to
be extended noe further than to those, upon whom after his assention in that
extraordinary manner he bestowed his spirit and the gifts thereof, though I
cannot but think they had an especial and first eye unto them, as unto the
first fruits of all the rest that should follow. For doubtless as Christ
requires all, that he spoke of before, that thirst to come unto him to drink
and to believe in him, as says the Scripture, and therefore looks for all
this at the hands of every true member of his mystical body the church: so
the thing promised appertains and is common to them all, though according to
the diversity of places that they hold in that body, one and the self ame
Spirit is diversely bestowed upon them, as we are taught 1. Cor. 12. Ver. 4.
etc. So that the Spirit and the gifts and graces of God, are here so promised
to them all, and shall be and are performed, as that aptly they may be called
rivers of water of life flowring out of their bellies. But yet then some may
marvel, comparing the spirit and gifts thereof seen in many of the
faithful, since Christ was glorified, with the Spirit and gifts thereof
found in sundry, as in the Patriarchs and Prophets and other famous holy men
in the old Testament, and finding them in show to be but equal, or rather
inferior to some of theirs, why John should either simply or by way of
comparison, thus signify unto us that the Spirit had not been given in such
measure before, as now Christ being glorified it should. Whereunto though I
might answer that John might well say so, in that then the partition wall
betwixt Jew and Gentile should be pulled down, and so the borders and
compass of the Church should wonderfully be enlarged, in comparison they were
before: yet more fully to answer this objection, though in respect of those
times wherein the Patriarchs and Prophets and holy men of GOD lived, in the
time of the old Testament, their faith and other fruits of the Spirit that
appeared and were found in them, were very commendable, yet in many respects
John might prefer the Spirit and the gifts thereof given to believers in
the new Testament so before them in the old, that in comparison thereof, the
Spirit might be said not to have been before. For first, though then the
mysteries of religion were sufficiently revealed for those times; yet were
they not opened so clearly and lightsomely then, as now since the coming of
Christ: and the Spirit that, he being ascended, he promises to his, leads
them to all truth and teaches them all things, John. 14.26. In so much that
the believing Christian now can speak by direction thereof, more plainly of
the Trinity, of Christ's person and office, and of many other mysteries of
Christian religion, than any of them had done or could. In respect and regard
whereof, Christ says of John Baptist, verily verily amongst them that are
begotten of a woman, arose there not a greater: and yet notwithstanding he that
is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. For he preached Christ, and
pointed him present, and none of them saw him or spoke of him but a far off;
and yet after Christ had gone through with that which he came for, and was
ascended; by his Spirit he so enlighteneth the hearts of the meanest sound
members of his Church, that they can say more of him than John could. And in
this respect Christ said, that many Kings and Prophets had desired to see and
hear those things which his Apostles and followers saw, and yet did not,
Luke. 10.24. Then who also knows not that the ministry and revelation of the
will of God was then very dark, it lay so much in types and figures, in
compasson that it is now, Christ being come and ascended, at whom those did but
aim and point at a far off; and that therefore in that respect, Paul might
truly and justly say, that the night was past and the day come, Romans 13.12.
and also magnify the ministry of the new Testament, as far more glorious
than that of the old, as most notably he does, 2. Cor. 3.6. etc? For then
they had but the light of the moon and the stars to direct them, whereas we
now have the brightness of the shining son; and theirs in comparison was
but of the letter and of death, and ours is of the spirit and of life, as
Paul shows there. And therefore how can it be otherwise, but that the
effects and fruits of the Spirit being conformable in some good measure to
the ministry whereby it works, but that now since his coming and
glorification they should be in his as rivers of water of life, flowing out of
their bellies; whereas before they were in comparison but like unto the little
and soft running water from out of the fountain of Siloah at the foot of the
mount Syon. And somewhat it makes the better to make us understand both what
Christ said and did, as John here has set it down, that Tremelius notes
upon this place. For he tells us that the Jews in their Talmud in the tract
of the feast of Tabernacles Chapter Chal. show that the last day of that feast
was the greatest, because as they say, their ancient Doctors taught them that
whereas the other days thereof, they should in joy only once circuit the
Altar carrying boughs and palms in their hands, and crying Hosannah, that
is, save I pray, this last day by tradition, as they took it from Haggai and
Zachariah, they were so to do seven times, crying both Hosannah and
Hatzlicannah, (that is, save us I pray thee, and make us to prosper) oftentimes
with a loud voice: and further he reports that there it is set down as the
fashion of that people received by the tradition (as they took it) from the
same Prophets, that that day they used with great joy to draw water out of
the fountain of Syloach, and to carry it to the Priests, that they might
power it upon the Altar with the drink offering of wine, having in the mean
time that song cheerfully and alowde, which we read, Esaias. 12.3. You shall
draw waters with joy out of the fountain of salvation: which whiles they did,
they thought they served God highly, and provoked him to bestow the Spirit of
prophecy upon them, as superstitiously they dreamed that he did upon Jonas
whiles he was so occupied. Whereupon (as he thinks) it might well be that
Jesus took occasion, as that day standing (whereas otherwise when he taught,
he used to sit and to speak but in an ordinary voice) to cry unto them, that
so the better, for all that noise and stir, he might be heard of them, If any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: he that believes in me (as says
the scripture) out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life: so to draw
them from that superstitious fashion, indeed to draw water of life out of
him, the fountain of living waters, as he is termed, Iere. 2.3. All these
things therefore now thus laid and considered together, I hope you understand
both Christ and John in these words of my text, and perceive what other
occasion soever he had, he had herein a purpose to promise them that directly
come unto him, by drinking of him to satisfy their thirsty souls, and that
leaving running to all other rotten cesternes that could hold no water, they
should find him no dry fountain, but a fountain to fill them, so that they
should run over again therewith to the watering of others: and besides you
see that the Lord has always taken a delight thus to speak of the spirit
and gifts thereof, that they should receive that would only seek to come
to the Father by him.

Wherefore seeing the ground of such metaphorical speeches is always the
similitude and resemblance (as once I have said already) betwixt the metaphore
and the things metaphorized; The right use and application of the promise.
let us see and view what likelihoode there is betwixt rivers of waterof life
flowing out of ones belly, and the gifts and graces of Gods spirit promised
to them that thus come unto Christ and believe in him. Mark therefore amongst
many other properties that water has, it has these sour; that is, first to
wash and make clean; then to soften and mollify; and next to make fruitful
that which otherwise would be barren; and lastly to quench and cool. For as
you know clothes and other things a number, are washed and made clean
thereby: the earth that otherwise would be as Brass and Iron under us, is
softened and thereby, it falling upon it in due season and manner, it is made
fruitful also; and thereby likewise we see fire quenched, and heat much
cooled and abated. Wherefore in that Christ promises his spirit unto those
that thus come unto him, and make him theirs by believing in him, under the
name of waters; thus much, to begin withal (unless we might think that he
could not tell how to speak aptly, which but to imagine were absurd,) even
hereby we are taught, that the spirit of God in such must and will be as
water, and therefore of power to wash and make them clean of the soul errors
and sins, wherewith before they were defiled: and so also of power to soften
their stony and hard hearts, that the seed of the word may sink deep
enough therein, and to make them bring forth fruit always in due season, and
finally likewise it will show it self of force to quench in them the fire of
concupiscence and to abate the heat of all other sin. Let not any man
therefore flatter himself, and think he has done what here Christ
commanded, unless he can approve it by the being and dwelling of the
spirit in him, in that sort and measure, that it may worthily bear the name
of water in all these respects. For Christ was and is of infinite power and
wisdom, and therefore we may be sure he has made here no other promise, but
that which he both can and will perform. Neither lack of ability to be as
good as his word, nor rashness or unadvisedness in passing of it at any
time, was ever found in him: wherefore let us not be behind in performing the
commandment, and nothing is more certain than that he will not be behind
with us in performing of his promise. If therefore we find our hearts and
lives still delighted with our old filthy errors and sins, stony and
slinty that the word can take no root in, or that cannot tremble at the
judgementes of God, barren of all goodness, and burning still with lust, and
on heat with, and after other sins: then whatsoever we can prate or talk of
Christ, or faith in him as yet we are mere strangers from them both. Without
figure or Metaphor that you may see the plain evidence thereof, mark (I
beseech you) but amongst infinite other places, these most plame testimonies of
Scripture concerning this point. The fruit of the stirit it in all goodness,
righteousness and truth Ephesians 5. Ver. 9. They that are in Christ, and so
partakers of his death and resurrection, they must be, and are thereby and by
the power of his spirit, dead to sin and alive to righteousness, Romans 6. Ver.
3. etc. Collos. 2. Ver. 11. and 12. They that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5. Ver. 24. And with such,
old things are passed away, and all things are become new, and therefore they
must be new creatures, 2. Cor. 5. Ver. 17. For by him we are delivered from the
hands of our enemies, to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our lives: and that before him, and as in his sight without fear. Luke
1.74.75. And therefore we must not walk after the flesh but after the spirit,
Romans 8.1. etc. and so put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, being renewed in the spirit of our mind, and
casting off the conversation, that was in times Past and the old man: Ephe. 4.
Verse. 22. etc. yea we may not dare call him Father, unless we pass the time of
our dwelling here in fear, in being holy, as he is holy. 1. Pet. 1. Verse.
16.17. and if we say we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, Saint
John will plainly tell us we lie, and do not the truth, Epist. 1. Chap. 1.
Ver. 6. Whereby it is most evident, whatsoever we have been before, when once
we are come to Christ and have pur on him, the case must be so quite changed
and altered with us, that then though Paul may say of us, you were once such
and such, yet now he may have cause to say, as he said in the like case of the
Corinthians; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified,
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. For David can say,
having an eye to Christ then far off, purge me with Hisop, and I shall be
clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51. Verse. 7. How then
may we do that dishonor unto Christ being come, as either to think that we
are washed in his blood and so justified, and yet remain still foul and
filthy, or having seemed to be cleansed and escaped from the filthiness of the
world, through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to suffer
our selves to be tangled and overcome therewith again? If we should thus do,
we do him the greatest dishonor and discredit that we can. For what cleanly
landresse would not take it to be a shame unto her, to be said or thought to
have washed her clothes, they remaining still as foul and filthy as ever they
were? And most certain it is, if having put our hand to the plow, we look
back again, we are, by Christ's own sentence already pronounced upon us, not
meet for the kindom of heaven, Luke 9.62. and if we be backsliders and
reuolters, Saint Peter has told us what we may trust to, namely that then our
latter end shall be worse than our beginning; yea that we are no better than
dogs, turned to our vomit, or than sowes, after they are washed, returning to
the wallowing in the mire, 2. Epist. Cap. 3.20. And most seareful is that which
we read, Heb. 6.4. etc. and 10.26. etc. touching apostataes and reuolters from
the faith: for there such are told that it is impossible that they should be
renewed again by repentance, that there is no more sacrifice to be offered for
their sins, that there is nothing left for them but a fearful expectation of
irreuocable judgment and condemnation. Now doubtless the very way and means to
come to this dreadful estate is, for them that have seemed to stand by
professing once the sound faith, to be careless in maintaining and preserving
conscience in their lives and conversation; and therefore to teach us as much
Paul. calls upon his Timothy, to maintain and nourish together, faith and a
good conscience, for that whiles some (as namely Hymineus and Alexander) have
made no careful reckoning of the one, they have made shipwreck of the other.
1. Tim. 1.19. and 20. Let him therefore that seems to stand, take heed he
fall not. 1. Cor. 10.12. and in any case also let him that would seem to be
in deed in Christ Jesus, be a new creature. 2. Cor. 5.17. for such have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. Gal. 5.24. they
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, (as ye have heard) Romans 1. and
they are a people zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. Wherefore let us never
once think that our sins are in Christ Jesus covered, unless we find our
selves cured thereof; or that for his sake they are pardoned, unless we in
truth perceive our bodies and souls purged at the least thereof, that sin
reign not in our mortal bodies Romans 6.12. For they that so are of God, John
says flatly, they cannot sin (meaning, so as that sin reign in them) for
that they are borne of God, and his seed remains in them. 3.9. Howsoever
therefore Hypocrites, and such as have but a temporary faith, may and often
do fall headlong into obeying sin with their full and whole consent as their
lawful king, in whose obedience willingly they take delight, and so such
worthily quite lease those gifts and good graces, which they seamed to have
before and consequently by their so falling away, as the same John teaches in
the former Chapter Cap. 2. Ver. 10. make it evident, that they were never of
the number indeed, that by a lively faith were in Christ Jesus; for then as
he says, they would still have continued with such: yet so it is neither
finally, nor at any time after, with those that once have unfeignedly and
rightly indeed put on Christ. For as Paul teaches most evidently and
forciblie Romans 6. throughout, and Col. 1.2. such have so put him on and are in
him, that as he once for all died and was buried to put away their sin, and
rose again, ascended into heaven, and sits there at the right hand of the
father, to confer and bestow upon them a perfect righteousness and
justification; so by the power and efficacy of Christ dwelling in them, they
are dead to sin, and alive to righteousness: and therefore, howsoever, will
they nill they, they may, by some relics of sin remaining in them to humble
them and to wrestle against, be enforced with the same Apostle in the next
chapter, co^plaining of the tyranny of sin, to cry out, I do not that good I
would, but that which I hate that do I, yet all such with a good conscience,
may comfort themselves again with him, and say, if I do that I would not do,
and hate, it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me, Cap. 6.15.
and 20. And in the end they may be sure, that the spirit that dwells in them,
will so strenthen them against the flesh, that they shall get in the end of the
battle, the victory, and that in the mean time, the flesh shall never be able
utterly to prevail: as they may read, Gal. 5.17. and. 24. For that Spirit
being once com into thefield, though old Ada^ muster all his beaten and wounded
soldiers never so often; yet that man in whose heart the field is once pitched
and fought, may assure him self, that it is as absurd for him to think that
either in the end or at any time, the flesh shall prevail to drive that spirit
out of the field; as it is to think that a base creature can overcome God the
Creator. And to assure all such hereof, Christ has promised when he sends once
this Spirit of his unto them, that it shall be their co^mforter, and that it
shall abide with the^ for ever. John 14.16. and that he would beg of his father,
that he should so do. And therefore they may be sure, that he has done it,
and has also obtained his suit; for he is truth it self. John 14.6. and
therefore true in his promise, and besides he tells us, that he knew his father
always heard him. John 11.42. Let not that wrong therefore be offerred either to
Christ, or to his Spirit, that any should but once think that either of these
can be driven out of possession, after once they have taken it in theirs,
either by Satan, the world, or the flesh: they may be busy to grieve and
trouble them, but never shall they prevail: for they are always the stro^gerin
finitely, and their love and care to keep and preserve theirs is like them
selves, that is eternal and most constant: and indeed, in that Christ here in
our text promises his spirit not only in and under the name of water, but of
rivers of waters, and that of life, flowing out of their bellies, that should
do, as before he commanded; all this being to be understood of the gifts and
graces of the spirit, which he would bestow upon all such (as we have heard;)
as thereby we are taught that he will give them to such, not in a scant, but in
a very plentious manner and measure, for that he is a liberal giver, James
1.5, so by calling them Rivers of the water of life, he teaches us and
assures us that they will never altogether die, or be dried up: for his gifts
given to such, are without repentance Romans 1.29. They show also by the other
addition, of flowing out of their bollies, that they will not be smothered and
kept in within the bellies of the believers own self, whatsoever the state of
the time be wherein he lives. For they must flow out of their bellies; and
therefore such must let their light shine be fore men, to the glory of God,
and good example and profit of others, as Christ has taught them Math. 5.16.
Wherefore let the first of these lessons occasion every one that is desirous to
have any comfortable assurance that this promise is made to him and
appertains unto him, to strive by all lawful and good means, to have the
sanctifying gifts of the spirit, in such plentiful and abundant measure in
him, that he may feel, and others find by experience, that they may worthily
be compared to rivers of water. And by the second let every such one also
learn for the better certifying of his own heart, that he is such an one
indeed, that he must persevere unto the end, Math. 10.22. evermore bringing
forth more fruit in her age, as the tree planted in the house of God whereunto
such are compared, Psalm. 92.13.14. uses to do. For to the unspeakable comfort
of all such, the gifts and graces of the holy spirit undoubtedly accompanying
their right coming unto Christ, and believing in him, are here resembled unto
rivers of waters of life, not only for that they come from the true fountain
of life, and will lead and guide the owner thereof thereunto, but also for that
in such in whom they are once found, they will never either wholly or finally
fail or dry up. As therefore such may be sure that the foundation of God
remains sure, The Lord knows who are his, 2. Tim. 2.19. so they may be by
these fruits of the Spirit without hypocrifie found in them, most certain
that according to Saint Peter's counsel they have joined virtue to their faith,
and so consequently have made their own election so sure unto themselves (which
always before was sure with God) as that they shall never fall. For this is
the indissoluble chain of God, whereof one link can never at all be severed
or sundred from an other after that but once the first two be coupled, whom he
knew before and predestined to be like to the image of his Son, and so
elected in him before the foundations of the world, those he first calls,
then justifies, then sanctifies, and lastly glorifieth, Romans 8.29.30. Ephe.
1.4. Whom therefore indeed we find once by these rivers of waters of life
sanctified, we may be out of doubt that the^ God has elected, called, and
justified, and that also them he will glorify. For this sanctifying spirit
bears witness with their spirits, that they are the children of God, and so
imboldneth them to call upon him saying, Abba Father, Romans 8.15.16. and it is
the holy Spirit of promise that seals them and is the earnest of their
inheritance and redemption in Christ Jesus, Ephe. 1.13.14. Though therefore
such to their own sense and feeling, and perhaps also in the conceit of others,
may have not only these graces of the Spirit more eclipsed at one time than
at another, yea may think that they are quite dried up and vanished: yet
forasmuch as whom God once loves, (as doubtless he does all them whom once
truly he does thus qualify he) loves to the end John. 13.1; let all such be
most firmly resolved that this is but the better to humble them, and to
provoke them, when they find these graces revived in them again, to work out
their own salvation with the more trembling and fear, because he that has
begun this good work in them, will never give it over until he have brought
it to perfection; and he it is that will work in them both the will and the
deed of his good pleasure. Phil. 1.6. and 2.12.13. For such have the
infallible marks of Christ's elect and chosen sheep, whereof he himself most
plainly teaches, that it is impossible that any should either take them out
of his hands, or that any of them should finally perish. Matthew. 24.24. and
John. 10.28. The reason is, that they are kept by the power of God through
faith, to salvation. 1. Peter. 1.5. Indeed meet it is and very needful,
that such that once have attained to the graces and gifts of the Spirit, to be
as rivers of waters of life in them that they should do what they may
possibly to nourish and increase the same, and they are to know that if they
do fail in doing of their duty in this behalf, that they are worthily
caused to see and feel to the great grief of their souls, the decay
thereof; yea that they have done as much as lies in them, utterly to lease them
and to provoke GOD to be their enemy: and therefore they are most earnestly
to repent their negligence and carelessness in this point. But yet the force
of this Metaphore, these places and a number more in the Scriptures, that are as
pregnant to this purpose, most plainly show that when thus it falls out with
such, that yet in the goodness of GOD toward them this their sense, feeling,
and the judgment of others prove no stronglier that these gifts of the
Spirit are quite gone in them indeed, than the eclipsing or hiding away of
the sun from our eyes by foggie mistes or clouds at noone days, the raking
up of the fire when there is store thereof in the ashes, the not stirring of a
live and strong child in the mothers womb at all times a like, or the not
appearing of leaves and fruit upon quick trees in an orcharde in the deep of
winter, prove that there is no Sun in the firmament, no fire on the harth, no
child in the womb, or that then there is no sap in the root of the trees.
As therefore when neither the moon, fogges, nor clouds are betwixt us and the
Sun, it will appear and shine again; as when the ashes are removed, and the
coals hid thereunder are blown again, thereof may grow as great a fire as
ever before; as when the child stirs again, though it have life without
motion a great while before, the mother conceiueth as certain hope that she
is with child as ever before; and as when the spring time comes, there will
be both leaves and fruit upon the trees in the orchard that seemed dead
before in the winter: so is it in this case, when GOD shall remove the lettes
and causes (as most certainly he will as well in this, as in these other we
see naturally and commonly they are) then the brightness, heat, motion and
liveliness of his Spirit, shall and will in his appear again.

But then the better and the more easily that they may find this to be thus,
lastly I would have all such to remember that it is not enough that to their
own sense, and in their own conceits they have these gifts of the Spirit as
rivers of waters of life: but that if they be such indeed as here are
promised, and therefore are performed to all that come unto Christ and believe
in him, that they must flow out of their bellies. Where by their bellies, we
are to understand, as Augustine has well noted in his 32. tract upon John, the
belly of the inner man, which, as he there tells us, is the conscience of the
heart. And as there also he says, this flowing of rivers of water out of the
belly of the inner man Beneuolentia eius est qua vult consulere proximo: si
enim putet quia quod bibit soli ipsi debet sufficere, non fluit aqua viua de
ventre eius; si autem proximo festinet consulere, ideo non siccat quia manat:
that is, Is his bountifulness wherewith he will provide for the good of his
neighbor: for if he think that that which he has drunk must but serve
himself, the water of life flows not out of his belly; but if he make have
to do good to his neighbor, it dries not up, and that because it flows.
For as Christ has taught us by the parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25.4. etc.
in no case we may conceal or hide the Talentes that he bestows upon us, but
use them we must to his best advantage; for otherwise they shall be quite
taken from us: whereas if we lay them forth, and use them to the gain of him
that bestowed them, they shall not only be increased, but in the end we
shall have a most comfortable reward. Pseudonicodemits then, whatsoever the
time and place be where and when we live, we may at no hand be: that is,
for fear of the Jews or Pharisees, we may not be such as dare with Nichodemus
come stealinge to Christ by night only, John. 3.1. For Christ most plainly
has told us, Mark. 8.38. That whosoever he be that will be ashamed of him
and of his words amongst an adulterous and sinful generation, he will be
ashamed of him in the glory of his Father. As therefore we believe with the
heart to righteousness, so Saint Paul teaches us, that we must confess with
our mouths to salvation, Romans 10.10. For where true and lively faith is
indeed, there it will make her owner to be at the same point that the Psalmist
was, whatsoever come of it, when he said, I believed, and therefore have I
spoken, Psalm. 116.10. And likewise where true faith is, as it works
immediately with GOD in heaven, for the justification of her owner, through
Christ Jesus, so straight also, and so thenceforth it sets the heart of her
owner so on fire with love both toward God, that in his Christ has so
tenderly loved him, and toward man for his sake, that thence he is most
careful that such works and words may flow as both shall and may give a
lively testimony thereof both to God and man. For all such have with Saint
Paul learned, that by Christ they are redeemed from all iniquity, and purged
to be a peculier people unto himself, zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. Thus
if these rivers of waters of life flow out of our bellies, then, and not else,
we may be sure we are come unto Christ, and have drunk of him to eternal
life. Whiles then we teach thus (as no otherwise we do,) do we set open any
gappe of liberty or licentiousnes to our hearers, or are we in our doctrine
any way enemies to good works, as our adversaries slander us? Nay do we not as
earnestly and vehemently, as they can for their lives, urge men to do them?
Indeed we dare not teach them, when they have done never so many of them, in
any case to make any piece of a savior, either of any thing they do or
suffer: because, as you have heard, we learned out of the Scriptures, that that
office so entirely and wholly is to be referred to Christ, that it may not be
imparted or communicated, without antichristian robbing of him of that special
honor that belongs unto him, to any thing or person else. But yet
notwithstanding, as now you hear, we most plainly teach, that none can have
any certainty in himself (without which our faith is but a fruiteles wavering
conceit that as yet he is in Christ and shall be saved undoubtedly for his
sake, until the power of him dwelling in him, truly appear by these fruits
of the spirit, that are here for their purity, multiplicitie, utility, and
continuance called rivers of water of life flowing out of the bellies of such.
And therefore though we dare not with our adversaries teach men, nor encourage
men to do good works, either in part or in whole to earne, deserve, or merit
heaven by, (which unless we would say with them, we say nothing to this
purpose) yet most clear and evident it is, that to that end we use and urge
all the arguments that the Scriptures have taught us. For we beseech them by
the mercies of God with Paul. Romans 12.1. to give up their bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, in serving him according to his word,
and not according to the fashions of the world. For that by these tender
mercies of God toward us in Christ Jesus, we that believe aright in him, are
delivered out of the hands of all our enemies, that we should serve him without
fear, all the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness before him.
Luke. 1.74.75. For in that this grace of God, that brings salvation unto all
men, has appeared, it teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and that we should live soberly, and righteously and godly in this
present world. Tit. 2.11.12. Yea having rightly laid hold of this grace, we
say again with the same Paul, That we are Gods workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which he has ordained that we should walk in Ephesians.
2.10. Again with Christ to this end we say unto all, Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which
is in heaven. Matthew. 5.16. and love one another, as he has loved us: for by
this shall all men know, that ye are his Disciples, John. 13.34.36. And with
Peter, we exhort all men to join virtue to their faith, to their virtue
knowledge, to their knowledge temperance, to their temperance, patience, to
their patience godliness, and to that botherlie kindness and love, so to
make their election sure, 2. Peter. 1.5. and 6. With James also we cry and
call upon every one that makes confession of faith, to show his faith by his
works, which if he do not, we as plainly tell him with the same James, that
his faith is dead in himself. Iam. 2.17. etc. For the faith that avails in
Christ Jesus, as Paul has taught us, works by love, not that love is in the
form of faith (for how can one distinct virtue be the form of an other) but
that it is the inseparable companion of a lively and sound faith. Neither are
we negligent in often laying before our people Gods law and the true meaning
thereof, both to teach them what good works are, and to incite them to do the
same. Wherein we dare be bold to say we go beyond our adversaries, in leading
men aright to good works. For we urge and show the law of GOD to be so
perfect and absolute a rule of good works, that it reaches to the condemning
of the first motions arising in our minds to sin, though they be not at all
yielded unto and liked of, for that it calls for the whole heart to be
occupied only in the things that please GOD, and that all sin is condemned
therein, and all virtue commended: whereas our adversaries the papists, hold
the law to be so imperfect, that it condemns not these first motions to
sin, and that there are a number of good works, and as meritorious, that
have for their ground but the traditions and commandments of men, as many
that are expressly commanded by the law of GOD: forgetting belike that the law
is so spiritual, that it made Paul to cry out of himself, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death? Romans 7.24.
and that Christ most flatly has said, that they worship him in vain that
teach for doctrines men's precepts. Math. 15.9. We use often to terrify our
hearers from ill works, and from omitting of good, by making it manifest unto
them, by the judgments of GOD therefore threatened and executed, that so to
do, is so daingerous, as that thereby they deserve all Gods heavy judgments
to be executed upon them both in this life, and in the life to come: and that
undoubtedly they shall, if they repent not. Wherein also we go further than
these our adversaries: for they teach that a number of sins, even for the
littlenes thereof, are not deadly, or such as deserve damnation, which may
easily be satisfied for and put away. Lastly we forget not to teach them what
promises of reward God has made to such as will carefully walk before him in
holiness and righteousness, both concerning this life, and that which to
come; assuring them with Paul, That godliness is profitable unto all things,
and has the promise hoth of this life present, and of that which is to come.
1. Tim. 4.8. wherein we go so far that also with Christ we confidently tell
them, that they shall not lease their reward in heaven, no not of a cup of
cold water bestowed aright in his name upon any of his. Mat. 10.42. For though
all that we do or can do, be infinitely less than we owe to God and are
bound to do, ( for in many things we sin all, Iam. 3.2.) yet all that
approve themselves to be in Christ by walking not after the flesh but after the
spirit in bringing forth the right fruits thereof, as Paul teaches Romans
8.12.13. etc. undoubtedly for Gods promises sake in Christ Jesus, shall both
here and in heaven find themselves and their works so liberally rewarded,
that they shall have no cause to complain, but rather to wonder at Gods most
bountiful crowning of his own blessings and graces with further both here
and there. Thus then you see that though, when the question is in hand why men
shall be saved, we dare send them to no other meritorious cause thereof but
only to Christ, and the things done by himself for us, because we know that
his name is the one lie name whereby comes salvation, Act. 4.12; yet when it
is demanded who they are, which for Christ's sake shall indeed be saved and
so rest in Gods tabernacle, and for ever dwell upon his holy hill, we are
boulde to teach that none but they that, according to the time and occasion
they have after they be in him, prove themselves to be such by the rivers of
water of life flowing out of their bellies, as you have heard, and therefore
are such as are described to that end, Psalm. 15.2. etc. And being such, we
count it no presumption, but most commendable faith in them to be fully
persuaded (because they have not only Gods word and promise generally
offered unto them, and particularly sealed in the administration of the word
and Sacraments outwardly; but also most effectually inwardly testified unto
their spirits by Gods own Spirit by these new fruits thereof, to appertain
particularly unto them, to ground this their perswation upon) that for Christ's
sake undoubtedly they shall be saved. These arguments therefore, we doubt not,
will be sufficient to move and to persuade all that unfeignedly be the Lords,
even of love and thankefulnes toward him for his unspeakable love and mercies
toward them, to strive both day and night, by all possible means, so to
stir up the graces of the spirit in them, that indeed worthylie they may be
counted as Rivers of waters of life flowing out of their bellies.

Thus then at last (well-beloved in the Lord) we have heard first, the
circumstances of a notable sermon made by Christ our Savior himself, as
where, when, upon what occasion, and in what manner he made it; namely at
Jerusalem, in the temple, in and upon the last and most solemn day of the
feast of Tabernacles, to draw them that were there, from their own vain
superstitions that led them from him to himself, uttered by him standing, and
that with a crying voice. Secondly you have heard that he spoke therein to all
that be thirsty, and to none else, that is to all that are truly broken and
contrite hearted under the burden of their sins, and so earnestly long for
redemption and deliverance from the same. Thirdly you have heard that he
commanded such, what, to ease them of this their spiritual thirst, they
should do; and that that was, and is, first to come unto him, that is to know
and acknowledge him what he is in person and office, and then to drink of him,
that is, rightly to believe in him, and so thereby to make him, with all the
mercies of God provided for man's salvation in him, their own: which they
having done, lastly you have heard that he promises all such that his Spirit
in them all should be as rivers of water of life flowing out of their bellies,
which was not, nor had not been as yet then; because when Christ made this
sermon, he was not yet glorified. And in handling of all these, withal you
have been showed what we are to learn every one of us thereby, both
ministers and people, which have been such and such and so many good things,
as that if we have heard as we ought to do, we have all of us (I hope) even
sufficiently to our salvation, learned both how to believe and how to live to
be saved. For first we have been taught how by the law we are to be humbled
and thrown down, that we may be fit patients for Christ Jesus secondly we
have heard by the Gospel, how we are to rise again and to recover a better
standing than ever we had in the first Adam, by knowledge and faith of the
second, Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior. For we have been showed how the
Spirit of God by the ministry of the word and Sacraments through this faith
of ours, grounded upon sound knowledge, unites Christ Jesus himself and us
together, though after a spiritual manner, yet most truly and effectually to
our salvation, and the contrary doctrine has at large been confuted. And by
the way it has most plainly been laid before us, how we ought to be
qualified both in faith and manners, both in hearing of the word and in the
use of the Sacraments, that thereby still we may grow up in the house of GOD
in Christ Jesus to be perfect men, and acceptable in the sight of his heavenly
father. Lastly, by the view of the promise we have been (I trust) thorowlie
taught what manner of lives we ought to lead, as long as we live, after that
once we be got to be in Christ Jesus indeed, in all true holiness and
righteousness. God therefore of his infinite mercy for our Savior Christ
Jesus sake give us grace so to imprint all these things in our hearts, that to
his own glory to the edifying of all others, amongst whom we shall live,
and to the everlasting comfort of our own souls we may every one of us that
have now heard these things, both unfeignedly believe and live always
accordingly. Now God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost,
three persons and one GOD, to whom be ascribed all honor, praise, and glory
now and for ever, be with all our souls and bodies, to bless, preserve and
keep us so in both this way, that we all of us living and dying may keep a
steddie and straight course therein until he vouchsafe to take us all hence
to be heirs of his eternal and everlasting kingdom. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
Printed at London for Robert Dexter dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign
of the Brazen Serpent. 1597.

Faults escaped.
Page. 2. lin. 1. for prove, r. provoke. p. 1. l. 2. for before to wards, r.
after or toward. p. 15. li. 21. for 13. r. etc. p. 22. l. 25. for on r. of p.
30. li. last. for when. r. even. and before for make a, p. 34. l. 6. for
priuitie. r. prauitie. and l. 22. next some put in sort. p. 37. l. 1^. for
free, r. fully p. 42. l. 24. for his, r he. p. 49. for sound r. fond. li. 10.
p. 46. li. 1. for sible to be, r. siblie be so. and li. 10. after they put in
neither. p. 52. li 14. for the r. this. p. 53 li. 9. after now, put to whereas
and li. 8. for where. r. what. and in the next line after man, put in, at. p.
54. li last. for where, r. whereas, and put out told, and r. to too. p. 55. li.
1 for of, r. and. and li. 6. for whereupon, r. hereupon. and li. 16. for
countred r. controlled. p. 56. li. ^1. or sinners, r. sins. p. 58. l. 15. for
an, r. and. 24 for. hereby, r. thereby. p. 60. li. 13. for as, r. is. p. 61. l.
2. for end, r. lend. p. 62. l. 24. for countenance. r. continuance. p. 66 l. 5.
for persons, r. person. line next but 2. for he r. so. and line last but 6. for
10. r. 1. p. 68. li. last but 6. after after put in by an in the last line, for
the r. that. p 70. li. last. after tended, put in, so. p. 72. l. 15. for his
of. r. of his. p. 77. li. last but 6. for made r. make. and last but. 4. for
it, r. him. and after so, put in, and. p. 80. l. 27. for not, r note. p. 82. l.
9. after of, put in he. p. 87. l 10. after but, put in one. p. 88. li. 10. for
though, r. through. p. 89. li. 21. for fruit, r. finite. r. 90. l. 7. for and
nailed. r. and having nailed. p. 91. l. 21. for these read those. p. 91. l.
last but. 5. for their redemption. r. in him their hope of redemption. p. 92.
l. 8. for the second as. r. us. p. 93. li 17 for speak, r. seek. p. 25. to r.
ho. p. 94. li. 22. after as, r. by. p. 101. l. 11. for he, r. Nathan p. 104. li
5. for extram. r. extreme. p. 106. lin. 5. put out so. p. 109. l. 16. for that
whey, r. what they. and l. 18. for is, r. are p. 11. l. 16. for money so, r. in
any sort p. 115. l. 8. for effectually r. especially. p. 122. li 1. for it is,
r. is it. and li. 9. after who put in can. and 20. after suffered put, by. p.
130. l. 6. after cribed put in him. p. 132. l. 9. for the, r. that. p. 134. for
be, r. to. p. 141. li. 24. for 6. r. 9. p. 151. li. 1. for in, r. into p. 158.
l. 9. for my, r. thy. p. 161. li. 1. for contains. r. co^tain. p. 170. li.
24. for there, r. the^. p. 193. li. 21. for meant r. ments. p. 200. li. 21.
after to put in, be. p. 217. li. 9. for which r. why. p. 234. l. 16. after is,
put in, his. p. 2^8. l. last next and, put in, a. 240. l. 4. for her, r. his.
p. 242. l. 8. for purpose. propose. p. 247. li. 24. for or impart, r. nor
import. p. 249. li. last but 3. after in, put in the. p. 251. li. 8. for the,
r. these. p. 273. li. 12. for destruction, r. distraction p. 275. li. 11. for
must, r. most. and li. 20. next us, put in salvation. p. 276. l. 1^. for such,
r. so. p. 284. on the margent for Consubstantiatio^. r. Transubstantiation. p.
286. l. 4. for 48. r. 4. p. 288. li. 9. for of Valentileans, r. of the
Valentinians. and li. 18. for inkling, r. iugling. p. 299. l. 19. for cannot,
r. can. p. 303. li. 16. after upon put in, him. p. 320. li. 16. for ame, r.
same. p. 348. li. 5. put out in.


