A LEARNED AND GRACIOUS SERMON Preached at Paul's Cross, BY THAT FAMOVS AND
ludicious Divine, JOHN SPENSER, D. of Divinity, and late President of Corpus
Chr: Coll: in OXFORD.

Published for the benefit of Christ's Vineyard, by H. M.

JOHN 15.2. Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away, and every
one that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

LONDON, Imprinted by George Purslowe for Samuel Rande, and are to be sold at
his shop near Holborne Bridge. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT REVER END AND worthily honored Father in God, JOHN by Divine
Providence, L. Bishop of LONDON, Grace and Peace be multiplied, with all the
complements of true Essential Happiness.
THe Author of this Heavenly Sermon, (Right Reverend and most worthy Moecenas
of Learning) I may justly compare to John the Baptist, of whom Jesus gives
this commendation, that he was a burning and a shining light, John 5.35. for
he was a John indeed, a faithful dispenser of the mysteries of God; in whom
the grace of God was exceedingly resplendent, who burned with zeal and love
toward Gods Vineyard; and was while he lived, such a shining light in the
house of God, in respect of his knowledge, learning, piety and godliness, that
he was reverenced of all good men, admired of such as excel in judicious
learning; yea, all me^ of what sort or condition soever, which knew him, did
worthily afforde him the testimony of a mild and loving spirit. Oh, what
admirable height of knowledge, and depth of judgment dwelled within the lowly
mind of this true humble man, great in all men's eyes except his own! with
what gravity, and majesty of speech did his tongue utter heavenly mysteries,
which many a Christian ear has heard, with unspeakable joy and comfort! Oh,
how did he empty himself to fill others! how did he waste and consume
himself, to inlighten that flock which was committed to his chargel yea, as
it is the nature of true goodness to communicate it self to others; so was it
this good man's endeavor, that as he was Lux illuminata, enlightened himself with
knowledge and grace from above, so he might be Lux illuminans, the instrument
and servant of God to inlighten others in the ways of their peace, to the
glory of his Master Christ, and the souls health of the lambs of his little
flock. For mine own part I profess it freely, that as I was to him under God
most of al indebted for my liuelihood in this world: so for matter of learning
and light of knowledge (if I have any) it was especially drawn from his
fountain, and derived from the splendour of his goodness; yea, while I lived as
it were under his roof (being his Minister for the space of five years) what
gain I got by attending his voice, how much I have profited by penning and
observing his precious meditations, and what a blessing I have reaped from the
harvest of his honest, religious, and unblameable conversation; those which
knew me before, and have been acquainted with me since, can truly testify to
Gods glory, that me mihi meliorem reddidit; quam accepit.

Wherefore now to show my thankfulness in part, and the reverend respect I
deservedly bore him, I have undertaken (though unworthy of all others) to
publish such of his learned labors as he left behind him: and which I am sure
he rather penned for his own private use, then with any purpose to have them
printed either before or after his death: for though by all possible means this
blessed man was ever ready to manifest his good will to the benefit of the
Church, and behoof of posterity; yet was he so lowly in his own eyes, so
cast down in his own conceit, and his labors of such little esteem in his
own sight, that he held nothing he did, worthy of the worlds view, though his
pains were never so great in the composing thereof; yea this of mine own
knowledge I dare affirm, that such was his humility and modesty in that kind,
that when he had taken extraordinary pains, together with a most judicious and
complete Divine in our Church, about the compiling of a learned and profitable
work now extant, yet would he not be moved to put his hand to it, though he
had a special hand in it, and therefore it fell out, that tulitalter honores.

Concerning this particular Sermon, which is his fathers postbumus, and
presents it self in the first place to the world before the rest, which by
Gods grace shall follow after, (though of it self it deserves allowance, and
binds dependency unto it) yet am I bold to recommend the protection thereof to
your Lordshippe, and to entitle it to your Honors name upon due deliberation,
and diverse just causes; as first, in regard of the unthankfulness of this
inconsiderate age of ours, which is more willing to entertain every idle
Pamphlet and vain toy that fond invention can excogitate, then to embrace such
laudable enterprises which further the Kingdom of God, or persuade the truth
of religion among the sons of men: amongst which ungrateful monsters, some
are such Atheists and open enemies of Gods truth, that they bark at them, sicut
Cerberus in Stygio; some are such Athenians, affecters of nouelty, that they
will hiss at them, sicut anguis in herba, and look asquint at every occurre^t
that fits not their humor: and there is an ignauum pecus, which them selves
stand idle in the market place all the day long, and yet with forked tongues
will they not spare to carpe at each monument of piety, and in a preiudicate
opinion reject and disgrace their pains, who shall but cross the path of
their wicked delights; wherefore I much desired (my Honorable L.) that this
worthy Sermon might find such an happy Patron as your self, being assured,
that passing under your Honorable name, it might be sheelded from the injury
and envy of impious, superstitious and contentious persons, and might find with
men of sound judgment the freer acceptance, and with men of great place the
grauer consideration, and with men of all sorts the better intertainment when
it comes abroad. And further, though I know your Lordshippe delights not to
have your name diuulged in printed papers, yet I doubt not but you will be
pleased to patronize this poor Orphan, and suffer it willingly to pass under
your Honors protection, and that for it own sake, being a discourse of Gods
Vineyard, a part whereof Almighty God has made you an happy ouerseer: but
especially for his fathers sake, whom while he lived, you loved as your own
life, and tendered as that which was nearest and dearest unto you: oh, how did
the loadstone of your love ever draw him after your self! so that in the same
University you were Students together, in the same house you were servants and
Chaplains together, in the same city you were neighbors and Preachers
together: to the same colleges where you were first Students, you were
advanced together, and I doubt not, but in the same kingdom (though he be
gone first) through Gods mercy you shall shine as stars together: and
therefore, seeing (good my Lord) he sleeps, but you are waking, he is in
heaven, and you on earth; what part or parcel of his writings can challenge as
of right, protection from any man that lives, save only your self, who have so
truly loved him in his life, and so redoubled your affection upon him in his,
since his death, which his religious, constant, and truly sorrowful widow
with her fatherless children do find and freely confess, pouring out
incessa^t prayers to almighty God for you and yours? And how can you want the
blessings of heaven, which have the widow and fatherless to intercede for you
upon earth? Oh give me leave to say of your Lordship, concerning this, without
suspicion of flattery, as Saint Hierom writes of Origin in his preface before
his book upon the Canticles, In ceteris libris omnes alios vicerit, in Cantico
Canticorum seipsum vicit: So in other of your paynfull works you go beyond
others, but in this work of piety you exceed your self. But not to trespass
too far upon your Lordships patience, seeing thus the God of mercy has moved
your heart, sincerely to affect the Author of this Sermon, and next under God
to regard his widow and fatherless children; let me presume to make this suit
further unto you, in the behalf of this the living Image of his soul, the
first fruit of his published labors, that you being a Reverend father of the
church, would give it your blessing before it go abroad, yea that blessing
which Jacob sent with his sons into Egypt, Genesis 43.14. God Almighty give you
mercy in the sight of the man; in the sight of the proud man, that you may make
him humble; in the sight of the poor man, that you may make him content; in
the sight of the stubborn man, that you may make him yield; in the sight of
the penitent man, that you may bind up and power wine and oil into his
wounds; in the sight of the barren man, that you may make him fruitful; in the
sight of every man, that you may touch their consciences, and win their
souls; but especially in the sight of our Joseph, our Jesus, who ever so
bless your Lordship, that your ways may be prosperous, your sorrows easy,
your comforts many, your virtues eminent, your conscience quiet, your life
holy, your death comfortable, your election sure, and your salvation certain.
Amen.

Your Honors humbly devoted, Hamlett Marshall.

GODS LOVE TO HIS VINEYARD.
ESAIAS the 5. VERSE 2.3. Now therefore, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of
Judah, Judge, I pray you, between me and my Vineyard: What could I have done
any more to my Vineyard, which I have not done unto it? Why have I looked for
grapes, and it brings forth wild grapes?


WHereas the beginning of man's salvation, the spur and goad which drives him
to Christ, is the sense of his own imperfections, and terror of his own
sins: Strange it is, how auerse we are by nature from this first means of
our conversion: strange, how blind, how partially, how corruptly we judge in
our own causes: either not once considering, or not faithfully acknowledging
our own transgressions: which forces God in the ordinary courses of man's
salvation, sometimes to deal by policies and devises, and to propose his own
case to him, not as his own, but in Parables, and in the person of others:
that drawing him from himself, he might also draw from him an impartial
sentence against himself. Thus God dealt with David, when he lay asleep in
the sin of Bershebah, and would not awake himself, to consider of his own
estate: that when David had given a severe sentence against the rich man that
slew the poor man's lamb, and had pronounced death against him with an oath,
As the Lord lives, he shall surely die: The Prophet might strike him to the
heart with the sentence of his own mouth: Thou art the man; Thus and thus have
thou done. And (to omit the manifold examples in Scriptures of this kind) thus
does our Prophet in this place deal with the people of Judah: he proposes to
them a Parable, and because it should be taken up in every man's mouth, he
sets it down in verse, and makes a song, of a Vineyard, which after the
infinite care and cost of the husbandman, in planting, fencing, weeding,
watering, pruning it, could not be won to bring forth any thing, but wild,
vnwholesom, and, as the word signifies, stinking grapes; wherein, having every
man's secret judgment, that such an unprofitable vineyard were to be left
desolate and neglected: he concludes out of this, their own severity,
against themselves, Verse 7. Surely, this Vineyard of the Lord of hosts, is the
house of Israel, the men of Judah are his pleasant plants, and he looked for
judgment, and behold oppression, for righteousness, and behold a crying.

And first by the way for the Parable it self: God has judged it profitable
thus to teach his Church sometimes by parables; which though they be vayles and
shadows, and do hide under them spiritual mysteries, yet when they are opened
and unfolded, they give a great light to the thing which they shadowed, and by
their sensible similitude and proportion, they breed a sensible conceit of
things removed from sense.

Now to discourse of this whole Parable, time will not permit. I have made
choice of that one part only, in which the case of the Vineyard is put to the
judgment of the people, that is, their own cause is referred to their own
arbitrament. Now therefore, O inhabitants, etc. Judge I pray you, etc.

In which words is comprehended the sum of the whole. 1. The Church of
Israel is proposed under the figure of the Lords vineyard. 2. Is set down the
Lords care of provision for his Vineyard: What could I have done for my
Vineyard, which I have not done? 3. The end of Gods care and benefits, fruits,
good works, ( I looked for grapes.) 4. The Churches unthankfulness, ( It
brings forth wild grapes.) 5. and lastly, the judgment which passed on it,
( Judge I pray you.)

First, for the Church of Israel, thus figured by a vineyard: As there is one
Creator both of heaven and earth: so wonderful are the similitudes and
resemblances of one order of his creatures to another, of things sensible, to
things intelligible, whereby in earth wise men do behold a shadow of heaven it
self: but of earthly things which represent spiritual, nothing does more
lively express the nature of the visible Church, then does a Vineyard. A
certain householder (says our Savior, Math. 21.) planted a Vineyard. And
John the 15. I am the Vine, and ye are the branches, and my Father is a
husbandman. For what property can we find in the one, which is not in a sort
answered in the other? Both Church and Vineyard, neither of them do, as
selfe-sowne things naturally spring and multiply out of the earth, both are to
be planted by hand and by art. Non exsanguinibus nec ex voluntate carnis, sed
ex Deo, says Saint John of the Church. Both Vine and Church grow up the
meanest of all plants; they cannot bear up themselves without props and
stays: even as the Elm is to the Vine, so is the civil state unto the
Church. Both in regard of their natural weakness are taught to twine their
arms and their branches one within an other, and embrace, sustain and
strengthen one another, as it were, growing in one by love; when they flourish,
and are suffered to spread, nothing so enlarges it self. As Pliny speaks
of Vines: Sine modo crescunt: So the Church spreads forth her arms from the
sea unto the river, from one end of the world unto the other. In the time of
their flourishing estate, and their summer, no plant is so pleasant, every
thing harboreth under their shadow: but when winter comes, and the
persecutions of storms take away their beauty, no plant stands so poor, so
deformed, so contemptible to the outward eye; the rich, the noble, the worldly
wise, like their green leaves, do commonly fall away. Both Vineyard and
Church, both must be strongly fenced, else they lie open to the prey of many
kinds of spoils: both must be pruned and kept under with continual cutting,
else they grow out luxuriously, and become wild; and as for their fruits, when
they prove fruitful, how are their weak branches laden with grapes? how do
their fruits exceed their strength? how do they bring forth their grapes in
bunches, and clusters, united in love? as the Apostle Saint James speaks of
the fruits of righteousness, that they are brought forth in peace of them that
love peace. And as for the kinds of their fruits, all other fruits in
comparison, are as nothing: It is the fruit of these two vines which ministers
mirth and comfort to all the world; and as the vine speaks, Judge. 9.
cherishes the heart both of God and man. Fruits of mercy and love, how do
they warm and cheer up the weak hearts? fruits of Justice and Equity, how
do they ease and relieve the oppressed soul? God and Angels, and men rejoice,
when these Vines are laden with these fruits. For when they are unfruitful,
both sorts of Vines are of all trees most unprofitable, serving for no use but
for the fire.

This is then the nature of Gods Church. It is a spiritual Vineyard; the root
whereof is but one, Christ Jesus the second Adam. Other foundation (says the
Apostle) can no man lay: Other Plants shall be rooted out: Into him the multitude
of believers are planted, into him they grow: for all the branches of it, are
of their own nature wild, taken from the old stock, the first Adam, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call, and they are set into that eternal Vine,
the second Adam, by ingrafting.

Now, as in Grafts, though all in like manner stand in stocks, and are fastened
to them with outward bonds, yet all do not incorporate themselves by drawing
sap from the root, and thereby growing in it, and bringing forth fruit; so
there is an outward ingrafting into Christ, by outward visible bonds of union,
the outward profession of the faith of Christ, and the outward Sacrament of
Incorporations, the society and company of which outward professions, so
visibly ingrafted, do make the visible Church and Vineyard of God on earth:
And with this visible and outward ingrafting, and by means thereof, there is
wrought an inward ingrafting and incorporating, through the invisible bonds of
the spirit also, in which some do grow into the stock, and receive sap and
life from the root, even the participation of the spirit of life from Christ,
and do bring forth fruit in him; the company of which only do make up that
mystical body of Christ, which is to man invisible, because the bond is
invisible. These two sorts of grafts, howsoever to our eyes they stand alike in
the stock, and do sometimes seem to grow alike, yet the Apostle distinguishes
most plainly with their several bonds also, Romans 2.28. He is not a Jew, who
is a Jew outward, neither that circumcision which is in the flesh: but he is a
Jew, who is a Jew within, whose circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit,
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. Notwithstanding,
both these sorts, as they communicate together in the outward bonds of one
profession, as they visibly continue together like one visible body, upon that
one root Christ Jesus, on whom they al outwardly profess that they depend, as
on the fountain of their sap and life: so they both together make this one
visible Vineyard, and visible Church on earth, to which God speaks by his
Prophets; that Vineyard which is sometimes fruitful, and sometimes brings
forth wild grapes. And of this visible kind of Vineyard we are now to entreat.

Our next question therefore is, where that Vineyarde may be seen. For in
Esayes days; Surely (says God) the Vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house
of Israel, the men of Judah are his pleasant plants: All the world besides, was
as a wilderness and a forest, the habitation of wild beasts: this only was the
Lords Paradise placed in the midst of the world, and fenced in from all the
world; the subject of our present Parable. But the circumstances of this Church
doc minister occasion of 3. doubts, concerning the general nature and state of
Gods Church on earth, which are necessary to be unfolded: first, seeing the
whole church of Israel and Judah, was at these times so generally corrupted, as
well in idolatry and superstition, as in life and manners; that, as it is, Esaias
1. From the crown of the head, to the soale of the foot, there was nothing
sound, but wounds and swellings, and sores full of cerruption: A doubt arises
how it might be called Gods Church and Vineyard, unless an Idolatrous, and
erring. Church, notwithstanding may be accounted Gods Church; an adulterous
wife, Gods Spouse. 2. Seeing the house of Israel at this day was divided, and
Ephram separated from Judah, not only in civil sort, but in the form of
Religion also; our next doubt is then, how these two Churches are
notwithstanding by the Prophet counted as one: The vineyard of the Lord of
hosts is the house of Israel, though the men of Judah be his pleasant plants:
And seeing both Judah and Samaria are now laid waste, and the Church and
Vineyard there is utterly destroyed; our last doubt is, where the Vineyard and
Church of God may now be found on earth. I will lightly touch them all;
speaking first of the place where the Church is; secondly, of her variable
state, her purity and corruption: thirdly, of her unity, how, many particular
Churches are notwithstanding one.

Now for the first, where the Vineyard of the Lord of hosts is. Unhappy Israel,
thou had an eternal promise; Psalm. 132. ver. 14.
This (said God) is my rest for ever, here will I dwell: but thou did thy
self reject God, and did cast the LORD thy Redeemer out of his own
Vineyard: thou did with a loud cry, in the sight of the Sun, and in the
hearing of the Gentiles protest, We will not have this man to reign over us,
we will have no King but Caesar. Thou did lead him out of thy City, and
did crucify him without the gate, calling for the guilt of his innocent
blood, not only upon thine own head, but also upon the heads of all thy
posterity. And now the Lord is risen up again, and is departed; the Vine is
removed, and planted elsewhere: and as for that old Vineyard, it is burnt, it
is burnt with fire, and the wild beasts of the forest have devoured it up.

Seeing then the Lord will not be without a Church on earth, without a
Vineyard: Psalm. 80.
if we demand where it is now; 1. it is evident, that since Judah is for her
contempt laid waste, the Lord has planted his Church in the desert of the
Gentiles: secondly, it is as evident, that according to the prophesies, he has
enlarged the bounds thereof, and has made it universal and Catholic, so that
there is no City nor Nation, which will receive that eternal root to be
planted in it, which may not become a part of his Church and Vineyard. This
appears by the manner of Gods proceeding. When Paul and Apollo the Lords
workmen went forth to work, in what City soever they stayed, they made a
Vineyard; Paul planted, Apollo watered: and by their industry the Lord had a
new Church in Corinth; a Church at Ephesus, a Church in Galatia, in
Thessalonica, in Philippi: the other Apostles and Evangelists did the like in
other Countries, planting Vineyards as far as India: so that if any man would
know where the Lords. Church is, we need not seek for secret marks and
tokens: These Vineyards are easily discerned from other parts of the earth:
And yet not by their fruits; for often they bring forth wild grapes, but by
their root that is planted in them, in what Country or place soever; that Vine
which came down from heaven is planted, wheresoever it is outwardly received,
as the root and spring of man's life and salvation: where there is Baptism to
ingraft and incorporate the new professed branches, and the food of the word,
and the communion of the Lords Supper, to make them increase and grow, there is
a Vineyard: because there both is his vine, and the means to make it spread to
the Lord of hosts, and therefore there is his eye, and care, and providence and
protection, there he expects fruit: for wheresoever God vouchsafes to bestow
the outward grace of the knowledge of Christ, Act. 16.9
and to continue the sowing of his seed of life; it is an evident token that he
has some people in that place.

Thus of those seven several Vineyards and Churches in Asia, with their Angels
and overseers, Revel. 1. though one Church was purer then another, and some
were so degenerated, that the great LORD of the Vineyard does threaten them
with desolation, and removing the vine root; yet his careful eye was over them
all, and he that seems to be gone into a far Country, yet was seen
walking in the midst of them, and, as it were holding them in his hand. And
thus to seek no other marks and notes of the Church, then this present Parable
affoordeth; what greater assurance can we have to our selves, that the Lord
has chosen us for a part of his Vineyard, then this, that he has with such
care and long assiduity labored to plant the knowledge of Christ crucified
among us; that he has raised up such multitudes of Laborers amongst us, and
endued them with excellent faculties and graces, and sent them into his
Vineyard to follow his spiritual husbandry; that he has so many thousands
daily ingrafted into him by Baptism; that he so mightily protecteth them with
his defenses, and so continually feeds them with the knowledge of his word,
so importunately calls at their hands for the fruits of a Vineyard, and no
doubt receives some? for it is impossible that all these things should be in
vain, as not from God, seeing not so much as the rain and snow from heaven
do return again in vain, Esai. 55.10.11.

The second question which the Vineyard moves, is concerning the state of the
Lords Churches, their purity or corruptions here on earth, whether they are
always clean, and not sometimes through the negligence of the Overseers
ouergrowne with weeds, or through their private covetousness sometimes planted
among, with other plants. For first, the Church of Judah, howsoever at this
time, in the days of Vzziah, it held the public profession of God purely, yet
was it both now so generally corrupted in manners, that in Esai 1. God cries
against it: Ah sinful Nation, laden with iniquity, corrupt children, which
have forsaken the Lord: After, in the days of Ahas, both Prince and high
Priest and people, even the whole outward state fell to Idolatry, and by little
and little so corrupted their ways, that as Ezechiel charge her, she went
beyond her sister Samaria in spiritual fornication and idolatry. And yet
notwithstanding this her uncleanness, she is still counted the Lords Spouse,
though a harlot also; and the Lords vineyard, though for the outward face in
most part clean degenerated; yea, and the Lord by his Prophets wooeth her as
his own, because she had not absolutely renounced his covenants; otherwise
God had no public and visible Church and Vineyard at all upon the earth in
those days. Nay, I may go further and affirm of Israel, that though it not
only worshipped God by calves, and after in Ahabs time, did set up Baal also,
the god of the Gentiles, and then as the Prophet charge them, halted between
God and Baal: yet the Lord, not only in this place calls it his Vineyard, and
professes, Ier. 3.9. I am a Father to Israel, Ephraim is my first borne; But
his merciful presence in the midst of these abominations did not clean
forsake the^, but that he had of his Prophets continually amongst them, and
many messages of kindness he sent to their state, and many miraculous
deliverances he wrought for them; and after almost three hundred years
Idolatry, when Israel was for this their irreuocable obstinacy in rebellious
fornication to be cast off into the hands of her enemies, and yielded up to
captivity: yet he is as it were distracted within himself, Hos. 8. How shall I
deliver thee up, O Ephraim? My heart is turned within me: I will not (yet)
execute the fiercenes of my wrath: for though Ephraim were a prodigal son,
yet he was counted a son to his last being, even till he gave up the seal of
circumcision and outward profession of the name of the God of Israel. Can then
an Idolatrous Church be counted the Lords Church? and a degenerate Vine that
only grows upon another root, and brings forth wild fruit of another
kind, be named the Lords Vineyard? Surely, to use Gods own similitude, where
there has publicly passed a solemn contract of marriage, visibly confirmed
by Covenants and pledges mutually delivered and received, though the wife keep
not the truth of her first faith, but even openly and shamelesly turns away
her heart after other lovers; yet til there passes a public renouncing one of
the other, and a bill of diuorcement given, and separation passed, she is
accounted his wife whose name she bears, and whose wife she publicly
professes her self to be: So is between God and his visible Church, both
Israel and Judah, notwithstanding their fornications, still kept the public
profession of the name of the God of Israel, they retained circumcision, the
outward seal and pledge both of his Covenant; both offered sacrifices to him
that brought the^ out of Egypt, even by that style, though in a superstitious
manner: both had the law of God publicly amongst them, and his Prophets also:
And therefore this outward foundation of the old league and covenant continues
still; the Lord accounts them both as his; and notwithstanding their known
adulteries, and their children of fornication by other gods (whom they also
served) he entreats them, though in anger and displeasure and in threats,
and sometimes in chasticements, yet as his own (for they were never denounced
till they were destroyed) and by the benefit of that same outward society and
coniunctio^, which in the midst of their other abominations still remained
between God and them, of the word and Sacrament many spiritual children also
were borne by them to the Lord, such as those 7000. were in Elias days, who
living in house together with their illegitimate brethren, feared their father,
the God of Israel, and secretly mourned at the abominations of their mother;
howsoever by living in so corrupt a house, they might be tainted with some of
the corruptions of their mother, and carnal brethren. And this is the nature
of the Christian Church, whereof that was a figure: it is here on earth, subject
to alterations, and to that like general defection and ouerrunning with weeds,
which both Christ and the Apostles prophecy should happen in the outward and
visible face thereof, which we see did happen in the figurative Church of
Israel before Christ, though the root and foundation of Christianity shall
never fail in it, and the book of God, the seed of immortality, shall remain
in it uncorrupted; and the public profession of Christ, shall never be utterly
choked for the Elects sake, that shall be from age to age of this world being
borne in it; yea, though one part of the Church, whose preservation of the
truth shall be less corrupted then an other, as Judah was in comparison of
Israel. For the particular Churches are like Vineyards; some flourishing for a
time, some barren, and according to their husbandmen, some cleaner kept, some
ouergrowne with thorns; some become wild for want of pruning; yea, they are
like our bodies, some sound and orthodox, some more diseased, some sick unto
death, and some unclean and leprous, and with whom there can be no communion.

Thus the Church of Corinth in the Apostle Saint Paul's time, was not so sound
as the Churches of Rome and Ephesus, the Church of Galatia was infected with a
most dangerous error. After, when S. John wrote, the church of Ephesus had her
imperfections; the other six Churches were more infected, and amongst them
Laodicea was in far worse estate then either Pergamus or Thyatira; and yet
all these remained the Lords Churches and Vineyards in the midst of their
errors and corruptions, because they held that foundation of Christianity,
upon which the Church is builded: Thou art Christ the Son of the living God:
For although as every sin is opposite to theloue of God, so every error also
is opposite to his truth, and do not agree together: yet by reason of our
weak eyes and judgments, not discerning the disagreement of truth and error,
as of righteousness and sin, the best men do receive some probable errors
into the society of truth, without rejecting and ouerturning their faith of
those grounds which they truly hold; and therefore though every little error in
matter of faith be dangerous, and causes some defect and mayme in our practice
of piety, either in our inuocations of faith, or in our works of love, and the
more deadly, the nearer they touch the principal grounds: yet they do not all
make wounds unto death, and kill our faith and piety, till they come to be
known and wilful errors, that is, to be heresies and sins of the will; for
then the least error is deadly, because it is wilful, and directly opposite to
the love of the truth of Christ.

Finally, as one Church is more or less pure and Orthodoxe then another, so
we see how the self same Churches continue not always in one and the self
same state; for the Church of Judah was sometime religious, sometimes
idolatrous, sometimes purged in part the groves and high places still
remaining; so has every Church in the world since Christ's time undergone great
alterations and changes: the Church of Rome in her first ages was very sound
and pure; the Eastern Churches were more ouergrowne with errors in these
latter ages since, as Platina observes, John 10. The people were clean
departed from Saint Peter's steps; the west Churches have more declined, and the
Eastern Churches, except that one error of the proceeding of the holy Ghost,
in all other parts of faith, remain much more pure then the Church of Rome and
her adherents: yea Rome it self began a little changing of her self, when
Pius the fifth, acknowledging that their books of public divine service in all
places were stuffed with vain errors of superstitions, did cast out some
corruptions, and (no doubt) besides the private reformations both in the
judgments and practice of numbers of her followers, who will not embrace all
her abominations, she would have proceeded further in public reformation, had
not, besides the love of her private gains, a respect of her public credit
hindered her: for by confessing any one error, she sees that she should give
prejudice against her self for other her opinions, in acknowledging that she
might err in them also. Which ministers an answer to their vain objections;
who demand of us where our Church was for so many ages, till Martin Luthers
days, in what cave of the earth it lurked? for our Church is one and the same
which it was at the first planting of Christianity amongst us; It has always
had one and the same root and foundation, one and the same Christ publicly
professed, though at the first more purely, afterward more corruptly; and not
by Gods mercy the same Christ more purely again. For as the new dressing and
weeding of a Vineyard, is not a new planting; and as the often repairing the
decays and purging of the uncleanness of the Temple, was not the new founding
and building of another Temple; so in our Church, since it was reformed we know
no other difference from that which it was before, then such as we see in the
Vineyard and Church of Judah, which in the days of Manasses was full of
superstition, in the days of Josiah had her abominations cast out, and the
purity of Gods service restored according to his own law.

There were crept into our Church graven Images, and the likenesses of things
in heaven, and things in earth; and men did bow down and worship them
contrary to the law, and contrary to antiquity; for, as yet appears even by
the buildings and walls of our most ancient Churches, there was no place
within the Church provided for them. To these Images of dead men they did light
candles, and burned Incense, and offered gifts after the custom of the
heathen; the light of the Church was removed out of the candlesticks; and the
word of God, which is the true light of the world, and lantern to our feet,
was hidden under an unknown tongue, as under a bushel; that which the Apostle
calls both our milk and our meat, was taken away, and nothing was read to
the peoples understanding, but the lies of their Legend; the author thereof had
a leaden head, and a brazen forehead, as Viues a learned Papist ce^sureth them.
The holy Sacraments of the church were profaned; to the sanctified water in
baptism, cream was added, and salt and spittle, and by the people received as
parts of the sacrament; the Lords Supper was mangled; the cup of blessing,
which is the Communion of the blood of Christ, was sacrile giously removed; and
the communion of the bread was turned into a private mass of dead ceremonies:
These and infinite other abominations were grown up so high, that they did
both draw all the fatnes from the root, and ouerdrop and ouershadow the true
vine, and even called for the fickle to cut them down: for there was not any
learned devout man amongst themselves in those ages, who did not both bewail
the corruptions of the Church, as appears by them that wrote, and in
particular acknowledge some one error of theirs or other; though now authority
stops their mouths, and clippeth such tongues; and the Indices expungatorij
do raze those confessions out of their writings. Now the indisposition
therefore, either of the Church of Rome, or any other neighbor Church to reform
themselus, can be no just excuse for our Church, and her overseers, not to
reform her self, then it had been for Israel to sin, because Judah sinned,
or for Judah, because of the sin of Israel. In these cases of Gods service
and honor, the expectation of neighbors, and desire of unity is no allowed
answer: but that of Iosuah belongs to all governors, which he spoke to all
Israel, Iosu. 15. If it seem evil in your eyes to serve the Lord, choose you
this day whom you will serve: but I and my house will serve the Lord: and that
rule of Hosea; If Ephraim be joined unto Idols, let him alone; and if Israel
play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin. Only our hearty prayer unto God is,
that as we do communicate in the general grounds and foundations of
Christianity, and jointly profess the same Creed, so the Lord would give them
hearts to remove these abominations, which block up the way of peace and
communion between Church and Church; or if either for pride or covetousness,
they will acknowledge no error, yet he would give them contented minds to keep
to themselves their own corruptions, which now being cast off by us, would be
so much the more loathsome to put on again.

The third doubt which the vineyard of the house of Israel answers, is the
unity of the Church, seeing the divided houses of Ephraim and Judah not so much
severed in state, as in religion, are yet by our Prophet accepted as one
vineyard: for though one read of many several Churches in the new Testament
also: Psalm. 64.
yet that of Saint Augustine is most true, there be many Churches, yet but one
Church; and in such sort many; yet they are all but one. Nay, in the unity of
the Church, we must yet go further, and acknowledge with the same father, the
Church is the body of Christ; not that which is here or there, but that which
is every where throughout the world; Psalm 90.
neither that which is at this time, but even from Abel, unto those which shall
hereafter be borne, and believe in Christ unto the end: the whole company of
saints belonging to one City, which is the body of Christ, and whereof he is
head: for this is that which the Apostle affirms of all believers: Be they
Jew or Gentile, bond or free, they are al incorporate into one Company, they
all make one body. But this unity is properly meant of Christ's mystical body
and Church, which is invisible, of which church these men are no part, who are
only in Sacrament is Ecclesiae, as Saint Augustine expounds himself; that
is, of the whole body of the faithful from Adam to the end of the world; yet
notwithstanding these outward visible societies of professed christians, in
which the militant members of Christ, mingled with the bad, are yet in framing
for eternity, these also have a bond of unity also, and though they be many,
yet are they but as one.

Now the outward bonds of these visible Churches are diverse: for 1. they all
spring by propagation, from one original mother Church: Jerusalem, which is
beneath, is the mother of us all, and from Sion came the Gospel by propagation
unto all Nations. But this bond is not so strong, as to tie them in one, that
are sprung from one beginning: There is a stronger, which this Parable of a
Vine does lay before us: for the Vine or tree which is divided into so many
several branches, some dying, some springing up; and one bough perhaps bearing
several fruits from another; what is it that makes them all one, but their
own stock and root, on which they all vifibly grow? this is the visible bond
of the several arms, and parts of the visible Church; they all outwardly
join in that one root Christ, in whom they are all visiblie ingrafted, and on
whom they all make outward show, that they do stand and grow.

The Apostle, Ephesians. 4.5. exhorting Christians to unity, sets down this
bond, and to it adds two other kinds, the uniformity of our faith, and
articles of belief. There is one kind of ingrafting, one badge of their
incorporation, Baptism. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: i. One King, under
which they live; one Law, by which they are guided; one common badge of their
incorporation, which they all publicly receive: so that seeing the Jews,
howsoever dispersed amongst all the Nations of the earth, and living without
dependence upon any one common governor, and yet accounted but as one Nation,
because of the bond of their unity in the public profession of the Law of
Moses; and seeing they that hang on Mahomet as their Prophet only, howsoever
divided both in sects and kingdoms amongst themselves, are yet in regard of
their common profession of Mahumetisme, accounted but as one body of
Mahumetans; How much more truly do these 3. bonds of professing one and the
same Lord and King, of receiving his one and the same law and word of
incorporating themselves into one body by Baptism, in which 3. the essence of
Christianity consists, make all the professed christians of the world of one
incorporation, howsoever they are scattered in the earth, and scattered in
place and in knowledge one of another? yea, and in some private opinions also
differ; for they all visibly meet in their one root Christ, and in professing
of faith in him. To these 4. common bonds the Primitive Church added, as they
might, a fifth bond of communion, and mutual society, every new created
Bishop and ouerseer of any particular Church, sending his synodicall letters
of the profession of his faith to his neighbor brethren, and they accordingly
receiving one another into the communion and fellowshippe of love, as appears
by the Ecclesiastical story. Lastly, when the Emperor himself became a
christian, and the bonds of the Empire and of the church were in a manner all
one, they added a 6. bond; the common assemblies of all the overseers of the
particular Vineyards within the Empire, in common counsel to make peace, and
set down orders for the peaceable and uniform government of the whole. But the
church of Rome, which in the greatness she is grown to, says of her self,
as Babylon, Revel. 18. I am a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
mourning, that is, I cannot fail, would teach the world a new lesson or
article of christian faith, not read in the Scripture, not thought of in the
Primitive church, not acknowledged by any ancient Father, not dremed of by any
ancient Bishop of that See, that notwithstanding God thundered, and was angry,
when the Israelites asked a King, as therein rejecting God to reign over them;
yet now the Church cannot be under Christ and his Judges, as Israel was,
unless she have a King, an absolute Monarch over her, and that is the Bishop
of Rome: that all who acknowledge not this doctrine, are heretics; all that
yield not that obedience, are schismatiques; none of the Church and body of
Christ; all as Publicans and Infidels, and in the state of damnation. A
fearful sentence, like that of the Bramble, Iugd. 9. If you put not your
trust under my shadow, fire shall come out from me, and consume the Cedars of
Libanon: For if all be schismatiques, and cut off from the Church, like
branches from the Vine, that acknowledged not the Bishop of Rome for their
King: then was Saint Cyprian in a damnable estate, who not only rejected
Stephanus the Bishop of Rome, in a matter of faith, but in matter and cases
of jurisdiction also forced appeals to Rome, and advised the Bishops of Spain
to repeal him, whom Stephanus had restored to his Bishopric. Then was Saint
Augustine in a damnable estate, who with 216. Bishops, in the 6. Council of
Carthage, not only wrote to Innocentius, not to receive appeals out of
Africa, nor to send his Legates a letter, nor to bring in the smoaky pride of
the world into the Church of God, but also made a decree purposely against his
challenged authority, that what Priest or Deacon soever should appeal to any
beyond the sea, he should be excommunicated throughout all Africa.

But what do I speak of particular Bishops, that a canonical Council of
Calcedon, of 630. Catholic Bishops was in a damnable state, which made a
decree, that the Archbishop of Constantinople should have equal privileges
with the Archbishop of Rome; and that he having the next place of honor,
should in causes Ecclesiastical be advanced as far as the Sea of Rome? And
although the Popes Legates did by all means labor to stay the decree, as
being repugnant to a former decree of the Nicene Council for the church of
Antioch, yet it passed with general consent, and was pronounced by the Judge
as the decree of the Council: neither is this it self so much to be regarded,
as the reason they gave for that their decree; that as their Father had not
given, without good advice, to the Sea of elder Rome, the first place of honor,
because that City was the seat of the Empire, so with a former council of 150.
Bishops at Constantinople, under Theodosius the elder, moved with like
consideration, had given equal privileges to the most holy See of new Rome;
and they insisting in the steps of sacred Fathers, did again decree the same
thing. This was in those days the opinion of the Bishops of the whole world,
concerning the ground and reason of the Bishop of Romes Primacy; neither was
that the opinion of the Church for a time: but three parts of the Christian
world, under the three Patriarchs of Constantinople, of Antioch, and of
Alexandria, have always since received him as heretical for his claim,
insomuch that they denied their Emperor Michael Palaeologus christian burial,
for yielding to the Church in the council at Lions; and even at this day,
though their miserable slavery under the Turk might force them to yield a show
of subjection to any christian, of whom they might hope of any comfort: yet
they cannot in their consciences frame themselves to this gross and lying
flattery. Wretched men, if undergoing such miseries under the hands of their
enemies for Christ's name, neglecting such liberties and worldly preferments, as
are proposed to reuolters, they are notwithstanding in the damnable estate of
the Turks and Infidels, and Aliens from CHRIST for that default, though they
thus live as Confessors, and many of them die as Martyrs.

But to conclude, the universal Church and Spouse of Christ, for many ages
after her Lords ascension, kept herself free from these domestical yoakes;
neither could she be induced, that any decree or cannon should be imposed
over her by any one of her Bishops, but that which her self in the free and
common Council of her elder children concluded to be good for her self and
hers: for execution of which orders and Canons, though she appointed her elder
sons to ouersee her younger first, some as Bishops to ouersee her
Presbyters; and after some as Primates to ouersee her Bishops; and lastly, some
as Archbishoppes and Patriarks to ouersee her Primates; yet all the orders
which they exacted of particular persons, were the common decrees of their
Synods. Now wonderful it is to consider, how one of her own children, by
getting the elder brothers place, has in the absence of the Lord, usurped and
claimed over the necks, first, of all his brethren in particular; and lastly,
over the neck of his mother also, creeping up by the Emperor, like Iuie by
the Oak, till he had ouertopped him also; from a primacy, to a supremacy, and
after, to an absolute and visible Monarchy and Kingdom of Romans, and as Lord
of all, imposed laws to his own mother, and drawing all power into his hands,
and making himself as the Sun, from which all others, both Moon and Stars
do receive their light.

Thus has Lucifer invaded Christ's poor Family, and has made choice of a
person of humility, by whom, under the color of piety and religion, he might
bring into the Church of Christ, the highest degree of pride, that ever the
world saw in any worldly state, or the weakness of man is capable of; whom
he setting up on the foundation, not of a rock, but of imagination and
opinion only; and crowning with a triple crown, has persuaded both him to
take, and persuaded men to give more then humane honors, as high as to the
titles of Optimus maximus, our Lord God the Pope; and as our Countryman
Stapleton writes to him, Supremum in terris Numen, forcing the Emperors
sometimes acknowledged for his gracious Lords and Sovereigns, to yield their
necks for him to trample on, and the Kings and Princes of the earth to lick
the dust of his feet, and all the people for their salvation to fall down
before him, as having all keys and powers of heaven and earth, and hell, and
purgatory; as blasting with the breath of his mouth like lightning, whatsoever
he curses; as having the oracles of God in his breast, and that never
ordinary privilege that he cannot err.

This was the punishment of the Church, after that through abundance and wealth,
and ease, she became wanton, and loved not the truth: that as it was
prophesied, 2 Thessalonians. 2. God should send strong delusions, and men should
believe lies, to the astonishment of all other churches, both Eastern and
Southern, who wonder that we can believe such fancies.

As for the necessity of one visible Monarch to make the visible church one,
seeing the Apostles writings in their so often mention of the church, and the
pastors of the same, never intimate this doctrine of this Monarchy, seeing
Ephesians. 4. the Apostle of purpose lays the grounds of unity, alleges those
other bonds, One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and omitteth this; seeing after
reckoning upon the several degrees of Ministers both ordinary and inordinary,
given to his church, after his affection for the building of it in truth and
love, he sets down Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers,
this one Monarch is not once named to the church; seeing before Christ's coming
God had a visible Church in Job his house, not depending upon the Church of
Judah, and is also granted by Bellarmine, and yet the Church of God was always
one; seeing since Christ the Primitive Church had no such head, but as Aeneas
Siluius acknowledges, Ante Nicenum Concilium sibi quisque viuebat, and ad
Romanam Ecclesiam paruus ad modum respectus habebat: and yet in the long time
of that little regard of Rome, the Church of Christ was one; seeing to this day
all Churches in the three parts of the world, have so anciently renounced this
one head, who notwithstanding may not be accounted castawayes, and no parts of
Christ's Church; seeing whatsoever reason is urged of necessity, one Bishop
does as necessarily prove the necessity of one King over all the Christian
world; truly, we are so far from thinking the necessity of one visible head
to be an article of our faith, that contrariwise we agree in judgment with
Gregory the Great, concerning the danger of the same, who disputing against the
very name and title of an universal Bishop, brings this reason against the
thing, Ecclesiae vniuersa corruit, si ille vniuersus cadit: if that universal
Bishop should fall, his fall be the ruin of the whole Church. This our
lamentable experience has made good, not only in the government of the
Western Churches, in which he has been like a wild Bore in the Lords
Vineyard, but also in their faith, which by reason of their general subjection
to that one head, was as generally tainted with the same errors: for as when
one foot slippeth, the other may stand and uphold the body, unless it be
carried with the sway of that which slipped: so when one Church fails in any
point of truth, an other may stand and uphold the same, unless they be dependant
one upon an other, and respect not that only incorruptible head Christ, and his
unchangeable laws.

2 Now, that we have found out the Lords Vineyard, and considered the nature
and state of the same, we are in the next place to consider the husbandry
which the Lord of this Vineyard uses, the labor, the cost, the skill, and
care he bestows on it to make it prosper; for since that universal curse
pronounced by the mouth of God, Cursed be the earth for man's sake: thorns and
thistles shall it bring forth: Genesis 3.
good things do hardly thrive, without skillful and Industrious planting and
cherishing; their impediments are many; their helps must be so many, that the
Vineyard which is neglected and left to it self, may seem in a manner
blameless, though it prove not fruitful; for these duties therefore of the
husbandman, the Lord conscious to himself of his own goodness toward it,
doubts not to make the Vineyard and Church it self, and every plant thereof,
even all the inhabitants of Judah, his Judges, what one thing he has omitted
which might have smothered it, (What could I have done to my Vineyard (says
God) which I have not done?

The particulars were set down before. 1. The choice of the seat of Canaan,
(My beloved had a Vineyard on a very fruitful hill. 2. His fencing it from
spoils ( He hedged it about) with his mighty protection. 3. The choice of the
plants, ( He planted it with the best plants) the root the ( true Vine that
came down from heaven) the branches, the sons of Abraham. 4. The preparing
of the Soil, he gathered up the stones that might hinder the growth, the
Cananites and Hittites. 5. For a further defense he built a Tower in the
midst of it, his glorious Temple. 6. He set up a Vinepresse in it, an Altar
upon which they might offer the fruits of their free will offerings; to those
he added continual pruning and dressing; and watring of it from the clouds
of heaven: It appears after, Ver. 6. For the proof of these particulars,
read the old Testament. What is the whole history of the Bible, but the
narration of Gods blessings upon his own people, as if he minded no other
nation, no part of his creation but only them? What is Genesis, but the
miraculous preservation of them in their first spring and tender beginnings,
till they were grown into a great people, now a plant able to be removed, and
to stand by it self? What are Exodus and Numbers, but a powerful translating
of this Vine by a mighty hand out of the Garden of Egypt, where it was borne
down, and the gracious ordering and preserving of it, as it were, above ground
in a wilderness, where it had nothing to live on for forty years, till it was
to be planted in Canaan? What are Leuiticus and Deuternomy, but the heavenly
rules and orders of husbandring, disposing and pruning, and dressing this vine
to preserve it in state? And lastly, what are the histories of Joshua and
Judges, and Kings, but the mighty planting of it in the land of Canaan, the
casting out of the Cananits, like stones and thorns, and the weeding out of
those mighty Nations, which might hinder the growth of the Vine? There the
heavens and the earth, the sun, the fire, the clouds, and the sea, together
with the Angels and host of heaven, all were commanded in their several
callings to attend upon this Vine: for they were the people which the Lord
called to be a holy generation, his royal Priesthood, and that was the place
of which he prophesies, Psalm. 132. The Lord has chosen Sion, and loves to
dwell in it, saying, here is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have
delighted therein: I will surely bless her victuals, and satisfy her poor
with bread: I will cloth her Priests with salvation, and her Saints shall
shout for joy. Now those temporal blessings of peace and abundance, those
temporary deliverances from al enemies, those miracles and those wonders, and
that sensible presence of God himself in the midst of them, though they
seem strange in our eyes, and at the reading of them do make us Christians to
say, He has not dealte so with any Nation, He has not dealt so with any
Christian Church; yet we are deceived, for the gracious kindness of God died
not with Israel: but rather those visible mercies toward Judah, were the
visible seals of his invisible and perpetual graces toward his Church, and
every part thereof; for where he has an outward Church, there he has also some
elect to be placed in it for eternity; and where any of his elect are, there
are all things necessary to their accomplishment, his Ministers, his Word, his
Sacraments, his Graces, his Protection, his exceeding love. For seeing those
outward visible Churches, be as it were the Lords Workehouses, wherein he
frames the invisible members of Christ's body by grace, and proportioneth them
to glory: that etern all wisdom and love will so provide, order, and
proportion also those means one to another, and all unto the end, that it may
justly challenge the whole world: what should I say? ( What could I have done
for my Vineyard which I have not done?) And here, though occasion is offered,
It were a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing unto the name of the most
high, to declare this his loving kindness in the morning, and his truth all the
day until night season: (for so much of our life is Angelical, as is spent in
songs of thankefulnes unto our God;) yet I must leave this work to be the
sacrifice of your private devotion. In which that one only benefit upon the
Christian Church is more then we shall be able to comprehend, that this
Vineyard, this Paradise whereof himself vouchsafes to be the husbandman, he
has purchased to himself by the price of blood, not as Ahab purchased Naboth
his Vineyard by the cruel shedding of the right owners blood, and unjust
robbing the possessor of it, but by giving an infinite price for it, the blood
of his only beloved son to redeem it, where it lay engaged in the hand of
justice: and the Apostle concludes necessarily, Romans 9. He who spared not his
own son, but gave him for his Church, how shall he not with him give all
things to her? he that has yielded up the person of his infinitely beloved to
be a sacrifice for her sins, and does give his flesh to feed his Church, and
his blood to be her drink: how justly may he demand, What could he do more
for his Vineyard which he has not done?

But here though it be with the consent of all tongues acknowledged, that the
blessings of God upon his Church and every part thereof are exceeding great,
yet this challenging, as it were, of his own omnipotency, ( What could I have
done more, which I have not done?) rayseth a doubt not to be ouerpassed. For
might not this house of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem have replied in
the words of the Leper, Math. 8.2. Lord if thou will, thou can make me
clean? the ordinary objection which many godles persons in our times do
frame, both against God and themselves, attributing their impenitency not to
their own obstinacy and corruptions, but to Gods irresistable will: for, if
he would (say they) he could sanctify us, and make us clean also. Wherein,
first, that is undoubtedly true, that God, who made Iron to swim, and rocks
of stone to yield forth streams of water; who made Aaron his dried staff to
bud, and bring forth Almonds in a night; he, who could of stones raise up
children unto Abraham, if he would by miracle, could mollify these obstinate
sinners also, and make their rockie hearts gush forth with tears; he could
make them of stones children, and of withered sticks fruitful trees, and that
in a moment by the might of his omnipotent power: but as in the government of
the world, he has set down an ordinary course according to the nature of his
creatures, which he does not alter, but upon special occasion, as our Savior
notes in the cure of Naaman, and in the feeding of the widow of Sarepththa,
Luke 4.27. so in the ordering of his Church also, and conversion of the souls
of men, he has set down an ordinary course of secondary spiritual causes
agreeable to their end, and fitted to persuade the mind of man; as principally,
the word of truth and light in the mouth of his messengers, accompanied with a
measure of his spirit. Thus by Moses and the Prophets he conuerteth sinners:
if men will not hear them, no though a man should rise from the dead, says
our Savior, they will not believe: for these are so forceable, and so
proportionated in his wisdom to the heart of man, so seconded with the graces
of his powerful spirit, both for the instructing of the mind, and thereby the
inclining of the will, that unless a man has more then ordinarily corrupted
himself in sin, unless he be like these trees in Jude his Epistle, Twice
dead, and plucked up by the roots, unless he be like Lazarus, not only dead,
but stinking also in his grave, habitually corrupted, and that with such kinds
of particular vices, as are opposite to the receiving of the life of grace; it
could not but draw him unto God. Of this sort are those obdurate sinners, which
have hearts and cannot repent: Romans 2.5.
for though all inherent sin be contrary to God and his truth; yet some
sins and vices are more opposite to Christ then others, which makes some
sinners conversion more difficult then others. Thus our Savior affirms, that
Publicans and Harlots shall sooner come to Gods Kingdom, then proud Pharisees,
that stand upon their own righteousness according to the Law, and therefore
conceived no need of repentance and redemption by an other Savior. Thus he
generally affirms of the Jews, whose ears and hearts were by custom grown
more then as all men naturally are, so obstinately hardened in contempt, against
the word of truth, that, Mat. 11.21
had the signs and wonders that were done amongst them been done in Tire and
Sydon, nay in Sodom, they would have repented in Sackcloth and Ashes, as the
Nineuites did at the preaching of Jonas only. And this is that obstinate
opposition of some against the ordinary means of man's salvation, that caused
not only the Prophets to mourn, but our Savior Christ to sit down and to
weep over Jerusalem, when he saw that she would not be gathered to her
Redeemet; as if Christ should have said, as God by our Prophet: What could I
have done more for my Vineyard which I have not done?

3 After the consideration of this so exceeding great cost and care bestowed
upon the Lords Vineyard, we are in the third place to look unto the end of
these his labors and husbandry bestowed on his Church; and that is the same
which every man which pla^teth a vineyard, does expect of his plants, fruits,
(I looked for grapes) fruits natural and proper to a Vine, proper to a
Christian that receives the nature, the sap, the spirit of the root Christ.
Why the good works and fruits of Christians are compared to grapes, and
themselves to vines, I partly showed before. For, as nothing is created for it
self; so the poorest creature that GOD has made, is enabled with some gift to
imitate the bounty and goodness of the Creator, and to yield something from it
self to the use and benefit of others; and this is their natural work: thus
the Sun and Moon, and Stars, as they are endued with light and virtue, so
they restlesly move to impart their light and influence to the inlightning and
quickening of the inferior world. Thus do the clouds fly up and down,
emptying themselves to enrich the earth, of which notwithstanding they reap no
harvest. Thus does the earth without respect of her private profit, liberally
yield her riches and fatnes to the innumerable armies of creatures, which all
suck her breasts, and hang on her for maintenance, as on their common mother:
and not to depart from our Parable, thus do all fruit-bearing trees, spend
themselves and the principal part of their sap and moisture, not on the
increase of themselves, but in making some pleasant fruit or berry, of which
neither they, nor their young springs shall taste; and this when it is ripe and
perfect, they voluntarily let fall at their masters feet: and thus neither does
the Vine make her self drunk with her own grapes, nor the Olive anoint her
self with her own oil, and yet they strive to abound with fruits. For the
more every thing furthereth the common good of the world, the higher is the
excellency of the nature thereof, and the greater resemblance it has to the
Creators goodness. Now when heaven and earth are fruitful in their kind,
when neither beast nor tree are idle, but are always bringing forth something
to the good of others; when not only the creatures under man, but the blessed
Angels of heaven are ministering spirits, perpetually and willingly serving
for our good: when God the father himself, with the Lord our King, are yet
working, and dividing the streams of their goodness to the best behoof of
the world; how can it be allowable, that when all the Armies of heaven and
earth, the Creator with the creatures are thus busied in bringing forth fruit:
only man should remain unfruitful, his faculties and graces idle, himself a
burden to the earth? It cannot be, for not only the Church of God, for the
gathering of her children, and the propagation of truth and piety amongst them,
but the world it self, for the upholding of her estate, does necessarily
require man's fruits: for seeing we grow together as members in a body, and
branches in a tree; the life and sap, and strength and help of the root, and
head cannot be derived to us, unless it be conuaied by joints and by sinews,
by arms and by boughs, by the mutual ministry of man, by the works of
justice and mercy from one to another: and therefore unless the Pastor yield
the fruit of his light and knowledge, unless the Magistrate do yield the
fruit of his justice and authority, unless every private man do yield forth
the fruit of those faculties and graces which they receive not for themselves,
but for the good of the body: they are no parts of Christ's body, neither have
they the spirit of the head, the spirit of love in them; but they are thieves
and murderers, enemies to Christ and to his Church, they starve his body, and
purloine from their fellow members those good things which the merciful head
has so intended by them to us, that the benefit might be ours, and the thanks
theirs, and al might grow by the natural fruits of love.

But here ordinarily arises in the mind of man a vain shift which much
hinders his fruitfulnes, and makes him draw in all to himself, and recall
his sap from the fruits into the root again, and that is a false reasoning
with himself, that because, do he the best he can, yet his fruits will be
earthly and sour, and never perfect and kindly ripened, because were they
never so perfect and abundant, yet they cannot merit life's eternity to him
that bears them, and because that which is wanting, is fully supplied in the
all-sufficient fullness and superrogatiue merits of the head, and therefore it
is but lost labor to spend himself in bringing forth such imperfect fruits,
so helpeles in the work of his own salvation: thus does iniquity lie unto her
self, and turns the truth of God into a lie: for though those three promises
are all true, yet the conclusion we infer upon them, is altogether
vncoherent. True it is, that though we be ingrafted into the eternal Vine
Christ, yet we retain something of the nature of the old stock whence we
were taken, which gives to our best fruits an earthly taste and some relish
of the old man. True it is, that though we are planted with the best heavenly
plants of piety, yet they grow in a foreign soil, and in a cold clime, far
from the Sun, and our fruits are not concocted and perfect; even our most
spiritual fruits, our prayers have not a pleasing taste, unless they have
some sweetning. But this defect is supplied by the great Angel of the
covenant, who when he presents these our fruits to God the great husbandman,
adds to them of his own precious incense, which helps their infirmity and
harshnes, and makes them acceptable, Renel. 8.4. Again, true it is, that these
our fruits, were they never so abundant, and as excellent as man's perfectly
restored perfection can afforde, yet can they not merit those crowns and
kingdoms, and the eternity of that glory, but that When ye have done all that
you can, we must say that ye are unprofitable trees, not worthy the care and
cost, the feeding, the watering, the graces, the continuance bestowed on them
in this world, no more then the fruits of the Orange and Lemmon, and
Figge-trees in this our cold land are answerable to the extraordinary charge
of their planting and maintaining; yet notwithstanding all this, even these our
sour and imperfect fruits, howsoever defective in themselves, are yet
sufficiently profitable for the uses of the Church, during this her warrefare,
wherein any mean thing is very comfortable, and troubled waters do often
serve for Soldiers drink; and in that regard all they are pleasing to the
great husbandman, to see these his plants in some degrees profitable to the
world, and by their fruits, loving, cherishing and feeding one another, as
their root does feed them. But for the Crown of heaven, and a kingdom of
eternal glory, this rises above the compass of the deseruings of servants:
It passes to us by another right and claim, by inheritance, due only to us
as sons, and therefore children and babes as soon as they are adopted in
Christ: thecues and murderers like the prodigal son, upon their faithful
return to God, though they die immediately (as the thief on the Cross) before
the time of fruit-bearing, and working in the Vineyarde; yet by right of this
their new birth, and adoption into Christ's body, they have a right to heaven
equal with their brethren, that have spent all their life in painful fruit
bearing; for if sons, then heirs (says the Apostle) even fellow heirs with
Jesus Christ: For notwithstanding for the present whilst these sons continue
in their minority, they differ not from servants, though they be Lords of all,
Gal. 4.1. they obey their Fathers commandments, and they labor in his
Vineyard, and do more faithful service in the house, one son of love, then
twenty hired servants do for fear of stripes: and this is to them as
discipline healthful and necessary for their own good also, and in their time
of living, the foundation of their perfection in grace, to make them fit for
that heavenly place, and in all virtues qualified, for so great an inheritance
in a society so glorious. And as for the reward of such obedient sons, we
have our fathers answer to the elder brother that challenged his fathers
justice for his bounty toward his unthrifty son, and hardness toward him who
had continued most faithful in his service: Son (says our Father) thou art
always with me, and all that I have is thine: as obedient sons therefore we
are always with our father, this is our security, and all is ours, because
sons. What can we desire more? Our good works and services of piety are
therefore, as S. Barnard most excellently concludes of them, in the very end
of his Book; De libero Arbitrio: They are the nurceries of our hope, the
Ministeries of our love, tokens of our secret predestination, foretokens of our
future blessedness: Via regni, non causa regnandi: they are the way unto our
kingdom: they are not the cause why we shall reign as Kings. Now if
notwithstanding all this, we Christians cannot be induced to exercise our
faculties in doing good, and to bring forth fruits of love answerable to our
new nature, as all other creatures do in their kind, without some reward and
hire; behold first we are created, or dained, redeemed, furnished with gracer,
maintained in our estate, with bountiful supplies of all necessaries for our
place: and what greater reward does the Vine or the Olive, or any other
Creature expect for their fruits but their maintenance, every thing in their
kind; the Centurion in the Gospel that had Soldiers under him, and could say
to one, Come, and he came, and to another, Go and he went, though into
certain danger of his life; what greater rewards could he give to them, then
this present abundance and maintenance, or what greater rewards does any
servant expect at his masters hand, for as great service and as faithful as we
men perform to God? Again, were our natural love and services one toward
another as ready and as perfect as are the duty of one member in the body to
another, (for the Apostle proposes as the sampler of our duty) yet we
receive a further sufficient reward, the like mutual helps from them again:
and what other reward does the eye or feet, or hand expect for their daily
atrendance, but the like mutual service from the body? Again, this is the
Apostles counsel, Gal. 6.1. If any man be fallen, ye that are spiritual,
restore him, considering thy self, lest thou be also tempted; Even as
travelers do mutually aid, comfort, and in any distress relieve one another
without any further respects of private gain. If all this will not stir up
our Christian hearts to perform the duties of a Christian man, by which their
own souls are bettered and increased in grace: Behold yet a further commodity
from the Master of the Vineyard, his special blessing, and increase of his
care and graces upon these plants which are most fruitful: For every branch
that bears not fruit in me, he takes away, and every branch that bears
fruit, he purges, that it may bear more, Ioh. 15.

Thus have they increase of graces from heaven, and which is the greatest of
all graces, the grace of perseverance, when other perish they are preserved and
watered, when fruitles branches are cut off for the fire: for he not only
blesses their store who spend it upon their brethren, as springs that run
are fed that they may continue; but he deals mercifully also with them that
are merciful to his children, and his pity is ready to pardon their offenses,
and to remit their chasticements who are kind and pitiful one to another: how
gracious is our God to his vines that bring forth grapes, who has reward for
those that give but a cup (not of the juice of grapes) but of cold water to
any little one for his sake? Thus does the temporary fruits of our love and
mercy make a way for us to Christ's mercy, and so to our eternal peace. Lastly,
if all this cannot stir up the graces of God in us unto fruitfulness:
Christ's final separation and trial of his sheep from goats, of his members
from aliens and strangers; his final public sentence of life and death given
in the sight of men and Angels, shall be grounded, not upon the diversity of
their inward hidden natures, but upon their several kind of acts proceeding
from them, upon the several kind of men's fruits: for every tree is known by
their fruits: all Christ's branches yielded grapes, all his members as they were
possessed, so they were moved, and did work by the spirit of love. Hereby ye
are known to be mine, if ye love one another, John 13.35. and therefore this
sentence also is (...)

our times be of any better kind, the exact judgment of this point belongs
unto God; but what is in the eye, if man may judge, whose tongue will not
confess, but that as God spoke of Judah, Ezec. 16. that she had justified her
elder sister Samaria by her sins; so we have justified our eldest sister
Judah by these our sins, and in stead of grapes have brought forth
oppression, injustice, covetousness, wild grapes full of poison, and the gall
of Aspes, our peace, our plenty, the richnes of our soil in which we live, our
want of severe pruning has brought forth a luxurious harvest of pestilent
weeds in the Vineyard, which have in a manner ouergrowne and choked piety,
righteousness, and all hearty devotion. I know the Lord has reserved unto us
a seed, a small remnant also: but look on the general face of our land, how
has this hateful sin of injustice ouergrowne all: for the root thereof
covetousness and self-love has got deep rooting, and all men now in a
manner do turn the sap and the blessings of God, their wealth, their
labors, not into clusters of fruits, according to their vocation, but into
their own arms and branches, every one strives not to be a good, but to be a
great tree, the bramble would grow to be of the bigness of the maple, and the
maple would be strong and tall, like unto the oak, ouerdropping, and by
getting ground starueth another, some by an insensible soaking from them, some
by violent and open wrong, some under color of right, and pretense of love; so
that in every quarter and rank of the Lords Vineyard, there is oppression, and
from oppression there ascends a cry to the Lord of the Vineyard. But what do
I speak of private injustice between men and men, when there is found in our
Vineyard a kind of oppression, not heard of amongst the heathen? Christians in
their greediness to lay hands upon their God and father, and unnaturally to
seek to rob him of that which the bounty of his better children had bestowed
on him for the maintenance of his worship amongst men. Does any man rob his
gods (says the Lord) Malachy. 3.8. yet this people robs their God, and they
ask wherein, even in tithes and offerings.

This is one maine root of unnatural impiety, a principal cause of all our
corruption, when the branches of the Vine do not only suck and draw one from
another, but do intercept that also which should maintain the principal
root, on which we all grow, even Christ and his service in his Church. When
God sent his son unto the Jews; Come (said they) let us cast him out of the
Vineyard, and kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.

The Lord our life has yet some inheritance and patrimony in his own Vineyard
amongst us, for the maintenance of his laborers, which should plant Christ
amongst us, and in graft us in him, unto his inheritance; how many covetous men
do cast their greedy eyes, and put to their hands also, that first the
Laborers might be cast out, and the inheritance may be theirs? What is this,
but by consequence to cast out Christ himself out of his own Vineyard, and as
much as in us lies, to kill Religion and Piety, to kill Christ himself within
our hearts? For it is not the loss only of earthly living, and the daily
diminishing of the maintenance of his Laborers, which is to be lamented
(though when you mussell the mouth of the Ox that treads out your corn, and
detract from the ordinary allowance of your laboring beast, you shall find the
want thereof in their hartles travel, and in your own empty harvest) but the
greatest cause of lamentation and complaint herein, is the corruption of the
Ministry of Christ, whilst Patrones and such as deal in the disposing of
Church livings, do shut up all the ordinary ways for the Laborers to enter
into the Lords Vineyard, but only by the door of Simonie, by which, men of
good conscience will not enter. Thus is the Lords work and tillage of his
vineyard unfruitfully followed, whilst men of corruptest minds, and the basest
of the people take up the places of (...)

should be plentiful among us, crying, I have looked for righteous dealing as
amongst brethren, who should rather suffer then offer wrong, and behold a
crying? I have heard a voice, (says Moses) Exodus 32. when he descended from
the Mount, the noise neither of them that have the victory, nor of them that
have the worse; for the people had sat down to eat, and were risen up to
play. But where there is oppression and wrong, there is a kind of war, some
have the better, and some have the worse, and therefore amongst them there is
always heard the noise of them that have the worse; the noise of Oppression,
the noise of complaining and of crying. A dangerous thing to have any crying
heard in the family of God, and amongst brethren; a fearful thing that the
complaint of the oppressed should come to his ear: Omne sub Regno grauiore
regnum est, Every Court is subject to a higher Court. That there should be no
wrongs it cannot be provided; but for redress, there is refuge to Gods
officers and ministers of Justice upon earth, and if they by righteous
judgment do take away the cause of crying, God is satisfied: but if the
wronged party can find no ease in those inferior Courts, but that in grief of
soul he appealeth to the supreme Court, when he cries after the Judge of
the world, as David, Psalm 10. Arise, O Lord, lift up thy arm, forget not the
poor, wherefore do the wicked contemn and say, thou will not regard? the^
the righteous God, the refuge of the fatherles, provoked with those often
appeals, takes judgment into his own hands, and as Psalm 12. Now for the
oppressing of the needy, and sighs of the poor, I will rise up, says the
Lord: for seeing Deuteronomy. 15.9. he charge us not to harden our hearts from
giving to our wanting brother, lest he cry unto the Lord, and it be sin unto
us: How much more certainly will he perform that which he protests, Exodus
22. If thou trouble or vex the widow or fatherles, and so they call and cry
unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall be kindled, and I
will kill thee with the sword, thy wife shall be a widow, and thy children
fatherless. Oh (my beloved) as there is much injustice in every estate, and
contrary to Pharaohs dream the fat do feed upon the lean, the stronger upon
the weaker, as the fishes do in the sea: so let no man presume upon the
weakness of the Plainetiffe, or upon his own means to bear out his cause in
the world; for though men should be silent in their own wrongs, the stones
shall cry, and the dumb creatures shall make complaint; the detained hire of
the labourer, though it lie in our chest, yet it sends up a cry into the
ears of the Lord of hosts, Jacob. 5. The stone that lies in the wall of our
own buildings cries, and the beam out of the timber answers, and
denounces, Woe to him that builds a Town by blood, and gets a City by
iniquity, Hab. 2.11. Who would have thought, that when Abels mouth was stopped
by death, and his blood swallowed up by the earth, that there had bin none to
complain? but his blood, says God, Genesis 4. which the earth had swallowed,
cries to me out of the bowels thereof. What a complaining noise then must the
blood of so many men as is daily shed in this land, make in the ears of the
Lord of hoasts, crying now for vengeance against them that will not revenge it,
against them that help to smother it, and do not remove evil from Israel?

But I will not dwell upon these sores of our land; we see the fruits which the
chosen Church of Israel and Judah his pleasant plant brought forth; we see the
fruits which our unthankful land, so blessed of the Lord, so instructed in
the precepts of piety and righteousness, does affoorde to him for all his
mercies and loving kindnesses: I looked for grapes, and behold wild grapes.
Here just occasion is ministered to inquire out some reason, why all these
blessings of God in planting, watering and pruning his Church, should not be of
force to make it fruitful, but that notwithstanding al his husbandry, it should
so degenerate, and bring forth the fruits not of the new, but of the old
stock; I will not undertake to set down all the particular reasons thereof, but
amongst many (no doubt) one, not the least, is that first blessing of planting
his Vineyard in a fruitful soil, his temporal blessings, his peace, his
plenty, his furnishing of it with all outward necessaries, that it might be in
heart, and strong to bring forth goodly fruit. It may seem strange, that these
helps of piety should prove the bane thereof: for when straw is not ministered
to Israel, but that they are forced to wander over the land to seek stubble;
what marvel if they yield not their full tale of bricks? or if the necessities
of this life doc distract Martha unto many things; how can she with her sister
intend to fit at the foot of Christ, and by the waters of the Word which
should increase her fruitefulnesse?

But though Abraham, Job, David, and all faithful men truly rooted and
grounded in Christ, the more they are increased with those outward blessings of
wealth, of honor, of authority, the more abundance of the outward fruits of
righteousness and mercy they do yield: yet in men not truly regenerated and
altered into the nature of the root Christ, of which sort the greater part of
outward professors always are, lamentable experience shows, how that fatnes
of the soil, which in the fanctified branches of the Vine Christ, does
increase good fruit, contrariwise in these vnreceiued Christians does feed the
corruption of their old nature, and do help to the fruits thereof. This
corrupted the purity of the Church of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.5. He that should have
been upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel. And Ier. 5. Though I
fed them full, yet they committed adultery, they assembled themselves by
companies in harlots houses. This corrupted the Church of Christians, Religio
peperit diuitias, and filia deuorauit matrem: Piety brought forth wealth, and
this daughter destroyed her mother that brought her forth. This corrupted the
Church of Rome. As soon as the Church was endued with riches (says Platina)
the worshippers of God were turned from severity to wantonness, and by the
general impunity, no Prince repressing the lewdness of men, monsters usurped
Peter's seat.

Lastly, this has been the bane of our church, our peace, our plenty, our
rest, even the Lords blessings, like plenty of showers, has brought forth this
harvest of weeds and brambles, which have choked true devotion; abundance
has increased luxuric, and ministered food to the pride of life; fullness of
bread has brought forth wantonness of the flesh, and lust of uncleanness,
which in want and hunger do ordinarily wither; peace has bread security, and
called every man to the building of his own house. Here began our gathering
when we conceived hope of inioying, and the increase of our goods increases
our love to wards the^, and by stealing our affection separateth our hearts
from the root Christ, in whom we should grow. And thus when men should have
said in their hearts; Let us fear the Lord our God that gives rain both
early and late, and reserueth to us the appointed time of harvest; or when
they should say with David, Psalm. 116. Enter into God thy rest (O my soul) for
he has been beneficial to thee, we say with the glutton, Take thy rest, O
my soul, for thou have goods laid up for many years, eat, drink and be
merry: Whereby as our Savior obiecteth to the Jews, Math. 13.15. This peoples
heart is waxen fat, and their ears are dull of hearing; with their eyes have
they winked, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them. So
necessary is the prayer of Solomon for the Church of God also; Give me not
abundance, lest I be full and deny God, and say, Who is the Lord?

But to conclude this point, howsoever the corruption of me^ does turn this
plenty of earthly blessings, to the nourishing of their earthly affections,
seeing as Vines cannot bring forth fair and goodly fruit in a barren soil: so
the fruits of the Church, and of righteous men cannot be abundant and fair
without this food; seeing God in his mercy also often takes away this
abundance, when his Church grows wanton, and by breaking the staff of bread,
tries them with scarsity sometimes, and with afflictions: the Lords challenge
does notwithstanding still continue firm: What could I have done to my Vineyard
which I have not done?

In this abundant allowance unto our bodies, if any man think that the
abundant provision made for the food of our souls also, this plenty of
preaching and of instructions should have kept down the pride of the body, and
held up the spirit above the flesh, and reformed the abuses of wealth and
peace; I may add even this abundance of spiritual food, as one of the causes
of co^firming and hardening corrupt minds in their corruptions: for in those fat
hearts which are either wanton or sleepy, the continual plenty of the word
causes a fullness, a lusting after Quails and novelties, and a weary
loathing of that plain bread of life which came from heaven: Our souls, said
the Jews, are dried up with this Manna. Even as water and bread, and fire,
because they are things without which we cannot live, God made them more common
then things of pleasure, and yet because they are so common, they are of less
price: so that word, without which there is no spiritual life, God in his
mercy makes it common in his church, that according to the prophecy, it may
run like waters in the midst of the streets; and this very commonnes of it
breeds a contempt, so that as great noise and loud sounds unto which we are
continually accustomed, do not strike the ear, but rather allureth sleep,
and as the hand which at the first is soft and tender, and galled with handy
labors, does with use wax hard, and gathers a senseless brawne: so the
ears of Jews and Christians, are by custom not affected with the continual
voice of God, and their hearts, which at the first are tender, galled and
pricked with every hard sentence of the word, by daily use grow hard and
insensible; that whereas Nineuie repented at the hearing of one fearful
Sermon of the Prophet Jonas, Israel was not stricken at the usual thunder of so
many fearful prophesies, neither did the works and wonders of our savior
bring the^ to any sense of themselus, Which if they had bin done in Tire and
Sidon, nay in Sodom and Gomorrah, would have drawn them to repentance in
sackcloth and ashes: notwithstanding, seeing this word preached, is the only
food, without which the soul pineth, and her life consumes: seeing by the
streams of this water, all faithful men do grow as trees (in whole countries)
planted by the water side, which bring forth their fruits in due season: there
is no reason why the Lord should scant his children of this bread of strength
and life, because some without government do abuse it to excess, or that his
bounty should not be magnified, in whose house the prodigal son happily
remembered, that even the servants have bread enough.

I come therefore to the last point of my Text, to the consideration of the
judgment which is due to those ungrateful Vineyardes, which notwithstanding
the exceeding great means used for their good, do obstinately continue in
bringing forth wild fruits; for the Lord, the great Judge refers this
controversy between himself and us, to our own consciences, our own case to
our own judgments, O inhabitants of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me
and my Vineyard, that is, Judge between your selves and me: for though God
begins his judgment at his own house, yet he goes to this judgment with a
heavy heart, as it were, and a slow pace, though upon our continual
prouocations, he gives out words of highest revenge, As Esai 1.24. Ah, I. will
ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies; and as Hose. 11. The
sword shall fall upon their Cities, and consume their bars, and I will meet
them as a Bear robbed of her whelps, I will break the kall of their hearts,
I will devour them like a Lion, their Infants shall be dashed in pieces, and
their women with child shall be ripped: yet when he is to com to the execution
of these fearful sentences, he stays himself, as in the 18. verse of the
same Chapter, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee up
Israel? How shall I make thee as Adamah? how shall I make thee as Zeboim? mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are rolled together, I will not
execute the fiercenes of my wrath, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I
am God and not man, etc. which is the reason why the Lord calls man first to
sit in judgment upon himself, because as Cor. 11.13. If we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. Judge therefore (I pray you)
between me and my Vineyard.

But unjust men that are so corrupt and partial in judging other men's causes,
when will we be upright and vncorrupt in our own causes? when will a man
condemn himself? when will he sift his secret corners, and set his own
vvayes both seen and hidden before his own eyes? when will he upon exact
examination, give that just doom and sentence of death upon his own
iniquities, and upon his own head, making true restitution what lies in him
of all his wrongs, and executing vengeance upon al his vices and corruptions,
that there shall, be no need of appeal from his own partial judgment, to
the judgment seat of God, no need of the Lords after coming to punish those
sins, which are acknowledged, condemned, removed and reformed? and now mercy
is implored for them, and supplications put up to the throne of grace: for to
them, Esai 1. Come now (says God) let us reason together; If thy sins were
as red as crimson, I will make them as white as snow, though they be double
dyed as scarlet, I will make them like wool. To them, that is spoken, Malachy
3. I will spare you, as a father spares his own son that serves him.

But these sins that have been so deeply rooted in us, and by long
familiarity and custom, are become dear to us, and which like that evil
spirit, Act. 16.16. do bring gain and pleasure to their masters; there is
little hope of our willing consents to root the^ out. We come like those Jews
with minds resolved in our courses, whatsoever the Prophets shall teach to the
contrary: And therefore what remains, but that this Vineyard should expect
the Lords sentence; Now will I tell you (says God) Ver. 5. what I will do? A
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

A sentence of deprivation of his graces: A sentence of final desolation,
only by removing his mercies and blessings by which only it stands, by
removing his own saving presence from it, 1. the hedge of his defense shall be
taken away, and then he shall not need to hiss to the nations to come against
her, she has greedy enemies at home that lie in wait for the prey.

Secondly, He will not maintain the wall or proppes which uphold her. How
can it then but fall down to the ground, and be trampled on by the feet of
every wild beast?

Thirdly, He will not bestow dressing and pruning of her by discipline and
chasticements: how can she then but grow wild? She shall not be dug and
weeded; then will thorns and corruptions ouergrow her. And yet by all these
punishments the wrath of the Lord is not appeased: for there remains one,
which takes away all future hopes and possible means of any one branch to
continue, and live in the midst of these former desolations: He will
command the clouds, that they rain no rain upon her: How then can the dry
and barren earth bring forth any good?

I cannot, I need not prosecute the particulars of this sentence: we all know
how exactly and severely it is long since executed upon the Vineyard of Israel,
and not a word of the Lord is fallen to the ground: that Garden and Paradise of
the earth, that delightful habitation of the mighty God of Israel, wherein the
light of life shined, when all the earth besides was darkness, lies now as
waste, as the wilderness of Horeb; and where the voice of the Bridegroom was
heard, and of him that did lead the dance with Tabrets and Harpes; where the
people of God joined together in the joyful songs of Sion; there now Zims and
Satyrs dance, the Ostrich and the Shrichowle do dwell there, and the
inhabitants themselves being cast out of their Cities and Vineyards, and
scattered over the whole earth amongst them that hate them, do live without
GOD, without a Savior and Protector, without a sacrifice, without hope and
comfort, a forlorn Nation, and according to the Prophesies, the reproach and
hissing and scorn of all people, a perpetual exemplary monument in the
midst of Christians and Nations of all tongues, of the Lords justice upon his
own unthankful Church and family.

Concerning now our selves, who have succeeded the Jews in Gods
inheritance, and are made a part of his Vineyard, what can we allege for
our selves, why the same sentence should not pass upon us? If we compare Gods
mercies toward us, we go beyond the Jews, as far as the light of Christ
and his Apostles does exceed the light of Moses and his Prophets, and the
son of righteousness does go beyond the Stars of the night, the grace of
the Gospel beyond the commandments of the law. If we compare our fruits of
thankfulness, what one complaint do the Prophets make of the Jews
covetousness, injustice, oppression, wantonness and pride, which is not, by
altering the names, as it were, spoken to our land, besides the sins of
sacrilege, of gluttony proper to us?

Wherefore seeing where the Lord had iuster cause to expect such multitude of
grapes, he is provoked with a continual Vintage of these vvild grapes, I will
not dare to pronounce the LORDS sentence, that thus and thus will he do unto
his Vineyard.

Yet seeing GOD refers it to our judgments, to pronounce what it has
deserved; I may with the secret assent of your own consciences affirm,
that, in that he has not yet executed that sentence upon us, he has not
dealt with us after our sins, neither revvarded us according to our
iniquities: for the hedge of Iewrie is broken down, and the wild Bore has
destroyed that Vine. The Beasts of the field have devoured it up. But the LORD
has kept our hedges, and the Bore has not devoured, the wild beasts have not
broken in upon us. The LORDS final Sessions are approaching; and who knows
whether by his exemplarie justice, he being sufficiently known to the world?
These public and corporal executions of his wrath upon sinful Nations, be
not referred unto that day. This is our chiefest cause of fear, lest a
spiritual curse proceed out of his mouth against us, like that of our Savior
Christ upon the barren fig tree; lest he neglect to prune and dress this his
Vineyard; lest he neglect to weed out our thorns, and suffer the brambles to
choke that little good that is found amongst us; lest to our final desolation
and spiritual vastity, he command the clouds not to rain their rain upon
us lest he make the Heaven over our heads to be as brass: for then the
earth shall be as iron, or as dry and fruitless dust.

What fruit can earth yield, when it is forsaken of heavenly grace?

Oh stir up therefore the graces of GOD which are in you, and apply them unto
fruitfulness; that ye may yet take, and lade the Altar of the LORDS
winepresse with the sacrifice of your fruits. Say in your hearts, as the Vine,
Judge. 9. Should I leave my Wine, whereby I cheer both God and man, and go to
advance my self above other trees? That as, Esai 65. When there is wine found
in the cluster, one does say, Destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it: So
our Lord visiting this Vineyard, may have cause to say, There are clusters
found in the Vine, destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it: and a
blessing be upon it.

Thus, and thus only may we continue Christ the Vine unto our land, and our
selves a Vineyard unto Christ; A Seat of perpetuity for the Lords mercies, and
inheritance of life to our Children and Posterity. Amen.

FINIS.

