AN ELEGY ON THE MVCH LAMENTED DEATH OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Arthur
Chichester Knight, Lo. Baron of Belfast, Lo. high Treasurer of Ireland, one of
the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, and of the Counsel
of War.

Honor sequitur fugientem. By ALEX. SPICER.

Printed at London by M.F. for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cheapeside at the sign of the Bible. 1625.

TO THE MOST NOBLE and most Illustrious George Duke of BVCKINGHAME his Grace,
etc.
SJr, like Parrhasius, J have thought it meet
To draw the work, J wrought on, in a sheet:
If your quick eye discern unhandsome feature,
Where 'twas my part to limne a comely creature:
Daigne to believe (my Lo.) my hand did shake,
Because much sorrow made my heart to ache.
Be then your gracious patience as the veil
To cover that, wherein my skill did fail.
Your Graces most submissiue and devoted Orator. ALEX. SPICER.

An Elegy on the death of my Lord Chichester.
DEad? and before we heard him sick, incline
To draw his breath toward that utmost line,
Which leads to earth? this moves me to enquire,
Why noble Belfast should so soon expire.
It Was thus, death knew that such a gallant pray
Could not be had unless 'twere snatched away:
And therefore struck him in a deadly hour,
Beyond recovery by Physicians power.
But we are bound to fame which keeps alive
This Nobleman, whom death would not repriue.
Dead? with sad throbs my fainting spirits trippe
In sorrows maze, and by my mournful lip.
My tears make way to tell my heart it is so,
And leave deep dints, like furrows, as they go.
The twines of all my hopes are riuell'd and
Like to some pinnace in no hope to land
At any port of safety, altogether
I lie exposed unto wrack of weather.
The point I aimed at was untimely lost
Not in March Winds, but Februaries frost:
Noble Belfast, I Will hug thine honored worth,
That in the warmth of it may issue forth
Forms of perfection; to express thy beauty:
Or if I fail in that, my humble duty
Shall kneel in public to pin on a Verse
With trembling fingers on thy sable Hearse,
Which must be arched high, to stand above
That Lord who filled all the world with love.
My muse shall have in charge to write of him,
As a noble branch of an ennobled stem.
From Chichesters descent he took his name,
And in exchange of it, returned such fame
By his brave deeds, as to that race shall be
A radiant splendour for eternity:
For fame shall write this Adage, Let it last
Like the sweet memory of my Lord Belfast.
When once the time of childhood did begin
To step aside, that youth might enter enter in,
He went to Oxford, that the liberal Arts
Might be ennamel to his native parts.
Fair education with good parentage
Made all his virtues walk in equipage,
That they who knew him young, presaged his scope
Was ever bending to that Cape of Hope
Where Honor rides He was a Captain of the ship called the Victory, under
the command of the Lo. Sheffield, employed against the Spanish Invasion, Anno
1587, and 88.

Afterward he was Captain and Commander in the Portugal voyage of 200. foot,
in the Regiment of the General sir Fra. Drake, 88. and 89.

He went with sir Fra. Drake to the West Indies, where he was Captain of a
Company of foot, and Lieutenant Colonel of a Regiment. And in Porterico he
set fire of the Admiral of the Spanish Frigates, 95. and 96.

After their return from that voyage, he was employed in France, being Captain
and Lieutenant Colonel of a regiment with sir Th. Baskeruile, 96

After his return out of France, he was employed into Ireland with the Earl
of Essex, etc.


; For after he had seen
The Muses, he returned to serve his Queen
With arms of valor, the report of them
May be a Chronicle: for so large a theme
Requires a book in Folio, not one leaf,
To show the homage due to Joseph's Sheafe,
All bowed to his, and no worth finds extent
Beyond the bounds of his, whom I lament.
Grave, brane, sure, pure, and like a heavenly star,
In peace, war, speech, and life, was Chichester.
Renowned Lord, whose noble acts yield matter
For me to praise, and yet abhor to flatter.
Besides the several voyages which he made
Against the Spanish foe, which would invade
Our British coast: the civil wars of France
Drew forth our English Scipio to advance
His colors there, which he displaid, and won
Honorable knighthood, when the fight was done.
Henry the 4. of France in graceful manner,
Upon desert conferred this warlike honor.
And fame imprints this Character on his shield,
Knighted by Burbon, in the open field.
Desert neglected, droopes; encouraged, bears
Its motions well, as the well ordered Spheres.
Our minds prove then, best active, when we know
Our plants are set where they are like to grow.
The homebred flames of France extinct, our own
Portend a hot combustion by Tyrone
A Traitor, who like a Tiger gnawes
The womb which bare him, with his bloody paws.
The Queen bestowed some favors, and he thought,
Had she done more, s'had done but what she ought.
Through the perspectiue of his fantasy,
He dreamed he saw his virtues grow so hie;
That, part of Vlster, for the great Oneale,
Was not so fit, as was a commonweal.
So, by ambitious proiects, looked for gales
Which might fill full, and yet not rent his sails.
Among the valiant chieftaines which were sent
To stop the current of his proud intent,
Came Chichester, whose acts did carry sense,
And weight of honor with experience.
His colors flew with such anspitious fate,
As if that fair Bellona there had sat
With wreathes of gold to make a crown for him,
Who harbored prowes in each manfull limb:
And made him after his victorious trial,
The Sergeant Mayor of the army royal.
The Lord Mountioy, Lord deputy of that realm,
Who sat as Pilot in that dangerous healme,
Wrote to the Lords in England his opinion,
Touching the safety of that sick dominion.
Because experience taught him often to learn,
That boggs and fastnes made the Irish kerne
To nestle in the North, he did propound,
That some one man whose judgment was profound
And valor matchles, might have forces ready
To curb the rebels at the first, if headie
Attempts should move them to an insurrection,
Or draw them (as they speak) to go in action:
For this employment (so records affirm,
And i will de liver it in it is proper term)
Sir Arthur Chichester is the fittest man,
(Says he) in England or in Ireland, can
Fame be more copious in her bounty: then
To praise his worth above a world of men?
That camp had many worthies who survive,
And live to see their reputation thrive.
Yet all with samous Mountioy, do agree
To write in that of Chichester, this is he:
But now they write he was, from whence abound
Our floods of grief like Spring-tides to surround,
Tyrone himself, whose lewd affections stood
To cross, with malice, the increase of good:
Who lay in wait with unappeased spleen,
In secret ambushments, to wrecke his teene
On careful Chichester, did protest, so many
Parts of a Soldier were in him, that any,
Who lead in warlike marches, could not be
More just, more valiant, nor more wise then he.
Those flames of good desert must sparkle hie,
Whose brightness is approved by enmity.
Great Britains Monarch read his true Essay,
In a fair copy, for a beaten way
Was made by Fame, which in the Presence told
The King in earnest, Ireland did hold
Such fair esteem of Chichester, that he might
Safely prefer him to maintain his right
In that adjoining and uncivil Nation,
The King thinks on it and approues the motion.
The Post took leave, and brought back certain word,
An honored Gentleman should receive the Sword.
Fame thou art sudden, and may err; in this
I Will take my oath thou never wentst amiss.
Almost twelve years in such a government?
If ages past can show a president,
I am deceived: such rules of requity
Were drawn forth by his hand, as piety
Gave order for: That learning which was poor,
Found means to help it self out of his store.
Virtue did meet with Honor; and Religion
With Wisdom, it with Bounty: all in One,
Valor reioyc'd to find a sure protection,
Upon the word of his brave inclination,
Which set an edge on Courage, when it found,
A gracious hand to bear it from the ground.
He loved both Arts and Arms: just such another
As Pembrokes Uncle, or as Leicesters Brother.
A Sydney, a Chichester, and that is as much,
As to write in plain English, a None such:
For in good sooth never before or since,
Could a Viceroy do more honor to his Prince.
The people praid, Lord if it be thy will,
Let this Lord be Lord Deputy with us still.
I seek not to detract, Boethius says,
Good is diffusiue and has ample praise,
To give this man his due, and yet retain
Good store for others, when it gives again.
One writes, the Deputies of that Kingdom are
Like Aple-trees, and if their fruit be fair,
The Cudgels then must fly: It Was so with him,
For some Informers, whose aspect was dim,
Who see no right, nor can discern religion,
Unless in the habit of their superstition,
Tax him of much injustice, by a rabble
Of false suggestions at the Council table.
But Royal Solomon did observe the cause,
And found 'twas not his Deputy, but his Laws
Were called in question: therefore daign'd to give,
Words which might make a dying man to live.
This man is clear, upon examination,
I find that all is an unjust accusation,
With other Princely speeches which transcend,
Nor can they, as they ought, by me be penned:
When innocence, his truest advocate,
Made replication to the Plaintiffes hate;
And that the Agents for their false report,
Should undergo the Censure of that Court;
His meekness followed and besought the King
To pardon his accusers, who did bring
Their own disgrace, not his: a rare example,
In these malicious times, inimitable.
They sought his ruin, he their good: we see
The lesson kept, Christ taught him, learn of me.
When the Kings pleasure ordered his remove
From that high place, the State with general love,
Bade him farewell, that every acclamation,
Seemed a discreet and studious Oration
To speak in order of those noble parts,
Which were the Loadstone of the Irish hearts.
His credit had just interest to assume
Iosiahs blessing, as a sweet perfume,
Which being odoriferous in sent,
Fills all the standers by with much content.
His name sounds just as when one sweetly sings,
To tunefull music on harmonious strings.
No praise, but what is exact, can fit his spirit,
Whose fair composure did consist of merit.
In these days Virtues lodge apart, but he
Prepared one lodging where they all might be:
I mean, his pious and courageous breast,
Where all the Graces built their common nest.
His natural gifts had tenures on condition
To yield to Grace: for his good disposition
Held it unequal in it is wise Idea,
Fair Rachel should submit to bleare-ey'd Leah.
Cheer up my Muse, and fly aloft to raise,
A lasting Colume by thy towering Lays.
Inscribe upon it, Chichester: for that word
Is a large Tomb of goodness; a Record
Of honor, wit, experience, valor, worth,
And Time's the Filizer to produce it forth.
It signifies a Captain or a Knight;
A Sarjeant Major when the Armies fight,
A princely Viceroy, a Lord Treasurer,
Or else the Germane Lord Ambassador,
In England a great Statesman: and to end,
Truths Champion, Arts encourager, Valors friend,
All which employments do present a taste
Of several honors in my Lord Belfast,
Whose happy Genius being put in action,
Drew forth the view of public admiration.
One night, not long since, in the sky was shown,
A Star depending on the forked Moon:
But now the Moon waits on the glorious Star,
Whose brightness does Surpass the Moonshine far.
Honor and Life, like to the Moon, have waines,
Christ is the morning star: in piercing pains
Of death, this Lord disdained the Moons respect,
For the felicity of the Stars elect:
He did confess, like that Divine S. Paul,
Christ was his gain, his hope, his life, his all.
His Tongue was tipped with golden sentences,
Which recollect the Soul, when her offenses
Have made her thoughts vnsteaddy, that she stands
Giddy, like the foun dation on the sands,
Until that Word of God afford a light,
To put the Soul in a more hopeful plight.
The goodly structures which were framed by
The curious platformes of his industry,
In earthly things, he did conclude were wind,
And subject to corruption: that his mind,
Empty of her own good, might mount up higher,
Whither a Christian ought for to aspire.
The Angels were on wing, to bear away
His soul, and yet he argues, their delay
To be over long; lamenting his abode
Was yet on earth, divided from his God.
Each faculty of his soul strived which should be
Best learned in the school of piety.
Zeal moved as lively in those christian strains,
As blood enclosed in the narrow veins.
To see him dye, was dolor: thus to dye,
Rauish't the Mourners with alacrity,
Because they saw, he went a glorious Guest,
At Supper-time, unto the Marriage feast.
Thus he expired; nor could a humane Creature,
With more content discharge a debt to Nature.
England laments: and where his body goes,
That Land is drowned with a Sea of woes.
Would I might live here still, the Irish Shores,
Will be as gloomy as the tawny Moors:
Their blacke-dide countenance will misinforme
The skillfull Pilot: and as in a storm,
Confusion will succeed; for beds of sand,
Will move the waves to drive them toward land,
That they may vie their multitudes with All,
Who shed a tear at his sad Funeral.
It Is well Knockfergus stands upon a rock,
For otherwise the fierce impetuous shocke
Of dismal outcries when the Corpse come thither,
Will make the Fort, and Wall, and houses shiuer,
Or crumble into dust, like Jericho,
When Iosuahs Rams horns were observed to blow.
Yea the whole Realm will make a doleful cry,
To make an Earthquake for his Elegy.
The swift wind will be reasty, as afraid
To waft the noise, lest all the land be made
Subject to ruin, in astonishment,
With much bewailing this dire accident.
Ioy-mount can be no mount of joy, but moan, The name of his house at
Knockfergus.

Like to the Turtle when her mate is gone.
The Drums and Fifes clad in their mourning suite,
Will sound, as if his death had made them mute.
The air will be all black, and like a Fuller,
Dye the light Banners in a sable color.
The burial must be wet, since no eye's dry,
In The swelling deluge of this misery.
Among the press, my Muse desires room,
To speak one word to him, who makes the Tomb:
Be sure to cut his Ear indifferent; and
A golden Pen in his laborious hand.
Show forth his eyes with such resplendent light,
As one who still retains his wonted sight.
As for his Robes of Parliament, let them be
Put on with such advice, that we may see
His Sword, and know a Soldier: on his Arms
Write this; The Bucklers to defend from harms
His Prince and Country. And beneath his head
A Pillow, as if he were gone to bed.
Thou may limme Honor, speaking; This is he,
Whose brave exploits has thus deserved me.
Let it not be, as if he sought for her,
For that will wrong the King, who did preser
His Deputy, of himself; and gave th'impresse,
I Will honor him, who sought for nothing less. Honer sequitur fugientem.

Make his Tomb wide and high, to imitate
The copious circle of his ample fate.
If in thy fabric thou do want a stone,
Since grief has made me Niobe, I Will be one.
I wish this happiness to his Heir; Inherit,
Like to Elisha, this Eliahs spirit:
For that is a stately impe of Fame, by which
More honor is, then is, by being rich.
Lord, What is man? when such a man as he,
Whose parts excelled in the highest degree,
Dies by a Plurisie, a corrupted tumor,
Proceeding from a bad unhealthful humor.
How ought we then, who are but Atoms small,
And in respect of him, are not at all,
To know our bodies but an house of earth,
And think on God before the soul goes forth?
His last to me was this; Much thanks, Good night.
May my best service study to requite
His noble complement: For it I return,
Millions of tears on his bewailed Vrne.
And fith, the bed he sleeps on, is his Biere,
I Will bid, Good night, and draw the Curtains here.
FINIS.

