MASCHIL UNMASKED. JN A TREATISE DEFENDING this sentence of our Church: Vidz.
The present Romish Church has not the nature of the true Church.

Against the public opposition of Mr. Cholmley, and Mr. Butterfield, two
children revolted in opinion from their own subscription, and the faith of
their Mother the Church of ENGLAND.

BY THOMAS SPENCER.

Who is this that darkeneth Counsel by words without knowledge. Job. 38.2. My
wrath is kindled against thee and thy two friends, for you have not spoken of
me the thing that is right. Job. 42.7. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES,
dwelling in Red-crosse-streete.

TO THE COMMONS HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.
Most grave, and honorable Senate:
WHen children are pressed with the want of good,

She has decreed (even in so many words) that, The Romish Church, is so far
wide from the nature of the true Church, as nothing can be more.

They undertake to maintain, that, The present Romish Church, has the true,
and formal essence of a Church.

This then is our request, lay up for their Children, and most willingly expend
their store upon them, when need requires. Our confidence herein is the more
increased, by two reasons; to wit, Our perpetual experience of your willing,
and ready providence for this our Church and Commonwealth, and the greatness
of the matter wherein we are your humble Petitioners.

If our Church had said nothing, Mary, and the Saints: because, it now
appears, that the words of the Trent Council, touching them both, are
doubtful and ambiguous.

But this is not our case; The Church of Rome is so far wide from the nature
of the true Church, as nothing can be more. Whereby we understand, that, she
conceiues the present Romish Church to be wholly destitute of every (the
least) jot or tittle of the nature, and essence of the true Church: for so it
is with every Society, which is so far wide from the nature of the true
Church, as nothing can be more.

Now, what title shall we give to this deed?

The deed of these men, root of bitterness, and the spirit of contention, it
did originally grow and arise; J say it sprang from hence: because the tree and
all the branches thereof, savours of such a root, and cannot be conceived to
grow from other soil. Contention it is, and nothing else: because it opposes
things ordained, and settled solemnly and with great authority, and so continued
for many years together, no man daring publicly, and professedly to say
against it. But, which is most of all, subscribed it is, as the faith of our
Church, by these very Opponents. Yea, a high degree of contention it must be
accounted because, the mind from whence it did flow, seems altogether
unquiet, and restless. Who would not content himself with that faith that is
thus established. I say thus, because the parties that collected it, used all
possible diligence, and faithfulness: they were learned, and of exceeding
gravity, and staydnesse: all ages (with us) have agreed unto their judgments:
yea, even these Opponents have had their share in it, and not in words, only,
that pass away: but under their own hand writing, that remains for ever. Can
the gainsaying of things thus adorned, and commended to these Opponents,
proceed from any ground but the spirit that can find no place to rest in?
Surely no: and J presume, that every advised man will say so with me.

These Opponents do tell us, It is charity toward the Romish Church that
hatched this deed: but we must not trust them, the father and the child are so
unlike. What does charity bid them hate their friend? Loves he indeed, that
pulls out his Mothers heart to give life to her vowed foe? These Opponents
may say so: because this their deed sorts with it, but, he that has his eyes
in his head, will reckon them amongst that number, who casts about
firebrands, and deadly things, and says I am in jest, Prove. 26.19. Jf then
their charity was unfeigned, they would love their Mother first, and others
after, and in relation unto her: seeing then, these Opponents do not so, but
the contrary, we must conclude, not their charity, but, their contention,
formed this deed.

This deed can be no less a sin against God, 1 Cor. 11.16. An offense it is
against our State; because, the continuance in things well ordered is a
fundamental law, in every Commonwealth. So is it an offense heinous and
grievous: for he that severs and pul^s asunder the limbs of the body,
destroys the person, and he that does so, must be reckoned a maine and
principal destroyer thereof; and thus do these Opponents: the life of our
Church, and all the members thereof is made, and united together, into one body
by the Articles of her faith: he then, that, overthrowes, and destroys those
Articles; discipates, and haleth in pieces her whole body, and being: and thus
do these Opponents in their deed in question.

Punishment is due unto them, The subversion of every being that is good, makes
guilty of punishment. Now the deed in question being a subversion of the faith
of our Church of England, by the same rule, must needs likewise make so guilty.
The degree of this punishment, J dare not name, J may not think upon, seeing
the cause now in hand is presented before your sacred Tribunal, whose office
it is to discern, determine, and adiudge the same. Yet (with all submission) J
crave a word or two of that matter. If any under the command of Rome, should
oppose the very words of the Trent Council, especially where the thing is
decreed explorately, so as no question can be made of her sense and meaning;
such a one, J say, should be held worthy of no small punishment, and we
certainly know it, because such persons are pronounced accursed by that
Council; and pursued with fire, and all extremity, as perpetual experience
does show. If these Opponents lived in that Church, and should defend this
sentence, [The office of judging the sense and meaning of the Scriptures
belongs not to the Church] we might easily guess at their punishment. Jf then)
hat Church esteems such opposition unto her faith to demerit so highly, how
can we esteem to deserve but little, seeing what their faith is to them, the
same our faith is to us: but with this difference, their faith is erroneous, so
is not ours; as the ensuing discourse will evidently show: how much (then an
opposition to an erroneous faith is less hurtful, then an opposition to a
true faith, so much more punishment doto be deserve, that opposes ours, more
then he that opposes theirs: and thus much is all wherewith I will trouble you
touching the deed in question.

Now, J hope J may also without reproof, 1. Our enemies of the Romish Church
will triumph over us, and thus they will argue: With you is not the true
Church, for where that is, there is unity, and a means of unity in all matters
of faith: but these are not with you: for see, your Church believes that the
Romish Church has not the nature of the true Church, yet two of yours, yea and
after their subscription, do out face her with the contradictory, and carry it
away when they have done, no man says black is their eye. 2. The salvation of
the unstable, and unwise will be really hindered: such a man will say unto our
Church; if you taught me the way to life, doubtless you would agree in it, or
suppress the gainsayers: seeing therefore you do neither the one, nor the
other; we must conclude, that the way to life is not with you, and
consequently it is no where, for in your judgment, the Romish Church has it
not; or (at least) men of good parts might say; if you agree not upon the way
to heaven, then it is hopeless for us to find it; because, with you are the
aged in years, great in experience, abundant in learning, considerate in
resolving, and in the office of governing: if our hopes to find heaven be
vain, and idle, why shall we bestow our pains that ways? who would labor
without profit? who would lay out his silver to fill his belly with the East
wind? Surely no man: wherefore here is our rest, seeing there is no profit in
the service of God, we will determine with our selves and say, We care not for
the knowledge of the most high, let us cast his laws behind our back; let us
eat, and drink, for to morrow we shall die. 3. The glory of our Church (at
least) is abated, nay, I may truly say, her beauty is stained with an eyesore,
too ugly to be looked upon. He that casts dirt in his Mothers face, wherein
nothing is wanting for feature, or complexion, shall have little thanks for
his labor: what then shall be be accounted, that scratcheth her, till she
bleedes? Nay more, that pulls off, and treads under foot, all the
ornaments of her countenance? If our Opponents gave the lie to a man of honest
reputation, he should disgrace him not a little; but if he charged him with
that lie, to the loss of his credit for ever, we know he should burt him
finally, and for ever. But thus (J say) if no better then on this manner, deal
these Opponents with their Mother the Church of England: she has determined
what must be held in certain points of religion, and in that her countenance
exceeds in beauty; because she did so determine, for the avoiding of
contention, and settling of Peace: Peace, (yea Peace) that visage of Peace, the
most lovely, delightful, and acceptable countenance, of all countenances: yet
behold, and cease not to wonder, our two Opponents will not keep this peace,
they have broken down the walls of that fortress, what she intended for
unity, and concord they divert to fraction, and discord, and so have robbed
her, of her goodly, and beauteous feature, and complexion. Nay, which is more,
they have given her that lie, which will stick to her ribbs for ever, without
the exemplary punishment of these offenders: for, if she be false in her
greatest children, for learning, gravity, wisdom, and piety, all met
together, when they gave that witness; then who will trust her? for, if her
word can be true at any time, it would be true then. Now, those, and each one
of them, are so inconvenient that, J conceive, they must be esteemed so
intolerable, if that be so, we have good reason to bemoane our selves unto
you, and seek for redress at your hands.

Can we imagine,

Hither to I have opened our cause, such assurance have I of the abundant
wisdom judgment, learning, and providence which dwells amongst you, that
in my self I blush to think of that deed. Some perhaps would encourage me to
provoke you to redress this evil by force of Argument, but that pleases me
as little: because I know the truth of God remains with you, and
therewithal the love of the truth; so as, you cannot be negligent in this
business: seeing the love of the truth causes such as have it, to do
nothing against the truth, but for it, I am assured, the voice of Christ when
he comes to Judge the world, does perpetually sound in your ears; even as if
by lively and personal voice, you heard him say: Thou good Steward, and
faithful, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee Ruler over
much, enter into your Masters joy.

Shall I tell you, no hindrance lies in your way, Go on in this thy strength,
thou mighty man: for God is with you. And we, for our parts, do live in a
joyful expectation, of a good, and a happy issue, because we know, God is the
author of truth, and his eye lids preserve pure knowledge, at whose arising
all his enemies, (even the maintainers of error) shall be scattered: And you
most grave and honorable Senators are worthy, watchful, and provident
instruments unto his sacred Majesty our dread Sovereign, in procuring the
welfare of all the true members of this our English Church and Commonwealth,
among which members I rest,

To your Worthiness an humble suppliant, not the least devoted: THOMAS SPENCER.

A PREFACE TO THE FOLLOWING DISCOVRSE, answering unto some points, which
concern the matter in Common.
REader,

Our present Opponents do seem to triumph,

They lead us with huge mountains of contumelious reproaches, and in
conclusion, Either laughed, out or despised: So as, they account Their
depracation and defense, a thing condiscended unto in courtesy: for themselves
they have another note, Instructers they are, and their Treatises are to give
Instruction. If you will know the reason why, they tell us also: In them, There
is a spirit, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding.
Wherefore, they dare and do provoke, even Cato himself, to come in, and see,
and censure, what they have written and done. If you desire to know why they
challenge to themselves these high prerogatives, as belonging only unto them,
they will not let you be ignorant. Great men (say they) are not always wise,
neither do the aged understand Judgment, therefore I said, bearken to me.
Which reason is utterly naught, unless all are fools but themselves.

Wise men do use both their ears,

We defend the faith of our Church, laugh us out, and aespise us for that? Is
it their courtesy to deprec^te, and defend themselves against her. We propound
the question in her terms, and in a single, simple or categoricall
Proposition. We explicate the terms of that question, in the words wherein our
Church has done it before us, and whereto these our Opponents do consent and
agree. We conclude that question, in the same full syllogism wherein our
Church has concluded it, and not varied, come short, or exceeded any one of
her words. We further prove every part of that Argument, that is, or may be
questioned; by the express word of God, or by a necessary application of the
express word of God. We defend that Argument of hers, against all opposers:
and finally, we reduce every Argument brought against her into true form, and
show what part we deny, and give the reason of such denial, and that in true
form of art: and must we needs be laughed out, and despised for t^a^? If they
say, we must be laughed out, and despised for any thing, it must be for these:
for herin consists our greatest folly. If they will have us laughed out for
these, then I leave thee good Reader to be Judge between us: if thou will say
he is a fool that does thus, Theirs be the day for this time, because we now
want fit opportunity to defend our selves against them.

All this while, We write divirity without rethorick, and that is (in us)
either madness, or impudency, But whether will they laugh us out, or dispose us
for this, we know not their mind as yet. Is our style horrid, and harsh, Is it
not quaint, and neat enough for our Opponents pallet? Can we not delight their
ears with iiggs, and tricks of wit? Surely then, we are content to be laughed
out or despised by our Opponents: for that is their own case, the one
confesses his style to be such, and the style of the other is so indeed.
Moreover these Opponents and our selves may joy so to be used; because, all the
schoolmen that have lived in the world join with us, and go hand in hand
with us the business.

We deal against persons better then our selves: But is this true? Do we
oppose our selves to men's persons, or qualities and condition; Nothing less:
the question on foot is an Article of faith. A point in Divinity wherein the
divine authority rules the case; the persons, and conditions of man can bear
no sway, nor be admitted any room, or place, but for this time let the persons
of men come in, and their qualities, honors, and conditions whatsoever. Yet we
deal not against our betters, for (to say the least) we are in the room and
behalf of our Church, which we dare prefer before all her Opponents, for
they have subscribed unto her, and thereby they have acknowledged and done
homage unto her Lordship, and Dominion.

We quarrel the persons of men in envy to their advancement and honors:
because he that said thus now, said so long, But is this true? our Opponents
say so; but their proof is insusficient, because in it self it is untrue, and
naught in the inference, perhaps their party avouched thus much before, and yet
not seen, or not regarded: for, who would suspect or misdoubt such a friend as
he seemed, and was accounted? If we were glasiers, or the sons of a glasier,
perhaps he might see our secret thoughts and intentions: but, because we are
not, we must not be laughed out, nor a^s^ised; because we oppose not unto any
man's honor, and adnancement.

We cast a stone that hitteth our Mother. If that be so: if we have done it,
and still avow the deed; let us be laughed out or despised, choose them
whether; but this is impossible, we cast no stones at all: by our office we
hold up our Buckler to defend our Mother, and to bear of such stones as are
cast by others, if any stone hits our Mother, it is that which is cast at the
Church of Rome, for that is the thing in question. If that stone hit our
Mother, these Opponents must laugh her out or despise her for her labor; for
it is she that cast it, we do no more but justify her casting. If these
Opponents will laugh her out, or despise her let them do so to us also, for
good reason the Mother, and Child should share alike, and stand or fall
together.

We cause our Church to suffer, Now we know we shall not be laughed out; nor
despised; for this: because we say of her no more, no not one word less, or
more then she has said unto us. If thus to impose deserves laughter and
dispite, then to deny her to say what indeed she has said deserves laughter
and dispite; for the case is the same in both. It that be so, then our present
Opponents must be laughed out, and despised; for they deny her to say, what she
has said, and so much the more they deserve to be laughed out, and despised;
because, they deny the thing wherein sense it self (even their own eyes) does
avow, and cannot be deceived, thus far touching the thing which concerns our
selves.

They mean not to speak a word in behalf of the impure Church of Rome: And
we are content to admit their pretense; because, such deep protestations, and
serious cravings goes with it; but notwithstanding they gain nothing, for two
reasons, 1. because, their deed cries loud, and inforceth strongly to bring us
back again to Rome. I say to Rome, even unto that Rome, which they call
impure; for, if they have written truly, no man can deny to enter commons with
them, even in those things which these Opponents call impure; because from them
we may argue thus, the Romish Church can yield salvation to her members,
therefore it is the safest way to ioyn to her, seeing all sides agree in the
Antecedent, but, unsafe it is, to ioyn with other Churches; for it is doubtful
and in question, whether salvation can there be had or no; and thus some of
that Church have reasoned against us; if any say, with us is perfection, and
purity of doctrine; with them, is heresy, and defection, he says Nothing
sufficient to keep us from Rome; because, if there were any power herein for
that end, it is, because, their heresy, and defection, (in the event) is able
to hinder salvation: but the Romish heresy, and defection, (according to these
Opponents) is not able (in the event) to hinder salvation; because, with them
The foundation is held, which has the property of that wine, which will not
mingle with poison, though a great quantity thereof be put unto it, yea, such
an Antidote it is and a thing so sovereign, that, it will destroy much poison,
and at last quite overcome it. If all this be true, who would not be a Papist;
seeing with them we find enough to persuade us; for who would not yield to
tread the way to heaven? and nothing to dissuade us: for no wise man will be
afraid of the thing that cannot hurt him: and this is the case between the
Romish Church and us; if these Opponents may be believed: if they say, They did
not perceive the issue of their doctrine, then must we blame them as heedlesse,
and inconsiderate; what, will they be our Iustructers? Shall their I reatises
serve to give us Instruction? Shall Cato be compelled to come in, and see, and
censure: and yet such foul, and gross faults be committed. Moreover, if
salvation may be had in the Romish Church, and their heresies cannot hinder it,
then doubtless, there is absoIntely nothing sufficient to bar us their
communion: seeing they do as strongly avouch their doctrine to be pure, as
these Opponents do condemn it as impure: In this case, what shall most men
living do, if they be seduced to Popery? If a Priest should say, with us thou
may go to heaven, (as your own side confess) with us is nothing to press
thee down to hell: for, though we were as bad as you make us, yet by the
confession of yours, we have an Antidote that in the event will preserve thee
from the evil, and reserve thee for the good. Lastly, it can not appear that
we are blamed justly: for, how much you say against us, so much (if not more)
we can say for us; we have the Records of all ages for us, Councels, Fathers,
history, are strongly on our side; we have alleged them, and you cannot
gainsay us: so as, now, either satisfy this last, or yield to join which us:
for, your selves do teach the two first, and you may not deny them; now, in
this case, what can a reasonable man do? He sees nothing but doubtful, and
difficult questions to keep him from Popery, and himself not able to
determine those doubts; I say, who would not resolve thus? I will join with
them, not with you; seeing I have nothing to debarr me, but some doubtful
questions that may be true, and may not be true; yet howsoever they cannot hurt
me.

If these Opponents would have us believe, Rome, and friends to us, they must
have esteemed the Church of Rome to want the nature of that Church whereof
Christ is the head: for, that makes all sure, that bars the door, and
shuts up all entrance unto her, no man will be so mad to join with that
society, where he knows the essence or nature of Christ's Church is wanting;
seeing in such a society, salvation cannot be had. It is a rule case in nature,
No man will come to his loss; and it is as true in the state of grace, no man
will venture where he shall lose heaven. But, because we find not this, they
must give us leave to oppose them as enemies, not receive them as friends, lest
their friendship turns to bitterness at the last end.

They would persuade us, Their opinion of the Romish Church is burtfull unto
her, because, therein they quit her with mercy, in stead of her cruelty: she
condemns us wholly, we condemn her but in part. But, this commends their
cause but little: for according to our common Proverb, Foolish pity spoils a
whole City: and this is their case: Foolish is their pity, because Gods word,
and true reason does abhor it, (at least) does not avow it. Spoil it does,
yea the whole City of God, (at least so far as it is able) because it opens,
I will not say a wicket, but the widest door to Popery; and stands also in
that door, and in the high ways like the strumpet, to call in, adulterous
lovers; as I have already showed: but let this pity condemn them of cruelty,
(as for this time I am content it shall) yet the Romish Church has no hurt by
it: for, it condemns them of a fault in the practice of good manners, wherein
the nature of the Church consists not, it meddles not with their faith,
wherein the Church consists. The truth is, their opinion of the Romish Church
is not love, nor pity: for, if it be their due, because they have indeed that
essence, and nature wherewith Christ's Church is formed, then it is Justice,
(which consists in giving every man his due:) If it be not their due, because
they want that essence or nature wherewith Christ's Church is formed, then it is
a lie, which always is committed, when a man pronounces of a thing otherwise
then it is in it self.

They plead, That, we mistake them indeed, The case stands not thus, we
understand them to say, The Romish Church has that essence, and nature
wherewith the Church of Christ is constituted and formed. And unto this the
Church of England, and all her right bred children say the contradictory, as
shall evidently appear in the disputation it self, when we propound,
explicate, and agree upon, the state of the question: wherefore, let not our
Opponents shroud themselves under our ignorant mistaking of their meaning in
the present question; for we shall deprive them thereof, and leave them naked
unto the wide world, when we come to the place aforesaid, where the Reader
shall find, that we accept the question, even in their own terms, and as
themselves do explicate, and unfold it: wherein we do no new thing; for our
Church had used the like explication before them, as the Reader shall perceive
in the place forenamed. These things being true, (as they are most true) it was
a poor shift, to cast upon us, the shameful reproach of mistaking their
meaning, as if, we were ignorant, and could not, or malicious, and would not or
over zealous and did not, understand their writing: we use to say, Better a bad
shift, then none at all: all we may answer it with the like; A shameless
shift, is worse then none at all: and this is the present case: when all means
fail, we must be ignorant, malicious, or over zealous mistakers of their
meaning, rather then they will be seen to mean falsely; their doings severeth
friends asunder, reconcileth not, nor bring them together.

Hitherto we have taken as granted,

The Church of England says thus.

The Romish Church has not the nature of the true Church. We say thus.

The Romish Church has not the nature of a true Church. She says, The Church:
we say, A Church. I have not found this exception made as yet by any, yet it is
very needful, that I propound it, and give answer hereunto; Some man
(perhaps) will attempt his escape by it; for, untruths of this nature, must
creep into the poorest corner, rather then remain without shelter. If there
be no differrence between The nature of a true Church, and the nature of the
true Church, then both these sentences are the same, and accordingly, they deny
what our Church does affirm; but they are the same, for Christ's Church
(howsoever it be taken, and with what word soever, it be donoted, and set out)
is formed and constituted, by one and the same formal essence, and being,
otherwise, there should be two Churches of Christ specifically formed, and
differenced: which yet, God never revealed, we never have read, and no man
therefore may avouch. If the word [A] and the word [The] import one specificall
thing, then the Propositions in question are contradictorie: because, the same
predicate is affirmed of the same subject in the one, and so denied in the
other: but, both these words import the same thing; for, a particular Church is
called [A Church] in the common use of men; and so it is called [The Church] by
the Apostle; The Church that is in thy house Moreover, though the words [A
Church] did make a difference from the words [The Church] yet the predicate
part of both these propositions are still the same, for, that difference can be
no more, then general or universal, and particular. which in this place makes
no difference in the predicates, which consists (cheisly) in the term
nature, or essence: and that is the same in the Church, taken as a Catholic,
or universal comprehension of all the members, whereof the Church consists,
or conceived in particular, as it is bounded and limited within one Nation.
This I say, the Church Catholic, and the Church National, or O Econumicall,
is formed and constituted by one and the same formal essence, and being, they
only differ materially, whose property it is, to individuate the form
materiated. And sense it self does teach it us, every singular man, and every
distinct Nation and all men without exception, have one and the same
specificall, and formal being, Intelligibillitie, and Ellectuallitie, is the
same in one man, and in all men, herin only they differ; the one is a
comprehension of many individual bodies, the other a comprehension of a few
individual bodies, so is it with Christ's Church, the same thing that makes
that whole society to be Christ's Church specifically, and formally, the very
same thing makes a Nation, or a fewer number, to be Christ's Church
specifically, and formally: by reason whereof, when we deny, The Romish Church
to have the nature of the Church, we deny it to have the nature of A Church.
And contrariwise, when we say, The Romish Church has the nature of a true
Church, we give her the nature of the true Church, and thus (I hope) I have
prevented all men that would doubt whether these Opponents do contradict our
Church or not, and have made it manifest, that they do contradict her indeed,
and accordingly we have heretofore, and may hereafter, rightly, and justly,
presume it as true, and take it as certain, and thus am I well near at an end
in my answer to all their passages in common: Two only remains, I will speak
breifely unto them, and then finish this matter.

Amongst the rest of their hard measure offered unto us,

Your minds are prepossessed with prejudiced. They content themselves only to
take up opinions upon trust, and will hold them, because they know where they
had them.

Whole volumes are nothing unto them,

Anuiles they are, and in vain should I spend my self in beating upon them.

Christians they are not ingenuous.

They have no care open for Justice, and truth.

Doubtless this Opponent meant to infer something from this rabble: for, a man
of wisdom, and learning will not speak words that serve to no purpose. I
conceive he would conclude thus.

Therefore our adversaries cause is naught. This was once Bishop Jewels case,
when he had to do with railing Harding; to whom he answered thus: I pray thee
good Reader, think not our cause the worse, though these men's tongues are so
ready to speak ill, content thy self a while, and thou shall see all this
smoke blown away, even with one blast. In whose words I answer too. These
ignominious terms are nothing to infer such a conclusion: for evil men may
speak the truth, and defend a good cause: Wherefore the naughtiness of a
person infers not badnesse upon a cause, or question. The Antecedent is also
false, we deny our selves to be guilty as he does charge us, he brings no
proof for his indictment, and therefore we must be pronounced Rectius in
Curia: and so every honest man (who has his eyes in his head) will say of us:
for, if accusation can make guilty, who shall be innocent. Thus, these pleaders
Argument is come to nothing, like smoke carried up with the air.

But let us reason the case with him a little; bear one another burden,
according to the Apostles rule. Nay, we will pray in the words of the first
Christian Martyr, and say, O Lord forgive him, for he knows not what he does:
his passion was at this time his master: but if this ill language be acted, if
it be taken up to serve a turn, the case is worse for him, his account (before
Gods Tribunal) is the greater and heavier; but for us the better, his
impatience shall commend our patience, his bitterness our meekness; his
crying in the streets, our silence; best it is to be like him, that as a lamb
dumb before the shearer, so was he, and opened not his mouth. And thus much is
enough for this passage.

The last thing which comes in our way, is our Opponents insulting and vaunting
terms, contained in the title of of his book, and the end of his English
Epistle; which I have reported in this Preface, number. 3. and these they are.

He is an Instructor. His Treatise serves to give instruction. With him is the
Spirit. The inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding, and him only,
for sometimes great men want w^s^d^me, and the aged understanding, and
judgment; therefore you must hear him. For his writings, they are such, as he
may let Cato come in, and see, and censure.
We have now the head, but we want the tail: he presents us with an
Antecdent, but his pocket holds the conclusion, a consequent. Is he wise in
that? Surely, a wise Logician I grant, for no man would do thus, but he that
excells in that art. But what say I? Do I commend him for Logic? I do: but
it is my fault, and I crave his pardon: when he disputes I must extol him, for
his Rethorick: for, with him, that art is the queen of arts to serve a
Disputers term; and no doubt she was his queen and he followed her laws when
he would thus extol himself. Doubtless, hereby he meant to abase us, and our
cause, else it had been vain, thus to elevate himself: and we will confess
(for our own parts) that we must come under his see, and hide our selves under
him from the weather shore; if all be true that he avoucheth: but I doubt of
that, and so must, till I hear Ca^^ his sentence; for, he commits the cause to
him, and so will we too: because ^ato (amongst all Philosophers) is held, the
wisest, and gravest Statesman and Lawmaker: therefore we will present his
particular braggs, and attend the sentence of Cato.

He appeals to Cato, Cato to the search and censure of his writings. Even he,
this Author, a youth, as him elfe professes, and all the world knows, he is
a yoncker and but a yoncker in age, and stadies: what will Cato say to this?
The excellentest of many, must rise from his grave, to censure the meanest of
thousands. Let him (...)

An instructor he is, but will you know what degree he bears in that office;
his title will tell you, even nothing inferior to God himself: for he borrowed
his whole title from Psalm. 32: 1. only God calls his work a Psalm, this
Opponent names his, a treatise, but one thing he comes short in, that word
MASCHIL in the Hebrew is written two several ways; in the one it fignifies to
understand, or things fit to be understood, If it be written the second way, it
signifies lightness, folly, or to be mad, as the learned in that tongue, have
observed. Thus much I baue been informed by men of credit in that language,
for my self am wholly ignorant that way: things standing thus, I say if he had
written that word with the Hebrew Character, we should have understood his
meaning, we might have known the full value of his style, and title of honor,
but because he has not, we can only guess at it: wherefore thus we say, if
we take it to signify things fit to give understanding, then in this office he
gives God the mate, what will Cato say to this, that a Youth (not 30. years of
age) becomes an instructor equal to God himself. No marvel though he dares
Cato to his face, seeing he dare set his foot to Gods, and instruct in things
divine equal to him: if he writes the word the second way, then folly is his
name, and madness is with him.

But, Catoes sentence, therefore Cato, speak and spare not, we know thou will
say as we do, therefore we will hear and fear not.

He tells us: Gods Spirit dwells with him and by the inspiration thereof, he
has understanding. Therefore he must speak, you you must not ^eare them; If
he prove the Antecedent, I grant the consequent, but that he cannot; nay it is
impossible. Gods spirit is fish of temperance, humility, meekness, kindness
love, so as, he that is taught by that Master, has learned these lessons; His
scholars are not proud, vain bosters of themselves, their minds are not
lifted v^ ^n them: but they esteem others better then themselue: If we lay our
present Opponent to this rule, in what case shall we find him: agrees he with
it? Does he notswarue from it? Let this title and conclusion of his Epistle
give Judgment, I say no more: though I know Cato would say no less; yea we
are sure, he would exceed us much, and thus am I come to an end of my answer
to such things as concern the disputation in common, and therefore I will
proceed in the next place, to a formal dispute of the question it self.

CHAP. 1. Of the question and parties to the disputation.
IN the following discourse we inquire after these two questions.

1 Whether the present Romish Church, be the true Church or not.

2 Whether the professors of the present Romish faith, can be saved or not.

These two do mutually imply each other. So as we may truly say, if she be a
Church, then is there salvation in her, if salvation, then a Church, and
contrariwise, wherefore the proof of the first confirms the latter.

The parties to the present disputation are,

Our Church holds the negative in the first question, and has set her
sentences down in the second Homily for whitsontide in these words

1 The state of the present Church of Rome, is so far wide from the nature of
the true Church, that nothing can be more.

2 The Bishops of Rome and their adherents, are not the true Church of Christ.

3 The true Church is not at Rome.

The first and second of the alleged sentences, are expressly found barely
set down as I have alleged them, and they are sufficient to let us know the
faith of our Church in the matter in hand.

The third, is necessarily employed by our Church at these words.

If it be poss^ble for Gods spirit to be there where the true Church is not
then is it at Rome.

In this latter sentence our Church presumes, that the true Church is not at
Rome, otherwise the inference would be fond and ridiculous, and indeed the
Disputation in that place being framed according to Art stands thus.

Where the holy Ghost is, there is the true Church. But at Rome, there is not
the true Church. Therefore the holy Ghost is not at Rome,
The Proposition is pursued after the words last alleged, the Assumption is
confirmed by arguments going before.

Thus our Church by repeating the same conclusion often, shows us how serious
she is in the matter, and by often varying her manner of speaking, we clearly
understand her meaning.

The foresaid two opponents do hold the affirmative against our Church,

The Church of Rome as she is at this present, is a true Church. As page 30 in
the one, and page 18. in the other.

Before we enter upon the discussion hereof,

By Romish Church, we mean the Bishops of Rome and their adherents, (that is
to say) all such both Clergy and Laytie, which live in the Romish Religion,
and communicate in her faith, and make up one society or body.

By true Church, we understand a Society or congregation, which has these
essential qualities that concur unto the being and form of a Church, And
herein all sides agree as the Reader may find in the Homily alleged, and in
both our opponents in page 13 of the one, and page 15, 17. and 100. of the
other. We must also further know, that the R^mish faith consists, either in
the Universal consent of their learned, or in the Decrees of their Councels,
or in both.

The first is their Catholic, the second is their divine faith. So as he that
professes their religion, and communicates in their faith, believes as they
do in the manner aforesaid.

Hitherto I have alleged the Homily, Doctrine, godly, wholesome, and
necessary, I say, it is so subscribed unto, because the 36 Canon requires,
that no person shall be received into the Ministry; nor suffered to exercise any
part of the Ministerial function in any place within this Realm, except he
shall first subscribe (amongst other things) unto the 39 Articles of Religion,
agreed upon by the whole Clergy Anno 1562. Now the 36 Canon in commanding
subscription to the said 39 Articles, does also consequently command
subscription to the books of Homilies, because the 35 Article does no more but
ratify and confirm the former and second book of Homilies.

Now if the present Homily be the doctrine of our Church, then the sentences
alleged out of the same can be no less, for they are such a maine and
principal part thereof, that the Homily cannot subsist without them. And thus
I hope every Reader has direction enough, touching the state of the question
and the parties to the Disputation.

CHAP. 2. Of our first Argument for the maine question, and of their general
answer thereunto.
Our Church in the Homily already recited,

The true Church is built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone. But the present Romish
Church, is not built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, for they
reteyne not the sound and pure doctrine of Christ Jesus, neither do they order
the Sacraments in such sort, as he did first institute and ordeyne them, that
now they may seem to be converted into a new guise. Therefore the present
Romish Church, is not the true Church.
The Homily takes the proposition to be a description of the Church, so
rgreeable to the Scriptures, and Ancient Fathers, that none may justly find
fault therewith. So likewise it takes the Assumption, as a confessed truth by
all such as have any light of Gods word, and insight into their lives, and
examples. Whereupon it is confident of the conclusion.

Though this Argument wants not strength, to infer the conclusion,

By Christ and his servants, not their persons, but their Preaching and
Revelation is understood.

The sacred Revelation, is called the Churches foundation, because by the
profession thereof, the Church is made to be that which it is, and is
differenced from all other Societies in the world, and good reason, because by
the profession of the divine Revelation, the Church is ordered unto heaven,
which befalls no Society else whatsoever, the Homily speaks of the
foundation of the Church, as one entire and individual whole, that is, of one
complete being undivided into parts or kinds, and it attributes the same in the
Proposition to the true Church, as adequate thereunto, and convertible
therewith, and it denies it in the Assumption, unto the present Romish Church
universally, or totally. So as the Church of Rome, and the Sacred Revelation in
the intent of the Homily, are divided as things really, and essentially,
distinct and different, as if our Church had said, the Romish Church sits
besides the foundation of the Divine Revelation.

And thus our Church must be understood, because this sense agrees with the
Scriptures, with the 39 Article, and with true reason, all other senses are
violent and enforced as we shall see in the prosecution of this Argument.

According to this interpretation,

The true Church professes the Preaching, or Revelation of Christ, and his
Apostles. The present Romish Church professes not the preaching or Revelation
of Christ and his Apostles, Therefore the present Romish Church, is not the
true Church.
Our opponent B. against this Argument proceeds thus, C. page 21. our opponent
B, in his English Epistle, denies the conclusion of this Argument to be our
Churches, but the opponent C says nothing.

I answer, B. say, our Church holds not the conclusion, who confessed even now,
that our Church made the Argument, unless he will say, that the conclusion of
an Argument is no part thereof. If that be his judgment, he must teach
Aristotle, for he thinks otherwise. Prior. lib. 1. cap. 1. Top: lib. 1. cap.
1. For this time the conclusion shall go for none of hers, that we may see
what they will say to it.

Opponent B. in his Latin Epistle says,

He that thinks the Church of Rome to be no Church, thinks nothing.

His partner C. in his Epistle Dedicatory, professes, that he trembles at the
very hearing of this Proposition, [the present Romish Church is no Church.]

I a^ sure, these parties are ill matched, because they ^rosse one the other.
The one thinks the present conclusion to be nothing, the other esteems it a
monster, and that is more then some thing, but let us for this time think so
too, because if that be so, then the premises which infer that conclusion are
monstrous likewise, if the premises be monstrous, then will these opponents
make them to appear to be so. And thus much for their answers to this Argument
in general.

CHAP. 3. Of the same Argument and their answer thereunto.
THe Reader must remember our Argument,

The true Church is founded upon (that is) professes, the sacred truth
revealed by Christ and his Apostles. But the present Romish Church is not so
founded, Therefore the present Romish Church, is not the true Church.
Our opponent C. answers hereunto, page 21,

These words must receive this construction.

First they must be understood of the accidental truth of the Church, in
regard of soundnes, and not of essential truth, in regard of Gods Covenant.

Secondly they must be understood even of soundnes, comparatively and not
simply, that is in regard of the Primitive Church, and not otherwise.

Thus far he and not one word further touching this matter.

I reply, Sampsons Riddle, or more senseless then becomes a reasonable man.

He seems thus to distinguish.

1. The truth of the Church is Accidental in regard of soundness. Essential
in regard of Gods Covenant.
2. Soundnes is taken Comparatively in regard of the Primitive Church. Simply.

For thus lies his words directly: but who shall understand him? The Rules of
Logic cannot help us, for according to them, these distributions are no ways
to be allowed.

According to Art, every distribution contains a whole, and part. So
Aristotle Top. lib: 6. cap. 1. Rursus vtrumque etc. cap. 2. Idem contingens: so
Ramus lib. 1. cap. 25. But here is no whole and part, for a whole is no more
but a gathering together of the parts, so as they all do make one certain
thing. Thus Arist. Physico: lib. 1. tex. 17. lib. 4. tex. 43. meta. lib. 5.
cap. 25. tex. 31. Thus Th. 1. q. 76. art. 8. in cor. and so Ramus lib. 1. cap.
25. But in these distributions, there is no whole and parts.

Moreover, truth is the thing divided, and that is set out by the term Church,
(that is) the adiunct or accident is set out by a first substance or
individual subject. If that be good, then Aristotle must come to him to learn
Logic: for (according to him) all other things are attributed to a singular
being, and that attributed to none. Categor. cap. 4. and 5. Prior. lib. 1. cap.
27. post lib. 1. cap. 22.

Again, the adequation of the thing, and the apprehension of our
understanding, in the Judgment of Aristotle de interpre cap. 9. and meta lib.
4. cap. 7. text. 27. and Thomas 1. p. q. 21. art. 2. in cor. 1. Did. 46. q. 1.
art. 2. ad 1m. But accidental and essential truth makes no such adequation:
for those terms import no more but a necessary and contingent predication
which belongs to the manner of predicating.

Lastly, he attributes soundness to accidental truth, and Gods covenant to
essential truth; but that is impossible. The second distribution is as fond,

We should now come to the application of this answer to some part of our
argument, and why: but I am altogether to seek for that, because he brings
nothing that leads us thereunto: Wherefore I come to himself and say in his
own words, page 3. (...) Apply John Barber, and thou shall have a new pair of
S^zors.

When he has done so he shall have further answer, and in the mean time I
will set down and examine what his partner B. says to our argument now in
hand; therein I will take only the sum of his answer and no more, to save
mine own labor and the Readers, following the example of the schools, who
always run that course.

He begins his answer at p. 84. at these words.

We profess that we esteem, And continues the same unto page 88. As his
partners answer was, so is his, intricate, perplexed, vnapplyed, but with this
difference he was briefer, as liking Logic and not Rethorick, this larger, as
loving Rethorick and not Logic, nothing could be made of his. Something as I
conceive may be made of this, wherefore I will set down that something with
the best warrant of his own discourse. Thus then he seems to answer.

The doctrine of Christ and his Apostles purely taught without mixture of error
is the genuine mark of the true Church: So as, where that is, there follows
the appellation of a true Church, and from thence we may argue thus.

Wheresoever Gods word is purely preached, and the Sacraments duly administered,
there is a true Church.

And so far the Proposition is true and agreeable to the intent of our
Church, and the Assumption is so also that severeth the doctrine of Christ from
the present Romish Church, but then the conclusion imports no more but that
she is not an orthodox Church which is not in question.

The doctrine of Christ and his Apostles taught purely without mixture of
error is not so essential to the true Church that so soon as unsound
doctrine is mingled with the truth of Gods word and the Sacraments unduly
administered that which was a Church should cease to be one.

In this sense the Proposition is false, for such doctrine belongs unto the
perfection and glory of the Church, and she may be without them as the children
of Israel were many days without a Sacrifice and an Ephod. Hosea. 3.4. yet
still they were Gods Church.

It may fall out that they may be corrupted as in the times of blindness and
superstition, or intermitted as in persecution.

In this sense the Proposition is not according to the intent of our Church
which meant not so strictly to tie Gods Church to these signs as if all were
excluded from the Church which do not rightly participate of the word and
Sacraments in the Judgment of Mr. Rogers in his Commentary upon 19. art.
propo. 8.

Lastly, in this sense the Assumption is false that makes a real and total
division between the present Romish Church and all revealed truth, we say she
has not abolished all truth, but retains some in their disputations, and as
we think more in their Sermons.

Thus I hope I have exactly expressed his intent, if I have missed in any thing
the fault is his, not mine; he may thank me for my pains, because I have done
for him what he could not, (at least) what he has not done for himself: that
I may use his partners words, page 5.

Now we will take it into several pieces, and examine them in several
chapters following.

CHAP. 4. Prooving this sentence, The present Romish faith is erronius.
THe examination of his last answer to our Assumption, Rome) is sufficient to
determine the worth of our argument now in hand, and the whole question it
self: for if the Romish Church be all error and Antichristian, (that is) if
her faith be erroneous, then without doubt she is none of Gods Church. The
Church of England in her Assumption (now in question) meant to say so, as I
have already said, cap. 2. n. 1. and will now prove by Gods assistance.

If the Romish Church retain some of Christ's doctrine pure without mixture of
error, not without the holy Ghost. But (according to our Church) 1. Christ's
doctrine is denied her in terms without limitation: for thus lie the words of
her Assumption: The present Romish Church is not built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, retaining the sound and pure doctrine of Christ
Jesus, neither do they order the Sacraments in such sort as he did first
institute and ordain them. 2. She is changed into a new guise by chopping and
changing, by adding and plucking away. They have forsaken the commandments of
God to set up their own constitutions. 3. They are without the Spirit of God.
Therefore (according to our Church in her Assumption) the present Romish Church
does not retain some part of Christ's doctrine pure without mixture of error,
but she is all error, and her faith erroneous.

Many learned amongst us have so understood our Church, and I will name some in
stead of all.

Bishop Jewel in the defense of his Apology, page cap. 11. divis. 1. charge
her in absolute terms, that she had departed from Gods ward: and more plainly,
page 5. cap. 13. divis. He says the same thing in these words. Th^se men have
br^ken in pecces all the popes and conduits, they have stopped all the springs
and choked up the fountain of living water with dirt and mire. He repeates
the same thing in other terms, cap. 15. divis. 2. thus. In the Romish Church
we cannot home the word of God sinetrely taught, nor the Sacraments rightly
administered, nor the name of God duly called upon, and wherein was nothing
able to stay any wise man, or one that has consideration of his own safety, I
will conclude with his words in the same Apology part 6. cap. 22. divis. 2.
where he says, that the present Church of Rome has utterly forsaken the
Catholic faith.

Doct. Reynolds in his 5. Conclusions and Preface, at the 6. does charge the
present Romish Church to be distempered not with a sickness that hinders the
functions of life, but with such a one, as for it self makes her past hope of
recovery; and namely she serves not God with a holy worship, nor believed God
with a holy faith as he has commanded, but stained the faith of Christ with
reproaches, creatures with the Lords honor, Gods service with Idolatry.

Doct. Whitakers in his second controversy of the Church q. 6. cap. 1.
adiudgeth the present Romish Church to be nothing else but a deep pit of
heresy and error, and thereby argues her no ways to be or to belong unto
the true Church.

Mr. Perkins in the Preface to his Reformed Catholic says: The whole Religion
of the present Romish Church is heretical and schismatic, and the cup of
abomination in the Whores hand, Revel. 17.4. And Doctor Abbot Bishop of
Salisbury in his defense of this place in Mr. Perkins does justify and avow
the same thing against bishop the Papist.

Bishop Careton in his directions to know the true Church proves at large that
the present Romish Church holas not unity with the true Church, neither in the
head, nor in the body, nor in the spirit, nor in the faith. If that be true she
is all error, her faith is erroneous.

exception thereto, by the authority of our Church and a cloud of her most
learned, and renowned children, I will make the same good by the testimony of
God himself. But I am prevented in that by Mr. Wotton, who has done it
already in his book called Run from Rome, where he begins this point page
14. number. 4. whereunto I might refer the Reader, as unto a most pious and
learned author, and a work that admits not any real, essential, or
substantial addition, but I will make bold to take out of him so much as
belongs to this cause not word for word, but so much as will be suitable, to the
buisinesse.

First I will set down how he unfolds the term and then come to his proofs
of the question.

The word Faith imports a singular thing, Ephesians. 4.5.

There is one faith, (says he) one Baptism, one Mediator between God and man.
1 Timothy 2.5. In what manner the Mediator is one, and Baptism is one, so Faith
is once for one phrase of speech is common to them all, but they are one
without division into members, or kinds: therefore so is faith. The thing it
self says no less, for this word Faith, imports a co^prehension of many
sentences made one body by a common band, namely the divine authority. For in
every article a part, and in all of them together, we find the same authority,
which draws us to consent to them as true, and accordingly the belief of
one, is the belief of all, the denial of one, the denial of all.

Every Engular sentence pronounced by the Church of Rome, as a thing revealed
by God is (in this question) the Romish faith.

An Article of faith is then erroneous, when it agrees not with the sacred
Revelation, and this we say, with warrant from the Council of Trent Sess. 14.
cap: 8. of the necessity of Satisfaction. And afterward in the Decree
touching the Sacrament of penance Canon. 6. And the thing it self does avowe
the same: for the varying from the rule, is the very nature of error, therefore
every article of faith, must needs be erroneous that agrees not with Gods word,
because that word is the rule thereof. By it our faith was revealed unto us,
and by the record thereof it is reserved for us. And so much for Mr. Wottons
explication.

We have his proof page 15.

That faith which has a fa^se and erroneous foundation is false and erronions,
But the foundation of the Romish says is false and erroneous: Therefore the
Romish faith is false and erroneous.
In the Proposition, two things are taken as granted. viz. 1 Faith has a
foundation without it. 2 Different foundations causes different faithes.


Both of them are clear and evident, therefore they stand not in need of my
proof, if the terms be opened they will be out of question. By foundation we
mean, the next and formal reason, why we assent to this or that proposition
in Divinity, (that is) why we judge this predicate to be truly and rightly
attributed to that subject: now this is without the Article it self, because
it is no more but the authority of him that pronounces the sentence. In the
second sentence we mean to say, Every distinct faith, follows the next and
formal reason of our believing; as when we believe this or that report to be
true, upon the authority of him that reports it: this is humane says, because
it follows humane authority; and accordingly the faith of Turks and Heathens
is accounted humane, because the next reason of their believing is man's
authority: accordingly that is Divine faith, when we esteem this or that
sentence to be true, because God has pronounced it. And thus have we cleared
the Proposition.

Mr. Wotton proves the Assumption by these two sentences.

1. The foundation of their faith is the authority of the Pastors of their
Church. No. 7.

2. This foundation of faith is false and erroneous. No. 10.

And this proof is manifest and without exception, if both these sentences be
true. But they are true: he proves the first number. 8. by this argument

They that have the office to determine what is the true faith, (that is, what
is revealed, and what is not revealed) their authority is the foundation of
faith. But the Romish Church, (that is, the Pastors of their Church) has that
office. Therefore the authority of their Church, (that is, the Pastors of their
Church) is the foundation of their faith.
The Proposition needs no relief, for that office of showing what is revealed,
and what is not, is the next and formal reason of their belief, as by their
doctrine and practice we shall see hereafter, number. 8. etc.

The Assumption needs our help as little, Trent. Sess. 4. praeterea, etc.
says.

It is the office of the Church to judge of the true meaning and sense of the
Scriptures. By Church, they understand the Pastors of the Church, and we know
it by their practice, and the Judgment of their learned. No man inioyeth a
share in the voice of deciding Judgment in any Council, but their Bishops, who
only according to them are the Pastors of the Church.

By Judging, is meant an enforcing power, compelling their sentence to be
obeyed and received.

By sense of the Scriptures, is understood every Article or sentence of faith,
for an Article of faith is a sentence held according to the true sense of Gods
word.

By Scriptures, they understand every particular sentence contained in the
Scriptures, for if they meant some places only, there could be no certainty in
this decree, because they do not determine the particular places subjected to
the Churches sentence; and when they subject the sense of the Scriptures unto
the Churches Judgment, they would have us believe, that the Church must tell
us which be the Scriptures, and which be not, else we can have no divine faith
of them: for reason tells us they must have authority in all points of faith,
or none at all.

This decree of the Council thus understood, Suarez gives it us in this one
sentence.

A general Council in which the Pope is present, either in his own person,
or by his Legates, and confirmed by the Pope, is an infallible rule of Faith.
And this is a matter of Faith. De Fide, etc. Tracta. 1. Disp. 5. Sect. 7. No.
6. and 9. Bellarmine delivers the self same matter in a most ample and large
manner in diverse places in his third book of Gods word, and I will report them
in order as they stand, and thus he begins, Cap. 3. Tota igitur.

The Church, (that is) the Pope, with his Council of other Pastors, is the
Judge of the true sense of the Scriptures, in which all Catholics agree, and
the Council of Trent has it expressly Sess. 4.

It is committed singularly to Peter, and his Successors, that they should
teach all men what is to be held concerning the doctrine of Faith. Cap. 5. Ex
his, etc.

The Councels and Popes execute the office of a Judge, committed to them by
God, a Judge delivers his sentence as a thing that necessarily must be
followed. Cap. 10. Respond. aliud est.

Christians are bound to receive the doctrine of the Church, when it sets
forth the matters of faith, and not to doubt whether those things be so or not,
Cap. 10. sept. argumentum.

Hitherto he sets forth the matter in gross,

The Scripture for it self needs not the witness of men, for it is most true
in it self whether it be understood or not: but for our sake it needs the
witness of the Church, because otherwise we are not certain what books are
sacred and divine, or what is the true and proper meaning. Cap. 10. Respondeo
Christus. Hitherto we find these authors concurring with the Council in the
sense aforesaid, and thereby our Assumption at number. 7. is confirmed, wherein we
say, Their Church, (that is, the Pastors of their Church) has an office to
determine which is the true faith, (that is) what is revealed, and what is not
revealed: and we must know that their judgment is not a private opinion, but
the faith of their Church. Suarez says so expressly in the place alleged, and
the thing it self does say no less of them both, for they agree with the
Council, and all on their side agree with them; none of theirs do deny what
they affirm. If any man think not so, he must show the contrary, which yet I
never found. Wherefore we need not doubt of the conclusion, wherein we
maintain, That their Church is the foundation of their faith, being the thing
we undertook to prove, number. 7.

Though this be enough to manifest the matter, Bellarmine does all this in most
plain and evident manner in the place following.

The word of God delivered by the Prophets and Apostles is the first foundation
of our faith, for therefore we believe whatsoever we believe, because God has
revealed it by his Prophets and Apostles; but we add, that besides this first
foundation there is another secondary foundation needful, to wit, the
testimony of the Church, for we know not certainly what God has revealed, but
by the testimony of the Church. Therefore our faith cleaves to Christ the
first, truth revealing those mysteries as to the first foundation: It cleaves
also to Peter, that is, to the Pope, propounding and expounding these
mysteries, as to a second foundation. Cap. 10. Respondeo ad hoc. If any man
desire to see this precept manifested by practice, he does that also after this
sort.

We are to know that a Proposition or Article of faith is concluded in such a
Syllogism as this.

Whatsoever God has revealed is true.

But this God has revealed.

Therefore this is true.

Of the first of these Propositions no man makes any question.

The second is held for certain truth amongst all Catholics, for it is
grounded upon the testrmony of the Church, Cap. 10. Respondeo verbum.

To conclude, I will report another testimony of his, whereby the whole frame
of this building is brought to perfection, and for that end thus he writes.

A precept of faith is to be proved four ways. 1. By express testimony of
Scripture with a declaration of the Church. 2. By evident deduction out of
express Scripture, with a declaration of the Church being added thereunto. 3.
Out of Gods word, not written by the Apostles, but delivered from hand to hand.
4. By eutdent deduction out of the word of God, delivered from hand to hand. De
Purga. lib. 1. cap. 15. Haec sive. Neither is this doctrine Bellarmines fancy,
but it is the Romish faith, for it is warranted by the testimony of all the
learned in that Church, and the Decree of the Trent Council, already recited
n. 8. for when it gives the Church the office to Judge of the sense of the
Scriptures, it grants that the Scriptures are in being already, and therefore
that they are the revealers of the Sacred verities, and consequently the first
foundation of our faith. When it subiecteth the sense only of the Scriptures
to the judgment of the Church, it gives the Church authority, to propound,
expound, and apply the Scriptures, and therefore it makes the Church a second
foundation, and no more.

By this time I hope it is evident enough,

Now we should prove, Wotton in the book recited even now, has made it
manifest against all opposers, page 21. number. 5. etc. If therefore any man
desires to see it, I refer him thither, because it fitteth not this business
to transcribe it. And thus much may suffice in proof of our Assumption
propounded cap. 3. number. 1.

CHAP. 5. Defends this sentence, The Romish faith is erronius.
propound it, and blame it, as a thorn in their eyes that may not be endured.

Our opponent B. disputes against this at large: but (according as I have done
before so will I do now) his long and tedious discourse shall be contracted
into a narrow room, least the reader be wearied with the length, and pusled
with the matter: yet still his own words and true intent shall be followed.

Thus then he says.

1 In the Church of Rome is some good.

2 They teach well touching the Trinity.

3 The Dominicans maintain Gods free grace, against man's freewill.

4 Much good is in the twelve books of Alvarez, and in the interpretations and
Commentaries of Maldonat, Lorynus, and the rest of the Jesuits. page 90.

5 We agree on both sides in these points following.

1 That the books of the old Testament written in Hebrew are Canonical.

2 That we are instified by faith.

3 That God has made heaven and hell for men's souls after death.

4 That God may be worshipped in Spirit without an Image

5 That we are to pray unto God by Christ.

6 That there be two Sacraments.

7 That Christ is really received in the Lords Supper.

8 That Christ has made one oblation of himself upon the Cross for the
redemption and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world,

9 Under the Papacy is much good, nay all, yea the very kernel of Christianity
page 39. 40. 41.

I answer, our Opponent C. page 4. and 5. that affirms without pooofe, and
makes it a Law, that such an affirmation is as soon denied as made. This is
the case of this opponent. He tells us a tale of their agreement with us in
diverse particulars, but he alleges no author, book, or chapter, whereby we
may try, whether he says true or not; if then we deny, that they and we do
thus agree, all his building falls to the ground, according to his partners
sentence, page 4. Thus soundly he answers to the thing that does most urge him,
but for this time I am content to say, they and we do thus agree, yet behold
his case from himself page 82. We hear of a great cry and little woll: and
page 83. of a man whose skill in Logic was so good, that he proved what was
granted, and being granted, was to no purpose. Now I commend him for so doing,
because I perceive he spoke the very truth, but himself gains nothing
thereby, for of him it is verified to the full, and that in this present
answer, wherein he spends the greatest part of 7 pages before he ends it, viz.
39. 40. 41. 86. 87. 90. 91. yet ten words had served the turn, as well as all
this st^r. If he had said no more but thus: The Romish Church agrees with us in
many divine sentences, he had been as near his purpose as now: therefore we
have a great cry and little woll. If he reply that all the rest proves that
sentence, I reioynd, I am content it shall be so, because that shows his great
skill in Logic, for then he proves the thing that none will deny, and being
granted, serves not his purpose, which none will do, but the good Logician
which his partner describes.



They that agree with us in the particulars recited, their faith is not
erroneous. But the Romish Church agrees with us in the particulars recited.
Therefore their faith is not erroneous.
But no part of this Argument is good. The Proposition is not true: and why may
I not say so, seeing in it self, and by it self, it is not manifest, neither
does he offer any proof for it; and now I have denied it, his whole building
is come to ruin, according to his partners-rule, page 4. even now recited.

To the Proposition I answer, To the Scriptures they add Traditions, to the
Hebrew Canon the Apocrypha, to faith works, to Heaven and Hell Purgatory; and
so forth in the rest: whereupon his Proposition beggs the question, and
therefore it has no force to infer the conclusion. His partner C. page 2.
cannot abide beggary, but this does love it we will; but in the mean time he is
a goodly Disputer, that can prove nothing, unless we grant him what himself
denies: this is enough to satisfy this Argument, because this feigned surmise
is the first and original foundation thereof. But out of our store of
exceptions hereunto for this time, we will forgive him this fault, and proceed
to the rest.



true, (as they are most true) his Assumption at number. 4. cannot be true, and
consequently, there is no means to excuse the Rom^sh faith from error; nor
cause to give her the name, and nature of a true Church: which is the thing we
seek for.

CHAP. 6. Defends this sentence: The faith of the Church is not right and
pure, false and erroneous together: viz. in different Articles.
B. his answer left unsatisfied, in cap. 3. number. 8. The first branch whereof
(we are now to deal withal) has these words.

The doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, taught purely without mixture of
error, is not so essential to the true Church, that so soon as an unsound
doctrine is mingled with the truth of Gods word, and the Sacraments unduly
administered, that which was a Church should cease to be one. In these words,
this sentence is implied: The faith of the Church, may be right and true, false
and erroneous together: viz. in different Articles.

And he does expressly avouch the same in diverse passages of his book; viz.

The present Church of Rome, is corrupted and deformed, yet has the true
essence of a Church: page 30.

The Church of Rome has a religion more after Homer, then after the
Scriptures, and yet holds fundamental truth: page 4.

In the Popes Arithmetic, Articles of faith are added: page 39.

Such affirmatiues of ours, as concern the foundation of Faith, are professed
by the Church of Rome: page: 41.

And nothing is more frequent with him, then words to this effect.

The Church of Rome, (that is all those which lying in that religion make up
one body or society) is not Babylon in the Revelation: but, that Babylon is a
faction in that Church: page 100. The Papacy is not the Church: but the disease
of the Church. The Papacy is in the Church, as an accident in the subject: we
must distinguish betwixt the Church, and the Papacy: page 28, 29. We have
learned to distinguish betwixt the Church, and the great Whore in the Church:
we have communion with the Church, we separate from Babylon: page 101. This we
deny, The faith of the Church, is not right and true, false and erroneous
together: viz. in different Articles. But, If some Articles of Faith be false
and erroneous, then the Faith of the Church it false and erroneous.

I will not now give reason of this denial: but deferr the same till we come
to the 7. Chap. where it shall be disputed so much as is requisite.

He brings proof for his opinion,

Thus then he disputes: If the Faith of the Church cannot be true, and
erroneous together, then where error in faith is, there cannot be a true Church.

But where error in faith is, there may be a true Church: for first, our
Church thinks so, Article 19. according to Mr. Rogers, in his Commentary upon
the place, Propo. 8.

2 The children of Israel did abide many days without a Sacrifice and Ephod,
etc. Hosea 3.4. and without Circumcision, the space of 40. years: Josh: 5.6.
yet then were they the Church of God.

3 The word and Sacraments may be corrupted, as in the times of blindness, and
superstition; or intermitted as in persecution.



I answer,

To all his proofs jointly, I answer: They are far to weak to uphold this
weighty matter, if this assumption be not true, then his whole cause falls to
the ground. Himself confesses (as we have heard) that the present Romish
Church is guilty of heresy; and, therefore can be no true Church, unless
error in faith may be in the Church: For herefie (at least) comprehends error
in faith. Wherefore it stood him upon to gather his wits, and unite his forces
together, to strengthen and mainteyne this business: we looked for pregnant
proof out of Gods word, (for doubtless) if this were true, we should find a
manifest record for it: because God has not left matters of this importance
for man to grope, and guess at. So loving and wise was the Lord, when he
appointed the means of man's salvation. But lo, no such thing is tendered, and
therefore we may conclude, no such thing is in being, and consequently, we
may set down our rest and say, doubtless the faith of the true Church cannot
be stained with error: yet that the misery of this cause may the better
appear, I will uncover the skirts of all his proofs, in particular, and
single out the one from the other.

B. for he that slighteth, yea rejects, nay disputes against her doctrine in
things supreme, must not crave her aid in things belonging to the mean: and
thus stands it with this opponent, who mainteynes the chief question in this
business against her, and at this instant, labors all he can, to refell the
Proposition of her argument. But how may it appear, that our Church makes for
him? He brings nothing but the authority of Mr. Rogers, and that is no greater
then his own, and consequently thus he says, our Church thought so, because I
say she did think so: but what if our Church and this opponent says she
thought not so, then (I hope) the matter thus far, will be at an end.

From this Opponent I argue thus. He that says all Gods revealed truth
universally, essentially, and reciprically belongs to the Church, frees the
faith of the Church from error. But this opponent does so, (for thus he writes
page 13. The true Church is a company of men professing Gods revealed truth)
now, in this sentence, he makes all Gods revealed truth to belong to the Church
universally, essentially, and reciprically: because 1. The words themselves (in
the common use of men) do lie so. 2. According to Aristotle: Poster: lib. 1.
cap: 44 and 33. lib. 2. cap. 3. Top. lib. 6. cap: 1. Thom. 2. did. 27. q. 1.
art. 2. ad 9m. Aliaco. quest. de resumpt. lit q Richardus de Trin. lib. 4. cap.
21. fol. 108. Every exact or perfect definition does so: but this Authors
sentence alleged, is an exact definition: page 13. Therefore this opponent
frees the faith of the Church from error, and consequently (according to him)
our Church does so too: for she has defined the Church, art. 19. just as he
has done in the sentence we alleged.

If art. 19. The visible Church is a Congregation, in which some part of the
pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments in some things be only
administered. But art. 19. must not be so read, least the words of the Article
(themselves) be perverted, and some man say, the avoiding of diversities of
opinions, and establishing of consent touching true religion, was not thereby
intended: contrary unto the protestation of our Church in the title to all the
Articles in general. Therefore Art. 19. subiecteth not the faith of the Church
unto error.

His second proof lies thus: The Israelites wanted Sacrifice and Circumcision:
Therefore the faith of the Church is subject to error.


I answer, this geere hangs not together, so well as Harp and Harrow; for they
sound alike in something, because both of them begin with a letter: but here is
nothing like: The jews Church was an Infant, and not established: Christ's
Church (whereof we speak) is of ripe age, and full growth. Their Sacrifice,
Ephod, and Circumcision, is nothing like to the faith of Christ's Church. Their
want of Sacrifice, Ephod, and Circumcision, is a mere privation, and a not
being: Error in faith is some position, for it comprehends an inconformable
Judgment, or opinion.

His third and last proof stands on this fashion.

The word and Sacraments may be corrupted in the time of blindness, and
superstition, or intermitted as in the the time of persecution.

Therefore the faith of the Church is subject to error.

I answer: the farther the worse, he must understand the word and Sacraments to
be every way the same thing with the faith of the Church; so also he must
understand the terms, corrupted, and intermitted, to be every way the same
with these terms, subject to error: else, here is not the least show of
consequence: but how he will do that, I do not yet see, and I presume I never
shall: he brings no proofs for the Antecedent, therefore at the best, we have
but his own word.

The last argument, B. his English Epistle, a little after the beginning, in
these words: If an Heretic were put to death for his Christian profession
sake, we could not deny him the name of a Martyr.

And we may apply it to the present purpose in this form.

Every Martyr is a member of the true Church. Some Heretic is a Martyr, viz.
such a one as suffers death for his Christian profession sake. Therefore some
Heretic is a member of the true Church, and consequently, the faith of the
Church may be true and false together.
I answer: Every Martyr in the sense of the holy Ghost, Revel. 20.4. is a
member of the true Church; and so far the Proposition is true: but the
Assumption is false, no Heretic is or can be such a Martyr. This Opponent may
presume it, and does; but prove it, he neither does, nor can: because the same
holy Ghost wills us, to avoid an Heretic as a party condemned of his own
conscience: Tit. 3.10. (and therefore of God who is greater then the heart. 1
John 3.21.) If God condemns an heretic, he esteems him not a Martyr. Revel.
20.4. For such Martyrs are commended and saved. Revel. 20.4. If this opponent
takes the word Martyr otherwise then God does, I deny the Proposition, and say,
He that is no Martyr of Gods, is no member of the true Church, notwithstanding
his name and tittle of Martyrdom. In this sense I grant the Assumption,
namely, some heretic may be a Martyr in the account of man, but not of God.

The proof of his Assumption supposes, Gal. 5.20. and is exercised about the
Christian faith, importing error in faith: but then his Assumption is
vnprooved, because, no man that is such a Christian, can be a Martyr, Revel.
20.4. for Gods Martyrs go to heaven, but so does not such Christians: flesh
and blood inherit not the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 15.50.

If he thinks, not his Logic, wrought now; because, he prefers that (for
disputation) before this: page 80, 81. But now, all the fat is in the fire: he
that begs the question proves nothing, if Aristotle may be Judge, Top. l. 8.
cap. 11. and this begging, of all others, is the most beggarly: for, it is a
woman's reason, they use to say, It is so, because it is so: and just so does
he. This is answer enough for such petty trifles, and thus are we come to an
end of all that which Opponent B. has to say against the Proposition of our
Churches Argument, Cap. 3. number. 1. and therewithal I have finished a full
defense of that whole Argument: The Reader must now judge whether the Mother or
the rebellious child has the better.

CHAP. 7. Contains a second proof, that [The Romish faith is false and
erroneous.]
Mr. Wotton has saved me a labor in this passage also, page 46. he brings
this Argument.

If some Articles of the Romish faith be false and erroneous, then the Romish
faith is false and erroneous. But some Articles of the Romish faith be false
and erroneous. Therefore the Romish faith is false and erroneous.
Perhaps I may seem unto some to argue very loosely, because it is a ruled
case, some parts cannot argue the whole, because all the parts together do
make up the whole, and are adequate thereunto. If some parts be wanting, the
whole is not obtained: from whence it falls out, the state, condition, and
denomination, of some parts alone, do not belong to the whole.

I reply, such a man mistakes this reason:

If any man desire to know how error in some Articles only is error in the
whole faith: I answer, he may satisfy himself in that demand, cap. 4. number.
5. where it is prooved, That Faith is such an unite, and continued thing, that
though it is made of many ingredients, yet it admits no division into
members, or kinds. Now, this being true, (as it is most true) then the faith
of the Church can no ways be said to be erroneous in any one Article, but
presently the whole is erroneous.

This Argument and manner of reasoning, Wherefore when the Priest in Moses Law
gave sentence of a leprous man, the whole man was comprehended under that
sentence, If a leprous man was shut out of the host, the whole man, (not some
part only) was thrust out: and this was not against reason, for the soul gave
life, sense, and vigitation to the flesh, and thereby it became subject to
discase and defection, and consequently the soul was indeed leprous, though by
reflection, and at second hand: so is it with the Christian faith, error may
be seated only in some Articles, yet the whole stand infected therewith;
because the foundation of faith, which is the soul thereof, runs through the
whole, as one continued stream without intermission, distinction, or
limitation; by reason whereof, if some Articles only be charged with error,
the foundation of faith cannot be free, if that be infected, the whole faith is
subject thereunto; because, every Article or Proposition becomes an Article of
faith by the force and efficacy of that foundation.

I conceive by this time that the Proposition of this Argument is sufficiently
prooved,

All ours do grant the Assumption, some Articles of the Romish faith be
erroneous: and amongst the rest both our Opponents are lavish enough in words
of that kind, calling that Church (so far as their faith is erroneous)
Babell, and heretical, so as in rigor I am not bound to answer further: yet
because our Opponent B. has done it samely, and falsely, page 40.90.124. etc.
to the shame of his own reading, and the sorrow and shame of our whole Nation,
if I may speak in his partners language, page 22. To mend the matter, and for
the Readers sake, I will proceed and show, that some Articles of their faith be
erroneous, by assigning the particulars which are so faulty, that it may be
known we do them no wrong, when we charge them in that manner: besides this,
every lover of truth, may the better be directed to sever truth from falsehood:
for that purpose I frame this Argument.

All the succeeding Articles are erroneous, viz.

1 The saving truth taught by Christ, and his Apostles, is contained also, in
unwritten Traditions. Council Trent, Sess. 4.

2 Original sin is an vneleannesse within man's soul, and is a sin which is
the death of the soul. Sess. 5. Decret. 2. and 3.

3 Grace does take away, whatsoever has the true, and proper nature of sin.
Sess. 5. Decret. 5.

4 Concupiscence in the regenerate, is not truly, and properly sin. Sess. 5.
Decret. 5.

5 He that receives the inspiration of grace, can [actually] reject the same,
and [actually] dissent therefrom, if he will. Sess. 6. Cap. 5. Can. 4.

6 The only formal cause of Justification, is Justice inherent. Sess. 6. Cap.
7.

7 Sin is mortal and venial. Cap. 11. and 14.

8 The just, in some actions, do not sin venially. Cap. 11.

9 By every mortal sin, a man falls away from the grace of Justification,
which he had received. cap. 14.15.

10 Gods Commandments are not impossible to be kept by him that is justified.
Sess. 6. Cap. 11.

11 The grace of justification is bestowed upon them, also, which are not
preaestinate. Sess. 6. Can: 17.

12 The whole temporal punishment, is not always remitted together with the
fault. Sess: 6. Cap. 14. and Can. 30: Sess. 14. Cap. 8. Can. 12.

13 The works which be done in God, do, for the state of this life, fully
satisfy the Law. Sess. 6. Cap. 16.

14 The just, in some actions, sin not at all: and in no action do they
deserve eternal punishment. Sess. 6. Cap. 11.

15 The good works of the just are their merits. Sess. 6. Cap. 16. Can. 32.

16 The Justified, by their good works, do truly merit the obtaining of
eternal life it self Sess. 6. Can. 32.

17 It is no sin to work in the intuition of the reward. Sess. 6. Cap. 11.
Can. 31.

18 The Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and other Saints. 1. Are to be had,
and kept, cheifely in Churches. 2. Due honor, and worship, is to be given unto
them. 3. Are of Sacred use, and yield much fruit. Sess: 25: Decret: de invocat.

19 The honor which we yield unto Images, is referred unto the thing which
they represent, and whose likeness they bear. Sess. 25.

20 Worship and honor is due to be given, to the bodies of Saints departed.

21 The Monuments, and memories of the Saints departed, are to be frequented,
and honored. Sess: 25.

22 Feast days are to be kept, in honor and celebration of the Saints, and
for visiting their Relics.

23 By visiting the Relics of Saints, we obtain their help. Sess. 25.

24 Prayers are to be made, for the faithful departed.

25 The Saints that reign with Christ, and enjoy eternal felicity in heaven,
1 are to be called upon. 2 they pray for us, even, singular men. 3 It is
profitable for us, to fly to their prayers, help, and furtherance for benifites
to be received from God. Sess. 25.

26 There is a Purgatory. Sess. 25.

27 Some temporal punishment remains to be satisfied for in purgatory,
before the way to heaven can be opened. Sess. 6. Can. 30,

28 The power of granting Indulgences was committed by Christ to the Church,
and the use of them is helpful to Christian people. Sess. 25. Decret. de Indul.

29 The whole choice of meats serves unto the mortification of the flesh.

30 The devout celebration of feast days, causes the increase of piety. Sess.
25. Decret: de delectu.

31 The Sacrifice of the Mass, prayers, alms giving, are suffrages of the
faithful, that are alive, for other faithful that are dead. Sess: 25. Decret:
de Purga.

32 The Sacraments of the new Testament, are neither more, nor fewer then
seven: to wit, 1 Baptism. 2 Confirmation. 3 The Lords Supper. 4 Penance. 5
Extreme Unction. 6 Ordination. 7 Matrimony. And every one of these, is truly
and properly a Sacrament. Sess: 7: Can. 1.

33 The Sacraments of the New Testament contain the things they signifi, and
beslow it upon them which hinders not. Can: 6. And upon all, as much as is
required on Gods part. Ca: 7. And that by the work wrought: Can: 8. Baptism,
Confirmation, and Ordination, imprint in the soul, a character that cannot be
blotted out: Can: 9,

34 After the Consecration of the bread and wine in the Lords Supper, the Lord
Jesus Christ, true God and Man, is contained, truly, really, and
substantially, under the shows of those sensible things. Sess: 13. de Sacra:
Eucha: Cap: 1. Can: 1.

35 By the consecration of the bread and wine, a conversion is made of the
whole substance of the bread, into the substance of Christ's body, and of the
whole substance of the wine, into the substance of his blood: so as, in that
Sacrament the substance of bread and wine remaynes not together with the body
and blood of Christ. Which conversion, is properly called transubstantiation.
Cap: 4. Can: 2.

36 In the Mass a true and proper Sacrifice is offered unto God, Propitiatory,
and profitable unto others, also, besides such as receive it, and it ought to
be offered for the quick and dead, for satisfaction of the punishment of
sins, and other necessities. Sess: 22. Can. 3.

37 The holy Eucharist is to be reserved in the Chancell, and carried honorably
to the sick. Sess. 13. Cap. 6. To be worshipped with a peculiar festival
celebritie, and divine worship; yea external also: solemnly and publicly to
be carried about, that it may be worshipped by the people. Can. 6.

38 Water is to be mingled with wine in the Chalice that is to be offered. Sess.
22. Cap. 7.

39 No man that knows himself to be guilty of mortal sin, how contrite
soever he seems to himself to be, may come to the holy Encharist without
Sacramental Confession going before. Sess. 13. Cap. 7. Can. 11. that is, vnill
he have confessed all, and every one of his mortal sins, and also those
circumstances which change the kind of the sin. Sess. 14. Cap. 5. and that
to a Priestan secret. Can. 6.7.

40 Our Savior Christ when he said [doe this in remembrance of me] did
institute his Apostles Priests, and ordained that themselves and other Priests
should offer his body, and blood: Sess: 22: Can. 2.

41 No man, unless he does Consecrate, is bound by Gods Law, to receive under
both kinds. Sess: 21. Cap. 1: but all such must receive under one kind only.
Cap. 5.

42 We may make satisfaction to God, through Jesus Christ, by temporal
afflictions, laid on us by God, and borne patiently by us. Sess. 14. Cap. 9.
and Can. 15.

43 By the Sacrament of Penance, the grace of Instification which was lost is
recovered. Sess: 6. Cap. 14.

44 Matrymony contracted, not consummated, is dissolved by the solemn
profession of Religion, by either party. Sess. 24. Can. 6.

45 Power was given to the Apostles, and their lawful successors to remit, and
retain sins, for the reconciling of such of the faithful as fall after
Baptism. Sess. 14. de sacra peniten. Cap. 1.

But these are Articles of the Romish faith.

Therefore some Articles of the Romish faith be erroneous.

None of ours will deny either part of this Argument,

If it be answered some of theirs do not agree to the Council in the
particulars assigned, and therefore their faith is not recorded therein, and so
our Opponent seems to argue, page 108. and 130. I reply, the Antecedent is
false, no man can name a member of their Church, that bids defiance to the
authority of that Council, nor can: for such a party is accursed by the
Council, and thereby made an heretic, and none of theirs as we find in the
decree thereof, touching the receiving and observing of the decrees of that
Council, Sess. 25. and the acclamation of the Fathers at the end of that
Council: whereupon we may rest assured, that some Articles of their faith be
erroneous, and which they be in particular. Having hitherto discussed the first
principal question, propounded, cap. 1. number. 1. I now descend to the second,
wherein I may be the more brief; because I have insisted so long upon the
first.

CHAP. 8. Prooveth this sentence, No Papist, (as a Papist) can be saved.
THis position speaks not of salvation actually,

By Papist is meant, such a man as does communicate in the Romish faith. So as
in plain English this sentence ought to be pronounced thus.

The Romish faith disposes or leads not unto salvation.

It belongs not to us to judge of the event, wise beyond sobriety, against the
Apostles rule, Romans 12.3.

Thus have we propounded the point, B. page 6. writes thereof in this manner.

The state of the Church of Rome, both now and many years past, is and has
been such, that plagues were due unto them, even from the greatest to the
least, even to all without exception, as well to authors, as receivers, from
the Idiot, and Handicrafts man, to the Pope, and the College of Cardinals:
because their religion in many parts of it has been heretical, and erroneous
for opinion and practice. I answer,

In the next page he lays out the way for their escape from the said danger
of punishment, Repentance to be the means: namely repentance, either actual
or general. By the first he would have all such to avoid that danger and be
saved, which indeed have builded themselves upon the rock, which is the
foundation of the Church; though through ignorance they hold the same but
weakly, and frame many base and unsuitable things thereupon: but he thinks that
actual repentance is necessary for all known faults.

I answer, Hooker, (of purpose as I conceive for his further grace) but it
availes him little. If he will be our debtor we will grant him all his writing,
who will not say, that by repentance the greatest sinner may avoid hell, and
go to heaven; seeing that, God has promised to put all our sins out of his
remembrance whenever we repent: Ezekiel. 18. Yet notwithstanding we need not
fear his strength in this cause, for two reasons. 1. This is nothing to the
present business, for we enquire after the end unto which the Romish faith
does tend, and he shows the fruit, profit, or end of repentance: how far
then repentance, or turning away from the Popish faith is different, or distant
from the Popish faith, so far is he wide from the cause in hand. 2. This
discourse, makes strongly for our assertion, thus. If a man must repent of the
Popish religion, that is he must turn himself from it, before he can avoid
hell, and obtain heaven, then doubtless the Romish faith leads not to heaven:
for the way thither stands not in need of repentance. Now, let who else will
grace his answer, seeing the more glory it has, the more glorious is our
cause, which is so strongly confirmed by it.

His partner Opponent C. rambleth about this matter, and scatters (in diverse
places) some words tending to the same purpose: but I will not trouble my self
and the Reader with them, only it is meet that we observe, (in his Epistle
Dedicatory) that he makes the point now in hand one of those whereat he
trembles when he does but hear it. If there be any cause why, it will show it
self by his arguments and answers for it, if he be naked in them, we may
conclude that he fears without a cause, and runs when none pursues.

Enough has bin said already, to drive this conclusion to the head: we have
proved that the Romish faith is erroneous: by arguments that are not, nor can
be refelled, and who would require more, to argue her faith to be unable, and
altogether unfit, to lead a man to heaven? Can an erroneous faith show a man
the way to heaven? Surely it can not: because it sits beside the divine
Revelation, which is the only record wherein the way to life is referved for
us. I say heaven and eternal happiness, is only to be found in Gods
Revelation, and who will not believe me? for where the end is above nature, the
means thereto must needs be so also. What need I then to trouble my self and
the Reader with more arguments? But seeing it will not save our labor (some
are so contentious, and will not rest in truths apparent) therefore such must
be met withal, and their endeavors prevented: as the frugall man weeds his
field, that his grain may be the better unto sight, and service.

CHAP. 9. Our Opponent B. his first Argument.
We are now come to the second part of this Discourse, B. who brings his first
Argument, page 31. to this effect.

The seat of Antichaist is the true Church, for he sitts in Gods Temple. 2 Thessalonians: 2.4. But the present Romish Church, is the seat of Antichrist:
Therefore the present Romish Church is the true Church.
The Proposition of this Argument, is set forth page 36. The conclusion is
employed in the title of Chap: 8, page 31 The assumption is wanting.

I answer: he is confident, that,

The Proposition is not only false, Revel. 16.19.17.9.18.^0. The true Church
is a society of men professing the revealed truth. If then this profession be
that place, or necessarily flows from the internal being thereof, (which is
impossible) then his Proposition may be true.

The Assumption has the same fault,

To conclude,

The space containing the person of Antichrist, is that society of men which
professes the revealed verities. But that society which professes the Romish
religion, is the space containing Antichrist. Therefore that society which
profess;eth the Romish religion, is that society which professes the revealed
verities.
But every child that knows chalk from cheese will laugh at this: therefore
it shall pass as ridiculous.

He does imagine, Antichristianity cannot argue the Church to be Christian,
being the bane and plain overthrow of Christianity. Page 36.

I answer, we do not thus answer to this Argument, neither need we, unless
our answer should be as fond as his proof, and experience will now justify
the same: we have answered otherwise, and yet his reason is refelled,

Keep your kindness for your friend, and answer for us when we need it, we
know Sophocles said true:

The gift of an enemy is no gift. In the rest of this 8.

The Jews Church in their worst estate was the true Church of God. Some of
Gods people are in Babylon.

Therefore many heretofore, and some at this day being outwardly of the Church
of Rome, we may justly, notwithstanding, challenge to our selves.

The Opponent C. shall answer him, page 3.

Prove and apply John Barber, and thou shall have two new pair of Sizors.

A recompense too great for such a workman, yet let me tell you, the Jews
Church at no time, was equal, or stood in the same terms or condition with
the present Romish Church: for they always retained the true, and undoubted
foundation of faith, they relied only upon Gods authority the revealer of
sacred things, so as what ever they believed, they so believed, because God
revealed it, they thrust not in the authority of man between the sacred
revelation, and their faith and credence: so as, still they enjoyed at least
the means for getting of divine faith, and consequently salvation it self;
but so it is not with the Romish Church, as manifestly appears in former
passages, cap. 4. number. 7. etc. whereupon we may conclude: Though the Jewish
Church was the true Church of God: yet that will not infer the Romish Church
to be so also. Moreover, the Jews defection was in matter of practice rather
then of precept: when they failed in doctrine, it was peculiar to some, not
universal and common to all that Church: their error was matter of opinion,
not of faith: for no public authority of theirs did command that opinion, or
misbeliefe, to be universally received as being divinely revealed. But with
the Church of Rome the matter is altogether otherwise, Their error is first in
precept, and then in practice: this error is common to all in that Church, no
man can be exempted therefrom, unless he will profess himself to be none of
theirs. Again, that error of the Romish Church is adjudged to be revealed by
God, and commanded to be received by all the members of that Church, by an
authority that pretends freedom from erring, and power of enjoying: so as,
whatsoever is so commanded must be obeyed without delay, or inquiring, as is
showed, cap. 4. number. 7. etc. wherefore we need not doubt to say, the one lost
not the truth of a Church, the other has not the truth of a Church.

We may allow God a share in some that dwell in Babylon: Come out of Babylon,
and they shall hear and obey in their appointed time. But what is this to us?
Elected persons, (not called) are such members of the Church as are unknown to
us, and therefore are reckoned to appertain to the Church invisible: but out
question is of the Church visible.

More then so, God may require us to come out of Babylon, even us that are not
there, for such a command is no more but to prevent our going thither:
forasmuch as the same person that is furthest from Babylon in this present
estate, is there, (even there already) in possibility: because, the holiest man
that lives, lives in the flesh, or humane nature, and therefore may he be
carried to Babylon, because Babylon is heresy, or at least includes it; and
herefie is a fruit of the flesh. By this time (I hope) his whole discourse, as
well that is to the purpose, as what is beside the purpose, is fully cleared
and satisfied: wherein ^hine departed from the liberty of an answerer, of love
and desire to satisfy the Reader.

CHAP. 10. Our Opponent B. his second Argument.
HE urges us, cap. 9. page 37.

That Society which wants the nature of a true Church, denies fundamental
truth, directly, not by consequence. But the present Romish Church, does not
deny fundamental truth directly, but by consequence (at the most:) for the
Popes Arithmetic, which he uses in calculating the Articles of faith, is not
subrstaction, but addition. Therefore the present Romish Church, wants not
the nature of a true Church.
The Assumption and conclusion, is set down page 41. and the title of the
Chapter, page 37. The Proposition is wanting.

In page 21, 22. he writes thus.

Our adversaries (in this cause) do bring the denial of the foundation of
faith, as a medium to prove the Church of Rome to be no true Church. I answer,
this man has a fair gift of inventing: some while he can find an adversary
that answers, another while one that disputes, and all is no more but his own
shadow, or imagination. If he would have the Reader to think otherwise, let
him name the Author that thus disputes, and the place where we may find it,
till then this must go for false.

None of ours would dispute so, for it presumes, that, some Articles of faith
be fundamental, and some be not; and that is false: the whole divine
revelation conduces to eternal life, and accordingly it is the foundation
thereof, and consoquently every Article of faith is fundamental.

I answer further,

He confines fundamental truth unto the being of the Scriptures, and Christ's
coming to save sinners: page 19. and 20. To deny fundamental truth
(according to him) directly, is directly to deny that [Iesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners] as Pagans, Turks, and Jews do: page 22. They deny
it by consequent, which holding it directly, maintain any one assertion
whatsoever whereupon the direct denial thereof may be necessarily concluded.
Thus the Galatians holding Circumcision, did by consequence overthrow salvation
by Christ, inasmuch as, it was impossible that they should stand together: page
23, 24.

According unto this explication, this Argument will be freest from exception
if it be framed in these terms.

CHAP. 11. Of the same Argument new framed.
THat society which wants the nature of a true Church does, in words, But the
present Romish Church does not in words, and professedly deny the Scriptures,
and Christ's coming to save sinners. Therefore the present Romish Church, wants
not the nature of a true Church.
His proofs for this Assumption are two, the one, page 126. in these words:
Offer the fundamental words to them of the Romish Church, and none amongst
them will refuse to subscribe unto them.

The other is his fifth Argument, page 59. etc: To prove the maine question: so
desirous he is to make shows of plenty, that one shall be divided into two,
rather then he will be short in number. In that, he writes thus: In our
disputations with them, we do not prove that Christ came to save sinners, but
we bring it in proof against them: page 62.

And this says he is A tacit consent of all ours, that the Church of Rome
does not directly deny the foundation. page 61.

In page 70. he writes thus.

I would gladly see the testimony of, but, one in estimation for his learning,
amongst us that ever affirmed the Church of Rome to deny the foundation of
Faith directly. The Church of England, has not passed any such sentence upon
her. Some of ours, The Church of Rome denies Christ Jesus directly, not by
consequence only.

At this our Opponent B. page 122. grows very angry, and craves pardon for
breaking his long patience, and does challenge him for an egregious
contradiction, in avouching a denial direct, and by consequence: and why?
Because, The foundation cannot be overthrown both by consequence, and directly
too. None can overthrow by consequence, unless they hold directly, and no man
can both hold directly, and deny directly: And in conclusion, he does gravely
reprehend that Author, because he labor to prove, that, the Church of Rome is
guilty of such denial, both directly, and by consequence; seeing such proof
makes the whole fall to the ground, being nothing worth: and least something
should be wanting pertaining to the honor of a learned Disputer, he gives his
word for all this, esteeming the least proof his great disgrace.

I answer, If you can prove the Church of Rome directly to deny salvation by
Christ, alone, we bind our selves to grant you the victory, and yours be the
day.

If I prove the Church of Rome by consequence, also, so to deny, then that
Author has made no contradiction by this Opponents own rule: namely, because
both of them may be true together.

This Opponent demands how, or where that proof shall be had, and made, page
124. I answer, I will have that proof out of the Council of Trent, and frame
it according to art, and the rules of answering; for that is my office at this
time. Touching the first.

I answer: to deny and affirm is made by voice, That there is a God. In the
first sense I grant the Assumption, (that is) The Romish Church professes,
even in so many words, the being of the Scriptures, and the coming of Christ,
by the voice of humane reason: and so far we are content to go along with
this Opponent: but the Proposition is false. This we say, The profession of the
Scriptures, and of Christ's coming to save sinners, by the voice of humane
faith, though it be in words never so plain and express, yet it gives not
being to the Church, for the Church subsisteth in it self, and differs from
all other societies, by supernatural, not by natural, or humane endowments:
and this I take as granted.

In the second sense the Proposition is true, namely, The profession, even in
so many words, of these fundamental truths: [There be Scriptures] [Christ
came to save sinners] by the voice of divine faith is the very soul of the
Church, and so essential thereto, that without it there can be no Christian
Church, and where that is, the Church is also: because it is so operative
wheresoever it does incline, that all other things requisite to a Christian
Church does follow: according as this Opponent writes, page 21.29.34.

CHAP. 12. The Romish Church directly denies salvation by Christ.
But in this sense the Assumption is false,

They that do not confess Christ's coming to save sinners, do professedly
deny his coming to save sinners: for in this case, a not confession, is a
professed negation, and so accounted by our Savior, who says, he that is not
with me is against me; he that gathers not, scatters: Matthew. 12.30. And
good reason he should so esteem it: for such a not confession, is a voluntary
omission of our duty; This is the will of my heavenly Father, that ye believe
on him whom he has sent. Ioh. 6.29. Even all men whatsoever, because the
earth is his inheritance, and the uttermost ends thereof is his possession.
Psalm. 2.8. We see the truth hereof in the omission of any duty. He that
withheld his tithes, is held professedly to deny the paying of tithes. Mal.
3.8. He that honors not his parents, is reckoned professedly to dishonor
his Parents. Matthew. 15.6. This Proposition then being very evident, I thus
assume.

But the Romish Church does not confess Christ's coming to save sinners, by
the voice of divine faith: because the faith of that Church (by means of the
foundation thereof) is humane, and not divine, as has been manifestly proved,
cap. 4. number. 7. etc.

He thinks to shroud himself under the authority of our Church,

Our Church does charge her to err in matter of faith, Art. 19 but not with
direct denial of salvation by Christ.

Therefore the Romish Church is not so to be charged.

I answer, 1. he takes the authority of our Church to be of moment, I demand
then, why he disputes against her all this while, yea against her doctrine
subscribed by himself? 2. The consequence is naught, our Churches silence
argues not the Romish Church to be innocent, for this question of denying or
not denying, was not in being when her faith was published. This was done, Anno
1562. that began, Anno 1588. or near thereupon, for any thing I can yet
learn, or this Opponent prove. 3. The Antecedent is false; for two reasons. 1.
Errors in matters of faith may be a direct denial of salvation by Christ; for
he that so denies, errs in matter of faith; and we must think our Church meant
so: because her words will bear it, and this Opponent cannot show the
contrary. 2. Our Church in the second Homily for Whitsontide (often times
already alleged) does deny her to be built upon Christ the corner stone in
that foundation, and that imports a direct denial of salvation by Christ:
because he that sits besides that foundation, shall go without salvation.

This proof and defense being considered, The Romish Church according to the
voice of divine faith, professedly denies Christ's coming to save sinners, and
accordingly we have the victory, and ours is the day: according to this
Opponents offer and our acceptance, number. 4. chap. 11. I might proceed to prove
their professed denial of the Scriptures upon the same ground, but I forbear
to do it; because the Reader may see this Argument serves for both that, and
this, by changing the terms.

This Opponent seems to qualify his former recited promise, They overthrow
the foundation directly, to whom Christ is an execration, And to tread under
foot the son of God, to count the blood of the covenant wherewith all we are
sanctified, an unholy thing, and to do despite unto the spirit of grace. Heb.
10.29. is directly to deny the foundation.

And then, he assumes in these words: Of which crime, whosoever is able, let
him indict the Church of Rome, producing sufficient evidence thereof: and
whosoever shall open his mouth to plead for them, let him be guilty of all the
dishonor, that ever has been done to the Son of God, and liable to the
Apostles curse: 1 Cor. 16.22.

I answer, this is his last refuge:

They that directly deny salvation by Christ, are guilty as aforesaid. But the
Romish Church are not so guilty. Therefore the Romish Church denies not
directly salvation by Christ.
I may except against the Assumption with better reason then he can argue for
it: wherefore this I say, The Romish Church is so guilty for, They that know
and believe Christ's coming to save sinners only by natural reason, and
humane faith, They tread him under foot, account his blood unholy, and do
despite unto the spirit of grace. Heb. 10.29. because, the natural man
perceives (or receives not) the things of God, (as they are the things of
God) forasmuch as they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14.

The very wisdom of the flesh is enmity unto God. Romans 8.7. But the Romish
Church does know and believe Christ's coming to save sinners; only by natural
reason, and human faith: for all their knowledge, and beleiving, arises upon
the teaching of the Pastors of their Church, which is merely human, because
they have no Commission for such teaching, as appears Cap. 4. number. 7. etc.

If any man do judge that the place alleged, Heb. 10.29. mean no more but
thus, then I rest here as in a sufficient answer to this argument, and claim
this Opponents final promise last mentioned, and so we are at an end for this
cause: the day is ours, we must carry the victory, and the signs thereof,
leading these Opponents in triumph.

afterward sin wilfully, ver. 26. by fors^king the Assembly of the
faithful, verse. 25. and therefore are certeinely subjected unto Gods fiery
devouring indignation and judgment, ver. 27. But Jews and Pagans deny
salvation by Christ, (in the judgment of this Opponent page 22.) Secondly, if
all that directly deny salvation by Christ are thus guilty, then this
guiltines in the Apostles intent is the total, and adaequate nature of that
denial, otherwise the Proposition contains not an universal truth. But this
guiltines (in the Apostles intent) is not the total and adaequate nature of
that denial: but (...) denial in one special kind, viz. Apostasy, and
wilful backsliding: for thus lies the Apostles reason. If wilful forsakers of
their profession, and the society of the Saints, shall certainly be punished
with Gods fiery devouring indignation, and judgment, then let us hold fast the
profession of our faith, and the assembly of the Saints without wavering.

But such shall be so punished: for their sin deserves it, inasmuch as,
thereby they tread under foot the Son of God, etc.

The Proposition and Assumption is set forth from verse 23. to the end of verse
27. and the proof of the Assumption verse 29. (being the place which we have
now in hand) whereupon we may conclude: Some that directly deny salvation by
Christ, are not thus guilty; and so his Proposition is false, that makes all
such deniers to be so guilty, and consequently, our Mother the Church of
England has the day of victory, and so shall hold it.

These Opponents are under the hatches, and there we will keep them.

This Opponent tells us, page 123.

I answer, and why does he account this pardon a favor done us, seeing
himself does confess the thing it self, so often: does he think, himself
can do what we cannot? Surely then, what differs he from the Bold
Braggadochiaes in the Camp, whereof we read in his partner Opponents
Epistle. It may be he will say, he that makes that proof must grant, that they
directly hold salvation by Christ, which he does, and we do not. I reply, he
is deceived, we do say, they directly hold salvation by Christ, according to
the voice of humane faith, as I have answered, chap. 11. number. 5. therefore if
any thing makes the difference between his power to prove, and ours, It is not
his affirmation, and our negation; but he has skill and we have none, well,
let him vaunt that has the vain, To the present matter, we say, we despise
his pardon, we crave no favor, let him do his worst, we know whose faith we
maintain, and will now prove.

CHAP. 13. The Romish Church by consequence denies salvation by Christ.
IN proof of this sentence,

They that directly hold salvation by Christ, and other things which cannot
stand therewith, they by consequence deny salvation by Christ: because from the
second, the direct dentall of the first may be necessarily concluded. But the
Romish Church directly holds salvation by Christ, and other things that cannot
stand therewith. Therefore the Romish Church by consequence denies salvation by
Christ.
This Opponent may not deny any part of this Argument: because the Proposition
and the proof thereof is his own, page 23. and 24. so is the Assumption, page
26. The conclusion is gathered out of them both, who therefore (on this man's
behalf) can except against any part thereof.

It may be some man may say, Romish Church, with a direct denial of salvation
by Christ, and in this argument we free that Church, from such denial, and
consequently we contradict our selves, so as the proof of the one, does
equally overthrow the proof of the other, and thus our opponent seems to
argue, as I have reported, Cap. 11. number. 3. I answer, this exception may be
taken off with ease: for we charge them and discharge them as is aforesaid,
indifferent respects, we say they deny salvation by Christ according unto, or
in respect of divine faith, we grant them the contradictory according unto, or
in respect of natural reason or human faith, as the Reader may find, cap.
11. number. 5. In regard whereof, both sentences and their proofs may equally
stand together, without damage the one to the other. If any man thinks
otherwise, he must show it by the rules of Art, else no man is bound to believe
him. I answer further, this direct holding of salvation by Christ, which we
grant unto them, is inducement and foundation enough, whereupon we may charge
them with the denial of the same thing by consequence? For that holding is a
real confession, and accordingly does put the thing confessed in a being
sufficient, whereupon it may be denied, or avoided by inference, and therefore
our Proposition is true, that supposes the same.

And thus our Argument is sufficiently fenced, against the claws of this
Opponent: and therefore here I must end the matter of their denial of
salvation by Christ by consequence: for none of our Opponents brings more then
thus touching the same.



Accordingly here we would rest, but our present Opponent is not so contented:
for he denies, that, the Romish Church may be ranked with the old Heretics,
because they go not the same way to work with them; They (says he) struck
nearer the head then the Church of Rome does. She indeed is wandered from God,
and her doctrine is iniurous and contumelious to God and our Redeemer: It does
gainsay the foundation of our faith: but yet it is removed a great distance
therefrom: raze it, it does: but by a circle of consequence (at the most) thus
he writes page 3. 18. 24. 25. 38. 41. 127. 128. Yet he does not varnish over
their opinion, nor help the best foot of a lame cause forward; if you will
believe his words page 127. For this cause therefore, I will prove the Romish
Church to deny salvation by Christ, by consequence, direct and immediate, not
by a circle, or means that comes between that proof and that salvation: and
then we shall know, whether that Church ranks with the old heretics or not,
and whether this Opponent is not a faithful advocate unto her or not. I frame
my proof thus.

Romish faith in themselves be opposite to this sentence. [Saluation is by
Christ] then that Church denies salvation by Christ, by a consequence that is
direct and immediate, not by circle and the interposing of others: for such is
the nature of opposites, that both of them cannot befall the same subject, in
the same respect, part and time, by reason whereof, the affirmation or presence
of the one, is a denial and absence of the other, as Aliaco does truly
teach. 1. sent. q. 2. lit: H. But some Articles of the Romish faith, in
themselves, be opposite to this sentence [Saluation is by Christ.] Therefore
the Romish Church, denies Salvation by Christ, by a consequence that is direct
and immediate, not circular by the interposing of others.
In the avowry of my Assumption, I will prove three things.

1. According to the Romish Church.

Inherent grace, merits and satisfaction of man's work, is the next and formal
reason of our title unto, and the possession of heaven. 2. According to the
Scriptures.

Jesus Christ is the next and formal reason of our title unto, and the
possession of heaven. 3. These two Articles are opposite in themselves.

When I have manifested these three, our Argument stands firm of all four,
(as we say) It is sound in all parts, and crazed in nothing.

Touching the first; The Council of Trent has decreed thus: Christ is the
Author of our salvation. Sess. 6. Cap. 11.

By Christ we have grace. Can. 2.

He merits grace for us. Cap. 7. and 16.

From him grace flows unto us, as the sap into the branches. Cap. 16.

In him, (that is he working with us) we merit, and satisfy. Sess. 14. Cap. 8.
de satisfact.

His grace makes our works meritorious. Sess. 6. Cap. 16.

Gods will makes them our merits. Cap. 16. Can. 32.



Thus far Christ has share (according to them) in our salvation, we will see
now what place they assign unto inherent grace, with the merit and
satisfaction of our works.

Eternal life is propounded as the grace of sons, and wages unto works. Sess.
6. Cap. 16.

By grace received we are made just of unjust, that we might be heirs of
eternal life according to hope. Cap. 7.

Inherent grace is a fountain in him that has it, springing unto eternal
life. Cap. 16.

The just do carry their grace before Gods Tribunal, and enjoy heaven. Cap. 7.

The works of the justified, wrought in God, do truly inherit the obtaining
of eternal life in due time, if they continue therein unto the end. Cap. 16.

The just ought to expect and hope for eternal retribution from God for their
works done in God, if they continue in his law to the end. Can. 26.

The justified by their works done in grace, do truly merit eternal life,
the increase of grace, glory, and eternal life it self: if they die in grace.
Can. 32.

Now (I presume) I have made it very manifest, that they attribute unto Christ
no other part in our salvation, but the office of giving us grace, and
therefore we are beholden to him for no more, but the beginning and the
possibility of salvation; but unto inherent grace, and the merit of work, they
assign the next and formal reason of our salvation, in hope while we live
here, and in possession when we are gone from hence.



By the grace of Justification received, the fault is remitted, and the
guiltiness of eternal punishment is blotted out: yet sometimes remains a
guiltiness of temporal punishment, to be satisfied for, either in this world,
or in Purgatory in the world to come, before the way to Gods Kingdom can be
opened. Sess. 6. Can. 30.

We are able to satisfy before God, not only by those punishments, which we
willingly under go for the revenge of sin, or imposed by the priest
according to the measure of our fault: but also, even by such temporal
afflictions, which God lays upon us, and we bear with patience. Sess. 14.
cap. 9. de operibus, etc.

We are able to satisfy God, and do so, for our sins. By Jesus Christ, he
working together with us, we are able to do all things: from whom our good
works receive force, of whom they are offered to the Father, and by whom they
are accepted of the Father. Sess: 14. cap. 8. de satisfact. cap. 9. de operibus.

As in the former, so here, they make the satisfaction of our works, the key to
open heaven gates, and the recompense for injury done to God, but Christ, he
shall have no more part in the business, but to make us able to turn the key,
if he help us we need no more of him, we do the rest our selves.

We no sooner turn the Key, but in we go: If we make recompense we are
discharged, and consequently, the satisfaction of our own works, is the next
and formal reason of our release from Purgatory, and the opening of heaven
gates.

I have done enough in proof of the first,

If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed. Ioh: 8.36.

He that beletueth in the Son, is passed from death unto life. Ioh: 5.24.
and 3.26.

We shall be saved by his life. Romans 5.

We are joint heirs with him. Rom: 8.17.

He brings many children to glory. Heb. 2.10.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. Romans 8.1.

Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and he shall appear the
second time without sin unto salvation. Heb 9.28.

Christ's takes away the sins of the world. Io. 1.29.

Christ once in the end of the world appeared to put away sin, by the
Sacrifice of himself. Heb. 9.26. and is entered into heaven it self, to appear
in the presence of God for us. ibidem v. 24.

If any man doubt whether these places do make Christ the next and formal
reason of our salvation, he may satisfy himself by the phrase, which the holy
Ghost uses: for he makes an immediate connection between Christ and heaven,
which he would not do so often, if some thing else came between Christ and
heaven: for to set forth a remote and mediate cause, by a next and immediate,
is an improper, and borrowed speech, which is an indecent thing to be so often
(and more often then thus) in the pen of the holy Ghost: If then we dare not
charge him so, we must conceive he meant to make Christ the next and formal
reason of our salvation.

I need not prove Christ and man's merits to be opposite next and formal
reasons of our salvation, for it is manifest by it self: so as, now our
Assumption number. 4. is sufficiently confirmed, let the Reader judge of our
cause, and the present Opponent.

CHAP. 14. They that deny salvation by Christ by consequence are not the true
Church.
THe Argument propounded, Whole Churches have denied, (and yet do) deny by
consequence, that salvaton is by Christ: yet we do, and must hold them
Christian.

All this while we have let that supposition pass untouched, as if it were
true: because the weakness of that proof should be the more apparent: but now
(and in all good time) we say, he supposes falsely, and therefore he is a
beggar, no prover.

We prove against him with this Argument.

Unto the true Church Christ may be profitable, Unto such as deny by
consequence that salvation is by Christ, Christ cannot be profitable: for unto
the Gallatians Christ could not be profitable. Gallat. 5.2, 3, 4. But all such
as deny by consequence, that salvation is by Christ, are the Gallatians. 5.2,
3, 4. I say they are the same with them, not by name, Nation, singular persons,
or doctrine: but in their denial they are the same, (that is) the one denies
salvation by Christ by illation inference and consecution, and so do all
other. The Gallatians held something for true: viz. [Salvation is by the Law]
This being granted, then must we deny that Salvation is by Christ. So stands
it with all others that by consequence deny him to bring salvation. Whereupon
we may conclude: All such as by consequence deny salvation by Christ, Christ
can profit them nothing, and consequently, such as deny by consequence that
salvation is by Christ, are not the true Church. I conceive, in page 24.

The Gallatians by consequence denied salvation by Christ. Gallat. 5.2. etc.
The Gallatians, Gallat. 5.2. etc. were a true Church.

Therefore some true Church, by consequence denies salvation by Christ.

I answer, those Gallatians whereof we read, Gallat. 5.2, 3, 4. by
consequence denied salvation by Christ, and therefore the Proposition is true:
but that the Apostle writes there, of the whole Church of Gallatia, may not
reasonably be affirmed, nor can possibly be proved; because, no part of Gods
word does say so, or lead us to think so. The Apostle in the 5. Chapter,
reproues the Gallatians, for biting, and devouring one another, verse 15. and
for vain glory, and envy, verse 26. Now the parties thus reproved were
particular persons, not generally the whole Church: for, it is not likely, that
every singular man in Gallatia was so guilty: if therefore, singular persons
were reproved here, then there also: for the same phrase and manner of
reproof, is used both there and here.

If any man be desirous, Gallatia, verse. 2, 3, 4. we may do it without profit
to this Argument.

For then, I grant, them of Gallatia were a true Church: because the Apostle,
cap. 1. verse 2. terms them a Church, and saluteth them with grace and peace
from God and Christ, verse 3. and does acknowledge them to have received
liberty, and freeaome by Christ, cap. 5. verse 1. We may continue, that, they
joined Circumcision, and the keeping of Moses Law, unto Christ, in opinion, not
as matter of faith. At that time they began to grow in liking with that
conceit; but they were not confirmed, and settled in their judgment that God
had revealed it, nor professed it to the world as such. If they did so indeed,
then I may grant the whole reason without loss; because, the conclusion urges
not us: we willingly acknowledge, that the true Church is subject to error, in
opinion, in things very important unto salvation: we only deny that erring in
matter of faith can befall the true Church, whilst it is so. I say we may thus
judge of that Church, until we see good reason for the contrary: because,
charity thinks not evil, nor is suspicious. Nay, the Apostles phrase leads
us to think so: for, if that had been a matter of faith with them, he would
have charged them with the fact as a thing perfectly done: but he does not so,
yea rather the contrary: for, verse 1. he wills them to stand fast in their
Christian liberty: and, verse 2. he puts the matter to an If, saying, If ye
be circumcised, etc: verse 7. he tells them, ye did run well, and demands
who it was that did let them, etc. and verse 10. and 12. he threatens, and
entreats for their punishment that did trouble them: and finally, verse 10.
he shows himself confident, that they would shake off, and forsake the
present doctrine, and continue in the same mind, unto which he had brought
them, and in which he had left them: wherein it is very apparent, he speaks of
them as men wavering, not as parties confirmed in their judgment.

These things considered, we may undoubtedly resolve, that, the Church of
Gallatia, is no example, wherein we find that denial of salvation by Christ
by consequence, which is the thing we seek for, and deny to the Church. And
thus much shall suffice in refutation of his great, and important argument,
propounded, cap. number.

CHAP. 15. Of the same Opponents third Argument.
HItherto we have discussed, say, touching the Romish Churches acknowledgement,
and public profession of the Scriptures, and of salvation by Christ, and have
insisted therein to the uttermost, lest some should be deceived by those
glorious and beautiful titles. In this place we must examine, what good their
Baptism does them, wherein we may say thus much (aforehand) If their
profession of the Scriptures, and salvation by Christ, does not grace them: but
notwithstanding such profession, they remain still destitute of the nature of
Christ's Church, then doubtless Baptism cannot help them to it, even in this
Opponents judgment; for page 85. he delivers it for a ruled case, that, The
Church of God may want Baptism for a time, and yet remain a true Church: But
he will not say so of professing the Scriptures and salvation by Christ; which
we believe, and he affirms, is the soul of the Church.

From their Baptism he frames this Argument.

That society which consists of persons Baptized, that is the true Church.
But the Romish Church consists of persons Baptized. Therefore the Romish
Church, is a true Church.
The Assumption, and conclusion, is plainly (enough) set forth in the title of
chap. 10. page 42. and in page 45. The Proposition is wanting, but all the rest
of the Chapter contains no more, but a proof thereof.

I answer: The Sacraments duly administered according to Christ's ordinance, in
all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same, is of the
internal, and formal being of the Church, I willingly grant with our Church
of England, which gives the Sacraments (in this sense) a place in the
definition of a Church, Artic. 19. and accordingly, in this sense, I grant the
Proposition, and say, that, That society wherein Baptism is thus administered,
and consists of parties thus Baptized, that is a true Church: and he may save
his labor to prove it, because all Christians will confess, that such
Sacraments are peculiars to the Church; Testimonies of Gods gracious dignation,
and favor, Pledges of his invisible grace, seals of the agreement between
him, and his Church, and badges to distinguish the same from all others:
because, no society else, does carry the like unto them, in the things
themselves, and the love of the Church: as this Opponent sets forth, page, 33.

But I deny the Assumption, and say, The Romish Baptism is the shell and
relic of Baptism: and I will now make it appear, though this Opponent of
ours seems to be tragically moved, and in a pelting fume thereat; insomuch
that he confesses himself to make good use of a bridle, page 46. and 47. and
it is well, so good an instrument was present; for the further he had roved,
the more he had missed of the true mark.

The Romish Baptism is the shell, no Baptism duly administered, as aforesaid,
I prove it by the authority of our Church, in the second Homily for
Whitsontide (oftentimes already quoted) which expressly says, the Church of
Rome does not order the Sacraments (and therefore this of Baptism) in such
sort as Christ did first institute, and ordain them: but, have so intermingled
their own traditions, and inventions by chopping, and changing, by adding, and
plucking away, that now, they may seem to be converted into a new guise.

Will our present Opponent think this insufficient, to prove the Romish
Baptism a shell and relic of Baptism? I hope not: if he does oppose it as
not sufficient, his partners words, page 17. shall serve him, O mouth! o
forehead! and he well deserves it: what? One man instruct a whole Church, yea
his Mother that bred him, whose Articles of faith gave him his first life, and
confirmed him in it, ever since? Nay will he afront himself, (yea himself)
not in transient words, but in manent letters, his subscription made with his
own hand, for he has subscribed this Homily.

Perhaps he will say, Gods covenant, and agreement with man, of necessity must
precede Baptism, for (according to this Opponent) Baptism is the seal
thereof. But the Articles of divine faith, are Gods covenant, and agreement
with man. Therefore the Articles of divine says, of necessity must precede
Baptism. If they must so precede, then the Romish Baptism is not administered
according to Christ's ordinance, in all things of necessity requisite unto the
same; for the Articles of their faith, are the Popes, and humane; not Gods, and
divine; as I have proved already. If their Baptism be not so administered, then
it is erroneous, and none of Christ's ordination. If that be so, it is a shell,
and relic of Baptism, retaining the outward ceremony, and material form;
but wanting the inward life, and true intention.

I answer further,

By way of reply to this answer, he averreth, page 45. and 46, that, Popish
Baptism is true Baptism, holy, good, and the ordinance of God.

But I know not what law will tie me to join thereunto; because, himself is
uncertain, and rests not in it, one while he says, he will not trouble
himself to prove it till he knows who denies it: another while, he takes it
to be out of all question, and so does contradict himself: for, if at another
time he will prove it, then it needs proof, and consequently it is not
without all question. If it be without all question, then it needs no proof,
for, according to Aristotle, Nothing must be proved, but things that may be
doubted of Top. lib. 1. cap. 11. and he esteems him mad, who puts that for a
question, that all men grants. Top. lib. 1. cap. 10.

In both the pages last mentioned, he disputes thus:

He that calls the Sacrament of Baptism a shell, and relic of Baptism, was
not guided by Gods Spirit, disgraceth Christ, and the Sacrament. But our
adversaries in this cause, so call the Sacranent of Baptism: page 35.47.
Therefore our adversaries in this cause, were not guided by Gods Spirit, and
disgrace Christ, and the Sacrament.
I answer, this is altogether without his own appointed order page 77. it is
meet the Reader should be put in mind of these things, least he mistake the
matter, and the learning of the disputer.

His mind cannot be at quiet,

The indecent rites, and erroneous opinions of the Romish Church, cannot make
nullities, and evacuate the force of the Sacraments.

Their Baptism (for the substance of it) is holy, and good, and effectual (no
doubt) to them that recetue it, as ours.

I answer, The Popish erroneous opinions, and indecent rites, make void the
being and efficacy of the Sacraments.

To the first branch I will say nothing, because I have done enough for that
already. In the second he is mistaken, or a false accuser: if he will excuse
himself, let him show the Author, and place of that opinion. This we say, and
have said it already, They have no Sacraments, because they have no divine
faith. And we think this consequence is good: because, the Sacraments have no
being, nor use, but in order unto, and in presupposall of, the divine faith:
and I suppose, our strictest Opponent will say no less; for if the Sacraments
might be inioyed, in their true and real being, and natural efficacy, where
divine faith is wanting, then Turks, and Heathen men might have them, which I
know this Opponent (at least) will deny: because, The Sacraments are peculiars
to the Church, making men Christians, and Christianity makes the Church: for
thus he writes, page 117. and 119.

He promised to forbear his proofs till he found his position denied, the
heat within him, whereof we read in his English Epistle, would not give way
to that: wherefore, page 118. he alleges two, and I will report them in true
form, that the Reader may see their soundness. In the first he concludes thus.

If they Baptize with water in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, then their Baptism is good, for here is water, and the words of Christ's
Institution, the one the matter, and the other the form; and both essential
to Baptism. I answer,

This proof supposes, that, Nothing is essential to Baptism, (that is
nothing by Christ's institution is of necessity requisite unto the Sacrament of
Baptism) but water, and the words of Institution.

I answer: entitie, comprehended under certain limits, as all unite, and
individual things are; taking that Sacrament as an individual being, made by
motion, there is nothing required to the being thereof, but the water, and
words of institution: and so far this Argument supposes rightly; but nothing
against us; for we do not deny an entitie, or being unto Popish Baptism: we
know, when water is powered on, and the words pronounced, there is a motion, and
a thing made by motion, which was not before, and is distinct from all other
motions, or things made by motion. In the Sacrament (so truly administered)
there is likewise, besides the said individual entity, or being; a certain
connotation, or essential relation, and that three ways. 1. Of man to God. 2.
Of the Sacrament it self. 3. Of God unto man. In the first relation man shows
his obedience to God. In the second and third man is ordered unto heaven, so
far as the Sacrament can: man being thereby confirmed in the expectation of
Gods love, and the receipt of inherent grace. Now, unto this relation, or
ordering to heaven, more things are essential then water, and the words of
institution: namely the sacred revelation, believed by a divine faith: which (I
say) does so order us to heaven, by commanding their use, and promising Gods
favor, and working grace, to such as use them rightly: from the first arises
our obedience, from the second our assured expectation of his favor, and
grace: and thus much this Opponent himself will confess I doubt not.

Nothing (I presume) will be questioned in this answer, but this distinction:
self, the name Sacrament imports, that there is this connotation, or
relation, over and above the unite, and individual entitie thereof: for, it
signifies (at least) that the unite, and individual thing is sacred, and
holy; and that is more then the individual entity it self: but howsoever it
be with others, this Opponent must not oppose the latter branch of the
distinction; for himself does teach it; expressly, if not more fully, then I
have set forth: thus he writes, page 47.

The very being, and nature of the Sacraments, consists altogether in
relation to some such gift, and grace supernatural, as God only can bestow.
These things are sufficient (as I conceive to satisfy his first argument, in
behalf of Popish Baptism.

His second follows in this form.

If the Baptism in the Romish Church be not true; then it must be iterated
when they turn to us. But the Romish Baptism may not be iterated, when they
turn to us. Therefore the Baptism in the Romish Church is true Baptism.
I answer, if by true Baptism he understands, all things of necessity
required unto Baptism, then this conclusion serves our purpose in the present
question: for, we inquyre and search after such a Baptism, otherwise not.

In that sense the consequence of the Proposition is unsound, negation is
better then his affirmation: he that alleges must prove, or loose his action,
by the course of all courts in the world. Yet (for this time) I will depart
from mine own right, and give a reason for my denial: because, I desire to
satisfy the Reader, and this I say:

Although their Baptism want some things which of necessity are required
thereunto, by the institution of Christ: yet, from hence will it not follow,
that it ought to be repeated: because where Baptism is repeated, there all
things essential thereunto (by Christ's institution) must be wantting: for
repetition argues a nullitie. But in the Romish Baptism, some things
essential thereunto (by Christ's institution) are present, namely, 1 the water.
2 The words of institution. 3 An outward profession of Christianity. The first
and second are essential to Baptism, as it is an individual being, and the
third is one use, and end thereof. So as, thus the case stands between us:
Their Baptism is refused, because the sacreed revelation, believed by a divine
faith goes not with it. It is retained, because the water, the words of
institution, and the outward profession of Christianity goes with it: and
herein we do well, because, for want of the first, it cannot order us to
heaven: and by the presence of the rest, we follow the institution of Christ:
when they come us we cannot give them of the water, of the words of
institution, and of outward Christian profession more then they have already.
All that we do when they come to us, is, to perfect what is begun, and supply
what is wanting.

I answer moreover, Papists, with us, may not be baptized again; because,
such as former heretics baptized, were not to be baptized again. This
consequence (I say) is naught, because the Popish Church, and former heretics
do really differ: for these are far worse then they, (as Bishop Carleton
has abundantly proved, in his Direction to know the true Church) and here ends
my answer to his third Argument.

He concludes this present matter more solemnly then any other passage in this
business:

Our adversaries, in this cause, must give us leave, till we hear further from
them, to think this our third Argument, (drawn from the lawful Baptism of
the Church of Rome) to be unanswerable. I answer:

CHAP. 16. The fourth Argument for the same purpose.
HIs fourth Argument, Wheresoever there be persons retaining the Ministerial
function and office, Ephesians. 4.8. There is the true Church, because such persons
have the tutelage of the Church, Cant. 8.11. and the promise of Christ's
presence to the worlds end. Mat. 28.20. But in the Church of Rome there be such
persons. Therefore the Romish Church is a true Church.
This Argument is employed in the title of chap. 11. page 48. The Proposition is
expressly delivered, page 50. and the proof thereof, page 49. the Assumption
and the proof thereof is employed in these words: There is lawful ordination in
the Church of Rome, page 56. In the Church of Rome there is true, and lawful
or dination, wherein they receive commission, and do promise to teach the
people, not the Popes Legends, but out of the holy Scriptures: so that, both
Pastor and Flock are ours, by admission, promise, and engagement: theirs, by
abuse and practice: page 58. The conclusion is also employed in these words: She
has not wholly lost the face of a Church: page 58. if we remember what has
been said touching the two former.

The proposition cannot be denied, because where the ministerial function
(mentioned Ephesians. 4.8.) is present, there the word and Sacraments of Christ
duly administered connot be wanting, seeing this function presumes that word,
and those Sacraments; as a fountain from whence it flowed, and an object
whereabout it is exercised, as our Saviors words Mat. 28.19.20. do import.

But the assumption is false, and impossible to be true. For, they have
forsaken the fountains of living water. Ier. 2.13. what life therefore can be
in them? Shall we look for the ministerial function, mentioned Ephesians. 4.8.
where the words, and seals of Christ's charter are wanting? Surely, no wise man
will, and he that does, shall loose his longing, and his eyes shall sooner
fail, then the thing he looks for be found. This is enough in the strictest
terms, to refell this argument.

Yet more specially I answer: Ephesians. 4.8. implies a double power the one of
Jurisdiction, and the other of Order. The first does exercise Church discipline
for government; as imposing of hands unto ordination, etc. The other
administreth the word and Sacraments, as Bellarmine truly has it: De Romans
Pont. lib. 4. cap. 22. At the beginning with the joint consent of all theirs,
and ours. Now, neither of these powers (of Jurisdiction or of Order, mentioned
Ephesians. 4.8.) can be found in the Romish Church: for, they serve to gather the
Saints, and to build up the body of Christ verse. 12.13. But the Romish Church
can have none such: seeing their faith is erroneous, and their Sacraments
shadows, and without the true substance.

Moreover, such as have the power of order, Mat. 28.19. to teach divine faith,
and administer Christ's Sacraments, but none amongst them, have such commission:
for, they are admitted, and and ordained, to offer up the body, and blood of
Christ, a propitiatory sacrifice, for the quick and dead, as we learn by the
Council of Trent. Sess. 22. Can. 1.2.3.

If any man think, that the Council has not set out the adequate nature of
their power of order, he must show some other Record (containing matter of
their faith) wherein their order of Preisthood consists in more then this.
But we know he cannot: because, perpetual experience shows, that so soon as
a Priest is ordained, he is such a sacrificer, and as he is a Priest, he does
noe other office, but offer that sacrifice, what everels they do, it is an
addition to their Preisthood.

They have the power of Jurisdiction in some sort, as a Revealer of the sacred
verities: (but, chiefly, and next of all) because, the Pastors of their Church
command it, and accordingly they exercise and apply it.

These things being true, (as they are certain) The Assumption is false: for
they have not that power of Jurisdiction whereof we read, Ephesians. 4.8. for that
is such a Jurisdiction as is received from, and employed about, the word of
divine faith.

Noreover, this power of Jurisdiction which we grant them, profits them
nothing: because, their power to ordain Elders, and exercise Church
Discipline, arising from humane reason, and serving to humane ends, has no
place, nor power, in constituting that Church, which is (indeed) the family of
Jesus.

Now we have denied his Assumption,

The first, himself disposes thus: If they have not lawful ordination, then
have not we, for ours comes from them.

I answer: this comes far short of his Assumption: for in that, he
attributes the Ministerial function, (whereof we read, Ephesians. 4.8.) unto the
Romish Church. In this he speaks only of ordination, which is but one part of
that function: so as, if he would dispute from their ordination, as he does
from their Ministerial function; his Argument, would prove their Church to be
a true Church, very weakly and lamely: because, the being, and essence of
Christ's Church, is not constituted by any power of ordination: and this is
enough to satisfy this consequence of our Opponent B. But we will try him a
little further.

He says, Our Ordination came from them, and thereby he endeavors to prove
the foresaid consequence: But it comes short of that: The outward ceremony of
Ordination, (that is) the imposing of hands by one that has Diocesan
Authority, which we enjoy and do exercise, came from them, so far (for this
time) we yield; that is, that, such Ministers of ours, as first led the way
unto our separation from them, were ordained or admitted into the work of the
Ministry by such authority of theirs. But this proves not, that our Ordination
and theirs is the same: for, ours arises from, and is exercised about, divine
faith; so is not theirs. Our Ordination, as it arises from, and is exercised
about, divine faith, is not received from them: because amongst them, that
divine faith is wholly wanting If then any desire to know, how they, and we do
agree in the outward ceremony, and disagree in the in the inward, and
Spiritual life of Ordina^ion, or the power of Jurisdiction, left by Christ
unto his Church. I answer, the providence of God has made that difference.
They are given up to believe lies, we are preserved in the truth, and faith
once delivered to the Saints.

The second proof of his Assumption, We do not ordeine them anew which have
taken Orders from that Sea, when they become converts.

I answer, 1. This proof has the same fault with the former: Orders cannot
argue the Ministerial function, Ephesians. 4.8. because that comprehends more then
then this, yea, this seems to be but the entrance into the function, and not
the essence thereof. 2. I answer, The inference is also naught. Their
ordination may not be repeated when they turn to us: yet ours and theirs may
be essentially different, as an empty vessel may not be rejected, and yet
differs from that which is full: and indeed so stands the case between their
ordination, and ours. They have the outward ceremony, taken up by tradition
from the precedent and pure ages of the Church: we have that and the substance
also, because divine faith goes with ours, but is wanting to theirs.

His third proof contains these words.

They receive commission to teach the Scripture: not the Popes Legends. I
answer, This branch came out of his own brain. He never found it in any
records of their faith. Moreover, the records of their faith are against him,
as I have partly alleged, Number. 3. and may further appear by the 4. Sess. of
the Council of Trent formerly reported, wherein the judgment of the true sense
of the Scriptures, is attributed to the Church, that is, as themselves expound
it unto the Pope. If then their priests must each the Scriptures in the Popes
sense, then the Scriptures are no better then the Popes Legends, and
consequently when they teach the Scriptures, they teach the Popes Legends.

To conclude, if Commission to teach the Popes Legends be a Ministry differing
from the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.8. (as this Opponent implies) then the Popish
Priesthood is not that Ministry, Ephesians. 4.8, because it teaches the Popes
Legends. And thus in stead of confirming he overthrowes his Assumption.

CHAP. 17. The conclusion of the whole, claiming our Opponents promise.
NOw we have fully finished the body of the disputation, we are to come unto,
both our Opponents conclusions, lest something be left untouched, to the hurt
of the cause, and offense to the Reader.

Our elder Opponent, concludes his book, page 115. with these words.

I desire to stand, but so right as I am in all honest Judgments, I beseech
all Readers to Judge wisely, and uprightly of what I have written. And in his
second Epistle he promises after this sort.

If you can soundly and substantially Convince me of untruth, I profess,
before God and the world, that, I will yield unto you without any more ado:
being already willing to be overcome of the truth in this case. The younger
Opponent, page 132. ioynes with his partner in the same promise.

If I have erred, I shall thank those that will bring me into the way again.
If I have favored any unsound opinion, yea, or have spoken suspitiously, let
me suffer as an Heretic: but, let no man condemn me till he has first showed
me better, and found me obstinate. I answer, the whole sum of their promise,
makes up this conditional Proposition.

If we have erred we will revoke that error. Whereunto I will add this
Assumption.

But you have erred. And accordingly every must make this conclusion.

Therefore you must revoke your error. The consequence of the proposition may
not be questioned, because then selves have made it, and the one has professed
(before God) to perform it.

The other craves the punnishment due to an heritick, if he breaks it.
Wherefore, so far, our ground work is certain.

If they doubt of the assumption, they have offered fair, and I accept it.

They are content to stand to the judgment of of such readers as be wise,
honest, and do fear God. I desire noe better arbitratours, They require to be
showed better by sound, and substantial conviction, and I say it is the best
issue.

If therefore, such Readers find such conviction these Opponents must grant
the assumption, and execute the conclusion; for every honest man performs his
promise, when he has received the condition.

FINIS.

