A GEOGRAPHICALL AND ANthologicall description of all the Empires and
Kingdoms, both of Continent and Islands in this terrestrial Globe. Relating
their scituations, manners, Customs, Provinces, and Gouernements.

Arsiam naturam superat, nam pendere Terra,
Quam facit haec facit hic pictor habere pedes.
printer's device of Thomas Creed, featuring a griffon seated on a stone or
book, resting on a ball or globe with wings (McKerrow 339)

LONDON Printed by T. C. for Simon VVaterson, dwelling at the Sign of the
Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1607.

In insequeus Geographium opus Decastichon.
QVid perigrinandi prodest tot adire labores.
Dum quod vbique petis possis habere domi?
Quae mare, quae tellus, quae tanta pericula monstrant,
Haec vno obtatu parvula charta docet.
Non hic Scylla vorax, aut formidanda Caribdis.
Temperat has placidas mitior auster aquas.
Hic tu cum cern^^^^ernas polyphemon in antro.
Non aper hic fertat dente vel vnque Leo.
Ergo quid vlterius satagis? Habet omnia habentem
Qui mundum, mundus quod tenet, ille tenet.
Io: Prideaux.
FLevit Alexander cum plures audijt orbs,
Tu potius plures non Iore flere potes.
Ille dolens vnum quod non superaverit, omnes
Armis desperate viuere posse suis.
Tam been tu veterem cum iam descripseris orbem
Nunc cupias alium posse videre novum.
Ne doleas: nam si non primus sufficit orbis
Quo tua se saturet Musa, secundus erit.
Interea Safforte tuum (quo pinxeris orbem)
Stabit forte (vetus dum cadet orbis) opus.
Casparus Tomannus.
NOn capiunt muscas, nec sepe minutis,
Ingentes animi rebus adesse solent.
Audaces fortuna invat, timor arguit autem,
Degeneres animos: hoc tua caepta sonant,
Cui genus antiqnum iuvenis, quem terra nec vndae,
Nee vasti spatium terruit oceani.
Quae tu tam dextre pinxisti cuncta: refer
Et genus, and proaves vt videare tuos.
Ergo age, iam notus, si nox tibi sufficit orbis,
Ignotos adeas inipiger Antipodes.
Johannes Glanuillae.
TO THE RIGHT Honorable, admired of men, and myrrour of women, the Lady
Elizabeth Russel Dowager, my worthy Lady and Mistress.
RIght Honorable, It may seem strange to your learned censure, to find him
the Author of a book, which so lately was your unworthy Page: But the seeds
then sown were such, and their manuring since of that quality, that the
ground had been too barren, if no fruit had followed. Little (God knows) it
is, and that very untimely, unable to endure the least blast of our modern
Critickes; were it not favorably sheltered by your Honorable Patronage; whose
rare learning and virtues, the world rather honors, then imitateth; my self
am fitter to admire, then express. The very conceit whereof, heartened me to
circuit the whole earth, in it to find something to present your Honor. Si
natura nigat facit indignatio versu^ Sat. 1.
Mere chafing, made Iuuenall a Poet, and me a Geographer: an ardent contention
to acknowledge my duty which sufficiently to perform, I esteem my self too
unworthy, and the whole world too little. The thing herein I aim at, is your
benign acceptance, in confidence whereof, I have presumed so far; which
seconding in this your manifold former favors, my hopes are attained, and my
self bound,

Your Honors in all service and duty to be commanded. Rob. Stafforde.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader (for so I suppose thee to be, until I find thee contrary)
thou art little beholding to me for this Geographical discourse, as containing
little in it worth thy perusing, and that which it is, thou have against my
will. Hardly I think I shall satisfy thee, who never in this kind could
satisfy my self: yet thus far importunity has forced me, and whatsoever
thou find, is more then my self intended, or thou could of me expect. A
poor Survey here thou have, not of my travels but reading: If sometime
therefore erroneous, I patronize it not, but relate it. So far thou may
believe me, that what my self believe not, I invented not, but took out of
others. The Method I had from my Tutor, and so far forth the rest, that I
account it but the gleanings of his plentiful Harvest. The rather to be
allowed (as I take it) because it admits without maime the cancelling of a
fiction, and the interserting of any notable thing omitted. If thy profit by it
counteruaile my pains, thou have somewhat: if otherwise, the briefnesse of it
cannot loose thee much time. They which have no leisure to seek farther, may
take this for an insight: others may fetch a great deal more from the^ of whom
I had this, to whose riper judgments I trust my youth may excuse me, when the
work cannot. As for the Punies of mine own rank,

Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua: Martial.


Shall serve for a counterblast. And so I commend this description of the
world, to the world: and thy self and it to the Creator of both. Not
determining to trouble thee any more for ought I know, and therefore rest,

Thine as thou use me, R. Staff.

To the Author.
WHen Caesar sitting in Imperial Robe,
was Soueraign Lord of the earth commanding Rome,
He sent to measure this terrestrial Globe,
To see how much was left to overcome.
Belike his Kingdoms Vice-Royes were too slack,
In due performance of this weighty task,
Or he some good Geographers did lack,
That might in brief resolve what he did ask.
Whilst he intended all the world to gain,
He in the Senate house was stabd to death.
A little Vrne his ashes did contain,
Whose mind was not content with half the earth:
Had thou (dear friend) lived in this Monarkes days,
And rendered up this book unto his hands,
He would have crowned thee with tryumphall Bays,
Or made thee ruler of some foreign lands:
For this small book (yet great in worth) does show
All that which mighty Caesar craved to know.
In idem opus Carmen Encomiasticon.
VT Microcosmus Homo est simulachrum Regis Olympi,
Sic Maiore minor pulchrior orb foret.
Factus erat Magnus Mundi ratione Minoris,
Scire licet patulo quicquid in orb latet.
O Tu qui externas ignarus tendis ad Oras,
Hunc discas librum mira legenao loqui.
Hic mores hominum graphice depingit, and Vrbes,
Et quicquia magnum sub lone Caesar habet.
Hic, campos, stuutos, montes, Capitolia turres,
Structaque Mygdonio marmore tecta, legas.
Hic fractos Regum tumulos, stratosque Colossos,
Ruptaque Montiuagae Templa Sacrata Deae.
Hic, vbi Troia fuit, magnae and Carthaginis arces,
Quaeque erat armipotens Roma vetusta scias,
Terra Arabum foelix, vbi Phaenix nascitur vnus,
Plus foelix, multos terra Britanna tulit.
Haec multos parit ingento, Gentoque potentes,
Parua sed eximij: Insula culta viris.
Inter quos semper meus est memoranous amicus,
Qui dulce, and nobis vtile texit opus.
Tho. Rogers.
A GEOGRAPHICALL AND ANTHOLOgicall description of the whole World.
CHAP. I. DE GEOGRAPHIA.
1 GEographie is an Imitation of the picture Definition.
of the whole earth, with those things which are annexed thereunto. Ptolm.
Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Therefore it comprehends under it Chorographie, the
description of a Region, Hydrographie, the description of waters, Topographie,
the description of a place, and the like.

2 The Subject of Geographie, is this Terrestrial Subject.
Globe, composed of earth and water, so far forth as the parts of it, have a
diverse situation, as well in respect of the heavens, as one toward another.
Maginus. page 3.

3 Concerning the Terrestrial Globe in respect of the Heavens, two things are
dilligently to be observed, Longitude and Latitude of places.

4 The Longitude of a place, is a distance intercepted between the first
Meridian, which passes Longitude.
through the Canarie Islands, and the Meridian of the place, which Longitude is
always to be measured from West unto East in the degrees of the Equator. The
reason is, because all Meridia^s cut the Equator.

5 The Latitude of a place, is a distance intercepted Latitude.
between the Equator, and any place North or South from it, which to find
out, turn the place in the Globe, until it come directly under the brazen
Meridian, then numbering in the brazen Meridian, how many degrees be betwixt the
Equator and the place, it shows the Latitude directly.

Therefore the Longitude and Latitude being known of a place, it is easy to
find it in any globe; and on the contrary, if you see the place first in the
globe, by turning it under the brazen meridian, both the Longitude and Latitude
is known.

6 Concerning the Terrestrial Globe, in regard of his parts one unto the
other, it is divided into Sea, and Land.

7 The Sea or Ocean, is a huge water compassing about this whole Universe,
whose parts passing by Sea.
many particular places; are called by sundry and particular names, as Mare
Britanicum, a Britania, Mare Mediterraneum: quia mediu^inter duas terras,
africae and Europae. Mare Atlanticum of the great mou^tain Atlas.

8 In the Sea, are to be considered three things: Creekes, Straights, and
Havens.

9 A Creek is a place where the Sea does run Sinus.
any where into the bosom of the earth: And such are Sinus Arabicus, or the red Sea: Sinus Persicus, or Mare Balserum, Sinus Adriaticus, or the Gulf of
Venice.

10 Fretum, is a narrow straight, or Arm of the Sea, passing betwixt two
Lands, so called a Fremitu. Fretum.
Whereof the chief are, Fretum Gaditaneum, or the straights of Gibraltar,
Fretum Magellanicum, or the straights of Magellane: Fretum Nassouicum, or the
North Straights.

11 A Haven is a little Creek or entrance into the Ports.
maine Ocean, where ships are always rested and harbored.

12 The Earth, as may be seen in all Geographicall Earth.
Maps and tables, is described and painted forth with huge Mountains, great
Woods, fair Rivers, and many famous Cities: the circuit of it, is 21600.
miles, and (as some write,) if a footman had a pathway round about the World,
he might go it in 900. days. Magiuus.

13 In the Earth are to be considered and observed, two things, the Islands, and
the Continent.

14 An Island, (quasi, eye of land,) is compast round Island.
about with the Sea, as Britania, Hybernia, Sardinia, etc: Of the Latins it is
called Insula, quasi in Salo.

15 A Continent is a great quantity of land not divided Continent.
by waters, where many Kingdoms and Empires are lincked and joined together.
As Spain, France, Germany. etc.

16 In both Islands and Continent, three things are to be noted: Istmus,
Peninsula, and Promontorium.

17 An Istmus or Chersonesus is a narrow or straight Istmus.
land between two Seas. Of which, the most famous are Istmus Corinthiacus, and
Istmus Cymbricus, both in Europe.

18 Peninsula (quasi pene Insula) is a part of the continent, every where
environed with the Sea, unless Peninsula.
it be where it is tied unto the firm land, with a little Istmus. The most
far fam'de of which are, whole Africa, Scandia, Taurica Chersonesus,
Pelloponesus or Morea, and Peruana in America.

19 A Promontorie, is a high Mountain, which Promo^tory
bends it self into the Sea, the extreme or end of which, is called a Cape.
Of which, the most known are the Cape of good Hope, in Africa: the Cape of
Saint Vincent, in Portugal: the Cape Comari in Asia: and the Cape de la
Victoria, in America.

CHAP. II. Of the unknown parts of the Earth.
1 Hitherto have I set down the general affections of the Terrestrial globe.
Now therefore will I descend unto particulars, and only, and particularly
speak of the earth, because Hydrographie does rather belong unto the art of
Navigations.

2 The parts of the Earth are either unknown, or known.

3 The unknown parts which lie in obscurity, are either in the North under
the Articke Pole, or in the South, under the Antarticke Pole.

4 The unknown Land which lies under the Artick Pole, is separated every
where (as it is thought) from the other parts of the World, with the North
Sea, which breaking in by 19. Inletts, and 4. Staights, is supped up, and
ingulft into the bowels of the earth, under the black Rock, which lies
directly under the Pole, being in compass 33. Leucars.

James Cnoyen in the book of his trauells, makes mention of a certain Priest
of Noruegia, which had by tradition from a Friar of Oxford, that by the help of
his magic, and taking the fittest opportunity of time, he undertook to
travel into those parts, and was directly under the Pole, where he descryed
all these things. Mercator.

5 Not far distant from the black Rock are situated four Islands of
reasonable bigness, the Sea running between every one of them, and making
them equal in quantity one unto the other. In one of the which Islands being
opposite unto Biarmia, are found Pigmies or little men, not above 4. foot in
height. Magin.

6 The unknown Land, which lies under the Antarticke Pole, is thought to be
greater then all the earth besides.

7 In it are descried some few Provinces, as Nona Guynea, Terra del Fuego
Psittacorum Regio, Lucach, Reach, and Maletur. All which together, are called
Magelane.

Of these Countries nothing can be certainly spoken, only that in the land del
Fuego there is much smoke, in Psittacorum regione, there are great Parrets, in
Beach, Gold: in Maletur Spices.

8 The Inhabitants of these Regions which have been seen (being very few)
go naked, and are most barbarous people. Mercator.

CHAP. III. Of the known parts of the Earth.
THe unknown parts of the World have been obscurely spoken of. Now follows
the description of the known parts, which are sour in number, Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America.

OF EVROPE.
1 EVrope (called by Pliny the fairest of all other Nations,) is on the South,
separated (from Africa) Bounds.
with the Straights of Gibraltar, and the Mediterr anean Sea, on the West (from
America,) with the rolling waves of the Atlanticke Ocean, and on the East (from
Asia,) with the Egaean Sea, Hellespont, Propontus, Thracius, Bospherus, Pontus
Euxinus, Bospherus Cimirius, Maeotis Palus, Tanais fluuium, and so drawing up a
line unto the river Duina, which runs along unto the Port of Saint Nicholas,
disburdning it self into Sinus Granuicus, or the North Sea.

2 The form of Europe is like unto a Dragon, the Simititude
head being Spain, and the wings Denmark and Italy.

3 In Longitude it is 3800. miles, reaching from Longitude
the Cape of Saint Vincent in Portugal, unto Constantinople in Thracia. Magin.
Orteli.

4 In Latitude, it contains 1200. miles, stretching Latitude.
it self from the Archipelago or Egaean Sea, unto Mare Congelatum, or the
Frozen Ocean.

5 The people or inhabitants of it, does far surpass Inahbitants
the residue of the other parts, in Religion, Learning, Arts, valor and
civility. And are all Christians, unless it be toward the northeren part of
Scandia, or those which are under the Tyrannical government of the Turk.
Magin.

6. In Europe are to be considered two things: First, the Kingdoms and
Empires which are contained within the Continent, and then the Islands.

7 First therefore of the Continent, in which are Division.
contained 16. Kingdoms, Spain, France, Germany, Belgia, Dania, Italy,
Illyria, Hungary, Polonia, Prussia, the Turkish Empire in Europe,
Transiluania, Lituania, Liuonia, Scandia, Moscouia, or Russia.

OF SPAIN.
1 Spain is in every place environed with the Sea, Bounds.
unless it be toward the north-east part, where it is joined unto France,
distinguished only by the high Pyrinean mountains. It co^taines in circuit,
1890. miles.

2 This land is very fertile, enricht with all kinds Quality.
of wine, Sugar, all sorts of fruits, grains, oils, mettalls, especially of
Gold and Silver.

3 The inhabitants of it are very ceremonious, superstitious, Inahbitants
proud, hypocrites, laborious, addicted more then any other Nation unto
Melancholy, and descended of the Goths, Saracens, and Jews.

4 This kingdom is divided into many Provinces, whereof the chief are first,
Portugal, famous for Provinces.
Navigations, in which the chief city is Lisbone: the second is Granado, or
Andalucia, in which are the best horses: the chief city in it is Civil, from
whence come our excellent civil Oranges: in this Province is also Cadiz or
Cales, that was once surprised by Englishmen: the third Province is Casteile,
in which is that great city Tolledo, the Byshoprick whereof comes near in
revenues unto the Popedom: the fourth is Navarre, in which stands the city
Bilbao, from whence we have so many excellent tried blades: the fifth and last
is Galicia, in which stands S. Iago: where Saint James is much reverenced.
Ortel.

5 The chief rivers of these provinces are four, Rivers.
Tagus, in which is found much golden Sand: Guadiana or Ana, which runs
into a Cauerne or hole of the earth, for a great space, and rises up again.
Guadalquiuir, upon whose bancks stand Civil. And the last is Duerus. Merula.

6 In times past this was divided into 12. Kingdoms, Government.
but now it is only one entire Government, subjected unto one King: who is
called, King of Spain.

OF FRANCE.
1 FRance is limited on the West, with Mare Aquitanicum, Bounds.
and the Pyrinea^ Mountains: on the North, with the English Sea: on the South,
with Mare Mediterraneum: on the East, with Germany: and on the Southeast, with
the Alps. Magin.

2 This country is extraordinary fruitful, abounding Quality.
almost in every thing, especially in Corn, Wine, and Salt, which causes that
saying, that France has three Loadstones to draw riches from foreign Nations,
Corn carried into Spain, Wines tra^sported into England and Flanders, and
Salt, wherewith the whole kingdom and bordering Nations are ple^tifully stored.

3 The Inhabitants of this Land are in the first onset Inahbitants.
of any thing very vehement, but at the length as slow and dull. In their
words only verbal, in their deeds cautelous: from whence it is said; that the
Frenchman sings not as he pricks, pronounces not as he writes, speaks not
as he thinks.

4 The Provinces of this Region are many, among which, three of them have free
Princes. The first is Lorreine, Provinces.
in which the chief city is Nancie: the second is Burgundy, whose
Metrapollitane and chief city is Bisancon, lying upon the river Doux; the
third is Subaudia, or Sauoye, whose chiefest city is Geneua, situated upon a
fair and pleasant Lake, and in which they have a law, that if any offender
fly for refuge thither, the law does as well take hold on him there, as in the
place where he committed the crime.

5 The other provinces are many, among which the chief are eight. First, the
Province of Normandy, whose Metrapolitane city is Roan, famous for traffic,
in many foreign countries: the second is Britanie, whose chief city is
Breast: the third is Burges or Berrie, whose chief city is called Burges,
which (as John Calmenus affirms) has an University in it, worthy to be
entitled: The Honor of all learning, and store house of learned men. The
fourth is Aquitanie, in which stands Tolouse, that beautiful, best peopled,
and most ancientest city of France, next unto Paris: the fifth is Picardie, in
which the chief city is Amiens: the sixth is Poictou, in which is the city
Poictiers: the seventh is Languedocke: and the eight is Aniou: Many others
there are, which to rehearse, would be too tedious, and therefore I omit them.

6 The Rivers of note in these Provinces, are four. Rivers.
The first is Sequana or Seine, which runs through the fairest and
Metrapolitane City of France, called Paris, or Lutetia, (quasi in luto sita.)
The second is Loyre, upon whose shores stand Angiers and Orleance, two famous
cities. The 3. is Rhodanus or Rhosne: the 4. and last of any note is Garo^ne

7 Two things are reported of this Country, very strange. The one is, that the
King cures a certain wenne, Wonders.
which rises in a man's neck, with the touch of his hand, saying these words:
Sanet te Deus, tangit te Rex. The other is, that there is a certain oil in the
church of Rheims, which as they report, was sent from Heaven: and the Kings
being anointed with it every Coronation day, it does never decrease. Hondius
in Tabulis.

8 This Kindome is governed by a Monarchical government, subjected unto one
sole King, who is called Government
the king of France, and his eldest son is tituled the Dolphine of France.
From this country is excluded by the Salick law, any woman, that she cannot
reign and be Queen.

OF GERMANY.
1 GErmany, is distinguished on the west from France, by Bounds.
part of the river Rheine, and a line, which is drawn up directly from
Strasburg unto Cales: on the South, from Italy, with the Alps: on the
South-east, with Istria, and Illyrica: and on the East with Hungary, Polonia,
and the river Vistula. Magin.

2 This country is inricht with all sorts of Mines, as Quality.
well of Salt, as of Mettalls. It has also great abundance of corn, wine,
saffron, fruits, hot bathes, and sweet fountains.

3 The Inhabitants of this Empire are generally very tall, goodly, warlike,
and faithful men, little addicted unto Inhabitants.
venerie, but much affecting drunke^nes, that welspring of Impiety, from
whence bubbleth out this saying of them, that Germanus potat quantum potest:
and Germanorum viuere, est bibere. They are also for their inventions in
Inventions.
arts Mechanical most excellent, and far surpassing any other Nation: for
from them came the invention of Gunnes, invented of one Bertholdus Swart, in
the year 1378. by them was also invented Printing, in the year of our Lord,
1440. by one Ihon Gutemberg, but (as Ramus affirms,) by one John Fust, who
printed Tullies Offices, which was the first book that ever was printed.

4 In the middle of Germany is situated Bohemia, a very Bohemia.
pleasant kingdom, compast about with a wood called Sylua Hyrcinia: the chief
city of it is Prage, in which the Emperor does keep his Court.

5 There are also in this great and large Dominion many Provinces.
Provinces, among which, the especial, first Saxony, whose Metrapolitane
city is Witteberg, lying upon the River Albis: the second is Brande^bourg: in
which stands Franckford, situated upon the River Odera: in which there is an
University, erected by Marquis Ioachim, in the year, 1506. The third is
Pomerania, the chief City of which is Stetim. The fourth is Bauaria, whose
best city is Munchen. The fifth is Slesia, in which is situated the city
Bressel. The sixth is Franconia, whose most noted City is Franckford, founded
upon the river Moenum, in which Martes.
place is always the Election of the Emperor, and the famous Martes for
books. The seventh is Austria, the Metrapolitan of which, is that famous
Vienna, seated upon the river Danubius, esteemed to be one one of the fairest
Cities in Germany. The eight and last, worthy to Heluetia.
be preferred before all the rest, is Switzerland or Heluetia, which is divided
into 13. Cantones or chief cities with their Apendices, the government of them
being only popular: for although the members seem to be separated, yet live
they as one body, firmly knit and united, every one having his particular
Magistrate and Council.

6 The most famous Rivers of these Provinces are six. First is the great
Danubius, which does receive into Rivers.
it 60. Nauigable Rivers, before it is disburdened into Pontus Euxinus: the
second is Rhene, from whence comes the best Rhenish wine, and upon whose
bank is situated the city Strasburge or Argentine, in which there is a tower
of 578. Geometrical paces high, counted the eight Miracle of the world: the
third is Amasus: the fourth is Moenus: the fifth is Odera: and the sixth is Albis.

7 The Emperors do not succeed, but are always chosen by these 6. Electors:
the Arch-byshops of Ments, Triers, and Colen: the County Palatine of Rhene:
the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandeburge. If these cannot agree,
then does the King of Bohemia decide the controversy.

8 Concerning the Government of this Empire, it has many free Princes, which
is the reason that the Emperor by some is called a King of Kings. Government


OF BELGIA.
1 BElgia, (or the Low Countries,) is limited on the Bounds.
East, with Germany: on the South, with France: on the West, with the main
Ocean: and on the North, with Denmark and part of the great Sea. It contains
in circuit 1000. Italian miles.

2 This Country does most excel in all manner of Linen, and fine Stuffes:
and about Frisea, Gelderland, Quality.
and Holland, they have Oxen of such an incredible bigness, which if they were
balanced, would weigh above 2000. pounds, for there was seen in Antwerpe, a
Bull, whose body did exceed 3200. weight. Magin. Ortel. In this Country
there is also great abundance of Butter, Cheese, Herring, and Salmon, and
especially in Holland.

3 The Inahbitants are very goodly and propermen, having Inhabitants.
generally well proportionated legs. They are great drinkers, not proud nor
envious, but unmindful both of benefits done unto them, and of injuries
offered. They are excellent Musicians, and in Mechanical arts most expert.
Provinces.


4 The provinces of Belgia are 17. in which are contained 4. Dukedomes, 7.
Earldomes, 5. Barondries, and 1. Marqueship.

5 The 4. Dukedomes are first, Brabant, in which the 1. Brabant.
chief city is Antwerp, fortified with 10. royal Bulwarks, and having within
it a Towne-house, whose circuit is 4812. paces. There is also in this Province
an University called Louaine. Ortel.

6 The second Dukedom is Liege or Luicke, called by 2. Liege.
some the Paradise of Priests: the chief city is Liege, from whence the
Dukedom takes his name.

7 The third is Lutzenburge, in which is the great Forest 3. Lutzenburge.
of Ardenna, which was in the time of Caesar 500. miles in length, at this day
only 90. the chief city is Lutze^burg. or.

8 The 4. and last Dukedom is Gelderland, noted 4. Gelderla^d.
chiefly for the excellent pasture grounds, which are in it, the chief city
is Nimmegen. Ortel.

9 The 7. Earledoms or Counties, are first Flanders, in 1. Flandres.
which the chief city is Gaunt, there are also many strong Port towns in it,
as Newport, Du^kerk, Ostend, and Slewis. Ort.

10 The second is Artois, the chief city of which is 2. Artois.
Arras, from whence comes the best cloth of Arras.

11 The third is Hainolt, whose fairest city is Mons, in which there is a
Capital of Religious women, that was 3. Hainolt.
erected by Vadruda, Duchess of Lorraine.

12 The 4. is Holland, very poor of it self, unless it be in pasture grounds,
in which they nourish so many Cattle 4. Holland.
that it does excel other parts in Butter and cheese. They are also so strong
at Sea, that they are able to make 800. great ships, and twice so many small.
The chief city is Amsterdam, so famous for Traffic, that there may be seen
in her Port sometimes, 500. great ships at once. Ortel.

13 The fifth is Zealand (quasi Sea and Land,) in which 5. Zealand.
country or County there is found no fresh water. In it is also very little
wood. The chief city is Middelborough, in the Island of Walcheren.

14 The sixth is Zutphen, of which very little or nothing 6. Zutphen.
can be spoken.

15 The 7. and last County is Namur, very plentiful 7. Namur.
of Woods and Dear, the chief city is Namur.

16 The 5. Barondries or Lordships are first, Friezland, Vltrect.
the noted cities whereof are Leuorden and Embden.

17 The second is Vltrect, whose chiefest city is Vtreck.

17 The third is Mechlin: the fourth is Ouerissel: the fifth and last Lordship
is Groining.

18 The 17. Province is, the Marquiset of the holy Empire, in which nothing is
famous.

19 The most noted Rivers of these Provinces are three, the first of which is
Rhene, mentioned before in Rivers.
Germany: the next it Schald, which washes the bancks of Antwerpe: the last
is Meuse, upon whose shore is situated Luicke.

20 This Country (famous for wars) is in part governed Government.
by many, whom they call States of the low Countries. But the Arche-duke of
Austria wageth war continually with them, to bring it under his Dominion,
claiming and laying Title unto it.

OF DENMARK.
Denmark is environed round with the maine Ocean, Limits.
unless it be on the South, where it is joined unto Germany.

2 This Kingdom does abound in goodly Horses, Quality.
and in such store of cattle, that there are yearly carried into Germany
50000. Oxen. There is also such infinite abundance of herring, (near unto the
I Will Scania) that the ships are scarce able by maine strength of Owers to row
out of the Harbor, the fish lying so thick, that their quantity is supposed
to surpass the water it self. Ortel. Inahbitants.


3 The Inahbitants of this country are very valiant both at land and Sea, in
their Religion they are all Lutherans.

4 The Provinces of this Kingdom are almost all Provinces.
Islands, among which, the chief are first, Sealand, in which is Coppenhagen,
the chief seat of the King, and an University, in it is also Roschilt, where
the Kings are still intoombed. The second is Loilant, in which there grow so
many Hazell-nuts, that ships are loaded there with them. The third is Fimera,
in which Ticho Brahe built a Castle by Art, to the wonder of every body that
has ever seen it. In the Continent are containd two other Provinces,
Iugtland, and Holsten, in which is Meldrope, the inhabitants of which are so
rich, that they cover their houses with copper. Magin.

5 In this Country is also a straight Sea, passing between some of the
Islands, called the Sound: which by Sound.
reason of the Imposts and Customs of the Ships which pass that way, yields
great gain and profit unto the King.

6 The Government of this Kingdom is under one Government.
sole Prince, who is called the King of Denmark.

OF ITALY.
Italy, (called by Merula a Terrestrial Paradise: The Bounds.
Phoenix of this Massy round, the earths rich Ornament, the Garden of the
Muses,) is guarded on the East, with the Adriaticke Seas on the South, with Mare
Mediterraneum: on the West, with the Terrhene or Ocean: and on the North, with
the Alps, which separateth it from Germany, it is like unto a man's leg,
reaching in length from Augusta Pretoria, unto Otranto, which is 1010. miles,
and is in breadth, in the brodest place, 420. miles.

2 To set down the fruitfulnes of this rich Region, it may be as well
declared in a line as in a leaf, for there Quality.
is of all things such plenty, as there is not of any thing any scarcity.

3 The people of this Nation are very grave, frugall, witty, excelling both
in virtue and vices, which are in Inhabitants.
lust, monstrous: in hate, implacable: and in their conversation most
deceitful: which had rather bestow any thing upon others, then upon
themselves: do more oftener blaspheme then swear. And will rather kill a man,
then give him a disgraceful term or word.

4 This Kingdom is divided into many Provinces, whereof the chief and most
famous are five. Provinces.


5 The first is the Kingdom of Naples, which is greater then any of the rest,
full of Nobility, and abounding Naples.
with all things necessary for man's use. The chief city of it is Naples,
lying upon the Terrhenean Sea.

6 The second is the Roman Territory, a Province richly furnished with all
provisions, in which is situated Roma.
the City of Rome, once called the Empress of the world, as well for the
beauty and Magnificence of the City, as for the Learning and fortitude of the
Citizens: but now it is much ruinated: true Religion and virtue clean decayed.
The Governor of it being the Pope, that proud prelate, persecutor of all true
piety, and zealous professors.

7 The third Province is Lumbardie, comprehending Lumbardie.
under it is the Dukedom of Millaine, which does excel for beauty all the
rest, having in it many fair Rivers and pleasant Lakes: the chief City of
which, is Millaine: whose buildings are to be admired for their extraordinary
sumptuousnes. In this Province is also the great Lake de Como, which is 60.
miles in length, and upon whose banks stands the city Como, in fashion like
unto a Crab, whose two feet covet the water. In this City the two Plinies had
their beginning, whose Fame by reason of their great learning, shall never have
ending. Ortelius.

8 The fourth Province is Tuscanie, little inferior unto Tuscanie.
the rest in any thing, the chief City of which is Florence, whose
inhabitants (since the time of Macheuill, which was their Recorder,) are most
politic and subtle, amounting unto the number of 80. thousand persons.

9 The fifth and last, is the Signorie of Venice, a free Venice.
State, and the most famous of any in Christendom, governed by a Prince of
great Majesty: yet both he and his authorite subjected unto the Laws.

This City with the Apendices unto it, is the richest and best provided with
munition, of any City in Italy, as is confessed in this particular ce^sure of
each Province, before spoken: that Naples excells for Nobilite: Rome for
Clergy: Millaine for beauty, Florence for policy: but Venice for riches.

10 There is is another province (somewhat famous) called Verona, in which is
the mountain Baldo, where all professors of Physic do resort, to gather
diverse sorts of precious Herbs. And in which there is a city called
Negarino, wherein is a stone in form like unto a woman's dugge, which does
continually distill a water, whose virtuous operation causes a woman's Milk to
return into her breasts when she has lost it.

11 The chiefest rivers of these provinces, are first Padus, near unto which
stands Patauine that noble University: Rivers.
the next is Athesis, adjoining unto which is Trent, where a Council was held
under Paul the third, in the year 1546. the next is Tiber, that runs
through the City of Rome, which when it does ouerflowe the banks, does betoken
some ill fortune which shall befall the City: the last is the river Poe, near
unto which stands Cremona, a City of great note.

12 In this Italy, which was in time past, one intier Government, Government
are now many absolute States, and Princedomes, by the great Policy of the
Pope, who thought it the best way to make himself great, by weakening the
Empire.

OF ILLIRIA.
ILliria is limited on the West, with the Adriaticke Sea: on the North, with
the river Sauus: and on the East, with Limits.
the river Drinus. No certain limits can be given of this country: For all
Geographers that write, do disagree about it.

2 The people of this land as (Liuie affirms,) are very Inhabitants.
proud and outrageous.

3 The chief Provinces are three, whereof the first is Provinces.
Zara or Sebenine, whose chiefest city is Zara, where (as Cornelius Sheppers
does report) is a Church called S. John de Maluatia, which was built by a
company of Mariners that were in a dangerous tempest, and made a vow that if
they escaped, they would build a church unto the honor of S. Ihon de Maluatia,
whose mortar should be tempered with Malmesie.

4 The next province is Dalmatia, in which the chief city is Ragusus or
Epidaura, where S. Ierosme was borne.

5 The third and last is Histria, which is under the Venetians. Many other
Prouines there are, whereof some Government
are subject unto the Turk, others under the Dominion of Hungary.

OF HVNGARIE.
HVngarie is bounded on the South, with the river Sauus: Limits.
on the East with the river Tibiscus: on the north, with Polonia and Russia:
and on the west, with Austria.

2 This country does exceed any other for plenty of Quality.
corn, which thrice in a year is there reapt, the ground being so fertile
that it does almost grow without tilling. There are also such infinite store of
Oxen, that there does yearly pass through Vienna into other cuntries, 80000.
besides there are such a great number of Dear, Phesant, and Partridge, that it
is lawful for any man to hawk and hunt at his pleasure. There is great
plenty of gold, and wines, which will suddenly make a man drunk by reason of
the Sulpherie waters, near unto which the grape is gathered.

3 The people and inhabitants of this Nation, are generally Inhabitants.
very strong, warlike, unkind, and of rude behavior, given little unto the
knowledge of Mechanic arts. They have an order in their Country, that no man
may wear a Feather; unless he has killed a Turk: and they never revenge
particular injuries one against the other any more, then with words, unless the
disgraceful tear me of cowardice be objected unto them: whereof the charged is
never freed, until he has proved himself in single combat with a Turk. The
Sons inherit equally after their Fathers death. In marrying their daughters,
they give them only a new garment, and nothing else.

4 The chief city of this kingdom is Buda, possessed City.
now by the Turk, near unto which, is the field Zebuliensis, wherein is a
river that conuerts wood into a stone, and the water it self being taken out
turns into a stone.

5 The Provinces which are most mentioned in this realm are only two: the one
is the county of Zoliense, Provinces.
wherein there is a certain gaping of the earth, the stinking vapors of which,
does kill all the birds that fly over it. The other is the Island Komora (in
Danubius,) the land of which is so fertile, that the grass of it does exceed
in length the height of a man. Magin.

7 The chief Rivers are Danubius, Tibiscus, Drauus, and Sauus, all which have
great plenty of fish, especially Rivers.
of Salmon and Sturgeon.

7 This Kingdom of Hungary was once governed by Government
Spiritual men, but now it is under the Emperor of Germany, and the Turk,
who have it betwixt them.

OF POLONIA.
1 POlonia is limited on the West, with Germany: on the Limits.
East, with the river Boristines, or Neiper: on the north, with Mare Balticum,
and part of Moscouia: and on the South, with Hungary.

2 This kingdom chiefly abound in Hunnie, Wax, Quality.
Fish, Mines of Copper, Iron, Brimstone, and in such great store of Horse, that
it is thought the Polanders are able upon any necessity, to raise 100.
thousand. In this country there is no wine: but in steed thereof, they have
an excellent kind of Methegline.

3 The Inhabitants are generally brave soldiers, excellently well furnished
with weapons, and most impatient, Inhabitants.
if injuries be offered them: they are very proud, thinking exceeding well of
their own worth, making great account of any one that will flatter them,
loving brave attire and delicious meats.

4 In this Kingdom are tolerated all sorts of Religions: Religion.
and Colleges of all sects, and factions: which causes this saying, that if
any one has lost his religion, let him go into Poland, and he shall find it.

5 The Kings seat and Metrapolitane City is Cracouia, City.
in which is an University, seated upon the bank of the river Vistula.

6 The most noted Provinces, are first Podolia: the land of which is so
fertile, that of one Sowing, they have Provinces.
three Haruests, and in their meadows the grass does grow so much in three
days, that if an Ox go in it, his horns cannot be seen.

7 The next is Sammagitia, in which the people live in cottages with their
cattle and laboring Beasts, some of them sacrificing unto a certain Devil,
called by them Siemiennicke.

8 The next is Nigra Russia, in which there is great plenty of Wax and Hunnie.

9 The last is Massouia, in which the chief city is Massouia, wherein is made
the best Methegline.

10 The chief and only River of this Country, is Rivers.
Vistula.

11 This kingdom of Poland is governed by one sole Government.
King, who does not succeed, but is always elected by, the Nobility of the
Land.

OF PRVSSIA.
1 PRussia is compassed on the West, with the river Vistula: on the East, with
Lituania: on the South, with Polonia: Limits.
and on the North, with Mare Balticum, and Liuonia.

2 This country is most famous for Amber, which is found on their Sea shore,
scarce any where else to be Quality.
seen. It is also well stored with a kind of leather, which we call Spruce
leather.

3 The Inhabitants of this place are much of the same Nature as the Polonians
are. Inhabitants.


4 The chief City is Dantzike, seated upon the river Vistula. City.


5 The Government of this county is under a Duke, who does subject his power
and himself unto the King Government.
of Poland.

Of the Turks kingdom in Europe.
Under the Turcian Empire in Europe, is comprehended all that lies between the
borders of Epidaurus Limits.
and Tanais, between Buda and Constantinople, and between the Euxine Sea and
the banks of Sauus: in which territory are comprehended many puissant
kingdoms.

2 The Turks are great Soldiers, patient in labor, sparing in their food,
slaves unto their Lord, great obseruers Inahbitants.
of their laws, and for the rest very inconstant. In the Lent they abstain
from meat in the day times, but take it out freely in the night. They
acknowledge Christ not as the Son of God, but as a great Prophet. They detest
Images, and will not be called Turks; but Musulmani, which is as much as
believers of the truth. Their private houses are most base and vile, whereas
their public places are stately. They use no tables, but eat their meat on
the ground, sitting after the fashion of Tailors upon a stall, and when they
piss, they do it with bended knees. Magi.

3 There are comprehended under this vaste government such an infinite company
of people, and so well ordered and brought up, that one notes these three
things of them, which breed a terror unto the whole world. The first, is their
multitudes of men unconquerable: the next, their Millitarie discipline
uncorrupted: the last, Corn and provision for store infinite.

4 The Provinces or rather Kingdoms of this great Provinces.
Empire, are divided into two parts: Into Dacia vetus, under which is
comprehended Bosnia, Seruia, Bulgaria, Valachia, and Moldauia: and into Grecia,
contained in which, are Epirus, Macedonia, Thracia, Achaia, and Peloponesus.

5 In Dacia vetus little is extraordinary notable, and Dacia.
therefore I omit the description.

6 Grecia is limited on the West, with the Adriaticke Grecia.
Sea: on the South, with the Mediterranean: on the East, with the Archipelago
and Thracian Sea.

7 The Inhabitants of it are now very base, altogether Inhabitanit.
ignorant of arts, living and going in their apparel after the Turkish manner.

8 The Provinces as are before set down, are first Epirus, Epirus.
in which Scanderbege lived, made famous by his worthy acts, he being called
the scourge of the Turks.

9 The next is Macedonia, for ever famosed, by the Macedonia.
means of him never to be forgotten, Alexander the great, who reigned there,
being conqueror of the world: In this Province is Stagira, the country of
Aristotle: and Olympus, that high topt Mountain, aspiring above the middle
region of the air.

10 The next is Romania or Thracia, a very barren Thracia.
place, in which stands the great City of Constantinople, wherein the Turk
does always keep his Court, this City is very populous, containing in it (as
some write) 700000. souls.

11 The fourth province is Achaia, famous for the Achaia.
most learned University, which was in it, called Athens, once the nurse of
all the witty and best Poets, the Mother and bringer up of all eloquent and
heart-winning Rhetoricians: and in general, it was the very heart and soul of
humane Arts and learning. In this Province is also Pernassus, and Hellicon,
consecrated to the Muses, by all ancient Poets.

12 The fist and last is Peloponesus or Morea, in whose Peloponesus.
Istmus or entrance, stands that once goodly city Corinth: which many books
do much mention. Further in the province, stands Lacedemon, not inferior unto
any of the rest in antiquity.

13 This Grecia (as is before said) is under the Turk, Government
who for money suffers all religions there.

OF TRANSYLVANIA.
TRansiluania (so called, by reason of the great Woods Limits.
which compass it) is limited on the west, with Hungary: and part of the
River Tibiscus: on the North, with Poland, and the great mountain Carpothus:
on the East, with Moldauia: and on the South, with Valachia Cisalpina.

2 The fruitfulnes of this kingdom is very much, having Quality.
horses whose manes sweep the earth: and Falchons, two of which will kill an
Eagle or Swanne. There is also great store of Mines, and in some rivers are
found lumps of Gold, which weigh a pound weight.

3 The Inhabitants of this country are very stubborn, slothful, and
intractable, following the religion of the Inhabitants.
Greek church, reading from the right hand unto the left, and swearing always
by Jupiter and Venus, according unto the old manner of the Ethnicks.

4 The chief city (where the King holds his residence) is Alha Guilia.

5 In this Kingdom is the Province of Zeckland, governed Provinces.
after the order of the Heluetians.

6 The chief rivers are Saluata and Rockle, both which Rivers.
are disburdened into Danubins.

7 This Transiluania is governed by a Christian Government
Prince, who once paid tribute unto the Turk, but now does war against him.

OF LITVANIA.
1 LItuania is bounded on the West with Polonia, on Limits.
the South with Podolia, on the East with Muscouia, and on the North with
Liuonia.

2 There is little to be spoken of this Country, only Quality.
that in it there is great store of Pitch, and Timber planks, whereof they
build many Ships.

3 The inhabitants of it, live after the manner of the Polonians. Inhabitants


4 The Metropolitan City, where the Prince does Cities.
keep his Court, is Vilna,

5 This Kingdom is governed by a Duke, but subject Government
unto the king of Poland.

OF LIVONIA.
1 LIuonia is limited on the West, with Mare Balticum, Limits.
or Sinus Venedicus, on the East with the river Narua the lake Bribas, and part
of Moscouia, on the South with Lituania and Prussia: and on the North with
Sinus Finicus.

2 The inhabitants of this country are for the most part Inhabitants.
al Christians: and the women do think so well of themselves, that in comparison
of their own beauties they discommend all others.

3 The riches of it are chiefly corn and horses, they have Quality.
also in their woods wild beasts, of an extraordinary strength.

4 The chief cities are first Riga, seated upon the river Duina: the next is
Riualia, near unto the Baltic Sea: the last is Derpt.

5 The notedst rivers are two, the one is the river Einbecke, which (at the
very mouth, where it does disburden Rivers.
it self into the Sea,) does fall such a height, that it roareth, making the
horriblest and horridest noise, that it deafeneth the ears of the inhabitants
near adjoining, like to those which dwell near unto the Cataracts of Nile:
the other river is Duina.

6 This Kingdom is a distract government, subject unto many Princes, as the
King of Poland, Denmark, Swecia, Government
and the Emperor of Moscouia.

OF SCANDIA.
1 SCandia is a Peninsula, (that is, almost an Island,) inuironned Limits.
on the North, with the frozen Ocean: on the East, with Mare Balticum, Sinus
Finicus, and Sinus Bodicus: on the South, with Sinus Codanus: and on the West,
with the vast Ocean.

2 This great country in the North part is very barren: but toward the South,
there is great store of corn, Salt, Quality.
Horses, and Mines, both of Silver, Iron, and Lead.

3 The inhabitants of it are very strong, perverse, unlearned, Inhabitants.
and much addicted unto Sorceries and witchcrafts.

4 This Scandia is divided into two great Kingdoms, Division.
Noruegia and Swetia.

OF NORVEGIA OR NORWAY.
5 NOruegia is bounded on the West, North, and South, Limits.
with the maine Ocean, and on the East, with the Dofrine mountains.

6 The Inhabitants of this Kingdom are simple men, Inhabitants.
given much unto Hospitality, and abhorring Theeuerie or any such courses.

7 The chief riches of this country are Cables, Mastes, Quality,
and such like furniture for Shipping, there is also great store of dried fish,
which they eat in steed of bread.

8 The Metropolitan City is Nidrosio, there is another City.
City called Bergen, one of the great Mart Towns of Christendom.

9 This kingdom is subject unto the crown of Denmark. Government.


OF SWEVIA OR SWEDEN.
10 SWeuia is limited on the West, with the Dofrine Mountains, Limits.
and on the other parts with the Sea, unless it be where it is joined unto
Moscouia, by a little Istmus.

11 This Kingdom is so fertile and fruitful, that it is Quality.
by some termed a most heavenly Land, abounding in so much provision, that it
is a hard thing to see a beggar amongst them: They dig pure Silver out of the
earth, and they have great store of Wolves, which passing over a strait in the
Sea, are with the extremity of cold blinded.

12 The Inhabitants of this Region, are agreeable Inahbitants.
much in disposition and quality unto the Noruegians: they live very long, for
it is no marvel with them to see one an hundred and forty years of age.

13 The chief City is Stockholme or Holoia, in which City.
the King does always keep his Court.

14 The Provinces of most note, are first, Goteland (quasi Provinces.
Good land) the next is Finneland (quasi Fineland) in both which, is plenty
almost of all things: the other provinces are Bodia, Scrikfinnia and Biarmia,
the inhabitants of which, are much addicted unto withcraft.

15 This Kingdom of Sweuia is subject only unto one Government.
King, whom they call the Duke of Sweuia.

OF RVSSIA, OR MOSCOVIA.
1 RVssia is part in Europe, and part in Asia, limited on Limits.
the West with Liuonia, and Scandia, on the North with Mare Glaciale, or the
Frozen Ocean, on the east with the River Oby, the Lake of Kataio and Tartarie,
and on the South with Lituania.

2 The riches of this Empire wherein it chiefly excels Quality.
are most rich Furs, (as Sables, Martins, white Fox, and such like.) It has
also in it much corn, fruits, and cattle. The air in these parts is so cold
in the Winter, and the frosts so great, that if a man cast up water into the
air, it will freeze before it fall down, and many times it is so vehement,
that if any man go abroad, he shall be almost stifled through the condensating
of his breath.

3 The inhabitants of this Country are very barborous, Inhabitants.
perfidious, contentious, and most prone unto any contumelious behavior: They
are altogether ignorant and unlearned, which is the occasion that they say, God
and their Emperor knows all things. The baser sort of people do always
break the Sabbath, saying, that it is only for Gentlemen to celebrate that
day. They are also very superstitious, having many foolish ceremonies, and
absurd solemnities, as the consecrating of rivers once in a year, the burying
of their dead with a pair of shoes on their feet, and a staff in one hand,
signifying a great journey which they have to go: and a letter in the other
unto S. Nicholas, for their readier admission into heaven.

4 The chief and most noted places of this mighty Region, are first Mosco,
the Metropolitan city, in which the Emperor does continually keep his Court:
The next is Pernia, in which they eat the flesh of Stagges in stead of bread:
And the last is Rhezan, in which there is such plenty of grain, that the ears
of corn do grow so thick together, that no horse can beat it down, nor
Lark or Quail pass through it.

5 The most famous rivers, are first Duina, (quasi twagna) Rivers.
called so of two rivers which meet together. The next is Boristines, or
Neiper, and the last is Tanais.

6 This large Empire is only subject to the Emperor Government
of it.

CHAP. IIII. Of the European Islands.
1 HItherto have I wandered al about the great continent of Europe, now folthe
Islands belonging thereunto.

2 The European Islands are divided into three parts: into those which are in
the Western Ocean, into those which are in the Mediterranean Sea, and into
those which are contained within the Archipellago, or Mare Aegaeum.

3 The chief Islands which are contained in the west Ocean, are seven,
Grocland, Groinland, Island, Freesland, Ireland, Great Britain, and the Azores.

4 Grocland is an Island which few Geographers mention, Grocland.
and therefore no certainty can be spoken of it.

5 Groinland (quasi Greeneland) is a Country wherein Groinland.
there are great store of Cattle, which causes Butter and Cheese to be very
plentiful in it: the inhabitants are for the most part witches, dwelling in
Caves and Dens.

OF ISLAND.
6 ISland is an Island very barre^ of grain, having no Trees Island.
in it, unless it be Byrch and Juniper: From this Island, comes the best
Ling, called of us Island Ling. In this country is also a mountain called
Heckleforte, always vomiting forth flames of fire: the inhabitants of which,
do conceit thereof, a most peevish and erroneous opinion that it is
Purgatory. This Island (as Ortelius affirms) is under the king of Denmark, but
others make it subject unto the Swedian Crown.

OF FRISLAND.
7 FRislande does abound with very great store of fish, and Frisland,
was wont by reason of the often sailing thither of English, to be called the
western England: this Island is under the crown of Denmark.

OF IRELAND.
8 IReland is a very watrish country, and full of boggs, yet Ireland.
seated in a most temperate and pleasant air, admitting no venomous thing in
it, it does most abound in horses and cattle. The inhabitants of this
Kingdom are for the most part very beautiful, active, and somewhat
superstitious, affecting nothing so much as slothfulnes. Magi. The chief city
is Dubline, wherein there is an university.

The most noted things of this I Will, are first the Lake Erno, now famous for her
past infamy, in which you may see the tops of houses and churches. The next
is the Lake of Armach, into which if a long Staff be thrust down unto the
bottom, that part which is in the water, will turn into a whetstone, and
that part which is in the mudde into Iron. Magin.

The Hybrides belong unto this Island, being in number 44. the inhabitants of
which are called Redshankes.

This Region belongs unto the Crown of England, by whom it is kept in good
subjection.

OF GREAT BRITTANIE.
9 Britain is divided into 2. parts, England and Scotland. Britain.
England is separated from Scotland, by the River Tweede, and the River Solway.

This rich Diamond set in the ring of the world, nurce of the most valiant,
wise, and victorious men, does almost with all things flourish: But especially
with such things as this verse that follows, shows.

Anglia Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Foemina, Laua.

This part of the I Will was commonly in the time of King HENRY the third, Puteus
inexhaustus, a well that never would be drawn dry: and is now termed by the
French, a Paradise for wives, a Purgatory for Servants, and a Hell for Horses.

Scotland lies in the North part of this Island: the Inhabitants of which are
very warlike.

The chief City is Edenbourge, near unto which is a fountain that carries
an oil, which being not taken off, does not increase: being taken off, does
not diminish.

Many other strange things there are in this place, as in Lenox there is a Lake
called Loumond, wherein fishes live without finnes: and in which the waves are
sometimes most boistrous in the calmest weather, most mild in the most
tempestuous weather: In this Lake there is also a fruitful Island which floteth
up and down upon the water. In the Province of Coile there is a stone not
above 13. foot in height, which if a Canon be shot off on the one side, he
which is on the other cannot hear it.

The Apendices which belong unto both England and Scotland, are first the
Orcades, being in number 30. the inhabitants of which are great drinkers, but
no drunkards. The next is the I Will of Man, wherein is the mountain Schesil,
upon whose top if any one stand, he may discern both England, Scotland, and
Ireland. Many other little Islands there are, all which with the rest are
subject unto the most mighty and puissant King of Great Brittainie.

INSVLAE AZORES.
10 THe Azores, or Canary Islands, are seven, from whence Azores.
comes great store of Woade, and Canarie Wines.

1 The chief and most renowned Islands in all old writers of the Medeterranean
Sea, are nine: Insulae Baliares, Corsica, Sardinia, Scicilie, Malta, Corsyra,
Ischia, Zazinthus, and Candia.

INSVLAE BALIORES.
2 INsulae Baliores are divided into Maiorica, in which Raimundus Insula
Baliores.
Lullius that excellent Scholar lived, and into Minorica. The inhabitants of
both which, are very strong and expert slingers.

CORSICA.
3 COrsica is an Island which does produce Horses of a Corsica.
fierce nature, and Hounds of a wonderful bigness. The Inhabitants of this I Will
are very rude and uncivil.

SARDINIA.
4 SArdinia (famous for the occasion of that great war Sardinia.
betwixt Carthage and Rome) is now subjected unto the King of Spain.

The chief and Metropolitan city is Cagliarie, seated upon a high mountain.

In this Country there is a beast called Mufiono, of whose skin is made a
Leather called Cordiuan, or as we term it, Spanish Leather. There is also an
herb, which if any one eat, it will enforce him to laugh till he dye, from
whence comes the Proverb, Risus Sardonichus.

DE SCICILIA.
5 SCicilie is a land whose inhabitants are very good soldiers, Scicilie.
desirous much of honor, and wherein is, and have been many excellent
Scholars, such as were Euclide, Archimedes, Diodorus Siculus, and many others.

This Country is very fertile and fruitful, abounding so much in corn, that
it was once called Horeum Romarorum, the Storehouse of the Romans.

In this I Will is also the Mountain Aetna, at whose top there are (as it were)
two furnaces with tunnels, out of which ascend continually flames of fire,
throwing out sometimes such store of ashes, and pieces of stones, that it does
greatly indaunger the Towns for many miles there about. This is the mountain
where the Poet faineth to be the shop of Vulcan, where the Cyclops did frame
Thunder-boults for Jupiter. This is the mountain into whose vast gaping mouth
Empedocles did cast himself. And this is the mountain where some of the
irreligious, Heretical, and besotted Papists imagine to be Purgatory. The
chief city of this I Will is now Palermo, before time Siracusa, in which lived
Archimedes, that famous Engine maker of the world, who, as it is written of
him, would by burning Glasses set Ships on fire sailing in the Sea. Belonging
to this are other, called the Vulcanian Islands.

This Scicilie is now subject unto the King of Spain.

MALTA.
6 MAlta is most famous for the farre-famed order of Malta.
the Knights of Jerusalem, who have oftentimes repelled and put to flight great
armies of the Turks, which have besieged it. This is the Country where Saint
Paul being cast up after his shipwreck, had a Viper hanging on his hand, and
did him no hurt. The chief City is Malta, wherein the Women are beautiful,
but hate company, never going abroad unless they be covered.

CORCYCA.
7 COrcyca is an Island flourishing with Wine, and Oil. In it is also great
store of Wild foul, Corcyca.
and Beasts, wherewith the inhabitants do very much (with pleasure and
pastime in chasing them) recreate themselves. The chief City in it, is called
Corfu, wherein both men and women are excellent Swimmers. This I Will is subject
unto the Seigniorie of Venice, who does defend it very well from the Turk.

ISCHIA.
8 ISchia (the chief of 18. Islands lying in the Gulf of Ischia.
Naples, begirt round with rocks and high mountains) has in it great store
of Hares, Conies, and other wild beasts.

The chief City is Ischia, which in the year 1301. was like to be burned
with a fire, that did run along in the earth, by reason of the veins of
Brimstone. In this I Will it is also reported that there is a Fountain near unto
the Promontory of Saint Angel, which is so hot, that it will in a short time
boil any flesh or fish that is put into it.

ZAZINTHVS.
9 ZAzinthus is a land where English Merchants do Zazinthus.
very much traffic, for the extraordinary store of Currants which are there.
In this I Will the inhabitants do speak Greek, and are subject unto the
Venetians.

CANDIA.
10 CAndie is an Island famosed by the intricate Laboborinth Creete.
which was in it, built by Dedalus: and which Theseus entered, and killed the
Minataurs, which were kept in it, by the help of Ariadne, who gave him a
bottom of thread to guide him.

In this I Will there is very much Suger-Candie, and Muscadine, in such plenty,
that there is yearly transported into other countries 12000. Buts.

The Inhabitants of this place do not affect labor, never using any manfull
exercise, but given unto many vices, especially lying: of which the Proverb,
Cretense Mendarium, and Cretisandum est cum Cretensibus. And Epiminides the
heathen Poet notes of them, that they are always great liars, dull beasts,
and slow bellies.

The chief city of it is Candie, inhabited much with the Venetians.

Of the Islands in the Aegean Sea.
1 THe Islands in the Aegean Sea, are all subject unto the tyrannical Turk,
and are divided either into the Cyclades, which are fifty in number, lying
toward the South; or into the Sporades, which are very many, lying toward the
North.

2 Of the Cyclades little can be spoken, only that in the Cyclades.
Island Delos stood the famous Oracle of Apollo, by so many writers made mention
of: And that in Ithaca valiant Ulysses was borne.

SPORADES.
3 THe Sporades are many, whereof the chief are first, Sporades.
Euboia, at whose banks the Sea does ebb and flow seven times in a day: which
Aristotle on a time viewing, and being not able to give a natural reason for
it, desperately threw himself into it. The next is Sciros, the country of
Achilles. Then Chios, the Country of the great Physician Hypocrates. And the
last of any note is Pathmos, the Island where Saint John lived in banishment,
and in which there is a dead hand, the nails of it still growing, which as the
Grecians say, was the hand of Saint John: But the Turks affirm it to be the
hand of one of their Prophets.

CHAP. V. Of Africa.
HItherto have I remained within the co^fines of Europe, now succeeds Africa.

1 Africa, (so called in Greek of a Bounds.
and phrica, a place without coldness) is limited on the West with the
Atlanticke Ocean, on the North with Mare Mediterraneum, and on the South with
the Aethyopicke waves, and on the East with the Red Sea.

2 This great part of the world, is for the most part Quality.
full of Deserts, very dry and sandy, having few Rivers, which is a great
occasion that some parts are not habitable. It is also full of all strange
beasts, as Elephants, Lions, Leopards, Hyppopotomos, Crocadiles, and such
like: which caused this saying of Pliny, Africa aliquid semper opportat Noui.

3 The inhabitants of it, are generally very black, of Inahbitants.
countenance rude, barbarous, and of uncivil behavior, addicted to all sorts
of religion, of Gentiles, Jews, Turks, Christians, and such like.

4 The famous Rivers of this part, are first, Nilus, which Rivers.
springs out of the Mountains of the Moon, as Ptollomie affirms: but (as
Heroditus says) out of a Lake called Strabo. The other rivers are Niger,
Fluuius, Senega, Cambra, Naire, Cuama, and Spiritus sancti. There is another
Mountain in Africa, called the Mountain Atlas, from whence (as Hondius
writes in his Mappes) most of the Rivers have their beginning.

The chief parts of Africa are seven: Barbary, under Division.
which is comprehended Mauritania, Tingitana, and Caesariensis, Ptolamt:
Numedia, or Benedulgerid: Libia, or Sarra: Terra Nigritarum: Aethtopia
superior, or the kingdom of the Abisines: Aethiopia inferior, and Egypt.

OF BARBARY.
1 Barbary is environed on the West with the Atlanlanticke Bounds.
Sea, on the North with Mare Mediterraneum, on the South with the great
Mountain Atlas, and on the East with Egypt.

2 This Region does abound with Oranges, Dates, Qualitis.
Olives, Figs, and a certain kind of Goat, whose hair does make a stuff as
fine as silk.

3 The inhabitants of this country are very faithful Inhabitants.
in their promises, ambitious, greedy of wealth, and most jealous of their
wives.

4 The chief Provinces of this great kingdom, are Provinces.
Morocco, Fez, Tremisen, Tunis, and Barca Marmarica.

5 Morocco, wherein the chief city is Morocco, the people of which does
always keep their beards shaued before they be married. There is also in this
Province the mountain Halemo, in which there is so much gold, that the
inhabitants are at continual strife for it.

6 The next Province is Fez, the chief and Metropolitan city of which, is
called Fez, being of a wonderful greatness, having in it 700. churches, one
among the rest being of a mile and half in compass. In this city are also
two Colleges, wherein live many Scholars.

7 The next province is Tremisen, whose Metropolitan city is Tremisen, in it
is also Algera, a great receptacle for Pirates.

8 The next is Tunis, in which is Bona, where S. Agustine was Bishop, and Hippo
where he was borne. The chief and Metropolitan city is Tunis, not far from
the ruins of old Carthage.

9 The last Province is Barca Marmarica, full of great sandy places, and in
which Islands is the Temple of Jupiter Hammon.

10 This Kingdom of Barbary, is a distracted government, Government
Fez and Morocco being under the Xeriffe, and the other Provinces under the
Turks.

OF NVMIDIA.
1 NVmidia is bounded on the West with Mare Atlanticum, Bounds.
on the North with the Mountain Atlas, on the East with Egypt, and on the
South with the Deserts of Libia.

2 This country has in it great plenty of Dates, and Quality.
the air is so wholesome, that it admits neither Pox nor Plague in it, but
cures any one that has it.

3 The inhabitants are oftentimes blinded, by reason Inhabitants.
of the unreasonable store of sand which is there, much of it being carried and
blowed with the wind. They are also much addicted unto Poetry.

4 The government of this Region, is not under any Government
sole King, but subject unto many free Governors.

Of Libia, or Sarra.
1 LIbia is limited on the West with Gualata, on the East Bounds.
with Gaoga, on the North with Numidia, and on the South with the kingdom of
the Negroes.

2 The inhabitants of this country are base minded, Inhabitants
ill nurturde, and great thieves: they live not subject unto any laws. In this
place were two of the Sybils, who prophesied of the coming of Christ.

3 This kingdom is full of Deserts, of which the chief are Zanaga, Zueziga,
Tarsa, Lempia, and Berdoa.

Of the Kingdom of the Nigers.
1 THe Kingdom of the Nigers is bounded on the Bounds.
West with the Atlanticke Sea, on the East with the Kingdom of the Abissines,
on the South with Manicongo, and on the North with Libia.

2 The inhabitants of this Country are most barbarous Inhabitants.
people, Gentiles, and free from the Plague or Pox.

3 In this great and large kingdom there are twenty Provinces.
five Provinces, among which these things are chiefly to be noted. First is the
River Niger, which with a great inundation increasing from the 15. of June,
until 40. days after, does ouerflow a great part of the land: and in the like
time it does decrease again. The next is the kingdom of Canaga, wherein the
King has no certain revenues, but only what his Nobles give him. The next
is Tombutum, where the king does entertain a great company of learned men, and
where inhabitants do spend their time in dancing and singing. The last is
Bornaum, where the people have neither proper names, children, nor wives.

4 This great Kingdom of the Nigers is governed by four Kings: the King of
Tombutum, Bornum, Goaga, and Government
the King of Gualatum.

Of the Kingdom of the Abissines.
1 THe Kingdom of the Abissines is limited on the North with Egypt, on the
South with the Mountains Bounds.
of the Moon, on the East with the Red Sea, and on the West with Manicongo,
and the Kingdom of the Nigers.

2 This country is chiefly inricht with Oranges, Lemons, Quality.
and Citrens, which grow of themselves. There is also great store of Barley,
Sugar, and Honey.

3 The inhabitants of this Nation, are generally unlearned, Inhabitants.
base, idle: the better sort of them attyring themselves in the skins of
Lions, Tigres, and Linces. They fear a Smith as much as a Devil: and at meat
never use a table, cloth, nor napkin. They always (in any matter) swear by
the life of the King, whom they never see but thrice in a year, which is on
Christmas, Easter, and Holy-Rood day. They never baptize their children before
the fortieth day, and also circumcise both men and women.

4 This great Kingdom is governed by Prester John, Government
who has under him 70. Kings; and whose color is white, his subjects being
all black. He draws his pedigree from Melecke, the son of Salamon, and
Queen of the South.

Of Ethiopia inferior.
1 EThiopia inferior, is every where begirt with the Sea, Bounds.
unless it be toward the North, where it is bounded from Ethiopia superior,
with the Mountains of the Moon.

2 The inhabitants of this Country are very Savage, Inahbitants.
cruel, and for the most part great Idolaters, so much co^temning
Christianity, that in the Province of Douos, no man can marry until he has
killed twelve Christians.

3 The Provinces of this Region, are under five free Provinces and Government.
Kngs: The king of Zanzibar, Monomotapa, Manicongo, Aiana, and Carfraria: of
all which little can be spoken, only that in the Monomotapa, there are Amozons,
which are more valiant then the men, and that the King thereof does keep for
his guard 200. Mastiffe dogs.

OF EGYPT.
1 EGypt is limited on the West with Barbary, on the Bounds.
South with Aethiopia superior, on the East with the Red Sea, or Sinus
Arabicus, and on the North with Mare Mediterraneum.

2 As concerning the fruitfulness of this Country, Quality.
these two verses which follow, shall and do sufficiently make it known.

Terra suis contenta bonis, non Indiga Mercis aut Iouis.
In solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
Lucan.
3 The inhabitants of this Kingdom are very active, Inhabitants.
liberal, given unto feasting, somewhat superstitious, many of them
Christians, but the greater part Mahumeta^s.

4 The chief cities are two, the first is Caire, once called Cities.
Memphis, near unto which stands the Piramides of Egypt, one of the seven
wonders of the world. The other is Alexandria, which was built by Alexander
the Great, and wherein was the most famous Library of the world. This was the
place also, where Ptolomie took all his observations.

5 In this Kingdom was invented Astronomy, Physic, Inventions.
and writing on paper: It was called Papirus, of the thing which it was made
of, and in Latin Charta, of the place where it was invented. Hond.

6 The government of this once famous Region, was heretofore under Kings, whom
they commonly called Government
Pharoes: but now belongs to the truth abhorring Turk.

CHAP. VI.
Of the chief Islands in Africa.
THus much of the continent of Africa: now will I knit unto it the description
of the Islands.

1 The Islands of Africa are divided into Division.
two parts: into those which are in the Atlanticke Sea, and into those which
are in the Aethiopicke Ocean.

2 Those Islands which are in the Atlantic Sea of note, are only the Canarie
Islands, the Gorgades, and the Island of S. Thomas.

3 The Canarie, or Fortunate Islands, are 7. of which the Canarie.
chief is Madera, wherein there is great store of Sugar, and Canary Wine.
There is another, which is called Tanariffa, wherein is a mountain so high,
that the inhabitants have all their fresh water from a cloud that droppeth
there very fast, hanging about a tree.

4 The Gorgades are nine, all which are full of Goats, Gorgades.
and subject unto the King of Spain.

5 The Island of Saint Thomas, lies directly under the Equator, it is very
plentiful of Sugar, and a place unto which the Portugals do much resort.

Of the Islands in the Aethiopicke Sea.
1 THe Islands of the Aethiopicke Ocean, are but two of Division.
any fame: Magdagascar, and Zocotara.

2 Magdagascar, or the Island of S. James, is a country Magdagascar.
whose inhabitants are very cruel and barbarous, and in which there are great
store of Elephants.

3 Zocotara is an Island, in which the people are all Zocotara.
Christians, and dwell in Caves, and great holes.

CHAP. VII.
Of Asia.
HItherto have I scorcht my self in the heat of Africa, now therefore of the
temperate Continent of Asia.

1 Asia is in every place begirt with the Sea, unless it be toward the
Western Limits.
parts, where it is limited from Europe with the River Tanais, and a line
directly drawn up unto the Port of Saint Nicholas. And from Africa with that
Istmus, betwixt the Arabic Gulf, and the Mediterranean Sea.

2 This part of the world is far more famous then any other: For here was the
place where the Monarkes of the Medes, Persians, Babilonians, and Assirians
flourished. Here was the place in which all the acts and monuments of the old
Testament, and almost in the new, were accomplished. And here was, and is, the
place where the Miracles of our Savior were done, for ever to be celebrated.

3 The fruitfulness of this great Continent is very Quality.
much, for it does contain within it, almost plenty of every thing.

4 The inhabitants of it, are generally very witty, for Inhabitants.
from hence sprang all the Sciences which the Greeks have learned of the
Hebrews.

5 The chief Rivers of Asia, are Iaxartes, Euphrates, Tigris, Rivers
Indus, and Ganges.

6 Two other things there are in this part worthy to be noted: First, is the
Mountain Taurus, which diuides whole Asia into two parts, being in length
5625. miles, and in breadth 375. Next, is Mare Caspium, a Sea which has no
intercourse with any part of the Ocean.

7 This Asia is divided into six great Gouernements, Division.
into that of Moscouia in Asia, which I have before described: Into Turcia
Asiana, Tartarie, Persia, India, and China.

OF TVRCIA ASIANA.
1 Under the Turks Empire in Asia, are comprehended Division.
Natolia, or Asia minor: Turcomania, Syria, or Palestina: and Arabia.

OF NATOLIA.
2 NAtolia, or Asia minor, is limited on the West with Limits.
the Archipelago, on the South with the Mediterranean Sea, on the East with the
River Euphrates, and on the North with Pontus Euxinus.

3 This Country is very fruitful and temperat, but Quality.
by reason of the Turks tyranny, it lies very waste, and not inhabited. For
in it may be seen the ruins of 4000. Towns and Cities.

4 The inhabitants are most idle, lazy, and in religion Inhabitants.
Mahumetans. Once they were all Christians, for with them were the seven
churches, which S. John in his Apochalips did write unto.

5 The chief Provinces of Natolia are 8, Pontus, and Bithinia: Asia propria,
or Sarrum: Licia, Pamphilia, Galatia, Provinces.
Cappadocia, and Cylicia.

6 In Pontus and Bithinia, there are two famous cities, Pontus and Bithinia.
the one called Nice, where the first general Council was held: the other
Chalcedo^, where the fourth was held. These Provinces were once governed by
Mithridates, who was the first finder out of Metridate.

7 In Asia Propria, or Sarcum, there are many things Asia propria
worthy the observation: as first, Phrigia mayor, of which Midas was King: next
Phrigia minor, wherein are to be seen the ruins of old Troy, and in which
stands Pergamus, where Gallen, that famous Physician was borne. In this country
also lived Gordius, who knit the knot, which for the intricatenesse thereof was
called Nodus Gordianus. The next is Lidia, in which lived rich King Craessus.
The next is Ionia, wherein stands that famous city Ephesus, most renowned for
the great Temple of Diana, which was in it, accounted to be one of the wonders
of the world. This is also one of the seven Cities which Saint John in the
Revelation wrote unto, and unto which Saint Paul did direct one of his
Epistles. In this Province is also Smirna, an other of the seven Cities, and in
which Policarpus (that was Bishop there) lived, who sometimes had been
Scholar unto Saint John the Evangelist. The next, is Halicarnassus, wherein
Dionisius and Heroditus, those famous Historiographers lived. The last of any
fame, is the river Meandrus, which has 600. turnings.

8 In Licia little is to be noted, only that there stand Licia.
some ruins of the Temple of Apollo, and that S. Nicholas lived there.

9 In Pamphilia stands the City of Seleucia, built Pamphilia.
by Seleucus, one of the four great successors of Alexander.

10 In Galatia were the people unto whom Saint Galatia.
Paul writ one of his Epistles: And this also is one of the Provinces, where
the Jews were dispersed.

11 In Capadocia is that flourishing City of Trepizond, Capadocia.
which in times past was a City Imperial.

12 In Cilicia is the City Tarsus, where S. Paul was Cilicia.
borne, and unto which Jonas fled, when he was commanded to go unto Niniuie.

13 The last Province is Armenia minor, in which there Armenia the less.
is great store of Oil, and excellent Wine.

OF TVRCOMANIA.
14 TVrcomania, or Armenia mayor, is bounded on the Limits.
West with the River Euphrates, and Pontus Euxinus, on the South with
Mesopotamia, on the East with Media, and Mare Caspium, and on the North with
part of Tartaria.

15 The inhabitants of this Region, are great robbers, Inhabitants
living after the manner of the basest sort of Tartars, that is, under tents,
going from one place unto another in companies.

16 The chief Provinces are two, the first is Georgia, Provinces.
seated on the banks of the Caspian Sea, wherein the inhabitants do chiefly
worship Saint George: The other is Colchus, from whence Jason did setch the
Golden Fleece.

17 In this Turcomania, the thing which is most famous, is, that the Ark of Noah did first rest it self upon the Mountains of Armenia, now called Nohae
montes.

Of Syria, or Palestina.
18 SYria, Palestine, or the Holy land, is limited on the Limits.
West with Mare Mediterraneum: on the South with Arabia, on the East with
Mesopotamia, and on the North with the mountain Libanus. This country is in
compass 200. miles.

19 The inhabitants of it were once so many, that it did Inhabitants.
contain in it 30. Kings: and when David did command the people to be numbered,
there were found 1300000. fighting men. But at this time there are very few,
and those Christians of every sect, and Saracens.

20 The fruitfulness of this Kingdom does chiefly Quality.
consist of Wines, whose Grapes do grow in such abundance, that they are
gathered thrice in a year: They have also great store of Apples, and Lemons.

21 The Provinces which this Region is divided into, Provinces.
are four, Gallilie, Samaria, Iudaea, and Idumea.

22 Gallily is divided into the higher and lower. In the Gallilie.
higher is Phinicia, under which is comprehended Tire and Sidon. In the lower
is Nazareth, where Christ was borne: and in it is also the Mountain Tabor,
where our Savior was transfigured.

23 In the Province of Samaria, stood that great city of Samaria.
Samaria, the ruins of which are yet to be seen: and not far from thence
the city Sichar, where Christ desired water of a certain woman.

24 In the Province of Iudaea stood the once famous Iudaea.
City of the world, called Jerusalem, where the Sepulcher of Christ is to be
seen: and not far from thence stood Bethlaem, where he was borne. There is
also in this Province, an herb called Bachara, whose color is like unto a
flame, and in the evening shines like unto a Sunne-beame, which if any one
come to pluck it up, it will wag from him, until the urine of a woman be
sprinkled on it. Josephus de Bello Iudaico, Lib. 7.

25 The chief Rivers and Lakes of these Provinces, Riue
are four. The first is Jordan, which springs out of the Mountain Libanus,
so called of Ior and Dan, two rivers which meet together. The second is the
Lake of Gallilie. The third is the Lake of Genazareth, or Tiberia, famous for
our Saviors sailing in it. The fourth and last, is Mare Mortuum, or the Dead
Sea, into which Jordan is disburdened. At the top of this Lake swimmeth Pitch
and Brimstone, from whence reaketh such a stinking mist, that it kills all
the birds that fly over it, and makes the Apples that grow by it, being fair
in show, very rotten. Moreover, the water is of that nature, that if an Ox
were thrown in with his feet bound, he will not sink. Josephus Solinus, 48.
Chap.

OF ARABIA.
26 ARabia is encompast on the West with the Red Sea, Limits.
on the South with the maine Ocean, on the East with Sinus Persicus, and on the
North with Syria, and Mesopotamia.

27 It is divided into three parts, into Arabia Deserta, Division.
Petrosa, and Foelix.

28 In Arabia Deserta nothing is worth the observing, but that it was the place
where God did keep the children of Israel for the space of 40. years,
feeding them with Manna from heaven.

29 Of Arabia Petrosa, little can be spoken, only that there stands the
Mountain Sinay, where God gave the Tables of the Law unto Moses.

30 Arabia Foelix, is one of the most fruitfullest Countries in the world,
having in it Franchincense, mirrhe, and most precious Balmes, which are in no
other places to be found.

31 The chief City is Mediua, where Mahumet was intombed in an iron Coffin,
which being carried into a Temple, the roof whereof was made of Adamant, is
attracted unto the top of the Vault, and there hangs, being supported by
nothing.

32 The inhabitants of this Region, are superstitious, Inhabitants
and in all their doings very unconstant. They are in their Religion
Mahometans. And as we reckon our time from the year of our Lord, so they from
the time of Mahomet, whose coming they have long expected: saying, there were
three great Prophets, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet. And as the Doctrine of Moses
was bettered by Christ, so was the Doctrine of Christ mended by Mahomet.

Thus much concerning the Turks Dominions in Asia.

OF TARTARIA.
1 TArtarie is limited on the North with the Scithian Limits.
Sea, on the East with the East Ocean, on the South with the Indies, and the
Wall of China, and on the West with Moscouia, and Sarmatia.

2 The inhabitants of this Country are of a mean Inventions.
stature, large in the shoulders, broad in the face, having flat Noses, and
long Beardes. They marry as many wives as they will, living abroad in Tents
made of the skins of Beasts: thinking it a great unhappiness, if they
remain in one place longer then the pastures have meat for their Cattle.
They eat the raw flesh of Horses, only a little scorcht in the Sun, not
respecting how they were killed, or what diseases they died of. When they
thirst, they let their Horses blood, and then suck till they be satisfied.
They cannot abide Hogs flesh. And for their Religion, they are both Pagans
and Saracens.

3 The chief Provinces of Tartarie are five, Tartaria Provinces.
minor, Tartaria Asiatica, Tartaria Antiqua, Zagathay, or Scithia intra Imaum
montem, Cathaia, or Scithia extra Imaum montem.

4 In Tartarie the less, is Horda Precopensium, which live in the fields
about Pontus Euxinus, Meotis Palus, and about Taurica Chersonesus. These are
all subject unto the Turk.

5 In Tartaria Asiatica, lying between the River Tanays, and the Caspian Sea,
are many Hordes, amongst the which the chief are Horda Astinchanensis, and
Casanensis, both being subject unto the Moscouite.

6 In Tartaria Antiqua, are the Kingdoms of Gogge, and Magogge, from whence
the Tartares first had their beginning, and from whence came King Tabor.

7 In Zargathay, or Scithia intra Imaum montem, is Samarchand, lying between
the River Iaxartes and Oxus, where Tamburline lived, that went into the field
against Baiazeth the Turk, with seven hundred thousand Tartares.

The chief and Metropolitan City of it is Richend, a place of great
Traffic.

8 In Cathayo, or Scithia extra Imaum montem, is the City of Cambalowe, the
chief seat of the Great Cham, being in compass twenty four miles. In this
part also is the mountain Altay, where they intombe always the body of their
Great Cham, which while they carry the dead corpse unto the Mountain, they
kill all they meet, and bid them go and serve their Master in another world.

9 This part of Tartarie or Carthayo extra Imaum montem, Government
is governed only by one, who is called the Great Cham, whose word stands for
a law, and is titled of his subjects, Filius Dei, Vmbra Dei, and Anima Dei.

OF PERSIA.
1 PErsia is limited on the West with Sinus Persicus, on Limits.
the North with Mare Caspium, and the river Oxus, on the South with the maine
Ocean, and on the East with Indus Fluius.

2 This mighty Region has in it great store of metals Quality.
and precious stones, as much flourishing in fair Rivers and Lakes, as poor
in fruits, having no trees but only Palms.

3 The inhabitants of this Kingdom are very courteous, Inhabitants.
affecting hospitality, addicted much unto Poetry and Physic, and among whom
Nobility is highly esteemed. They are of Religion for the most part
Mahumetans, Religion.
but such as the Turks call Scismatickes.

4 The Provinces of this great Government are sixteen, Provinces.
Mesopotamia, Assiria, Chaldaea, Susiana, Farsus, Germania, Parthia, Hyrcania,
Gedrosia, Drangiana, Aria, Margiana, Aracosia, Parapomissus, and Brachana.

5 Mesopotamia, quasi mesos potamos, lies between the Mesopotam.
river Tigris and Euphrates, in which, some think, stood the terrestiall
Paradise, and that from hence came the wise men, which brought presents unto
Christ, being guided by a star. This country is now subject unto the Turk.

6 Assiria is very famous for the great City Niniuie, Assiria.
which stood in it, unto which Jonas was commanded by God to go and preach.
This is also subject unto the Turk.

7 Chaldaea is renowned for that great city of Babylon, Chaldaea.
one of the seven wonders of the world, and from whence came the confusion of
tongues. Here was that famous Erithea, the fifth Sybil, that prophesied of the
coming of Christ.

8 Of the other Provinces nothing I find worth the noting, and the refore omit
them.

9 The chief and Metropolitan City, is Persepolis, seated upon the River
Bindimire.

10 This Kingdom of Persia is governed by one, Government
whom they call the Sophy.

Of the East Indies.
1 INdia Orientalis, or the East Indies, is bounded on the Limits.
West with the river Indus, on the North with the Mountain Taurus, on the East
with China, and on the South with the maine Ocean.

2 This country does exceed any other in fruit, which is Quality.
gathered there twice in a year. There are also such a huge kind of Mastiffe
Dogs, that for strength they are able to contend with Lions. There are great
store of Elephants, white Apes, Camels, Dragons, and an innumerable company of
Serpents, which are as big as any man, the inhabitants eating them as commonly
as we do any meat.

3 The inhabitants are a mixed sort of people, being Inhabita^ti.
Persians, Scithians, Arabians, Hebrews, and some Christians. They are
commonly ingenious, much inclined unto all Sciences. They adore one sole God,
which they paint with three heads, but cannot give a reason for it.

4 India is divided into two parts, India infra Gangem, and India extra Gangem.

De India within Ganges.
5 INdia intra Gangem, is environed on the West with the Limits.
river Indus, on the South with the maine Ocean, on East with Sinus Bengala,
and the River Ganges, and on the North with part of the Mountain Taurus.

6 This part is divided into forty seven Kingdoms, Provinces.
among which there are only five of any note, Cambaia, Decan, Malabar,
Narsinga, and Delly.

7 In the Kingdom of Cambaia, the people are so Cambaia.
ceremonious and superstitious, that they will not eat any thing that has had
life in it. They are great Idolaters, living in due observance of their King,
who is a most valiant Prince. The chief City is Cambaia, wherein if any one
dye, they presently burn his body, that it may dissolve into his proper
elements. Hondius in tabulis.

8 Decan is a Kingdom made famous by the Portugalls, Decan.
which lie continually in the great City of Goa. Not far from this city is
a place, which if the horns of any Beast be cast, they will take root and
grow up out of the ground. Hugo a Linschotten in cap. 61. of the description of
the Indies.

9 In Malabar stands the City Calicute, the inhabitants Malabar.
of which do worship the Devil: the King of it is titled by his subjects
Samori, which signifies God on earth. They are very skillful Soldiers, using
when they go unto War, to tie unto the hilts of their Swords Shingles of
Copper, or Silver, the sound whereof in steed of Trumpets and Drums,
encourages them unto fight. By the law of their Country they may not marry,
but are allowed women in common.

10 Narsinga, is a land fruitful in every thing, unless Narsinga.
it be Horses. The chief City in it is Bisnagar, in which the people when
they dye are burned: and if they were married, their wives do come and leap
into the fire, willing to dye with them.

11 The last is the Kingdom of Delly; in which the Delly.
chief and Metropolitan City is Delly, where the great Mogor does always
keep his Court.

12 The government of all these Kingdoms are under Government
the great Mogor, unless it be Narsinga, and Calicute, which have free Princes.

Of India without Ganges.
13 INdia extra Gangem, is limited on the West with Sinus Limits.
Bengala, and the River Ganges, on the South with the maine Sea, on the East
with part of China, and the East Sea, and on the North with part of the
Mountain Taurus.

14 The chief Provinces of this part of the Indies are Provinces.
three, Pegu, Siam, and Chauchin china.

15 In Pegu there are most beautiful Parrats, and great Pegu.
store of ciuet Cats. The chief city is Pegu.

16 In Siam there are many Schools, the inhabitants Siam.
whereof are great Idolaters, worshipping the higher Elements: And when any one
dies with them, they will not bury them in the earth, but hang them up in the
air, rather wishing the Birds which are heavenly, to eat them, then the
worms which are earthly to touch them. In this Province is also Comboia, the
people of which do think themselves and all other men to be of the same
nature that brute beasts are. Hondius.

17 In Chauchinchina, there is great store of gold, silver, and Purceline, of
which the Purceline dishes are made. Chauchinchina.
The inhabitants in many places of this country, are Anthropophagi, or men
eaters.

18 This part of the Indies was once governed by the King of Paga, and Siam,
but now is brought in subjection Government
unto one sole King, who is King of Barma, keeping his Court in the City of
Odia, in which are contained 200000. Citizens.

OF CHINA.
1 CHina is bounded on the West with India, and the river Cautan, on the South
with Chauchinchina, on Limits.
the East with the East Ocean, and on the North with a wall of 600. miles in
length, which defends it from the invasion of the Tartares.

2 This Kingdom is not only held to be the chief of all Asia, but of all the
world, being so fertile, that it does Quality.
both yield what is fitting for humane life, and whatsoever the delicate and
effeminate appetite of man may lust after.

3 The inhabitants of it are very witty, politic, great Inhabitants.
Mathematicians, conceiving so well of themselves, that they are accustomed to
say, that themselves have two eyes, the people of Europe one, and the residue
of the other Nations none.

4 Under this great kingdom are comprehended 15. Provinces, the least of which
exceeds in largeness the greatest in Europe, and in them are contained 70.
Kings, which are all subject unto the King of China. The inhabitants are so
many also, that they exceed the number of 70000000. And the cities and towns
stand so thick, that the whole kingdom seems as one mighty city.

5 The chief things which are to be observed, in these Provinces, are first,
that there are some of the inhabitants which dwell in houses upon the Sea,
buying, selling, and keeping market as they do in any town. And in many
plains they have houses running upon wheels, with sails at the top of them,
that when they will go unto any place, they tarry only for a wind to drive
them. There is also in this Kingdom the great City of Quinzay, whose circuit
is 100. miles, having in it 1600000. inhabitants, and 12000. stone bridges,
among which there are some so high, that a great Ship with top-saile may
pass under them. In the middle of this City, there is a Lake thirty miles in
compass, in which there are two goodly Islands. Some put this City in
Tartarie, some in China, others in the confines of both: but wheresoever it is,
it is much ruinated since the time of Paulus Venetius, who makes a full
description of it.

6 This great kingdom is governed by one sole king, Government
who is called of his subjects the Lord of the world, and the son of the
shining Sun.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Islands in Asia.
THus far have I rashly run over the Continent of Asia: now therefore will I
link unto it the description of the Islands belonging thereunto.

1 The Asian Islands are divided into those in the Mediterranean Sea, and those
which are in the Indian Ocean.

Of the Islands in the Mediterranean Sea.
2 THe chief Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, are only Division.
two, Rodes, and Cyprus.

3 The Island Rodes is very famous for many things, Rodes.
but chiefly for three: The first is, that the Sun was never so maskt with a
cloud, but that once in a day she did shine upon this Island. The second is,
that the great pillar of the Sun offered by the Gentiles unto Jupiter, stood
in this I Will, made in the form of a mighty huge man. The third and last is,
that the order of the Knights of the Rodes was held in this place.

13 The Island Cyprus is very fuitfull, but little famous. Cyprus.


De Insulis In Mari Indico.
5 THe chief Islands in the Indian Ocean, are Ormus, Division.
Zeilan, Samatra, Aureae Iusulae, Borneo, Iaua Mayor, Iaua Minor, Iapan, the
Molucco, and the Philippian Islands.

6 Ormus is of it self a kingdom, and commands Ormus.
most part of the Persian gulf: it is exceeding barren, but the City Ormus
(in which the Portugals do hold a strong Castle) is so fair and full of
trade, that they say there, if the world were a ring, Ormus ought to be the
stone thereof.

7 The I Will Zeilan is seated in Sinus Bengala, in which Zeilan.
there are Fields whose grass continually grows, and Trees that are laden
with fruit all the year long. Insomuch that some did think, that this was the
place where Paradise stood. This Island is subject unto the Mogor,
notwithstanding the Portugalls do hold a strong Castle in it.

8 The Island Samatra lies directly under the Equator, Samatra.
having in it a Fountain which sends forth water, that if it be put into
fire, does not quench it, but makes it burn more vehemently. In it is also a
Mountain which sends forth continual flames of fire. The inhabitants of
this Island are Anthropophagi.

9 In Iaua Mayor, the inhabitants are excellent Seamen, Iaua Mayor
great Pirates, which acknowledge Mahumet, and live upon Cats and Mise. Yet this
Island for the extraordinary fruitfulness of it, was called by Scaliger, the
Compendium of the world.

10 In Iaua Minor little is worth the noting, only that Iaua Minor
it does flourish with Spices.

11 In the Island Iapan, the inhabitants are very superstitious, Iapan.
and great Idolaters, washing their children so soon as they be borne in
Rivers. They will never also come into the rooms where they dine or eat any
thing, with their shoes on their feet, but keep the places (as they term
it) hallowed. This Island has very much gold in it, insomuch that Paul
Venetus does affirm, that in his time the Kings Palace was covered with gold.

12 The Moluccoe Islands are famous for the great Moluccoes
plenty of spices which are in them. There is also in these Isles a Bird,
called Monicodiata, which has no feet, continually flying without
intermission. The female of this Bird does lay her eggs when she breeds in a
hole which is in the back of the Male, like unto a nest, and these are never
taken before they dye and fall upon the earth.

The inhabitants of these Islands go naked, and are great Idolaters.

13 The Philippian Islands lie North of the Moluccoes, Philippians
the air being very temperate, brings forth all kind of Spices.

CHAP. IX.
De America, sieve India Orientali.
Having discourst of three parts of the world, Europe, Africa, and Asia, I will
now venture on the last and greatest part, which is America.

1 America is environed on the East with the maine Ocean, on the South Limits.
with the Straights of Magelane, on the West with Mare Del Zur, or Pacificum,
and on the north with the unknown Land.

2 This part of the world, was first discried by Christopher Columbus, in the
year 1492. and then after that made better known by Americus Vesputius, of
whom it is called unto this day America.

3 The fruitfulness of this soil is to be admired, for Quality.
in it are wonderful store of Spices, Birds, and Fishes. There is also gold
in such plenty, that the Spaniards have reported they have dug in some
places more Gold then earth. The chiefest want in this part are Horses, of
which they have few or none, and which was the occasion, that when the
Spaniards brought Horses in the battle against them, they fell down
astonished, thinking that when the horses neighed, they had spoken unto them.

4 The inhabitants of this mighty Territory, are most Inhabitants.
barbarous, being in some places men eaters, they are altogether ignorant and
unlearned, which was the cheiefe cause that they conceited themselves, when any
one of the Spaniards did read a letter, the Devil told him the co^tents. They
are ignorant of the use of iron, and estimate glass above gold. To conclude,
they are excellent runners, and swimmers.

5 This fourth part of the world, is chiefly under the Government
King of Spain, and is divided first into two parts, Mexicana, and Peruana,
afterward subdivided as follows.

DE MEXICANA.
1 MExicana is limited on the east with Mare Del Norte, Limits.
on the West with Mare Del Zur, on the South with an Istmus, betwixt Peruana
and it, and on the North with the unknown land.

2 In this part of America are many Provinces, the Provinces.
chief of which are Quiuira, Mexicana, Nicaragua, Iucatan, Florida, Virginia,
Norumbega, Noua Francia, Terra Cortealis, and Estotiland.

3 The Province of Quiuira extends it self unto Sinus Quiuira.
Califormia, being a most dry and barren ground.

4 The Province of Mexicana was first found out by Mexicana.
Ferdinando Cortesius, in the year 1518. There are in this place many Rivers,
in which breed great store of Crocadiles, whose bodies the inhabitants do
eat. There are also many mines of gold. And there is a mountain called
Popochampeche, which does continually vomit forth flames of fire. The chief
and Metropolitan city of this Province, or of whole America, is Mexico, in
which the Prorex for Spain does lie, and in which there is both money coined,
and books printed.

5 The next is Nicaragua, wherein is a great lake which Nicaragua.
has no intercourse with the Sea, and yet does ebb and flow as the Sea does.
The people in this place are more manlike then others, both in behavior and
shape.

6 In Iucatan Chersonesus, the chief city is Guatimala, Iucatan.
where another Viceroy for Spain does lie. The inhabitants of this Country
did adore the Cross before Cortez coming.

7 Terra Florida (so called of the French, who first Terra Florida.
founded it) has in it many Provinces, whereof Panuca is one, in which the
people are very warlike, but butcherously minded, killing all the captives they
take, and eating them. Furthermore, they never marry until they be 40. years
of age, and live most upon Serpents and worms. There is another place in this
Province, called Alberdosia, wherein the women let their children suck until
they be 12. years of age.

8 Virginia (so nominated of our late Queen) was first Virginia.
found out by Sir Walter Rawleigh, who gave it that name. Of this Country what
may be spoken more at large, see the discourse of Master Harriot, and Master
Hackant.

9 Norumbega (so called of certain fishes which are Norumbega.
in it of that name.) The chief City of it is Norumbega.

10 Noua Frauncia lies near unto that great Sinus of Noua Francia.
Saint Laurence. It was discovered and taken first of the French men, under
Frauncis the first of France. The inhabitants of this Province have little
boats made of leather, which they use to fish in, and when they have done to
take them up at their back, and carry them away.

11 Terra Cortealis, is little famous, unless it be for a river Terra
Cortealis.
there, which is called the three brothers.

12 Estotiland was first found out by Anthony Zenus a Estotiland.
Venetian, near unto which lies Fretum Dauis, where they have sought
oftentimes for a passage unto the Moluccoes and China, but it could not be
effected. Not far from this lies Newfound-land, from whence comes most of
our fish. And in the North part lies a land, called by Sir Frauncis Drake,
Noua Albion, of which nothing can be certainly spoken.

13 Thus far of the Provinces of Mexicana, now follows the description of
Peruana.

De Peruana.
PEruana is in every place environed with the Sea, unless Limits.
it be toward the North, where it is joined unto Mexicana, by a little Istmus.

2 This part of America does chiefly flourish with gold, Quality.
precious stones, Spices, Sugar, and strange herbs, among which is that herb
Tobaco, which is so much, and idely used amongst us.

3 The inhabitants of this place are generally cruel, Inventions.
rude, barbarous, and men eaters, not unlike unto those of Mexicana: They go
naked, and if they take any man captive, they slice his body out into collops,
and broile it upon the coals, making merry so long as that indures them. They
are toward the South part mighty great men, being all Idolaters, worshipping
the Devil, or some monstrous misshapen Idol.

4 The chief River of this Southern part of America, Rivers.
are three, the River Amazon, Maragon, and the golden River Rio, or de la
Plate, in which there is found much gold and silver.

5 This Peruana is divided into four great Provinces Division.
or Kingdoms, Castella Aurea, Peru, Chile, and Brasile: In each of which the
King of Spain has his Agents.

6 Castella Aurea, does comprehend in it the whole Istmus, Castella Aurea.
which does link and tie the two parts of America together. In it are the two
famous Ports or Havens, in which the Spanish Ships are either laden for Spain,
or disburdened for America. The one called Theomina, or Nombre de Dios, the
other Panamais.

7 Peru is limited on the North with Castella Aurea, on Peru.
the West with Mare Pacificum, or the calm Sea, on the South with Chile, and
on the East with a Mediterranean unknown. This place was found out by Frauncis
Pizarus, in the year 1525.

8 The inhabitants of this Region are great Idolaters, Inhabitants.
worshipping in some places black filthy sheep, in other places Serpents.
They are also such great men of person, that the Spaniards have found teeth of
them that were three fingers in breadth, and four in length.

9 The fruitfulness of this country does chiefly excel Quality.
in the herb Tobaco, and Cocam, which if it be put into any man's mouth, it
quenches his thirst. And there is a certain Beast, that when he runs away
has a bag hanging down under his belly, into which his young ones convey
themselves. There is also such plenty of Gold, that the inhabitants care not
for it, and when the Spaniards came thither first, they shooed their Horses
with it. In this Province are the three rivers before mentioned in the general
description of Peruana.

10 The chief city of this Kingdom is Michaelia, City.
in which lies a Protex for Spain.

11 Chile does flourish in many things, but that which Chile.
is of greatest note, there is a River which in the day time does run, and in
the night stands still: the reason is, because this river lies under
Mountains, on which snow falling, in the day is dissolved, in the night
congealed. The chief and Metropolitan City of this Province, is the city of
Saint James, in which lies another Protex for Spain.

12 Brasile is extended from the river Maragon, unto Brasile.
the straights of Mageian.

13 The inhabitants of this large Province, are sine Fide, Inhabitants
Lege, and Rege: that is, without faith, law, or King. They are also such
excellent swimmers, that they can tarry under water for the space of an hour.
They are very great dissemblers, shedding tears (which they have always in
readiness) when any of their friends come unto them.

14 The fruitfulness of this Country lies much in Quality.
Sugar, and a wood called Brasile, which is transported from thence into many
parts of Europe. In this Country is also that Beast, called Pigritia, which in
fifteen days will be going as far as one can throw a stone. Here are also
many strange Herbs, whereof two are of most note. The first is the herb
Copaibas, of which the excellent Balsomum is made, that cures all green
wounds. The other is an herb, which of the Portugals is called Sentida, of
Lincotanus Sentiens, and of others Viua, whose quality is, that if any one
throw any thing unto it, or touch it, it will shut his leaves, and will not
open them until the party which did displease it be departed Here are also
near unto the Seashore, Fishes which will fly like unto birds. And to
conclude, here are trees of that bigness, that there are as many families
dwelling in one of the limbs of them, as are in some Parishes of England. Magin.

CAP. X.
De America Insulis.
THus far of the continent and Kings contained in America: Now only remains
the description of some few and particu-Ilands, and then I have finished what
in fine I wished.

1 The Islands of America are divided into those which Division.
are in Mari Del Nort, and those in Mari del Zur.

2 The known Islands in Mari Del Nort, are five, Hispaniola, Iamaica, Cuba,
Caribum, and Cimbubon.

3 In the Island Hispaniola there are many mines of Hispaniola.
Gold. The chief City in it, is Saint Dominicke, in which the Archbishop
thereof does continually lie. This was the Island which Columbus did first find
out.

4 In Iamaica, or the Island of Saint James, little is to be Iamaica.
observed, only that in it there is a City called Civil, in which there is a
fair Abbey.

5 In the Island Cuba, the Metropolitan City is Hauana, Cuba.
so called, because it is the Haven where all the Ships do succor themselves,
which come from Spain unto Peru, or the contrary.

6 In the Island Caribum, the inhabitants are all Anthropophagi: Caribum.
And from hence is brought that woade which is called Guaicum, or Lignum
Sanctum.

7 In the Island Cimbubon, there is a Tree very famous Cimbubon.
for his leaves, which when they fall unto the earth, do creep, having on
either side things like unto two feet, besides, if one offer to touch or come
near unto them, they will move, and offer to run away. Guilandinus reports
it, and Scaliger in his 112. exercise against Cardanus.

De Insulis in Mari Del Zur.
1 IN Mari Del Zur, there are only three Islands which Haccari.
are known, called Hacari, in which are great store of Gold.

Quem nos depictum vix recte aspeximus orbem,
Solius verbi fabrica sola fuit.
Illi igitur terrae qui fundamenta locauit,
Sit soli nostro gloria sola Deo.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
1 AFrica. 2 America. 3 Asia. 4 Arabia. 5 Abissinorum Regio. 6 Armenia. 7
Azores Insulae.
B
1 Barbaria. 2 Brasilia. 3 Baliares Insulae. 4 Belgia. 5 Britania Magna.
C
1 China. 2 Corsica. 3 Candia. 4 Cyprus 5 Chile.
D
1 Dania. 2 Dacia Vetus.
E
1 Europea. 2 Egypt. 3 Ethiopia Inferior. 4 Estotilandia.
F
1 Frislandia Insulae. 2 Florida.
G
1 Gallia. 2 Germania. Grecia. Groinlandia. Groclandia.
H
1 Hispania. 2 Hungaria. 3 Hibernia.
I
1 Italia. 2 Illiria. 3 India. 4 Islandia. 5 Insulae in Mari Atlant. 6 Insulae
in Mar. Egeo. 7 Insulae in Mar. Ethiopico. 8 Insulae in Mar. Indico. 9 Insulae
in Mar. Del Nort. 10 Insulae in Mar. Del Zur. 11 Ischia.
L
1 Lituania. 2 Liuonia. 3 Libia.
M
1 Moscouia. 2 Mexicana. 3 Malta.
N
1 Nigretarum Regio. 2 Numidia. 3 Noruegia. 4 Natolia.
O
1 Ormus.
P
1 Polonia. 2 Prussia. 3 Persia. 4 Peruana. 5 Peru. 6 Palestina.
R
1 Rodes.
S
1 Scandia. 2 Scicilia. 3 Sardinia. 4 Sweuia.
T
1 Tartaria. 2 Transiluania. 3 Turcicurh Imperium Europeum. 4 Turcia Asiana. 5
Terra Borealis Incognita. 6 Terra Australis Incognita.
V
1 Virginia. 2 Venice.
Z
1 Zazinthus. 2 Zeilan.
FINIS.
A Table of the chief Cities contained in the whole world, with their
Longitudes and Latitudes annexed thereunto.
A
long. long. lat. lat. D. M. D. M. 1 ALexandria in Egypt. 60 30 30 0 2
Amsterdam in Belgia. 27 34 52 40 3 Antuerpe in Belgia. 24 30 51 48 4 Angiers in
France. 18 10 47 25 5 Argentine in Germany. 27 50 48 44 6 Athens in Greece. 52
45 37 15 B
1 Belgia in Chaldea. 83 10 33 50 2 Bethlem in Judea. 65 45 31 50 3 Bengala in
Indies. 0 0 23 0 4 Bisancon in France. 20 30 46 30 5 Bourges in France. 22 10
46 20 6 Buda in Hugarie. 42 0 47 0 C
1 Caliz in Spain. 5 10 37 0 2 Calicute in Indies. 112 0 17 0 3 Coimbra in
Portugal. 11 25 40 0 4 Constantinople in Greece. 56 0 43 5 5 Colen in Germany.
30 30 51 0 6 Copenhagen in Denmark. 34 30 56 50 7 Compostella in Spain. 6 0
20 0 8 Corinth in Greece. 51 15 36 55 9 Cracouia in Polonia. 42 40 50 12 D
1 Damascus in Judea. 69 0 33 0 2 Doway in Belgia. 25 0 50 30 E
1 Edenburge in Scotland. 19 0 58 0 2 Ephesus in Natolia. 57 40 37 40 F.
1 Florence in Italy. 34 0 43 40 2 Frankfort ad Maenu^ in Germany 30 0 50 30 3
Frankfort ad oder. Germany. 34 0 52 30 G
1 Geneua in Sauoy. 28 0 45 45 2 Goa in Indies. 0 0 17 0 3 Granado in Spain.
17 15 37 30 I
1 Jerusalem in Judea. 66 0 31 40 2 Ingolstad. 32 10 48 40 L
1 Lacedemon in Natolia. 50 15 35 30 2 Leiden in Belgia. 27 20 52 10 3 Lisbon
in Portugal. 21 20 38 50 4 Louaine in stelgia. 23 0 51 0 5 London in England.
20 0 52 30 6 Lutesia in France. 23 20 48 0 7 Lions in France. 25 40 44 30 M
1 Ments in Germany. 27 30 50 30 2 Mexico in America. 0 0 20 0 3 Millaine in
Italy. 33 0 44 20 4 Moscouia in Russia. 0 0 61 0 N
1 Naples in Italy, 39 30 41 0 Nice in Natolia. 57 0 41 40 3 Niniuie in Asiria.
38 0 36 4 4 Nidrosia in Noruegia. 89 45 60 50 O
1 Orleance in France. 22 0 47 10 2 Ormus in the I Will Ormus. 92 0 19 0 3 Oxford
in England. 15 0 51 30 P
1 Paris in France. 32 0 48 10 2 Padua in Italy. 36 10 44 45 3 Pauia in Italy.
33 5 44 0 4 Poicters in France. 39 15 50 10 5 Prage in Bohemia. 19 10 46 10 R
1 Rome in Italy. 38 0 41 20 2 Rodes in the I Will Rodes. 58 0 35 0 3 Riga in
Lyuonia. 53 45 59 0 S
1 Civil in Spain. 14 20 37 30 2 Siracusa in Scicilie, 40 30 37 30 3 Sienna
in Italy. 36 15 42 20 4 Stockholme in Sweuia. 47 0 60 30 5 Saint Iago in
Spain. 10 50 43 5 T
1 Tarsus in Natolia. 66 14 38 56 2 Tolledo in Spain. 16 40 40 10 3 Tollouse
in France. 20 30 43 5 4 Triers in Germany. 0 0 49 50 V
1 Valentia in Spain. 21 10 39 55 2 Venice in Italy. 37 0 44 50 3 Vienna in
Austria. 31 45 48 20 W
1 Witteberge in Germany. 0 0 51 20 2 Witsberge in Germany. 0 0 50 0

FINIS.

