A SERMON ON THE SECOND COMMANDMENT: Preached in Saint PAVLS Church, Januarie
6.

1623.

By JOHN SQVIRE Vicar of Saint LEONARD in Shorditch by London.

LONDON Printed by W. S. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at his shops
at the sign of the Star under Saint Peter's Church in Cornhill, and in
Pope's Head Alley.

1624.

TO THE REVEREND, THEOPHILUS AYLMER, Doctor of Divinity, and Archdeacon of
London.
SIR,
I May not rob you: take your own. Your own is this Sermon: originally,
efficiently, occasionally, and authoritatiuely: First, you sent me to the
University: there your cost, counsel, and care, made me a Student, Scholar,
and Fellow. Secondly, you called me from the University, to a Living of your
own Donation, a Donatiue indeed; without Simonie, or Flattery. Would God
every English Patron, and Pastor, could say so much, and so truly. Thirdly,
Your discourse did direct me to this Text. Fourthly, As your Substitute, I
preached these Meditations. Take therefore your own, this Sermon: with
interest, the Author also. Who proclaymeth himself bankrupt, that he is able
to pay no more: you having bound him in a farther Obligation. But he hops,
you will accept him, as you hope God will accept you, 2. Cor. 8. 12. And so
much he promises to you, before him, ever to rest

Yours, in Christ to be used. JOHN SQVIRE.

To the moderate Romish Catholic, and the unsettled English Protestant,
Knowledge, Zeal, Truth.
Brethren,
THis Sermon, does not endeavor to impose on you Faith implicit; from the
authority of a Mother, the Church; either of yours Romish, or of ours
Reformed. But to propose to you, Truth explicit: from the verity of a Father,
even of our own God, in his own Word. When I leave it, do you leave me:
though you be but Men, and I could be even an Angel. While I follow it, you
should follow Gal. 1. 8.
me, though you could be even Apostles, and I but a Matthew. 23. 3.
Man, ye a Pharisie. To the end, that this Truth may be thus embraced: I
preach this to you, do you pray for me: and our common Christ bless us all.

Yours, in the Truth. IHON SQVIRE.

A SERMON ON THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.
EXODUS 20. 4, 5, and 6.
THese ten Commandments, contain one thing: the duty of Man. But that is
twofold: Supreme, to his Father, in the first; and Subordinate, to his Brother
in the second Table. Our Duty to God, must be both Internal, in the first
Commandment; and External, in the three following; and that in three
respects, of Things, in the second; of Words, in the third; and of Times, in
the fourth. This Second then, is a Commandment inioyning Things concerning our
external duty to God. It is negative: forbidding literally, only the
worshipping of Images: but synecdochically, all (...), will worship, or devised
devotion. In it is touched the very pith of all all precepts: both the
commandment to which, and the argument by which it does persuade us: Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the
earth: Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. This is the
Commandment praefixt; to which is affixt, as commanding an argument: For, I
the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the Fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation in them that hate me: and
showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

The Commandment forbids all men, two things concerning Images: their
Purpose, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any likeness,
of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth: and their Practice, thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. And that the Commandment may the better descend into our hearts,
the Argument does ascend from two heads. First, he persuades us from his
Justness, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, which visit the sins of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third, and fourth generation in them
that hate me. Secondly from his Goodness, and showing mercy unto thousands in
them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

That my discourse may not altogether floate, in this fathomlesse sea, I must
diue a little deeper, by another subdiuision. To prevent the very Purpose of
Image-idolatrie, the Lord does here premise a plain Prohibition, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven Image: and to make that yet plainer, he
annexeth a plain Exposition, nor any likeness, of any thing, that is in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth.

Furthermore, for as much as that Purpose is the Parent which gives life to
the Practice: he smites at the Body of Image-adoration, Thou shall not bow
down to them: and at the Soul thereof, nor Worship them. That he may even
kill Idolatry, he inhibiteth both the inferior and superior act thereof: men
may neither bow to them, nor worship them.

And that this may be (not brutum fulmen) a piercing precept, he does protest
his Justness, both in regard of the Punisher, for I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God: and of the Punishment, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation in them that hate me. Finally,
that the Lord may appear to be, not only, a God to affright the bad, by his
Justness; but also a Father to inuit the good, by his Goodness; he
proclaymeth that also in three remarkable particulars. First, the Quality, it
is excellent: I will show mercy. Secondly, the Quantity, it is infinite, unto
thousands. Thirdly, the Qualification, it is apparent; God will put his own
liuerie on his own servants: some men are as it were, marked out for the mercy
of their Maker: I will show mercy on them that love me and keep my
Commandments.

Here we have a long Text, but a little Time. Therefore, God Almighty enlarge
our hearts, that we may receive much by our little, yet serious attention.

To run over these particulars yet more particularly: hear the first three
words, in two words. Non facies tibi sculptile: Non facies, THOU shall not: a
singular note, from this phrase of the singular number. God does as it were
take the Israelites at their word: chap. 9. verse. 8. all the people said, All
that the Lord has spoken, we will do. Here God does tie them to a personal
performance of that general promise, THOU shall have no other gods but me, and
THOU shall not make to thy self any graven Image. Whereby we may see that
coecum idolum (as our learned Bishop of Winchester does Tortura Torti, page 9.
term it) that Blind idol, implicit Faith.

Do not take up thy Truth on trust, from the Priest, from the Pope, or from
the Church. Whatsoever they do teach thee, this phrase may assure thee, that
no Coliers Faith can blanch this Ethiopian crime: but at that day, God will
question thee in this phrase, Tu fecisti? did Thou make any graven Image?

Thou shall not make any graven Image Tibi, to thy self: take this phrase
Tibi, to thy self also, it merits thy attention. It is an Hebraisme,
signifying, that men must make no Images for Religion, of their own heads,
without Gods command. Moses indeed made an Image, the Brazen image, but not
Sibi to himself: and Solomon made Images, the Cherubins, but not Sibi of his
own invention. God himself commanded the one, Number. 21. 8. and the other, 1.
Reg. 6. 23. But it seems, the Successor of Saint Peter, has a prerogative
above the person of Moses. Solomon indeed did not, durst not make an Image,
Sibi, to himself, of his own authority: but behold, a greater than Solomon
is here, the Pope does make Images Sibi, to himself, and commands them to be
made, by others also. But if he will make an Image for himself, let him make
an answer for himself also: Be not thou partaker of other men's sins. Ne
facies Tibi: make no graven Image to thy self, till thou can find some
plain place of Scripture expressly to command it.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image: (...) says Pagnine,
signifies Sculpere, or Dolare, Pasal. Pesel.
to carue or grave: (...) Sculptile (and dicitur tam de lignis, quam de
lapidibus) any Image carved in wood, or graven in stone. By the Septuagints it
is translated, both (...), an Idol, as here, Exodus 20. 4. and (...), an Image,
as Esaias 40. 18. Which is an hint sufficient, to anticipate that
Idol-distinction, betwixt an Image, and an Idol.

The second point does inhibite a second sort of Images, (...), by the former
word some understand Temounah.
(...) Images framed with caruing or grauing tools: by this word (...), Images
formed with a Pen, or Pencill, Statues or Pictures. Others take this last word
in a more large sense, to signify (as our translation does also render it) any
likeness: Similitudo, be it figura or phantasma, says Pagnine, Voce (...).
either the outward action of the hand, or the inward fiction of the mind. Dij
factitij or fictitij, as Calvin speaks: be the intention of man what it
will, or the invention of man, what it can: here is a general interdiction of
all Images: Thou shall not make to thy self any likeness.

Though this be plain enough, yet is the Lord pleased to explain this
Precept, by an enumeration; Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image,
nor any likeness of any thing, in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in
the water under the earth: that is, no Image must be made to religious use, of
any, either Foul of the air, or Star of the sky; either of Beast of the
field, or Tree of the forest; either of Men on the land, or Fish of the sea:
(...) or (...): nec desuper, nec desubter. Bamajim. Bashamajim.
not any likeness, of any thing, in any place. Surely if some had not set
themselves, to support their opiniatiue conclusion, I could not imagine, how it
were possible, for any man, to exempt any Image, from this general
distribution, by their supersubtile distinctions.

The precept having prohibited the purpose, it proceeds to the Practice: Thou
shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. The first word, to bow, in the
Hebrew is (...) to humble ones self, with the signs Shachah.
of humiliation: as baring the head, bending the knee, bowing the body,
spreading the arms, etc. In Greek (...), coming of (...) Canis, a metaphor
taken from the manner of Spaniels, when Zanch. in Praec. 3. c. 14. page 367.
they couch, and crouch on the ground before their Masters. Our Latin
translation is, incuruare, to bow, expressing only one gesture, but inuoluing
all the other. The Image-aduocates, that they may reserve a (...), one starting
hole, for an evasion, translate it, non adorabis, thou shall not adore B.
Bonner in sec. Praeceptum. page 249.
them. Although this make a tautologie, the next word, coals, signifying
Worship, or Adoration: nevertheless we admit this their own translation, but
with their own distinction. Adoration is twofold, says Lyra, Signi and Facti,
the outward, of the Action; and the inward, of the Affection: it is here used
in the first sense, as also 2. Reg. 5. 18. Thus then runs the inhibition,
Thou shall not perform any religious gesture, to any Image. Now, whether this
be not the Practice of the Church of Rome, when they creep to a Cross,
kneel to an Image, and kiss them both; Let the Roman Catholics themselves
gainesay: but I think they cannot gainesay so common a Practice.

The second point prohibited in our Practice, is Worship: the Hebrew term is
(...), which the Gnauad.
Greeks turn by two words (...), Mat. 4. 10. and (...), Coloss. 3. 24. (where
note by the way, that distinction of Dulia and Latria, may be taken out of the
way, it is not uncontrollable, its members are not distinct, it self therefore
is no distinction) the Latins translate it by one word Seruire, to serve, it
being a metaphore from Servants. But this Service, being (in Religion) of an
higher nature, our translators do well express it, by a word of an higher
name, Worship. Now this worship, or religious service, consists of many
particulars, all inhibited by the Scriptures, to be exhibited to Pictures: as
invocation of them, Esaias 44. 17. Thanks to them, Ier. 2. 27. no not to Bow
before them, 2. Chr. 25. 14. Preaching for them, Ier. 2. 8. Swearing by them
Zeph. 1. 5. Sacrificing, 2. Reg. 17. 35. Censing, Ier. 18. 15. etc. The sense
then is this: impart no such service, to any Image: for thereby thou shall make
it an Idol, 2. Reg. 18. 4. and thy self, an Idolater, Romans 1. 25. Thus are
we come (...).
ad vmbelicum vsque, to the Nauel, middle, and pith of this Commandment.

From commanding, our God goes on to persuading. The first Argument is from
his Justness: in which the Punisher is premised, as a preface to the
Punishment, I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God. The Lord, Jehovah, of (...),
to be. God being, Haiah.
the Being, ens entium, in himself primitiuely, in us deriuatiuely: in him
we have our Being, Act. 17. 28. Elohim, God, contradistinct to Elelim, the
last signifying (vanities) a false god: the first a true God. The affixe (...),
Thy God. Thy Eloheca.
God by purchase, and thy God by promise: I bought thee, and brought thee from
Egypt, and the Egyptian slavery, verse. 2. and Thou did promise to hear
me, and obey me, Exodus 19. 8. three words, three Arguments.

1. Thou shall worship him alone, who is Jehovah, thy Creator.
But an Image is (a creature) not Jehovah, thy Creator. Therefore.
Thou shall not worship an Image.
2. Thou shall worship him alone, who is Elohim, the true God.
But Images are not Elohim, true Gods; but Elilim, false gods. Therefore,
Images are not to be worshipped.
3. Thou shall worship none but Thy God, who did purchase thee, and whom thou
did promise.
But an Image is not Thy God, it did not purchase thee, thou did not promise
it. Therefore,
Thou shall not worship an Image.
If a confirmd Idolater could (...), outface these three Arguments, these
three Titles of God: God does send out Seconds, a supply, and does reenforce
his persuasion, by two other Attributes, a jealous God. Two things animate an
Adulteress to be impudent and incorrigible in her Adultery: if her husband be
either mild, that he will not, or if he be awed, that he cannot revenge that
injury. God here argues from the contrary to these two. I am (says he) God,
(...), that is, fortis, strong; and (...), El. Kanna.
Zelotes, jealous: and thus lies the Argument.

Thou shall not provoke him, who both can and will plague thee, by worshipping
Images. But I am a strong jealous God, who both can, and will plague thee.
Therefore, Thou shall not worship Images.
Finally, God is sometimes termed the Husband of his people, Ier. 2. 2. and
Idolatry, Adultery, Ier. 3. 20. therefore as the jealous man does rage, and
will not spare in the day of vengeance. Prou. 6. 34. so God menaceth from the
same metaphor. Thou shall not worship any Image: For -- I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God.

But the servile nature of some people is so slavish, that they will not fear
the threatening of their Master, till they feel the Whip: our Lord therefore
does, as it were, show us the Rod, I will visit, that is, punish and plague
the worshippers of Images. According to the Psalm 89. 32. If they break my
Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: I will Visit them with a rod, and
their sins with scourges. and in our own language the Plague, and Gods
Visitation are usual Synonima's. The sins of the fathers, on the children:
here he alludeth to their being in Egypt. Whilst your fathers were there
(says he) some of them, did worship some of those Images: for the Egyptian Cow
did teeme that Calfe of Israel. Ex. 32. I did wink at them: but I see you; and
you shall feel me. If you do here, as they did there, worship Images, I will
plague their sin on you: I will visit the sins of the fathers, upon the
children. Nor will I stay there: but as you propagate your children, so will I
propagate my punishments: from the Father, to the Child, to the Grandchild,
and to the Child after him. You shall survive, and your eyes shall see that
propagated plague: I will visit the sins of the fathers, upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation. And for a most just cause: because the
worshippers of Images do Hate me. All sinners in general (and therefore
Idolaters in special) I have proclaimed to be my enemies, Malach. 2. 8. From
these premises, he concludes this Argument.

You should fear to commit that sin, which does cause you to hate God, and
God to plague you, for the fathers, in the children, and on your own persons.
But the worshipping of Images is a sin, which does cause you to hate God, and
God to plague you, to visit you: from the fathers, to their children: even to
the third and fourth generation.
Therefore you should fear to worship Images.

This fearful punishment, is such a fearful Argument: that me thinks, it
should make the ear to tingle, and the heart to tremble, of any person, which
does but bow to an Image: if he does but hear these words pronounced. If you
do worship Images, on such I will visit the sins of the fathers, upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation.

Finally, although in a bad cause, Pyrrhus could not persuade Fabritius,
neither by affrighting him with his Elephant, nor by alluring him with his
gold: yet, in a good cause, many are more moved with Gods mercies, than forced
with his judgments. I conceive therefore that the most weighty argument,
lies here in the bottom of my Text: where Gods goodness is proposed unto us
in three branches: the Quality, I will show mercy, in the Postills phrase,
mercy of Confection, mercy of Refection, and mercy of Perfection: that is, all
Gods mercies in regard of our Creation, Regeneration, and Glorification: shall
be conferred upon, and confirmd unto, such as will not worship Images, The
Quantity, Gods mercy, is like a Mathematical line, shot throughout the whole
world: he will show mercy unto Thousands, unto such as will not worship
Images. The Qualification: for Gods Goodness, as he does show it, so his
servants may know it, that they shall have it, by a sure token: by a token
Impressed, if they love me: and Expressed, if they keep my Commandments. To
such as love me, and keep my Commandments, I will show mercy: if -- they
will not worship Images. So from Gods Goodness considered three ways, we may
consider three Arguments, against Images: in Thesi, in Antithesi, and Hypothesi.

1. In Thesi: If thou do desire my Mercy, thou shall not worship Images.

But thou do desire my Mercy. Therefore, Thou shall not worship Images.

2. In Antithesi: If thou do desire my Mercies, a thousand times surpassing
my Judgments, Thou shall not worship Images.

But thou do desire my Mercies, a thousand times surpassing my Judgments,
these being but to the fourth, those to a thousand generations. Therefore,

Thou shall not worship Images.

3. From Gods Goodness, in Hypothesi, we may frame an Hypotheticall Syllogism.

If thou do love me, and wilt keep my Cammandements: Then will thou not
worship Images.

But I know, thou do love me, and wilt keep my Commandments. Therefore,

I know, Thou will not worship Images.

To inuolue all in one: If there be a Gehenna, and a Paradise: if there be an
Hell, and an Heaven prepared: then dare not wretched men be so desperate of the
one, and so presumptuous of the other, but they will be persuaded, not to
worship Images. But if they will worship Images, let them look for poena
sensus, and poena damni: let them be assured to lose the one, and to feel the
other. For -- I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation, in them that
hate me. Although I show mercy unto thousands, in them that love me, and
keep my Commandments.

Let me crave your patience, that I may read over my long Text, once more:
Thou shall not make to thy self, any graven Image, nor any likeness of any
thing in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the water under the
Earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, For I the Lord thy
God, am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers, upon the children,
unto the third and fourth Generation in them that hate me, but show mercy
unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

When the Sicilians accused Verres of Briberie, Tully (being entertained their
Lawier) omitted his usual Oratorie, and Rhetorical Oration, only putting the
Case in plain terms, produced the witnesses, and said, This is his crime,
and our accusation: Let who can gainsay this evident transgression. Hortensius
the others Advocate, considering the cleerenesse of the Case, and manifest
euiction, refused to plead one syllable in the defense thereof: and Verres
yielded himself unto a voluntary banishment.

Had the Patrons of Images, but the honest bashfulnesse of Heathen Hortensius:
and were the consciences of those we challenge for worshipping them, no more
confident then Verres himself: I should make no question, but that only the
reading of this plain Precept against Images, would make the Learned blush to
plead for so plain Idolatry: and cause the common people, the common
worshipper of Images to recant, and make a voluntary submission.

But alas we contest with men, resolved to hold the conclusion: who shame not
to support a shameful sin, against the very Letter of the Law. I am enforced
therefore, to enforce my accusation: wherein I must act two persons, first,
(...), then (...): first, I will show what they can say for Images: and next
what we can say against Images; both: truly, painly, impartially; even as I
hope to plead, my own self, for my own soul, before our great God, at his
dreadful Day of judgment.

Our Adversaries are like the Thebans: Quot sunt Thebarum portae, they have
seven Bulwarks, whence they propugne their Images: the materials whereof they
pretend, all to be fetched from this Commandment.

All their Arguments, and Answers are raised from these seven Heads: from the
consideration of the Agent, of the Action, of the Instrument, of the Work* of
the Object, of a Commandment propounded, and of this Commandment expounded.
First, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image: We do not, say they:
God does give us patterns, and is our Patron, God himself did make them.
Secondly, Neither do we make them to our Selves, we have a Warrant from
Heaven, both ordinary, and extraordinary: he has granted leave by the
Scriptures, and graced Images with many glorious Miracles. Thirdly, That
Instrument of our adoring God, is an Image, not an Idol, as the Heretics
mistake it, and miscall it: no Idol, therefore no Idolatry. Fourthly, We do
not Worship them, it is not godly honor we give them, but Reverence, or
Veneration. Fifthly, For our Religious Worship rests not in them, but
reflecteth on him: it is God we worship, and not the Image. Sixthly, We have a
Commandment, equal to this Commandment, Pari pietatis affictu veneramur, The
Tradition of an vn-erring Church to justify our action. Seventhly, Council.
Trident sub Paul^ 3. Sess. 4.
and lastly, this very Commandment (so much urged against us) it is either
included, and but a part of the first Commandment: or excluded, and no part of
the perpetual Moral Law: it being only Positive, for that Place and People.
They dispute then, from Examples, from Scriptures, and Miracles, from the name
of an Idol, from the nature of Adoration; from the Person adored, from
Tradition, and from the Exposition of this second Commandment. Thus have we
viewed the Heads of their Troops: I will now discover their several Files and
Ranks, that you may see the Army of our Adversaries, which defend their Diana
dropped from Heaven, their Crusadoes, which fight for their Crosses, and
worshipping of Images.

Their Examples, give the onset: of the Cherubins Consilium sui redit. sect.
20.
in Gods House, Exodus 25. 18. and of the Lions in the Kings house, 1. Reg. 10.
19. alleged by the De Imag. lib. 2.
Bishop of Spalato, of the Brazen Serpent Numb. 21. 8. by Bellarmine and a
whole College of Jesuits, have concluded out of Daniel. 3. 1. that, as
Rhemists in Reu. 9. 14.
that Image was for the honor of the King: so their Images were for the honor
of Christ. Nay, the Image of Saint Stephen was made by an Angel: and the Image
of Edissa, by Christ himself, says Bellarmine. These Examples (I say) gave
the De Imagine. lib. 2. cap. 18.
onset, and indeed they are like the forlorn Hopes quickly cut in pieces: or
rather like honest Subjects, forced to the fight against their Sovereign, they
turn their Weapons upon the Rebels, which bring them to the Battle. Consider
the Author, and the end of all these Images. For the first: when the
Image-worshippers are as wise as Solomon, and as pure as Angels, having the
same authority with Christ, from God: then may they do, what they say these
did, erect Images to religious uses. Notwithstanding these were never made for
Adoration. The two last, the Image of Saint Stephen, and of Edissa, were not
made, I mean by those Artists: the other were made, but not worshipped. The
Lions were in the Kings Palace, whither the people did come, but not to
worship: the Cherubins were in the Sanctum Sanctorum, whither the people did
not come. But the Serpent, is an unanswerable instance, again Image Adoration:
for so soon as it was adored, it was damned for an Idol, 2. Chron. 31. 1. All
these Examples therefore, are impertinent, that one only excepted of
Nebuchadnezzer: which was worshipped at Babell, as an Idol: and therein I
confess, their Images do answer that Example.

In the second place, they instance in the second phrase, we do not (say they)
make any Images to our selves, we have a warrant from God, to worship them.
We have his warrant ordinary: his Word and Oracle, and his warrant
extraordinary, his Works and Miracles. The ordinary warrant they seem to
repute, but an ordinary Argument, they urge the Scriptures very sparingly.
Suarez Apol. lib. 2. c. 11, 12, 13, and and 14.
Learned Suarez in his large Discourse of Images, alleges not one Scripture,
to avouch the Adoration of them. Seven indeed are cited by Bellar. de Imag.
lib. 2. c. 22.
Bellarmine: but so, as that I cannot tell which to admire most: either the
first, that the Scriptures are not quoted: or the last, that they are so ill
quoted; by two of our learned Adversaries, in the greatest point in
Controversy: they accusing us for Heresy, because we oppugn; and we them
for Idolatry, because they propugne the worshipping of Images. Suarez his
Scriptures, are soon assailed, because never cited. Take Bellarmines
testimonies, according to his own corrupt Translation, and make the best of
them. Adorate scabellum, Worship his foot stool. Psalm. 95. Nolite iurare per
Coelum, Matthew. 5. Swear not by Heanen. Locus in quo stas terra sancta est, The
place wherein thou stand is holy ground, Exodus 3. The Passover is called,
Dies sancta, and venerabilis; A holy, and reverend Day, Exodus 12. The Priests
apparel is called, Vestis sanctae, Holy Garments, Exodus 28. The Grave of
Christ is called, Gloriosum Sepulchrum; A glorious Sepulcher, Esaias 11. And the
Scriptures are called, Sacrae Literae; Holy Writings, 2. Tim. 3. How any
ingenious indifferent person, can frame from these Scriptures, any conclusion,
consequence, or collection, for the worshipping of Images: this surpasses my
imagination.

But the truth is, they are not very confident in the Scriptures: but in
Miracles they place extraordinary confidence, in this extraordinary Warrant.
This Argument is used by Coster, Bellarmine, Suarez; and almost by all on that
side. A Brazen Costerus Enchiridion, p. 442.
Image was erected by that woman, whose bloody issue was stopped by Christ,
under which grew a Panacea, an herb that healed all diseases: therefore
Images are to be worshipped, says Costerus. Another Image of Christ, was
smote thorough by a Jew: and out of that wound issued blood, which cured many
diseases: therefore Images are to be worshipped, says Bellarmine. Theoph.
Alexandrinus, Bellar. de Imag. lib. 2. c. 12.
could not die till he had adored the Image of Saint Chrysostom, whom he had
hated Suarez Apol. lib. 2. c. 11 sect. 19. Down. of Anti. lib. 1. c. 7. sect. 6.
in his life; and therefore Images are to be worshipped, says Suarez. Pretty
Stories: I will tell you a few more of them. An English Image at Chester, moved
the Hand, as if he had blessed the people. Sheldon. Mot. 5.
A French Image at Saint Omers, removed it self, to a place fitter for
Adoration. A Spanish Image, went in the night to visit the sick. And many
Italian Images have been seen to weep grievously, when the sprigs of new cut
Vines, have prompted Hisp. Conuers. page 19. Relation of the Religion, sect. 44.
them to such tragical tears. Neither is the story of the Florentine Image,
altogether unknown, nor altogether vnbeleeued. Before which, when as Giouanni
Gualber to did prostrate himself, holding in his hand his mortal enemy, whom
he protested that he there forgave, as he did desire himself to be forgiven
by Christ. Then did the Crucifixe bow down his head, with a gracious
approbation: and for the eternal memory, of their reciprocal charity, the
Image does stand with the head bowed unto this present hour. Peradventure
these Stories may be censured for Apocryphal: I De vita Sancti Hyacinthij,
lib. 1. cap. 13.
will therefore add one or two out of Classical Authors. Seuerinus says, in
Kiouia, there was a goodly stone Statue, of the Blessed Virgin Mary, some six
hundred weight and upward. When Hyacinthus fled from the incursion made by the
Tartars, Runnest thou! and leauest me to the fury of the Barbarous? quoth the
Image. Alas, glorious Lady, replied he, thy Image is too heavy, to carry with
me. Try, quoth the Image; and upon the trial, he found it as light as a Reed,
and went with it dry foot, over the great River Borystenes, to the great City
Cracouia. In the life of Saint Thomas of Aquine, it is related that when
Aquinas did pray before a Crucifix at Naples, the Image did answer him, Been
scripsisti de me Thoma: Thou have written very well of me good Thomas. Do not
al these Examples, merit one conclusion? Ergo: Images are to be worshipped.

But let us consult a little, before we conclude; Falsa, ficta, fucata omnia:
almost all these, and all such, are mere Lies: and none to the purpose, for
the proof of Adoration. Grant that they were true: yet look back wards, the
Heathen had Miracles for the confirmation of their Idolatry, faith Valerius
Maximus. Their Priests did speak Valor. Max. lib. 1. c. 1. Theodoretus lib. 5.
c. 22.
through their Images, says Theodoret. The Palladium did Vibrare hastam, shake
her Spear, and move her eyes, and the Mirabilarij, could plead Miracles,
though Heretics. Then look forwards, Antichrist shall also establish his
doctrine by Miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Conclude we therefore in Gods own
phrase: Though men should do signs and wonders, yet must they not persuade us
to Idolatry.

In this cause the Patrons of Images, are like the Low Country Soldiers: they
desire a Defensive, rather than an Offensive War. If they but keep ground in
this Question, they think they get ground in their Religion. Hence they
fortify themselves with such Distinctions, as that it is as easy to discern
a Camelion with the Eye, a Proteus with the Hand, and a Sphinx with the
Understanding, as to understand, and least to display their more subtilties.
First, they distinguish of the word Image, and Idol: John Roberts the Jesuit,
Job. Rob. Imposturae Eccles. A^gl Art. 22. Prop, 3.
when he has alleged eight and twenty Scriptures, alleged by us against
Images: he suddenly blotteth them all out, with this one Distinction. Nihil
habeo quod respondeam, nisi quodtoties responsum est a Catholicis: non agi ijs
locis de Imaginibus, sed de Idolis. That this Commandment, and those
Scriptures, condemn only the Idols of the Heathens, and not the Images of the
Christians! where let us understand what an Idol is. Imago est similitudo rei
Verae, Idolum falsae, says Bell. de Imag. lib. 1. c. 5. P. Lumbard. lib. 3.
did. 37.
Bellarmine: That is an Image is the likeness of a true thing, an Idol of a
thing feigned. The Master of the Sentences has this Distinction also.

This Distinction; does both excuse the Pagans, and accuse themselves of
Idolatry. Who dares challenge the Heathens, that their Images did represent,
only (...), Chimaeras, and Fictions. Were not the Sun and Moon, Bodies? the
Cats and Crocodiles, Beasts? Jupiter and Saturn, Men? all Creatures? and
therefore the representations of them, were Images, and not Idols. But our
Adversaries themselves, have not they Saints, which were never in the World? as
Saint Longinus, Saint Christopher, Saint Martial, Saint Vrsula, Saint
Catharine, Saint Margaret, etc. and therefore their representations are not
Images, but Idols; according to their own Distinction.

Moreover, that this inhibition is absolute of all Images, and not respective
of Idols only, it is apparent from these four considerations: A voce,
extensione, fine, and ratione precepti: From the Word of the Precept, from the
Extension of the Precept, from the Scope of the Precept, and from the Reason of
the Precept. First, the Word (...) Pesel.
(as I have touched already) is translated, both an Idol, and an Image also:
Again, the Septuagints set forth by the authority of Pius the Fifth, term
the Statues of Baal, (...), Images, 2. Reg. 11. 18. but 2. Chron. 23. 7. they
call them (...), Idols. And their own learned Cardinal Caietane, confesses
Bell. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 7. page 2027.
that these two words Image, and Idol are confounded. Therefore it is a vain
Distinction. Secondly, The Interdiction is Universal: any likeness, of any
thing, in Heaven, Earth, or Sea. Now the Romish Images, are they not some
likeness of some thing, either in Heaven, or in the Earth, or in the Sea? how
can they be exempted, from this general inhibition. Thirdly, the End, scope,
and drift of this Commandment, is to preserve religious worship to God alone:
it must not therefore be imparted to any creature, whether it be to an Idol,
or an Image: whether it be by a Pagan, or a Christian. Nay the profession does
aggrauate the Idolatry, 2. Sam. 12. 14. Fourthly, the Reason of the precept is
this: For I am a jealous God. Now will the jealous man, permit the Honor of
his Bed, to Some men, by way of Difference? No more will God permit the Honor
of his Worship, to some Images, by way of Distinction.

Add to this that Logical axiom, Cui conuenit definitio, conuenit definitum:
such as have the same Definition, are the same Thing: but the Romish Images,
and the Heathen Idols, have the same Definition; therefore they are the same
thing. Thus David does define them, Psalm. 135. 15. The Images of the Heathen,
are but silver and gold, the work of men's hands: They have mouths and speak
not, and eyes have they and see not: they have ears, and hear not: neither is
there any breath in their mouths. But the Romish Images, are but Silver and
Gold, and the work of men's hands: they have mouths and speak not: and eyes
have they and see not: they have ears and hear not: neither is there any
breath in their mouths. Therefore the Images of the Romish Catholics, and the
Idols of the Pagans, are all one without Distinction.

I will shut up this point with the saying of Agobardus; p. 237. Si Sanctorum
imagines, hi qui Doemonum cultum reliquerunt, Venerari ^uberentur: puto quod
videretur ijs, non tam idola reliquisse, quam simulacra mutasse, that is, If
the Pagans should be persuaded, to leave worshipping^ the Images of their
Heathen Gods, and to wor^^ip the Images of our Christian Saints: they would
suppose, that they did not forsake, but alter their Adoration of Images.

By this we see that there are Idols in Rome: but for Idolatry, this they
obscure with a cloud of quaint distinctions, which I cannot say whether they be
more infinite, or intricate: yet this I say; first, that their Army of
Distinctions are very Midianites, they destroy one another. Again, as the
Sepia, by pouring out her inkie puddle, does so dazzle the eye of the Fisher,
that he cannot discern the body of the Fish: yet by the very action, he
knows more certainly the place where about she lurketh. So their many
perplexed distinctions, make understanding ^hen, the more assured of their
errors, and Idolatry (they would not thus struggle, and wind about, with
their snapping distinctions, to bite in sunder the thread of our arguments: but
that they feel themselves enwrapped, and fast bound with these manifold cords
of Scripture, and reason, choking their (...)) though I confess that their
nicities, will exercise a sound judgment punctually to discover them.

Although we say, they have Idols: yet they say, they do not worship them.
With Dulia peradventure, Consilium sui Reditus.
but not with Latria, says Spalato. Nay, neither with Dulia, nor Latria, says
Bellarmine, unless it be Analogice and Reductiue. Yea Images De Imag. lib. 2.
c. 25.
are to be adored, both with Dulia, and Latria, and Hyperdulia also, says A.
D. but improprie, per A. D. Sect. 4.
accidence and analogice. Again, all worship is to be exhibited to all Images,
Deriuatiue, not Primitive, Enchirid. c. 13.
says Casterus. L^ncino would have them to be worshipped Relative, only in
regard of their representation: Trent. Hist. lib. ^. p. 799.
Lainez likes not that restitution, but pleads that they may be worshipped
Obiectiue, in regard De Trad. par. 3.
of their dedication also. Peresius says, that veneration ought to be only
Motive: but Sayrus, Clauis li. 4. c 30.
Inhaesiue, that they are truly venerable.

Concerning this multitude of distinctions, I will apply that saying of Cicero:
as it is already Jewel in H. Art. 4. Sect. 12.
applied by Bishop Jewel; Bonum esse negus: Praepositum dicis: An minuis hoc
pacto Auaritiam? thou will not have wealth, called Bonum, but Praepositum: but
do thou hereby any thing abate avarice? Even so say we to our adversaries,
ye will not have the worshipping of Images be called Latria, but Dulia: but
do they hereby any thing abate Idolatry? Or to come closer to their
conscience, in the words of our Sovereign: When Praemonit. p. 41.
Christ at the day of Judgment shall accuse, them for Idolatry, I doubt
whither he will be satisfied, by such nice sophistical distinctions. Haec sunt
verba Suarez Ap. li. 2. c. 12. number. 1.
regis: Quibus prudenter obuiare mihi difficilius est, quam clarissimis
rationibus respondere: says Suarez, his words speak the truth; that he found
it more easy to assoile the most learned argument, then to answer this plain
appealing to his conscience, and indeed the plain conscience of a poor
sinner, dare not depend on such curious distinctions against the day of
Judgment.

To proceed; although the Heads of these Fox-like distinctions, be divided:
yet all their Tales meet in this concurrance; that they do not properly worship
Images; not with Latria, as Bellarmine De Imag. lib. 2. c. 20.
calls it, or with godly worship, as our Countrymen English it. I answer,
that even Dulia, or Rhemists in Act. 17. Sect. 4.
the lowest degree of Divine worship is inhibited by God: as the only bowing
of the knee, in this Commandment, and also Leuit. 26. 1. Again, I say, that
Latria it Self, or the highest degree of godly worship, is exhibited by some
of them unto Images. The Image of Christ is to be adored adoratione Latriae,
with the very worship due to God: Sum. part. 3. quaest. 25. Art. 3.
these are the very words of Thomas.

This also is the suffrage of all the Thomists, says Institut. part. 1. lib.
9. cap. 6.
Azorius; yea, it is the definitive sentence of a greater than Thomas, or all
the Thomists, even of the Pope himself. Clemens the eight spoke thus, Crux
Legati, quia ei debetur Latria, erit a dextris: that is, The Cross must have
the right hand, because it is worshipped with Gods own worship.

If they mince the matter with more distinctions: I answer in the words of one
of their own, an Englishman, the Author of the Monarchomachia, that the plain
people stand not to weigh words, Tit. 1. page 49.
but they take them in cortice, as the letter imports: or in the words of
another, their own too, an Italian, Bellarmine. Coguntur vti subtilissimis
distinctionibus, quas ipsi vix intelligunt, nedum populus De imagine. lib. 2. c.
22. p. 2078.
imperitus. They are constrained to shift us off with such subtle
distinctions, as their Doctors themselves can hardly understand, and therefore
much less the poor plain people. Again (if we be so liberal as to grant
that) the Learned may worship God with Latria, and his Image at the same time,
with an inferior kind of the same worship: Be it, I say, that their Learned
may make such Mathematical abstractions, and have a diversity of the manner,
in the identitie of the action of adoration: They, forsooth, can do it: but
can they make the common people so Metaphysicall?

And for the People! all their kissing, creeping, crouching, prostrations,
inuocations, processions, Costerus Enchi. c. 13.
pilgrimages, etc. Are all these, no part of Gods worship? Let them clear
this, and I will confess, that they have no Idols, and are no Idolaters.

Thus far have we followed them, and have found, that amongst them there are
Idola, Idols; and Latria, worship: yet, say they, there is not Idololatria, no
Idolatry. Because they give not this worship, to those Idols, tanquam Dijs, as
if Sayrus, Clau. Conscientie. lib 4. c. 4. Sect. 5.
they were very Gods. The Idolatry, which we object, they excuse, by
distinguishing of the Object: in the adoration of Images, we do not (say
they) adore them, but Him; not That image of God, but God in that Image. And so
they say of their Saints also, and their Images. Lignum non adoramus, sed in
Duraeus in Whitak. page 424.
ligno adoramus eum qui in ligno pro nobis pependit, says Duraeus: that is, we
do not worship the Crucifixe, but the Crucified: not the Cross, but in the
Cross, he who was hanged on the Cross for us, is adored by us. To which
purpose is that distich.

Effigiem Christi cum cernis, pronus adora:
Non tamen effigiem, sed quod designat, honora.
When thou do see the Cross, full low Adore:

Not it, but Him, the Cross for thee once bore.

The phrase of my Text will fit them for an answer: I am a jealous God. Such
is the way of the adulterous woman: She eats, and wipeth her mouth, and
says, I have done no wickedness, Proverbs 30. 20.

If incestuous Clodia had distinguished, that she received Clodius into her
bed, but tanquam fratrem, not tanquam maritum (only as her Brother, not so
entirely as her Husband) her husband Metellus it would hardly have excused her
of Adultery. No more will God, those who shall plead Tanquam Deum: that indeed
they worship Images, but not as if That Image were God Himself.

But I answer three ways: First, All the old Idolaters did not adore their
Images, as Gods: and yet they were Idolaters notwithstanding. Secondly, Though
our Adversaries do worship the Saints, and God in their Images, yet are they
Idolaters. Thirdly, That they do worship the very Image, and some of them so,
as if it were God Himself.

First, admit that some of the Heathen were so gross, as to think their
Images to have been very Gods: yet all were not so. The Thebaides did
Rainolds de Idololatria lib. 2. 6. 3. Sect. 48.
worship their God (though pictured like a man) whom they called Cneph,
esteemed immortal, and proclaimed the Creator of the round World, and of all
that therein is. Iulians answer is obuious, Zanchius in pracept. 2.
Non lapidem Iouem, sed Iouem in lapide; That he did worship God in that
Statue, not that Statue as God. And it was the crime of the Heathen Idolaters,
that they did worship God, (...) in the Image of a man, Romans 1. 23. But the
Idolatrous Jews exclude all evasion, Exodus 20. 23. (...) and (...). Thou
shall not Lo Lechem Lo ^^ti.
make any Image To thee, nor With me, that is, neither to be worshipped as
God, nor yet with God. Moreover, in Exodus 32. ponder three things: first, the
Antithesis, verse the first, the Calfe is opposed to Moses, which should go
before them in his stead, and as he did; as a Visible Vicegerent of God.
Secondly, weigh the Hypothesis in the fourth verse, These are thy Gods, O
Israel, Qui eduxerunt te de terra Aeygpti: these are thy Gods O Israel, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Now our fiction cannot fasten such a
stupidnesse on that people, that they should suppose that Calfe, which they
made that Day, to have brought them out of the Land of Egypt four months
before. Thirdly, consider the Enthesis, or Ecthesis in the fifth verse, Cras
erit solenitas (...), to morrow shall be a feast to Iehoua, the Proper name of
the Hebrew God. Finally it is confessed Catech. Tvi. in prac. primum.
by their own Catechism, that the Israelites did adore God in the Calfe.

Secondly, suppose that our Adversaries do not adore their Images, but their
Saints in their Images; Yet cannot they thereby acquit themselves from
Idolatry, indeed from a double Idolatry: Internal, because in worshipping
Images, they worship Men, Act. 10. 26. or Angels, Revel. 19. 10. and
External, because in worshipping the Saints, they do that worship to Images,
which is forbidden by God, they Bow to them, Leuit. 26. 1. And if they worship
God in the Image, there also is a twofold transgression: First, they make his
Image, against his express inhibition, Deuteronomy. 4, 15. Next, Adorare Deum in
signo non proprio, est Idololatria, says Altisiodoras; Altis. l. 1. c. 15.
The Adoration of God in an Image (or sign) which God has not appointed, is
Idolatry.

Thirdly, we charge them, that some of them do worship Images, as if they
were very Gods. Some indeed do extenuate their palpable Idolatry, and
(especially in discourse and disputation) they will tell you, that they
worship, only before them. But our Sayrus informs their consciences Clauis
Consc. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 11.
otherwise, that the very Images are to be adored.

Bellarmine speaks yet broader: that they do De Imag. lib. 2. c. 21.
not worship tantum, coram, per, and in: only Before, By, or In the Image: but
that they give their worship to the very Image, as men do their alms to the
Poor: and that, Ipsae Imagines terminant venerationem, that their worship does
rest in the Image. Yet lacobus Naclantus (as he is quoted, by Homily of
Idolatry, part. 3. page 71.
our excellent Homily against Idolatry) out-draweth him in his own Bow, and
is more bold, and broad than Bellarmine himself, in the behalf of
Image-adoration. Non solum fatendum est fideles in Ecclesia adorare, coram
Imagine (vt nonnulli ad cautelam forte loquuntur) sed and adorare Imaginem sine
quo volueris scrupulo. Some (says he) say that we worship, only before the
Image (which they speak cautelously) but we adore the Image it self, without
any manner of scruple.

Proceed we from their Positions, to their Practice: and we shall perceive
that some of them worship the very Image. Our English woman is one, Rainoldus
de Idol. lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 70.
who prayed to the Image of our Lady, that it would intercede for her, to the
person of our Lady: as it is related by that reverend Divine, Doctor Rainolds.
Their own Italian women are many: who worshipped the Image of the Lady
Prunetana of Florence, tanquam pluuiae, serenitatisque Donatricem, as the very
Author of Rain and Faire-weather. The instance is authentical: a Pope is my
Author, Pius secundus. Moreover, Coment. Pi^. 2. lib. 2.
they utter Prayers to their Pictures, which cannot concern the (...), or
thing Resembled: Thus they Pray to the Cross.

Ara Crucis, Salve lignum Breuiar. Romans part^ Hye^al. fine.
Lampas lucis, Vitae, dignum Vera salus Hominum: Far mundi pretium: Nobis
pronum, Confer isti Fac Patronum, Plebi Christi, Quem tulisti Dominum. Crucis
Beneficium. O Altar bright, Hail holy Wood The Lamp of light, Of life: the
Rood Thou hope of our salvation: Of pearelesse estimation: Cause him to hear,
Of thy good grace, whom thou did bear, Bless this whole place, To free us
from damnation. And goodly congregation.

That the Cross should intercede to Christ: this Prayer cannot be to Christ,
but to the Cross it self. These words also are spoken directly to the Painted
cloth, and to the Image: and are not agreeable to Jesus Christ.

Salve sancta facies nostri Redemptoris: Moulins Buck^^ sect. 120. page 321.

In qua nitit species, diuini splendoris:
Impressa panniculo niuei candoris:
Salve vultus Domini, Imago beata:
Deduc ad proprium, O foelix figura:
Ad videndum faciem, quae est Christi pura.
Hail holy face, of Christ Redeemer mine,
In which the sparks of heaven it self do shine,
Here pictured in pure linen white and fine.
Hail blessed Image of that blessed face,
Of Christ himself: O bring me to that place,
Where His face I may see, by Thy sweet grace.
Neither may we pass their Pater Noster, which they are permitted to pray unto
an Image, even by Catech. Trid. Tract. de Orat. Tit. Quis Orandus.
their Trent Catechism.

To come to a conclusion of this point: Bellarmine himself does grant, that
Christians have worshipped the very Images, and that with Divine Bell. de Imag.
l. 2. c. 11.
Honor: and he does imply, that Christians may worship the very Images. The
two maine reasons he renders wherefore the Heathen did adore the very Images,
are these. Quia mouebantur, and loquebantur: De Imag. l. 2. c. 13.
because they seemed to move and speak: and quia praedita erant forma humana;
and because they had the members of men: things not unusual amongst our
Adversaries.

I add, that Christians do worship the very Images, and that with divine
Honor. We cense them, says Bishop Bonner. Suaues odores, nos etiam Bonner in
Praec. 2.
in ipsa Ecclesia, offerimus Imaginibus: We offer sweet odours (even Incense)
unto Images in our Church, says their Bellarmine. And when God Bell. de
Eccles. Triumph. l. 1. c. 13. p. 1957.
himself would discipher most detestable Idolaters, he describes them thus:
Every man, had a Censer in his hand. Ezech. 8. 11. And in the Pontifical it is
said, Thus a Pontifice in thuribulum imponi: Pontif. Part. 2. de benedict. noua
Crucis.
that the Pope does stand with a Censer in his hand, and mox Crucem incensari,
and that Incense in that Censer is employed about the Cross.

Moreover, Nabuchodonosor, in signum honoris iussit, ei offerri munera odorum,
and suffituum, id quod nos etiam secundum fidem nostram Imaginibus facere
consueuimus. Nabuchodonosor (says Vasquez) by way of honor, commanded that
Odours and Perfumes Vasquez. de Adorat. Disp. 6. cap. 3.
should be offered unto Daniel: which we also, according to our Faith, use to
perform unto Images. And (which is yet more considerable) the same Vasquez in
the same book concludes, that Hezechiah did break the brazen Serpent, quia
illi adolebant Incensum, because they burned Incense unto it: and yet he
confesses that they do the same to their Images in the Church of Rome.

I cannot tell how to express it, nor they how to excuse it. Think withal
that they swear by them, go a Pilgrimage to them, a Procession with them, and
place them in the principal places of their Churches, to bow and creep unto
them. I demand, With divine Honor external, could more be done, if the
natural Image of God, Christ Jesus himself, did descend visibly to be
adored? I must answer my self: but in the phrase of holy Augustine (quoted by
our holy Bishop Jewel) Nemo mihi Iuell. Artic. 14. sect. 12.
dicat, Non est Deus; nam pro qua re habeant, Ara testatur: Let them never say,
We do not worship Images as God; Let their Incense alone testify their
Adoration. Or rather I will conclude Bell. de Imagine. lib. 2. c. 24. page 2081.
in Bellarmines own words: Etiamsi quis dicat, id se facere propter Deum, vel
Christum, non propter Imagines: hoc ipso, quod eas colit diuinis honoribus,
conuincitur: eas colere propter ipsas, non propter Deum: quicquid ipsi verbis
dicant. Let the Image-worshippers protest what they please, that they worship
God in the Image, and not the Images themselves: yet so long as we see their
Practice, we know they worship the very Images indeed, although they speak
never so much to the contrary.

Audito nomine Ecclesiae, Hostis expalluit: They Camp. Rat. 3.
triumph in Tradition: and press us with the perpetual Practice of the
Church, which does undeniably prove (say they) that the worshipping of Images
is lawful. This Arch-argument is urged by that Arch-apostate. Consider his
confident assertion, Consilio sui reditus, sect. 23. page 24. Ecclesiam porro
Christianam, etiam Antiquissimam, Totam, ac Vniuersalem, summo consensu, absque
vlla oppositione, aut contradictione, statuas ac imagines veneratam esse, est
certissimum, ac probatissimum: It is, says he, most sure, and most certain,
that the whole ancient Church, with one consent, and without any opposition,
did practice the worshipping of Images. I cannot sufficiently admire the
impudence of this Assertion: which aduanceth it selse with a double insolent
injury: the first, against God; and the second, against the Church. Suppose
his Brauado to be true: that the whole ancient Church with one consent did
admit Image-adoration. But suppose withal (with your eyes see) that Gods Law
does interdict it: Is the Tradition of the Church a warrant sufficient, to
justify the breach of Gods own inhibition? the case is here clear: they are
mandata mea, not aliena: the Commandments of God, and not of the Church, which
must judge or justify us at the Day of judgment. Next, as this Assertion
wrongeth God, by equalling the Commandment of the Church to his Commandment:
so does it wrong the Church also, by a manifest belying of it: that the whole
Church did concur in one consent to worship Images. Leo Isaurus, Constable.
Copronymus, Leo Armenius, Michael Balbus, and Theophilus: all these Emperors
were Iconomachi, that is, enemies to Images, says Bellarmine. Bell. de Imag.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
Again, Serenus Bishop of Marcellis, Claudius of Turin, Hincmarus of Rhemes,
and Agobardus of Lions: all these opposed Images, as it is acknowledged on all
sides. Finally, the Constantian Council in the East, and that of Franckford in
the West, Chemnit. Exam. part. 4.
did definitiuely condemn Images: and the Libri Carolini were wrote at the
same time, on the same Theme. Now, when as five Emperors, four Bishops, and
two Councels, plainly opposed themselves: Books were written, Images broken,
and millions slaughtered in this cause of Images: and that dreadful
prognosticon, the Sun seventeen days darkened, Homil. of Idol. part. 2. p.
36.
when the Emperor was murdered, and Images established by Irene: Where now is
that face, and whence was that forehead hewne, which blusheth not to say that
it is most certain, that the whole Church did worship Images, with one
consent, and without any opposition or contradiction?

Moreover, how iniustly he does father this idolatry on the old Church, let
these old Fathers testify, even out of my small reading. (...), Clem. Alexand.
P^otreptic. page 15.
(...), Are they not monstrous men (indeed in a monstrous error) who prostrate
themselves before a stony Statue, says Clem. Alexandrinus. And the same Author
says in the same place, that (...), Men become the worshippers of Statues,
(...), because custom bereaueth them of their senses. (...), Iu. Martyr Resp.
ad Orth. Resp. 43.
says Justin Martyr, We should worship no things, but such as have life: we
can easily assume: But Images have no life: and you can conclude with like
facility: therefore, we should not worship Images. Chrysostom condemns the
idolatry of the Chrysostom. in psalm. 134. 15.
Heathen, because they worshipped that which (was (...)), A thing without life,
and sense: the true properties of Images worshipped by Christians at this day.
Theodoret says on this Commandment, We are forbidden, a double act, (...),
Theodoret. in Exodus quast. 38.
and (...), both to Worship and to Bow: in regard of a double object, (...) and
(...), not only Idols, but all Similitudes, says he, are interdicted to be
adored. All those Scriptures which Cyprian alleges against the Images of
Pagans, may Cypr. ad Quirinum, lib. 3. sect. 59. Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 2.
as properly be urged against the Images of Christians. Lactantius does dispute
the case (I may say with our Adversaries) Quae dementia est aut ea Fingere quae
Timeant, aut ea Timere quae Finxerunt? What a folly-frensie is it either to
make that which you do fear or worship, or to worship that which you have
made? Non ipsa inquiunt timemus, sed eos ad quorum imaginem sunt ficta: We are
not so gross (say they) as to fear or worship the Image: but in the Image,
the thing which is represented by the Image. Nempe eos in coelo arbitramini:
cur ergo oculos ad coelum non tollitis? Cur ligna and lapides spectatis? You
suppose then, that those whom you worship are in Heaven: Why then do you not
lift up your eyes to Heaven? Why look thou on that picture, on that stock
or stone? Thus Lactantius argues this very Controversy: Let our Adversaries
study how to answer him. For my part, I cannot be their Advocate, against so
direct an Accuser.

Arnobius prosecuteth the same Argument, which may be applied with a small
inuersion: Discutite Arnob. Adu. Gent. lib. 6. page 677.
aliquando caliginem: At length, says he, Put away the mist from your eyes.
Simulacra ista, quae vos in templis omnibus prostrati adoratis, lapides sunt,
and ligna: The Images which you worship in all your Churches (look on them)
alas, they are but stocks and stones. Deos inquitis per simulacra veneramur:
Lib. 6. page 671.
It may be you excuse your selves, that it is but veneration, and not to the
Image, but through the Image to the Saints. Quid si coli se nesciunt dij? What
if those Saints be not omniscious? What if they do not see your adoration?
Are not you then blind idolaters? Saint Augustines saying is not impertinent,
though it may be not so pat to the purpose, as the premises. Et Idola quidem
omni sensu August. Ep. 49. quest. 3. page 194
carere, quis dubitet? verum cum his locantur sedibus, honorabili sublimitate,
vt a precantibus, and immolantibus attenduntur: ipsa similitudine animatorum
membrorum, and sensuum, quamuis insensata, and inanima, afficiunt infirmos
animos, vt viuere, ac spirare videantur: Who is so stupid, as not to know that
an Image has neither life, nor sense? yet is it not possible, that their
place, in the principal part of the Church, the people practice to bow before,
and to make Prayers and Oblations to them: and their shape and very form of
men. Is it not possible, that these things may so affect the weak minds of
the silly Vulgar, that they may think, that they have even life, and sense
also?

These Fathers have argued, they shall also conclude for us. Arnobius
concludes the very point: Arnob. lib. 6. page 673.
Ridetis priscis temporibus Persas; Fluuios coluisse, Arabas Lapidem, acinacem
Scythas, Lignum Carios pro Diana, etc. and abstinetis a risu, cum pro Dijs
immortalibus, sigilliolis hominum, and formis supplicatis humanis? So he of
the old Romans: and this I bring home to the doors of the present Romans: You
laugh to hear that the Heathen idolaters did adore, some the Rivers, some a
Sword, others a piece of wood for Diana: and Stocks and Stones, for their other
Deities.

And can you abstain from laughing, to think that your selves do worship the
Saints in Pictures, and a piece of wood for the Person of the Savior of the
whole World? Lactantius his conclusion is very Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 18.
confident, Non est dubium quin nulla religio sit, vbicunque simulacrum est: It
is certain, there is no Religion, wheresoever there are any Images worshipped:
Images I say; for what else is simulacrum? Let our Adversaries distinguish of
this Censure. And yet Saint Augustine does anticipate their curious August.
Epist. 49. Deo gratias.
Distinctions. Neque illinc excusant impij sua sacrilega sacra, and simulacra,
quod eleganter interpretantur, quid quaeque significant: Neither can any
Image-Patron excuse their Image-Adoration, by varnishing it over with the
pretty colors of their nice Distinctions.

Here is enough for this point: but that one of their own says more, and
drives the Nail to the very head. Peresius delivers words, which are as
Peresius de Tra. part. 3. de imag.
it were Antipodes to those of Spalato. Neque Scripturam, neque Traditionem
Ecclesiae, neque communem sensum sanctorum, neque Concilij generalis
determinationem aliquam; neque rationem, qua hoc efficaciter suaderi potest,
adducunt, says Peresius. And Cassander Cassand. Consultatio Tit. de Imag.
concurreth in the same Conclusion, that is: No man (say these men, our
Adversaries) can produce either Scripture, or Tradition, or consent of Fathers,
or definition of any general Council, or any sound Reason, whereby they can
plainly prove the lawfulness of the worshipping of Images.

Thus their Cloud of Traditions is vanished like the morning deaw before the
Sun: they dim not our eyes from seeing this Truth as clear as the Sun at
noone day. Images are not to be worshipped.

At the end, when a battle is defeated, a desperate Soldier receiving a
mortal wound, when he can do no more, he does what he can: in fury he
draws the weapon out of the wound, and breaks it in pieces. So this plain
precept, having smote this prime point of Controversies through the loins: the
Idol-champions act their last furious part, in breaking this second
Commandment into pieces, two ways; by Inclusion, and Exclusion. First, some
include this in the first, and say that it is but a part of that Commandment,
Thou shall have no other Gods but me, with an etc. in stead of this long
Commandment, both in their Catechismes, and in their Controversies also. So
Costerus alleging Coster. Ench. cap. 13.
our principal Argument, omitteth the principal part of our Argument, Non
facies tibi sculptile, neque vllam similitudinem; Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven Image, nor any likeness of any thing, leaving out that thing
which is most material, Non adorabis ea; Thou shall not bow down to them. But
this shuffling makes their Cause the more suspicious: he that puts out the
Candle, does kindle a conceit, that there may be some theeuerie, and it is a
pretty trick of petie Pilferers, when they have stolen one bag of Ten, to
divide one of the Nine into Two, to make up the number. But God be blessed, his
providence has prevented this sacrilege. For, Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors house: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife: but,
Deuteronomy. 5. 21. it is inuerted, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife: Thou
shall not covet thy neighbors house. The Tenth can be but one Commandment:
if the Second be none, then are there but nine Commandments, and this is short
measure for a Decalogue.

The next is more gross: a peremptory excluding of this Commandment,
auouching it to be Positive, and proper only to the Jews: not moral and
obligatorie to the whole world. This is the refined device of Vasques: and this
seems to be Vasques de Adorat.
the scope of subtle Suarez, though he carry it more covertly. Said, I say, it
is by some of our Adversaries, to be ceremonial, and therefore not to
concern us Christians.

The Heathens had an Hieroglyphick, expressed Rainold. de Idol. lib. 2. c. 3.
sect. 49
by five figures, a Child, an old Man, an Hawke, a Fish, and an Hippopotamus,
or Horse of Nilus, wherein the imprese was, (...), that is, O ye who are
coming into the world, and ye who are going out of the world, God does hate
impudence. By the Child they understood Life, or Men coming into the world: by
the old Man, Death, or such as are going out of the world: by the Hawke (which
is of a most quick sight) the omniscient God: by the Fish (which is an
abomination to the Egyptians) Hatred: and by the Hippopotamus (which is said
unnaturally to kill the Sire, and to force the Damme) Impudence. I may make bold
to make use of this phrase: I say therefore, O ye Romists, from the old
Cardinal to the young Nouice: Know that the Eagle-eye of Gods vengeance will
pursue that hated Wretch to perdition; who dare so to smite his Father, God:
and to offer such violence to his Mother, the Church: as to vilify, and
nullify that Precept, which He has given, and She should keep.

Consider the commination, God will visit Image-adorers: the commendation, God
calls it love, if men will not worship them: the long plague, I will visit
the third and fourth generations of them that do worship: and the longer
promise, I will show mercy unto thousands, of them that do not break, but
keep amongst the rest, especially this Commandment. The Titles; of himself,
I am a jealous God: of the Sin, Iniquity, and the hatred of God, to bow to
an Image. Now is all this but Positive? but Ceremonial? but for a People? but
for a Season?

But where as God has written in this Commandment, as it were in great
letters, that he which runs may read them, Mandatum meum, My Commandment:
for Man to blot this out, and in the stead thereof to write Mandatum nullum, No
Commandment: This is somewhat harsh; to say no more. Whereas God says here; I
will show mercy unto thousands of them that keep, Mandata mea, my
Commandments; to reply, Lord we will have thy mercies, and we do keep,
Mandata tua, thy Commandments; only this long Commandment is Mandatum
nullum, no Commandment: it is ceremonial, it concerns not us. Can we
conceive this without blushing?

Leave we then the Image-worshippers to their shifts and subtilties. For us,
let us use almost the words of their Bellarmine in this case, though in Bellar.
de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 22. page 2077.
another branch thereof* Dicent fortasse praeceptum loquitur de Latria per se,
and non propter aliud: Peradventure they will distinguish of this Commandment.
Nil facit ad rem: hic enim non de sensu, sed de verbis agimus: Their
Distinctions are nothing to the purpose; for we are here to consider the
words of the Commandment. Satis nobis est in praecepto simpliciter negari,
imaginibus deberi latriam: It is sufficient for our sides if the Commandment
do plainly prohibit the worshipping of Images. Nos enim modum loquendi
praeceptorum sequi debemus: We are bound (I hope I may speak that of the
Commandments, which Bellarmine spoke of the Councels.) We are bound, I say, to
follow the letter of the Law.

And the letter of the Law, I am sure, runs roundly for our cause: Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any likeness, of any thing,
that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under earth.
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them.

Thus long have I been (...), and have showed what they can say for Images.
Now I must be (...), and show what we can say against Images. A few blows
will be enough fastened on a feeble Adversary: I will dispatch this discourse
very speedily. As Debora sang of the Heavens, Judges 5. 20. that the Stars
therein in their courses fought against Sisera: so may I say of this Precept,
that the Points herein, in their courses fight against Images. In the Purpose,
the first Point is the prohibition: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, that is, without authority from God. Let all our Image-worshippers,
show any one authority out of the Scriptures, for the making and worshipping
of Images, and we contend no farther.

And as it follows in the plain syllables of the Exposition: if their
Crucifixes, Roodes, and other Images, be not some likeness, of some thing,
either in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the
Earth; then will we cast down our weapons, and confess them Conquerors.

For their Practice: if it does not (by their Prostrations, Precations,
Pilgrimages, Processions, Censings, etc.) exhibit that superior worship in
the highest degree, even an external Latria, befitting even Christ himself,
if corporally present; then may they excuse.

But if they do not perform that inferior practice, and do not bow to a
graven Image, then will we bow to them, and beg forgiveness for our
calumny: but if they do, -- then deem I it their duty to bow to God, and
crave pardon for their idolatry.

The Arguments, drawn from Gods justness and goodness, are rather from
Images then against Images: and therefore they seem not very pertinent to this
point. Yet it will appear, that these also, are not like Meroz, Judges 5. 21.
but that they also come forth to the help of the Lord, to the help of the
Lord against the mighty.

The Punisher, God: is expressed by a dreadful Title; He is a jealous God!
Now, when a jealous man will excuse his wife, who has communicated her Bed and
Body to another, mitigating that Action by the manner thereof, and the quality
of the Person: then will our jealous God approve the worshipping of Images,
qualified by quaint Distinctions.

The Punishment, is powered on Persons, who are here said to hate God; and such
are the worshippers of Images; effectiue, at the least. By it they have
occasioned the Heathen to hate Christ, and Christianity. Images have been an
infinite scandal to the Turks, to the Jews, and to the Gentiles, as it is
avouched by learned Chemnitius. Exam. part. 4. page 6.


Gods Goodness, both in regard of the Quality, Mercy: and of the Quantity
thereof, to Thousands: is enlarged to such as are so qualified as the Text
mentioned, who in declining of Images, do keep Mandata mea, eschewing this
sin forbidden in the Scriptures.

The Scripture (is our David against the Philistims) it brings forth an army
of Arguments against Images. Of this Army of allegations, I will draw out
(like Gedeon, Judges 7.) only some few selected Voluntaries; although a
multitude might be pressed forth to this purpose. These also (as David did his
mighty men, 2. Sam. 23.) I will reduce to three Companies. I will oppose
Images, from the Law, from the Prophets, and from the New Testament.

The Law, you see, the very Letter thereof does smite down Images in this
Commandment: besides this, we have a Caveat, not to make the Image of God,
Dent. 4. 15. A command not to bow to an Image, Leuit. 26. 1. And because they
did make an Image, and bow to it, Thousands dyed for it, Exodus 32. 28.

The Prophets: Esaias says, They that make an Image, are all of them vanity,
44. 9. A molten Image is a Teacher of lies, says Habbakkuk 3. 18. but of all
that is most fearful, Psalm. 97. 7. Confounded be all they that worship carved
Images. The curse of God strikes somewhat nearer then a Trent Anathema: and
the Trent abettors, had need to take notice of it.

The New Testament: To change the glory of God into the Image of a man, was
the sin of the Pagans, says Saint Paul, Romans 1. 23. And it shall be the
property of Antichrist, that his servants shall worship Idols, or Images,
says Saint John, Revel. 9. 20. and therefore that we should be neither
seduced to Antichrist, nor reduced to Paganism: the Apostle shuts up his
Epistle with that emphaticall Cave, 1. Ioh. 5. vlt. Babes take heed of Idols;
not only of Idolatry, but of Idols, and the very occasion thereof.

Now, I may use the phrase of that Heathen Judge: Si hic non sit testimoniorum
satis, nescio quid sit satis: If these be not testimonies enough, I know not
what is enough. But this I know, that they all give plain witness to the
plain words of my Text. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image.
Therefore; Image-adoration is most abominable.

Let me crave your leave, that I may take my leave in a word of Exhortation:
God knows when we shall meet here again together; let not therefore my long
Vale tire you, though it be indeed somewhat ouer-tedious.

First therefore, I address my speech two ways, to two sorts of Romish
Catholics. Some are rigidi, resolute in their determinations: others are
molliores, more moderate in their opinions.

For the first, I should presume, if I should but hope, to prevail with them
by persuasion. I remember that peremptory protestation of the Abbot
Theodosius, in the seventh Synod. Potius omnia lupanaria esse intranda, quam
intermittendam Chemnit. Exam. part. 4. page 63.
adorationem illius Imaginis: That he had rather men should enter all the
Stews, then omit the adoration of that Image.

And I cannot forget that three Popes, Gregorius the third, Adrian the first,
and Leo the third (Bellarmine is my Author) that they Bell. de Imag. lib. 2.
cap. 15.
fell from the Emperors, excommunicated their Persons, inhibited their
Tribute, and thrust them out of their Dominions: all this, for this one Point,
because they opposed the worshipping of Images. I know also that Idolatry is
a lie, (...), Of all errors: and that there are such, who believe a lie, 2.
Thessal. 2. 11. and therefore their Faith is fastened on this Tradition, as the
Truth is on Gods Word, Matthew. 5. 18. Heaven and Earth shall pass, before they
will alter one jot, or tittle of their Religion.

Therefore I say, I presume not to persuade them to an alteration of this point
of their Religion: yet I despair not, to entreat them to a mitigation of one
affection in their resolution; that they would not hate us, because indeed we
do hate their Images. I will speak Bellarmines own words. Eos male agere,
quod Bell. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 8. page 2031.
pro Imaginibus suis, Dei occiderent Imagines. Surely those Catholics do not
well in hating us, who are Gods Images, because we hate Idols, which are their
Images.

Let them not marvel that I insist so much on this point, that they hate us,
and that for this point, for Images. Although their powder plot would have
buried our Records, yet our Records cannot bury their powder plot. That
tells us, that they hate us; and that they hate us as for Popery in
general; so for Images in particular.

Were they not Image-worshippers, which were those powder Pioners? And was it
not a miraculous Image, which some afterward Garnets straw.
produced to justify, nay to sanctify either the Action, or some Actor in
that conspiracy? But blessed be God! that Action was indeed an Image, Idolum,
Scimus idolum in mundo nihil esse, it did nothing in the world to hurt us. And
those Actors were mere Idola, like the Heathen Images, Psalm. 135. 15. They had
eyes, but they saw not; that Flame which they looked for. They had ears, but
they heard not; that Crack which they prayed for. They had The seven Sparks.
mouths, but they breathed not; out that threatened havoc to our Church and
Commonwealth, which they conspired for. O then, although you esteem us not
Christians, yet abate, abate, as ye are men, abate this inhumane cruelty. And
if that plot had been perfected, you had doubtless plagued us, to the third
and fourth Generation: but withal I fear, I fear, you had prevented God from
showing mercy (toward your selves) even to Thousands. Therefore for our Bodies
sake, and for your own Souls sake: Blessed be our God, for that blessed
prevention.

But to those who are disposed more mildly, I dare vnbosome my Exhortation more
boldly. Some Romish Catholics, I bear them Romans 10. 2. Act. 17. 30. 2. These.
2. ^2.
record, that they have zeal, but not according to knowledge: and I know, God
will show mercy to the ignorant; provided that their ignorance be not
affected, and that they take not pleasure in unrighteousness.

Let me speak therefore unto you, as Saint Paul did to Agrippa: Do you
believe the Act. 26. 27.
Scriptures? I know you do believe them. If you do! Think you: Is not this
Commandment the Scripture? Are they not the very syllables of this
Commandment which I have read to you? yea, let me press you a little
farther. Have I not laid open all your starting holes? that your best Arguments
are but Figleaues, not able to cover the apparent nakedness of your idolatry?
Let me therefore convent your conscience: and in the sight of your conscience,
and of God himself, let me conjure you to read over this long Commandment,
again and again, at your best leisure. And then consider advisedly, whether
GOD does not seem to speak to you, as he did to Jonah: Do thou well to
be angry for the Jonah 4. 3.
gourd? so here, do you well to be angry for the forbidding of Image Worship?
But if you should answer GOD for your error, as Jonah verse. 9.
did for his anger; We do well to worship Images, even unto death, that you
will die in that Devotion: Then do I fear that the seventh verse of the
nintie seven Psalm will be the Epitaph on your Graue-stone: Confounded are all
they which worship carved Images.

But beloved, I hope for, and pray for better things, for many of you: even
such things, as may accompany salvation. To which end, consider this plain
Commandment! Not any likeness, of any thing, in any place. Consider also the
Argument. The Punisher, a jealous God, whom ye cannot blind with your
blanched excuses. The Punishment, he will visit the sins of the Fathers on
the Children, to the third and fourth generation, that is, if you persist, Gods
visitations and plagues may be powered on your own Persons, yea and on your
childrens children, and your own eyes shall behold them.

But if you convert (Christ move your hearts to such a happy conversion) then
mercies shall be multiplied upon you in Thousands: you shall be made the
instruments to save thousands of souls, of such as shall issue from your own
bodies.

I beseech you therefore, for Gods Judgments, and for Gods Mercies, for Gods
sake, for your own sake, for your childrens sake, yea for your childrens
childrens sake, for the sake of a thousand Souls yet unborn: I beseech you
Brethren, I beseech you, consider what I say; and God almighty give you
understanding in all things.

But be it so, that in Gods secret Wisdom, or in his sacred Justice, our
Adversaries do esteem these poor words of mine, to be indeed but Words,
but Wind, but Water spilt upon the ground, not worth the taking up: yet you,
who are Friends, Brethren, and Fellow Members, be ye Gedeons fleece, attract
this deaw of Heaven, more then the Romish Catholics (that is in their sense)
more then all the world besides. A motive: Consider the Controversy betwixt
us. It is not (as Bellarmines phrase is) de stillicidijs, concerning that
Eauesdropping, House ransacking, Soule-sifting, Bosome-exenterating, Auricular
Confession; though that be a strange intruding mystical policy. It is not de
vno apice, of one Point, that full Point, where the Papists would pitch their
period, the Papacy, the Primacie; though that be an insolent insulting proud
Tyranny. Neither is it only an heresy; although the worshipping even of
Christ's Image, was esteemed an heresy, by Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Augustine,
Bellar. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 21. page 2081.
and Damascen, as Bellarmine himself does testify. But it is Idolatry:
Idolatry, at the very name whereof, Heaven does lament, Hell triumph, and the
Earth cannot but quake and tremble.

Idolatry, of which Perinottus protested, that the Emperor could suffer any
reproach of errors, Melchior. Adam. in vita Me^a.
abuses: but of Idolatry, he was impatient, as of a thing insufferable.

Idolatry, for which Claudius and Nicostratus, Bell. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 6.
expert Statuaries, were put to death, because they would not make such
Statues; choosing rather to die, then to give the occasion of Idolatry.

Idolatry, of which Spalato speaks: that Idolatry is worse then most
Heresy: Idolaters Consilio sui Reditus, sect. 2.
to be separated from by all men. Idolatry, is the crime from which God does
command you, and I persuade you.

Now, that worshipping of Images is Idolatry, I need not tell you; ex ore
infantium, when you catechize your children, your children will catechize you,
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. But now you know it,
your care must be to shun it. For -- the Lord is a jealous God, and will
divorce that Soul, which shall sin by Idolatry, by spiritual Adultery,
and He will visit -- send out a plague. It is Carions opinion, that Carrion.
Chron. lib. 2.
the Turks have ouer-run so much of Christendom, for this one sin of
Idolatry. How soever our Security may suppose the Turks long arms too short
to reach us so far off: Yet (if we become Idolaters) may He, or some such
as He, by Gods permission, visit us -- But the Lord bless us from such a
visitation.

And this Visitation may be derived to the third and fourth generation: if you
worship Images, you may see Gods plagues on the children in this world: and in
the world to come you may hear your childrens children, cry out in that
phrase of Saint Cyprian; Heu parents sensimus parricidas: alas, our Parents
have damned us, by their exemplarie Idolatry.

But I pass these punishments, persuading my self that I shall persuade you
from Promises. You being Sons or Servants, not Slaves; to be led with
gentleness, and not to be forced with whipping: Beware then of Images,
because God will bequeath mercy unto Thousands, and Thousands of mercies unto
you, if you do beware.

The Means also God sets before you; Amor mei, and Mandata mea. If you have
the love of God ^^ your Hearts, and the Law of God in your (...);
Image-Idolatrie will find you impregnable. Custom, in the later Ages, may
perhaps stagger the Ignorant: but Mandata mea, Gods Law does obscure Man's Law,
as the Sun does the smallest Candle! Read the Scriptures, and it is
impossible to be enticed to Idolatry. For the other branch: The love of
Traffic may prevail with Merchants; the love of Novelty with Travelers;
the love of Profit with Tradesmen; the love of Pleasure with Gallants; and the
love of Preferment with the Ambitious. Moreover, men may be allured to
Idolatry by the love of Friends, by the love of Parents, by the love of
Children, by the love of a Wife, or by the love of a Husband. O but let these
petie Streams fall into this main Ocean. Let this Love of God, swallow up all
these Loves of Men. And the force of this Love constrayneth me, at the very
thought of Images, to Bow my knees to You, that You would never bow your knees
to Them. And God himself bow all your Hearts to Him, that you may Never bow to
any Images. Amen, Amen.

(...).
FINIS.

