A SERMON PREACHED at Hartford Assizes, March 14. 1616.

BY John Squire, Preacher of Gods word in SHOREDITCH.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop
at the South-entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THOMAS NEWCE, Esquire, High-Sheriffe of the County
of HARTFORD; Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
SIR:
TO excuse my self for writing, is the excuse of all Writers: You know it, I
omit it. This Sermon was lately preached before you, now printed for you: your
entreaty had the one, your command has the other. Such as it is: it was in the
Ears of some, shall be in the Eyes of others, and God grant it may be in the
Hearts of all.

Yours in the Lord John Squire.

A SERMON PREACHED AT HARTFORD Assizes, March. 14. 1616.
I Being unknown in this place, and unexpected of this people, ye may speak
that phrase to me, which the King did to his Guest, Matthew. 22. 12. Friend how
come thou hither? I answer: I come not from the South, as the Queen of
Saba did, 1 Reg. 10. to behold the majesty of your Country, and admire the
magnificence of your company: Nor come I from the East, as the wise men did,
Mat. 2. 11. to present you with gold, and to bring you golden presents: Neither
come I from the West, as the violent wind did, Exodus 10. 19. to blow away the
contentious grasse-hoppers of this corrupt generation: (It must be Virga
reformantis, not Verbum informantis, the sword of the potent Magistrate, not
the word of the poor Minister, which must bring that noble act to pass.) But
I come from whence promotion comes, Psalm. 75. 6. Neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South; but from the Lord. From the Lord I come to
you, as one of the children of the Prophets did to the Sessions of Israel, 2
Reg. 9. 5. I come to bring you a message; Therefore, harken to me you men of
Israel, that God may hearken unto you. I bring you a message from the Lord:
the Lord make it honorable unto him, and profitable unto you.

My message which I bring to you, is part of Moses his message which he brought
from Sinai to the people of Israel, as it is written in the 20. chapter of
Exodus.

Exodus 20. verse. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness Text.
against thy Neighbor.

Would we be perfect Christians? Then must we perform two works of
Christianity: our duty to God, and our duty toward Man. Our breaches of the
last may be called Legion, for they are many: of many, there are two maine
ones. We wrong our neighbor either by the Violence of the hand, or by the
Virulence of the tongue: The first is inhibited in the precepts praemised, the
other is forbidden in the Text: the Text therefore does teach us, as Saint
James speaks. 3 8. (...), to bridle an unbridled evil, to take heed that
we offend not with our tongue: and we are bound to obey this precept, by
four necessary bonds: Divine, Moral, Natural, Civil. Divinity does teach
that God is (...), that God himself, is the truth it self; and therefore to
speak and do the truth, is to burnish the blemished image, and to ingraue the
character of the divinity in a Christian soul: Our Manners we senceably
apprenend inclining to false-hood, every man is a liar, says the Apostle, Romans
3. 4. Therefore must this inclination be restrained, by embracing the truth.
Nature looks upon an untruth, as upon some unnatural monster: for Oration, is
oris ratio; the Soul is the Mother, and the Tongue should be the Midwife of
Truth: Now for the soul to conceive a truth, and the tongue to bring forth a
lie, this is unreasonably unnatural. And for Policy we cannot but know, that
it is the disroynting of the body of the commonwealth, if that contracts be
not avouched by testimonies, and if every truth be not established by the mouth
of two or three witnesses. Behold then the necessity obliging us to the Truth,
and Vae mihi si non euangelizauero: Woe be to me, if I speak it not: Woe be to
you if you hear it not; and woe be to us all, if we practice it not: A
necessity is laid upon us. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor, says my Text.

I divide my Text as Jacob did his company, Genesis 33. 2. into three parts: The
person offending, Thou: The person offended, thy Neighbor: and the offense it
self, Bearing false-witnesse. I will inuert the order, and put the persons
offending hindermost, as Jacob did Rachell and her children, lest some rough
Esau (before he be appeased) should be angry and smite them, or me for them. I
begin with the Offense, Bearing false witness: Men do bear false witness
two ways: Privately, and Publicly* Privately, by our selves. Publicly,
before the Magistrate.

Private bearing false witness, is a body of sin, which I divide into five
members:

(...), Slandering.
(...), Railing.
(...), Tale-bearing.
(...), Flattery.
(...), Lying.
I may term these five sins, the five fingers of Satan; for whosoever is
tainted with them, undoubtedly the Devil has a great hand over him.

1 Slandering is both active and passive: Active, when men are reprouers of
their neighbors by slanders. Passive, when they are approuers of the
slanderers, by hearing them. Both are forbidden in this Text; for the original
(...), gnanah, signifies both to speak, as it is translated in the Text, and
to hear, Psalm 143. 1. and both are comprised in the 15. Psalm. Verse: 3. that
man shall dwell with the Lord, who slaundereth not with his tongue, nor
receives a false report against his neighbor. Whence Bernard shaped his
sentence, Non essent qui detraherent, si non adessent qui audirent: that is,
where there are no Receivers, there no Thieves will be: and stop thou the ear
of thine own affection, do not hear slanders, and thou shall muzle the mouth
of detraction; few will dare to speak slanders. And reason have we to perform
it: because the Devil is the grand-slanderer, the father of slanderers, the
grandfather of slanderers: he is named (...), an accuser, a slanderer: whence
it is well said, if two men be (in communication) one speaking, and the other
hearing slanders, they are both possessed; the devil is in the ear of the
one, and in the tongue of the other. And indeed it is my hearty unfeigned wish,
that both the Speakers and Hearers of slanders, might be Zimri and Cosbi, that
both might be smote through with one sword of the Magistrate at one season.

2 The second sin is Railing: Railers are open as Slaunderers are secret
adversaries of men's reputation: the one underminers, the other assailers of thy
good name: He a ziba, this a Shemei. Railing, or (as the Scripture phrase is)
Blasphemy, Leuit. 24. 11. is called (...) Killel, of Kalel, perforare, to
stabbe or smite through, answerable to the phrase of the psalmist, who styles
words, swords; implying that Railers stab at the very life of our credit. Happy
were we, had we an Abishai, a Magistrate, who would and could take away the
heads of these dead dogs; that Railers might no more bark against the honest
name of their honest neighbors.

3 Tale-bearing is the next: Tale-bearers tell (though) the truth (yet) untruly
or untimely: and therefore are in truth, false-witnesses. Leuit. 19. 16. Thou
shall not walk about with tales amongst my people: This was a Law in Israel,
would God it were so in England also. S. Paul does point at these men, 2 Timothy
5. 33. they are says he, (...), never busy at home, ever busy, ouer-busie
abroad. Such are like Sampsons Foxes, they carry fire with their tails, to set
the whole world in a combustion. Oh that we English, could deal with these
Foxes, as the Welsh men did with their Wolves! that we could pluck off their
skins, till they were extinct, and not one left in a whole nation.

4 Flattery is the fourth: Slanderers, Railers, and Tale-bearers, Bear
false-witnesse to thee against others: Flatterers, bear false-witnesse to thee
against thy self. Therefore do thou as God does, hate them. Psalm. 12. 3. God
threateneth to cut off flattering lips: These are mercenary wretches.
Flatterers prostrate themselves, thereby to suck out private advantage. As
Iehonadab, 2 Samuel 13. did prostitute his service, to be the shameless
instrument of Ammons shameful lust, that so he might insinuate himself into
the favor of the young Prince.

These are like false Looking-glasses, they make men to appear to themselves
to be younger, fairer, and comelier, then indeed they are: and they have one
true property of false Looking-glasses, Flatterers hurt our Eyes, that we
cannot see our selves. If my sentence might stand, I would censure such unto
the doom of Adonibezecke, Judges 1. 7. Their toes should be cut off, that
they might go to none: their hands should be cut off, that they might lay
hold of none: and they should gather their crummes under men's tables: they
fawn like dogs, let them feed like dogs: Flattery is a work meriting
such a wages.

5 Lying is the last limme of the Devil: This devilish vice has been
abhorred by all good men at all times. Cyprian in his Treatise against
Gamesters, does build his inuection against Dicers, upon De Aleatoribus page
532.
this ground: because gaming did occasion mandram medaciorum, a world of lies.
Lactantius pronounces Epit. c. 6.
all lies impious, because (says he) every lie, aut nocet, aut fallit, does
either hurt us, or deceive us. Augustine does retract, even Ironies, Retract.
l. 1. 6. 1.
Rhetorical figures, only because they had the appearance of lying: it
repented him of the petty Confess. l. 1. c. 19.
excuses which he made to his Parents being a child, and to his School
master being a boy: and in his Epistle to Vincentius he calls Truth, Epis.
48. Vincen.
the Character of a Christian, and says, that a holy man dare not tell a lie.
And doubtless all these holy men cursed this sin out of the mouth of the
holy one of Israel, lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, says Solomon,
Prou. 12. 22. And most justly, for this is the Jeroboam that made Israel to
sin; all private and public breaches of this precept, issue from this
fountain, Lying. Wherefore blessed were that Commonwealth, which would make
this common vice like Ahab, leaving not one liar to piss against the wall: and
his yoke fellow Aequiuocation, like Iezabell, breaking the neck of that sin,
though the face thereof be painted, and an impious vice, cloaked with many
godly pretenses.

These are Private false witnesses, but the Public is the principal
offendour against this precept: Of him more fully in the end of this exercise:
Here only take notice that the false-witnesse, will not go to hell alone,
but has many attendants. There are six accessories unto this Principal:
three before the act, and after the act there are three guilty of Bearing
false witness. Before false witness is given, men may be accessaries
thereunto praecipiendo persuadendo, and consulendo, that is, by commanding,
persuading, and by councelling any to bear false witness. First, by
commanding, either directly, as 2 Samuel 12. 9. Nathan told David that he had
killed Vriah, when as he only commanded Ioab to kill him: otherwise
indirectly, when the superior does authorize inferiors, who are corrupt,
Prou, 26. 8. As a man that puts a stone in a sling, so is he that gives
authority to a fool. If I put a stone into the sling of one, intending to
brain his neighbor, I am guilty of that murder: so the Magistrate authorizing
a corrupt man, he is author of that corruption. Next, to persuade any unto
false-hood, is a communicating of that crime, especially by that real
persuasion, Bribery; so Mat. 28. 12. did the Jews give large Money to the
soldiers to testify falsely against the resurrection of our Savior. And by
Councelling men contract the same guilt, as did the same Jews in the same
place, Mat. 28. 15. who taught the soldiers how to answer the Magistrates
interrogatories. Thus by commanding, directly or indirectly, by persuading, or
by councelling, many men be accessory unto false-witnesse, before the testimony
may be tendered. Afterward they may be accessory, as many ways: Conniuendo,
consentiendo, defendendo, that is, by Conniuence, or winking at it; by
consenting and approving it; by defending and excusing it. Those that wink at
faults are faulty themselves; This was Elies case in another cause, 1 Samuel 3.
13. because his sons ran into a slander, and he staid them not, therefore the
hand of the Lord was heavy upon him. So the Magistrate, who does but suspect
false-witnesse, or any false-hood, let him look forward to prevent it,
otherwise conniuence may make him fall backward; Eli is a dreadful example.
Consent also contracteth the guilt, be it either expressed by plain partaking
with impiety, as Psalm. 50. 18. or be it suppressed, as Proverb. 24. 11. 12.
Deliver them that are drawn to death: if thou say, we know not of it,
shall not he that pondereth the heart understand it? Not only tendering, but
also not hindering of false-witnesse is a breach of this commandment. Finally,
excuse the act, and thou thy self do act the sin which thou excusest, for
woe be unto them which speak good of evil, and evil of good, Isay 5. 20.
Conclude we then that Conniuence, consent or defense, make men accessory to
false-witnes, though performed. By this I have opened many maladies, one word
contains one medicine for all of them: that one word in the Ephesians. 4. 15.
(...), To speak and do the truth. This word, is like the word made flesh,
Mat. 4. 23. it heals every sickness, and every disease among the people. To
Plaintise and Defendant, to Judge and Jury, to Counselor and Advocate, to
Witness and to All, magna est veritas and praeualet; Great is the Truth -- and
God grant it may prevail with all of them for evermore.

The person offended is our Neighbor: our Neighbor has a double
signification; either it is taken particularly for an adjoining acquaintance,
as Luke 1. 58. Neighbors are called (...), men who have their houses near
together: Or it is taken generally for every man, as Luke 10. 37. the
Samaritane is termed the wounded man's neighbor, each being an undoubted
stranger unto the other. In this Text it is used in the second sense, a
Neighbor, signifying any man, as Math. 5. 43. our Savior does argue the
gloss of the Pharisees, as corrupt, for restraining the word Neighbor, to
signify a Friend only.

The Doctrine of which point does spread it self into two branches. First
Christians must have a care and conscience that they bear false-witnesse
against no man: not following the phrase of Lucilian in Lactantius, Homini
amico and familiari mentiri non est meum; It is not (says he) my guise to lie
unto my friend, nor bear false-witnesse against my acquaintance. But, Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor; that is, against no man,
says my Text. Again, we must yield true witness unto all men. Unlike the
Athenians, who were wont to pray only for themselves, and for their neighbors
of Chios: so for a Christian to give true witness only to whom he is
enforced by Law, or engaged by nature, this is Athenian, uncircumcised, and
heathenish. Both these Christian duties are confirmed by Christ himself, Math.
5. 45. Be ye children of your Father that is in heaven, for he makes the
Sun to rise both on the good and on the evil; and be a true witness unto
thy neighbor; that is, to every one under the Sun, says my Text.

Would God that this instruction were as usual as it is beneficial. Behold
here a Cynosura, a loade-starre, to guide our conscience, in the proposing and
composing of all controversies; especially laying the foundation on that ground
of religion, Math. 22. 39. Love thy neighbor as thy self. If the Lord would
please to infuse it into the hearts of all men, that Judge, Jury, Sollicitour,
Counselor, Advocate, Witness, Accuser, that every one would esteem the
Accused as himself: this would make all men to be (...) and (...), to be Peace
keepers, and peace makers; to use a Conscience in accusing his Neighbor; Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: this is a principle in Nature, God give
us Grace to follow it.

Many persons offending are comprised in the first word, Thou: Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neighbor. Here the hearer may preach to the
Preacher, and say to me, Physician cure thy self; and do not Thou bear
false-witnesse. For false-witnesse Augustine. Retr. 224.
we do bear, when we make our Sermons like the Manna (in the Jewish fable)
to give a several taste, answerable to each several appetite: Such humorous
humouring Sermons, the Lord does execrate out of the mouth of Jeremy, 6. 14.
They have healed the hurt of my people with sweet words: And how they healed
that hurt, Cyprian does express, Cypr de Lapsis sect. 12.
by an excellent comparison: Soothing Preachers are like unskillful
Chirurgians, who softly touch the wound on the outside, thereby making it to
fester the more dangerously in the inside. A fit resemblance: Who obscrueth not
that the smooth tongue of the Preacher, makes an impostumed heart of the
hearer? Sensible of which sin was holy Augustine, when he cried to God to
Aug. Conf. 6. 6.
pardon the sins of his youth, but especially this; that being young he did
Preach, non vt doceret, sed vt placeret: to delight the ear, rather then to
smite the heart of the congregation. Let me therefore begin this point with the
words of that holy man, being an ancient and penitent Preacher: August. de
Vir. Relig. cap. 55.
Hortor itaque vos omnes charissimi, meque ipsum hortor vobiscum: I exhort you,
first framing the same exhortation to my self! O my soul, do not Thou bear
false-witnesse: Be thou like S. Paul, Ephesians. 6. 20. speak thy message boldly,
yet speak as thou ought to speak.

First therefore, the honorable Judges are humbly Gods cause, that they will
bear true witness in Man's cause. I acknowledge my self an unworthy
instructor of them, and their calling: to them therefore I Preach not, but
propound a Preacher answerable to their place; a Prince, Preaching unto Judges,
2 Chronicles. 19. 6. and 7. Take heed what ye do; for ye execute not the judgment
of man, but of the Lord. Take heed, for with the Lord there is neither respect
of persons, nor receiving of rewards. Verbum sapienti, an excellent Sermon in
two words: There must be neither respect of persons, nor receiving of rewards.
This is Iehoshaphats Sermon: I do only (this day) rehearse it to your ears,
the Lord repeat it every day unto your hearts.

Nevertheless, although Elisha be good, yet Gehazi be bad: Naaman sueth to be
cured of his leprosy (to have some controversy ended) which has stuck to
him, and his, for a long season; Noble Elisha bids him to wash in Jordan,
informs him in the honest easy means to heal him: only Mr. Gehazi must
have a tallent of silver; some silver, Memorandum, for admission, or for
expedition, A certain fellow had one squinte eye, and the other smote out:
here-hence, one said unto him, thou have two eyes, but Vnum ncquam, alterum
nequaquam, with one eye thou do see ill, with the other thou do not see
at all. Historians say that some Magistrates have been attended by some such
servants. The Client comes to one servant, he is nequaquam, he cannot see to
help him: he craves favor from another, and he is nequam, he will not see
to admit him -- unless it be through a pair of silver spectacles. These are
Gehazies! O that it were in my power to bequeath them the blessing of Elishai!
That Servant to a Judge, that Clerk to a Justice, or that Deputy to a
Sheriff, who shall (be a false witness) sell his neighbors cause, and his
Masters credit, for a reward, let the Leprosy of Gehazi cleave to him for
ever: Would God the worm of conscience might never cease gnawing their guilty
souls, till they have made speedy restitution, and open confession.

The great wheel in this Clock of wickedness, Plaintiff, or Accuser: Who
(though his cause be good, yet) if he prosecute it for hatred, like Doeg, or
for covetousness, like Iezabell, then dare I bouldly say to such a man, Thou
do bear false-witnesse against thy neighbor. But the Salamander, who loves
to live in the fire of contention, he is a false-witnesse in an high degree.
As Ferdinando Lopez advises ambitious Princes to war eight or ten years
with one neighbor; then to pick a quarrel with another, lest use instruct
the former to be as cunning as himself: Such a politician is many a Plaintiff,
who does force his quiet neighbor into a forced unquietness, by turns, to
arm himself for the wicked war of continual contention. In this cause my
prayer in general, is, that the Magistrates might be like the Aramites, 1 Reg.
22. 34. that they would bend the whole force of justice against (this Ahab)
this man, who troubles all Israel: And in particular my unfeigned prayer is,
that heaven would enable my unworthy self to be that Archer, 1 Reg. 22. 34.
that ignorantly I might smite some such quarrelling wretch, though he have his
harness on, and comes with a seared conscience to this congregation.

These have two maine assistants: the Supporters, Reporters of their cause:
Councillors who speak to them in private, and Advocates who plead for them in
public. I honor the Law, and will instruct them concerning their souls, as
from my soul I desire they should instruct me concerning my estate: where I
suspect an ill case, I will tell it plainly. Let that imputation laid upon the
Romish Lawyers, be as far from ours, as Rome is from England. Thus wrote
Hildebert Bishop of Mentz, of the Roman court: employ them in your causes, and
they delay them: employ them not, and they hinder them. If you solicit them,
they scorn you: if you enrich them they forget you. Never may this language of
Canaan be understood in our land of Israel. Rather what Possidonius reports
of Augustine, let that be reported of all good Lawyers: he would rather loose
his friend; and in the name of God, let these rather loose their fee, than
conceal the truth. And let every conscionable Lawyer know, that if he advise
in a bad cause, at Gods bar that same Client shall appeach him to be Eve,
that he gave the apple, that his council opened the way to the forbidden fruit:
and as a praeamble to Gods hate, he shall first incur man's hate, he that
says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall that people curse, Prou. 24.
24. Wherefore let me once council the Councellor, of all other: Do not thou
bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Neither can the conscience of the Advocate plead for himself that he is good,
if his tongue does plead bad. If (...) were not impossibilities: Oh that the
noble soul of Papinianus lived in the bosom of our English Advocates. When
Antoninus had made away his brother Geta, after the first year of their joint
Empire, he entreated Papinianus (a famous Lawyer) to plead his excuse: Whose
answer was like himself, Noble; It is easier said he, parricidium facere, quam
excusare: to do wickedly, then to excuse the wickedness: Thou may (said he)
command my neck to the Block, but not my tongue to the Bar: I prize not my
life to the pleading of an ill cause. Behold a Pagan man, but a pattern to
Christians: and christianity will compel worthy Advocates to imitation: for
he that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, are both an
abomination to the Lord, Prou. 17. 15. Therefore as the boy every day cried
unto King Philip of Macedonia, (...), Remember that thou art a man: So is it my
hearty wish, that whenever the Advocate is beginning to plead, that then the
spirit of God would whisper unto his soul, the words of my Text. Take heed,
now: Do not thou bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Other accessaries unto false witness, may be Bailiffes and Undersheriffs.
Some have been suspected, suspicion only,) that Writs being sent into the
country, have been entertained by these officers, as the Ephramites were by
the Gileadites, Judge. 12. 6. If they cannot pronounce Shibboleth, but
Sibboleth: if there be but a syllable wanting in the word, but a quadrine in
the gratification; they cannot pass, they dye for it, they must go no
further. Now these men do hinder true witness, and thereby come within the
compass of false witness. And indeed, such as do hinder the Law from
execution, happy were it, if the Law would put them to execution. To every one
of them therefore, let me cry again, and again, as loud as thunder (for they
dwell near Catadupa: these men are very deaf of that ear:) let me I say cry
again, and again, to every one of them, as loud as thunder: Do not thou
bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The Jury also may be the instruments of false witness. The Jury should be
like the Disciples, Luke 10. 5. wheresoever they come, they should say, peace
be to this house: but sometimes they are like the Apostles, Ioh. 6. 70. they
are twelve in number, but one of them is often (too often) a Devil, a
devilish Judas, who will betray the cause, betray the country, and betray the
company, for filthy lucre. Would you know him by his badge? he usually bears
the bag, and Bribery is his master. I heard of a wretch who sued that
authority might flicke him on a Jury, that so he might stick to his friend:
if the Magistrate would stick such a Pagan, as Ehud did stick Eglon, Judge 3.
21. he had a right recompense of reward. To prevent this unchristian insolency,
injury, perjury, to each of the Jury I must propound a new Text, the third
Commandment. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for
the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain: Let the
Jury note only that one phrase, if they swear and forswear, God will not
hold them guiltless. Let the punishment of the third precept be their
admonishment for the ninth precept: You are to swear by God, and before God;
therefore as you tender an oath, and tremble at Gods wrath, I charge you upon
the peril of your souls, let you Verdit shun this rock: Do not bear false
witness against thy Neighbor.

Hitherto have I mustered out an army of rebels against this precept, yet
remains the King behind: he is like Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 22. he will hide
himself as ashamed of his dignity: Notwithstanding pluck him out, and you
shall find him (indeed like Saul) higher than all the premised offenders by
the shoulders upward. This vassal of sin, and vessel of Satan, is named in
the express phrase of my Text; A false-witnesse is this man, this monster of
men, a Knight of the Post, who does post to perdition: a mischievous miscreant,
execrable to all men and narions. A false witness is dragged to damnation by a
threefold gable of wickedness; he is guilty of breach of Justice, of
justifying a Lie, and of (the sin of sins) Perjury, says Aquinas; and
therefore most worthily execrated. The Israelites punished such by a Tali^,
limme for limme, and life for life: what he intended to offer by his falsehood,
the same was he judged to suffer for his falsehood. The Romans censured a
convicted false-witnesse to be plunged head long Zanchi. tom. 4. lib. 1. page
193.
from the steep mountain Tarpeia. Excellent laws; no fault but this, they are
not in force with us in England. The holy ghost does display this infidel in
(yet) more lively colors. Pro. 25. 18 A false witness is compared to an
Hammer, a sword and a sharp arrow. First for himself, because he having once
cracked his credit (and being known for false and for sworn by him that hired
him) like to those iron instruments, he becomes hard, and puts on a
harlots face: shameless of Perjury.

Moreover, there are three several persons are smote by his false tongue,
three several ways, answerably to those three instruments: first a false
witness is an Hammer to the Judge, he does astonish him (as if one man should
smite another in the head with an hammer,) so that he knows not what to
determine. Next he is a sword to him that hired him, he incourageth him with
hope to vanquish his adversary the second time by his purse, and puts a
sword into his hand to kill the innocent. Finally he is a sharp arrow to him
against whom he does witness, (though that man be least in damaged, have he
but grace to be patient) yet to him he is a sharp arrow, to stick in his
life, estate, reputation. To conclude: I say of a false-witnesse, he is an
Ahab, a villain, who has sold himself to work wickedness in the fight of
the Lord: And I say to a false-witnesse, as Simon Peter, did to Simon Magus,
Acts 8. 23. and 22. Thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity, pray unto God, -- if so be -- that the wickedness of bearing false
witness may be forgiven thee.

And thus have I ripped up this excellent Text, and it may be some impious
conscience also. We see the disease, what medicine remains to cure it? The
ordinary means is this: to make the Sermon, like the Preacher. The Preacher:
you see me to day, I go away, and most of you shall never see me any more: So
for the Sermon, you have heard it to day; it goes away, and many (I am afraid
too many) of you will never think on it again. This is the usual medicine:
not so much as to think on the Sermons which goad our guilty conscience. But
beware, it is desperate Physic, it is Opium, it will cast you into a dead
sleep, that you shall drop into Hell, before you so much as dream of
damnation.

Give me leave therefore to prescribe another: Indeed it is a Corasiue, but
sovereign notwithstanding. Let this time transport our souls to meditate one
another time: Now you see one Judge, the time will come when we must come
before another: one whom we believe will come to Judge both the quick and the
dead. As now the trembling malefactor is led out with a dismai^d soul, to
behold the dreadful aspect of the severe death-sentencing Magistrate: so then
the guilty conscience shall be haled forth by thousands of ministering flames of
fire, to appear before that Judge whose face is Majesty, and frown confusion:
Do but think upon this; the very thought of it will compel the Preacher to
instruct bouldly, the Judge to determine justly, the Servant to inform
honestly, the Plaintiff to accuse uprightly, the Counselor to advise wisely,
the Advocate to plead warily, the Under-officers to execute law impartially,
the Jury to give their Verdit sincerely, the witness to swear fearfully,
and give evidence truly: and all of us to live conscionably. We are before one
Judge, we shall be before another: The Lord grant that we may so discharge our
duties this day, that we be not afraid to appear before that Great Judge at
the last day. Amen.

(...).
FINIS.

