

Talis erat vultu, sed lingua, mente^, manuque
Qualis erat qui vult discere, scripta legate
Consulat aut famam: qui lingua, mente^, manuu^
Vinceret hunc, fama iudice^, rarus erat.
VOERST FE^:



Her Scepter sweet, her sword was seldome^ sharp.
Yet re^c^ subjects, and invading foes,
It quaid, repelling these, reclayming those,
Such cure did set in tune the farring Harp.
To this last Act of her exploits and glory,
A Plauaite reviveth by this story.
MAde bright and glorious by Afflictions flame,
Forth from a Prison to a Crown she came,
Attempting and effecting harder things,
Then have been reached by the greatest Kings.
Of all her Causes, Religion was the prime,
Which she reformed in a dangerous time,
And, though her neighboring Princes thereat stormed,
Did all her life defend what she reformed.
As watchful in the State-Affaires was she,
And often from civil broils her Realms did free;
From Ireland she the Spanish (...) expeld,
And all the rude rebellious Irish queld.
In Scotland she did mar the Frenchmens hope,
She fooled all the projects of the Pope;
And though his Bulls did roar in every place,
Turned all his thundrings to his own disgrace.
Spaines fury without fear she did oppose,
And gave their Forces famous overthrowes,
Yea, she the huge Armado over came,
Which of Invincible usurped the name.
And though she had at home great works to do,
She aided France, and saved Belgia too.
Her Coin ^hee to just values did reduce;
Her wholesome Laws redressed much abuse;
By Trades abroad she Riches did increase,
By Providence at home established Peace.
Then having till the forty fifth year reigned,
And to the seventieth of her age attained,
She dyed, and lef^ behind her such a Fame,
As shall be loved while England has a Name.
G. W.
Printed for Robert Milbourne. 1633.

PACATA HIBERNIA. IRELAND APPEASED AND REDVCED. OR, AN HISTORY OF THE LATE
Wars of IRELAND, especially within the Province of MOVNSTER, under the
Government of Sir George Carew, Knight, then Lord President of that Province,
and afterward Lord CAREVV of CLOPTON, and Earl of TOTNES, etc.

Wherein the Siedge of Kinsale, the Defeat of the Earl of TYRONE, and his
Army; The Expulsion and sending home of Don Iuan de Aguila, the Spanish
General, with his Forces; and many other remarkable passages of that time are
related.

Illustrated with Seventeene several MAPPES, for the better understanding of
the Story.

IUVENAL. SAT. 10. Bellorum Exuviae, truncis affixa trophaeis
Lorica, and fracta de Casside buccula pendens,
Humanis majora bonis creduntur: --


LONDON, Printed by AVG: MATTHEW'S for ROBERT MILBOVRNE, at the Sign of the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

TO HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
SIR,
THE great Actions of worthy and eminent Persons, have ever been esteemed so
powerful for the instruction of succeeding times, that all Civil States have
made it their principal care, to preserve and transmit them to Posterity, for
their Example and Imitation. The Means by which this is done, is HISTORY, a
powerful suggester and Recorder of Gods providence in public Blessings and
Judgments, the Mother of Experience, the Nurse of Truth, the common bond and
ligature, which unites present times with all ages past, and makes them one. To
manifest this, if other Arguments fail, the Examples of the greatest Emperors
and Generals were sufficient, who in the midst of their Conquests, thought
their public duty not discharged, if they employed not some time, to leave
the immortal memory of their own actions by writing to Posterity. The
omission of this has bin a great defect of some ages foregoing ours, being the
Middle times between learned Antiquity and this latter age, wherein Language,
Arts and Elegancie have revived and flourished; In those times though there
have been many, Qui fecerunt scribenda, yet there were few, qui describerent
facta. I dare not say that this our. Age and Nation are guilty of the like
error or negligence, in deciphering to the life the occurrences of our own
times and affairs by such as best knew, and faithfully would relate them; A
want of which many have complained, but few have labored to supply. That which
I now in all humility present, is your Majesty's by many Titles; First, from
the subject matter, being the final Dispersion of that cloud of Rebellion,
which has so long hung over that Kingdom of Ireland, which by undoubted
title, and lawful succession is descended to your Majesty, and that performed
by the prudent fortitude of the English Nation, which your Majesty now so
happily governes. Next, from your Majesty's late faithful Servant, the Earl
of Totnes, whose Actions are not the least part of the Argument of this
History, he being at that time chief Governor of the Province of Mounster,
which was the Stage whereon the last and greatest Scene of that Tragedy was
acted, and since advanced by your Majesty's Royal Father and your self to
many Honorable Titles and Employments of State. And lastly, from the
Publisher, through whose hands nothing can pass, which to your Majesty is not
justly due, both by common All geance, and particular Service. Pardon (gracious
Sovereign) this presumption, in aspiring to so high a Patronage, and
graciously accept this poor Tribute of Duty and thankfulness from him who
has eternally bound himself

Your Sacred Majesty's most faithfully devoted Subject, and Servant, THO:
STAFFORD.

TO THE READER.
OVT of a necessity imposed by powerful Custom somewhat must be said to you
Reader, both to prevent mistakings touching the publishing of this Work, and
to prepare you with some unprejudicate affection to the reading thereof. The
large space of time (thirty years and upwards) between the matters Acted,
Written, and now published, may beget some wonder, in what obscure corner this
Work has lain all this while, without notice given or taken; or if known,
why so long kept from public view. For answer heereto, understand indifferent
Reader, that it was composed while the Actions were fresh in the memories of
men, by the Direction and appointment of the Right Honorable Earl of Totnes
(late deceased) then Lord President of Mounster, so often mentioned in this
History. The Collection made, was by him first reserved for his own private
Information; Secondly, preserved for the furtherance of a General History of
that Kingdom of Ireland, when it should please God to raise up some
industrious Writer to undertake a complete Description of those Affairs; And
lastly, out of his retired Modesty, the rather by him held back from the
Stage of Publication, lest himself being a principal Actor in many of the
particulars, might be perhaps thought, under the Narration of public
proceedings, to give vent and utterance to his private merit and Services,
howsoever justly memorable. He leaving the world, left it among his Papers,
where it was found by the now Publisher thereof, to whom they were bequeathed,
and by whom it has been offered to the view and censure of diverse learned and
judicious persons: By them it has been esteemed worthy the view of the world,
that those of present and future times, who desire not to be strangers to what
has passed, and been acted at home, may receive true Information hereby. In
confidence whereof, I presume that whether you be English or Irish that shall
read this History, you shall find much matter of contentment to advance the
Honor of both Nations: If English, behold the most dangerous and overgrowne
Rebellion that ever was since the Kings of this Land were Lords of that Isle,
suppressed by the puissant valor of thy victorious Countrymen, and a
powerful Invasion of a brave and warlike Nation repulsed, and sent home to
their Native Land: Or if you be of that other Nation, you may observe the
loyal fidelity of the greater part to their lawful Prince, though animated
to disloyalty by the strongest persuasions of their supreme Spiritual Pastor,
with promises of heavenly reward. Here also you may behold a fatal period
given to the Rebellious Insurrections, under whose burden that Country has
groaned some hundreds of years, and a firm and assured Peace established to
the comfort of them and their posterity. And whether English or Irish, forget
not (next after the right hand of the most High bringing mi^htie things to
pass) to acknowledge the Prudence, Courage, and Felicity of that late
Sovereign, who in her deep and declining age, did seal up the rest of all
her worthy Acts with this accomplishment, as if she had thought that her
task would be unfinished, and Tomb unfurnished, if there could not be
deservedly engraven thereon, PACATA HIBERNIA; The lot whereof was cast, and
fell happily on our side, by the prosperous success of those Preparations and
Encounters which befell this short time of about three years, recounted by way
of Annalls and Iournalls in this present Narration; whereto thou must add the
like acknowledgement of the Wisdom, care, and provision taken by our late
Sovereign of blessed memory King James, in the establishment not only of
Peace, but also of good Laws and Justice there flourishing, and continued by
the Providence and Piety of our present Sovereign King CHARLES, the true
Inheritor of his renowned Fathers Virtues as well as Kingdoms. For the story
it self, it was collected, not out of flying rumors, and popular tales, but
(as the Title promises) out of the careful and diligent Observations of the
principal Actors in the services there related; And for the truth of their
Reports, I hope it shall receive the Approbation of many Honorable and Worthy
Persons yet living, who may justly challenge a large portion of the honor
achieved in those Wars. But I will detain you no longer, (Judicious Reader)
but leave you to the use of what is here presented, commending it and my self
to your favorable censure.

T. S.
A TABLE ALPHABETICALL.
A
LOrd Audley. Fol. 83 Ardart Castle taken. 78 Sir Anthony Cook. 31, 319
Articles between the Queen, and Sir George Carry Treasurer of Ireland. ^54
Allen Appesley, 248 Advertisements of the Spaniards arrival. 195 Army
encamped before Kinsale. 205 Articles of Composition between Don Iuan de
Aguila, and the Lord Deputy and Council. 245 Ardea Castle rendered. 365 Archer
the lesuite flies into Spain. 324 Army lodged before Donboy. 311
B.
Tege ^ Bryen slain. 126 Ballitrarsnie Castle taken. 47 Balliragget. 27
Bat^ell of Kinsale. 232, etc. Berengary Castle taken. 383 Lord Barry joins
with Sir Charles Wilm^t. 363 Lord Barry commands the Rising out of the
Country. 360 Captain John Barry. 295 Captain Tho. Button his service. 204
Tege ^ Brien makes an enscape. 131 John Burke makes his submission. 47 Intends
a journey to Rome, and Saint James of Compostella. 329 Walter Burke slain. 126
Sir Thomas Burke. 365 William Burke flies out of the Province. 364 Ballihow
Castle taken. 297 Sir John Barkley his services, 126, 127, and 199, 233 Sir
Francis Barkeley s^nt into Connaght. Fol. 159 Brough burnt by Piers Lacie. 38
Bear and Bantry spoiled. 365 Sir Samuel Bagnall commanded to stay with his
Regiment in Mounste^. 329 Blarnie Castle rendered to the custody of Captain
Taffe. 126 His service against Tirrell in M^skerry. 355 Baltimore described.
325 Bearehaven described. 324
C.
Carbrie O Conner. 30 Cahir Castle rendered. 76 Carigfoyle taken by John O
Conner, 225 rendered by him. 66 Castle ni Park rendered by the Spaniards. 216
Castles delivered by the Irish into the Spaniards hands. 224 Certificate of Do^
Iuan de Aguila into Spain after his landing. 192 Commission to Roger Harvey
for the government of Carbry. 250 Carties of Carbry submit the^ selves. 367
Clanwilliam spoiled by the army. 46 O Conner Kerry flies out of the Province.
364 Cloghan Castle rendered. 358 Castle-haven described. 325 Cape Clear castle
taken. 324 Carriknesse castle rendered. 365 Cape Clear castle gua^ded by
Captain Harvey. 267 Lord of Cahir. 377 C^rmock Man Dermond serves against the
Spaniards, 203 Accused of sundry Treasons, 331 Committed to prison, 332 Plotted
his escape, 334 Makes an escape, 351 Makes his submission, 353 His service. 377
Camp entrenched, and approaches made before Donboy. 311 Sir Charles Wilmot
commands the forces in the Lo. Presidents absence. 362 Sir Charles Wilmot sent
into Kerry. 323 Clement VIII. Pope his Bull for spiritual livings to Owen mac
Egan. 371 His Letter or Breve to Tirone and the Irish Rebels. 369 His
Indulgence to the Irish in Rebellion. 368
D.
Dermond Moyle mac Garty slain. 300 Dermond O Conner murdered by Theobald ne
long Burke. 103 Discourse between Capt. Reger Harvy, and Pedro Lopez de S^to.
274 Lord Deputy raised his siege, and came to Cork. 249 Sickned in his
journey to Dublin. 280 Sends for the Lord President with men, etc. 382 Doctors
of Salamanca allow the war of Ireland to be lawful. 284 Donghe Irish'an
Island. 304 Dingle Castle rendered. 99 Sir Henry Danvers. 199, 233 Downings, a
Lieutenant at Dorsies. 313 Downings. 363 Donogh Mac Cormock Cartie slain. 128
Doneshed, and Donelong Castles rendered by the Spaniards. 267 Dodington a
Captain short at Donboy. 318 Donboy taken from the Spaniards by Osulevan
Bear. 268 Donboy fortified by the Rebels. 289 Viewed by the Lo. President. 310
Besieged, 315 Battered. 315 O Donnels hasty march. 211 Joined with the
Spaniards. 224 Shipped for Spain with others. 237 His landing and reception in
Spain. 266 Dyed in Spain. 354 Donnegall Castle in Carbry taken. 324 Downings
castle in Carbry taken. 321 Donmanus castle in Carbry taken. 303 Dillon a
Captain. 82 Dorsies Island taken. 313 Connor O Drischal flies into Spain. 324
E.
Walter Ednie goes into Spain 346 Edward Gough knighted. 279 Sir Edward
Wingfield sent with 500 foot into Connaght. 383
F.
Florence Mac Cartie made by Tyrone Mac Cartie More. 20 Fights with her
Majesty's forces. 29 Makes a submission to the Lord President. 35 His demands.
ibid. Persuaded to go into England* 114 Makes another submission. 94 His
juggling. 93 Franci^ Slingsby. 82 False rumors of a Spanish Fleet. 328 False
rumors of the state of Mounster. 376 Forces sent into Thomond. 56 Forts to be
erected in Mounster 252
G.
George Flower, Captain. 198 Sir George Bourcheir sent to Kilkenny. 27 Sir
George Bourchier comes to Cork. 199 Sir George Thornton joins with the Lord
Barry. 360 George Kingesmill maimed at Donboy. 314 George Blunt. 41 Glancoyne
castle surprised by Sir Francis Barkley. 84 Glin castle besieged and taken. 63,
64 Gregory Castle taken. 297 Geoffrey Galway Major of Limricke fined,
imprisoned, 110 And a new Major elected. 111
H.
Henry Skipwith Captain. 15, 315 Henry Malbie slain. 365 Sir Henry Folliot.
233 Husseyes Report of the Rebellion in Mounster. 146 Hopton dyed of a hurt.
214 Hostages delivered by Don Iuan, and their Names. 247 Hugh Mostian. 128 Sir
Henry Power. 31, 253
I.
James Fits Thomas apprehended by Dermond O Conner. 54 John Power. 55 John
Bostocke. 30 Instructions for the Lord President of Mounster. 6 James Archer,
Jesuit. 26 Instructions to the Earl of Thomond. 287 Instructions for Capt.
George Blunt. 256 James fits Thomas the titulary Earl taken prisoner. 135 His
Examination. 174 His Relation to the Lord President. 139 James fits Thomas and
Dermond Mac Gragh make a narrow escape. 106 Don Iuan de Aguila, his Declaration
at Kinsale. 200 His Request to the Lord Deputy for shipping. 252 Intelligence
of the Spanish Invasion 188 Irish in Mounster revolted to the Spaniards. 224
Irish fled into Spain, with their Names. 237 James Gold, second Justice of
Mounster. 6 John fits Thomas his practice to decei^e the Lord President. 328
James fits Thomas the young Earl of Desmond comes into Ireland, 85 Returns
into England. 122 James Grace. 217
K.
Kinsale summoned, and Don Iuans Answer. 219 Kinsale Burgesses desire their
Charter. 252 Kinsale receives their Ensigns of Magistracy. 359 Kilcow castle
taken by Capt. Flower. 383 Knight of Kerry protected. 299 Defeated by Sir
Charles Wilm^t. 361 Makes his submission. ibidem. Kilcrey Castle and Abbey
rendered* 334 Kirton, a Lieutenant hurt at Donboy. 318
L.
Lowghguyrre taken by the Rebels, and recovered again from them. 45 Listoell
Castle besieged and taken. 97 List of the Captains of the Spanish army. 191
List of the Army in Mounster. 290, 382 Lixnaw castle taken by composition. 296
Leam^con castle taken. 321 Lettertinlesse castle taken and burnt. ibid. Laghlin
O Dallic. 360 Lord of Lixnaw defeated by Captain Boys. 383 Letters Patents for
Sir George Carew, to be Lord President of Mounster. 3 A Letter from the Lord
President and the Earl of Thomond, to the Lords of the Council. 24 A Letter
from James Galde Butler to the Lord President. 42 A Letter from James fits
Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie. 40 A Letter from the Mounster Rebels to O
D^nnell. 58 A Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie. 62 A Letter
from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie. 70 A Letter from James fits
Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie. 48 Two Letters from William Burke, and Moroghe
ni More O Flartie to the Lord President. 60, 61 A Letter from her Majesty to
the Lo: President. 86 A Letter from Redmond Burke to the Lord President. 96 A
Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie 80 Letters Patents for
James fits Gerald to be Earl of Desmond. 89 A Letter from Cormock Mac Dermond
unto Tyrone. 100 A Letter from the Earl of Clanrickard to Theobald ne long
Burke. 103 A Letter from the Spanish Archbishop of Dublin, to James fits
Thomas. 111 A Letter from her Majesty to the Lord Deputy. 116 A Letter from
the Lord President to the Lord Deputy. 119 A Letter from Redmond Burke to the
L. President, with his Answers. 128 A Letter from Tyrone to Florence Mac
Cartie. 132 A Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord President. 132
A Letter from the Lord President to her Majesty. 141 Two Letters from James
fits Thomas the titulary Earl to the K. of Spain. 154 A Letter from her
Majesty to the Lord President, touching base Moneys. 147 A Letter from Thomas
Shelton to Florence Mac Cartie. 169 A Letter from the Spanish Archbishop of
Dublin to Florence Mac Cartie. 170 A Letter from Tirone, James fits Thomas,
Florence Mac Cartie, and Mac Donogh to the Pope. 175 A Letter from Mr.
Secretary Cecill to the Lord President, with Spanish Intelligence. 182 A Letter
from the Lord Deputy to the Lord President. 185 A Letter from the Lord Deputy
satisfactory to the Lord President. 186 A Letter from Donnell O Sulevan Bear
to the King of Spain. 228 A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to the Archbishop of
Dublin. 260 A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to Don Iuan de Aguila. 260 A Letter
from the Secretary Ybarra to Don Iuan de Aguila. 261 A Letter from the
Secretary Franquesa to Don Iuan de Aguila. ibid. A Letter from the Duke of
Lerma to Don Iuan de Aguila. 262 A Letter from the King of Spain to Don Iuan
de Aguila. 263 A Letter from the L. Deputy and Council, to the Lords in
England. 264 A Letter from O Sulevan Bear to the King of Spain. 269 A Letter
from Owen Mac Eggan to Richard Mac Goghagan. 307 A Letter from John Anias to
the Lord of Lixnaw. 309 A Letter from John Anias to Dominicke Collins. ibid. A
Letter from James Archer to Dominicke Collins. 308 A Letter from Donnell O
Sulevan Bear to the Earl of Carazena 27^ A Let^er from Donnell O Sulevan
Bear to Don Pedro Zubiaur. 272 A Letter from the Lo. President to the Spanish
Cannoniers in Donboy. 294 A Let^er from Don Iuan de Aguila, to C^ptaine Iuan de
Albornos Y Andrada. 227 A ^etter from her Majesty to the Lo. P^esident. 209 A
Letter from her Majesty to the Lord President. 339 A Letter from Don Iuan de
Aguila to Tirone and O Donnell. 227 A Letter from the Lord President to her
Majesty. 253 A Letter from the Lord President to Don Iuan de Aguila. 326 A
Letter from Tege Mac Cormock Cartie to the Lord President. 330 A Letter from
the Lords of the Council in England, to the Lord President. 336 A ^etter from
her Majesty to the Lord P^esident. 339 A Letter from the Lord President to her
Majesty. ibid. A Letter from Captain Roger Harvie to Pedro Lopez de Soto. 340
A Letter from Don Iuan de Aguila to the Lord President. 344 A Letter from the
Lord President to Don Iuan de Aguila. 345 A Letter from O Donnell to O Conner
Kerry. 343 A letter from her Majesty to the Lord President concerning the
Earl of Clanrikard. 378 A Letter from John Burke to the Lord President. 379 A
Letter from John Burke to Sir George Thornton. 380 A Letter from the Lord
Deputy to the Lords in England. 384
M.
Maurice Stack sent into Kerry, 67 Treacherously murdered. 79 O Mulrians
Country spoiled. 47 Mac Awley spoiled by Sir Francis Barkley. 108 Mocrumpe
Castle besieged. 334 Taken. 351 Muskrey-quirke, and Arloghe spoiled by the
army. 106 Mounster, in what state after the Siedge of Kinsale. 283 Malachias
the Popish Bishop of Kilmakow. 380
N.
Names of the Counselors of Mounster. 19 Sir Nicholas Walsh. 199
O
Earl of Ormond taken prisoner. 24 O Sulevan repaires with Tirrell into
Muskrey, 352 Remains in Bear. 392 O Sulevan More sent by the Lord Deputy to
the Lord President. 84 Prisoner by the practice of Florence Mac Cartie. 49
Olerie slain. 95 Owen Mac Eggan, the Popes Viccar slain. 366 His quality and
condition. 367
P.
Lord Presidents Letters Patents. 3 His letter to James fits Thomas. 51 Sent
against O Donnell. 210 Surprised with a Fever. 280 His opinion of a defensive
War in Ireland. 348 Sends 1000. foot to the Lord Deputy. 377 Meets the Earl
of Ormond at Clonmell. 105 Proclamation for publishing the new Money for
Ireland. 149 Principal men in Tyrones and O Donnells army. 212 Propositions
made by Don Iuan. 241 Patrick fits Morris L. of Lixnaw died. 71 Preyes taken
from the enemy. 293
R.
Roger Harvey. 29 Sir Richard Masterson. 29 Sir Robert Gardener. 199 Sir
Richard Levison his service at Castlehaven. 225 Sir Richard Greame. 232 Roger
Harvey died of sorrow. 257 Richard Power. 43 Regiment sent by the L. President
into Connaght. 159 Reply of Don Iuan to the propositions of the Lo. Deputy.
241 Reasons mooving the Lo. Deputy and Council to a Composition. 244 Sir
Richard Percie. 40 His Service. 111 Robert Tent. 30 Rincorran Castle battered
by the Lord President. 206 Yielded, and the Spaniards received to mercy. 208
Lo. Roche commended for his loyalty. 377 Andrew Roche. 144 Richard Ailward
knighted. 279 Rancoliskey Castle taken. 324 Rathmore Castle rendered. 68 Rahane
taken. 297 Ratho Abbey burnt by Sir Charles Wilmot. 101 Redmond Burke defeated
by O Dwyre. 33 Richard Owen comes to Cork with a Message from Tyrone. 254 Sir
Richard Wingfield. 199
S.
Spanish Fleet discovered at sea by Captain L^ue. 189 Spaniards land at
Kinsale. 190 Spaniards make several fallies. 230 Spaniards make a great sally.
221 Spaniards beaten out of their tre^ches. 219 Spaniards landed at
Castlehaven. 223 Spaniards how many transported out of Ireland. 248 Spaniards
imbarqued at Kinsale. 268 Spanish letters intercepted. 258 Spanish Hostages
licensed to depart. 326 Spaniards make three sallies. 236 Spaniards defeated at
Kinsale in the time of Richard the second. 359 Spanish ship arrived near
Ardea. 306 Spanish money distributed amongst the Rebels. ibid. Shandon Castle.
333 Sessions held at Limerick, Cashell, and Clonmell. 105 Selby a Lieutenant,
363 Supplies of 1000 foot from England. 323
T.
Tirlogh Ro^ Mac Swiny. 318 Tyrone comes into Mounster. 20 Tyrone writes to the
Lord Barry. 20 Returns into Vlster. 23 Sir Thomas Norris. 2 Towns of Mounster
required to send Companies of foot to the camp. 200 Earl of Thomond commands
the Garrison at Askeiton. 75 Comes with supplies to the camp. 216 Marches with
an army into Carbry. 287 Returned to Cork. 289 Thomond spoiled by O Donnell.
55 Sir George Thornton left a Commissioner of Mounster. 383 Tirrell desires a
Parley with the Earl of Thomond, and fayles. 307 His men executed at Donboy.
320 Flies out of the Province. 362 Tho. Tailor hanged in chains at Cork. 320
Tho. Oge makes his Submission. 361 William Taffe Captain. 29 His Service
against the Rebels in Carbery. 366
V.
Victuals delivered to Don Iuan. 248 Victuals and money arrived at Cork. 118
W.
Warrant for the L. Presidents Patent. 3 Sir Warham Saint Ledger slain by Mac
Gwyre. (...) William Saxey Chief Justice of Mounster. 6 William Power
Captain, his Service at Donboy. 318
A Catalogue of the several MAPPES contained in this HISTORY.
In the first Book.
1 A Map of Mounster. Page 1. 2 A Map of the Earl of Ormond taken prisoner,
between pa. 24. and 25. 3 A Map of Cahir Castle, between page 42, and 43. 4 A
Map of Askeiton Castle, page 52, and 53. 5 A Map of Glin Castle, page 62, and
63. 6 A Map of Carigfoyle Castle, page 66, and 67. 7 A Map of Castle Mange,
page 96, and 97. 8 A Mapp of Limerick Castle, page 108, and 109.
In the second Book.
9 A Map of the Siege of Kinsale, between page 188, and 189. 10 A Map of the
Fort of Hallibolyn, page 252, and 253.
In the third Book.
11. A Map of the Army in Bear, between page 292, and 293. 12. A Map of the
Siege of Dunboy, page 310, and 311. 13 A Map of Muskrey, page 330, and 331. 14
A Map of Castle-nigh-parke, page 352, and 353. 15 A Map of Limerick, page 362,
and 363. 16 A Map of Yough-hall, page 376, and 377. 17 A Map of Cork, page
382, and 383.


PACATA HIBERNIA. THE FIRST BOOK OF THE WARS IN IRELAND.
CHAP. I.
The Lord Deputy, and the Lord Presidents landing in Ireland. The Warrant for
passing the Lord Presidents Patent. The Patent. The Lord Deputy and Counsels
Instructions to the Lord President.
THE Wars of Ireland having 1599.
received their original and foundation in the North, proceeded like unto a
strong poison, which having infected one member, without speedy prevention,
does spread the contagion over the whole body; for the Irish perceiving the
prosperous success of those first Rebels, even beyond all expectation and hope
(of those that were ill affected) and that her Majesty's Forces had sustained
many disasters, which were never feared until they happened, the neighbor
Provinces of Connaght, and Leinster, following the current of the present time,
begin to dismaske themselves of that cloak of subjection, which before they
pretended, and to show themselves partakers in that wicked action, and
furtherers of the rebellion. And these being united in a strict Combination,
did verily persuade themselves, that it would be a matter very feasible, to
enable them to shake off the English Government, and to make themselves
absolute Commanders of all Ireland, if the chief Lords of Mounster, with their
friends and followers would join with them, to banish the English out of that
Province. They did account that Province to be the key of the Kingdom, both
by reason of the Cities and walled Towns (which are more then in all the
Island besides) the fruitfulness of the Country, being reputed the garden of
Ireland, and the commodious Harbors, lying open both to France and Spain. They
devised many plots, cast many projects, and used many persuasions, to animate
the Provincials to begin to enterprise. But currenti quid opus est calcaribus?
they were not so ready to yield reasons, as those were to hear; and their
ears no more open to hear, then their hearts to consent; and their hands
nothing backward in the execution thereof.

The Earl of Essex at his being in Ireland with his Army, Devoreux.
made a journey into Mounster, in hope to compose the troubles thereof; all
that he performed at that time, was the taking of Cahir Castle, and receiving
the Lord of Cahir, Butler.
and the Lord Roche, Roche.
with some others into protection. Who after his departure did either openly
partake, or secretly combine with the rebels again.

Her Majesty being resolved to send a new Lord Deputy into Ireland, made
choice of a worthy and noble Gentleman endued with excellent parts, as well of
body, as mind, Sir Charles Blunt Blunt.
Lord Mountioy. And at that time the Presidencie of Mounster being void, by the
unfortunate death of Sir Thomas Norris, lately slain by the rebels, she made
election of Sir George Carew Carew.
Knight, who was by his former services experienced in the Irish wars, to be
the Lord President of that Province. The landing of the Lord Deputy, and Lord
President in Ireland.
The 23 of February these Lords embarked at Beaumarris, St. Lawrence.
and upon the day following they landed at the head of Hothe, lodging that
night at the Lord of Hothes house, and the next day they rode to Dublin, where
by the relation of the Council, they found a miserable torn state, utterly
ruined by the War, and the rebels swollen with pride, by reason of their
manifest victories, which almost in all encounters they had lately obtained.
The President, Carew.
although he much desired to employ himself in his government, yet he was
enforced to make a long stay in Dublin, as well to assemble the Forces allotted
unto him, by order out of England (to be in list 3000 Foot, and 250 Horse,
which were dispersed in sundry remote Garrisons) as to procure the dispatch of
his Instructions from the State, which is usual, and of sundry Commissions
under the great Seal of Ireland, which of custom is granted to every
President, but especially the passing of his Office (by virtue of her Majesty's
Warrant) under the great Seal of that Realm; the Copies of which Warrant,
Letters Pattents, and Instructions, I do here insert as ensues.

Her Majesty's Warrant.
RIght Trusty and Welbeloved, we greet you well. Our Province of Mounster, in
that our Realm of Ireland, being without a principal Officer to govern it,
ever since the death of Thomas Norris Knight, late President there; The Warrant
for the passing of letters Patents to the Lo. President Norris.
And the tumultuous state of that Province requiring the government of a person
of Judgment, and Experience, We have made choice of our servant Sir George
Carew, Carew.
Knight, Lieutenant of our Ordnance here. To commit to him the charge of that
part of our Realm, as one whom we know, besides his faithful and diligent
endeavors informer services, to be well acquainted with the estate of that
our Realm, (where he is a Councellor) and with the condition and nature of
that Province. Wherefore we require you, immediately upon the taking of our
Sword, and chief charge of that our Realm of Ireland, as our Deputy, Blunt.
according to our Commission granted to you, To cause a Commission to be made
out under our great Seal of that our Realm of Ireland, to the said Sir George
Carew Carew.
of the Office and Charge of President of our Province of Mounster, in such
manner and form as John Norris.
and Thomas Norris Norris.
Knights, or any other our Presidents of that Province have used to have, or
with any such other clauses, as you shall think, that the present State of our
affairs there does require. Giving him thereby power to rule and govern our
people in that Province, with the advice of our Council there, according to
such Instructions and Directions as have been given by us or our Council
here, or our Deputies of that our Realm, or shall hereafter be directed to
him, for the government of that Province. The same his power to continue during
our pleasure. And our further will and pleasure is, that he receive toward his
charges all such Allowances, Fees, Profits, and Entertainments of Horse and
Foot, as Sir Thomas Norris, Norris.
Knight, our late President at the time of his death had; The same to begin
from the day of the date hereof, and to continue during our pleasure: Carry.
And these shall be to you and to our Treasurer for the payment thereof
sufficient warrant and discharge. Given under our Signet at our Manor of
Richmond, the seven and twentieth day of January, in the two and fortieth year
of our reign, etc.


The Letters Patents. The Lo. Presidents Letters Patents.

ELIZABETH by the grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland Defender
of the Faith, etc. To all men to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting;
Whereas our Province of Mounster, in that our Realm of Ireland, being without
a principal Officer to govern it, ever sithence the death of Sir Thomas
Norris, Norris.
Knight, late President there; And the tumultuous State of that Province,
requiring the government of a person of Judgment and Experience. We have made
choice of our trusty and welbeloved Servant, Sir George Carew, Carew.
Knight, Lieutenant of our Ordnance in our Realm of England, and one of our
Privy Council of our said Realm of Ireland, and to commit to him the charge
and government of that part of our realm, as one whom we know, besides his
faithful and diligent endeavors in former services, to be well acquainted
with the State of that our realm, and with the condition and nature of that
Province. Knowye, that we reposing our trust in the Wisdom, Valor,
Dexterity, Fidelity, and Circumspection of the said Sir George Carew, Carew.
Knight, of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, and
according to the tenor and effect of our Letters on that behalf, directed to
our right trusty, and right welbeloved Councellor, Blunt.
Charles Lord Mountioy, Knight of the most noble Order of our Garter, and our
Deputy general of our realm of Ireland, dated at Richmond the seven and
twentieth day of January, in the two and fourtieth year of our reign, Have
given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant to our said
Servant George Carew, Knight, the Office of our Lord President of our said
province of Mounster. And the said George Carew, Carew.
Kn^ght, our Lord President, and Governor of the said province by these
presents, do make, ordain, and constitute, and to the said George, the
government of the said Province, and of our people there resident do commit.
And further, we do give and grant by these presents to the said George
Carew, Carew.
Knight, in and for the exercise, and execution of the said Office, all such
Authorities, Jurisdictions, Preheminences, Dignities, Wages, Fees, Allowances,
and profits whatsoever, which John Norris, Norris.
Knight, or the said Thomas Norris, Norris.
Knight, or any other President of that province have used to have, And with
such other clauses (or articles of Authority) as our said Deputy shall think
that the present state of our affairs there does require, to be further
granted unto him the said George Carew, Carew.
Knight. Giving him hereby full power and authority to rule and govern our
people under that province, with the advice of our Council there, according to
such Instructions and Directions as has been given by us, or our Council
here, or our Deputies of that our realm, or shall hereafter be directed to
him, for the government of that Province; To have, exercise and enjoy the said
Office, to, and by the said George Carew, Carew.
Knight, with other the premises, and all Authorities, preheminences, wages,
fees, entertainments, and profits to the said Office belonging; and all such
allowances, profits, entertainments of Horse and Foot, as the said Thomas
Norris, Norris.
Knight, our late President of the said province, at the time of his death had
or ought to have; The said allowances and entertainments, to begin from the
date of our said Letters; And the said Authority and Entertainment to continue
during our pleasure. And where the said George Carew, Carew
Knight, in respect of our service in other places, may have occasion to be
absent out of the said Province of Mounster, and that in such his absence, our
pleasure is, that some meet person may be substituted to govern that
Province, as Vice President; We do therefore by these presents, by the assent
of our Deputy aforesaid, and according to the intent of our said Letters, give
full power and authority, to the said George Carew, Carew
Knight, to appoint, choose, and substitute in his absence, such a meet and
sufficient person, for whom the said George Carew Knight will answer, to be
Vice President of the said Province, and the said person, so appointed, chosen,
or substituted, We do by these presents authorize, to govern and rule the
said Province, in the absence of the said George Carew Carew
Knight to all respects and purposes as if the said George Carew
were personally present, and might rule and govern, by the authority
aforesaid. And if the said person so chosen, appointed, and substituted, shall
chance to dye, or shall not govern himself to the liking of the said George
Carew Carew.
Knight: That then the said George Carew Knight shall from time, to time, by
virtue of these presents, during his authority and government aforesaid,
choose, appoint, and substitute, a Vice President as aforesaid, to govern and
rule the said Province as aforesaid. And our further pleasure is, that the said
George Carew Carew.
Knight, shall from time to time certify our said Deputy, or other Governor
general, of this our Realm, for the time being, the name and names, of such
Vice President, or Vice-presidents, as shall be by him appointed, named, or
substituted as aforesaid: Willing, and straightly commanding, all our
Officers, as well ^ivill as martial, as all and all manner our loving Subjects
to be respectively aiding, assistant, and obedient in, and to the said George
Carew Carew
Knight, or any authorized by, and under him as aforesaid, in the exercise and
execution of the said Office, as they will answer to the contrary at their
porills. Although no express mention of the true yearly value, or certainty
of the premises, or any part thereof, or of any other gifts, or graunts, made
by us, or any our noble Progenitors, to the said George Carew Carew
Knight, before the date hereof, be not expressed in these presents. Any
Statute, act, provision, restraint, proclamation, Law, use, or custom, to the
contrary hereof, heretofore made, ordained, enacted, provided, used, or
proclaimed, or any other cause, thing, or matter to the contrary hereof in any
wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to
be made Patents. Witness our Deputy general at Dublin the sixth day of March
in the two and fortieth year of our Reign. 6 Martij



Instructions given by us the Lord Deputy, Blunt.
and Council, The Lo: Deputy and Councels instructions to the Lo. President.
to our right trusty and welbeloved, Sir George Carew, Carew.
Knight, Lord President of her Majesty's Council established in the Province
of Mounster, to be communicated by him to her Majesty's Council of the same
Province, and to be observed by them, and every of them, according as the same
are particularly declared in these several Articles following, dated at
Dublin, 7. Martij 7. Martij.
1599.
FIrst, Carew.
the said Lord President shall at all times, when he shall think fit, for the
service of the Queens Majesty, call together all such as be, or that
hereafter shall be appointed to be of that Council: And shall with the advice
of such of the Council as shall be by these Instructions appointed to assist
him with Council by Letters and Precepts, command all and every person of the
said Council, at all convenient times, to do such things as shall be meet for
the service of the Queens Majesty in administration of Justice, and
maintenance of the same, amongst all her subjects residing or coming into the
parts of the Jurisdiction of the said Commission. And in his commandments and
directions, to the said Council, he shall have such regard to their Estates,
Vocations, and other Conditions, as the credits and several estimations of the
same Councillors may be in their due actions and well-doings preserved and
maintained, for the furtherance of her Majesty's service.

And on the other part, her Majesty wills, charge and commands that all
and every of her Majesty's said Counselors, shall exhibit and use to the said
Lord President, Carew.
all such Honor, reverence and obedience, as to their duties appertains, and
to the person having the principal place in the Council is due, and shall
receive, and execute, in such sort all the precepts and commandments, to them
to be addressed, in any Process to be done, or served in her Majesty's name,
and shall give at all times, such advice and counsel as appertains to the
duties of trusty Servants and Counselors to her Majesty, and according to
their corporal oath.

And because it shall be convenient that some number shall be continually
abiding with the said Lord President, Carew.
or such as shall supply his place, with whom he may consult, in hearing such
matters as may be exhibited unto him, for the better expedition of the same:
We the said Lord Deputy and Council by these presents do ordain, That
William Saxey, Sax^y.
Esquire, Chief Justice, and James Gold, Gold.
second Justice of the said province of Mounster, being of special trust
appointed to be of the said Council, shall give their continual attendance at
the said* Couneell, and shall not depart at any time without the special
License of the said Lord President. Carew.
Likewise Clarke of the Council, shall make his like attendance upon the Lord
President and Council, etc.

And the said Lord President shall have in consideration of his continual
attendance, Carew.
and great pains to be taken in that Office, the wages and entertainments of
one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence sterling by the
year, for himself: and for that the Countries aforesaid being in such
disorder, and the people in the same in such disobedience as partly they are,
whereby it shall be needful for him to have continually about him some
competent number of Soldiers, whereby his decrees and orders justly taken and
made, may the more effectually be executed; It is considered and ordained,
that the said Lord President shall have for his guard and retinue, Carew.
thirty horsemen and twenty footmen, and two shillings by the day for a petty
Captain, and for a Trumpeter and Guydon, two shillings each of them: the
entertainment and daily wages of all which Officers and Martial men, shall
run in the course, and pay appointed for the Queens Majesty's ordinary
Garrisons, resident in this Realm. Provided always, Carew.
that the said Lord President, shall at the first entire, give in the names, of
all and every the aforesaid Soldiers, to the Clearke of the Cheque, to be
entered in his book, and from time to time shall certify the deaths and
alterations of the same to the Lord Deputy, and Cleark of the Checque* in
convenient time, as the same may reasonably be done: having regard to the
distance of the place, and as other Captains of the army are bound to do.

Item the said Justice Saxey Saxey.
shall have for his stipend yearly one hundred pounds sterling; and the said
James Gold, Gold.
assistant or second Justice, one hundred marks sterling, and the said Clark
of the Council, twenty pounds sterling; and which stipends and wages shall be
paid quarterly, by the hands of the Treasurer at wars, or Vice-treasurer
here of this Realm of Ireland: And if the said Justice, or assistant, and
secondary Justice, shall depart out of the Limits of the Commission aforesaid,
without the special license of the said Lord President, Carew.
or having leave, shall tarry longer out then the time granted, then (without
reasonable cause of excuse) the said Lord President shall deduct, Carew.
and defalke out of their said several entertainments, so much as the said
wages of so many days does amount unto, to the use of her Majesty toward her
other charges, to be extraordinarily sustained in the execution of their
Commission, at the discretion of The said Lord President.

Item for further reputation and honor of the same Office, the said Lord
President shall have continually attending upon him, Carew.
a Sergeant at Arms, who shall bear the Mace of the Queens Majesty's Arms
before him, in such manner as the Sergeant at Arms does bear the Mace before
the President in Wales; which Sergeant may at all times be sent by the said
Lord President and Council, for th'apprehending and bringing in of any
disobedient person, receiving of every such person, being of the degree of a
Gentleman, so commonly known, and having yearly liuelihood by any means of
ten pounds, for his arrest ten shillings; and for the arrest of every
particular person, six shillings eight pence, and six shillings eight pence for
every days travel, and not above. He shall also have his diet in the
Household of the said Lord President, Carew.
and toward his maintenance the ordinary wages of one of the thirty Horsemen.
And forasmuch as there must be of necessity one Officer to whom all offenders
and malefactors are to be committed, during the time of their Imprisonment: it
is thought meet that the said Lord President shall appoint one Porter, Carew.
to have charge of the Goal, who shall have his diet in the househould of the
said Lord President, and be accounted as one of the twenty Footmen, and
receive the wages due for the same: and also such other profits upon every
prisoner, as ensues, viz. for the entry of every prisoner so to him committed,
having liuelihood of ten pounds by the year, three shillings four pence,
and twelve pence by the day for his diet, during his abode in prison, and for
every other person of inferior condition, two shillings for his entry, and six
pence by the day for his diet.

Item, Carew.
the said Lord President and Council, (if opportunity may serve) monthly, or
once every two months at the least, advertise us the Lo. Blunt.
Deputy and Council here of the State, of the Country within their
Commission, or oftener if they shall see cause.

And where the said Lo: Carew.
President and Council shall have by their Commission, sufficient authority to
hear and determine, by their discretions, all manner of complaints, within any
part of the province of Mounster, as well guildeable as franchise, yet they
shall have good regard, that except great necessity, or other matters of
conscience, conceived upon the complaint, shall move him, they shall not hinder
nor impeach the good course and usage of the common Laws of the Realm, but
shall to their power further the execution thereof, nor shall without evident
cause, interrupt such Liberties, and Franchises, as have lawful commencement,
and continuance by the warrants of the Law, other ways then where any special
complaint shall be made unto them, of any manifest wrong, or delay of Justice,
done, or used, by the owners, Officers, or Ministers of the said Franchises or
Liberties: Carew.
In which cases; the said Lord President and Council shall examine the said
defaults, so alleged, by way of complaint, to be counted in the Franchises,
and shall send for the Officers, against whom complaint shall be made: and
finding the same to be true, they shall not only hear and determine the
particular and principal causes of the parties complaints, but shall also
reform and punish, according to their discretions, the defaults of the said
owners and Ministers of the said Liberties; and if the matter shall so serve,
upon due information to be made to us, of the abuses of the said Franchises and
Liberties, so as the same may be done by order according to the laws tried,
and upon just causes the Liberties resumed into the Queens Majesty's hands.

Item, Carew.
where the said Lo: President and Council shall have Commission, power, and
authority, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of this Realm of Ireland,
and of Oyer, Determiner, and Goal deliverie, in as large and ample manner as
any such Commission or Authority is granted to any Commissioners for that
purpose, within the Realms of England, Blunt.
or Ireland: We the said Lord Deputy and Council, Carew.
do earnestly require and charge the said Lord President and Council, that
he and they do diligently and often, severely and justly sit, hear, and
determine, by virtue of the same, such causes as shall be brought before them,
in such several places as best may agree with the necessity of the cause, and
the commodity of the people.

Item, Carew.
where also the said Lord President has full power and authority, by Letters
patents under the great Seal of this realm, to execute the Martial law, when
necessity shall require, in as large and ample manner as to any other it has
been accustomed to be granted within this realm of Ireland: The said Lord
President shall have good regard thereunto, that no use be made of the Martial
law, but when mere necessity shall require; for the exercise thereof is
only to be allowed, where other ordinary administration of Justice cannot
take place* foreseeing always, that no person having five pound of Freehold,
or goods to the value of ten pound, shall not be tried by the order of the
Martial Law, but by order of the common Law: And yet if necessity for
service, and terror to others, shall at any time require the Martial Law to
be executed upon any one person or more being of greater value in lands or
goods, then above is expressed, Carew.
the President in such special causes may use his discretion, and thereof, and
of the causes that moved him, shall make us the Lord Deputy and Council
privy. Blunt.


Item it is, Carew
and shall be lawful for the Lord President and Council, or any two of them,
whereof the Lord President to be one, to prosecute and oppress any rebel, or
rebels, with sword and with fire, and for the doing of the same, to leavie in
warlike manner and array, and with the same to march, such and so many of the
Queens Subjects, as to his discretion shall seem convenient; And if that any
Castle, Pile, or House, be with force kept against them, it shall be lawful
for the said Lord President and Council, or two of them whereof the Lord
President to be one, Carew.
to bring before any such Castle, Pile, or House, so to be kept against them,
any of the Queens Majesty's Ordnance and great artillery, remaining within the
limits of the Commission: And with the same, or by some other means or Ingine,
any such Castle, Pile, or House, to batter, mine, or overthrow, as to their
discretions shall seem best. Straightly charging and commanding all
Archbishops, Earls, Bishops, Vicounts, Barons, and Baronets, Knights, Majors,
Sheriffs, Justices, and Ministers of peace, and all other Gentlemen and Commons
being her Majesty's Subjects to help, Carew.
aid and assist the said Lord President and Council, in such sort, and at such
time, as by the said Lord President and Council, or two of them, whereof the
Lord President to be one, they shall be commanded, upon such pains, as for
the nature and of the defaults shall be thought meet, to the said Lo:
President and Council to limit and assesse.

And it is ordered by us the said Lord Deputy and Council, Blunt.
that if any person complain to the said Lord President and Council, Carew.
and that they shall think their Complainants worth the hearing, that the
persons so complained upon, shall be sent for by a Letter missive under the
Queens Signet, to appear before the Lord President and Council at a day and
place by them to be appointed, there to answer to such things as shall be laid
to their charges, and further to be ordered, as shall stand with right,
justice, equity, and conscience: and for lack of appearance upon such Letters
they shall send forth Letters of allegiance, Proclamations, or other
Process, to be made, directed, and awarded by their discretions to the
Sheriff, Constable, or other Minister whereby the party complained upon may
be called to come to his answer as appertains, and if by the obstinacy of
the party complained upon, the case so require, to sequester his or their
lands or goods, or either of them by their discretions. And furthermore if in
case any person or persons having habitation or dwelling or any lands or
teneme^ts by lease or otherwise, within the limits of the Commission aforesaid,
shall by covin, fraud, or d^ceit, or otherwise absent himself, or go out of
the limits of the said Commission: That then Letters missive signed with the
Queens Signet, shall be delivered at his House, Lands, or Tenements, and the
copies of the same shall be left there, so that by most likelihood the same
may come to his knowledge being so sent for. And if within a certain time
after limited by their discretion, the person or persons so sent for, Carew.
will make default of appearance: the said Lord President and Council, or any
two of them, whereof the Lord President to be one, shall as well proceed to
other Process, as to the hearing and determining of the matter or cause in
variance, according to the Laws, Statues, Ordinances made therein, or
otherwise at their discretions.

And if in case any Letters missive, be sent and addressed from the Lord
President and Council, Carew.
to any person or persons, of what estate, or degree soever they be, to appear
before them at a day appointed, the same Letters being delivered to him or
them, or otherwise left at his or their house, as is above specifyed, the said
Lord President and Council, or any two of them, whereof the Lord President to
be one, shall cause him or them so contemning or disobeying, to be punished by
imprisonment, and reasonable fine, or shall other ways proceed according to
their discretions. In which said causes, if any of the parties commit any
resistance, or disobedience, either of their appearance, or contrary to the
Commandments, direction, decree or determination, made, or to be made, and
decreed by the said Lord President and Council; Carew.
That then the said Lord President and Council, or any two of them, whereof
the Lord President to be one, shall or may command the Sheriff, Major, Sergeant
at Arms, Constable, Bailife, or other Officer or Minister, to whom it shall
appertain, to attach very person so offending, contemning, or disobeying,
Blunt.
and to send him or them to the Lord Deputy in ward, together with Certificate
of his contempt or disobedience, or else by their discretions to cause the
parties so attached, to be committed to ward, there to remain in safe
custody, until the time that the pleasure of us the Lord Deputy, Blunt.
and Council be known in the premises, or that the same person or persons,
assent, fulfill, and agree to the determination of the said Lord President and
Council, Carew.
or any two of them, whereof the Lo: President to be one.

And the said Lord President and Council shall have full power and authority,
Carew.
by these presents, diligently to hear and determine, and try, all, and all
manner of extortions, maintenance, imbracery and oppressions, Conspiracies,
rescues, escapes, corruptions, falsehoods, and all manner evil doings*
defaults, misdemeanors of all Sheriffs, Justices of peace, Majors,
Sovereigns, Portriffes, Bailiffes, Stewards, Lie^tenants, Excheators,
Coroners, Goalers, Clerks, and other Officers and Ministers of Justice, and
other Deputies, as well within all the Counties and Countries within the
Province of Mounster, as within the supposed Liberties of Typperarij and
Kerrij, and in all Cities and other towns corporate, within the limits of
their said Commission, of what degree soever they be, and punish the same
according to the quality and quantity of their said offenses, by their
discretions, leaving nevertheless, to the Lord and owners of all lawful
Liberties, such profits, as they lawfully claim.

And it shall be lawful for the said Lord President, Carew.
and Council, or any three of them, whereof the Lord President to be one, to
conceave, make, and cause to be proclaimed, in her Highness name, any thing or
matter tending to the better order of her Majesty's Subjects, within the
precincts of their Commission, and the repressing of malefactors and misorders,
after such tenor and form, as they shall think convenient, and to punish the
Offenders then according to their discretions.

And also we the said Lord Deputy and Council have thought meet, Blunt.
that the said Lord President and Council, Carew.
or any three of them, Carew.
whereof the said Lord President to be one, shall and may compound upon
reasonable causes by their discretion, with any person, for all forfeitures,
growing, or coming, or that shall grow, or come, as well by all and singular
penal Statutes, as also of obligations and Recognizances, taken, made, or
acknowledged, before the said L: President and Council, Carew.
or any of them, within the limits of their authorities and Commission for
appearance, or for the peace, or good abearing, or by reason of any special
Statute whatsoever, then made or to be made, And shall also have authority, to
cesse reasonable fines for any offenses, whereof any person shall happen to be
convicted, before the said Lord President and Council and such Sums of money,
as shall grow or come, by reason of any such compositions or Fines, they shall
cause it to be entered into a book, subscribed with the hands of the said Lord
President and Council, or two of them at the least* whereof the Lord President
to be one: To the end the Queens Majesty may be answered of the same
accordingly: And also upon such compositions made of Fine or Fines, set as
aforesaid, shall have authority to cancel or make void all such Obligations
and Bonds.

And also the said Lord President shall cause, Carew.
as much as in him lies, all Writts or Processes, sent or to be sent, to any
person or persons inhabiting, or being within the precinct of his Commission
out of the Kings Bench, Chaunce^^e, or Exchequer, or any other Court of Record,
diligently to be observed, and effectually to be obeyed, according to the
tenor of the same. And if he shall find negligence, slacknesse, or wilful
omission, in any Officer or other Minister to whom the delivery or serving of
such Process does appertain: He shall punish the same severely according to
the greatness and quality of the offense.

And it shall be lawful for the said Lord President and Council, or any
three of them, whereof the Lord President to be one, after examination in the
causes necessary, upon vehement suspicion and presumption of any great offense
in any party committed against the Queens Majesty, to put the said party so
suspected to tortures, as they think convenient, and as the cause shall
require: and also to respitt Judgment of death upon any person convicted or
attainted before him and that Council, for any treason, murder, or any other
felony: Or after Judgment given to stay execution until such time as he
shall certify us the Lord Deputy and Council of his doings, and
consideration of the same, and receive answer from us thereof: Provided
always, that the same certificate be made to us the Lo: Deputy and Council
within the space of 21 days after such thing is done.

Also if any Inquest within the precinct of their Commission, within Liberties
or without, being sworn and charged upon trial of any fellonie, murder, or
any like offender, whatsoever he be, having good and pregnant evidence for
sufficient proof of the matter, whereof the said offender shall be accused,
indicted or arraigned, do utterly acquit such offender contrary to the said
evidence, that then the said Lord President and Council, or any two of them,
whereof the Lord President to be one, shall examine such perjuries as well by
deposition of witnesses, as by all other kind of proofs by their discretions;
and if the said Inquest be convicted before the said Lord President and
Council, or three of them at the least, whereof the Lord President to be one,
the said Lord President, and Council may and shall proceed to the punishment
of such offense by fine, imprisonment, or wearing of papers, or standing on the
pillorie, as by their discretions shall seem meet.

Also, we the said Lord Deputy and Council, do earnestly require, and
straightly charge the said Lord President and Council, that they at all times,
and in all places, where any great assembly shall be made before them, do
persuade the people by all good means and ways to them seeming good, and
especially by their own examples, in observing all Orders for Divine Service,
and other things appertaining to Christian Religion, and to embrace, forlow,
and devoutly to observe the Order and Service of the Church, established in the
Realm by Parliament, or otherwise by lawful authority, and earnestly to
call upon and admonish all Bishops and Ordinaries, within the precinct of their
Commission, diligently, fervently, and often to do the same. And if the Lord
President and Council, shall find them negligent and unwilling, or unable to
do the same, That then they shall advertise the Lord Deputy and Council
thereof, and they shall call earnestly upon the Bishops, severely to proceed
according to the censuring of the church, against all notorious Advowterers,
and such as without lawful divorce, do leave their Wives, or whilst that
their lawful Wife lives do marry with any other, and the Sentence pronounced
by the Bishop or Ordinary upon the offender: The said Lo: President and
Council shall endeavor themselves to the uttermost that they conveniently
may, to cause the same Sentence to be put in execution according to the Laws;
And if they shall find the Ordinary slack or remiss in this duty, and not
doing according to his Office, they shall punish, or cause to be punished, the
same Bishop or Ordinary, according to their discretions.

Also the Lord President and Council shall examine the decay of all parish
Churches, and through whose defaults the same be decayed, and to proceed to the
procuring or informing of such as ought to repair any Church or Churches, with
all convenient speed, according to their discretions: And in cases where her
Majesty shall be (after due and advised inquisition) found by reason of her
possessions bound to repair the same Churches, In those cases advertisement
shall be given to us the Lord Deputy, etc. Or if they shall know of any that
shall spoil, rob, or deface any Church, they shall with all sincerity proceed
to the punishment of the Offenders, according to the Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances of this Realm, or according to their discretions: They shall assist
and defend all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical Ministers in
the ministry of their function, and in the quiet possessing of their Lands,
rents, services, and hereditaments and shall punish the with-holders,
intruders, and usurpers of the same, according to their discretions, and the
quality of the offense. They shall also give earnest charge for the observation
of all Laws, and Statutes, or Ordinances made, or to be made for the benefit
of the Commonwealth, and punishment of malefactors, and especially the Statute
for the Hue and cry, for Night-watches, and for Weights and Measures, to be
diligently considered, and severely put in execution.

Also the said Lord President shall have and retain, one Chaplin or Minister,
that shall and can preach, and read the Homilies, who shall be allowed his
Diet in the Household of the said Lord President, and shall receive his
entertainment to be paid out of the Fines growing in that Province, to whom
the Lo: President shall cause due reverence to be given, in respect of the
Office that he shall have for the Service of God.

Also the said Lo: Deputy and Council will, that the said Lord President and
Council, or two of them at least* whereof the Lord President to be one, shall
endeavor themselves to execute as well all and all manner Statues of this
Realm, Proclam^tions, and to do and execute all other Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, and other Ordinances, as to punish the transgressors of the same,
according to the said Statutes* Ordinances, and Proclamations: And to leavie or
cause to be leavied all and all manner of forfeitures contained in the same,
according to the order limited by the said Laws: And if cause so require,
shall compound for reasonable causes for all and singular such forfeiture^ and
pains by their discretions; Having therein regard not to diminish the ^ines
specially limited by the Laws, without great necessity of the poverty of the
parties to be joined with repentance and disposition of amendment in the
party, for otherwise it is per^llous to give example in weakening the just
terror of good Laws.

Also the Lord President and Council or two of them whereof the Lord President
to be one, shall and may assesse and tax Costs and damages, as well to the
Plaintiff as to the Defendant, and shall awarde Executions for their doings,
Decrees and Orders: And shall punish the Breakers of the same, being parties
thereunto by their discretions.

And the said Lord President and Council* shall immediately upon their repair
to some convenient place, where they mean to reside within the Limits of their
Commission* appointing two sufficient men to be Clearkes o^ Attorneys to that
Council, for the making of Bills, Answers, and Proceses for all manner of
Subjects, and th^r^n not multiply such Officers, le^t also they be occasion to
multiply unnecessary suites, and some trusty wise persons to examine witnesses
between party and party, which of necessity would be chosen with good
advise, foreseeing expressly and charitably, that no excessive fees be by any of
them taken of the Subjects, but that their fees be assessed by the Lord
President and Council, and the same fair written upon a Table* and fixed upon
some public place where the same may be seen* and understood of all Suitors,
and that in the beginning the Fees may appear, and be mean and reasonable; So
as in no wise the prosecution of relief by way of Justice be not so
chargeable as the poor oppressed sort be thereby discouraged to make their
complaints.

And because it shall be convenient, that a Register be daily kept for all
the doings, orders, decrees and proceedings, which from time to time shall
pass by the said Lo. President and Council: The Lord Deputy and Counsels
pleasure is, that the Clarke of the said Council for the time being, having
reasonable allowance for the same of the parties having an interest thereby,
shall diligently execute and perform this charge without any further expenses
then shall be specially directed unto him by the said Lord President to be
sustained by her Majesty's Subjects, for enteries of Acts and Orders, etc.

Also the said Lord Deputy and Council have thought it convenient, that there
shall be one honest and sufficient man appointed to be Clarke and receiver of
the Fines, at the nomination of the said Lord President, who shall diligently
and orderly keep a Book of all such Fines as shall be taxed upon any person;
the fine to be always entered by the hand of the Lord President, and shall
have full power to send out Process for any person, upon whom any such fine
shall be so seized, and to receive all such fines, and in every Michaelmas^
Term, thereof to make a true and perfect account before the Barons and other
Officers of the Queens Majesty's Exchequer for the time being, to the end we
may be assertained what fines have bin acquired to the Queens Majesty, and
how the same have been employed. Provided always, and it shall be lawful for
the said Lord President and Council, to employ of the said Fines, reasonable
sums for reward of Messengers, and repairing the Queens castles and houses,
and in building and reedifying Goales within each County, in the precinct of
their Commission, where by Laws of the Realm no other persons are thereto
bound and chargeable: and also for furnishing of necessary utensils for the
household, as to the said L. President and Council* or to any two of them,
whereof the Lord President to be one, shall seem ne^dfull and convenient. In
all which the said Lord President shall have regard to moderate those
allowances, as of the Fines assessed and levied* the Queens Majesty may be
answered some reasonable yearly Sommes toward her great chardges in
maintaining of this Council, the same being to the Crown of England a new
chardge, and any warrantme^t signed by the said Lord President, or any one of
the Council for any such Sum or Soms, shall be a sufficient dischardge to
the said Clearke our Receiver of the said Fines for the issuing of the said
Sommes. And the said Clearke or Receiver shall have full power for the sending
out of Process against any person upon whom any such Fine shall be cessed, and
to have his Process gratis from the Clearke of the Signet, and he to have his
diet in the house of the said Lord President, and to be accounted one of the
number of this Horsemen* and to receive the wages, and entertainment due for
the same.

Also the said Lord Deputy and Council have thought meet there shall be a
continual household kept within the precinct and limits of the Commission
aforesaid in such place, as to the Lord President shall seem most convenient;
All servants necessary for which household shall be at the Nomination of the
said Lord President; In which house, each Councellor bound to continual
attendance, and attending shall be allowed their diets, and the clearke of the
Council, and every other Councellor, being either sent for, or coming for any
needful business, for the Queen, or country shall be allowed during their
abode there their diet. And for the more honorable port of the said Household,
there shall be allowed unto the said Lord President and Council after the rate
of ten pounds sterling by the week, to be employed upon the Table chardges of
the said Household, half yearly to be received at the hands of the
Vice-treasurer, and general Receiver of the Queens Majesty's revenewes of
this Realm, for payment of which there shall remain in the hands of the said
Vice-treasurer, (who is also Treasurer for the Wars) as Warrant dormant,
whereby the said Vice-treasurer shall be authorized to pay to the said Lord
President, one half years allowance always before hand toward the making
his necessary provision, out of the revenew: Or if he shall not have sufficient
Treasure, then out of any other Treasure, the said Lord President shall
nominate and appoint one discreet and sufficient man of his servants to be
Steward, or clearke of the same Household, who shall weekly write and sum the
chardges thereof, and the same also shall he weekly present to the Lord
President and Council, to be considered.

And because her Majesty means principally to benefit her Subjects, not
only with the fruits of Justice, but with the delivery of them from all
unnecessary burdens: The Lord President and Council shall foresee, that no
manner of extraordinary or excessive charge be put and laid upon any person
against their Wills and Agreements, by finding or sustaining of any Horsman, or
Footman, or Horse-boy, or Horse belonging of the said Lord President, or any of
the said Council, on any belonging to them. And in the like manner shall see
that the Subjects be not oppressed with the like by any other, contrary to the
Laws of the Realm for such causes provided.

Item, considering the Queens Majesty has title and right to no small
quantity of possessions, within Mounster, as well of ancient revenew of the
Crown, and of other Seigniories devolued to the Crown; And also of the
dissolved Monasteries and other Houses of religion, the which are not duly
answered to her Majesty as reason would; The said Lord President and Council
shall from time to time employ their Labors by all their good discretions, to
procure that her Majesty's Officers or Farmors appointed for that purpose, may
peaceably and fully from time to time possess and receive the profits of the
same.

The Oath to be ministered by the Lord President to such as shall be admitted
to be of the Council of Mounster, being not already sworn of her Majesty's
Privy Council in Ireland, as well the oath provided in the Statute for
swearing of Officers, as also this heereunder written, viz.

You shall swear to the uttermost of your power, will, and cunning, you shall
be true and faithful to the Queens Majesty our Sovereign Lady, and to her
Heirs and Successors.

You shall not know nor hear any thing that may in any wise be prejudicial to
her Highness, or the Commonwealth, peace and quiet of this her Highness Realm,
but you shall with all diligence reveal and disclose the same to her
Highness, or to such other person or persons of her Majesty's Privy Council
in Ireland, as you shall think may and will soonest convey and bring it to her
Highness knowledge.

You shall serve her Majesty truly and faithfully in the room and place of
her Majesty's Council in Mounster.

You shall in all things that be moved, treated, and debated in any Council,
faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion according to your heart and
conscience: In no wise forbearing so to do for any respect of Favor, Meade,
Dread, Displeasure, or corruption.

Ye shall faithfully and unrightly to the best of your power, cause Justice to
be duly and indifferently ministered to the Queens Majesty's Subjects, that
shall have cause to sue for the same, according to equity and order of Laws.

Finally, you shall be vigilant, diligent, and circumspect in all your doings
and proceedings, touching the Queens Majesty and her affairs.

All which points and Articles before expressed, with all other Articles signed
with the hands of the Lord Deputy and Council of this Realm, and delivered
to me the Lord President of her Highness Council established in these parts:
You shall faithfully observe, keep, and fulfill to the uttermost of your
Power, Wit, Will, and cunning, so help you God, and the contents of this Book.


THE NAMES OF THE COVNCELLORS TO BE ASSISTANT to the Lord President of
Mounster, as they are directed under the hand of the Lord Deputy.
The Earl of Ormond. The Earl of Kildare. The Earl of Thomond. The Vice-Co:
Barry. The Lord^Audley. The Bishop of Cork. The Bishop of Limer. Sir Nicholas
Welsh. Justice Saxey. Sir Francis Barkley. Sir George Thornton. Justice Gold.
The Queens Sergeant. The Q. Attorney general. The Q. Solicitor. Sir Charles
Wilmot. Garret Comerford* Esquire. Hugh Cuffe, Esquire.
Adam Dublin. Thom. Midens. George Carry. Rich. Wingfield. Anth. St ledger.
George Bourcher. Geof. Fenton. ^ra: Stafford.
CHAP. II.
The Earl of Tyrone in Mounster, and his Actions there. The White Knight
Tyrones prisoner. Florence Mac Carti made Mac Carti More, and Donell Mac Carti
displaced. The Lord Barry spoiled. Tyrones letter to the Lord Barry, with the
Lord Barry's answer. Sir Warham Saint ledger, and Mac Guyre slain. Tyrones
return into Vlster.
A Little before the landing of the Lord Deputy in Ireland (as is said) the
Arch-traytor Tyrone, The Earl of Tyrone in Mou^ster, and his actions there.
to unite the Rebels of Mounster, and especially to confer with James fits
Thomas, the titulary Earl of Desmond, and Florence Mac Cartie, at whose
entreaty he made a journey into Mounster; Those whom he found obstinate in
rebellion, he encouraged, from such as he held doubtful, he took pledges,
or detained prisoners: of which last sort was the White Knight, The White
Knight Tyrones prisoner.
and his son in law, Donogh Mac Cormocke Cartie, whom in hand-lockes he
carried away with him: And whereas Donell Mac Cartie, the Earl of Clancares
base son had been by the Mac Carties of Desmond advanced to the Style, title
and authority of Mac Cartie More: Him he displaced, and in his room Florence
Mac Cartie Florence Mac Carty made Mac Cartie More, and Donell Mac Carty
displaced.
was surrogated, being a man as he conceived, of far more use then Donell.
Such as were, or reputed good Subjects, these he prosecuted with sword and
fire; Amongst others which felt his heavy hand, the Lord Barry was one, upon
whom, when he could not work his desire to draw him into actual rebellion,
by the persuasion of the Provincial rebels, him he preyed, The L. Barry
preyed and spoiled.
burned, and spoiled, to make it manifest, that he was solicited to enter
into Rebellion; both the Letters of Tyrone, and the Lord Barries Answer, are
here truly set down, the tenors whereof do ensue.

Tyrones Letter to the Lord Barrie.
MY Lord Barry, your impiety to God, cruelty to your soul and body, tyranny
and ingratitude both to your followers and country are inexcusable and
intolerable. You separated your self from the unity of Christ's mystical
Body, the Catholic Church. You know the Sword of Extirpation hangs over
your head, as well as ours, if things fall out other ways then well; you are
the cause, why all the Nobility of the South (from the East part to the West,)
you being linked unto each one of them, either in affinity, or consanguinitie,
are not linked together to shake off the cruel yoke of Heresy and Tyranny,
with which our Souls and Bodies are oppressed; All those aforesaid depending of
your resolution, and relying to your Judgment in this common cause of our
Religion and Country, you might forsooth with their help, (and the rest that
are combyned in this holy Action) not only defend your self from the
incursion and invasion of the English, but also (by Gods assistance) who
miraculously and above all expectation, gave good success to the cause
principally undertaken for his glory, exaltation of religion, next for the
restoration of the ruins, and preservation of the Country, expel them, and
deliver them and us from most miserable and cruel exaction and subjection,
enjoy your religion, safety of Wife and children, life, lands and goods, which
all are in hazard through your folly, and want of due consideration: Enter I
beseech you into the closet of your Conscience, and like a wise man weigh
seriously the end of your actions, and take advise of those that ^an instruct
you, and inform you better, then your own private judgment can lead you
unto. Consider, and read with attention and settled mind, this Discourse I
send you, that it may please God to set open your eyes, and graun^ you a
better mind. From the Camp this instant Tuesday the fixed of March according
to the new Computation. I pray you to send me the Papers I sent you, as soon
as your Honor shall read the same.

O Neale.

The Lord Barries Answer to Tyrone.
YOur Letters I received, and if I had answered the same as rightfully they
might be answered, you should have as little like thereof as I should mislike or
fear any thing by you threatened against me; (which manner of Answer, leaving
to the construction and consideration of all those that are fully possessed
with the knowledge of the Law of duty to God and Man.) You may understand
hereby briefly my mind to your objections, in this manner; How I am undoubtedly
persuaded in my conscience, that by the Law of God and his true religion I am
bound to hold with her Majesty: Her Highness has never restrained me for
matters of religion, and as I felt her Majesty's indifferency and clemency
therein, I have not spared to relieve poor Catholics with duetifull succor,
which well considered, may assure any well disposed mind, that if duty had not
(as it does) yet kindness and courtesy should bind me, to remember, and
requite to my power, the benefits by me received at her Majesty's hands: You
shall further understand, that I hold my Lordships and Lands, immediately under
God, of her Majesty and her most noble Progenitors, by corporal service, and
of none other, by very ancient Tenor, which Service and Tenor, none may
dispense withal, but the true Possessor of the Crown of England, being now
our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth. And though ye by some over weening
imaginations, have declined from your dutiful allegiance unto her Highness;
Yet I have settled my self never to forsake Her: Let fortune never so much rage
against me, she being my anointed Prince, and would to God you had not so
far ran to such desperate and erroneous ways, offending God and her
Majesty: who has so well deserved of you, and I would pray you, to enter into
consideration thereof, and with penitent hearts, to reclaim your selves,
hoping that her Highness of her accustomed clemency* would be gracious to you,
wherein I leave you to your own compunction and consideration. And this much I
must challenge you, for breach of your word in your Letter, by implication
inserted that your forces have spoiled part of my country, and preyed them to
the number of four thousand Kine, and three thousand Mares and Gerrans, and
taken some of my followers Prisoners, within the time by you assigned unto me
to come unto you, by your said word, (if ye regard it) I require restitution
of my spoil, and Prisoners, and after (unless you be better advised* for
your Loyalty) use your discretions against me and mine, and spare not if you
please, for I doubt not with the help of God, and my Prince, to be quit with
some of you hereafter, though now not able to use resistance: And so wishing
you to become true and faithful Subjects to God and your Prince, I end, at
Barry Court this twenty six of February, 1599.

While Tyrone was in Mounster, Sir Warham St ledger and Mac Guire slain.
a disasterous action happened, upon the day of February, Tyrone with his
Hell Hounds being not far from Cork, Sir Warham St Ledger and Sir Henry
Power (who after the death of Sir Thomas Norris, Lord President of Mounster in
the vacancie of a President had been established Commissioners for the
government of the Province) riding out of the City for recreation to take the
air, accompanied with sundry Captains and Gentlemen with a few Horse for
their Guard, not dreaming of an enemy near at hand, carelessly riding every
one as he thought good, within a mile of the Town, or little more, Sir Warham
St ledger, and one of his servants a little straggling from his company, was in
a narrow way, suddenly charged by Mac Guire, who with some Horse (likewise
dispersed) had spread a good circuit of ground, in hope either to get some
booty, or to have the killing of some Subjects, they charged each other. Sir
Warham discharged his Pistol, and shot the Traitor; and he was stricken with
the others Horsemans staff in the head, of which wounds either of them dyed:
but none else on either side was slain. 1600.
Tyrone Tyrones return into V^ster.
having dispatched his business in Mounster turned his face toward Vlster. The
Earl of Ormond, the Lord Lieuetenant general of Her Majesty's Forces with a
competent Army was before him with a purpose to fight with him in his retreat;
But by what accident he missed of his intention I know not, being a hard
matter to fight with an enemy that is not disposed to put any thing in hazard:
He went through Ormond and stayed not until he had passed through a part of
Westmeth between Mollingar and Athlone. The Lord Deputy on the 5. of March
had intelligence that he meant to pass through Westmeth; Whereupon with all
the force he could presently a^^emble he marched from Dublin, but his
endeavor was fruitless, for Tirone was past before his coming.


CHAP. III.
The Lord President le^^t Dublin. The Earl of Ormond taken prisoner by Owny
Mac Rory Omore. A joint Letter from the Lord President and the Earl of Thomond
to the Lords of the Council in England. The manner of the Earl of Ormonds
taking prisoner. The narrow escape of the Lord President, and wounding of the
Earl of Thomond. The order taken for the (...) of the Count^ey after the Earl
of Ormonds disaster. The submission of Tho: Fitz James, and Tho: Power.
THE Lord President having attended long at Dublin about his dispatches before
mentioned, The President left Dublin 7. April.
(wherein he lost no time) upon the seventh of April being accompanied with
the Earl of Thomond, the Lo: Audley, Captain Roger Harvy, Captain Thomas
Brown, Captain Garret Dillon and some other Captains and Gentlemen with
seven hundred Foot and one hundred Horse; He took his leave of the Lord
Deputy, who with all the Counselors and Captains then in the City, (to do
him honor) rode with him about two miles out of the Town, and that night he
lodged at the Naas, the next night at Catherlogh, and the day following he
came to Kilkenny to visit the Earl of Ormond being a noble man whom he much
respected, as well for the honorable parts that were in him, as for the long and
familiar acquaintance which had been between them: After salutations and
complements were past, the Earl told the President that the next day he was
to parlie with the Rebel Owny Mac* Rory Omore at a place about eight miles
from Kilkenny, and he was desirous that the President would go with him,
whereunto he easily assented: the next morning being the tenth of April, 10.
Aprilis
according to the appointment, the Earl parlied with the Traitor, and was
there taken Prisoner: The Earl of Ormond taken prisoner by Owny mac Rory O^more
To the end the Reader may truly understand the manner of that days
misfortune, behold the Letter which the President and the Earl of Thomond sent
to the Lords of the Council in England, wherein the same is fully related.

A Joint Letter from the Lord President and the Earl of Thomond to the Lords
of the Council.
IT may please your Lordships: Although I the President have by my Letters
advertised the Lord Deputy, the manner in what sort the Earl of Ormond was
taken, which I think is by his Lordship sent unto you, yet, we think it our
duties to make relation thereof unto your Lordships; and to make known unto
your Honors, how accidentally we were witnesses of his misfortune. On Monday
the seventh of April, we departed from Dublin, and upon Wednesday at night
we came to Kilkenny, where we found the Earl of Ormond: In our company we
had one hundred Horse, dispersed in the Country ten or twelve miles distant
from us, by the Earls Officers: as soon as we came unto him, he acquainted
us, that he had appointed the next day to parlie with Owny Mac Rory, we told
his Lordship, that we would attend him: And I the President, desired his
Lordship, that my one hundred Horse might be sent for to go with us, for his
Lordships better guard, which he refused, thanking me for my offer, The manner
of the Earl of Ormonds taking.
saying that he had no need of them: The next day being the tenth of this
present* after Dinner his Lordship not having in his company above the number
of seventeene Horsemen (of his followers) armed, and not little above the like
number of all sorts, whereof we were part, and the rest Lawyers, Merchants,
and others upon Hacknies, with no other Weapons then our Swords, road out to
the place of meeting, eight long Miles from Kilkenny, called Corronneduffe,
upon the Borders of Ydough; Leaving his Lordships own Company of two hundred
Footmen short (of the place of Parlie assigned) above two English Miles; The
place where we met with the rebels, was upon a Heath ground, descending
toward a narrow straight, having on either side of us a low shrubbie boggie
wood, within three pikes length (at the farthest) from the place where we
parlyed, and the like distance from the straight aforesaid, the choice whereof
we much misliked. Owny Mac Rorye when he came unto us, brought with him a
Troop of choice Pikes, leaving in a little plain beyond the straight, within
half Culvering shot of us, in our sight, all his gross, being in all to the
number (as Redmond Keting, one of the rebels did swear unto me the President
five hundred Foot strong, and twenty Horse, whereof three hundred were
Bonoughes, the best furnished men for the war, and the best appointed that
we have seen in this Kingdom. At our first meeting, and so during the
parley, (which was appointed for some good causes best known to his Lordship)
they stood (as they might) every one trayling his Pike, and holding the cheek
thereof in his hand, ready to push. The Earl himself was upon a little weak
Hackney, unarmed (as all we were that were about him) standing so near with
the side of his Hackney to the rebels, as they touched him. After an hour and
more was idly spent, and nothing concluded, we and others did pray his
Lordship to depart: But he desirous to see that infamous Jesuit Archer, did
cause him to be sent for; as soon as he came, the Earl and he fell into an
Argument, wherein he called Archer Traitor, and reprooved him, for sending,
under pretext of Religion, her Majesty's Subjects into rebellion. In this mean
time the gross of the rebels had left their standing in the plain, and some
crept into the shrubbes aforesaid, and others did so mingle themselves among
us, that we were environed, and stood as if we had been in a Fair, whereof
diverse did advertise his Lordship. And at last I the Earl of Thomond willed
Ownye to put back his men: And I the President desired his Lordshipp to be
gone, for that I did not like their mingling with us; wherewith as his Lordship
was turning his Horse, at an instant they seized upon him, and us two: His
Lordship was in a moment drawn from his Horse; we had more hanging upon us,
then is credibly to be believed: but our horses were strong, and by that
means did break through them, in tumbling down (on all sides) those that
were before and behind us, and (thanks be to God) we escaped the push of
their pikes, (which they freely bestowed) and the flinging of their Skeines,
without any hurt, saving that I the Earl of Thomond received with a Pike a
wound in the back. The Earls Horsemen (which were armed) were far from us,
for every one was dispersed, and talking with particular rebels, about the
bordering business, so as we do protest unto your Lordships, in all we were
not above ten unarmed men near unto him, and as soon as the Alarm was
raised, every man of his followers came away, without ^ooking behind him: After
we had cleared our selves (within a Butt length at the most) we made hault,
and called for the Trumpet, and cried upon the Earls men for a Charge, but
none stood by us, but Captain Harvy, Captain Brown, Master Comerford, a
Lawyer, and three of our Servants, which was all the company that we had then,
and all of us, without Armor or other Weapon then our Swords, so as for want
of more company, we were enforced by the Enemies shot, to leave them the
ground; But we do assure your Lordships, the place wherein we parlied was of
such advantage to the Enemy, that 500 Foot, would not have cared for 500
Horse, and therefore (his Lordship having no Foot with him) it was unpossible
to do the Enemy any harm with Horse: this treachery (for so we must term it
in respect of his Lordships confidence in the valor of his own men, and also
in his opinion that the Enemy durst not show him this foul measure) was
contrived by that Villain Archer, and none was made acquainted with it, The
narrow escape of the Lord President.
but Owny Mac Rory, two Leinster men, and four Bonnaghes, for if more had
been trusted, there is no doubt but his Lordship should have had knowledge of
it; Owny Mac Rory laid his hands on me the President, as they report, and
(next unto God) I must thank the Earl of Thomond for my escape, The Earl of
Thomond wounded.
who thrust his Horse upon him, and at my back a Rebel newly protected (at my
suite) called Brien Mac Donoghe Kevanaghe being a foot, did me good service,
and wounded one of the Traitors, that laid hands on the Earl of Ormond, for
the rest I must thank my Horse, whose strength bare down all about him. On
our side there was but one man slain, not above five hurt, whereof Pierce
Butler (a kinseman of the Earls) was one, who behaved himself valiantly; and
about fourteen taken Prisoners; and of the Enemy was one slain, and a few
hurt; the Prisoners were taken by their own negligence, who were grazing their
horses: The taking of this great Lord breeds unsettled humors in these parts,
for all the Gentlemen of the country (whereof some of them were his true
followers) for want of a Defender are wavering; others, which in their own
dispositions were naught, and contained themselves as Subjects but for fear of
his power, are now at liberty, and we fear will shortly declare themselves:
The order which was taken for the settling of the country after the Earl of
Ormonds disaster.
To keep them from present uproares, I the President, did immediately send for
six hundred Foot of the Mounster Companies, which were at Watterford, and the
hundred Horse, which were in the country, to the Town of Kilkenny, which has
wrought good effect, and stayed the unsettled humors; besides, thereby it did
assure the Lady of Ormond, and her daughter, which otherwise had been subject
to many dangers, so sorrowful a Lady in all our lives we have not seen; and
do believe, that if it had not pleased God, that we at that time, had been
there, she would hardly have undergone those griefs that did oppress her: For
besides the loss of her husband (in being Prisoner with those rogues) she
beheld the apparent ruin of her self and her daughter, and no less danger of
both their lives; the Guard whereof she committed unto us, not being assured
of those that serve her, for there is diverse that pretend to be the Earls
Heirs; First Sir Edmond Butler his second Brother, which Sir Walter Butler the
Earls Nephew, (whose blood is not attainted) will not yield unto, because his
Uncle Sir Edmond is not restored in blood; And the Vicount Mountgarret thinks,
that he ought to be Earl of Ormond, for many reasons which he pretends. This
controversy could not but breed great danger to the Countess, and her
daughter, for that either of those would be glad to possess themselves in
the Earls houses, and the doubt who is to succeed him, breeds unsettled
humors in the Gentlemen of the country, that be followers to the Earl,
every one addicting himself to the party they affect, whereby there is a
general distraction which would have broken out into a dangerous Rebellion,
if the Forces and we had not been here to keep them in awe: Besides we did
not neglect to send for all the Lords and Gentlemen in the country (that are
of the best quality) and have temporized with them; So as we hope, the dangers
which were like to ensue, will be for a time well appeased: Also understanding
that Balliragget a house of the Lord Mountgarets, in the which there is a Ward
for the Queen, kept as a Pledge for his loialty, that the same was attempted
to be won by the Vicecounts sons, who are in rebellion; And immediately
upon the Earls taking, lay before it, in hope to starve the Soldiers, (for
their last days victuals was spent) I the President did take up in Kilkenny,
upon my credit victuals, and with a strong convoy of Horse and Foot, have
revictualled it, for six weeks, whereof the Lord Deputy is advertised,
praying him to be careful, before that victual be spent; And because that all
things might be continued in good order; We thought good to remain in
Kilkenny, until the Lord Deputy should determine of some course, so to hold it
for her Majesty's benefit, the countries good, and the Countess and her
daughters safety; wherein we were enforced to make large disbursements, of our
small stores, for dieting in that time of the horse and foot Troops, whereof
I the Earl, defrayed the charges of my own Company of two hundred Foot, and
I the President of all the rest, during our abode there, which was eight days.
In this mean time we understanding that Mountgarrets sons, (which are in
rebellion) did come to spoil the country near to Kilkenny; We sent out some
part of our Troops, who lighted upon some of their men; And amongst them which
they slew, there was one of the Butlers, a near kinsman to Mountgarret and a
Leader slain, and the Traitors driven to their Woods, being enforced to leave
their enterprise.

The sixteenth of this present, Sir George Bourchier, and Sir Christopher St
Lawrence, sent from the Lord Deputy, came to Kilkenny, Sir George for chief
Commander of her Majesty's Forces there, and to take charge of the Countess,
her Daughter, and the Earls Houses, and Sir Christopher to be directed by
him. The Forces there left is two hundred Foot of the Earls, other two
hundred Foot of Sir Christophers, thirty Foot left in a ward in Mountgarretts
house, called Balliraggett, eighty five Horse, (whereof fifty of the Earls,
five and twenty of St Lawrences) and ten of Sir George Bourchiers. Since the
Earls taking, we kept the Rebels from doing any hurt in the Country,
neither as yet is there any in rebellion in the same, but Mountgarrets sons,
whose force is not such, but in our opinions, (without they call strangers to
assist them) her Majesty's Forces there is much too strong for them. The
seventeenth we left Kilkenny, and came to this City, leaving Sir George
Bourcheir as aforesaid. This accident has withheld me the President from my
peculiar charge, more then I purposed, but therein I hope your Lordships will
hold me excused, being other ways so necessarily employed in these causes of
so great importance; whereof I humbly beseech your Lordshipps, in your
wisdoms to have due consideration. To morrow we proceed in our Journey
toward Cork, from whence, (with the rest of the Council there) we will
advertize your Lordships, in what estate we find the Province, not being able
here to certify your Honors so particularly as then we may. So we humbly
take our leaves: From Waterford, the eighteenth of April, 18. April.
1600. Strange it was to consider how much this misfortune distracted the minds
of sundry that before were inclined to subjection, and greatly animated the
Traitors to persevere in their wicked enterprises, which might evidently be
seen in Pierce Lacy, a wise and malicious Traitor, who being but few days
before upon the Earls protection, promising great loyalty and much service,
did presently relapse, and became a more dangerous Rebel then at any time
before. But now leaving farther discourse of former occurrents, we will betake
our selves wholly to prosecute the relation of such things as happened in
Mounster, after the Lord President came to Waterford, which was the sixteenth
of April; For the prosecution of the Service in which Province, by order out
of England, the List, as aforesaid for Mounster, was established to be three
thousand Foot, and two hundred and fifty Horse. After his repair thither,
Intelligence came unto him, that the Titularie Earl of Desmond with the
greatest part of his Forces was remaining not far from Yoghall, about
Drum^inin, with intent to give impediment unto him, The submissions of Tho.
fits James, and Tho. Power.
and such Companies as he had with him. Thomas fits James, Bastard son of
Sir James fits Gerrald, late Lord of the Decies, and Thomas Power, the Lord
Powers Cosen Ierman, the chief Rebels in the County of Waterford, receiving
advertisement that the President was in Waterford, fearing peradventure lest
some draught might be drawn upon them; and that themselves or followers might
receive some great prejudice by means of the Presidents Forces, made great
instance by the Lord Power, and Sir Nicholas Welsh, to be received into her
Majesty's protection, promising and protesting not only that they would
reclaim themselves, and their followers from committing any outrage against
her Majesty's Subjects; but further, that they would endeavor to recompense
and requite their former defaults by some acceptable service. The Lord
President considering, that the receiving of them and their Dependants into
protection, would be a means both to weaken the Traitor Desmond of some part
of his strength, and to secure and open the passage betwixt Waterford and
Yoghall, which before was so kept, especially by them, that there was no way to
send but by Sea: Upon the best assurance that could be gotten for their future
loyalties, accepted their submissions, and granted protection both to
themselves and their followers, since which time they have been good and loyal
Subjects.


CHAP. IV.
The encounter of her Majesty's Forces with Florence Mac Carty. The prey of the
Brough taken. The state of the Province of Mounster, when the Lora President
came into it. The Lord Barry preyed. Redmond Burke defeated by Odwyre. Odwyres
Country harrassed by Redmond Burke.
THE twentieth of April 20. April.
the Lord President accompanied with the Earl of Thomond, the Lord Aud^^y, the
Lo: Power, the Lord of the Decies, Sir Nicholas Welsh, Sir Anthony Cook, Sir
Richard Masterson, Captain Roger Harvie, Captain William Taffe, Captain
Richard Greame, Captain Fleming, Captain Gifford, Captain Dillon, Captain
Oreilly, and diverse other private Gentlemen, with eight hundred Foot, and one
hundred Horse, came that night to Dongarvan, where he found Sir George Carry
the Treasurer his Company, which the next morning he took along with him to
Yoghall. 22. April.
The two and twentieth he received advertisement of an encounter between
Captain Flower, Sergeant Major of that Province, and Florence Mac Carty, the
performance whereof was as follows.

Florence Mac Carty notwithstanding the infinite favors and bounties which he
had received from her Majesty, The encounter of her Majesty's forces with
Flor. Mac Cartie.
being wholly Spaniolized, had possessed the minds of those in Carbry and
Desmond with a strange opinion of his worthiness, and having combined with
Tyrone and the other Rebels at his late being in Mounster did show himself in
open action against her Majesty. Whereupon the Commissioners Sir Warham Saint
Ledger, and Sir Henry Power sent Captain Flower and Captain Bostocke into
Carbery with twelve hundred foot and one hundred horse (which Flower commanded
in chief) to make prosecution against the Rebels of those parts, in their way
toward Rosse, they burned and spoiled the Country as they passed, they got
the heads of thirty seven notorious rebels, besides others of less note:
Florence gathered together of the Provincials and Bownoghs (for so they call
their waged men) to the number of two thousand or thereabouts, Dermond Oconner,
as General, (for so they termed him) of the Bownoghs; These being gathered to
a head, attended their opportunity to give some blow to our Forces, yet never
did encounter them, until they were in their return within five Miles of
Cork. In the mid way betwixt that City and Kinsale, there is a foord and a
bridge, over the river called Awneboy. Here the rebels lay close in an ambush
on the North side of the river, in a glynn between two hills, and also on the
South side, in a scrubbie Wood near the river: The Companies coming on, not
thinking there to expect an Enemy, marched scarce orderly, and but a few maches
burning, Captain John Bostocke, riding a good pretty distance before them, and
past the bridge, espied the Morians of some of the suncke ambush in the Glinn,
presently retiring back gave notice of the Enemy, and willed them to prepare
themselves. The rebels finding that they were discovered, presently rose, and
charged our men before they were well ordered; Captain Flower the Commander
finding himself oppressed with numbers, drew to the walls of an old ruinous
Castle to the Eastward, near half a mile distant for his safety, in which
retrait, they being upon the point of routing, were charged home both with
Horse and Foot. Flower to prevent the danger, directed Lieuetenant Lane,
officer to Sir John Barkley, to lie in ambush under an old ditch, with a
squadron of Musketeers; Carbry Oconner brother to Dermond aforesaid, came on
with his Company, following the execution of some of our men, until he fell
into the ambush, where hearing a volley of shot delivered upon them, Carbry
with other Gentlemen were slain; At which accident the rebels being amazed,
the Horse took the opportunity, and chardged them with such resolution, as
instantly they rowted, and our men fell upon the execution of them: In which
Charge I cannot but particularly commend Robert Tent, Sir Anthony Cooks Cornet,
who did behave himself with extraordinary valor: besides Carbry Oconner,
ninety eight were slain in the place, and near that number hurt, whereof
diverse afterward died: On our part, none of note hurt, but Greame, brother to
Captain Richard Greame, and eight Soldiers: Captain Flower, (who did that
day admirably well) had two Horses slain under him, and received sundry
wounds, both with sword and pike, and it was his fortune to encounter with
Dermond O Conner, at whom he discharged his Pistol, which lighted upon his
Targett, whereby he received no hurt. That night they marched into Kinelmekagh,
and encamped beyond the Bridge of Balline Coursie, where they stayed with their
hurt men two nights; the third day in the evening they dispersed their
Companies to those Countries where they had Bonaught.

The same day Captain Francis Slingsby, Commander of the Lord Presidents Foot
Company, and garrison at Kilmallock, where there was the Lord Presidents two
hundred Foot, Captain Clares one hundred and fifty, twenty five of Sir
Anthony Cook his Troop, and twelve of Sir George Thorntons Horse, drew forth
in the night, part of that garrison, to take the prey of the Brough, a Castle
of Pierce Lacies, but three miles from Kilmallocke, to expect the coming
forth of the prey to grase, The prey of the Brough taken.
which accordingly, about an hour after day light came forth, and they took
it: Then presently the cry being raised, three hundred Foot, and fifty Horse
led by Pierce Lacie, skirmished with them for the space of six hours; but
seeing they could not prevail, they gave over the pursuit: There was slain
of our men, but one Horseman of Sir George Thorntons Troop, and four or five
of the Lord Presidents Foot hurt; their losses were more, whereof Con Oneale,
Tyrones base son was hurt.

The three and twentieth at night the Lord President lodged at Barriscourt, 23.
April.
the Lord Barries house, and the four and twentieth he came to Cork, upon the
way being met by Sir Henry Power, the Commissioner of the Province, and the
Captains that there were garrisoned. The first thing that the President
intended (after he was come to Cork) was thoroughly to understand the state of
the Province, as then it stood; the greatest part whereof, although it was
known to him before, yet he calling the Council of that Province together,
desired to be certified by them in the particulars thereof, to the intent that
he might address his actions accordingly, Sir Henry Power being sole
Commissioner (since the death of Sir Warham St Ledger) reported the same much
after this manner.

I know not how more fitly to describe unto your Honor the estate of this
Province, The state of the Province of Mounster, when the Lo. President came
into it.
then by comparing the same to a man that is diseased of a languishing, and
almost incurable sickness, the Head so sore, and the Heart so sick, that
every member refuses his natural Office, in so much that I dare boldly
affirm, that since the Conquest of Ireland, this Province of Mounster was
never more distempered then now it is, for all the inhabitans of the country,
are in open and actual rebellion, except some few of the better sort; who
though themselves in their own persons attend the state, yet all their
Tenants, Friends, and Followers, yea and for the most part, either their Sons
or Brothers, publicly professed in the devilish action; as for example, the
Lord of Cahir, Cormocke Mac Dermond Lord of Muskry, Gerald Fits James Lord of
the Decies, Mac Carty Keugh; The computation and number of the rebels, how many
they are, especially of the Province, by reason that they are dispersed in so
many several countries, and commanded by so many heads, we can give no
certain judgment, but for strangers (meaning Connaght men that receive
bonnaght amongst them) we are certainly advertised from diverse, that are well
acquainted with their affairs, that they are in List five thousand men, which
strength added to the Rebels of the Province, does make them absolutely
Masters of the field, and her Majesty's Forces here garrisoned in Cities and
walled Towns for their safety, (by reason of their weakness before your
coming) were in condition little better then besieged. Furthermore, all this
might seem more tolerable, if the Cities and walled Towns were (in these
times of extremity) a safe and well assured retreat for them: but all of them
are so besotted and bewitched with the Popish Priests, Jesuits, and
Seminaries, that for fear of their Cursings and Excommunications, they are
ready upon every small occasion, to rise in Arms against them, and minister
all underhand, aid and succor unto the Rebels: so that considering the
generality of the Inhabitants that are in open rebellion, the infidelity of
those that pretend subjection, the multitude of Connaght men that defend the
Action, and the little confidence that may be reposed in Cities, (by reason of
their contrary religion) we may very well conclude, that the estate of this
Province is like a man sick of a most dangerous and desperate disease.

The Lord President having heard by his former advertisements concerning the
same matter, thus confirmed; He told the Council that he much doubted of any
good success that could suddenly be expected, and the rather because his
Forces were far inferior to the rebels, being in list but three thousand
Foot and two hundred and fifty Horse: Yet remembering the old Proverb, that
Ardua virtutis est via, and relying upon the justness of the War, more then
upon the number of his Forces, resolved to try the uttermost of his wit and
cunning, without committing the matter to the hazard of fortune, to quench the
fire that now raged with such extreme fury.

The same day John Fits Thomas accompanied with one hundred Kerne, The Lord
Barry preyed
or thereabouts, came into the Lord Barry his country, near Castle Lions,
and there took from him and his Tenants a prey of three hundred Cowes and ten
Horses.

The morrow following being the twenty sixth, 26. April.
intelligence was brought from Cormocke Oge Carty called by the English Charles
Carty, Son to Sir Cormocke Mac Teg, that the Arch-traitor Tyrone had sent
Letters to Florence Mac Carty, to encourage both him and his adherents to
persist in the action: Assuring them that within one month, namely in May
next, he would be with them again in Mounster, and for that Journey, his
Munition, Victuals, etc. were already prepared.

The twnety seventh (as Dermond Odwire informed the President by his Letters)
Redmond Burke with six hundred men entered into his country to burn and prey
the same, Redmond Burke defeated by Odwire.
which to effect, he divided his Forces into three sundry parts: Odwire having
assembled as many men as that short warning would permit, fell upon one of the
Divisions before mentioned, which consisted of two hundred Foot, of them he slew
one hundred and twenty, and many hurt: In revenge whereof Redmond Burke upon the
sixth of May following, having gotten as many men as he could assemble,
Odwires country harrassed by Redmond Burke.
entered the second time into the aforesaid country, where he slew Man, Woman,
and Child, burnt all the houses, (Castles excepted) and drove away all the
Cattle of the country.

CHAP. V.
Loghguyre preyed. The submission of Barrett and Condon. The submission of
Florence Mac Cartie. Florence Mac Cartie's demands. The submission of Nugent.
The Broughe burnt by Pierce Lacie. Redmond Burke departed out of Cownologhe.
Ten of the Bonoughs slain by Sir Richard Percy. A Letter from James Fits
Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie. The Army set out from Cork toward Limericke.
The submission of the white Knight.
THE twenty ninth, 29. April.
Captain Francis Slingsby drew forth one hundred and fifty Foot, and twenty
Horse, of the Garrizon of Kilmallocke (in the night) to take the prey of
Loghguire, Loghguire preyed.
five miles distant from his Garrizon, a place which much anoyed the passage
between Kilmallocke and Limericke; in the morning when the Cattle were put
forth to grase, he took it: the Ward to recover it sallied, but after a
short skirmish, being hopeless to do any good, with some loss returned.

About this time also the Lord president began to give forth speeches of a
Journey, that he speedily intended toward Limricke, with a purpose to burn
and spoil all the Rebels Houses and Corn, and to take the prey of the
country near adjoining, through which his Army should pass, whether it were
the brute of this Journey, or the hard measure that he had lately received at
the hands of the Arch-traitors, Tyrone and Desmond, the white Knight (whose
country lay near to the way as the Army should march) sought by the means
of Sir George Thornton, to be received into protection, promising to repair
and recover the credit he had lost, by his lewd and disloyal courses, which
afterward he performed accordingly as shall be showed in its due place.

About this time also William Barrett of Ballencolly, The submission of Barret
and Condon.
and Mac Mawghe Condon, both chief of small Countries, submitted themselves
to her Majesty's mercy. But the principal mark which the Lord President
aimed at, before his entrance into the Field with his Army, was to reclaim
(if possible it might be) Florence Mac Cartie (before spoken of) from further
pursuing those hateful and ungrateful courses, which unadvisedly he had
entered into. This he desired for diverse reasons: First and especially for the
service, which he foresaw might receive some good countenance by his
subjection. Secondly, because (if he continued in action) of necessity he
must be constrained to employ a great part of his Forces (which he thought
both inconvenient and dangerous to be divided) to follow the prosecution of
him and his Accomplices; And lastly, a good opinion which some his honorable
friends in England, and himself also had conceived of him: For these causes,
was the President moved earnestly to desire, that this Florence might be
stayed from further persisting in those exorbitant courses, and the rather,
because the said Florence had written Letters unto him, which upon his way into
Mounster he received, that as soon as he should come to Cork, he would
present himself personally to him, and do all his endeavors to advance the
Service. All which being made known by the Lord President to the Earl of
Thomond, he entreated the said Earl, and Sir Nicholas Welsh, to join with
John fits Edmonds, Florence his Godfather, (a man very famous in those parts,
for his learning and liberal hospitality in entertaining of strangers) to
send a Messenger, to signify to Florence Mac Cartie, that they were very
desirous to confer with him, about certain particularities concerning his
own good. By his Letter remised in answer of this message, he appointed both
a time and place for their meeting, which was accordingly performed. After more
then two hours spent, and many Oaths passed, as well by the Earl as Sir
Nicholas Welsh, that the President had promised his safe return; with
fearful guiltiness he came to Cork, and from thence to Shandon Castle,
upon the third of May, 1600, 3. Ma^^. The submission of Flor. Mac Carty.
where the Lord President remained at that time, before whom when he had
presented himself, he made his submission upon his knees, with many
protestations of the sincerity of his Heart, and the true loyalty, which he
always bare toward her Majesty, desiring that he might be received into
her Majesty's favor, and he would serve her as faithfully and unfainedly, as
any man in Mounster. The Lord President reprooved him very sharply, for his
traiterous behaviors, laying before him the odiousness and foulness of his
faults, and the monstrous ingratitude toward her Majesty, from whom he had
received many great benefits, and gracious favors: These speeches finished,
the President bade him to stand up; when as both he, and the Earl of Thomond,
Sir Nicholas Welsh, and John fits Edmund, did every of them very feelingly
preach Obedience unto him: His answer being very general, carried great show
of loyalty and obedience at that time. Upon the next morrow he was called
before the President and Council, who was again urged (by them all in
general) not only to desist from proceeding in evil, but with alacrity of
mind to do some such service, as might merit reward; for assurance and
performance whereof, the President demanded his eldest son in pledge: for
the avoydance whereof he used many colorable reasons, viz. That it would
cause the Bonnoghs to forsake him, yea, and to drive him out of his Country,
erecting his wives base Brother in his place; That he had of long time tasted
of miseries and wants; That he had lately recovered his Country of Desmond
with great travel and charges, and therefore like the burnt child, he feared
to run into any such inconvenience, as might cause his friends to relapse from
him. Adding moreover, that it was needless in them to exact any such thing at
hishands, who was in his soul wholly addicted and devoted to her Majesty's
service. The weakness of these reasons were both wisely discovered, and
effectually answered: but all that could be said, was no more pleasing to him,
then is delightful music to deaf ears; which being discerned, the
President betook himself to a new devise: for now he vehemently threatened,
(that leaving for a time all other services) a sharp prosecution of
Hostility, with fire and sword against himself, his tenants and followers,
should speedily overtake him, upon his return into Desmond. Much was he
amazed with this denunciation, and therefore having made a short pawse,
answered thus: Since my needless pledge is so earnestly desired, Flor. Mac
Carties demands.
I am content to leave my eldest son in Cork upon these conditions: That her
Majesty would pass unto me the Country of Desmond, in as large and ample
manner, as before it was conveyed unto my Father in law the Earl of Clancare.
Secondly, that she would give unto me the Name and Title of Mac Cartie More,
or Earl of Clancare. Thirdly, that she would give unto me three hundred men
in pay, for assuring my Country from all that would offend it. These
hyperbolicall demands, were no sooner propounded, but absolutely rejected:
Therefore he desired that License might be granted unto him, to write to his
honorable friends in England, to work for him the before recited Conditions,
which without any great difficulty was permitted. Lastly, the President
questioned with him what he intended to do, if these his desires were not
satisfied; thereupon he swear upon a Book, that he would never bear Arms
against her Majesty's Forces, (except he were assaulted in Desmond) and that
his followers should likewise abstain from actual rebellion; and further,
that he would send him intelligence from time to time, of the Rebels
proceedings, and do him the best underhand-service that possibly he could.
Now had the President effected a great part of his desires, namely, that by
Florence his remaining in Neutralitie, his Forces might be wholly employed
against James fits Thomas, who being once slain or banished, it would be an
easy matter to teach him to speak in a more submissiue language, and forget
to capitulate either for Lands, Title, or Charge. Florence is now departed
toward his Country of Desmond, where leaving him in suspense, betwixt doubt
and fear, we will proceed in the accidents of Cork.

Now the President discerning this War in Mounster to be like a Monster with
many Heads, or a Servant that must obey diverse Masters, did think thus; that
if the Heads themselves might be set at variance, they would prove the most
fit Instruments to ruin one another: The two chief Heads were the Sugan Earl
(for so they called Desmond) Commander of the Provincials, and Dermond O Conner
General of the Bownoghs before mentioned. This Dermond O Conner was a poor
man in the beginning of his fortune, and not Owner of two Plough Lands, in
Connaght his native Country; his reputation grew partly by his wife, who was
daughter to the old Earl of Desmond, and partly by his valor, being reputed
one of the most valiant Leaders, and best Commanders amongst the Irish rebels.
By means whereof he had now the command of fourteen hundred men in his own
Bonaght, and besides that, might strike a great stroke with the other, being by
Tyrone at his departure out of Mounster, ordained chief Commander of them all.
This man did the President make choice to deal withal, for these reasons:
First because he knew that the said Dermond being a mere Mercenary, and
serving in Mounster only for pay, might be induced by large Sums of money,
to serve the Queen as well as the rebels: Secondly, he had a very fit
Instrument, whereby the more easily to work him to his will, namely his Wife,
who being brought up some part of her time amongst the English, had not only
learned the language, but stood reasonably well affected to the English
government, and likely it was that she would use all her industry, to advance
the service, in hope that if it succeeded well, it would prove a good step or
Ladder, to procure the liberty of her Brother James Fits Gerald, Son and
Heir to Gerald Earl of Desmond slain (now Prisoner in the Tower) and to
raise his fortunes. Lastly it was publicly known that the Sugan Earl, would
never do service upon the Bownoghs, except he might have both the title and
possessions of the Earl of Desmond confirmed unto him, which her Majesty
would never condescend unto. Upon these grounds in very secret manner, he
provided and sent a fit agent, to sound the inclination of the Lady Margaret,
for so was Dermonds Wife named; and finding her fit to be wrought upon, the
Conditions should be propounded, viz. That if her husband would take Desmond
Prisoner, and deliver him into the hands of the President, he should
incontinently receive one thousand pound sterling; and that he should have a
Company of men in pay from the Queen, and other conditions of satisfaction, to
her self and her Brother: The Messenger was ^o sooner sent about these
important affairs, but that another occasion offered it self unto the
President, of no less moment then the former, to advance the service: for
immediately hereupon, one John Nugent sometimes servant to Sir Thomas Norris,
late President of Mounster, pretending some wrongs and injuries to be offered
unto him by the State, joined with the Rebels, and became (to his power) the
most malicious and bloody Traitor in all these parts. At last having as it
should seem spit his poison, and spent his Venom, sought to Sir Warham Saint
Ledger, and Sir Henry Power, the Commissioners, to be received into protection;
who more for fear of the hurt that he might do, then hope of the good that
he would do, granted the same, until the Lord Presidents pleasure (who was
now ready to depart from Dublin toward Mounster) were further known. At this
time therefore Nugent came to make his submission to the President, The
submission of Nugent.
and to desire pardon for his faults committed: Answer was made, that for so
much as his crimes and offenses had been extraordinary, he could not hope to
be reconciled unto the State, except he would deserve it by extraordinary
service, which says the President, if you shall perform, you may deserve not
only Pardon for your faults committed heretofore, but also some store of
Crowns to relieve your wants hereafter; He presently promised, not to be
wanting in any thing that lay in the power of one man to accomplish, and in
private made offer to the President, that if he might be well recompensed, he
would ruin within a short space, either the Sugan Earl, or John Fits Thomas
his Brother. And indeed very likely he was both to attempt and perform as
much as he spoke. To attempt because he was so valiant and daring, as that he
did not fear any thing; and to execute, because by reason of his many outrages
before committed, the chief Rebels did repose great confidence in him. The
President having contrived a plot for James Fits Thomas (as is before showed)
gave him in charge to undertake John his Brother: But because the matter might
be carried without any suspicion, upon the next morrow, the Council being set,
and a great concourse of people assembled, Nugent renueth his suite for the
continuance of his protection. But the President rehearsing in public
audience, a Catalogue of his mischievous outrages lately committed, told the
Council, that having farther enquired, and better considered of Man and
Matter, for his part he thought it an action of very ill example to receive
unto mercy such a notorious Malefactor: the Council were all of the same
opinion, who reviling him with many biting and bitter speeches, and assuring
him, that if it were not for a religious regard, that was holden of the Queens
word, he should pay a dear price for his former misdemeanor, and so with
public disgrace, was he dismissed their presence. The promised submission of
the white Knight, the jealousy which the rebels conceived of Florence Mac
Carty by his coming to the President, and the Presidents Journey being now
blazed through the Province, it caused Pierce Lacy, The Brough burnt by Pierce
Lacy.
who all the time of the Wars (until now) had kept a ward in the Castle of
the Brough three miles from Kilmallocke, despayring to hold the same against
her Majesty's Forces; And knowing it was a convenient place for a Garrison,
plucked down some part of the Castle, burnt the rest, and by the light thereof,
ran into the Woods: Redmond Burke Redmond Burke departed out of Connologhe.
also with five hundred Bonoghs about this time, which was in the beginning of
May, withdrew out of Connillogh, and kept himself for a little time about the
borders of Ownhy, where being pressed with want of Victuals, he intended to
leave the Province. The Sugan Earl, Pierce Lacy and some other hearing of this
sudden departure, dispatched Messengers unto him, with earnest entreaties, and
large promises, for increasing his Bonnoght, if he would return, but to no
purpose. The cause of this his unexpected departure was a traffic between
him and the President, who did uphold him in certain faint hopes, about the
obtaining of the Barronie of Lettrim, which he claimed as his inheritance: For
this is most true, that not long before this time, one Richard Burke Uncle to
the said Redmond, wrote unto the President, that his Nephew would be very glad
of his Lordships favor, and that he would withdraw both himself and his
Bownoghs out of Mounster, so that he would not send any Forces to molest him
in Connaght. Whereunto was answered, that it became nor a Governor, no not a
private Subject to make any such agreement with a man in his condition: And
farther that he might assure himself, that by strong hand he could never
invest himself in the Barrony of Lettrim, nor be in secure possession of his
Fathers Lands: But if he would reclaim himself and do service to her
Majesty, the President would use the best friends that he had, either in
England or Ireland, that his cause might be respected with all favor
according to the equity thereof.

Not long after the receipt of this Letter, he left the County of Limericke,
severed himself from the Mounster Rebels, and settled in Ormond, and Tirrell
stayed not long behind, inwardly doubting some practice upon himself, but
publicly pretending the cause of his departure, for a mislike between him and
Dermond O Conner. The President had given forth, ever since his first coming
to Cork, that his Army should be on foot in the way to Limerick, by the
sixth of May; his intention not being to rise until the twentieth: the bruit
thereof caused the Rebels greatest strength to assemble together, who by the
day assigned, had united their Forces in the great Wood called Kilmore,
between Moyallo, and Kilmallock, near the place of Ballihawre, through the
which the Army was to march. There they continued the space of ten days,
attending continually, and hearkening daily for the Presidents coming: but
finding that he stirred not in all this time, (imagining that he durst not
take the field at all) they dispersed their Companies, and departed every one
into his own Country. Hereupon some thought, that the President had altered
his determination for going to Limerick, and intended to begin the prosecution
in some other place: others supposed, that he would not venture out of Cork,
until he had received new Supplies, which were daily expected out of England:
But both the one and other were besides the mark; for by this stay, (which
from the beginning he determined) he saw diverse commodious opportunities might
accrue unto him, as that hereby he should receive certain advertisement of
the strength of the enemy that was to confront him, and also that it was
impossible for them (any long time) to hold together, for diverse wants which of
necessity must accompany such an undisciplined and disordered multitude, by
means whereof they would be constrained to break with their own weight;
wherein he nothing failed of his expectation; for within a few days following,
they were all divided into so many places, and those so far distant, that
they could not speedily be reassembled.

Upon the sixteenth of May, May. 16.
the President was advertised by Sir Richard Percie, Ten of the Bownoghs
slain by Sir Richard Percy.
who was Governor at (...), that by his Horsemen in Kinalmekagh, whom he had
sent to forage that Country, ten of the Bownoghs were slain, and a far
greater slaughter had been made of them, if Florence Mac Cartie had not had
some intelligence out of Kinsale of his intention, who gave the Bownoghs
warning of their coming, whereupon they fled, and dispersed themselves.

Upon the seventeenth of May, May. 17.
James fits Thomas, the usurping Earl of Desmond, wrote a Letter to Florence
Mac Cartie, praying the aid of his Forces, the Copy whereof is here inserted.

A Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie.
AFter my very hearty Commendations; Having received Intelgence of your happy
escape out of Cork, it was very joyful to me, and many other your Cosens and
adherents here; the fruit of your conference with the President, and the rest,
I hope shall purchase ripe experience, and harvest of further knowledge, to cut
off the cruel yoke of bloody enemies, who daily study to work our perpetual
destruction and exile: I am given to understand that they pretend a journey
toward the County of Limerick, I am gathering the best force and rising out
of these parts, to resist their wicked desires: Redmond Burke is bordering on
the Confines of Ormond, expecting to hear from me, if occasion of important
service should require, I have the other day received his Letters signifying
his constant service to be ready whenever I shall send to him, what news you
have with your best advice in all causes tending to our general Service, I
expect to hear, and if the President do rise out (as it is thought) I pray
you good Cosen slack not time, with your best Force and Provision of victuals
to prosecute him freshly in the Reareward, as you respect me, the exaltation of
the Catholic faith, and the ease of our country: I look no excuse at your
hands, which I pray to lay apart, wherein you shall further the service, and
bind me with all my Forces to second you at your need. I have retained Dermond
Oconner in Kerry two hundred Soldiers this quarter, besides the Clanshihies
and other Bonoghs with the rising out of my country, so as I think I shall make
up sixteen or seventeene hundred strong, well appointed, together with the
Force of Redmond Burke: Thus for lack of farther Novelties, I commit you to
the blessed guiding of God. From Crome the seventeenth of May 1600.

I am credibly informed that five Spanish ships are landed in the North with
Treasure, Munition, and great Ordinance, with a competent number of three
thousand Soldiers Pioners, and religious persons; I expect every day
advertisement in writing, and the coming up of Captain Terrell with the
Munition sent me by Oneyle. I appointed your Cosen Maurice Oge Fits Maurice
Gerald to have the charge of Kierrycorrie, I pray you afford him your lawful
favor.

Your most assured Cosen James Desmond.

The same day Captain Gawen Harvy, who then had in her Majesty's pay a man of
War, wherein for the payment of the Army there was three thousand pound in
money, Munition, Victuals, and Soldiers apparel, set sail with direction
for the River of Shenan, to meet the Lord President at Limericke.

The President the twenty one of May left Cork, 21. Maij. The Army set out
from Cork toward Limricke.
and with his Army encamped that night within three miles of Moyallo.

The twenty two they lodged within five miles of Kilmallocke, the twenty
three the Army came within a mile of Kilmallocke, where the white Knight
according to his former promises made his humble submission unto the President,
23. Maij. The submission of the White Knight.
whereby the Faggot began to unloose which combined the Rebellion in Mounster,
but let us a little look backward.

CHAP. VI.
Cahir Castle surprised by James Galdie Butler. A letter from James Galdie
Butler to the Lord President. The rendering of the Castle of Loghguyrre. Nugents
attempt upon John fits Thomas* ^lanwilliam sp^yled and burnt by the Army.
THe President being at Yoghall in his journey to Cork, Cahir Castle surprised
by James Galdie Butler.
sent Sir John Dow^all, (an ancient Captain in Ireland) to Cahir Castle, as
well to see the same provided of a sufficient Ward out of Captain George
Blunts Company, as to take order for the furnishing of them with Victual,
Munition, and other warlike Provision, there he left the eighth or ninth of
May a Sergeant with nine and twenty Soldiers and all necessary Provision for
two months, who notwithstanding, upon the three and twentieth of the same were
surprised by James Galdie alias Butler, brother to the Lord of Cahir, and as it
was suspected by many pregnant presumptions, not without the consent and
working of the Lord himself, which in after times proved to be true. The
careless security of the Warders, together with the treachery of an
Irishman, who was placed sentinel upon the top of the Castle, were the causes
of this Surprise.

James Galdie had no more in his Company then sixty men, and coming to the
Wall of the Bawne of the Castle undiscovered by the help of Ladders, and some
Masons that brake holes in some part of the Wall where it was weak, got in and
entered the Hall, before they were perceived, the Sergeant named Thomas Quayle,
which had the charge of the Castle, made some little resistance, and was
wounded: Three of the Ward were slain, the rest upon promise of their lives
rendered their Arms, and were sent to Clonmell. Of this Surprise the Lord
President had notice when he was at Kilmallocke, whereupon he sent direction
for their imprisonment in Clonmell, until he might have leisure to try the
delinquents by a Marshals Court. Upon the fourth day following James Butler who
took the Castle wrote a large Letter to the President, to excuse himself of
his traitorly Act, wherein there was not so many lines as lies, and written by
the underhand working of the Lord of Cahir his Brother, they conceiving it to
be the next way to have the Castle restored to the Baron: The copy of which
Letter here ensues.

A Letter from James Galdie Butler to the Lord President.
RIght Honorable, hither came unto me yesterday my Lord my Brother,
accompanied with Mr. Patricke White, and Nicholas White of Clonmell Gent. and
M. Geonge Lea of Waterford, who treated with me (as they said) by your Honors
Commission, what might be the causes why I should attempt the surprising of the
castle of Cahir, being kept as a garrison for her Majesty. And albeit my good
Lo: I may not, nor will not justify what has been done therein; yet will I
signify the truth, (the which graciously being (...) mercy) I doubt not to
excuse whatsoever has been (...). And therefore my Lord, first your Lordship
shall vnde^ (...) where heretofore by youthful instigation, and as I must
(...) together without the privitie of my Lord my Brother aforesaid, I kept the
said Castle, until the same was besieged by her Majesty's Forces, and battery
laid thereunto; the which I made choice rather to forsake, then stand to the
defense thereof; which action my good Lord, was so much raised to my contempt,
with the mouths of her Highness enemies, (whom I then of force obeyed) as
they imagined nothing else would raise credit, but the gaining thereof again.
The next that moved me to enterprise the same, was, that public report was
made in the name of the Archbishop of Cassell, (who is well known to be a
professed enemy of my House) to have the keeping of the said Castle. Thirdly,
that it was also reported, that the Soldiers of late left in garrison therein,
purposed for want to sell the same for a piece of money, unto John of Desmond,
whom the Country knows not to be my friend, for the late killing of many of
his men, for which service, my Lord of Dunboyne had only the thanks, being no
more assistant thereunto then your Lordship: and last my good Lord, when I
considered the apparent wrongs (as I thought) proffered unto both my Brethren,
that your Honor and the State would countenance their known and vowed Enemies
against them, and to make their griefs the more corrosiue to bestow upon them,
the chief and dwelling Castle, of the one of them being Cnocknamma to my Lo:
of Dunboyne, which makes my poor brother to go in a manner a begging, and my
Eldest Brothers Castle of Dorenlare upon Richard Power. These being the
principal causes that moves this my desperate attempt, I pray may be
construed, as if your Lordship or any other Gentleman were in my case, and do
also request, that your Honor, and all others, do suspend to condemn me, of
my Disloyalty in mind, howsoever my youthful actions do deserve; And that by
example the same may the better appear, consider that having won the Castle
aforesaid, that unless it be such as by mischance were slain, I suffered not
the blood of any other, nor any part of their apparel to be spilt, or taken,
but send them conducted to the next incorporate Town; And for her Majesty's
Ordinance, that here has been left, I could wish your Lordship had them, only
that I know, they must be removed by the force of many men, the which I dare
not adventure to trust (as now I stand*) But let your Honor be well assured,
they shall be as safely kept as formerly they were, for her Majesty; Unless
your Honor or the State do drive me to do that I shall be unwilling.
Forasmuch therefore my good Lord, as not only these, but many else the causes
of the rebellion of this Province, have hitherto and are well known, to be
for want of considerate Justice, and clemency of your Predecessors, Governors,
shows liberally the benefit of her Majesty's Proclamations, and gracious
authority given you; And let the first example thereof be, to withdraw the
Castles of Darenlare and Cnocknamma aforesaid, from the possession of such, as
the world do know, of pretended malice, to have sought them, and to be
bestowed, wheresoever your Lordship do think fit in Justice they shall be
given: And this much my very good Lord in excuse, and as the simple truth of
the Premises, I am bold to signify; and now it rests, I must complain
against my Lord and Brother, who as I suppose ought to maintain both me and
the rest, whose wrongs hitherto proffered, I will not forgive, nor forget,
having so sufficient a distress as now I have in possession, the which I
purpose to keep, until our controversy be decided by friends, or your
Lordship, or the State do determine between us; Holding the same with most
assured safety to her Majesty's use, and no hurt unto my country, and to your
Honors good liking, and not otherwise: all the premises concluded and
considered, it rests now only how I shall be maintained, which my good Lord
is to be supplied, by that gracious entertainment, that her Majesty has, and
does bestovv, upon less faithful, more unable to do her service, and not so
vvilling as my self; The which in company with the rest, I leave to your
favorable consideration: Yet all these shall not satisfy me, but that it may
please your Lordship, to forgive and forget, if in ignorance I have either
spoken or written any thing that might give you cause to be offended. And so
with my humble Duty, I take leave,

Caher the twenty seventh of May, 1600. Your Lordships very assured to
command, James Butler.


The four and twentieth, 24. Maij.
the Army encamped at the Brough, where the President left a Ward, partly to
offend the Rebels of Loghguire, three miles distant from thence; and partly to
open the way betwixt Kilmallocke and Limerick, which for two years space had
been impassible for any subject.

The five and twentieth, 25 Maij.
the army passing near Loghguire, which was as yet held by the Rebels, the
President attended with a Troop of Horse, rode to take a particular view of
the strength and situation thereof, as also by what way he might most
conveniently bring the Cannon to annoy the same. He found it to be a place of
exceeding strength, by reason that it was an Island, encompassed with a deep
Lough, the breadth thereof being in the narrowest place, a Calievers shot over,
upon one side thereof stands a very strong Castle, which at this time was
manned with a good Garrison, for there was within the Island John fits Thomas,
with two hundred men at the least, which showed themselves prepared to defend
the place. The President being approached within shot, to discover the ground,
they discharged some twenty Muskets at him and his company, but without any
hurt done: and having effected as much as he intended at that time, they
casting forth some reviling speeches, he left the place. That night the
President came to Limerick, the Army encamped within little more then a mile
thereof. The three days next following, we bestowed in providing things
necessary for the mounting and drawing of the Cannon, the City being
altogether destitute of necessaries thereunto, which at last with many
difficulties was effected: Wherein the President showed himself to be a
Master in that faculty; for Canonier or other Artificer (skillful in the
mountures of Ordnance) he had none, the Smiths and Carpenters were only
directed by him, according to the proportion he gave, they wrought, and in the
end a demie-Cannon was mounted, and drawn toward the gate of the City,
that leads to the Island of Loghguire before named. The Rebels within the
Castle receiving intelligence thereof, one Owen Grome, a stranger of the North,
(to whose charge John fits Thomas had committed the custody of the Castle)
sent word, That for his pardon, and a competent sum of money, he would
deliver it up unto her Majesty's use. The President considering, that many
impediments would arise, if he should attempt the taking of it by force, and
that it must needs be chargeable to the Queen, cost the lives of many his
men, and a great delay for the prosecution of other services, which he
intended, accorded to his demands, Therendring of the Castle of Loghguire
and received the Castle, the money (which was threescore pounds) being paid
by the Presidents order, by one Rowlye, who lost the fame to the Rebels:
Whilst these things were in handling, Nugent (whose Promises to the President
before we recited) intending no longer to defer the Enterprise, attempted the
execution in this sort. The President being past Loghguire, John Fits Thomas
riding forth of the Island toward the fastnes of Arloghe, where most of his men
remained, with one other called John Coppinger, whom he had acquainted with
the Enterprise, Nugents attempt upon John fits Thomas.
and as he thought made sure unto him, attended this great Captain, and being
now passed a certain distance from all Company, permitted John Fits Thomas to
ride a little before him, minding (his back being turned) to shoot him
through with his Pistol; Which for the purpose was well charged with two
bullets; the opportunity offered, the Pistol bent, both heart and hand, ready
to do the deed, when Coppinger at the instant snatched the Pistol from him,
crying, Treason: wherewith John fits Thomas turning himself about, perceived
his intent. Nugent thinking to escape by the goodness of his Horse, spurred
hard; the horse stumbled, and he taken, and the next day after examination,
and confession of his intent, hanged. This plot, a though it attained not fully
the desired success, yet it prooved to be of great consequence: For now was
John fits Thomas possessed with such a jealous suspicion of every one, that he
durst not remain long at Loghguire, for fear of some other like attempt that
might be wrought against him; and therefore leaving the Castle in the custody
of the said Owen Grome, (who as before, kept it a very short time after)
departed suddenly unto his Brothers Camp. Nugent in his Examination freely
confessed his whole intent, which was (as he then said) to have dispatched
John fits Thomas, and immediately to have poasted unto the Sugan Earl, to
carry the first news thereof, intending to call him aside, in secret manner to
relate the particulars of his Brothers murder, and then to execute as much
upon him also; Adding moreover, that although they take away his life, (which
he would not entreat them to spare) yet was their own safety never the more
assured: for there were many others, which himself perfectly knew, to have
sollemnly sworn unto the President to effect as much as he intended. This
confession being sealed with his death, did strike such a fearful terror
into the two Brethren, that James Fits Thomas himself afterward, unto the
President acknowledged, they never durst lodge together in one place, or ever
serve in the Heads of their Troops, for fear to be shot by some of their own
men.

Loghguire being now possessed for the Queen, Clanwilliam spoiled and burnt by
the Army.
and the Army well refreshed, the President marched into Clan-William a
country of the Burks; Whereupon one of the principal Freeholders then in
rebellion called John Burke, half Brother to Pierce Lacy, desired to come unto
the President, but no ear would be given to his request, until he had first
testified his humble submission, whereof he made scruple, alleging that his
conscience would not suffer him so to do, having before been taught by his
Instructers that it was sinful and damnable, personally to submit himself
unto her Majesty; His answer was much disdained, and he plainly told, that he
should never hope to be accepted for a Subject, and receive the benefit
thereof, except he would absolutely disclaim that rebellious opinion; which
he absolutely refusing, was sent away with this Proviso: That although
himself did fly into the Woods; yet his Castles, Towns, and Corn, which he
could not carry with him, should be the next morrow destroyed, which was not
vainly meant, but truly performed, for by the Noone of the next day, being
the twenty nineth of May, 29. Maij.
the Army came upon his Lands, many of his Houses, some of his Corn, and one
of his Castles fired. When a second Messenger, came to entreat that he might
be admitted to make his submission, whether it were that some Popish Priest,
had granted him a Dispensation, or that he would undertake himself to dispense
with his conscience, rather then see himself ruined, is to me uncertain; But
sure I am, that this alteration was now wrought in him. Very unwilling was the
President to accept him to mercy, which the day before he so unadvisedly
refused; Yet being much importuned by his Mother and others, who with weeping
eyes entreated for him, and the rather that he had married one of Sir George
Thorntons Daughters, was inclined to admit him to his presence.

CHAP. VII.
The submission of John Burke. The Castle of (...). Omulrians (...) burnt and
spoiled by the Army. A Letter from James Fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie. O
Sulevan More detained Prisoner by the practice of Flo Mac Cartie. The plot
contri^^d by the Lord President, for the apprehension of James Fits Thomas. The
Lo. Presidents Letter to James fits Thomas. Fine hundred men sent to lie in
Garrison at Asketon. Supplies of Money, Munition, (...), etc. The apprehension
of James Fits Thomas by Der^^ond O Connor.
THE President now on Horseback, The submission of John Burke.
in the midst of his Army, took occasion of speech with some of his
Commanders; when John Burke bringing his Brother Theobald Burke with him,
a^ighted from their Horses, and kneeling upon the ground, desired that their
submission might be accepted: The President seeing, would not see them, and
harkening to the other, would not attend them, until (they creeping upon their
knees by the Horse side) it was told unto him that two of the Burks were there;
he staying his Horse, spent some time in reproving them for their rebellious
obstinacy, and then (upon four sufficient Sureties for their future Loyalty)
granted them protection. The next day the Army marched to a Castle called
Ballitrarsny, The castle of Ballitrarsnie taken.
belonging to Mouroughe Kewghe one of the Brians, which stood near a great
Fastness, being very commodious, both to open the passage from Limerick, to
Gashell, and to hinder the Rebels for coming out of Kilquige into Conniloghe:
The Rebels of the Ward, as soon as they saw the Army draw toward them,
quitted the castle; which was not to be won but by the Cannon; and therein
was found great plenty of Grain; whereof some was largely bestowed amongst the
Troops of Horse; some sent to Limerick by the Soldiers, and yet enough left
to suffice the ward for one whole year.

The day following, O Mulrians Countries burnt and spoiled by the Army.
five hundred Foot were sent into Ownhy, inhabited by the O Mulryans, a strong
and fast Country; all the Inhabitants thereof being notorious Traitors: This
being burnt and spoiled by them, and diverse* Traitors put to the sword, whereby
the disorders in those parts were well corrected; the Army without any loss
at all, returned again to Limerick, and within short time after, viz. at
Likadowne, bordering upon Connilogh, Kilmallock, Limerick, and Askeiton, were
bestowed in several Garrisons, which are not so far distant, but that upon
every occasion, they might be united again. At this time Florence Mac Cartie
received a Letter written unto him from James Fits Thomas, the Copy whereof
here ensues.

A Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie*
Cosen, your Letters of the fifth of this present, I received the eighth of
the same, wherein you write of your sickness, and the impediments that caused
your Soldiers to be slow in prosecuting our general Action. In your former
Letters you write and vow, that there has been neither peace, truce, nor
cessation confirmed between you and the President. I am informed by my
particular friends, and also by a Letter (intercepted) from the President to
you, that some mittigation of time is limited betwixt you and them, whereupon
they depend, your assistance to be restrained from us. If this be thus, it is
far contrary to that I hoped, and much beyond the confidence reposed by
Oneale and my self in your vowed fidelity and service to God and our Action.
I perceive Donell Mac Cartie is raising head in disquieting your Country, the
redress whereof consisted in your constant assistance to be bestowed; the
President being not able to perform any service by Land, has appointed to
come by Sea to Askeiton, and some force out of Thomond toward the Glinne; all
which by the divine providence of God shall be prevented. The causes of urgent
affairs are very many, which required your presence and helping assistance,
that without your sound advice, can hardly be accomplished. And therefore in
regard of your fidelity, let me entreat you, (if your sickness be not
apparently known to be so extreme) to lay all excuses apart, and to draw
toward this Country, with so few or so many as you may possibly afford; else
you give us cause to think of some inward meaning in you, contrary to our
general action. At your entreatie, and Letters, I have discharged Dermond Mac
Tirlogh, his Son I will keep till that you and I do confer further of
that cause. For Manus Mac Shihyes dealings, I will see redress if my abuse be
offered. I understand you have apprehended Owen Mac Shihy, I desire you to see
him released, and restitution made of what he had taken from him; and if you
can charge him for any offense to you, I will upon these my Letters see him to
be forth coming, to answer his Contempt, I pray you delay not his release,
for I have present occasion to employ him in service. And thus expecting your
present repair or speedy answer, I commit you to God. June vt Supra.

Your very loving Cosen, James Desmond.

Whilst the President was at Limerick, O Sulevan More detained prisoner by the
practice of Flor: Mac Cartie.
he had certain notice brought him, that Florence Mac Cartie had a meeting in
Connilogh, with James fits Thomas, and Dermond O Conner, and there in a parlie,
because Osulevan More did refuse to contribute toward the bearing of his
Bownoghs in Desmond, he contrived with Dermond O Conner, that he should lay
hands upon him, but it must be done as it were by force, that it might appear
to the world, that it was against his will: for O Sulevan was his Brother in
law, having married his Sister. Thus was O Sulevan betrayed by his dear
Brother, and detained prisoner by Dermond: And also there was at that time, by
Florence his directions, the two Brothers of O Sulevan More, the two Odonoghs,
Mac Finires son, and others to the number of eighteen, delivered as pledges
into the hands of Dermond, for Bonnoght due unto him, which Florence should
have paid; all which prisoners were sent by him unto Castlelishin.

Before the President departed from Limerick, the Earl of Thomond, invited him
to his Castle of Bonrattie; the same night that he was there, in the Evening,
Captain Gawen Harvie, (who from Cork was embarked the very day that the
President marched from thence with his Army as aforesaid) came into the River
of Shenan, to an anchor, at the mouth of the Creek, where the Castle is
seated: He brought with him, to the comfort of the whole Army, Money,
Munition, Victual, and Apparel for the Soldiers, which if it had not come in
due time, it might have prooved a hazard for the overthrow of that Summer
Service. The next morning Captain Harvie was directed to go to the Key at
Limricke, where after his charge was landed, the President willed him to fall
down with his Ship, and to ride before the Castle of the Glinne, there to
remain at an anchor, until be with the Army should present himself before
it, and sent with him a Demie Cannon, for the guard whereof, certain Soldiers
were appointed under his charge.

Much did it amuse the minds both of the Council of the Province, The plot
contrived by the Lo. President for the apprehension of Ia. fits Thomas.
and of all the Commanders in the Army, to see the Forces suddenly dispersed,
at such a time, as for diverse reasons they thought very unseasonable: The Army
for the numbers was strong, having received no disaster since their coming
into the field, the time of the year, (being now about the beginning of June)
June.
was most convenient to lie in Camp; whereas if the Service should be
deferred until Winter, the Companies would be weakened both by death and
sickness, and more difficulties should they find in the fowlnesse of the
weather, and deepnesse of the way, then in the sword of the Enemy, whom now
they did ardently desire to encounter withal: yea, many there were, that
ceased not confidently to utter, that they did now plainly perceive, that
though her Majesty's charges was greatly inhaunsed by increasing the List in
Mounster, yet her Service was likely to be no better followed then in the year
last past.

But that the true ground of this action may be discovered, we must have
recourse to the prosecution of the stratagem, that all this while had been in
working with Dermond O Conner; for after his Wife the Lady Margaret had
acquainted him, both with the Enterprise and Conditions (which was not until
the Army was at Kilmallock aforesaid) he showed a good inclination to effect
it, were it not for three difficulties that seemed to interpose themselves:
First, the President being altogether unknowen to him, he demanded sufficient
Pledges to be put into his hands, there to remain until the conditions
promised should be performed. Secondly, he wanted some show of reason or
colorable cause, to satisfy his Copartners in excuse of his action: And
lastly he alleged that no opportunity could be found for the execution of
the Design, so long as James Fits Thomas remained with all the force he could
possible make six miles from the Camp, to confront the Presidents Army in
his passage to Askeiton: For assurance of the conditions, the President was
content to deliver into his hands four Pledges, which yet notwithstanding must
be in such sort delivered by the one, and received by the other, as no
suspicion might arise: The Hostages agreed upon, were Redmond and Brian, Sons
of Milerius Mac Craghe Archbishop of Cashell; who himself had before been a
Principal Actor in the business, and Captain William Power, and John Power his
elder Brother, who likewise had been employed in the Action. These were made
choice of; because they might be free from the violence of Dermond O Conners
men; The Powers being foster brethren to the Lady Margaret* and the Archbishop
himself borne in Vlster, a natural Follower unto the Arch-Traitor Tyrone.
Therefore that these four should make a Journey from Kilmallocke toward
Kinsale, where Captain Poor his Company were then in Garrison; and the time
of their going being made known to Dermond O Conner, he should lie with some
of his Forces, in the pace of Ballihowre to intercept Passengers, where these
four should (as it were) by chance fall into his Ambush, and so they did,
where Dermond O Conner, although for the reasons before mentioned, saved their
lives, yet he could not restrain the fury of his men, that knew nothing of
his purpose, but that they were stripped of their clothes, and left almost
naked.

These being in this manner taken the eleaventh day of June, 11. Iunij.
they were presently carried to Castle Lyshin, seated in the great Wood called
Kilmore, seven miles from Kilmallock (where the Lady Margaret his Wife then
remained;) and there straightly kept in Irons, until the Ransom were
discharged, which was given forth to be no less then two thousand pound
sterling.

As Soon as they were taken, James Fits Thomas repaired to Castlelishin, and
instantly requested Dermond, that he might have the two Powers executed; for
unto them he was an ancient Enemy, which Dermond would not assent unto, as
well in respect of the great ransoms, which he pretended to expect from them,
as for giving of offense unto his Wife, unto whose Brother (then in the Tower
of London) they were foster Brothers; then the which in Ireland, there is no
greater Obligations of love.

The first Impediment being thus removed, care was taken to devise some show of
reason to excuse this action to the Bonoghs (if they should be discontented)
after the execution thereof; which was disguised by a Letter as written by the
Sugan Earl from the President; which forasmuch as the Contents thereof do
manifest the invention: I have thought not unfit to be inserted in this
present relation.

The Lord Presidents Letter to James Fits Thomas.
SIr, your last Letters I have received, and am exceeding glad to see your
constant resolution of return to subjection, and to leave the rebellious
courses wherein you have long persevered; You may rest assured that promises
shall be kept; and you shall no sooner bring Dermond O Conner to me, alive or
dead, and banish his Bownoghs out of the Country, but that you shall have your
demand satisfied, which I thank God, I am both able and willing to perform:
Believe me, you have no better way to recover your desperate estate, then by
this good service, which you have proffred; and therefore I cannot but commend
your Judgment, in choosing the same to redeem your former faults: And I do
the rather believe the performance of it, by your late action touching
Loghguire, wherein your Brother and your self have well merited; and as I
promised, you shall find me so just, as no Creature living shall ever know,
that either of you did assent to the surrender of it; all your Letters I have
received, as also the joint Letter, from your Brother and your self; I pray
loose no time; for delays in great Actions are subject to many dangers. Now
that the Queens Army is in the field, you may work your determination with
most security, being ready to relieve you upon a days warning: So praying God
to assist you in this meritorious Enterprise, I do leave you to his protection
this twenty nineth of May 1600.

This Letter was sent to Dermond O Conner, which when time should serve, he
might show as intercepted by him; and therefore what he did, was imposed upon
him by necessity, except he would suffer himself, wittingly and willingly to
be betrayed.

These things thus contrived, there remained nothing but to separate the
reputed Earl from his strength, that no resistance might be made by the
Provincialls, when he should be apprehended. This was not likely to be
effected, unless the President would divide his Forces, and bestow them in
several Garrisons, as though they should leave the field for that Summer,
whereupon was judged that the Rebels would likewise disperse themselves; and
even so it came to pass: for they understanding that the English Army was now
garrisoned, 500 men sent to lie in garrison at Askeiton.
(nothing suspecting that he would adventure to send a Garrison to Askeiton,
without the countenance of an Army) separated themselves into diverse
Companies. The President had no sooner advertisement hereof, but he sent
forthwith under the conduct of Sir Francis Barkley, five hundred Foot from
Limricke by water, to go to Askeiton, which they might easily effect in a few
hours, too short a time for them to assemble their Forces to impeach their
landing: By these means were they settled in Garrison, without any other
difficulty then a light Skirmish, the number of the Rebels to give them
resistance, not exceeding two or three hundred at the most, which otherwise
could not have been effected without much blood.

The seventh of this month of June, the President received Intelligence from
John Butler, a Gentleman of the County of Tipperrary, that the Earl of
Ormond, for the ransom of three thousand poud sterling, to be paid upon
certain days agreed upon, was to be enlarged, and set at liberty by Ownhie
Mac Rory Omore, with whom he had been prisoner ever since the tenth day of
April: for the true payment of the same, twelve Hostages, who were the eldest
sons of the principal Gentlemen in the Country, were delivered into the
hands of the said Ownhye: It app^ared that he was detained somewhat longer
then was expected, for the assurance of his delivery came not unto the
Presidents knowledge until the seventeenth ensuing, at which time the Earl
himself by his Letters advertised him thereof.

I must here crave a little leave to look back to time past, as well to
relate by what means the Army in Mounster was from time to time enabled to
subsist in this prosecution, as to show the acts and the progress in the
same. No man is ignorant, that Armies of men's bodies cannot subsist, unless
they be continually supplied with Money, Munition, and Victuals, and
especially in such a Kingdom as Ireland is, which was exhausted of all means
of those natures, by the continuance of the Rebellion, and particularly in
Mounster, before the President came thither: so as unless he had been
carefully supplied of them out of England, no service could have been
performed, and herein I cannot but commend his care in demanding, as the
Lords of the Counsels readiness to effect the same. At his departure from the
Court of England, he humbly prayed, that against his coming into the
Province, (for as you have heard he went by the way of Dublin) some
proportions of Money, Munition, and Victuals might be sent thither, whereof
their Lordships were not unmindfull, as by their Letters dated the eight and
twentieth of March last past may appear, wherein they certified the President,
Supplies of money, munition victuals, etc.
that they had sent for the Province of Mounster, nine thousand pound in money,
three months victuals for three thousand Foot, and two hundred and fifty
Horse (which was the List of his Army) and as he desired, the one half of it
was sent to Cork, and the other moitie to Limricke: Also five Lasts of Powder,
with Lead, and Match proportionably, with two hundred sixty nine Quarters of
Oats; All which arrived in May following, the Oats excepted, which came to
Cork in April: Moreover, in the same month the Soldiers Summer Suites
arrived at Cork: Further, as by their Lordshipps Letters to the President,
dated the seventeenth of June, they had sent for the supply of the Province,
five Lasts more of Powder, with Match and Lead; And that shortly afterward,
there should be sent unto him ten thousand pound in Money, and two months
victuals for the Army, the one moitie to land at Cork, the other at
Limricke, as he had demanded; And for that they had here certified, that the
Soldiers, (having had by her Majesty's favor their Powder given unto them
without any defalkation upon their entertainments) made unnecessary use of the
same, and sometimes sold it to the Irish Merchants, and others, they required
the President to let them know, and to take order accordingly, that they should
not be allowed any expense of Powder, but in days of trayning or service only.

But to return to Dermond O Conner, who now perceiving that it was a fit time
for his Design, sent a Messenger to the Earl of Desmond, The apprehension of
James Fits Thomas by Dermond O Conner.
for so he called James Fits Thomas, desiring him to meet him at a place of
parlie upon the eighteenth of June, to confer about certain matters
concerning the Wars. James Fits Thomas (as he since confessed to the
President) had received some secret intelligence of Dermond his intent; which
although he did not absolutely credit, yet did it work some jealousy in him;
and therefore brought with him to the Parlie some two hundred of his Foot:
Dermond O Conner brought one hundred and fifty Bownoghs: After some speech
passed, among the chief, at last, a Controversy did arise between Moroghe
Mac Shihy, Marshall to James Fits Thomas, and the Marshall of Dermond, about
such Hides, as were or should be killed in the Army; the one deriving his
authority from Tyrone, the other from the Earl of Desmond; in contention they
grew warm, and Dermond so blew the Coal, that the kerne of the one, and the
Bonoghs of the other, were ready to pass from words to blows; much did the
Sugan Earl labor to quiet this Mutiny, which could not be thoroughly
appeased, until the Companies on either part were severed and dispersed: James
Fits Thomas willing to give all satisfaction to Dermond and the Bownoghs, made
offer to dismiss his own men, which was willingly accepted of the other, and
so sent them into the Country near adjoining: They being departed, and the
Principals settled again to parlie, about the deciding of this controversy;
the Bownoghs by Dermonds appointment drew near unto them: Then Dermond O
Conner laid hold upon James Fits Thomas, and said, My Lord you are in hand; in
hand ( answered he) for whom, or for what cause? I have taken you for Oneale,
says he, and I purpose to detain you, until I be certified of his pleasure,
for your self have combined with the English, and promised to the President to
deliver me, either alive or dead into his hands; and for Proof thereof, behold
(says he) Letters which were intercepted, and brought to me (under the
Presidents hand) to confirm the same, and therewithal produced them.

This colorable Pretense, gave a good satisfaction to the Companies for the
present; and yet for the better content, he gave Thomas Oge of Kerry, and two
of the Clanshyhies Brethren, whom he took also at the same time, unto the
chiefest of his Captains, to be reserved for their Ransomes.

Now James Fits Thomas, and the other Prisoners being mounted upon poor
Garrans, are conveied through the Fastness in Connilogh to Castle Lyshin,
where they were no sooner bestowed, but Dermond O Conner went presently to
another Castle called Balliallinan, belonging to Rory Mac Shihy, Father to the
two brethren of the Mac Shihies before mentioned, which he also took, and
therein settled himself, and sent with all speed to Castle Lishin for his Wife
and the English Pledges, which were there in Handlocks; Leaving some sixteen
Warders to guard the Prisoners; these he removed from thence, either because
they might more conveniently, send some one of them, with the relation of his
doings to the Lord President, or for fear lest the Friends and Followers of
the Arch-Traitor, Desmond, reuniting themselves, and his own Bonoghs, of whom
he was very uncertain, taking part with them, they might join their Forces,
and at one push, both rescue the Prisoners that he had taken, and also take
himself Prisoner, and the four English Pledges: To the intent therefore, that
he might not adventure all his substance in one Ship, he divided them as
before you have heard.

These businesses thus contrived, 19. Iunij.
Dermond O Conner, upon the nineteenth of June, sent John Power (one of the
Pledges before spoken of) in all have to the President at Limerick, with a
Message tending to this purpose: That if the Lord President, would instantly
gather all the Forces he could make, and draw to Kilmallock, where the Lady
Margaret should meet him, for the receiving of one thousand pound, which was
promised him, upon the delivery of the Prisoner; praying withal, that the
President would not move out of Kilmallock, until she were come unto him; in
the mean time he would keep him in safety, and accomodate all things for
the more assurance in the effecting of the business.

To Kilmallock he came the next Morrow, 20. Iunij.
the twentieth of June, with one thousand Foot, and two Troops of Horse; for
a good part of his Army was at that time gone into Thomond, to secure the same
from Odonnell, who was come far up into the Country, and had taken many
preyes there.


CHAP. VIII.
The Country of Th^mond, harassed and spoiled by O Donnell. Forces sent into
Th^mond. James fits Thomas set at Liberty. Dermond O Conners Letter to the Lord
President. A Letter from the Mounster Rebels to O Donnell. Dermond O Conner,
and the Rebels agreed, and reconciled. The Castle of Crome taken by the Army.
A Ioyns Letter from William Burke, and Morrogheny More O Flagharly to the Lord
President. A Letter from Morrogheny More O Flagharly to the Lord President. A
Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Carty.
THIS sudden coming of Odonnell for Thomond, The Country of Thomond
harassed and spoiled by O Donnell.
was so secretly carried, as the Earl of Thomond had no notice of it, until he
was come to the Borders thereof; he then being at Limerick with the President,
prayed him to lend him part of his Army, to make Head against the Rebels:
Whereupon his Lordship commanded the Sergeant Major, Captain Flower, and with
eight hundred Foot, and sixty Horse to attend the Earl. Forces sent into
Thomond.
Odonnell entered the Country, and Harassed all Thomond, even as far as
Loopthead, and took all the Preyes of the Country. Nevertheless he went not
away scot free; For the Noble Earl fought often with his Forces, slew many of
them, and never left them, until he had recovered a great part of the Cattle,
which Odonnell had taken; And upon Mid-somer day, chased him out of Thomond.
This sudden and unexpected coming of Odonnell with such great Forces, as
attended him, could never have been undiscovered, if the next Neighbors to
Thomond, the Inhabitants of Clanrickard had done their duties, through which
Country Odonnell passed, and returned, without doing of any hurt that ever I
heard of: James fits Thomas set at liberty.
And so leaving with this Digression, it is time to speak of the Success of
the usurping Earls apprehension. By this time it was suspected, and publicly
noised abroad, that the Sugan Earl should be delivered to the President;
which Rumor began first to be bruited in Limerick, and Kilmallock; and (as it
always happens in that Kingdom, from the Towns, the rumor is speedily
conveied into the Country; which being no sooner heard, then believed by the
Rebels, as well Provincials as others; they all combined themselves; John fits
Thomas, Pierce Lacy, and William Burke, being the Triumviri of this League, to
set the Prisoner at Liberty: With this determination they had gathered
together of Dermonds Bonoghs and Provincials, some four thousand men, nee re
Castle Leshin, in the great Fastness of Conniloe; for there was this Castle
seated, with intent both to block up the way, that the President should take
in coming thither, and to constrain the Ward to deliver the Earl.

The President being at Kilmallock as aforesaid, hourly expecting the coming
of the Lady Margaret, stayed there from the twentieth to the twenty sixth day,
26. Iunij.
and in all that time he never heard from her, or her Husband: Upon the twenty
sixth the Lady Margaret came to him, she related that Castlelishin was
besieged by the Rebels; her cause of stay was, the danger of the way.
Immediately the President (notwithstanding, the rest of his Forces were not
returned out of Thomond) purposed to raise the Siedge; and the Army being
drawn forth before they had marched an English mile upon the way, they met a
Messenger, who delivered unto them for certain, that James fits Thomas was
rescued that morning, and himself did see him out of the Castle.

In Castlelishin, where James fits Thomas was prisoner, Dermond O Conner (with
the Ward) had left a Priest, whose persuasions prevailed so much with O Conners
men, as they delivered the reputed Earl as aforesaid, but upon Caution, as may
appear by Dermond O Conners Letters to the President, as follows.

Dermond O Conners Letter to the Lo. President.
MY good Lord, it is so, that contrary to my directions, and without my
privitie, my Ward at Castlelishin was hardly set unto by the Enemy, after the
breach of the Castle, were constrained to yield to the surrender of the Earl
of Desmond upon Composition, viz. to receive as pledges from the said Earl,
his son, and his Receiver, one Gerald fits Nicholas, and the chief of the
Walls or Faltaghs of Downmoylin, and John fits Thomas, Brother of the said
Earl, to be delivered into the hands of Mac Cartie More* or some other
indifferent man his hands, as the said Earl and I shall agree: hereof I
thought good to certify your Honor, (assuring the same upon my credit, that
this Composition was made without my privitie, as your Honor shall understand
manifestly hereafter) to the end your Honor might be advised not to send the
Army, for fear of any mischance, in respect of the greatness of the Enemies
forces, and fastness of their strengths, the Earl being enlarged; all which I
hope to bring to a worse case then they were in, and that in a short time, if I
be well furthered by your Lordship: the manner whereof I am ready to declare to
your Honor, as occasion shall serve: for speedy effecting whereof, I pray your
Lordship to send me your best advice by Captain Power, the which expecting
forthwith, I humbly take my leave:

Balliallinan this 26. of June, 1600. Your Honors to command, Dermond O Conner.


The reason which I conceive moved Dermond that he did not presently render
him to the President, was partly his fear, that his money would be detained
from him, when the prisoner was once delivered, and therefore he would be
first sure of the same; partly his over much confidence in his men whom he
thought that they would not for a world have betrayed him as they did; but
especially I conceive, that the danger of the way was the occasion of the
protraction: for undoubtedly the man did mean to perform his promise
sincerely; and if the Lady could have come sooner to Kilmallocke, the titularie
Earl had been brought from Castlelishin without any difficulty.

Upon the seven and twentieth Dermond O Conner wrote to the President, praying
to be excused, that he did not come unto him, for the ways were too
dangerous for him to pass, until his Brother, who was in Desmond with four
hundred men, did come unto him, or that the Enemy did scatter, or the President
with his Army should draw into those parts; and in the mean while he would
remain in the Castle where he was; and besought the President to send him a
safeguard for himself, his followers, and goods, protesting his loyalty to
her Majesty, and promising to be directed by the President in whatsoever it
should please him to command. Within a few days after the delivery of the
Sugan Earl (as aforesaid) the Earl of Thomond having intercepted a Letter
sent by the Rebels of Mounster, to O Donnell and his Associates, did send the
same unto the President; whereby it may appear, how much the taking of James
fits Thomas did grieve them at the heart, which is the reason I do in this
place insert the same.

A Letter from the Mounster Rebels to O Donnell.
ALL hearty Commendations from Mac Maurice, and the rest undernamed, to O
Donnell, and the rest of the Lords and Gentlemen that are with him, Letting you
to understand, that Dermond O Conner has played a lewd part amongst us here;
He has taken the Earl of Desmond, Thomas Oge, and the two sons of Rory Mac
Shihy, together with their Towns and Castles* claiming in right of his wife
the Earldom of Desmond. The Earl is as yet upon his hands, and the Country
is all preyed and destroyed, and Rory Mac Shihy, who is old and blind, is
banished out of his Town, leaving him bare without any thing, and his sons
bound very safe and sure: which Act being considered by Con Oneale, and others
the Gentlemen of Connaght, who were in the said Dermonds company, to proceed of
treachery and falsehood by the said Dermond; whereupon the said Con Oneale, and
the rest of those Connaght men ea^^e unto us, bringing with them the said Rori^
his sons, for which we rest very thankful to them, and therefore we desire
you to show them thanks likewi^e* and that you should write unto the said
Dermond, touching the enlargement of the Earl, and that he should take good
pledges of the Earl, to be put upon the hands of the Clergy, or some
indifferent temporal person^s, and he to ^et (...) the like, and your Order,
and the Order of the Clergy to pu^^e between them, and we desire your present
help* To that purpose Dermond is drawign the English ^word to ^word the Estate
with them, we and the Gentlemen of Connaght here are (...) the Castle where
the Earl lies: and seeing that the River of Shanen is passable, if it had
been your pleasure to come to help us, we would be very glad thereof; and yet
if we can rescue the Earl, and it to be your pleasure, we will draw toward
you; hereupon send us present word.

Castlelishine the 24. of June, 1600. Your trusty Friends, John Gerald. Thomas
fits Maurice. Edmond Valley. M. fits Thomas. Patricke Lixnawe William fits
Gerald. Dierby Mac Cartie. Pierce Lacie. Mac Shihy.



The President being out of hope, to get this Haggard into his hands by these
Limetwigs, intending the prosecution, which was to take in the Castles of the
Glynne and Carrigfoile; the one belonging to the Knight of the Valley, the
other to John O Conner (commonly called O Conner Kerry) both being seated upon
the River of Limerick, and so to pass the Mountain into Kerry.

The President having taken order for all such necessaries as should be
requisite in his Journey; 28. Iunij.
on the twenty eighth marched 29. Iunij.
to Limericke, the twenty nineth (upon a Letter which he received from
Dermond O Conner) into the Heart of Conniloe, and encamped at a Town called
Ballingery fourteen miles from Limerick, being by him requested (who was now
besieged by the Enemy in the Castle of Balliallinan) to relieve him with her
Majesty's Forces.

The President being advanced within three miles of the Castle, Dermond O
Conner and the Rebels agreed, and reconciled.
where Dermond O Conner was besieged, the Rebels understanding thereof, and
fearing to be assailed by him, and loath that Dermond O Conner should fall
into his hands, to be employed in service against them, whose credit with the
Bownoghs was such, as that he could persuade them to what he listed; they
resolved to treat with Dermond, and upon his oath of future faith, to take him
again into their society, and to restore him to his former Command. Dermond
(as it should seem, fearing that Relief would not come unto him in convenient
time) accepted the offer, and rendered the Castle and himself into their
hands: But yet I could never hear that Dermond afterward was had in any great
estimation amongst them: This business being thus composed, they presently
dislodged, with intent to give impediment to the Army, in their passage
toward the Glynne; His Lordship being advertised of the reconcilement, The
Castle of Crome taken by the Army.
directed his March to the Glynne; and understanding that the Castle of Crome,
the Earl of Kildares inheritance, which was not much out of his way, and held
by a Ward left therein by Pierce Lacy, which gave great Annoiance to the
Subjects thereabouts, and comfort to the Rebels, being seated at the entrance
into Conniloe, took it in his way; upon the sight of the Army, the Warders
quitted the Castle, and the President possessed himself thereof, together with
some store of Corn, and other Provision, that was found therein. The last of
June, 30. Iunij.
the Army marched through Kerry, a safe Country, unto Askeiton, where it
remained four days, in expectation of Victuals, that should come thither from
Limerick by Water: The fourth of July, 4. July.
the Army rose from thence, and marched to Ballintare, upon the Mountain of
Sleughlogher, twelve miles from Askeiton; the Enemy to the number of three
thousand, marching all that day in our view.

Now did the President assure himself, that this Army of the Rebels did only
attend the opportunity for some place of advantage, where they might
conveniently attempt our Forces; and no doubt so they would have done, if the
fore conceived Jealousy, and distrust between the Provincials and Bonoghs,
confirmed in them by the bones of Dissension (that the President had cast forth
amongst them) had not wrought in either of them, a desire of nothing more, then
to be freed from the danger (reciprocally apprehended) each of the other, as
might well appear, by two Letters, (which this night were brought to the
President) from the Principal of the Connaght men; the true Copies whereof, I
have thought not unfit to be in^erted in this present Relation.

A Joint Letter from William Burke, and Moroghe ny More O Flaghertie to the Lord
President.
COmmendations to your Honor: For as much as we think your Honor willing, to
further and augment your credit, in doing your Princess service; we thought to
make you acquainted, that we are here in Camp two thousand and five hundred
Connaght men: Yet we let your Honor to understand, that we will not set upon
you in any way, nor molest you in your Journey, so that your Honor consider us
with a piece of money, and give us your Pass and safe Conduct, to depart this
Country; not that we fear you or any other, but that we mean to do you no
harm, so your Honor show us the like favor; You may well accept of this our
proffer: for it is a thing that others of your Calling sought for, and could
not obtain, although very desirous for the obtaining of it. Thus troubling
your Honor no further, only expecting your speedy resolution, we commit you
to God*

From the Abbey of Feil^ the third of July 1600. Your Friends to use during
your Friendship, William Burke. Moroghe ni More O Flarty.


A Letter from Morogh ni More O Flaghertie to the Lord President.
MY duty remembered, I commend me unto your Lordship: Whereas about May last,
I came hither in my Galley out of Connaght, to draw home my people, soldiers
and followers into my native soil, there to live quiet, and under her
Majesty's subjection, whereupon I have had her Highness protection and
Passeport for my self and them, and all other out of Connaght, that shall
accompany me; Whereby ever since my self and soldiers have been so crossed,
and troubled by this Country people, as they did not suffer me to depart from
the Earl of Desmond; I have thought good therefore, in respect it is a thing
belonging to the advancement of her Majesty's service, to bring the number of
one thousand persons, soldiers and tenants to peace, to pray and desire your
Lordship to grant me, and all such as I shall bring with me, your Passeport
and Safe Conduct through all your Garrisons, and her Majesty's Subjects, as
well in this Country, as in Thom^nd. And in so doing we shall pray, etc. And
so I humbly take leave.

Clanmorishkerry this third of July 1600. Her Majesty's true Subject, if your
Lordship please. Moroghe ni More O Flartie.


Unto these Letters the President deferred to return any present Answer, as
well because they should know, that they who had attempted, and performed so
many outrages, and rebellious practices against her Majesty and her Subjects,
should not so presently and so easily receive favor from the State; as also
they might have imagined, (if he had instantly condiscended unto the^e their
demands) that he stood in fear of them, which might have made them more bold
in attempting some enterprise upon his Army. And lastly, he conceived a hope,
that to effect their longing desire of returning into Connaght, they would at
the last be glad to do service one upon another; remising therefore only this
Answer, that he despised their Forces, and he knew they durst not interrupt his
passage: Nevertheless at further leisure, he would consider of their demands:
At this time James fits Thomas wrote a Letter to Florence Mac Cartie, which in
this place I think good to insert.

A Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie.
MY very good Lord, I was driven through the treacherous dealings of Dermond O
Conner, to let the President and the English Army pass into Glenne, without
any resistance; and yet they are but thirteen hundred Foot, and one hundred
fifty Horse: Dermond O Conner did undertake that the Connaght men should not
meddle with them, nor take our parts* being the only encouragement of the
English, to venture this Enterprise: But now God be praised, I am joining my
Forces with them, and do pray you to assist me with your Forces, for now is
the time to show our selves upon the Enemy, for they are but very few in
number, and destitute of all relief, either by Sea or Land: If your Lordship
be not well at ease your self, let your Brother Dermond, and the Chief
Gentlemen of your Forces, come without any delay; assuring your Lordship, that
I will, and am ready, to show you the like against your need: Beseeching your
Lordship once again, not to fail, as you tender the overthrow of our Action:
Even so committing your Lordship to the tuition of God Almighty* I end.

Portrinad the fifth of July, 1600. Your Honors most assured Friend and Cosen,
James Desmond.


CHAP. IX.
The Army sat down before Glyn-Castle. The Knight of the Valley upon safe
Conduct, spoke with the Earl of Thomond. The Constable of Glyn-Castle, his
Advise to the Earl of Thomond for his safety. A Breach made and assaulted. A
Sally made by the Rebels. The Constable etc. slain, The Castle of the Glyn
won, and the Rebels put to the Sword.
THE next morning, being the fifth of July, 5. Iuliji.
the Army came unto the Castle of the Glynne, The Army sat down before
Glyn-Castle.
distant from Ballintare but five miles; the Rebels still marching within less
then two English miles of us; but never offering any skirmish, where we found
Captain Gawen Harvy (according to his direction) at Anchor before the Castle,
where he attended our coming about fourteen days. The Army was no sooner
encamped, but order was presently taken for unshipping the Cannon, brought by
water in a Boat of the Earl of Thomonds from Limerick; and that night
entrenched our selves, before the Castle between it, and the River: The day
following, the Ordnance (which was one Demi Cannon, and one Sacre) was planted
before the Castle, without any resistance, or the loss of any one man, by
reason of a Parlie that was purposely to that end entertained, during the
which, the work was performed.

The seventh, 7. Iulij.
the Knight of the Valley, by a Messenger from him to the Earl of Thomond, The
Knight of the Valley upon ^f conduct spoke with the Earl of Thomond.
prayed a safe conduct to the Camp, which was granted: He told the Earl, that
he desired to confer with the President, which he refused, without absolute
submission to her Majesty's mercy, whereunto he would not yield, but stood upon
conditions, whereupon he was commanded to depart: He saw the Cannon already
planted, and his Son then a child in the Presidents hands, ready at his will
to be executed, being by himself formerly put in pledge for his Loyalty;
then he desired to speak with the Earl of Thomond again, which was granted:
But the Earl found his obstinacy to be such, as he disdained to have any long
conference with him: And so being safely conveied out of the Camp, he returned
to his fellow Traitors, who were on the top of an Hill, not far of, where
they might see the success of the Castle.

When he was gone, the same day toward the Evening, the Constable of the
Castle (who was a Thomond man borne) sent a Messenger to the Earl of Thomond,
The Constable of Glyn Castle, hi^ advice to the Earl of Thomond for hi^
safety.
praying his Lordship to get a safe conduct from the President, that he might
come to speak with him, which being granted, in his discourse to the Earl; my
Lord (said he) in the love I bear you, being your natural Follower, I desired
to speak with you, to the end that you may avoid the peril that you are in;
for the Earl of Desmond, and the Connaght men, lodge not two miles from this
place, they are three thousand strong at least, and the Lord President may be
assured, that they will give upon his camp, for so they are resolved; and in
all likelihood, you will be there put to the Sword, or driven into the River
of Shenan. The Earl deriding these threats, advised him to render up the
Castle to the President, whereby his life and his fellows might be secured,
which he with vain glorious obstinacy refused, and returned to the Castle;
for a Farewell, the President sent him word, that since he had refused the
Earl of Thomonds favorable offer, that he was in hope before two days were
spent, to have his Head set upon a Stake, which proved true (as you shall
hear) before the Castle was taken.

The next day, 8. Iulij.
when we looked that the cannon should begin to play, the Cannonniere found
the Piece to be cloyed, all the art and skill which either the Smith, or
himself could or did use, prevailed nothing. The President (who is a man that
knows well to manage great Artillery) commanded that the piece upon her
carryage (as she was) should be abased at the tail, and elevated at the musle,
as high as it might be: then he willed the Gunner to give her a full charge
of powder, roll a shot after it, and to give fire at the mouth, whereby the
touchhole was presently cleared, to the great rejoicing of the Army, which of
necessity in attempting the Castle, (without the favor of the Cannon) must
have endured great loss. This particular I thought good not to omit, because
it may be an Instruction to others, whenever the like accident should
happen. The Piece being thus cleared, the President having the Knight of the
Valleys eldest son, (a child of six years old) in his hands, to terrify
the Warders, he caused the child to be set upon the topp of one of the
Gabions, sending them word, That they should have a fair mark to bestow their
small shot upon: The Constable returned answer, That the fear of his life
should not make them to forbear to direct their Volleyes of shot to the
battery: for said he (in undecent terms not fit for me to write) the place is
open where he was borne, and the Knight may have more sons. The President not
intending (as he seemed) caused the Infant to be taken down from the Gabion,
knowing that the discharging of the Cannon would have shaken the poor childs
bones in sunder, and then presently he commanded the battery to begin, and the
small shot did so incessantly burn powder, as the Warders durst not stand to
their fight, A Breach made.
until a breach was made assaultable into the Seller under the great Hall of
the castle: all this was done with the loss of one only man, a Cannoniere.

Then was Captain Flower commanded by the President, with certain Companies
assigned unto him, to enter the breach, The breach assaulted.
which he valiantly performed, and gained the Hall, and enforced the Ward to
return into a Castle close adjoining unto it, where from out of a Spike, they
slew four of our men, then he ascended a pair of stairs, to gain two
turrets over the Hall, in which attempt Captain Bostocks Ensign was slain;
by the winning whereof, they were in better security then before, and there
were our Colors placed; and because it was by this time within night, Captain
Slings by, (who was there with the Presidents Company) was commanded to make
it good till the morning; during which time, some whiles on either side, small
shot played, but little or no harm done: about midnight the Constable seeing
no possibility to resist long, and no hope of mercy left, thought by the
favor of the night in a sally A sally made by the rebels.
to escape; but the Guards were so vigilant, as they slew him, and some others;
nevertheless two escaped, the rest which were unslaine, The Constable etc.
slain
returned into the Castle, and the Constables head was (as the President
formerly had told him) put on a stake: 9. Iulij.
Early in the morning, the Ward was gotten into the Tower of the Castle,
whereunto there was no coming unto them, but up a narrow stayre, which was so
strait, as no more then one at once might ascend; and at the staire foot, a
strong wooden door, which being burnt, the smoke in the stairs was such, as
for two hours there was no ascending without hazard of stifling; when the
extremity of the smoke was past, one of the Rebels presented himself, and
said in the behalf of himself and his fellows, That if their lives might be
saved, they would render; but before any answer was made, he voluntarily put
himself into our hands: The smoke being vanished, a Muskettier, and to his
second a Halbardier; Then Captain Flower, and Captain Slingsbie; Lieutenant
Power, Lieutenant to Sir Henry Power; Ensign Power, Sir Henry Powers Ensign;
Lieutenant Nevill, Lieutenant to Sir Garratt Harvie, which was after killed in
Connaght, seconded by others, ascended the stairs in file, where they found no
resistance, nor yet in the upper rooms, for the Rebels were all gone to the
Battlements of the Castle, with resolution to sell their lives as dear as they
could. Our men pur^ued the way to the Battlements, whereunto there was but one
Door* Captain Flower entered upon one hand, The Castle won, and the rebels
put to the sword.
and Captain Slingsb^e upon the other; the gutters were very narrow between
the Roof of the Castle and the Battlements: In conclusion, some were slain in
the place, and others leapt from the top of the Castle into the water
underneath it, where our Guards killed them. In this Service eleven Soldiers
were slain, whereof one was an Ensign, and one and twenty hurt, of which
number the Sergeant Major, (who served admirably well) was one; he received
three or four wounds, but none of them mortal; there was also the Lieutenants
of the Earl of Thomond, and Sir Henry Powers hurt; of the enemy (of all sorts)
were slain 80, or thereabouts, whereof 23 were natural borne followers to the
Knight of the Valley, in whom he reposed greatest confidence.

The reasons which moved the Knight thus obstinately to persist, was partly
the strength of the Castle, which he (ignorantly) thought defensible against
the Cannon, and also (...) ^anifold oaths and protestations made unto him by
his fellow Rebels, that with their whole Forces they would give relief, and
raise the Siege* but how much he failed in expectation of the one, and they in
the protestation of the other, ye have already heard; whereof if the
protesters had had any feeling (of their promised faith) the provocation they
had was great; for they were eyewitnesses, when the Castle was assaulted and
won. This Castle is a place of great importance, and ever since the beginning
of the rebellion, one Anthony Arthur (a Merchant of Limricke) lay in it, as a
general Factor for the city, to vent commodities to the Rebels.

CHAP. X.
A Ward put into the Castle of Glynne, by the Lord President. AWard put into
the castle of Glin by the L. President.
Carrigfoyle rendered by O Conner Kerry. Victuals and Munition sent out of
England into Mounster. Maurice Stacke sent into Kerry. The B^noghs obtained the
Lord Presidents Passeport to depart the Province. Sixty of the Bonnoghs slain
by the Lord Burke. The Lord Presidents return to Limericke. The Castle of
Corgrage rendered. A garrison left in A^keiton. The Castle of Rathmore rendered.
A garrison placed at Kilmallock. The Rebels enforced to rise from the siege of
Lyskaghan. Florence Mac Carrie's persuasions to the Ward, to quit Lyskaghan.
Florence attempts again to corrupt the Constable of Lyskaghan. A Letter from
James fits Thomas, to Florence Mac Cartie.
THE President was constrained to stay here five days after the taking of the
Castle, to place a Guard therein, which was left to the charge of Captain
Nicholas Mordant, with one and twenty Soldiers, and to repair the breach and
ruins made by the Cannon, which being finished, he intended to draw the
Cannon to Carrigfoyle, five miles distant from the Glinne; which Castle was
held then against her Majesty, as it was in anno 1580, and won by Sir
William Pelham, the Lord Justice, under whom (at that time) the President was a
Captain of Foot: But O Conner Kerry Carrigfoile rendered by Oconner Kerry.
being advertised hereof, desired a protection, and for assurance of his future
loyalty, offered to surrender his said Castle, to be kept unto her Majesty's
use: His profer the Lord President accepted, and a Ward of Sir Charles Wilmot
his Company was placed therein.

The Earl of Thomond, in his good affection to the service, gave unto John O
Conner, during the Wars, a Castle and thirteen Plow Lands, for his Tenants
and himself, to live upon in Thomond, which was a better Pledge upon him, then
any he could give: Nevertheless, after the Spaniards landing in Ireland, this
perfidious Traitor, relapsed as hereafter you shall hear.

About the midst of this Month, Victuals and munitio^ sent out of England
into Mounster.
there arived first at Cork, a small Bark of five and twenty Tonnes, laden
with Victuals; and the day following, a greater quantity; also three Lasts of
Powder, with Lead and Match proportionable, which was a great comfort to the
President, and the whole Army.

Whilst these things were in doing, the President to the end the Rebels might
be set on work, in many places at once, employed one Maurice Stack, Maurice
Stacke sent into Kerry.
a servant of his own into Kerry (a Native of that Country) a man of small
stature, but of invincible courage, with fifty men; who confidently
undertaking no more then he valiantly performed, surprised by scale, a Castle
in the Heart of the Country, called Liscaghan, appertaining to Master Edward
Gray, an Undertaker, put the Ward to the Sword, burnt Ardart and other Towns;
took some Preies for the maintenance of himself and his Company, and made
good the place, until he was seconded, by the coming of Sir Charles Wilmott,
as after you shall hear.

From the beginning of the War, until this undertaking of Maurice Stacke,
none of her Majesty's Forces had been seen in Kerrie; the Country was strong
in men, and full of victuals, yet this undaunted Spirit of Stacke, would with a
handful of men attempt the Enterprise: Still did the Bownoghs (seeing their
hopes in Mounster to be frustrated) importune the President, by Letters and
Messages for his Pasport, The Bonoghs obtained the Lord Presidents Passeport to
depart the Province.
to safe conduct them into Connaght, promising there to live under her
Majesty's Laws, as should become Loyal and Duetifull Subjects; which at last
upon mature deliberation, was granted unto them. The Lord Burke Sixty of the
Bonoghs slain by the Lo. Burke.
being either ignorant of what was done, or would not take knowledge of it; in
revenge of his two Elder Brothers deaths, who were slain by them, with the
help of Limerick men, set upon their Rear in Clanwilliam, as they were
passing the Shenan, and slew sixty of them, besides diverse that were drowned;
and took some part of their Prey: In this skirmish, an Alderman of Limericke
called Dominicke Roche, and a Protestant, was dangerously wounded with a Musket
Bullet; among these Bownoghs, Dermond O Conner passed into Connaght: Whilst
these things were thus in handling, the President still remained at
Carrigofoile, expecting daily and hourly a Ship of Victuals, which had bin
coming from Cork thither, since the beginning of June; upon arrival whereof,
he purposed with the greatest part of his Forces to have passed further into
Kerry, and to have settled that part of the Province.

But the Victuals by reason of contrary Winds, not being as yet come into the
River of Shenan; the thirteenth of this Month, he was constrained for want
thereof, to return to Limericke again. The Lord Presidents return to
Limerick.
In which return, we having marched through exceeding strong Fastness,
encamped the first night before the Castle of Corgrage The Castle of Corgrage
rendered.
seated upon the Shenan, belonging to Master Trenchard the Undertaker, and of
strength sufficient to hold out against any Force, except the Cannon. But the
example of the Glynne, was so fearful unto the Rebels, that upon the first
summons, they yielded the same, with safety of their lives. And the President
gave the Custody of it unto Oliver Stephenson.

The next day, the Army marched twelve miles unto Adare, a Manor House,
belonging to the Earls of Kilda^e, wholly ruined by Pierce Lacy; from thence
the President sent seven hundred Foot, and seventie five Horse to Askeiton,
there to remain in Garrison. A Garrison left in Askeiton.


The fifteenth, 15. Iulij.
advertisement being given, that the Castle of Rathmore The Castle of Kathmore
rendered.
(three miles out of the way to Limerick) was still held by the Rebels; we came
before it, which the Ward instantly delivered unto the President, from whence
he sent four hundred and fifty Foot, and fifty Horse unto Kilmallock; A
Garrison placed at Kilmallock.
for it was well found, that the greatest hope of the Arch-traitor Desmond, did
consist in Conniloe, which by reason of the fertility of the Soil, the
strength of the Country, and the Inhabitants being all his Natural borne
Followers, did yield him more Command and Relief, then any part of the
Province besides: These two Garrisons therefore were placed at Askeiton, and
Kilmallock, that did so infest the Rebels, that resided in those parts, as
before the next Winter was ended, they were utterly wasted.

The sixteenth, 16. Iulij.
the President with the rest of the Army, came to Limerick, which was no
sooner dispersed and disposed in the manner aforesaid, but the Enemy drew their
Forces to Liscaghan, surprised (as you have heard) by Maurice Stacke, and by
him still possessed in despite of the Rebels: The Rebels enforced to rise from
the siege of Liskaghan.
This Castle therefore they besiege, and placed an Engine (well known in this
Country) called a Sovv (to the Walls thereof) to supp the same: But the
Defendants did so well acquit themselves in a Sally, as they tare the Sovv in
pieces, made her to cast her Pigs, and slew twenty seven of them dead in the
place; finding therefore that Force would not prevail, to effect their
attempt, they betake themselves to fraud: For the more cunning conveiance
whereof, Florence Mac Cartie was employed as a principal Instrument by Fits
Maurice, who then with two hundred Foot and twenty Horse lay at Ardart, not
half a mile distant from the Castle; within a few days after the former
Salley, the said Florence came to speak with the Ward, Flor. Mac Carties
persuasions unto the Ward to quit Liskaghan.
(commanded by Walter Talbot, in the absence of Maurice Stacke) about some
particulars concerning their own good; who amongst other conference assured
them, that the President was gone to Cork, that most of his Troops were
defeated, and that it was impossible for them to expect aid before the next
Spring: All which notwithstanding, for the love he bare to the President, he
would be glad to save their lives; and if they would deliver up the place to
him, he would undertake to convey them in safety to Carrigofoile: Much did
this smoth report, distract some of the Wards; for they well understood, that
he had not showed himself in any overt action against her Majesty, since the
President came into his government; and although he did converse with the
Rebels, yet it might be, that it was either to do some service upon them, or
else to draw them into subjection. But others misdoubting, Anguis in h^rba,
resolutely answered, that they would make good that place against all Ireland,
until a second might come unto them: Then he began to ^ertifie them with the
strength of the Enemy, and weakness of her Majesty's Forces, reporting the
one to be at the least seven thousand, and the other at the most two thousand
and five hundred: But finding that this last attempt, prevailed no more then
the first assault, with some threatening speeches he departed to the Lord of
Lixnaw. The next morning, Florence Florence Mac Carty attempted to c^rrupt the
Constable of Liskaghan.
attempted the Ward again, but they made answer as the day before; then he
proffered Walter Talbot, if he would render the place unto him, he would give
him sixty men in wages, and a good Horse; but all his offers being rejected,
he went his way.

Notice hereof being brought unto the President, then residing at Limericke,
he addressed himself in all speed toward Kerry, and set forward the three and
twentieth of July: 23. Iulij.
But whereas (by reason of continual rain that had lately fallen in great
abundance) it was thought that the mountain of Sleulogher was impassible for
carriages, was constrained to take the way of Tho^ond. The forces which he
carried with him, were in list ^050 Foot, and 75 Horse. These therefore marched
to Kilrush, a place in Thomond, opposite to Carrigofoile, and by the eight and
twentieth of the same, 28. Iulij.
all the Foot, the Troops, and baggage were transported, which in respect of
the breadth of the River in that place, being at least one league and a half,
was expedited beyond all expectation. In the speedy dispatch whereof much was
attributed, and that worthily, to the Earl of Thomond, who provided Boats and
such other necessaries, as his Country could afford. The beginning of August
James fits Thomas wrote unto Florence Mac Cartie a Letter, the true Copy
whereof follows.

A Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie.
Cosen, yesterday I came over the Mountain, and brought with me the Bonnaghs
of Conelloe, the residue and force of the Country I have left to keep their
Crets. I understand since my coming, that Sir Charles Wilmott with six hundred
Foot, and fifty Horse, are come to Clanmorris, and this night pretend to be
at Tralee. I have sent to the Knight, Fits Gerald, Knight of Kerry.
and all the Country presently to meet me to morrow, to resist their
determination: And for your better furtherance and accomplishment of our
action, I am to entreat your Lordship, as you regard your own quiet, and
exaltation of the Service, to make what haste and force you may, and speedily
to yield us your helping assistance, for which we will rest thankful, and
most ready to answer your Lordship at your need: And thus referring the
consideration hereof to your Lordship, I commit you to God.

Primo Augusti, 1600. Your Lordships very loving Cosen, James Desmond.


CHAP. XI.
The Lord President at Carrigfoyle. The Castles of Lixnaw, Rathowin, and Tralce
surprised by Sir Charles Wilmot. The Bonoghs defeated by Sir Charles Wilmot.
The death of Patrick Fits Maurice Lo. of Lixnaw. Florence mac Cartie sent for
by the Lord President, but refuses to come. A marriage practiced by Florence
for James fits Thomas. Letters and messages between Florence and Tyrone. An
encounter between Captain Harvie and the White Knights son. The White
Knights son defeated. The Knight of Kerry, and the Lord of Lixnaw sue for
protection. The Earl of Thomond left to command the garrison at Askeyton.
Florence Mac Cartie continues his practice with Tyrone. Lands given by James
fits Thomas to Florence Mac Carry. Donnell Mac Cartie taken in upon protection.
THE President being come to Carrigofoyle, The L. President come to Carrigofoile
advertisement was brought, that the Rebels hastened to ruin their Castles in
Kerrie. Wherefore the nine and twentieth 29. Iulij.
he sent Sir Charles Wilmot, (a very valiant and understanding Gentleman) with
the Forces aforesaid into Clanmorris, who without much difficulty, by reason
of his sudden and unexpected coming, recovered the chief House of the Lord
Fits Maurice, called Lixnaw, The Castles of Lixnaw, Rathowine, and Tralee
surprised by Sir Charles Wilmot.
being formerly by him sapped and underset with props of Timber, to the end,
that whenever any English Forces should come into the Country, that at an
instant (fire being set unto them) the Castle should be ruined, which he
rather wished, then that a Garrison of Soldiers should be lodged in it: But
the sudden coming of Sir Charles, prevented his intention. He surprised also
in the same manner the Castle of Rathowine, belonging to the Bishop of Kerry,
into both which (being very convenient for service) he put sufficient Guards,
and then rode with fifty Horse to view Tralee, which was Sir Edward Dennies
House: James fits Thomas had appointed one hundred and fifty Bownoghs for the
ruining hereof; who having almost fully finished their task, as they were
busily employed about the undermining of certain vaults remaining after the
rest unruined, Sir Charles Wilmott, The Bonoghs defeated by Sir Gharles Wilmot.
with his fifty Horse, as they came suddenly, so they ran violently, like a
Whirlewinde (in fair weather) upon those Rebels, killed two and thirty of
them dead in the place, and recovered the Arms of one hundred, who by the
means and favor of a Bog and Mountain near adjoining, escaped with their
lives, being fr^ghted almost out of their wits. The second of August 2. August.
Sir Charles Wilmott with his Troops returned to Carrigfoile.

In this mean time the President was advertised, that the victuals which he
expected from Cork, was arrived at Carrighowlogh in Thomond, almost opposite
to the River of Cassan in Kerry, from whence in Boats they were transported up
the Cassan to Lixnaw, four miles into the Country, which service was
performed by the aid of the Earl of Thomonds Boats.

The Lord Fits Maurice, whose name was Patricks, and father to Thomas Lord Fits
Maurice now living, an obstinate Rebel, hearing of our being at Carrigfoyle,
fearing our Neighborhood, brake his Castle of the Beaulieu, seated upon the
Shenan, two miles distant from Carrigfoyle, when he saw his chief House
possessed by our Forces, The death of Patricke fits Maurice, L. of Lixnaw.
took such an inward grief, as the twelfth of this instant he gave up the
ghost. The County of Kerry at this time was the best inhabited Country of all
Mounster; but whosoever took the most pains in sowing, certain it is, that
the Garrisons as they were shortly after placed, reaped all the profit of
that Harvest.

The Island of Kerry, an ancient and chief house of the Earls of Desmond, and
of late belonging to Sir William Harbert, as an Undertaker, together with many
other Castles in those parts, are (by the rebels) absolutely ruined, near upon
the first bruit of the Armies approach, which was an evident argument of their
obstinacies.

The President upon his first coming into Kerry, hearing that Florence Mac
Cartie Florence Mac Cartie being sent for would not come unto the L. President.
was not then above ten miles distant from him, about a Parlie with James fits
Thomas, wrote for him, to come and speak with him at Carrigofoile, but he
remising nothing but oaths and delatory excuses, came not; Whereupon second
Letters together with a safe guard were dispatched unto him, but unto those he
returned no answer at all. This delaying conferred with the report of some
Protectees, that averred Florence to have entered into a new Combination with
James fits Thomas; (and that he had sent in this Month of August Owen Mac
Eggan, a Traitorly Priest into Spain;) made the President not doubtful only
of his former promises to him made, but almost out of doubt, that he would show
himself again in open action. Which would bring to pass, that his Labors
(like those of Hercules) should daily be renewed, new Heads still growing upon
this rebellious Hydra; for the Septs of the Carties themselves (with their
Followers and Dependants) were known to be no less then three thousand able
men; and to the intent, that all these might more firmly unite themselves,
with the rest which were no less, then four thousand and five hundred strong
against Her Majesty: This Florence was now busy in working of a Marriage,
between the Sugan Earl, A Marriage practiced by Florence for James fits Thomas.
and the sister of Cormacke Mac Dormond, Lord of Muskerry, a populous, a rich,
and a fast Country. The President having received advertisement thereof, left
Sir Charles Wilmot to prosecute the service in Kerry, and himself hasted his
return toward Cork, there to work some means, for the overthrowing the
proceedings of this dangerous Complot.

The President being returned so far as Limerick, certain notice was brought
him, that Florence had lately employed a Messenger to Tyrone Letters and
Messages between Florence and Tyrone.
(as he pretended) for the releafe of Osulevan Moke, his Brother in Law; but as
the truth was, to procure aid from the North, to support the Rebellion in
Mounster: Tyrone by the said Messenger, sent Letters of Comfort and
Encouragement, as well to Florences as to the rest of the Lords in that
Province; assuring them, not only of succors from himself, but farther, that
the Spanish Forces would land in Mounster before Michaelmas next. These
exorbitant courses of Florence, gave a great impediment to the service, for the
President (as he would often say) did see him like a dark Cloud over his Head,
threatening a Storm, to hinder and disturb his proceedings: But we will leave
Florence for a while busily employed, in devising means how to procure aid,
either from Spain, or from the North, or from both; and betake our selves to
such other occurrents as happened about this time. Upon the sixteenth of August,
16. Aug.
the Lord President came to Limericke.

The eighteenth, Aug. 18.
Pierce Lacy wrote unto the President, humbly beseeching him, that he might be
received into Her Majesty's gracious protection, promising ever afterward to
remain a loyal Subject; but withal he made certain demands, which were so
much disliked by the President, as his suite was rejected; for the President
insisted upon a Rule (which he never brake) that he would not give care to
any Traitor that did capitulate. The twentieth Aug. 20.
he came to Kilmallock, remaining there but one day, to take assurance of
certain Gentlemen and Freeholders, that had lately submitted themselves.

The day following at Kilmallock, 21. Aug.
the White Knight being there to attend the President, An Encounter between
Captain Harvie and the White Knights Son.
news was brought unto him, that diverse of his people and Followers were
slain by the Garrison of Moyallo, commanded by Captain Roger Harvy: The
President careful to give him contentment (being under her Majesty's
protection) in his own presence examined the matter; and there it was found,
that Captain Harvy having intelligence by a Spy, that was his Guide, of a
notable Traitor called John Mac Redmond, and certain other Traitors, and their
goods, which were reported to be near unto Sir Walter Raleigh his Lands,
adjoining to the White Knights Country, with seventie Foot and four and
twenty Horse, marched that night one and twenty miles from Moyallo; and at
the break of day, our men thinking, that they had been brought upon an
Enemies Town, set fire to a House, having some few people therein: But an old
Soldier knowing the place, told the Captain that it was the White Knights
Town: Whereupon he commanded his Company to forbear committing any outrage,
either upon the people, or any of their Goods: But the White Knights younger
Son, John fits Gibbon, having suddenly gathered to himself, one hundred and
sixty Foot and eighteen Horse, overtooke Captain Haruy; who began to excuse
the matter, telling him (as the truth was) that the Guide whom he had there with
him, to answer the Fact, had brought him unwillingly upon that place; and
therefore for the hurt done (ignorantly) he would make a large satisfaction.

But the young man following the advice of one Garret Mac Shane, (who had
lately been a notable Traitor) thinking it not possible for so small a Company
to resist his great Force; The White Knights Son defeated.
(without returning any answer) began presently to chardge our men, whom they
supposed without any great resistance to have at their mercy, and came up
close to our Foot, who nothing dismayed, stood firm, expecting their Chardge:
But they not coming on, Captain Harvy advanced toward them, and brake them
instantly. In this Conflict were slain and hurt above sixty of their party;
and among them Garret Mac Shane, the Leader and Procurer of the fight; of our
men, some four were hurt, but none killed; Captain Harvy received a shot on
his Murrian, a blow with a pike upon his back, but escaped danger by the
goodness of his Buffe Coat, and had his Horse slain under him. The White
Knight upon dew knowledge hereof, condemned both his Son and people for their
folly, to enforce a fight, having no harm intended them; and confessed they
were well lost. But yet for his better satisfaction the treacherous Guide, who
did upon a set purposed malice draw this Draught, was by the Presidents
appointment, delivered over to the Marshall, and presently hanged: The three
and twentieth 23. Aug.
the Lord President returned to Cork.

Sir Charles Wilmot having made his entrance into Kerry (as already you have
heard) and there proceeded so far as Lixnaw, made known to the President,
that the Rebels were exceeding strong in that Country; The Arch-Rebell James
fits Thomas being attended with five hundred Bownoghs, besides the Forces that
the Knight of Kerry, Thomas Oge, and the Gentlemen of the Country could make:
Hereupon the President knowing that those parts were always affectionately
addicted to the Earls of Desmond, caused a Footman of the young Earls, (who
was shortly afterward to come into Ireland) as the manner is, having his
Masters Arms upon his coat before and behind, to show himself in most
places of the Country, that thereby they might be the better persuaded of his
coming, and be a means to alienate their hearts from the counterfeit
Desmond. The vigilant care that Sir Charles Wilmot used within his charge,
having taken diverse preyes, and killed some of the Rebels, together with this
Invention, caused most of the Freeholders of that Country to submitt
themselves, and seek unto the Governor for her Majesty's protection: the
principal amongst these was William fits Gerald, The Knight of Kerry, and the
Lord of Lixnaw made suite to be protected.
commonly called The Knight of Kerry, who by Messengers signified the great
desire that he conceived to live a Subject, and had present occasion to show
some proof thereof; for the Sugan Earl coming about this time to the Dingle,
the said Knight would by no means receive him into his Castle; whereupon he
ruined all the houses that were standing in the Town, and so took his journey
unto Castle Mange: Thomas fits Maurice, (the pretended Baron of Lixnaw) also
now newly come to his Barronie by the death of his father, sought by means of
his wife, (who was Sister to the Earl of Thomond) for the Presidents favor,
and her Majesty's protection: Both were promised upon condition, he would
perform such service as might in some good sort deserve the same: but this he
absolutely refused, because (forsooth) it stood not with his Conscience, nor
with his Honor: for these were his own words in a Letter that he wrote to my
Lord of Thomond: and upon this Answer the President rejected both the man and
his suit.

The affairs of Kerry succeeding so well with the Governor, it was supposed,
that the reputed Earl of Desmond would not long remain in these parts, lest
the Protectees might offer him some false measure; which if it should happen,
most likely it was that he would pass the Mountain, and shelter himself in
the Fastnes of Conniloe, and therefore the Lord President entreated the Earl
of Thomond, to stay with the Garrison at Askeiton, The Earl of Thomo^d left to
command the garrison at Askeiton.
both to do service upon such Rebels as should lurk in those woods, as also
to secure the goods of those that were newly become Subjects; for (as the
manner of the Irish) had they lost but twenty Cowes, or ten Garrans, they
would have held it sufficient cause to have relapsed again. My Lord of Thomond
therefore lying there in Garrison, received advertisement by certain espialls
(whom he used) that Florence Mac Cartie Florence continues his practice with
Tyrone.
had assuredly made a new combination with the Arch-Rebell Desmond, and had
sent second Letters to Tyrone about O Sulevan More his enlargement; but in
truth the effect thereof was, to implore aid of that Egyptian Reed, to
underprop their ruinous, and almost rotten Building. Of this new and late
combination, the Lord President was also advertised by the Lord Barrie, That
James Mac Thomas, to assure Florence unto him, did give him these Lands and
Rents following: Lands given by James fits Thomas to Flor. Mac Cartie.
viz. the Querinie, Killaha, the rents of Bear and Bantrie, the Beoves of
Carbry, Carrigroaghan and Ballinry near unto Cork; all which Florence
accepted, and their place of meeting (where this Agreement was made) was at
Rahinemroeg, bordering upon Slewlogher. Upon this Intelligence the Governor of
Kerry, by direction from the President, received into protection Donnell Mac
Carty, Donnel Mac Carty taken in upon protection.
natural son to the late Earl of Clancare, and Brother to Florence his
wife, whom the Country in the beginning of this Rebellion, saluted Mac Cartie
More, or chief Lord of Desmond: But at Tyrone his late being in the Province,
he was deprived of that promotion, and both the Title and Lands by him
conferred upon the said Florence: wherefore they thought this man to be a
special fit Instrument, of whom there might be very good use, when the
President should begin his prosecutions against Florence.

CHAP. XII.
The Castle of Main in Connologh taken. Omaghon, and the O Crowlyes protected.
Cahir Castle rendered. Supplies of Horses and Money sent for Mounster. Dermond
Mac Owen, O Keefe, and Mac Awley make suite to be received as subjects. The
submission of the Knight of Kerry. James fits Thomas, and Pierce Lacie defeated
by the Knight of Kerry.
THE Rebel that next bordered upon this Garrison of Askeiton, was Garret fits
Nicholas, and some few Kerne that followed him, whom Sir Francis Barkley so
haunted and hunted, that he got from them all their prey, their own riding
Horses, and at last the Castle of Main, The Castle of Main in Connologh taken.
held by them, wherein there was provision of Corn for all that year.

The President having disposed of his Garrisons in such sort, that they were
lodged either in the Rebels Countries, or very near thereunto, sent unto them
several Letters, willing the Commanders to employ their Companies (at this
time especially) about the standing Corn now ready for the Harvest, to gather
in for their own uses, what lay most conveniently for them, and the rest to
destroy with Man and Horse, which was performed accordingly; and this no doubt
was one principal cause, that they were unable to hold up their Heads the next
year; for presently hereupon Omaghon and the O Crowlies in Carbery, Omaghon
and the O Crowlies protected.
sought to Sir Richard Percy lying at Kinsale, that he would be a means, to
the Lord President for Her Majesty's protection; which being granted, they
remained Loyal Subjects with their Tenants and Followers until the landing of
the Spaniards. In this interim, the Lord President labored with Cormuck Mac*
Dermond, partly by promises, and partly by menaces, to frustrate the intended
Marriage, The intended Marriage of James fits Thomas frustrated.
between James fits Thomas and his Sister; which at last with some difficulty
was frustrated, by c^using the said Cormuck to undertake for his Sisters
appearance, whenever he or the Council should call for her.

Toward the later end of this Month of August, the Lord Deputy writing to the
President about some other o^casions; it pleased him to remember Cahir Castle
Cahir Castle rendered
(which was lost as before you have heard) signifying that he much desired to
have that Castle recovered from the Rebels; the rather because the great
Ordnance, a Cannon, and a Culverin being left there by the Earl of Essex, were
now possessed by the Rebels. This Item from the Lord Deputy, spurred on the
President without further delay, to take order therein; and therefore presently
by his Letters, sent for the Lord of Cahir, to repair unto him, who (as before
you have heard) was vehemently suspected, to have some hand both in the taking,
and keeping thereof. The Barron of Cahir being come, the Council persuaded him
to deal with James Butler (nicknamed James Galde) his Brother, about the
redelivering thereof to Her Majesty's use; but his Answer was, that so little
interest had he in his Brother, as the meanest Follower in all his Country,
might prevail more with him then himself; (for he was unwilling to have the
Castle regained by the State, except it might again, be left wholly to him, as
it was before the first winning thereof) which the President surmising told
him, that if it might speedily be yielded up unto him, he would become an
humble Suitor to the Lord Deputy (in his behalf) for the repossessing
thereof; otherwise he would presently march with his whole Army into those
parts, and taking the same by force, he would ruin and raze it to the very
foundation; and this he bound with no small protestations: Hereupon, Justice
Comerford being dispatched away with the Lord of Cahir, they prevailed so far
with young Butler, that the Castle upon the twenty nineth following was
delivered to the State; as also, all the Munitions, and the great Ordnance
conveied to Clonmell, and from thence to Watterford.

The nine and twentieth 29 August.
the Lord President, among other things in his dispatch made for England;
advertised the Lords of the Council, that there was lately arrived at Limerick
ten thousand pounds in money for the Army in Mounster; Supplies of Horses
and Money sent for Mounster.
and that also at Cork thirty six Horse, (for the supply of his Horse
Troops) were landed at Cork; for the which he gave their Lordships humble
thanks: The Horse sent were forty, but the Conductor delivered no more then
aforesaid.

While these things were in handling, it happened that a French Bark arrived at
Dingle, laden with Wine and some Munition, which they sold to the Rebels, and
thereby ministered unto them no small relief, being before in great want
thereof. Whereupon the President wrote his Letters to the Lords of Her
Majesty's Privy Council, entreating that it would please them, to procure Her
Majesty's Letters to be directed to her Ambassador Ledger in France, to deal
with the King, for preventing such further mischiefs, as might arise by his
Subjects merchandising with the Rebels.

The six and twentieth 26. August.
of this Month, Dermond Mac Owen Dermond Mac Owen O keefe and Mac Awly, made
suite to be received as Subjects.
Lord of the Country, called Dowalla, a man for wit and courage, nothing
inferior to any of the Mounster Rebels, by his Letters directed to Captain
Roger Harvy, bearing Date the twenty sixeth aforesaid, made humble suite unto
the President, that himself, Mac Awly and O keefe with all their followers,
might be received into Her Majesty's gracious protection; promising both for
himself and them, from thence forward, to continue and remain loyal and
obedient Subjects; and for the performance of the same, they would put in
sufficient security, which humble suite the President not long after granted.

Near unto the day before mentioned, William fits Gerald, the Knight of Kerry,
The submission of the Knight of Kerry.
in a very penitent manner submitted himself to Sir Charles Wilmott, and
received her Majesty's gracious protection, protesting with many vows his
future loyalty, whereof Sir Charles advertised the President, praying the
confirmation of the same, which was upon sight of his Letters granted. Four
or five days afterward, as Sir Charles lay with his Force before Ardart in
Kerry, James fits Thomas, and Pierce Lacie, Ia. fits Tho. and Pierce Lacy
defeated by the Knight of Kerry.
with all the Force they could make, entered (by night) into the Knight of
Kerries Country, with a full intention either to surprise his person, or to
spoil and burn his towns, and corn, to his utter ruin: The Knight having
some little foreknowledge of the storm at hand, as soon as they were entered
into his Country, he fought with them, slew two of their chief Leaders of
the Bownoghs, the one called Teg O Kelly, the other Walter Mac Castelogh, and
with them sixteen others. The Invaders finding so ill a vvelcome, returned,
not having gained so much as one Cow.

CHAP. XIII.
The Castle of Ardart taken by Sir Charles Wilmot. Maurice Stacke treacherously
murdered. The prey of Kilkoe taken by Sir Richard Percie. A Letter from James
fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie. James fits Thomas defeated by the garrison
of Kilmallock.
ARdart for some nine days made good defense, The castle of Ardart taken by
Sir Chapter Wilmot.
and had burned with Fire-workes such Boardes and Timber as Sir Charles had
placed against the wall of the Castle, for his men's safety as they undermined.
But at the last Sir Charles sent for a Saker out of an English man's Ship,
(which one Hill the Master lent him) with a purpose only to break open the
door of the Castle; for the walls were too strong for so small a Piece to
offend: The Rebels at the sight of the Saker yielded: Sir Charles hanged the
Constable; the rest of the Ward, which was but eight, with the women and
children were spared.

Toward the latter end of August, Maurice Stack, the brave undertaker before
spoken of, was by Honor ny Brien, wife to the Lord of Lixnaw, invited to dine
with her, Maurice Stacke murdr^d treacherously.
in her Husbands Castle of Beaulieu in Kerry; at which time Donnell Obrien,
Brother both to her, and the Earl of Thomond was then with his Sister; Dinner
being ended, the young Lady desired to speak with the said Stacke privately in
her Chamber, where after a little time spent, and disagreeing about the matter
then in speech, the Lady cried out unto Dermon'd Kewghe Mac Corman, William
Odonichan and Edmond Oheher (being at the Chamber door) do you not hear him
misuse me in words? Whereupon with their skenes they instantly murdered him in
the place: As Soon as he was slain, she sent unto her Husband, and willed
the Murderers to repair unto him* of this barbarous and inhumane Act, some
say that this Lady was the principal Agent, though some of her friends have
since sought to excuse her: The Earl of Thomond upon the knowledge of it, was
so infinitely grieved, and for the same held his Sister in such dete^tation, as
from that day forwards (to the day of her death) which was not many Months
after (as I think) he never did see her, nor could not abide the memory of her
name: But howsoever this worthy Subject, (more worthy then whom there was no
one of Ireland birth of his quality) was thus shamefully butchered as you have
heard: The Lord of Lixnaw, not satiated with his blood (traitrously and
shamefully shed) the next day after, he hanged Thomas Encally Stack, the
Brother of the said Maurice Stack, whom he had held Prisoner a long time before.

About the beginning of this Month of September, September.
the Garrison of Kinsale was droven into the field, and marched so far as
Rosse Carbery, being commanded by Sir Richard Percy, The Prey of Kilkoe taken
by Sir Richard Percy.
and guided by Walter Coppinger of Cork, upon hope of doing service
thereabout, but being disappointed thereof, they marched beyond the Leap, and
coming suddenly to Kilcoe, they took there a Prey of three hundred Cowes,
which they brought in safety without any loss to Littertinlis, and from
thence they returned again to their Garrison.

The Garrison of Kerry, had by this time so galled the Forces of the usurping
Desmond, as he found himself unable long to subsist, except Florence Mac
Cartie (who had long played the Machiavillian Ambodexter, betwixt him and the
L* President) would now at the last join with him in defense and supportation
of the Action; this did he importune by diverse Letters, but especially by one,
which because it contains his estate at this time, together with other
particularities fit to be understood; I have thought good to insert the very
words of his own Letter as follows.

A Letter from James fits Thomas to Florence Mac Cartie.
MY Lord, your Letters I have received, and the present time of Service is now
at hand, which by Letters, nor any excuse so effectual ought to be delayed;
And whereas you write, that you intend to confer with the President, and the
Earl of Thomond, I marvel that one of your Lordships acquaintance with their
proceedings, does not yet know their enticing bayts, and humors, to entrap us
all within the nets of their policies; Your vow to God and this action, for
the maintenance of the Church, and defense of our own right, should not for
any respect be unregarded: you know that of long time your Lordship has been
suitor to the Queen and Council, and could not at any time prevail, nor get
any likelihood of your settlement; and now being duly placed by the assent of
the Church, and us the Nobility of this Action, your Lordship should work all
means possible for to maintain the same. You know the ancient and general
malice that heretofore they bare to all Irish Birth, and much more they rave at
this present, so as it is very bootlesse for any of us all to seek their
favors, or countenance, which were but a mean to work our total subversion:
Write to me effectually your Lordships mind, and what resolution you purpose
to follow, whereby I may proceed accordingly. This Army is but very slender,
for they are but six hundred Foot, and eighty Horse; I am my self and Fits
Maurice six hundred Foot, and some Horse: We expect your Lordships
assistance, which we heartily desire, and not any further to defer us with
Letters, as you respect us, and the service: and whereas you write you have no
force, your own presence, and the brute of your coming, will much further
the Service, and dismay the enenemy, etc.

2. September. 1600. Your loving Cosen, James Desmond.


Notwithstanding the importunity of these Letters, together with his own
inclination, yet Florence finding that this their divided Kingdom could not
long stand, he would not in person join with them, but sent word to the white
Knight by his daughter ( Donogh Mac Cormock his wife) that rather then the
Action should fall to the ground, he would himself make a journey into
Spain, to entreat aid and assistance from the Pope and Spanish King: but in
the mean time, the supposed Earl being still pursued by Sir Charles, is
constrained to abandon Kerry, to go to Conniloe, and so to Arlogh; in which
passage he sustained such a loss (as shall be said) which prooved to him
irrecoverable. There was not left any man of esteem likely to defend the
Action, but Florence Mac Cartie, (lately spoken of) who having temporized all
this while, (to see this Summers prosecution) was grown by other men's examples
to be more wise then honest, became now an Intercessor to the President, with
frequent Letters, and damnable oaths, that he was in his heart and intentions
sincerely devoted to her Majesty's service.

The concurrence of this fortunate success, did promise a present reduction of
the Province, and an establishment thereof in a settled quiet, and so no doubt
it would have prooved, if the Protectees had meant in their hearts, as they
professed with their tongues: but it was far otherwise, for the President
did at this time receive certain advertisement, that the titularie Earl being
driven to great extremity, and eagerly prosecuted in all corners, by the
consent (in common Counsel) of his associates, whereof some of them had never
been in actual rebellion, and others lately protected, and seeming to forsake
him (notwithstanding their pledges in her Majesty's hands) have advised him
partly for his safety, but especially to make trial what aid he could
procure (out of Connaght and Vlster) to depart from thence, with confident
promises, that whenever he should return with new Forces, that then they
would as constantly stand for him as heretofore: Whence by the way may be
discerned the cankred disposition of their malicious hearts toward the English
Government, who nothing regard the disease of their Persons, the loss of their
Goods, the hazard of their Lives, and danger of their perjured Souls, so that
they may be able to continue in action against her Majesty; hoping thereby
that at the length she would grow weary of her extreme charges, and by that
means be driven to condescend to their own Conditions and Liberty of
conscience; wherein although they were not disturbed at this time, yet can they
not be satisfied without public allowance, and Exercise thereof under the
Romish Authority, which they strive to have supreme; and what kind of
subjection can be expected at the hands of any such Papists, may appear, for
that some of great quality in Mounster, did about the midst of this month,
purposely send certain Priests to Rome, to purchase absolution from the Pope,
for the sin that they Committed, in not entering into public Hostility with
the rest; and because they saw that the Queen could not be violently
dispossessed of Ireland, did likewise entreat a dispensation from overt action,
but yet to live unchangeably in the Catholic Religion, and to be permitted in
outward temporal obedience her Majesty's Subjects. Consider therefore I say,
the dutiful Alleagiance of these men, whose obedience depends upon the Popes
allowance.

Sir George Thornton had in garrison at Kilmallock, James fits Tho* defeated by
the garrison of Kilmallocke.
Captain Francis Slingsby, with the Presidents Company, Paul Arundle, with the
Lord Audleys, Captain Dillon, and Captain O Reilly, with their Foot
Companies, and Captain Greame with his Troop of Horse, to whom intelligence
was brought upon Tuesday being the sixteenth of September, 16. Sept.
that the Rebels James fits Thomas, and his accomplices, were that day to pass
from Conniloe, to the huge Fastness of Arlogh: Whereupon Captain Greame
instantly drew forth (with his Troop) toward the said Fastness; Order being
likewise taken, that the Foot should hasten after with all possible speed;
Captain Greame making extraordinary haste, suddenly espied their Forces
somewhat near the wood; but before they could recover the same, he gave them
a Charge, and at the very first possessed himself of their Carriage, and
killed all those that guarded the same: Hereupon the Rebels (having four
Colors) in defense of their Carriage, drew toward him, and gave him a charge,
which he answered with his Horse; and by this time a Sergeant of Captain
Dillons, with some light shot, were come up, and delivered a Volley in their
teeth, which killed diverse of them, and slew Pierce Lacie his horse under him:
Hereupon Captain Greame charged their Battalion home to the Colors, which
they resisted; but at his second charge, he brake clean through them, and they
betook themselves to running, and our men to killing; and surely had not our
Horse been over-wearied with their long forrey before they came to fight, and
our Foot tired and out of breath to come up, there had not one man escaped
alive: But as it was, there were slain at this skirmish of the Rebels, at
least one hundred and twenty, whereof one half were of their best men,
amongst whom was Desmonds base son, T^g O Kelly, and Hugh O Kelly, Captains
of the Bownoghs, whose heads were the next day presented to the President at
Moyallo: There were (besides these) above fourscore dangerously wounded; we
took from them one hundred and fifty Pikes and Pieces, besides many Swords,
Targets and Skeines; we got fourt^e Horses and Hackneys, and at least three
hundred Garrans laden with baggage, to the value (as was reported) of five
hundred pound, together with all their prey of sheep and covves, except some
few that ran into the woods, being feared with the cry of the people, and
noise of the shot and drums. The greatest loss that we sustained was in
Horse; for Captain Greame lost sixteen Horse, the Lord Audley had a Sergeant
slain, and there were six more wounded, but not mortally; one of Captain
Greames troop took the Archtraytor Desmonds Ensign, which the Captain
perceiving, he stooped down to reach the Colors, but at an instant receiving
a blow with a Piece upon the reins of his back, was not able to recover
them, being rescued with six Pike-men.

This Disaster proved so fatal to the usurping Earl, that although of the
six hundred Foot he brought with him, four hundred did still remain able
to fight; yet could he never afterward gather one hundred of these to a Head;
for some gat into Connaght, some into Vlster, and in fine, every man to his
own home, leaving the Earl to a desperate fortune; who now perceived that the
Provincials submitted themselves daily to the President, and the strangers
returned into their several Countries; and that no aid approached either from
the South or North, by Sea, nor Land, was compelled together with John his
Brother, Maurice Mac Thomas, Pierce Lacy, and the Knight of the Glyn, to leave
the Country of Cork, and to fly into Tipperary and Ormond, and from thence,
John fits Thomas hastes to Vlster.

CHAP. XIIII.
Supplies of Foot sent from England. Osulevan More sent by the Lord Deputy to
the Lord President. The Castle of Glancoyne surprised by Sir Francis Barkley.
Florence Mac Carties Wife and Followers persuaded him to go to the Lord
President. The young Earl of Desmond arrived at Yoghall. A Letter from Her
Majesty to the Lord President. Her Majesty's Letters Patents for James
Fitzgerald to be Earl of Desmond.
THE Lords of the Council of England, by their Letters bearing Date the
twenty seventh, Supplies of Foot sent out of England.
advertised the President, that there was six hundred Foot in a readiness to
be sent to Cork, to supply the Army; and for that many Soldiers daily
arrived in England by Passeports from their Captains only: They gave the
President a strait Charge, to take order with all the Maritime Towns, that no
Soldier should be transported out of any of them, without a Pass under his
own Hand and Seal; and the last of the same, he had directions from their
Lordships, that good Bands with Sureties should be taken upon all Merchants of
Ireland, which traded with Spain or France, not only for their own good
behaviors and loyalties, when they were beyond the Seas, but to all such
Passengers as they should carry with them, which was presently put into
execution.

Dermond O Conner at his late being in Mounster, had caused Osulevan More, a
man above sixty years of age, and yet never known to be in action against
Her Majesty; neither in James fits Maurice his Wars, nor in the old Earl of
Desmonds, nor in this last Rebellion: This man I say, Dermond O Conner had
taken Prisoner not without Consent and Council of Florence Mac Cartie, because
he refused to pay Bonnaght unto the Connaght men: Captain Tirrell by force or
fraud (I know not whether) took the Prisoner from him, and carried him into the
North, who escaped out of the Vlster men's hands, was taken by Sir Theobald
Dillon of Connaght, and presented to the Lord Deputy, by whom he is committed
to the Castle of Dublin, until his estate should be further known; and not
long after he sent him to the Earl of Ormond, Osulev an More sent by the Lord
Deputy to the Lord President.
to be sent by him to the President, to be disposed of according to his
discretion: He being about this time come to Cork, raileth bitterly against
Florence, ascribing both the beginning and continuance of his troubles to him,
and relating to the Council such intelligence, as he had learned in those
parts where he had been detained, returns into his own Country.

The Arch-rebels, James fits Thomas Fits Maurice, and the Knight of the Glyn,
not finding (as it should seem) the entertainment they expected in my Lord of
Ormonds country; or rather, notintending at the first to make any long stay
there; but only that thereby the President might think them quite gone, and
so make no further inquiry after them; did in the beginning of this Month of
October, October.
steal back into the County of Limerick, yet not so privily, but the
President had intelligence thereof; 4. Octbe
for it was signified unto him, the fourth of this instant, that Desmond was
about Arlogh, having not above five in his Company, and two of them came lately
from the Pope, with promise of Succors, which came too late for his turn, as
hereafter shall be showed.

In the mean time our Garrisons prospered so well, The Castle of Glan Coin
surprised by Sir Francis Barkley.
that Sir Francis Barkley got the Castle of Glancoyne in Connilogh, burning,
and spoiling great store of Corn in those parts; and Sir Charles Wilmot in
Kerry prevailed so far, that Castlemange held by Thomas Oge, and Listoell
defended by Fits Maurice, were the only two Castles held against her Majesty,
which were both regained within short time; and Captain Flower at Lysmore,
wrought miracles against the Rebels in those parts, as Sir Richard Aylward
wrote to the President. But Florence Mac Cartie, notwithstanding his manifold
Letters, stuffed with abominable oaths, came not (as yet) to the President,
nor indeed minded he to come (as it was reported) had not his Wife and some of
his Country, Florence Mac Carties wife and followers persuaded him to go to
the Lord President.
in a manner compelled him thereunto; for she refused to come to his Bed,
until he had reconciled himself to Her Majesty; saying that she knew in what
manner her Father had that Earldom from her Highness; and though she be not
pleased to bestow the same wholly upon her, yet she doubted not to obtain some
part thereof; but if neither of these could be gotten, yet was not she minded
to go a begging either unto Vlster nor into Spain; and to confirm this
report, it was certainly known, that she with the help of her friends, kept
the Castle of the Lough in Desmond by force from him.

Her Majesty having evermore had a determination, The young Earl of Desmond
arrived at Yoghall.
to send James fits Gerald, Son unto the late Earl of Desmond attainted in
Ireland; and having found by experience, that the attempt which Dermond O
Conner made in the apprehension of James fits Thomas, was at his Wifes suite,
in hope thereby to obtain the restitution of her Brother to his old Title of
Earl of Desmond, and also unto some state of Inheritance for his maintenance;
did now resolve to put her determination in effect, hoping that his presence in
Ireland, would draw the ancient Followers of the Earl of Desmond (his Father)
from James fits Thomas the supposed Earl; and therefore releasing him out of
the Tower (where from his infancy he had been Prisoner) she not only
admitted him to her presence, but styled him Earl of Desmond, and sent him
conducted into Ireland by Captain Price, a sober, discreet Gentleman, and an
ancient Commander in the Wars, 14. October.
who landed with his charge at Youghall the fourteenth day of October, from
thence he brought him to Moyallo to the President; upon the eighteenth, 18.
October.
where from Her Majesty he presented to his Lordship the young Earl; Her
Majesty's Letters, and Letters Pattents under the great Seal of England for
his restitution in blood and Honor; both which Letter and Letters Pattens, I
think it not unnecessary to set down the true Copies, which were as follows.

A Letter from her Majesty to the Lord President.
ELIZAB. R.
Trusty and Welbeloved,
we greet you well: We have now at the last resolved to send over James fits
Gerald into Mounster, after long debate with Our self what accidents might
follow thereupon; wherein although there might be many doubts, to what he may
be inveagled in times to come, yet that opinion which we conceive of his own
good nature and disposition to gratefulness, for this high benefit which he
receives, together with the orderly course which we intend shall be observed
in the raising, and disposing his Fortune, does make us less doubtful of
that mischief, then we are for the present of some other scorn, which we
shall receive, if by our sending him over, and your resolution to restore him,
no such effect should follow, as might be answerable to that which is expected:
In which consideration, although we know there are many of Opinion, that the
way to draw greatest things by him, were to raise him high at first (because it
will make those cleave to him the faster) yet will we follow therein Our own
resolution, which is rather to proceed in such a case by degrees, then in any
sudden, without reasonable caution and reservation: For the first step
therefore, we have now sent him over by Captain Price, (a trusty and
discreet Person) to deliver him safely into your hands, whereas we know the
keeping of him in any state of a Prisoner, would wholly overthrow the work,
and multiply the jealousies of those who judge all others by themselves; So in
respect that you are in place where all circumstances are clearest known, and
that the change of causes alters Councels: Know this from Us, That we shall
never disallow it, if you in your discretion find it necessary (at any time)
that you do abridge him of any liberty, or any favor now afforded him: For
as we have much the rather assented to send him over, and place him there,
because you have had your part in the Counsel: So do we refer the managing
of him to your discretion: for his maintenance during his abode there, there
are but two ways, the one to bestow Lands upon him with an habitation: the
other to maintain him out of our own purse with a pension. In the first there
must be time to consider where to seat him: for the second, because it is a
thing that must be done, and that he must be maintained with a convenient
attendance, that they may not scorn him, and that he has one or two sisters,
whom we had rather should depend upon himself, then be matched with any other
that were ill affected, (whereof many there be that would be glad to fortify
themselves by them.) We do hereby give you order, to peruse the Numbers you
have, and where you find any unprofitable Captain that has a weak band,
that you do presently cashiere the same, and to employ part of that charge,
which was formerly bestowed in that Band, toward the maintenance of him and
his, as you shall see requisite, without further charging us, and the same to
continue, until we may see how to resolve of some convenient Habitation for
him, that they may see he is to be seated amongst them, with a competent
portion of living, where he may be a stay to Our service. And now because we
know the Country will think him unlikely to stead them that shall follow him,
if they be not assured that he shall have the Title, (which is a matter they
do so much affect to follow) We have heerewith sent you a Patent of his
Earldom, to the intent that you may assure all that are diffident of our
performance; and yet We can be content, they plainly do understand also,
that if they shall not actually, and substantially perform those Services,
which may deserve this extraordinary clemency, and give us cause to
consummate the rest: We both can and will quickly recall all that is hitherto
performed: for which purpose we do hereby command you, to advertise Us,
what is effected for him, by this demonstratiue act of Ours, and then to
receive our pleasure, before the Patent be delivered out of your hands;
although for the present you may let it be showed to any such persons as you
shall see cause, to assure by view of the same, and thereby make them perceive
how unjustly We have been slaundered, by those that should possess the
world, that We have no desire or end, but to extirpate as well the Innocent,
as the contrary of that Nation, seeing We are contented to raise the Son of
that Father, that had committed so notorious crimes. For as much as We do
hold it convenient, that the Archbishopp of Cassell should not be in any sort
kept in extremity: We would have you convert ten dead pays of Foot to his
use, parcel of that hundred which is appointed to be cashiered for the
maintenance of James Fits Gerald; Wherein likewise We would have consideration
held of poor, and some maintenance for the wife of Dermond O Conner; All
these allowances to be borne by the Cashiering of that Company, and to be
ordered according to your discretion, because We would not have apparent
penury to surprise any of these that have entered so deeply, although the
fruits are yet ungathered, which is the time when they must be further
rewarded. We have likewise given order to the Deputy, to make an allowance of
forty shillings a week to the Archbishop, in nature of Dead Pays to
Preachers, in lieu whereof he may stay the pension of some other, who is not
so necessary to be provided for: Having now assented to do that you have
advised, We leave it to be ordered accordingly to your discretion, assuring
you, that we are still of opinion, if you use not this Patent well, that they
will be less greedy to dispatch any business for Us, then they would have
been, if we had not gone on so hastily with theirs: But we repose such trust
in you, as we think our Honor and safety of that Province in safe hands, for
so much as faith and discretion can secure, to whom we render condign thanks
for the good proof you have hitherto made of them both. The Bishop is not
unfit to frequent the young Gentleman; and therefore, that credit which is fit,
let him have, and let your proof of his zeal, excuse other of his
indiscretions.

Given at our Manor of Otlands the first of October, 1600. To. Cecill


Her Majesty's Letters, Patents for James fits Gerald, to be Earl of Desmond.
ELIZABETH Dei Gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, fidei Defensor,
etc. Archiepiscopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Vicecomitibus,
Episcopis, Baronibus, Iusticiarijs prepositis, Ballivis, Ministris, and omnibus
alijs fidelibus suis salutem. Cum non ita pridem Gerot nuper Comes Desmondae,
Cuius proavos ob praeclaras suas erga Rempublicam res gestas, progenitores
nostri Regij Comitum titulo or narunt, infandi in nobis Coronamque nostram
perduellionis attinctus generis sanguinisque sui nobilitatem viciauerit,
totumque illud dignitatis nomen penitus aboleverit. Ea tamen semper fuit nostra
ad clementiam propensitas atque ad ignoscendum Regia facilitas, vt in tota
imperij nostri moderatione in hujusmodi proditor' posteros, non modo, non summo
jure vsi sumus, sed etiam eos (meritis suis non obstantibus) ijsdem quibus
reliquos subditos nostros favoribus and praemijs affecerimus. Eaque de causa
nos sumptibus nostris properijs, Iacobum fits Gerald filium prefati Gerot natu
maximum aluimus, omnique apparatus and educationis genere homine tam nobili
orto non indigno institui cur avimus: Non ferentes delicta mala meriti patris,
in bono indolis filio castigari. Et quoniam idem Iacobus ita vere virtutis and
nobilitatis insignijs preditus est, vt merito illum and nobis and Coronae
nostrae omni fidelitate inseruitur, ac Patriae suae summo futurum ornamento
speremus, si honoribus dignitatisque titulis per patrem nuper amissis
insigniretun. Sciatis igitur, quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
scientia and mero motu nostris, prefatum lacobum fits Gerald in Comitem
Desmoniae, in Regno nostro Hiberniae ereximas, perfecimus, and creavimus; Ac
per presents erigimus, perficimus, and creamus; Et ei nomen, statum, stilum,
titulum, honorem et dignitatem Comitis Desmoniae, Loro and suffragio, in
Parliamentis nostris in praedicto Regno nostro Hiberniae, tenendum, sicut and
eodem modo quo praedictus Gerot, jam ultimus Comes, aliquo tempore ante
attinctur am suam praedictam, habuit, seu habere debuit, seu consuevit, Cum
omnibus alijs and singulis preheminencijs, honoribus, ceterisque quibuscunque
huiusmodi, statui, and dignitati Comitis Desmoniae, temporibus retroactis
pertinent' seu spectant', damus and concedimus, per presents: Ipsumque statu
stilo honor and dignitate Comitis Desmoniae per Cincturam gladij insignimus
and realiter nobilitamus. Habendum and tenendum nomen, statum, titulum, honorem
and Dignitatem Comitis Desmoniae praedict'. Cum omnibus and singulis
preheminencijs, honoribus, suffragijs, and ceteris premissis quibuscunque,
praefato Iacobo fits Gerald, and Heredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime
procreatis, and procreandis, imperpetum. Quoniam autem Comitis Dignitat',
convenire putamus, vt qui ejusdem dignisat' a patre, out alio parente
successionem proximam expectet, aliquo inferioris dignitatis titulo decoretur,
proinde de vberiori gratia nostra volumus, and concedimus, pro nobis Heredibus
and Successoribus nostris, quod quilibet Here Is masculus de corpore dicti Iacobi
fits Gerald legitime, procreat', qui successionem in dict' Comitate velut
proximiore gradu expectet, and pro Hered' apparente, juxta tenorem huius
concessionis nostrae ^a^eatur, Baro de Inchequin in Comitatu Cork, in dicto
Regno nostro Hibernae durante ejus vita, qui praedict' dignitat' Com' obtinet
perpetuis futuris temporibus vocetur and appelletur, ac nomine, stilo, statu
dignitat' and preheminencijs Baronis de Inchequin, eodem pro tempore gandeat
and vtetur. Et hoc absque fine, seu feodo, solvend' in hamperio nostro seu
alibi, ad vsum nostrum quoquo modo, Eo quod expressa mentio de certitudine
premissorum, five eorum alicuius, aut de alijs don^s five concessionibus per
nos seuper aliquem Progenitorum nostrorum, praefato Iacabo fits Gerald, ante
haec tempora fact' in presentibus minime fact' existit, aut aliquo Statuto,
Actu, Ordinatione, Provisione, sieve Restrictione, in Contrarium inde antehac
habit' fact' edict' ordinat', sine provis^, hand aliqua alia re causa vel
materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test me ipsae apud Otlands, primo die Octobris Anno Regni nostri Quadragesimo
secundo. Peripsam Reginam.


It was thought by all men, that the coming of this young Lord into Ireland,
would have bred a great alteration in the Province, and an absolute revolt of
all the old Followers of the House of Desmond from James fits Thomas, but it
proved of no such consequence: For the President to make trial of the
disposition and affection of the young Earls kindred and Followers, at his
desire consented that he should make a Journey from Moyallo into the County
of Limerick, accompanied with the Archbishop of Cashell, and Master Boil
Clearke of the Council (a person whom the Lord President did repose much trust
and confidence in, and with whom he then communicated, and advised about his
most secret and serious affairs of that Government;) And to Master Boil his
Lordship gave secret charge, as well to observe the Earls ways and carriage, as
what men of quality or others made their address unto him, and with what
respects and behavior they carried themselves toward the Earl; who came to
Kilmallock upon a Saturday in the Evening, and by the way, and at their entry
into the Town, there was a mighty concourse of people, insomuch as all the
Streets, Doors and Windows, yea the very Gutters and tops of the Houses were
so filled with them, as if they came to see him, whom God had sent to be that
Comfort and Delight, their fowls and hearts most desired, and they welcomed
him with all the expressions and signs of Joy, every one throwing upon him
Wheat and Salt (an ancient Ceremony used in that Province, upon the Election of
their new Majors and Officers) as a Prediction of future peace and plenty: That
night the Earl was inv^ted to (...) to Sir George Thorntons, who then kept his
House in the (...) and although the Earl had a Co^ard of Soldiers, which made
a Lane from his lodgings to Sir George Thornetons (...) yet the confluence of
people that flockt thither to see him was so great, as in half an hour he
could not make his passage thorough the crowd; and after Supper he had the like
encountere at his return to his lodging. The next day being Sunday, the Earl
went to Church to hear divine Service; and all the way his Country people
used loud and rude dehortations to keep him from Church, unto which he lent a
dease ear; but after Service and the Sermon was ended, the Earl coming forth
of the church, was railed at, and spet upon by those that before his going to
Church were so desirous to see and salute him: Insomuch, as after that public
expression of his Religion, the Town was cleared of that multitude of
strangers, and the Earl from thence forward, might walk as quietly and freely
in the Town, as little in effect followed or regarded as any other private
Gentleman: This true relation I the rather make, that all men may observe how
hateful our Religion and the Professors thereof, are to the ruder and ignorant
sort of people in that Kingdom: For from thence forward none of his Fathers
followers, (except some few of the meaner sort of Freeholders) resorted unto
him; and the other great Lords in Mounster, who had evermore been overshadowed
by the greatness of Desmond, did rather fear then wish the advancement of the
young Lord: But the truth is, his Religion, being a Protestant, was the only
cause that bred this coyness in them all: for if he had been a Romish
Catholic, the hearts and knees of all degrees in the Province would have bowed
unto him: Besides, his coming was not well liked by the Undertakers, who were
in some jealousy, that in after times he might be restored to his Fathers
Inheritances, and thereby become their Lord, and their Rents (now paid to the
Crown) would in time be conferred upon him. These considerations assured the
President, that his personal being in Mounster would produce small effects,
but only to make trial what power he had.

CHAP. XV.
The juggling of Florence Mac Cartie. Supplies of Men and Apparel sent into
Mounster. The submission of Florence Mac Cartie. A skirmish between the Mac
Carties, and the Oleries. Olery slain. A Letter from Redmond Burke to the Lord
President.
THE President attempted by his means the getting of Castle Mange, a Castle of
her Majesty's, in the which before, and at the beginning of the War, she had
a Ward surprised by the supposed Desmond, and left by him in the custody of
Thomas Oge, as aforesaid, which by his negotiation with the said Constable, was
at last rendered unto him, together with Pierce Lacie his two sons, which were
kept as pledges therein; and this was all the service that he did or could
do, during his abode in Ireland: And that work of his Florence Mac Cartie
used all his wit and policy to prevent and overthrow: for at the very instant
when Thomas Oge (who had the keeping of Castle Mange, and Pierce Lacies sons
as pledges therein) had faithfully assured the yielding up thereof, and of the
aforesaid Pledges to the Lord President; (Florence being then entertained by
the President in his house at Moyallo, and as fast bound unto him by many
benefits and favors, as Florence was by the strongest oaths and vows that
any Christian could be obliged by) got some secret hint that Castle Mange was
by Thomas Oge to be yielded up to her Majesty; who well foreseeing what
reputation it would bring to Desmond, and how much it would make up toward the
hastening of his own ruin, if that Fort were once regained, and an English
Garrison placed there, he presumed, and that in the Presidents own house,
where he was so graciously used and entertained, to write his effectual and
earnest Letters to the said Thomas Oge, assuring him, that Redmond Burke, and
Captain Tirrell were on their way with great Forces to set Mounster on fire
again, dissuading him from keeping his promise with the President and the
young Earl of Desmond, promising, and binding his promises with damnable
oaths, that he would presently revictuall the Ward of Castle Mange for three
months, pay them the Arrear of all their wages, and that he would give Thomas
Oge and his Heirs for ever, six Plowlands of his own Inheritance, so he would
not deliver up Castle Mange. And these Letters were by the watchfulness of
Master Boil intercepted and delivered to the President. And from thenceforward
after Florence knew his Letters were intercepted, and his treacheries more and
more discovered. But all this while it was a world to see how Florence played
fast and loose, The Inggling of Florence Mac Cartie.
between the President and the Governor of Kerry: For when the President sent
to have him come to him, then he answered, that he was within few days to
meet with the Governor of Kerry by a former appointment; if Sir Charles sent
for him, then he was shortly to repair to the President, and so deluding both,
he would come to neither: His stay was (as we have showed) because he purposed
to stand out, and for that cause had the last Month before planted as it was
reported, some number of Bownoghs in his Country; but the governors people,
upon one side, and these his Bownoghs on the other side, had by this time so
harried and consumed his Country, as he found the same unable longer to
maintain his Mercenaries; and therefore delayed with good words to gain
longer time, for it was commonly spoken among the Protectees, and Captain
Taffe wrote so much to the President from Kilkenny, that Redmond Burke and
Captain Tirrell, with all the Forces they could gather in Connaght, and
Linster, would make an other incursion into Mounster, so soon as the Lord
Deputy should return from the North, which was expected very shortly, because
the time of the year would breed many difficulties and inconveniences in his
longer stay: Whether it were this brute, or the hearking after a Ship, to
arrive in those parts, which might transport him beyond Seas, that occasioned
his delatory excuses, I know not; But sure I am, that they proceeded not from
any loyal or dutiful mind.

The beggarly Earl in the mean time, lurked in the Woods with some two or
three in his Company, sometimes in Arlogh, sometimes in Drumfinnin, but most in
the County of Typperrarie, where he had much kindred by his Mothers side: The
President had intelligence every day where he lodged the night before, but
never until he was departed, and had left the place; not but that the Country
could have reported as well where he is, as where he had been, but they were
possessed with such a superstitious folly, and so terrified with the Priests
Thunderbolts of Excommunication; as they adjudged him unavoidably damned, that
should ruinate such a principal Pillar of the Catholic action: And Fits
Maurice was in little better case; for although since his return into
Mounster, himself with the Knight of the Glyn, had assembled some four score
in the Fa^tnesse of Clanmorris, who guarded their Corn that should maintain
them for the year following: Yet Sir Charles Wilmot marching twelve miles
through their Woods, being directed by a trusty Guide, came suddenly upon them,
and slew sixty of them; the two Principals escaping very narrowly: After the
killing ended they scow^ed the Woods, and finding great store of Corn therein,
they burnt the same, and returned with the Arms of all the dispersed Kerne.
Pierce Lacy had so well bestirred himself in his negotiation, with those of
Ormond and Ossery, that of the Ormond and Ossery men, with the Purcels and
Omaghers, he had reinforced himself with five hundred men, and being now
joined with Redmond Burke, who had one thousand Foot and sixty Horse (as was
credibly informed) drew their Forces into O Carrels Country, threatening daily)
to invade the small County of Limerick, which bordered upon them, but their
stay (as was reported) depended upon the return of John of Desmond, who was
expected with Forces out of the North. But Tyrone was so well set a work, by
the honorable, painful, and prosperous proceedings of the Lord Deputy, as
he had enough to do in defending his own Country, much less could he spare
any Forces for other parts.

In September last, mention is made that the Lords of the Council had promised
to send unto the President six hundred Foot for the supplying of his Army,
Supplies of men and apparel sent into Mounster.
which accordingly arrived at Cork, as appears by the Presidents Letters
written to then Lordships, dated the five and twentieth of this Month of
October, and with them three hundred and fifty. Winter suites of apparel.

But to return again to Florence Mac Cartie, The submission of Florence Mac
Cartie.
after all the tergiversations before mentioned, and many other too tedious to
be inserted, finding all his Neighbors to have submitted themselves, and his
own Followers, so much impoverished by the Wars, desirous to do the like;
was contented (Tandem aliquando) to repair to the President lying at Moyallo,
bringing some forty Horse in his Company, and himself in the midst of his
Troop (like the great Turk amongst his Ianisaries) drew toward the House
(the nine and twentieth of October) October. 29.
like (...) higher by the head and shoulders then any of his Followers; upon
his submission, the President as having forgotten all former matters, gave him
kind entertainment, being indeed heartily glad of his pre^ence, as hoping
thereby, tha^ these Wars of Mounster were brought to a final end; to secure
him therefore to the State, the President demanded his Eldest Son in pledge,
who being unable to take so long a Journey by the indisposition of his body (as
Florence protested) he left two others; the one his base Brother, who had spent
many years in France, Spain and Hungary; and the other his foster Brother,
both which he had in very precious esteem. Florence requested that those
pledges might suffice for the O Sulevans, the O Donoghes, the O Crowlie^, and
Omaghon Carbry: But hereunto the President would by no persuasion be drawn to
condescend; and that especially for two causes; the one was, that hereby he
might draw from Florence this great rabble of Dependants; and the second was,
because every of these being compelled to put in pledges for themselves, the
Queen might have the stronger assurance of these wavering and slippery
Subjects.

The Province being reduced to this pass (as you have heard) the Irish having
now no other Enemy to oppugn, A skirmish between the Carties and the Oleries.
begin to go together by the ears amongst themselves, for certain of
Donoghe Moyle Mac Cartie (son to Sir Owen Mac Cartie Reughe) his people,
following the track of some Cowes, that had been stolen from them into
Muskerry, the Oleries assembled themselves to the number of one hundred or
thereabouts, and following the Carties, (who were by this time returned into
Carbery;) at last overtooke them, and without many words gave the Onset, the
other stoutly resisted, between whom there passed a short, but a sharp
skirmish, wherein were slain Olerie, Olerie slain.
the Head of that Sept, and ten other the chief of his family, with some more
of less note, and of the Carties, Finin Mac Owen his Brother dangerously
wounded, with some few slain of his part. Cormock Mac Dermond Lord of Muskery,
much grieved with the slaughter of the Oleries his Followers, was an earnest
Suitor to the Council, that he might be permitted, to revenge this loss upon
the Carties in Carbery; some there were that thought it not unfit to accord
unto his demands; because which party soever should prevail, yet could not the
Queen loose a good Subject: But the President would by no means yield
thereunto, lest the hot prosecution of these particular grievances, might
kindle the coals of some further mischief, in giving occasion of distaste to
the now reconciled Subjects.

Redmond Burke being weary of his vagabond life, living like a Woolfe upon
every one from whence he could take any thing, or rather wittingly foreseeing
the ruin and destruction of those his Confederats, which were in rebellion, of
whose fortunes he was in all likelihood to be a Partaker, wrote a Letter to the
President dated the thirtieth of October, which because it is but short I do
here insert.

A Letter from Redmond Burke to the Lord President.
RIght Honorable, I doubt not the detestable and apparent wrong, that the
Earl of Clanrickard has done me, is manifestly known to your Lordship
already, as I need not larger to express it; but this I am sure, that the
tolleration thereof, and that I would not otherwise bin caused to run this
course, and if there were any hope of redress, that I would long ere this be a
Subject, and will now show my self worthy to be accepted, if I be entertained,
and my Fathers Lands seized into your Honors hands, till my Title be tried;
This Country of Ely being in your Honors Province, is a parcel to whom I
make claim, wherein I would expect your Honor to right me first: And thus
requesting your Honor to accept my service, and favor my right, I take leave.

From Ely the thirtieth of October, 1600. Your Honors as you please. Redmond
Letrim.


The President much misliking the tenor of his Letter, as well for other
reasons, as for capitulating for the Country of Ely O Carrell, before he had
by his service merited any favor; and lastly, for the slight subscription,
Your Honors as you please, returned him no Answer in writing, utterly refusing
any further traffic with him, it being his custom not to deal with Traitors
upon Conditions.

CHAP. XVI.
The Lord President sueth for a general Pardon for the Provincialls. The
Submission of Thomas Oge Fits Gerald, and the rendering of Castle M^nge. The
Castle of ^^stoell besieged and taken. The Castle of the Dingle rendered.
THE Province of Mounster now growing to a peaceable estate, the President, by
his Letters of the second of November 2. November.
to the Lords of the Council, humbly prayed, that they would be pleased to
move her Majesty, that a general Pardon might be granted unto all the
Provincialls that desired the same, The Lo. President sueth for a general
pardon for the Provincials.
the lurking Earl, his Brother John fits Thomas, Pierce Lacie, and two other
of good quality (who are yet living) only excepted, for those he knew to be
the most malicious Traitors, and also her Majesty's inclimation was no way bent
to extend her mercy unto them: The reasons which moved him to sue for this
General Pardon, was principally the multitudes of the protected persons, who
living from time to time upon protection, were not so assured to the State as
they would be, if they were pardoned; whereby the Government received much
impediment: and besides, there were many poor women and children, that had no
ability to be at the charge of suing forth of their pardons; and lastly, it
was much desired by the Provincials themselves: Nevertheless he added this
caution, that if any of the Protectees did in this interim do any treasonable
act, that the President, with some four or five of the Council of the
Province joined with him, might have power to deny them the benefit thereof,
and also that Priests, and Romish religious persons, (which were the first
ineiters of the Rebellion, and the continual fomenters of the same) should
likewise be excepted. The opinion of the President had good allowance in
England; yet for some private respects of commodity to Officers, (as it may
be imagined) the motion of a general Pardon took not the effect desired; but
afterward, (as you shall hear) there was order given, that all such as the
President would recommend, should have the favor to sue out their Pardons.

In the beginning of November, a strong castle in Connilogh (which was held by
James fits Thomas) was surprised by our Forces, so as he had no other Castle
at his devotion left, but Castle Mange.

The fourth of November, 4. November.
Thomas Oge fits Gerald, Constable of Castle Mange The submission of Thomas Oge
fits Gerald, and the rendering of Castle Mange.
(for James fits Thomas) having evermore had a better affection unto the young
Earl of Desmond James (lately sent by her Majesty into Ireland, as has been
declared) upon the Earls entreaty and persuasions, came to Kilmallock, and
there made tender of the said Castle unto the Earl, for her Majesty's use. The
Earl the next day brought him to Moyallo to the President, where he made his
submission, and direction was sent to Sir Charles Wilmot for the receipt of the
said Castle.

Sir Charles Wilmott knowing that Fits Maurice the Lord of Lixnaw, had only
one Castle called Listoell, The C^stle of (...) besieged and taken.
wherein to shelter himself, finding no other means to compass the same,
determined to besiedge it, and intimated so much to the President by his
Letters, requesting his advice and allowance therein, who returned answer, That
he desired nothing more, then to have that Castle gotten for the Queen, and
for the manner, left the managing thereof wholly to his discretion. He sat
down before it upon the fifth of November, 5. November.
attempting to get it by a Mine; in the which after he had wrought five or
six days, and brought it underneath the Castle wall, being ready to make a
bed for the placing of the powder, suddenly the spring brake forth in such
abundance, as that work became fruitless: thereupon new ground was sought,
which proved good, the foundation of the Castle was undermined, as far as the
midst of the Seller, which the Ward perceiving, made humble suit to be
permitted to depart with their lives, which Sir Charles absolutely refused; but
if they would simply render themselves, the Castle and all things in it to his
discretion, he would then stay further proceeding in his work, otherwise they
might look within very few hours to be blown up. The Ward which were
eighteen in number, came forth, and upon their knees submitted themselves unto
him, whom he caused to be apprehended; the women and small children he
suffered to depart, of the weaponed men he hanged nine, so many of ours being
lost at the Siege, which continued more then three weeks; the residue he
detained, until he had acquainted the President with all these accidents, who
gave present order for the execution of the rest; for they had been all of
them formerly protected, except one Sir Dermond Mac Brodie, a Priest, whose
life was saved upon this occasion: It fortuned that within this Castle, at the
rendering thereof, there was unknowen to Sir Charles, the Lord of Lixnawes
eldest son, being a child of five years of age; the Warders upon their
coming footh, disarrayed this child of all his clothes, and having besmeared
his face with dust and dirt, committed him to an old woman, who bringing the
Infant naked and disfigured at her back, conveyed him away without suspicion.
Sir Charles receiving advertisement of this escape, sent out some Soldiers,
and some Provincialls, (whom he most trusted) for the recoverie of him, but in
vain they all returned with lost labor: at last he bethought himself, that
peradventure some of the prisoners could direct him in the pursuit, and
questioning the Priest concerning the Child: He answered, that he could best
resolve him, for that himself had given direction to the woman where she
should bestow the child, till she might deliver him to his Father: Why then,
says Sir Charles, will you not conduct me to him? Know you not, that it is in
my power to hang you, or to save you? Yes, and I assure you, if you will not
guide me to the place where he lies hidden, I will cause you to be
instantly hanged: The Priest answered, That it was all one to him, whether he
dyed this day, or to morrow; but yet if he might have his Word, for the
sparing of his own life, and the childs, he would reveal his knowledge;
otherwise the Governor might do his pleasure. Sir Charles, though very
unwilling to grant the Priest his life, yet the earnest desire he had to get
the child into his hands, caused him to agree thereto. The Priest being put
into a Hand-locke, is sent with a Captain, and a good Guard of Soldiers about
this business, who guided them to a Wood six miles from the Castle, by reason
of thick briars and thorns, almost unpassible, in the midst whereof there
is a hollow Cave within the ground, not much unlike by description to Cacus his
den, or the mouth of Avernus, in which desolate place they found that old
woman, and this young child, whom they brougt to the Governor, and the
Priest and child were shortly after sent to the President. In this Castle were
gotten all the Lord of Lixnaw his goods, besides store of provision for the
War, who were plentifully provided for six months with such kind of
victual as the Country yields; and it was said, that the Baron himself
would have set up his rest in this Castle, which he held impregnable against
any force, (the Cannon excepted;) but it should seem his heart failed him, no
less then his expectation. While these things were in doing, Sir Richard Percy
drew his Company forth of Kinsale into Kinalmekagh, A prey taken in Kinalmekagh.
and there took a prey of two hundred Cowes, and got the killing of some
Rebels.

In the beginning of this Month William fits Gerald, the Knight of Kerry, came
to the President with a Letter in his favor from Sir Charles Wilmot, dated the
thirtieth of October, wherein he witnessed for him, that (ever since he was
received under protection) he had demeanded himself, not only like a good
Subject, in doing no harm, but that he had endeavored (to his uttermost) to
annoy the Enemy, and had lately in token of his obedience, delivered unto Sir
Charles his Castle at the Dingle: The Castle of the Dingle rendered.
This testimony wrought so much with the President, as he used him very
kindly, and returned him home with great contentment.

Not long after the landing of the young Earl of Desmond in Ireland, the minds
of the Provincials were much distracted, every one fearing what might be the
success thereof. But after a little while it appeared that he was able to do
but little. To the end that the Reader might see, that at the first it did
breed some distraction; I do here insert a Letter unto Tyrone from Cormocke
Mac Dermond, the Lord of the large Country of Muskry, who was never personally
in actual Rebellion, neither before, nor after the Spaniards arrival; the
copy of which Letter came not to the Presidents hands, until the latter end
of the year one thousand six hundred and two, and he then pardoned, wherein
it does evidently appear, what cancred hearts the better sort of Subjects, did
bear to the Crown of England, and the English government.

CHAP. XVII.
A Letter from Cormocke Mac Dermond unto Tyron^. The Abbey of Rat^o burned, and
fourti^ of the Bonoghs slain. One thousand Bonoghs levied by Florence Mac
Cartie. Connaght and Vlster men change their Resolution, for the invading of
Mounster, and the cause why. Dermond O Conner m^rdered by Theobald ne Long
Burke. A (...) f^^m the Ea^le of Clanrika^d to Theobald ne Long.
A Letter from Cormock Mac Dermond unto Tyrone.
I Have received your Letter of the twentieth of September, and do thank you
for the great trust you repose in me, which by the help of God shall be by
me discharged to the uttermost of my power; But the English have (in these
parts) so much prevayled (by the sinister false dealing of the Connaght men) as
the President has taken Pledges of most of the Gentlemen, and men of power in
these parts. And besides, we are so weak in men, as that we are out of
necessity constrained to yield to the yoke of the English Heretics, from the
which we pray God to deliver us, according to our hearts desire; and therefore
do hope you will bear with our present necessities, being ready at all times
to obey your directions, when you shall be able to send us help; but because
that we shall neither deceive you or our selves, we do pray you to send us
word, what numbers you will send us, and by what time, that accordingly we may
make our selves ready, to give you our best assistance: But of one thing I
think good to give you particular notice, which is, not to put any confidence
in any of Mounster, of the English Nation; for whatsoever they profess or
protest unto you, they mean not to deal faithfully with us, but will forsake
us in our greatest need. The newe^ of these parts are, that the Son of Geralt
the late Earl is arrived, unto whom, his Fathers old Followers do much
resort; he is an Heretic, yet nevertheless (by the help of the English) he
will do us great harm: The right Earl of Desmond is forsaken of all men, and
not able to make Head, and the less hope of his rising again by the coming
of young James, who is the Queens Earl, and has a Patent for his Earldom;
I pray your speedy Answer; in the mean time, I will dissemble with the
President, who deals sharply with us; the Letter which you sent with these to
Mac Carty More, I have sent unto him by a Messenger of my own, who is lately
agreed with the President, and so we are deceived in him, and therefore he is
not to be firmly trusted with the commandment of all the Clan- Carties.

Cormocke Cartie.

Sir Charles Wilmot (in the mean time) ma^ching to an Abbey in Kerry called
Ratho, The Abbey of Ratho burned, and forty of the Bownoghs slain by Sir
Charles Wilmot.
near unto Lixnaw, as soon as his Colors were descried, was fired by the
Enemy that lodged there; from thence with his Horse only he marched ^o Tralie,
where he found one hundred Bonoghs of the O^^^llies, among whom was Moriertagh
Mac Shighie, and three or four more of the lurking Earls chiefest Followers
on horseback; our Horse charged them, the Horsemen (by flight) saved
themselves, but of the ^oo^e there was slain about forty dead in the place,
the rest by the ^avour of a neighbo^ring bogge, and the Mountain at hand
escaped, but all their Arms were left to our shares.

The perpetual juggling which Florenc^ Mac Cartie continued toward the Lord
President, A thousand Bownoghs levied by Florence Mac Carty.
I have so often touched as it needs no other proof; but for the better
Testimony of his ill ^ffection to the State, even now when the Sugan Earl was
in the estate of a fugitive, hiding himself from the sight of men, Florence
(as the Lord President was advertised from Sir Charles Wilmot) had raised one
thousand Bownoghs to be placed upon Desmond, four hundred upon Kerry, and
six hundred upon Carbry, and concludes with these words: Viz. assuredly he
purposes to be a Villain, though he could be contented to live in
neutralitie, as he does, if he could carry it cleanely: Also at that time the
Baron of Lixnaw (who was banished Kerry) was by him relieved in Desmond; but
observe well I beseech you this wavering and unsettled companion, who not
knowing which way either to be a Subject or Rebel, not many days afterward
(as shall be said) came to the President, with a smooth countenance full of
Loyalty, but inwardly the same man he had ever been.

Nothing was more common now in Mounster, Connaght and Vlster men being ready
to invade Mounster suddenly brake their resolution* and the cause why.
then a brute of the strangers from Connaght and Vlster, coming to invade the
Province with two thousand men, and hereof the President received daily
advertisement from the Earl of Thomond, the Lord Barry, Justice Comerford and
others; and to verify the same, Pierce Lacy was come into the borders of
Kilquig, and had preyed Glanogre, a Town belonging to Sir George Bourchier,
Master of the Ordnance, being a parcel of his Signiory, and then in farm to
Alexander Fitton; this caused the President to assemble the greatest part of
his Forces to Kilmallock, attending there to behold what should become of this
Cloud which threatened such a dangerous Tempest, which at length vanished
without any great disturbance; for about the midst of this Month, they
withd^^w themselves into Ormond, within the Liberty of Tipperarie; the cause
why they departed, before they had made any Bonfiers in Mounster (which was
their arrand) as I have since learned, was two fould. First because Redmond
Burke could by no means be drawn into the Province, being in expectation of
great favor from the President, as appears by his Letters sent about this
time, which because it is but short, and yet apparently declares this truth; I
thought not unfit here to be recited in his own words.

RIght Honorable, I would long ere this be a Subject, and will now show my
self worthy to be accepted, if I be entertained, and my Fathers Lands seized
into your Honors hands, till my Title be tried; this Country of Ely O
Carrell being in your Honors Province, is a parcel whereto I make claim,
wherein I would expect your Honor to right me first; and thus requesting your
Honor to accept my service, and favor my right, I take leave

this ninth of November, 1600. Your Honors as you please, Redmond Letrim.


The President, to hold Redmond (as I conceive) in some hope, that he might
not join with the Northern Forces (then expected to come into Mounster,)
returned him answer to this effect, That his Demands seemed to be somewhat
reasonable, and that he was very sorry, that it was not fully in his power to
accomplish his request; Notwithstanding there was no doubt, but upon his
Letters already dispatched to the Council of England, and to the Lord Deputy
in his behalf, such order should be taken, as he should hold himself well
satisfied; and surely whether the President dealt plainly, and bona fide with
the said Redmond, or whether he fed him with good words only (like a
Courtier) to serve his own turn, (I know not;) but if I might deliver my
poor opinion, I think him to have received some hard measure, (I mean in
respect of his Fathers Lands, upon whomsoever the fault lies; but to return.

This Redmond commanding the greatest part of the Forces now assembled,
depending this much upon the Presidents favor, (as by his Letter appears)
could by no allurements of these Mounster Rebels, be enticed to commit any
outrage within that Province: An other cause why these Rebels thus assembled
came no further up into Mounster, was, because the wandering Earl James fits
Thomas, who should have given them Bonnaght in the Province, knowing that
Lixnaw, Redmond Burke, Pierce Lacie, and all of them were grown weary of the
Rebellion, and that the President had commerce with all those, durst not commit
himself into their power, they being so strong, and he so poor and weak,
fearing left they should have delivered him, (being the mark the President
chiefly aimed at) to work their own peace.

Dermond O Conner Dermond O Conner murdered by Theobald ne Long Burke.
having now heard that the young Earl of Desmond (his Brother in law) was
arrived in Mounster (according to the Presidents promise to him made, that he
should come) was desirous that he should repair thither, with intent to do
some acceptable service for her Majesty; which being made known by the Lady
Margaret his wife, the Lord President sent him a Safe Conduct for himself and
his followers, and procured the like from Sir Arthur Sa^age, the chief
Commissioner in Connaght, and also from the Earl of Clanrickard, to secure his
passage through his Country, and for his better safety, he sent an hundred
Foot to guard him as soon as he should enter into Thomond: He being now past
Clanrickard, and coming to Oshafnesses Country, within seventeene or
eighteen miles of Limerick, Theobald ne Long Burke, who had a Company of an
hundred Foot in her Majesty's pay, (notwithstanding all his Safe-guards)
assaulted him, who for his safety, retired into an old Church, burnt it over
his head, and in coming forth of the same, he killed about forty of his
men, and took him prisoner, and the morning following cut off his head: which
being done, Theobald sent to the Earl of Clanrickard for a protection,
pretending that what he did, was done in rev^nge of his Cosen the Lord Burkes
death: But the Earl misliking the Action, in stead of a Protection, returned
him this Letter ensuing.

A Letter from the Earl of Clanrickard, to Theobald ne Long Burke.
I Do understand that you have yesternight assaulted Dermond O Conner and his
Company, which is both a very mighty impeachment of Her Majesty's word, in
respect the Gentleman had her gracious Protection and safe Conduct, from the
Lord President of Mounster, and the Governor of this Province, for his safe
passing, and a perpetual slander and abuse unto me and my posterity,
considering the Gentleman was ceased in my Country, and had my word at my very
good Lord, the Lord President of Mounsters request, and the Governor of this
Provinces direction, which I little expected to be by you resisted, but rather
imagined your coming into the Country, to do better service upon Her
Majesty's enemies, which are daily threatening to come for us on all sides. But
if in lieu thereof your service be to murder a Gentleman that is drawn for
good considerations, tending the advan^ement of Her Majesty's service, contemn
her gracious protection which he has, and offer the Lord President of
Mounster, the Governor of this Province, and my self, the mightiest wrong and
abuse that may be, I take it, such a coruse as I do not doubt, your self and
your house to be thereby ever overthrown, and everlastingly live hopeless of
any favor (...) kindness of me, except you take such apt and present course,
as to send the Gentleman unto me released, and all the rest of his people, as
many as you have in hand of them, with a full restitution of their goods;
otherwise think of me as the greatest Enemy you have in this world, which
with the permission of God, I will make you and yours feel, if you urge me
thereunto; and so expecting to see the Gentleman from you with expedition
without hurt, I leave Doiehoway the four and twentieth of October, 1600.

Your very loving Kinseman if you will, Vlick Clanrickard.

Whilst Dermond was in Rebellion, he received no prejudice by Theobald ne
Long; but now (being as he knew) a man fast lincked to the State, and able to
perform extraordinary service, he is treacherously murdered to the great
dishonor of Her Majesty, in violating Her word, solemnly and advisedly
given: The Lord President was exceedingly incensed, against the Actors,
Abettors and Procurers of this murder; writing his Letter both to the Lords of
Her Majesty's privy Council in England, and also to the Lord Deputy, and
Council of Ireland, signifying how much Her Majesty's honor was blemished and
the Service hindered, by this malicious and hateful murder; who considering of
the fact, besides sharp rebukes and reprehensions, the Lord Deputy was
commanded presently to casheere and discharge him both of his Command and
Entertainment.

CHAP. XVIII.
Sessions held at Limericke, Cassell, and Clonmell. The Lord President and the
Earl of Ormond meet at Clonmell. Muskry, Quirk and Arlogh burnt and spoiled
by the Army. The submission of the Burkes and the Obryens. The narrow escape
of James fits Thomas, and Dermond Mac Craghe, the Popes Bishop of Cork. In
what good estate the Province of Mounster stood. Mac Awley preyed by Sir
Francis Barkley. A Marriage practiced between the Lady Ione Fitz Gerald and O
Donnell, but prevented by the Lord President.
NOtwithstanding, the retiring of these Rebels as you have heard; yet the
President thought it meet, to spend some time in those parts before his Army
should be reduced: In consideration whereof, finding it expedient for
furtherance of her Majesty's service, that Sessions of Jail delivery should
be held (as often as conveniently they might) that the Course of civil
Justice might again be renewed, whereunto of late years they had not been
accustomed, the eighteenth of November 18. Nov.
his Lordship left Kilmallock, and marched to Limerick, Sessions held at
Limerick, Cassell, and Clonmell.
where he kept Sessions, from thence to Cashell, and so to Clonmell, in both
which places he did the like, doing exemplary justice upon such Rebels, as had
before been apprehended thereabouts. During the Sessions holden at Limerick (as
aforesaid) the President sent a message to the Earl of Ormond, signifying unto
him his purposed coming to Clonmell, wherein also he besought his Lordship,
that if it might stand with his leisure and good liking, it would please him to
make a Journey that way, to the intent that upon their meeting, some conference
might be had about diverse particularities concerning the service. The Earl
accorded both to time and place, which was at Clonmell: The six and twentieth
of November, 26. Nov.
amongst other matters (there consulted betwixt them) the President moved the
Earl about some present order to be taken, The Lord President and the Earl of
Ormond meet at Clonmell.
for the prosecution of those Rebels, that had (now for a good space) remained
without impeachment in the borders of Ormond in Typperarie; and for so much as
his Lordship peradventure had not sufficient Forces to displant them, he
offered his own service, with such Companies as he had there assembled, being
the greatest part of the Army of Mounster: The Earl either unwilling to have
the President set foot within his Liberty, or else desirous himself to have
the sole honor of that service; did entreat the President to satisfy
himself concerning that business, for he would undertake it; and that within
few days, to make them repent that ever they set foot within his Liberty;
which I think had immediately been performed, had not the immature death of
his most virtuous and honorable Lady: (the lamentable tidings whereof were now
brought him to Clonmell, oppressing his aged heart with immeasurable sorrow)
caused the same for a time to be deferred.

This service therefore thus undertaken by the Earl; December. Muskryquirke,
and Arloghe burnt, preyed, and spoiled by the Army.
the President having received certain information, that the Mounster
Fugitives were harbored in those parts, having before burned all the Houses and
Corn, and taken great preyes in Owny Omulrian, and Kilquig, a strong and fast
Country, not far from Limerick, diverted his Forces into East Clanwilliam,
and Muskry-quirke where Pierce Lacy had lately been succored, and harrasing
the Country, killed all mankind that were found therein, for a terror to
those as should give Relief to runnagate Traitors; thence we came into Arloghe
Woods, where we did the like, not leaving behind us man, or beast, Corn or
Cattle, except such as had been conveied into Castles: The prosecution of this
Service was committed to the care of Captain Francis Slingesby, The submission
of the Burkes and Obriens.
who had under his Command five hundred foot; whereupon the Burkes and Briens
(that inhabited those places) came all upon their knees, beseeching to be
received into Her Majesty's gracious Protection, and promising to do service
upon any Rebels that should hide themselves in those Woods; who putting in
their pledges were received to mercy.

In this Journey it chanced there was a youth taken Prisoner, The narrow escape
of James fits Thomas, and Dermond Mac Craghe, the Popes Bishop of Cork.
who had lately before been servant to the imagined Earl, who being brought
to the President and examined, took upon him to bring our Forces to the place
where his Master was: The Earl of Thomond, Sir George Thornton, and Captain
Roger Harvy with their Companies following the direction of this Guide, were
conducted to Lisbarry, a parcel of Drumfinnim woods; no sooner were they
entered into the Fa^tnesse, but presently the Sentinells which were placed in
the skirt of the wood, raised the cry, which as it should seem, rowsed the
counterfeit Earl of Desmond, and Dermond Mac Craghe the Popes Bishop of Cork,
who were lodged there in a poor ragged Cabin: Desmond fled away barefoot,
having no leisure to pull on his shoes, and was not discovered: but Mac Craghe
was met by some of the Soldiers clothed in a simple mantle, and torn
trowses, like an aged Churl; and they neglecting so poor a creature not able
to carry weapon, suffered him to pass unregarded: upon the end of this journey
(by the wi^e and painful proceedings of the President, (Gods blessing always
accompanying the same) it came to pass, that there was not one Castle in
Mounster held out against the Queen; Nay, which was more, it was not known
that there were five Rebels in a company throughout the Province, nor any one
of note except these five (lost sheep) the children of perdition, James fits
Thomas, and his Brother, Lixnaw, Pierce Lacie, and the Knight of the Glinne,
who lay lurking in desert, uncouth, and unknowen places; yet notwithstanding
there were diverse vagabonds and loose people dispersed in sundry corners, for
whom no man would undertake, that lived by stealth and badroagues, disquieting
the good Subjects, being the relics of the rebellion.

The President by his Letters dated the fifteenth signified unto the Lords of
the Council, In what good estate the province of Mounster was.
that now the Province was so much overawed by her Majesty's Forces, that
unless Northern Rebels came to infest it, or that the Spaniards did invade it,
he was well able to contain the Provincials in obedience; 15. December.
and although five hundred of his List was already cashiered, he would at any
time lend the Lo. Deputy one thousand Foot to serve in Linster, but with this
caution (for countenance sake) that they might be evermore (in estimation) of
the List of Mounster; which if the Reader do well observe, he shall find that
the prosecution of the service in that Province, had successes beyond
expectation: for in May last, when the President first took the field, the
Rebels were no less then seven thousand strong, and now the Subjects Cattle
day and night lay abroad in the fields, no Body of Rebels united, and not one
castle in all the province that did withstand her Majesty: This was the work
of God, and unto him only it must be attributed.

Her Majesty (as has been said) did by her Letters to the President command,
that one Company of one hundred Foot should be cashiered for the sustentation
of the young Earl of Desmond, and of others which were mentioned in that
Letter: The Lords of the Council likewise by their Letters bearing date the
tenth of November, required the President to see the same performed; which
being done accordingly (as was directed) the President by his Letters of the
twentieth of this December, 20. December.
made an account how the partition was made; Now you must understand, that
although one hundred Foot was discharged for the maintenance of the Earl, and
the rest, yet her Majesty's meaning was not that more should be turned to that
use, then the ready money which was paid to the Company yearly for their
Lendings, for their apparel was saved unto her Majesty, the yearly lendings
of one hundred men amounts unto no more then seven hundred eighty two pound,
two shillings, and ten pence. The Archbishop of Cassell, who was a principal
Agent in stirring up Dermond O^Conner to make the attempt he did upon the
titulary Earl, had for his share, one hundred twenty one pound, thirteen
shillings and three pence; John Power, who was one of the Hostages, (as has
been related) had thirty six pound ten shillings; the Lady Ellis, sister to
the Earl, had thirty three pound, six shillings, eight pence, which was as
much as her other sisters formerly had in pension from her Majesty: the Lady
Margaret, the Earls sister also, and wife to Dermond O Conner, (in regard of
her forwardness to have done the Queen service) had an hundred pound, and the
remainder, which was five hundred forty pound, twelve shillings ten pence, was
to the Earls own use.

About the eighteenth of the same, Sir Francis Barkley Mac Awly preyed upon by
Sir Fra: Barkley.
finding good cause, and fit opportunity to plague Mac Awley, (and his
Tenants, who under protection, relieved the heart-broken Rebels) with the
Garrison which he commanded at Askeiton, he harrassed all the Country of
Clanowlie, and took from thence one thousand Cowes, two hundred Garrans,
besides Sheep and other spoil, and had the killing of many Traitors, which
harbored themselves in the bogs and woods thereof.

Whilst the President was holding Sessions at Limericke (as before) he
received notice, that Mary ni Shye, one that had been an old servant to the
Countess of Desmond, was in the Town: but he (suspecting her errand to have
been no other, but to see James the young Earl) seemed to take no knowledge
thereof, to make trial whether the said Earl would acquaint him with such
Letters, or Messages, as should be brought from his mother: At the end of
three days, the Earl related to the President, that such a woman was in
Town, whom he had seen that morning, and not before. The President answered,
That her repair to the Town was known to him certain days before, but
desired to be certified from him concerning the occasion of her coming; who
replied, that her errand was to his Sisters, the Lady Ioane, and the Lady
Ellen, and especially to the Lady Ioane, A practice of a marriage between the
La. Ioane fits Gerald, and O Dounel, but prevented by the Lo. President.
but himself had received neither Letter, Message, nor token by her. Whereupon
the President suspecting some other cause of her coming, being so necessary a
servant to the old Countess, caused her to be brought before him and the
Council; and upon her examination it was found, that the especial cause of
her coming was to convey away the said Lady Ioane to her mother, and from
thence to O Donnell, who had promised to consummate a Marriage with her, and
for the same purpose had himself written Letters to O Conner S^^go, her father
in law (in being her mothers husband) to hasten her away. The Lady Joan, upon
her examination likewise confessed the same, but denied to yield any consent
thereunto, without the advice of her Brother, whom (as she said) she purposed
shor^ly to have acquainted with this business. The old crafty Coun^esse
understanding that this complot was discovered, pretended, that her endeavors
in seeking to effect this Marriage, tended to no other end, but to reduce O
Donnell to be a Subject, although indeed there was nothing less meant: The
President and Council upon the discovery, (for preventing such mi^chiefe as
they foresaw might arise by this marriage) committed the Lady Ioane to an
Aldermans House, and Marie ny Shye (the said Countess servant) close prisoner
in the Goal, till time and occasion should minister further opportunity to
deal in that affair of so great importance.

CHAP. XIX.
The Mayor of Limerick fined and imprisoned, and a new Mayor elected. A Letter
from the Spanish Archbishop of Dublin to James fits Thomas. The S^eriffes men
slain by Florence Mac Cartie. The Lord President persuades Florence to go
into England. Florence seems to like of the motion, and the use he made of it.
THE Country being now reduced to that outward obedience and conformity (as
you have heard) the President and Council returned unto Moyallo the thirteenth
of December, where they had some leisure to look in the Corporate Towns, whom
they found to be principal ayders, abettors, and upholders of this unnatural
Rebellion, which proceeded partly out of malice to the State for matters of
Religion, but principally for their own benefit; for in these turbulent times,
the greatest part of the Queens Treasure sent over into this Kingdom, is
expended by the Captains and Soldiers amongst them: Again, they issue their
Merchandise to the Rebels (underhand) at very excessive rates, and buy the
Country Commodities at their own prizes; by reason whereof it was probably
conjectured upon good grounds, that the Towns of Mounster were more inritched
within these three years of War, then they were before almost in twenty
years of peace. Another thing also at this time was noted in the Towns,
namely, that all the chief Cities made choice of professed Lawyers to be their
Ma^ors, Magistrates, and chief Officers, and such as before were Ring leaders
of their Corporations. These prepensed Elections, whether they were made for
fear, left they should be called to account for their former faults, both in
assisting the Rebels, and resisting the Soldiers, or to maintain the Towns
in obstinate superstition, which before was much a^gmented by these
Instruments, or for some other hidden cause, known only to themselves, I
cannot certainly determine, but sure I am it proceeds not from any loyal or
dutiful disposition. Amongst these lawless Lawyers thus elected, there was
one Geoffrey Gallway, Major of Limerick, a man that had spent many years in
England, in studying of the Common Laws, and returning into Ireland about
three years since, did so pervert that City by his malicious counsel, and
perjurious example, that he withdrew the Major, Aldermen, and generally the
whole City from coming to the Church, which before they sometimes frequented.
Moreover, about a year since there happened an affray in Limricke, between
the Soldiers and some of the Town, at what time this Gallway came to the then
Major, advising him to dis-arme all the Soldiers, and told him, that all their
lives were in the Majors hands, and at his mercy, whereby a gapp was most
apparently opened by him, to have induced a wicked and barbarous massacre upon
her Majesty's Forces. With this man therefore did the President take occasion
to enter into the Lists, upon a manifest contempt offered unto his Office and
Government, as follows: It came to pass, that a Soldier of the Earl of
Thomonds Company, was imprisoned by the said Major, for a supposed Petty
Larceny of a Hatchet. The President (being upon his journey against the
Rebels, that were now reported to have invaded the Province) required to have
the said Soldier delivered unto him, that he might receive a present trial,
and punishment for his default, if he were found guilty, or else to repair
to his Colors, and to go the journey. The Major before he would deliver the
Prisoner, desired that he might confer with his Brethren; This being
granted, he returned answer, that it was not thought fit by the Corporation
to release the prisoner, except his Lordshipp would make a Warrant, enjoining
and commanding them so to do. The President and Council being assembled, a
Warrant was framed, signed, and directed to the Major: but this Warrant was
deemed unsufficient, and therefore desired to have the same amended in certain
particulars, which without difficulty was yielded unto, and a second and a
third framed according to the Majors own directions; and thus did he dally
until he saw the President ready to leave the Town, some part of the Army
being already upon their March, at which time the Major came to the President,
and utterly rejected all those Warrants, affirming that the Authority given
them by the Charter, did sufficiently exempt them from the Jurisdiction and
Command of the President and Council: The President much scorning to be thus
deluded and dallyed withal, told the Major, that he would shortly find a time
to call him to an account for his contempt offered, not against his Person, but
against her Majesty and her Government established in the Province: Who being
now returned from the Service, (as you have heard) and abiding at Moyallo,
directed his Warrant to the said Gallway, commanding him upon his Allegiance,
that he should immediately appear before him and the Council at a day
assigned at Moyallo, to answer unto such things as should be objected against
him on her Majesty's behalf; where making his appearance, he was censured to
live as a prisoner in a Castle in the Country, The Major of Limerick fined and
imprisoned, and a new Major elected.
and not to come into the City of Limricke, until he had paid a fine to her
Majesty of four hundred pound sterling, which was designed for the reparation
of Her Majesty's Castle there; which sum was employed afterward to that use;
and lastly, that a new Major should be placed in his room. The Townsemen
presently sent an Agent (as their manner is) to make suite unto the Council of
England, seeking to abuse their Lordships with counterfeit humility and false
suggestions, to get abatement either in whole or in part of this fine
aforesaid; but therein they failed of their expectation, and having received a
check for their proud contumacie against the President, they were commanded
from the Court.

The one and twentieth of this Month of December, 21. December.
Sir Richard Percy Kinalm^kaghe preyed by Sir Richard Percy.
sent sixty of his Garrison at Kinsale into Kinalmekaghe, Omaghons Country, to
get the prey of the same, whereunto he was encouraged by one who promised to
guide them, so as they should not miss of all the Cowes in the same; Dermond
Moyle Mac Cart^e Florence his Brother, and Moylmo Omaghon the chief of his
Sept, having some intelligence of their coming, with three hundred Foot and
some Horse, assailed them, not doubting but to have cut all their throats; for
the space of two hours a good skirmish was maintained; but the Rebels not
finding the Defendants to be Chikins, to be afraid at the sight of every cloud
or kite, with some loss (of slain and hurt men) soberly retreated: of the
Garrison of Kinsaile only two private men were hurt, yet they returned ill
pleased for that they missed of the booty expected. About this time the Spanish
Archbishop of Dublin wrote unto the lurking ritulary Earl of Desmond, the
Copy whereof I do here verbatim relate, translated out of Latin.

A Letter from the Spanish Archbishop of Dublin to James fits Thomas.
MY most Honorable good Lord, having long desired a fit opportunity to write
unto you, the same i^ now offered by M^. John, whereof I am very glad, that by
such a most sure and faithful Messenger I might open my mind to your Lordship;
as also to show that most certain and undoubted hope of aid is shortly to
come. I would most willingly have come unto your Lordships presence, which
lately I have assayed, and doubtless would have done, unless I had been
hindered by these Lords, which told me that present and imminent dangers were
to be feared in my Journey, unless I had an Army of soldiers to conduct me;
and now (but that there is a necessity of my returning into Spain) I would
have come to you in the company of Master John; He m^aneth John fits Thomas
brother to the titulary Earl.
But I hope that most speedily and most fortunately I shall return unto you
again: In the mean time I have pretermitted nothing which might tend to your
profit, as well to our Catholic Master, as any other whosoever, which now also
in Spain I will perform; I would therefore entreat your excellency, that
you would be of a good courage together with all other of your faction; and
that you would fight constantly and valiantly for the faith and the liberty of
your Country, knowing and firmly hoping, that the help of my Lord the
Catholic King, is now coming, which when it comes, all things shall be
prosperous, and will place you in your former liberty and security, that ye
may possess your desired peace and tranquillity: The Almighty conserve your
Lordship in safety long to continue. From Donegall the thirteenth of January,
1601.


The Province of Mounster standing now in these good terms of Obedience and
Conformity (as you have heard) the President thought good for the diminution
of Her Majesty's charge to spare some part of those Forces, which at first were
allotted unto him for this service; and therefore besides those five hundred
which were of late cashiered by direction from the Lord Deputy; he was
contented to spare one thousand more to be disposed for the wars of Linster,
or other places near adjoining, conditionally that they might remain upon the
List of Mounster, as well to countenance his proceedings, as also that he might
call them back upon any occasion, if new broils should be raised; and so in
effect reduced the Army of that Province to fifteen hundred Foot and two
hundred Horse.

You hear before, that the Earl of Ormond upon conference with the President,
undertook to drive Redmond Burke, and the other Rebels his associats out of
his liberty of Ormond, within the liberty of Tipperary, which although he
oftentimes assaied to effect, yet it sorted not to his desired end, until the
beginning of this Month of January, January.
at which time he employed the Lord of Dunboyne, Sir Walter Butler his Nephew,
and Captain Marberry, with such forces as he had (of Her Majesty's and the
Country) to so good purpose, that besides forty fighting men that were
presently slain, and amongst them Thomas Burke, brother to the said Redmond,
and the Arms of thirty more gotten, they forced Redmond and all his Company
into the river of Nore, being at that time very high, and there drowned
seventie of his men with their arms, besides diverse Churles and all their
baggage; certain persons were also taken in this service, amongst whom was
John Burke, brother to the said Redmond, who was shortly after executed in
Kilkenny, and William Burke an other of his brethren, grievously wounded. But
to return to the Presidents actions, who desirous that the Country might grow
acquainted with the civil government, whereunto of late it had been a
stranger, thought it convenient, that the Sherifes being necessary officers for
the State, should look into the Country, as well to find out such ill
disposed Malefactors, and idle Vagabonds, as were pernicious to the government,
as also to levy at reasonable rates, such provisions as the Country yields,
and the Garrisons wanted: for this cause John Barry, the Sheriff of the County
of Cork, made a Journey unto some of Florence Mac Cartie The Sheriffs men
slain by Flor. Mac Gartie.
his lands, who no sooner entered into his Country (as he termed it) but
presently he was resisted; and before he could make his retreat, some of his
men were murdered; the like measure was also offered to some of the Garrison of
Kerry, who had no sooner set foot beyond the Mang, a River that parts Kerry
and Desmond; but they were instantly assaulted by Florence his Followers, and
two of his soldiers slain.

The President receiving Advertisement of these malicious and traytourly
practices of Florence (still continued) was exceeding desirous (according unto
directions sent him out of England) to get him into his hands, if it might be
effected, without putting the Queen to a further charge, which without some
temporizing could not as yet conveniently be performed: For Florence Florence
his excuses received for truths.
finding himself to have notoriously incurred ^everall breaches of his former
protection, wrote diverse Letters unto the President, in excuse of these facts,
the same being stuffed (as his phrase was) with damnable oaths, and execrable
blasphemies, that himself was never acquainted with the former slaughters, and
that his people were strangely overseene therein, who mistaking the Soldiers
for the Sheriffs men, and the Sheriffs men for Traitors, committed those
offenses at unawares. Answer was remissed by the President, that the State was
well persuaded of his loyalty and innocence, touching these disorders, and
therefore requested him very earnestly to make his repair unto him, that he
might by his presence and advice, the better find out and punish those
malefactors; but by no means or ways could he be drawn forth of his strong
Country of Desmond, before he had gotten his protection to be renewed; a
plain demonstration of his guilty conscience.

Not long after, upon his repair to the President, he moved him to go for
England, The L. President persuades Florence to go into England.
laying before his Judgment diverse commodities that might thereby accrue unto
him: First, he should prove these suggestions to be untrue, which some of his
Enemies had buzzed into the ears of the Council of England, That he was a
vowed enemy to the English Government, and a devoted friend in his heart to the
Spanish King. Secondly, that by his own presence (with the Council) he might
get that Country of Desmond confirmed unto him, which he now held rather by
courtesy then by right. And lastly, that the Queens Majesty might understand
(out of his mouth) the present estate of that Province, to whose relation (as
he verily thought) she would give attentive ear and credit: All this was
urged, to the end, that the Province might be rid of so dangerous a member, who
was most likely to breed new commotions: This Gentleman smelling the
Presidents drift, pretended himself to be most willing, Florence seems to
like of the motion, but means nothing less, and the use he made of it.
and for that purpose would return into Desmond, and when his necessaries were
provided he would speedily proceed in his Journey for England. Within certain
days after, he sent Messengers to the President, signifying unto him, that the
Country of Desmond was so poor and beggarly, as it could not possibly afford
him means for such necessaries as he needed for his Journey, and therefore
requested his Lordships Letters unto the chief Gentlemen of Carbery, that they
would be contributors unto him in a business that did so nearly concern
him: All this being granted and effected, he neither went forward, nor did he
purpose at all to go, as the sequel of his doings manifestly declared.

CHAP. XX.
The Lord President advertiseth into England of the intended invasion of the
Spaniards. Demands made by the Lord President for Money, Munition, Victuals. A
Letter from Her Majesty to the Lord Deputy of Ireland, to pardon all such as
the Lord President should nominate, certain persons excepted as incapable of
pardon. A certain branch of the Lords of the Councels Letters to the Lord
President.
THE President having (as is said) reduced Mounster to good terms of
obedience, and had promised to lend the Lord Deputy at any time one thousand
(...) for the service of Linster; yet he still insisted that they might remain
as part of the List of Mounster: (...) to that end; upon the thirteenth of
January, 13. January.
he wrote unto the Lords of the Council in England: The President adverti
seth into England of the intended invasion of the Spaniards.
Also he advertised their Lordships that undoubtedly the Spaniards would
invade Ireland; for testimony whereof, he sent unto them many advertisements,
which came unto him out of Spain; and that many Romish Priests and Friars,
which are the forerunners of mischiefs in this Country, were lately come into
Ireland, to no other end, then to withdraw the hearts of Her Majesty's natural
Subjects from Her to the Spaniard. Also for prevention of future mischiefs,
that he might not be unprovided (if the kingdom were invaded) although he
should have no more then fifteen hundred Foot left in the Province, when he
had sent the one thousand promised to the Lord Deputy, yet he humbly desired
the Lords, that they would be pleased (until Michaelmas next following) to
continue the victuals to be sent for Mounster, as formerly was accustomed,
that is for three thousand two hundred and fifty, and for the same reason of
innovation, he besought them to send unto him five Lasts of powder with match
and lead, two thousand shovels and spades, (...), munition and victuals.
five hundred pickaxes, and fifty Crows of Iron; and lastly that they would
be pleased, to send a competent s^mme of money for the soldiers to live upon;
for until the expectation of the coming of Spaniards were past, he would
preserve his victuals untoucht.

I formerly recounted unto you, that the President by his Letters of the second
of November, humbly besought their Lordships, that a general pardon might be
granted for the reasons then alleged which (as it seems) had good acceptance
in England, as by Her Majesty's Letter to the Lord Deputy, dated the one and
twentieth of December may appear, which came to the Presidents hands the
nineteenth of January; the true Copy of which Letter is here inserted. And
also for the Lord Deputies farther discharge, a draught of a Warrant to be
passed under the Great Seal of Ireland, was sent unto him by Her Majesty.

A Letter from her Majesty to the Lord Deputy of Ireland.
ELIZABETH R.
RIght Trusty and Welbeloved,
We greet you well. We understand by such advertisements as we have received
from Our President of Our Province of Mounster, that it will be very expedient
for the reducing of Our Subjects, dwelling in that Our Province to a settled
obedience, to grant unto them our general and gracious Pardon, thereby to
remove from them all suspicion of impeachment for their former offenses,
whereunto the greatest part of them have been violently carried, rather by the
power of the arch-traytours, then by any wilful defection in their loyalty;
We being therefore in Our princely Clemency, graciously pleased, to accept
the humble submission of such our Subjects within that Province, as have not
out of their desperate and disloyal hearts entered into this horrible action of
Rebellion against Us, do think meet, and hereby do will and authorize you,
The Lord Deputy to pardon all such as he should no^minate.
that from time to time, you cause such general and particular pardons to be
passed in due form of Law, under our great Seal of that our Realm, to all
and every the Inhabitants of that province, of what condition or estate soever
they be, either by ample words of our general Pardon, (as we understand has
been granted to some Counties in Connaght, upon like occasion) or by
particular Names of peculiar persons, as by Our said President and Council, or
two of them with the President shall be desired of you, excepting out of every
pardon such persons, and inserting such Conditions, and Limitations, for our
service, as by our said President, and two of our Council shall be thought
requisite. And to the end, our people wasted with the misery of these wars,
may not be pardoned with expenses in the obtaining their pardons, or putting
in Security for our peace, in Causes where it may be needful: Our gracious
pleasure is, That the Fees of our Seal, and all other Officers Fees in these
cases of our affairs, shall be either wholly remitted, or so moderated by you
and Our Council there, that our Subjects may have cause the more dutifully and
gladly to embrace our princely Clemency, and Bounty in this our gracious and
free Pardon: Nevertheless such is Our detestation of the Treasons, and
horrible Murders committed in this Rebellion, that for a perpetual memory in
every such pardon, either general or special, there shall be an express
exception, Certain persons excepted incapable of Pardon.
that the same extend not to pardon James Fits Thomas, usurping the Title of
Earl of Desmond, John his Brother, Pierce Lacie, the Knight of the Valley, nor
Thomas Fits Maurice, son to the late Barron of Lixnaw, who are known to have
been the ringleaders to many monstrous and unnatural outrages: Neither shall
our pardon be availeable to any of the servants and followers of the persons
so excepted, unless those servants and followers shall fully and absolutely
submit themselves to our President and Council of that Province, or to some of
them to be bound with Sureties for their future Loyalty within twenty days
after public proclamation made of this Our gracious Pardon. And for the doing
hereof, these Our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge.
Given under Our Signet at Our Palace of Westminster this one and twentieth of
December, one thousand six hundred, in the three and fourtieth year of Our
Reign.


And at that time he received a Letter from the Lords of the Council, agreeing
in substance with that of her Majesty's, to the Lord Deputy: Wherefore I hold
it needless to set it down at large, only I will recite the first part of
it, whereby it is manifested how agreeable the Presidents proceeding was, as
well to her Majesty's liking, as to their Lordships.

A Branch of the Lords of the Councels Letters to the Lord President.
AFter our very hearty Commendations to your Lordship. We have received your
Letters, bearing date the second of November, whereby you have made us an
orderly Relation of the state of that Province, whereof we have informed her
Majesty, who has commanded us to give you notice of her most gracious
acceptance of your Endeavors, in the whole course of your proceedings, as that
which has prooved greatly to her Honor, and the advancement of her Service;
wherein as we have been always ready to perform the best offices, in
respect of your discreet proceedings toward us in all things: so it does not a
little content us, (for the love we bear you) to be messengers of her
Majesty's favor toward you, then which we know you can receive no greater
comfort, etc. From the Court at Whitehall the foureteenth of December, 1600.


CHAP. XXI.
Victuals and money arrived at Cork. One thousand Foot and fifty Horse to
be sent out of Mounster to the Lord Deputy. A Letter from the Lord Presi^ent
to the Lord Deputy. The Companies sent for by the Lord Deputy, and stayed by
his directions. The effect of the Lords of the Councels Letters to the Lord
President, with an Abstract of his Letter to the Lords of the Council.
THE five and twentieth the President advertised the Lords, 25. January.
that there was arrived out of England, Victuals and money arrived at Cork
at Cork, a proportion of victuals, and money, and in the same dispatch, he
humbly besought their Lordships (for that the Province was in a manner by the
long war thoroughly wasted, and that the Horse having nothing but grass to
sustain them, grew weak and unserviceable) That they would be pleased to send
(with the best expedition) four hundred quarters of Oats, which should be
defalked upon the Horsemens entertainements.

Upon the thirtieth, 30. January.
the President received Letters from the Lord Deputy, 1000. foot, and 50.
horse to be sent out of Mounster to the Lord Deputy.
praying him to send for the service of Linster one thousand Foot, whereof the
Companies of Sir John Barkley, and Sir Garret Harvies to be part, and with
them Sir Richard Greames troop of Horse: According to this direction, he
assembled them at Clonmell, and gave the Command of them unto the Lord Awdley;
and as they were ready to march, he received advertisement from the Earl of
Thomond, that a body of more then three thousand men of Vlster and Connaght,
were presently to enter into the Province; whereupon he wrote unto the Lord
Deputy this ensuing Letter, making stay of the Lord Awdley until he should
receive answer thereof.

A Letter from the Lord President to the Lord Deputy.
IT may please your Lordship, I am so infinitely distracted between the earnest
desire I have to satisfy your Lordships commandments, and the present dangers
which I see hangs over this Province; if I should observe them, as that I stand
amazed, what Council to take, being in my self wholly addicted to obedience,
and by necessity (in a manner) enforced to pause upon the same, until I may
receive your Lordships answer to these, and then without farther protraction I
will be ready accordingly to observe your commandments; wherein I humbly pray
your Lordship deliberatly to advise, being (as I take it) especially material
for the furtherance of Her Majesty's service. The next day after, I received
your Lordships Letter of the seven and twentieth of January (being the
thirtieth of the same) for the better expediting of your directions, I
addressed several warrants unto the Captains residing nearest unto me,
commanding every of them, to meet at the Towns of Clonmell and Fetherd, by
the sixth of this Month, there to receive such further directions, as the Lord
Awdley (who I have appointed to command them) should direct. The List consists
of one thousand and fifty Foot, and Sir Richard Greames Horse, Sir Garret
Harvie, lies so far remote in Kerry, as I could not conveniently in so short
a time, draw them to the rest: Wherefore, for that particular I humbly pray to
be excused: and for Sir John Barklies Company (who are part of the List
aboue-said) I have directed them by warrant according to your Lordships former
pleasure signified unto me, before the receipt of your Lordships last letters
to repair into Connaght, but have now countermanded them, and do hope they
are not yet past. Thus your Lordship may see my willingness to obey your
directions, which I did as gladly and affectionatly as your Lordship can
desire. But since having this day received these enclosed Letters from the
Earl of Thomond and Master Comerford; I do make humbly bold to present the
consideration of them unto your Lordships wisdom, before I do thoroughly
accomplish your Commandments, wherein my hope is, that your Lordship will both
give me thanks, and hold me excu^ed; because the public service does
violently urge me unto it. In my judgment I am persuaded that this
intelligence is true, drawn thereunto by many and sundry the like
advertisements, from all parts and persons, lately reconciled, whereof I could
send your Lordship bundels of papers of diverse men's relations, and now
confirmed in the same by these enclosed Letters, which as your Lordship sees,
threatens the present disturbance of this Province, not yet well settled. Yet
nevertheless, that it may appear unto your Lordship, that I am not backward
to accomplish any thing, which your Lordship shall require: I do yet continue
(though not without some hazard to this Province if these Northern Forces
should presently invade us) to send the Companies (aforesaid) to the Rendevous
before mentioned, with directions to remain there until your Lordship shall
return me your pleasure in answer of these, and then what you shall prescribe
unto me, I will dutifully and carefully effect, assuring my self that your
Lordship will have such a special regard to the State of this Province, as
that you will not withdraw them, but upon certain knowledge of the untruth of
these intelligence. But (as a Councellor to speak my opinion) if your Lordship
can other ways follow the prosecution in Lin^ter, without calling Forces from
hence, it were very expedient to forbear the same, until this Cloud be
overpast, which cannot long hold in suspense; for all the danger is between
this and the end of the next Month, after which time until the Cattle be
strong, and give milk, there is little doubt: All which humbly referring to
your Lordships better consideration, I rest.

Moyallo the second of February, 1600. 2. February.
G. C.


Not many days after, the Lord Deputy The Companies sent for by the L.
Deputy, stayed by his directions.
by his Letters so well approoved of the reasons, why the President stayed the
Lord Audley, as he thanked him for it, and willed him to make Head against the
Rebels descent, and hereafter when they might be better spared, then he prayed
him to send them unto him.

The effect of the Lords of the Counsels Letters to the Lord President.
January 28. the Lord President received Letters of great comfort from the
Lords in England, saying, That they were exceeding glad, to see that in so
short a time he had reduced the Province to such terms, as that he could
endure the cashiering of five hundred Foot, and spare the Lord Deputy one
thousand more of his List, which was an evident demonstration of his Labors
well spent in the Service; and that his holding of Assizes and Sessions, so
long dis-used, was a manifest sign of a new life in the Province; That they
had written to the Lord Deputy, to call Theobald ne Long Burke in question for
the murdering of Dermond O Conner, and had required him to see it punished;
That notwithstanding her Majesty's pleasure was signified unto him, that James
fits Thomas, his Brother John, the Baron of Lixnaw, the Knight of the Valley,
and Pierce Lacie, should not be received to mercy upon any condition, but to
be left (as children of perdition) unto destruction, yet considering how long
Rebels may continue (by underhand friendships) in Ireland, she was pleased,
that the Lord President should have power (if he saw cause to induce him
thereunto) to accept of the last three, but with this caution, That they should
be pardoned for life only, and that not until they had performed some signal
services which might merit such gracious favor. Lastly, they admonished the
President to carry a strict hand upon the Commissaries of the Musters; for by
Certificate from Dublin, they understood that they were very slack in their
duties.

The President knowing that it was a matter of no less moment, to retain and
keep the Provincialls in subjection and good order, then it was at first to
reduce them hereunto, employed now a great part of his time, in devising such
courses as might secure them from a future revolt, and therefore first resumed
into his own hands all power of protecting, and then protested never to renew
any protections (already granted) whereby they were constrained to use all
celerity and haste for the obtaining their Pardons. In so much, that within
less then two Months, (namely before the end of February) the President had
recommended above four thousand by name unto the Lord Deputy for Pardons, who
had all put in such pledges or other Caution, as by the State of the Province,
was thought convenient, which indeed was such and so warily taken, as no
Governor in former times had ever done the like: All which notwithstanding,
the President could not satisfy himself in the safety of the one, and so
consequently in the security of the other, so long as their pledges were
remaining in the Cities of Cork, and Limerick, the places of their custody
not being of sufficient strength, the Keepers many times negligent or corrupt
in their charge* and the Citizens so partial, as they had rather help to
convey them into the Country, then to retain them within the City: An
abstract of the Lord Presidents Letter to the Lords of the Council.
for prevention whereof, the President became an humble Suitor to the Lords of
the Council of England, that they would be pleased to give commandment, that
the Pledges of greatest moment might (by an order from them) be commanded to
the Castle of Dublin, which should not be any thing chargeable to Her Majesty,
and yet very profitable for the State: As also that they would be pleased to
give Commandment to all such Undertakers, as hold land within the Province,
that they should make their immediate repair unto their Signiories, that
thereby the Country might be the better furnished with English upon any
occasion: As also that Her Majesty might from them receive their rents in some
part, of that immeasurable treasure which was expended in these Wars.

And lastly being fully assured of a Spanish Invasion, in all his dispatches
for England: He evermore put the Lords in mind of it, sending unto them the
intelligences he had, and for that he would not be taken unprovided, he
continually in all his Letters besought supplies of Victuals, and Munition. And
for that in his last dispatch, he had entreated a large proportion of Victuals;
now in this of the sixth of March 6. March.
he forbear the same, requesting only five Last of powder, and four hundred
quarters of Oats.

The young Earl of Desmond, having been tenderly brought up in England, and
not well agreeing with the manner and customs of Ireland, and also seeing how
much he was deceived in his hopes, supposing that al his Fathers Followers
would have relied upon him, and obeyed his directions; whereof finding little
or no appearance, desired the Lord President to give him leave to go into
England, whereunto (for the reasons before mentioned) the President easily
assented; for in all the time of his being in Ireland, no one Rebel did for
his sake submit himself to Her Majesty, Thomas Oge of Kerry only excepted,
who at his request submitted himself and rendered Castle-mange (whereof he was
Constable) by James fits Thomas his assignement into Her Majesty's hands, as
formerly has been declared. But it may be truly supposed, that wit and
necessity did persuade him to submit, and render the Castle as he did; for Sir
Charles Wilmot had so blockt him up with Garrisons, as at that present he was in
fear of starving; and if he had not taken the opportunity offered upon the
Earls motion, he was in danger to have lost both his life and it. This I write
not to upbraid the Earl, or to lessen him in any thing; for I must confess,
he was too good to live amongst such traitorly Followers, and no man living had
a more willing desire to serve Her Majesty then himself; but the truth is,
that this was all the service which he did or could do during his abode in
Mounster, from whence he embarked the two and twentieth of March, 22. March.
and landed at Miniade in Somersetshire, and so to the Court of England; where
after a few Months he died. The Letters Pattents which Her Majesty had
granted for his restoration, the President never delivered unto him, where in
my opinion he did discreetly, and according to his directions, for they were
sent unto him by Her Majesty (with caution) not to deliver them, except he saw
sufficient cause so to do, and that his services (or services done for his
fake) should merit the same; of both which there was but weak and slender
performance.

In this first Book the Reader may behold in what a confused estate the
Province of Mounster was in, when the L. President entered into his government;
in the first year whereof these memorable accidents happened: the unfortunate
death of Sir Warham St Ledger, the departure of Tyrone out of Mounster; The
taking of the Earl of Ormond by the rebels; The defeat of Florence Mac Cartie;
the loss and recovery of Cahir castle; the submission of the White Knight; the
recovery of the Island and castle of Loghgier; the bold attempt of Nugent, and
the effects which followed thereof; the burning and spoiling of West
Clanwilliam, and Omulrians country; the taking and escape of James fits
Thomas, the titulary Earl of Desmond; the siege and winning of the Castle of
the Glinn; the freeing of the Province of 2500 Bownoghs; Odonnels harrasing of
Thomond; the encounter betwixt Captain Roger Harvy, and the White Knights
son; the planting of garrisons in Kerry; the perpetual juglings of Flo. Mac
Cartie; the taking of the Castle of Listoell in Kerry; the defeat (by the
garrison of Kilmallock) given to the Sugan Earl; the poor and distressed
estate he was driven unto; the submission of Dermond Mac Owen, L. of Dowalla,
and sundry others; the coming into Mounster of the young Earl of Desmond; the
submission of Flor. Mac Cartie; the rendering of Castle Mange; the murdring of
Dermond O Conner; the burning and spoiling of East Clanwilliam, and Arlogh; the
quiet settling of the Province, and the restoring the civil government:
Whosoever with indifferency will consider, how much was done in such short
time, must acknowledge it to be beyond expectation, and say that God fought
for us, and directed our Counsels, otherwise it was not to be hoped for: And
had not the coming of the Spaniards, given new interruptions, the work of
Mounster had been thoroughly finished: The Province fully reduced to a settled
peace, and in all likelihood so to have continued.


The end of the first Book.
PACATA HIBERNIA. THE SECOND BOOK OF THE WARS IN IRELAND, Whereby that
Country was reduced to Subjection and Obedience.
CHAP. I.
Connaght and Vlster men drawn to a head to invade Mounster. A Regiment sent
by the Lord President into Connaght to assist Sir John Barkley. Walter Burke
and Teg O Bryen slain. The Lord President with the remainder of the Army come
to Limrick. The rising out of the Country commanded by the Lo. Barry drawn
near to Limericke. The Rebels distressed for want of victuals, and defeated.
Donogh Mac Cormocke Cartie slain. Redmond Burkes letter to the Lo. President,
with the Lord Presidents answer.
THE prosperous Successes of the last year, did promise fair hopes, that the
malice of the War was spent, and that the Province would within short time
be reduced to a settled conformity: but the malicious practices of the Irish
Papists, had so far enraged the Pope and the King of Spain, against our
Sovereign Mistress, and her good Subjects, the Professors of the true
Religion, (whom the Romanists falsely term Heretics) as in this year of
1601, 1601.
the Province of Mounster was not only set in a raging flame, but the whole
Kingdom was endangered to be torn from the Crown of England: But God in his
great mercy fought for his servants, and made this intended mischief to be
the breake-necke of the Rebellion throughout the Kingdom, and consequently,
the peace and tranquillity, which by the goodness of God we enjoy.

About the latter end of March, March.
1601, Intelligences were brought to the Lord President, and Letters
intercepted, whereby it probably appeared, that Forces from Vlster and
Connaght, were in preparing, (by the way of Thomond) to pass into Mounster,
Connaght and Vlster men drawn to a head to invade Mounster.
under the conduct of Redmond Burke, Captain Hugh Mostian, and Con Oneale,
(Tyrones base son) with about two thousand men, (besides Mounsters fugitives)
to relieve the lurking Earl; but although the circumstances of that Relation
prooved to be untrue, both in the Leaders, and number of men, yet that smoke
did arise from some fire: for presently hereupon Redmond Burke, and Hugh
Mostian, with eight hundred Connaght men, and Teg Orwrk, John fits Thomas,
Donogh Mac Cormocke, and Pierce Lacie, with seven hundred of the North came
through Connaght; Sir John Barkley, Governor in the absence of Sir Arthur
Savage, being constrained to give way to their greater force: Likewise the
Barron of Lixnaw, and Teg Kewgh Mac Maghon, were busy in providing Galleys to
come by Sea, and the O-Maylies, and O Flagherties had a purpose with six
hundred men, (which they had already furnished) to invade Kerry. The President
having received certain Intelligence of all those preparations, principally
set on foot to disturb his Government, first dispatched away one thousand
Foot, under the command of Captain George Flower, Sergeant Major of that
Province, with direction to march forward in all haste into Connaght, to join
with Sir John Barkley, A Regiment sent by the L. President into Connaght, to
assist Sir Ioh. Barkley.
that they might do some good service upon the Rebels at their passage over
the Shenan, which of necessity they must hazard before they could come into
Mounster.

The nine and twentieth of March, 29. March.
Captain Flower rose out of Limerick, and that night lodged at Quyn in
Thomond, had notice that the enemy was advanced into Thomond, to spoil the
same, having the assistance of Teg, Son and Heir to Sir Tirloghe Obrien, who
went into action not above three days before: The Sergeant Major discovering
their Forces, came up close unto them; and when he began to fight, they began
to run, whom notwithstanding he so well pursued (with my Lord of Thomonds
Company) that they ^lew and hurt diverse of them; and amongst the rest, Walter
Burke, Son to the blind Abbot was slain, and Teg Obrien Walt. Burke, and Teg
O-Brien slain.
(now mentioned) received a mortal wound, whereof (within three days after)
he died, besides these Forces by land, the President also made certain
provisions by Sea, for preventing of Fits Maurice with his Omaylies, and
Oflagherties from coming into Kerry; upon which occasion there was a tall
Merchant (lately come with provent apparel for the Army, into the river of
Limerick) together with certain small boats, well victualled and manned,
commanded to attend, about the mouth of Shenan, to do service upon such Rebels
as should appear upon that Coast; all which being notified in the Country,
the Enemy finding his purpose frustrate of transporting his Army into Kerry
that way, they retired themselves into a strong Fastness in Tough-kynalehin,
betwixt Clanrickard and Thomond; Her Majesty's forces lodging so near them as
possible they might: The President also himself with all the rest of his
forces (except the Garrisons of Kerry) followed as far as Limerick, The Lo.
President with the remainder of his forces came to Limricke.
as well to give countenance to the other Companies (that attended the Rebels)
as also to be ready (upon the first allarum) to intercept or interrupt them;
If by any devise or chance they might escape the forces in Connaght, and
because the Enemy should be desperate of any help, and assured of strong
resistance in the Province, the President took order that all the Chiefes of
every Country, should assemble themselves at Galbally in the County of
Limerick, and to bring with them the best forces they could make of Horse and
Foot, together with victuals for ten days, to attend such directions as they
should be commanded by the Lord Barry, The rising out of the Country drawn
near to Limricke, and commanded by the L. Barry.
who was appointed General of the Provincials. What service they would have
done (if occasion had been offered) I know not; But sure I am, although they
did somewhat exceed the time limited, before they were assembled, yet at last
there was gathered thirteen hundred Foot, and one hundred and twenty Horse of
the County of Cork only, with great alacrity as seemed of doing some
acceptable service. In the mean time Sir John Barkley lays so hardly to the
Rebels, still keeping within their Fastness, that they could not possibly get
any prey of the Country, but were constraind from the thirtieth of March to
the thirteenth of April to feed upon garrans flesh, The Rebels distressed for
want of victuals.
and such unsavory meat: Afterward being half starved, and altogether past
hope of O Donnels coming to their relief with more forces, they stole away in
the night, and drew into Omaddins Country; out men perceiving their rising
pursued them, and held them fighting all night, and in the morning found that
we had slain many of them; yet by break of the day, they had recovered
another strong Fastness, wherein Sir John Barkley (though often assaying)
could not annoy them: after two days being distressed with like want as
before, they were enforced to dislodge again in the night, our forces pursued
them at the heels, and coming close up unto them, put them to route, and
forced them over the Suck, a deep River, wherein they lost two hundred men,
with the most part of their munition and baggage. In this service there was
lost and hurt of our men and twenty, The Rebels defeated.
but not any of note, except Nevile, Sir Gerrard Harvy his Lieuetenant only:
The Rebels were so terrified in this prosecution, that such as escaped the
River sought not to unite themselves again: Teg Orwrke retired into his
Country, Redmond Burke went to O Donnell, John fits Thomas to Tyrone, and the
meaner sort dispersed into sundry places, and Hughe Mostian with his Company
rested himself in O Conner Roes Country: In one of the aforesaid skirmishes
in Oshafnes Country, upon the seven and twentieth of March, Donoghe Mac
Cormock Donoghe Mac Cormock Carty slain.
(before mentioned) was slain, being lately enlarged by Tyrone, to set a fire
in Mounster. These affairs thus accomplished with good success, although not
fully so good as was both promised and expected; Captain Flower with his
Regiment, returned the one and twentieth of April 21. Aprilis.
to Limerick.

Ever since the Presidents first coming into Mounster, there had been (as
formerly you may observe) secret traffic held between the Lord President and
Redmond Burke, the pretended Barron of Letrim: Burkes ends was to have the
President to assist him for the recovering of his Fathers lands, against his
Uncle the Earl of Clanrickard, and the President held him on with good words,
and messages for two respects; the one for keeping him from joining with the
rest of the Bownoghs in Mounster, the other to procure him (if he might
possibly work him unto it) to do some signal service upon the Rebels:
Redmond still pursuing his desires, (when Captain Flower was in Connaght with
the Mounster forces as aforesaid) writes this Letter here inserted to the
President, and the answer unto it was as follows.

Redmond Burkes Letter to the Lo. President.
Honorable Lord, having heretofore complained to your Lordship of the
inestimable wrongs that are offered me, which seeing your Honor cannot
redress here, I would request your Honor, (in respect that I specially mean
not to disturb any place under your Lordships, or the Earl of Thomonds
Jurisdiction) not to be a means to stop me from demanding my right, or
pursuing it in this sort, seeing by right or Law the State pleases not to
satisfy me; and assure your Honor, if your self had any power to minister
Equity betwixt her Majesty's Subjects, the fame of the honorable worth and
equity your Lordship does carry, would not only alien me to loath this kind of
life, but also very many unspecified others. And thus requesting your Lordship
to draw your Forces for the defense of your Lordships Charge, which otherwise
might suddenly revolt, if they had any aid by Sea or Land, as very many they
expect; which if your Lordship wrong me not, I will stop to my best endeavor,
I betake your Honor to God.

From the Camp, the twelfth of April, 1601. Your Honors loving Friend.
Redmond Letrim.


The Lord Presidents Answer.
I Have received your Letter on the twelfth of this instant, The Lord
Presidents a^^wer.
and am glad to find by the ^ame, that the life you now lead is odious unto
you; I do wish, that the feeling of your duty may increase in that manner in
you, as that you would make your self capable of the Queens mercy, which is
far more infinite then your transgression hitherto has been; Of which Royal
disposition of hers, the examples (of the offenders in this Kingdom) are
plentiful and apparent. The pretense you make in your continuance in action,
is the wrongs done unto you, by your Uncle, and to enable him farther to
suppress you utterly; you add here to that Arch-Traytor Tyrone, and forsake
your duty to your Sovereign, refusing her Laws, (by the which you may be
righted) with opinion to be repossessed by the strength of his sword: your
Youth may somewhat excuse your error, but believe me, you shall neither be
Barron of Letrim, or possess your Fathers Inheritance by the aid of that
perfidious Traitor, which I know has not the power any long time to support
this Rebellion; and if he had, yet your self and all the English race of
Ireland birth, is as odious unto him, as now we are, that are natural English:
If his power were able to make him Monarch of Ireland, the Burkes, with all of
English descent, must look for no other then assured extirpation: I am sure
you are of discretion sufficient to conceive as much as I write, wherefore I
need insist no longer upon the same: To be short, if you will follow the way
which I do by this Messenger prescribe you, you may make your self capable of
the Queens mercy, and find both means and friends to obtain Justice: The
request you make unto me to forbear sending of Forces to annoy you, and in so
doing that you will spare Mounster, and keep others from harming the Province:
If I were but an ordinary Subject, and not an Officer to the Queen, I neither
might, or would make any such contract with you, and therefore much less may I
hearken to any such motion, being an Officer of that quality as I am; and do
marvel that you would require me to juggle with my Prince, whom I wish that
you did serve with the like faith and duty as I do. I do wish that your
estate were such, that I might show you friendship. If you persevere in
rebellion, I hold you lost, and in condition with them who have made themselves
unreconcileable. What I leave unwritten, I refer to this Bearer.

Limrick this fourteenth of April, 1601. Your loving Friend when you are an
obedient Subject, G. C.


This Answer of the Presidents could not be very pleasing to R^dmond, for it
plainly manifested, that his purpose was not to do him any courtesies, until
he had done somewhat that might deserve his friendship, and Her Majesty's
grace: Nevertheless it seems that there was some hopes for him to feed upon,
in the messages sent, which he did not write, or else Burke could not have
been contained from harming of Mounster as hitherto he was. To conclude, he
fed him with fair language and threats; and sure I am, that the President made
his advantage by it.

CHAP. II.
Intelligence of Spanish Invasion. Intelligence of Spanish invasion.
The escape of Teg O Brien brother to the Earl of Thomond. Florence his
preparations for munition and men. A Letter from Tyrone to Florence. A Letter
from the Lords of the Council to the Lord President. The report of Dermond Mac
Awley touching the coming of Vlster men into Mounster.
I Must desire the Reader to excuse me, if I do a little break the rule of
the progress of this Story, in looking back some few days, for that which
proceeds of the accidents of Captain Flowers Service in Connaght, did so
necessarily depend one after the other, Intelligence of Spanish invasion.
as that I was enforced to continue that Relation until this return to
Limericke, which made me forbear to speak of Sir Henry Dockwray, who upon
the seventh of this instant April, wrote to the Lord Deputy, (as his Lordship
advertised the President) that Hugh Boy, (who was a man of good estimation, and
very in ward with O Donnell) assured him, that the Spaniards would this year
invade Ireland with six thousand men, and would land in some part of Mounster,
and that three of the chief Towns (which must be Cork, Limerick and
Waterford, for they were the chiefest) had promised to receive them, and that
Florence Mac Cartie (by the necessity of the time only) had submitted
himself to the President, but upon the Spaniards landing he would assuredly
come unto them, with all the force he could make.

The six and twentieth of April, 26. April.
the President leaving at Limerick, and near unto it, twelve hundred Foot and
fifty Horse for the Guard of those borders, returned toward Cork; and the
seven and twentieth, the next day following he heard that Teg Obrien, brother
to the Earl of Thomond, The escape of Teg Obrien, brother to the Earl of
Thomond.
having been a long time Prisoner in Limerick, (by the corruption of his
Keeper) made an escape; Immediately he wrote unto the President; protesting his
loyalty to Her Majesty, professing to do service, His submission.
such as should merit favor. Humbly besought him (not desiring any protection)
that he might remain with his Lordship: The President granted his request,
and withal sent him a Protection, which in an other Letter unto Richard Boil
the Clarke of the Council he besought: The reason which moved the President,
to grant his request, was the absence of the Earl of Thomond, then in England,
that during the same, the County of Clare might be freed from Bonfires, but
now for a time we must leave the President in Cork, and return to Florence Mac
Carty.

You heard before that Florence had a cutting (as they call it) upon Carberry,
toward his charges in the pretended journey for England, but employed all the
same, and whatsoever more he could procure, to another end; for about this
time he provided a Bark, which he fraught with Hides, Florence his
preparation for Munition and men.
Tallow, and such commodities, committing the care and trust thereof to some of
Kinsale, by whom the same merchandise should be transported beyond the Seas,
and in liew thereof, munition, and abilliments of war should be returned, and
and delivered unto him in the Harbor of Valentia: Moreover, about the same
time, he did earnestly solicit aid from the neighbor Provinces, to resist
Her Majesty's forces; and for the same purpose wrote a Letter in Irish (which
was read by James Welsh, by whose relation I received this light) unto one in
Ormond called Cahir Mac Shane Glass Omulrian, desiring that he would leavy for
him six hundred Foot in Linster, which if he could not, then to procure
Redmond Burke to come with so many to his aid, and if he failed likewise
herein, to deal with Captain Terrill to the same effect, and he would pay
them upon the Country of Desmond* Lastly, Donoghe Mac Cormuck called Mac
Donoghe (his Agent with Tyrone) labored so much at his hands, and that so
earnestly, as he procured a Letter from Tyrone; the Contents whereof were as
follows: And thus translated out of the Irish.

A Letter from Tyrone to Florence Mac Carty.
Our commendations to yo^ Mac Carty More, I send shortly unto you according to
our trust of you, that you will do a stout and hopeful thing against the
pagan beast, and thereupon our Army is to go into Mounster, and with the will
of God, we consent unto you, and will that you believe not any word from us for
ever, before we write again unto you; for you shall see trouble enough in
England, by English men it self, so as there shall be easiness of suffering
their wars, at May next, in respect of that it is now: And since this cause
of Mounster was left to you (next under God) let no weakness or imbecillitie
be found in you, and the time of help is near you, and all the rest.

From Dongannon the sixth of February, 1601. Stilo Novo. Oneale.


The Army mentioned in this Letter, was the same which now you heard of,
taking their journey by the way of Connaght, which as may appear both by the
examination of James Welsh, and the Contents of those Letters, were solicited
and sent principally by the means, promises, and procurement of Florence, he
being then and before under protection, the breach whereof he nothing
esteemed: But surceasing farther to rake in the filthy Channels of his
malicious practices, like maladies immedicable, lest it should be loathsome to
the Reader, I will lead him abroad into the open Air, to behold the hunting,
rousing and fall of a great Stag, which was after sent into England to Her
Majesty, and by her received as a most acceptable Present, although it was not
Gods will, that she should live to reward the chief Ranger.

About the midst of May, the Lord President received a Letter from the Lords
of the Council in England, which bare date the eight and twentieth of April,
which for the Readers better understanding, how the Affairs of Mounster did
suit with the Directions and Counsels in England, I think it meet to be
inserted.

A Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord President.
AFter our very hearty Commendations to your Lordship: Although we have before
this time acquainted you with her Majesty's gracious acceptance of your
service, because we know you had no greater object, then to deserve her
Majesty's grace and favor; yet now we will forbear to touch it at this
time, because her Majesty gives you notice of it with her own hand, and for
the present only let you know what care we have taken to satisfy all your
demands for her Majesty's service, because it may appear unto you, seeing you
do orderly and carefully give us account of your proceedings, that we will in
no sort neglect such things as you in your discretion hold fit or necessary.
We have therefore first by her Majesty's Commandment, sent you a supply of
Munitions according to your request; We have likewise given order for Victuals
in good proportion, although it seems to us by the Certificate of the
Victualler, that you were better stored at your writing, then you knew for: We
have also given order for Oats to be presently sent you; and because you have
so good use of a Ship for transporting of Victuals to and fro, besides the
service she may do, in mastering those Barques and Boats which offend the
Coast, we have sent Captain Harvie with a good Ship for that purpose. And now
that you may know, what Letters we have intercepted out of Spain, concerning
those bruits which we perceive are spread of Spanish succors, you shall
receive the Copies of three Letters, whereof we have the Original, which were
committed to the charge of Peter Strong of Watterford, whose Ship and Goods
were taken in Famouth, where they were put in by storm; One of them comes from
the Governor of the Groyne, and another from a Friar that resideth with him,
the third from one Sennock, who as it seems, being unwilling to have Tyrone
deceived, shows him truly how little reason they have to trust to any of the
Spanish Succors as they expect; of these you may make such use as you think
good. As concerning your desire, to know what shall become of the Lady Ioane of
Desmond, we think you should do well to set her at liberty again as she
was before, referring the care of her well doing to some of her Sisters, that
may have an eye over her. We do also require you still to foresee, that her
Majesty's Forces being now so much diminished, may not be spent in maintaining
private men's Castles and houses, but where those places are of use for her
Majesty's service. Lastly, concerning the Fine imposed on the Major of Limrick,
for which we find you had so just occasion, we wish you in no wise to remit
it, but rather to bestow it upon the repair of her Majesty's Castle there,
which as it seems, will serve to so good purpose for her Ma^esties service:
And so we bid your Lordship very heartily farewell.

From the Court at Whitehall the 28 of April 1601. Your Lordships very loving
Friends, Thoma^ Egerton. C. Tho. Buckhurst. W. Knowles. To. Cecill. Ioh.
Fortescue. I. Herbert.



The eight and twentieth day May 28.
Dermond Mac Awlie, The report of Derm. Mac Awlie touching the coming of
Vlster men into Mounster.
who was lately come out of Vlster, and daily conversant with the Traitors of
Mounster, and acquainted with all their proceedings and Council, by mediation
of friends, made his repair to the President, and being examined whether they
intended to come again with new forces into the Province, he affirmed that at
his departure from them, they were ready to come away, and did particularize
what Munitions, and Money every one of them was furnished withal, by Tyrone,
viz.

The Lo. of Lixnaw, Calievers, 40. Powder Barrells, 02. Lead one Sow, 01 Match,
faddoms 120 Money, 14. pound. John fits Thomas. Calievers, 25. Powder Barrels,
01. Lead Sowes, Match faddoms, Money, 10. li. Pierce Lacie. Calievers, 20.
Powder Barrels 01. Lead Sowes, Match faddoms, Money, 8. li. Mac Donogh.
Calievers, 25. Powder Barrels, 01. Lead Sowes, ^ Match, Money, 12. li. Redmond
Burke. Calievers, 150. Powder Barrels, 10. Lead Sowes, 05. Match, Money, 500.
li. Teg Orwrke. Calievers, 150. Powder Barrels, 10. Lead Sowes, 05. Match,
Money, 500. li. From Odonnell to
Teg Kewgh. Calievers, 12 Powder Barrels, 02 Lead Sowes, Match Fathomes, Money,
40. li.

CHAP. III.
James fits Thomas, the titulary Earl of Desmond taken Prisoner. James fits
Thomas kept Prisoner in the Lord Presidents house. His (...) and condemnation.
His relation presented to the Lord President. The Lord Presidents Letter to Her
Majesty. Two Letters from James fits Thomas to the King of Spain. The causes
of the Rebellion in Mounster as James fits Thomas alleged. Hussies report of
the causes of the Rebellion in Mounster.
THere was no man of account in all Mounster, whom the President had not
oftentimes labored about the taking of the reputed Earl, still lurking
secretly within this Province, promising very bountiful and liberal rewards
to all, or any such as would draw such a draught whereby he might be gotten
alive or dead, every man entertained these proffers, as being resolute in
performing the same service, although they never conceived any such thought;
but at last it happened after this manner. The Lord Barry having one hundred men
in pay from the Queen, employed them many times about such service, James fi^s
Thomas the titulary Earl of Desmond taken by the White Knight, and brought to
the Lord President.
as either the President should command or himself thought requisite; and
namely about the fourteenth of May, knowing that one Dermond Odogan, a Harper
dwelling at Garryduffe, used to harbor this Arch-rebell, or else upon occasion
of some stealth that had been made in his Country, the thieues making toward
this Fastness, his Soldiers pursued them into this Wood, where by good
fortune, this supposed Earl with two of the Baldones and this Dermond were
gathered together, being almost ready to go to supper; but having discovered
these Soldiers, they left their meat, and made haste to shift for themselves;
they were no sooner gone out of the Cabin, but the Soldiers were come in, and
finding this provision and a Mantle (which they knew belonged to James fits
Thomas) they followed the chase of the Stag now roused. By this time the Harper
had convaied the Sugan Earl into the thickest part of the Fastness, and
himself with his two other Companions, of purpose discovered themselves to the
Soldiers, and left the Wood with the Lapwings policy; that they being busied
in pursuit of them, the other might remain secure within that Fastness, and
so indeed it fell out; for the Soldiers supposing that James fits Thomas had
been of that Company, made after them till Evening, by what time they had
recovered the White Knights Country, where being past hope of any farther
service, they returned to Barry-court, and informed the Lord Barry of all those
accidents: On the next morning, the Lord Barry glad of so good a cause of
complaint against the White Knight, whom he hated, hastes to the President,
and relating unto him all these particulars, signifies what a narrow escape
the Archtraytor had made, and that if the White Knights people had assisted his
Soldiers, he could not possibly have escaped their hands: Hereupon the White
Knight was presently sent for, who being called before the President, was
rebuked with sharp words and bitter reprehensions, for the negligence of his
Country in so important a business, and was menaced, that for so much as he
had undertaken for his whole Country; therefore he was answerable both with
life and lands, for any default by them made: The White Knight receiving these
threatenings to heart, humbly entreated the President to suspend his judgment
for a few days, vowing upon his soul, that if the said Desmond were now in
his Country (as was averted) or should hereafter repair thither, he would
give the President a good account of him alive or dead, otherwise he was
contented that both his Lands and Goods should remain at the Queens mercy;
and with these protestations he departed: And presently repairing to Sir George
Thornton, he recounted unto him the sharp reproves, which from the President
he had received; Sir George finding him thus well netled, took hold of the
occasion, and never left urging him to perform the service, until he had
taken his corporal oath (upon a book) that he would employ all his endeavors
to effect the same* As Soon as he was returned to his house, he made the like
moan unto some of his faithfullest Followers, as he had done to Sir George
Thornton, and to stir up their minds to help him in the peril he stood;
he promised him, that could bring unto him word where James fits Thomas was,
he would give him fifty pound in money, the inheritance of a Plough land, to
him and his Heirs for ever, with many immunities and freedoms. One of his
Followers, which loved him dearly, compassionating the perplexity he was in,
but would you indeed (said he) lay hands upon James fits Thomas, if you knew
where to find him? the Knight confirmed it with protestations, then follow me
said he, and I will bring you where he is: The White Knight, 29. May.
and he with six or seven more (whereof Redmond Burke of Muskry-quirke was
one) presently upon the nine and twenty nineth of May took horse, 29. May.
and were guided to a Cave in the Mountain of Slewgort, which had but a narrow
mouth, yet deep in the ground, where the Caytiffe Earl (accompanied only
with one of his foster brothers called Thomas Opheghie) was then lurking: The
White Knight called James fits Thomas requiring him to come out, and render
himself his Prisoner: But contrariwise he presuming upon the greatness of his
quality, coming to the Caves mouth required Redmond ^urke and the rest to lay
hands upon the Knight, (for both he and they were his natural Followers) but
the wheel of his fortune being turned, with their swords drawn they entered
the Cave, and without resistance disarming him and his foster Brother, they
delivered them bound to the White Knight, who carried him to his Castle of
Kilvenny, and presently dispatched a Messenger to Sir George Thornton, to pray
him to send some of the Garrison, of Kilmallock to take the charge of him, which
employment was committed to the care of Captain Francis Slingesby, who
marching with his Company to Kilvenny, had the Prisoner delivered unto him, and
from thence with as much expedition as might be, the White Knight, Sir George
Thornton, and Captain Slingesby brought them unto the President, then residing
at Shandon Castle adjoining to Cork. But how the White Knight performed his
promise to his Servant it may be doubted, though he had one thousand pound
given him from Her Majesty for the service.

The President having thus gotten his long desired prey, James fits Thomas kept
Prisoner in the Lord Presidents house.
not adventuring to have him kept in the Town, appointed him lodging and a
Keeper within Shandon Castle, where himself then remained, and there held him
in Irons, until he was sent into England, which was yet deferred; for the
President being informed by the Queens learned Council, that if he should dye
before his arraignement, the Queen could not be interressed in his Lands, but
by act of Parliament, and also his Brother John, was not debarred by the Law
from the title, which this Pretender holds to be good in the Earldom of
Desmond. When the White Knight had delivered his Prisoner, James fits Thomas
into Captain Slingesbyes custody; he told him, now the house is yours, take
care and charge of him.

And in conference with Captain Slingesby, told him how much it grieved him,
that the Lord President should suspect him to be a Releever of James fits
Thomas, contrary to his protestation of service to Her Majesty and to him; and
to make it the better appear what infinite prejudice he had received by his
means. For first at the coming of Tyrone into Mounster, James fits Thomas
having some jealousy (and not without cause) that the White Knight would quit
the confederacy, and humbly seek Her Majesty's gracious favor, acquainted
Tyrone with it, who thereupon apprehended him, and willed him either to put in
his Son John as Pledge of his perseverance, or else he must detain him
Prisoner: which the White Knight being neither able nor willing to perform,
committed him to the custody of Redmond Burke, who carried him out of the
country, making him lackie it by his horse side on foot like a common
Horse-boy; and that in his absence his Country being thus distracted for want
of a Head, the Earl of Ormond came with some forces, preying, burning, and
spoiling most part of his Country; and that he was forced to pay unto Redmond
Burke two hundred pound ransom after three months imprisonment with this ill
usage, concluding that it might well be believed, he had small cause to do
those favors to James fits Thomas (which were suspected) considering he had
received those harms and losses from him, who was never able to repayr him of
the least part thereof. But it may well be conceived that the White Knight had
not (until he was so pressed by the President) made any diligent inquity after
him; and that if he had more timely sought it, he might sooner have effected it.

Captain Slingesby having now the Prisoner and the whole house and keys
committed over to his charge and keeping, setting his Guards and Sentinels both
within the house and without, as was fitting for the Guard of so welcome a
Prisoner, went to where the said James was to be his Watch that night, and
judging a man in his case not capable of any favor from Her Majesty (as being
the principal cause of all the rebellion of Mounster, though otherwise none of
the bloodiest enemies) could take no comfort, in discourse was silent by him,
not willing to grieve him with discoursing on that which he thought could not
be pleasing unto him, until James fits Thomas himself first ministered
occasion, who having had some notice what Captain Slingesby was, after some
complements, began in foam sort to extenuate, though not to excuse his former
faults to Her Majesty, how he was enforced to take that title upon him,
otherwise his brother John would not have been so nice in the accepting; and
that he never shed any English blood in the first insurrection, nor suffered
any to do it that he could withhold (though many of his Followers did not so
piously observe it) but with the best respect of humanity, did cause them to be
sent out of the Country to the next coast Towns with the least offense that
might be* and therefore hoped Her Majesty, who had extended her clemency to
far greater crimes (though it was his hard fortune to be so eminent a man in
that action) she would now retract nothing of Her wonted goodness and mercy:
Intimating withal his Father to be elder brother to Gerrot, Earl of Desmond,
who by the power of his Mother a second wife was disinherited, and her son,
though a younger received and acknowledged for Earl of Desmond. With these and
other discourses they spent the whole night until it was day, when they made
ready to go to Cork to the Lord President, to deliver the Prisoner.

Upon these reasons, James fits Thomas arraigned and condemned.
the Prisoner at a Sessions (holden in Cork for that purpose) was indicted,
arraigned, convicted, and adjudged, to be executed as a notorious Traitor;
which being done, the President advertised all the proceedings into England,
and desired that he might be sent to the Tower of London, and there to remain
in prison; humbly praying that his life might be spared, in policy of State;
for whilst he lived, his brother John could not make any pretext to the
Earldom; whereas to the contrary, he being dead, it was very probable that
the Rebels would set him up (for a new Idol) in his place, whereof what
inconveniences might ensue was apparent. These reasons although they are
subject to every man's understanding that has common sense; and therefore no
marvel, that the Lord President should light upon them: Behold here what the
Captive Earl himself does say concerning that point, who being Prisoner in
the Presidents house, having the favor to have Paper and Ink; 3. Iunij.
upon the third of June, one thousand six hundred and one, wrote this which
insueth; humbly entreating the President to send it to Her Majesty, or to the
Lords of her Council in England, which he performed in his next dispatch.

The Relation of James of Desmond, to the Right Honorable Sir George Carew,
Lord President of Mounster, most humbly beseeching your Honor to certify Her
Majesty, and the Lords of her most Honorable Council of the same: A Relation
presented to the Lord President by James fits Thomas and sent into England.
Hoping in the Almighty, that Her Highness of her accustomed clemency and
mercy, by your intercession, will take most gracious and merciful
consideration thereof, to the end that Her Majesty's Realm of Ireland shall be
the better planted, and maintained in good government by his release. The third
of June, 1601.
FIrst it may please your Honor to consider, that this action at the beginning
was never pretended, intended, nor drawn by me, nor my consent; but by my
Brother John, and Pierce Lacy, having the oaths and promises of diverse
Noblemen, and Gentlemen of this Province, to maintain the same, and not ever
consented unto by me, until Sir Thomas Norris left Kilmallock, and the Irish
forces camped at Rekeloe in Connologh, where they stayed fine or six days;
the most part of the Country combining and adjoining with them, and undertook
to hold with my Brother John, if I had not come to them; the next Sessions
(before these proceedings) at Cork, Sir Thomas Norris arrested me (in person)
therefore my Brother, he being then suspected by him, and intended to keep me
in perpetual prison for him, until I made my escape; by this the intent of
Sir Thomas Norris being known, the fear and terrification thereof drew me
into this action; and had I been assured of my libe^ty, and not clapped up in
prison for my Brothers offense, I had never entered into this action: Further, I
was bordered with most English neighbors, of the Gentlemen of this Province, I
defy any English that can charge me with hindering of them, either in body or
goods* but as many as ever came in my presence, I conveyed them away from time
to time.

Also it is to be expected, that the Spanish Forces are to come into Ireland
this Summer, and Oneale will send up the strongest Army of Northren men into
Mounster, with my Brother John, the Lord of Lixnaw, and Pierce Lacy; and when
they are footed in Mounster, the most part of the Country will join with
them: Preventing this, and many other circumstances of service, the saving of
my life, is more beneficial for Her Majesty then my death: For if it may
please Her Majesty to be gracious unto me, I will reclaim my Brother, the
Lord of Lixnaw, and Pierce Lacy, if it please Her Majesty to be gracious unto
them, or else so diligently work against them with Her Majesty's forces, and
your directions, that they shall not be able to make head, or stir in
Mounster at all; for by the saving of my life, Her Highness will win the
hearts in general of all her Subjects, and people in Ireland, my own service,
and continuance of my alliance in dutiful sort, all the days of their lives.

Farther, I most humbly beseech your Honor to foresee, that there are three
others, of my Sept and race alive; the one is in England, my Uncle Garrets
Son, James, set at liberty by Her Majesty, and in hope to obtain Her
Majesty's favor, my Brother in Vlster, and my Cosen Maurice fits John in
Spain; wherewith it may be expected, that either of these (if I were gone) by
Her Majesty's favor, might be brought in credit, and restored to the House: It
may therefore please Her Majesty to be gracious unto me, assuring to God and
the world, that I will be true and faithful to Her Majesty during life: By
which means Her Majesty's government may be the better settled; my self and
all others my Alliance, for ever bound to pray for Her Majesty's life, long to
continue.

But afterward being examined by the President, and the Provincial Council:
He added some other reasons for his taking of Arms against her Majesty, which
in its due place shall be mentioned: In the dispatch which the President made
into England upon his apprehension, he wrote a Letter to her Majesty as
follows.


The Lord Presidents Letter to Her Majesty.
SACRED AND DREAD SOVEREIGN,
TO my unspeakable Joy, I have received your Majesty's Letters signed with
your Royal hand, and blessed with an extraordinari^ addition to the same,
which although it cannot in^rease my faith and zeal in your Majesty's Ser^ice,
which from my (...) (I thank ^od for it) was ingraffed in my Heart, yet it
infinitely multiplies my comforts in the same; and wherein my (...) may be,
since my time of banishment in this rebellious Kingdom, (for better then a
banishment I cannot esteem my fortune, that depriues me from beholding your
Majesty's Person) although I have not done as much as I desire in the charge I
undergo, yet to make it appear that I have not been idle, (I thank God for
it) I have now at length, bu the means of the White Knight, gotten into my
hands the body of James fits Thomas that Archtraytour, and usurping Earl,
whom for a present with the best conveniencie and safety which I may find, I
will by some trusty Gentleman send unto your Majesty, whereby I hope this
Province is made sure from any present defection. And now that my task is
ended, I do in all humility beseech, that in your Princely commiseration my
exile may end, protesting the same to be a greater affliction to me then I
can well endure: for as my faith is undivided, and only professed, (as by
divine and humane Laws the same is bound) in vassalage to your Majesty; so
does my heart covet nothing so much, as to be overmore attendant on your
sacred Person, accounting it a happiness unto me, to dye at your feet: not
doubting but that your Majesty out of your princely and royal bounty, will
enable me by some means or other to sustain the rest of my days in your
service* and that my fortune shall not be the worse, in that I am not any
importune ate craver; Or yet in not using other arguments to move your
Majesty thereunto, then this, Assai dimanda qui ben serve e face. So most
humbly beseeching your Majesty's pardon, in troubling you with these Lines,
unworthy your divine eyes, do kiss the shadows of your Royal feet. From
your Majesty's City of Cork this third of June. 3. June.
1601.


I may well term him a notorious Traitor, because he was within one year
before his apprehension, the most mighty and potent Geraldine that had been of
any the Earls of Desmond, his predecessors: For it is certainly reported, that
he had eight thousand men well armed under his command at one time, all which
he employed against his lawful Sovereign; and secondly, a notorious
Traitor, because he sought to bring a most infamous slander upon a most
virtuous and renowned Prince, (his Queen and Mistress) with his false
suggestions unto foreign Princes; and notwithstanding that her Name was
eternized with the shrill sounding Trumpet of triumphant Fame, for the meekest
and mildest Prince that ever reigned, yet was not he ashamed, (so far had
the rancour of malice corrupted his venomous heart) to inculcate into the Ears
of the Pope, and Spanish King, that she was more tyrannical then Pharaoh, and
more blood-thirstie then Nero: But because I may be thought to feign these
allegations, to aggravate his treasons, I will therefore (for satisfaction of
the Reader) set down the very words of two his Letters, bearing one date,
which he sent to the King of Spain.

A Letter from James fits Thomas to the King of Spain.
MOst mighty Monarch, I humbly salute your imperial Majesty, giving your
Highness to understand of our great misery, and violent order wherewith we
are of long time oppressed by the English Nation: Their government is such as
Pharaoh himself never used the like; for they content not themselves with all
temporal superiority, but by cruelty desire our blood, and perpetual
destruction, to blot out the whole remembrance of our posterity; as also our
old Catholic Religion, and to swear that the Queen of England is Supreme of
the Church. I refer the consideration hereof to your Majesty's high
judgment; for that Nero in his time was far inferior to that Queen in
cruelty. Wherefore, and for the respects thereof, high, mighty Potentate, my
self, with my Followers and Retainers; And being also requested by the
Bishops, Prelates, and religious men of my Country, have drawn my sword, and
proclaimed wars against them, for the recovery first of Christ's Catholic
religion, and next for the maintenanc^ of my own right, which of long time
has been wrongfully derained from me and my father, who by right succession
was lawful Heir to the Earldom of Desmond; ^or he was eldest Son to
James my Grandfather, who was Earl of Desmond; and for that my Uncle Gerald
(being the younger brother) took part with the wicked proceedings of the
Queen of England, to farther the unlawful claim of supremacy, usurped the
name of Earl of Desmond in my fathers true title; yet notwithstanding he had
not long enjoyed his name of Earl, when the wicked English annoyed him, and
prosecuted wars, that he with the most part of those that held of his side,
was slain, and his Country thereby planted with Englishmen: And now by the
just judgment and providence of God, I have utterly rooted those malepart
bows out of the Orchard of my Country, and have profited so much in my
proceedings, that my da^^erly enemies dare not show their faces in any part of
my Country, but having taken my Towns and Cities, for their refuge and
strength, where they do remain (as yet were Prisoner^) for want of means to
assail them, as Cannon and Powder which my Country does not yield. Having
these wants most noble Potentate; I have presumed with all humility to address
these my Letters to your High Majesty, craving the same of your gra^ious
clemency and goodness, to assist me in this godly enterprise, with some
help of such necessaries for the wars, as your Majesty shall think
requisite; and (after the quiet of my Country) satisfaction shall be truly
made for the same, and my self in person with all my forces, shall be ready
to serve your Highness, in any Country your Majesty shall command me. And i^
your Majesty will vouchsa^e to send me a competent number of Soldiers, I will
place them in some of my Towns and Cities, to remain in your gracious
disposition, till such time as my ability shall make good, what your Majesty
shall lend me in money and munition: and also your Majesty's high Commission
under the broad Seal for leading and conducting of these Soldiers, according
to the prescript order and articles of martial discipline, as your Majesty
shall appoint me, and as the service of the Land shall require. I praise the
Almighty God, I have done by his goodness more then all my Predecessors; for I
have reclaimed all the Nobility of this part, under the dutiful obedience of
Christ's Church, and mine own authority, and accordingly have taken pledges,
and corporal oaths, never to swerve from the same; and would have sent them
to your Majesty, by this Bearer, but that the Ship was not of sufficiency and
strength to carry so noble personages, and will send them whenever your
Highness please. So there rests nothing to quiet this part of the world; but
your Majesty's assistance, which I daily expect: Thus most mighty Monarch, I
humbly take my leave, and do kiss your Royal hands, beseeching the Almighty
of your Majesty's health and happiness:

From my Camp the fourteenth day of March, 1599. Your Majesty's most humble at
all command James Desmond.


An other Letter from James Fits Thomas to the King of Spain.
YOur Majesty shall understand, that the bearer hereof Captain Andrew Roche,
has been always in the service of the Queen of England, and has performed
her manifold services at Sea: whereby he had great preferment and credit, and
being of late time conversant with Catholics, and teachers of divine
Instructions, that were sorry for his lewd life, made known unto him the danger
wherein his soul was; so that by their godly persuasions, he was at that time
reclaimed, and subverted to be a good Catholic, and to spend the residue of
his life in the defense and service of the Church; since which time of
reconcilement, he was to repair to your Majesty with his Ship and Goods, as
is well known to your Highness Council, who confiscated that Ship to your
Majesty's use; himself being at that time stricken with extreme sickness,
that he was not able to proceed in the voyage; and when his Company returned
into Ireland, they reported that the Lantado wished rather his person then the
Ship, which made him fearful ever since to repair thither, till he should
deserve his freedom by some worthy service to your Majesty.

The Heir apparent to the Crown of England, had been carried by him to your
Highness, but that he was bewrayed by some of his own men, and thereby was
intercepted, and himself taken Prisoner, where he remained of long, till by
the Providence of God, and the help of good friends, he was conveyed into
Ireland to me in a small Boat; and leaving these occasions to your Imperial
Majesty, and being assured of his trust, faith, and confidence toward me,
have committed this charge into his hands; the rather for that I understand
your Royal Fleet is directed for England this year, to the end he may be a
Leader and Conductor to them in the Coast of England and Ireland, being very
expert in the knowledge thereof, and in the whole art of Navigation. And thus
with all humility I commit your Highness to the Almighty:

From my Camp the fourteenth of March, 1599 Your Majesty's most humble at all
command. James Desmond.


Consider I beseech thee gentle Reader, into what proud arrogancy, and
audacious insolency this Arch-traytor was elevated (like a Vapor in a Sunshine
day) when blind fortune laughed upon him; the Queen a Tyrant, the English all
cowards, the Cities and walled Towns all his, and the Mounster Nobility
subdued under his authority; was there ever Rebel so far transported with
ambitious presumption, beyond the limits of reason? was it not sufficient for
him like cursed Shimei, or black mouthed railing Rabshakeh, to revile the
Lords anointed, but he must challenge her territories, her Cities, her People,
and her Nobility (whom she and her ancestors had created) to be his own, who
had no portion nor inheritance in any part thereof, being the Impe of a borne
Bastard. But surely I must persuade my self, all this was permitted by the
unsearchable sapience of the alseeing Deity, who even as he caused proud
Lucifer to be throne from the Chair of highest Majesty, (whereunto he
presumed) into the lowest Dungeon of dark obscurity, for ever to be
tormented; so did he suffer this aspiring Absolon, to magnify himself in the
height of vain glory, Vt lapsu graviore ruat, that being thrown headlong
down from the Pinnacle of ambition, he might for ever be poynted at as an
exemplary mirror for all insolent Traitors.

Whilst he remained Prisoner in Shandon, the President thought good to send
for him oftentimes, before himself and the Council, and there to examine him
upon such particulars, as they thought most material for the advancement of
the present service. And amongst the rest, they questioned him concerning the
original causes and principal motives, The causes of the rebellion in
Mounster as James fits Thomas alleged.
that induced this late rebellion in Mounster; he answered that the foundation
principally was religion, then the Undertakers encroaching upon Gentlemen's
lands, the fear of English Iuries passing upon Irish men's lives, the taking
notice of slight evidence upon such arraignements, the general fear conceived
of the safety of their lives, by the example of the execution of Redmond fits
Gerald and Donoghe Mac Craghe, and the great charge (which was yearly exacted)
for Her Majesty out of every Plough-land within the Province, called the
composition rent; and because these his pretenses, do not much vary from the
allegations ((...)) by Oliver Hussie, a Schoolmasters, a most pernicious
member in this traitorous combination, I have thought fit to interpose the same
in this place. This Hussie therefore examined upon the same Interrogatories,
answered as follows.

First the Country was (much against their wills) driven to pay composition to
the Queen, Husseys report of the causes of the rebellion in Mounster.
for three years upon certain Covenants: These Covenants were not observed on
Her Majesty's part, nor yet the composition ceased at the determination of the
said term: Wherefore they thought the Composition would not only be
continued, but also augmented* from time to time, at the pleasure of their
Superiors, till they should be weary of their Lands* Many new and
extraordinary ways were sought out in concealements (and such like) to the
great discomfort and fear of Landlord^ and Freeholders.

The extortions and unlawful dealings of Sherifs, and other like officers, to
rob the Contrymen of their goods; for they did use to keep many Courts (for
gain) and not for Justice, they did use to bring many Writs from Dublin, for
very small causes, they did use to buy old caveling titles, to receive bribes,
for not going to poor Gentlemen's houses, and other like inconveniences.

The continual vexation by Processes from the spiritual Court, where by Fines
and Bribes (to save men's consciences) they were greatly grieved, and specially
by the High Commission.

The manner of execution of Donog^e Mac Craghe, and Redmond fits Gerald, and
seeking of Thomas fits Maurice his blood, did greatly discomfort them, fearing
that every of their lives were in like danger.

The several examinations of these two (being both deeply engaged in the
action) ^ have therefore inserted into this present relation, First that the
world may be satisfied, upon what weak pretexts, and imaginary supposed
conjectures the Rebellion was grounded: And therefore the former scandalous
suggestions which Hell had devised, and the Popes damned Legate had forged
against Her Majesty, were the more abominable. And secondly, that those
Officers that should succeed in governing this kingdom, might carefully shun
and warily avoid all Bribery, Corruption, and Partiality, that the exclayming
mouths of these discontented people, may be either altogether shut, or else
opening the same, they may spue out nothing but their own shame. But to
proceed.

About the beginning of this Month of June, the President received gracious
Letters from Her sacred Majesty, wherein she acknowledging her thankfulness
for his services, and signified her pleasure unto him concerning base moneys,
and withal she sent the Proclamation, and the Articles between her and Sir
George Carry Knight, Treasurer of Ireland, touching the exchange for the
alteration of the said moneys, all which do here ensue.

CHAP. IIII.
A Letter from Her Majesty to the Lord President concerning base Moneys. A
Proclamation concerning base Moneys. Articles between Her Majesty and the
Treasurer at Wars for Ireland, concerning base Moneys.
A Letter from her Majesty to the Lord President concerning base Moneys.
Your loving Sovereign, ELIZABETH R.
Trusty and welbeloved,
We greet you well: Although We have forborne when we intended to have made
known unto you by some express testimony from Our self, Our acceptance of
your Services, yet We have given particular charge to Our Council, that they
should in Our Name make you perceive our liking of your proceedings, in such
sort, as you might not conceive that either the report of them came not to our
ears, or that you served a Prince not willing to acknowledge the good merits
of her Servants. But now that cause is ministered unto us, to give charge unto
you of other matters specially concerning our service; We thought it convenient
to encourage you to that which follows, by thankes-giving for that which is
past, and by assuring you by our own Letters, that as you have not deceived
our expectation of your sufficiency, or our trust reposed in your faith, So
will not we be wanting on our part, to manifest how acceptable these things
are unto us, whenever We find them in any one, whom We have conferred
trust in employment. The matter that now We think meet to acquaint you with,
is, that having found by long experience, that the using of sterling moneys in
the payment of our A^mie there, and for our other Services, does bring
marveilous inconveniences both to that Realm, and to this; And that the
wisdom of all our Progenitors (for the most part) did maintain a difference
between the Coins of both Realms, (that in Ireland being ever inferior in
goodness to that of this Realm) howsoever by error of late crept in, it has
been otherwise tolerated to the infinite loss of this Kingdom, Our Moneys
being out of that Realm transported into foreign Countries, for lack of
Merchandise. We have thought it reason to reviue the ancient course of our
Progenitors in that matter of Moneys, and have caused a Coin proper for that
Our realm of Ireland, to be stamped here, of such a Standard as We find to
have been in use for the same, and do now send a great quantity thereof
thither by Our Treasurer at Wars, to be employed for the payment of Our
army, and for other uses, and the same do authorize by Our Proclamation, and
decrie all other Moneys. In the establishing of which course, as we doubt not
but Our Deputy and Council there, will as they are by Us commanded, proceed
according to such directions as we have given them: So because the Province
(whereof you have charge) is a place of most Traffic of any other of that
Kingdom, and therefore in it, it is most likely that Merchants at the first
show of such an Innovation, will for private respects ^ee most opposite: We
have thought it fit to give you particular notice of this our purpose, and to
require you to use all your authority and your judgment likewise t^ward our
people there, as well of the Towns as others, to make this new course pleasing
and well liking to them, upon such reasons as are contained in our
Proclamation, publishing the same, and as you may gather touching the same out
of such other matters as have passed from us to our Deputy and Council there,
or between us and our Treasurer of Ireland concerning this matter, whereof we
have given order, that herewith Copies shall be sent unto you, by which you
will be sufficiently instructed of apparent reasons to lead us to do it,
although it be a matter which we need not make gracious with any reason at
all, being merely dependant of our Prerogative, to alter the Standerd of our
Moneys at our pleasure. Wherefore, though we nothing doubt of your
forwardness, to further whatsoever we find reason to command: Yet we require
you in this thing, as a matter which we would have well founded in the first
establishing, to give all attention of it, as well by your own actions, as by
assisting Our Treasurer and his Deputies in the uttering of these new Moneys,
and bringing in all others according to the course of Our Exchange, which by
Our Proclamation you may perceive that we have instituted to make the matter
better accepted of Our people. Given under Our Signet at Our Manor of
Greenwitch this sixteenth day of May, one thousand six hundred and one, in the
three and fourtieth year of Our Reign.


The Copy of the Proclamation for publishing the new Money for Ireland.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty, A Proclamation concerni^g base moneys.
finding by the Records of both her Realms of England and Ireland, that in the
times of diverse her Progenitors, Kings of England and Ireland, it has been
accustomed as a thing by them found convenient for the good of the loyal
Subjects of both Realms; that there should be a difference between the
Standerds of the moneys allowed to be current, in each of her said Realms;
and knowing by many Laws of this her Realm of England; and namely by one made
in the third year, and another in the nineteenth year of Her Majesty's
Grandfather of famous memory King Henry the seventh, that the tran^portation of
moneys of the Coin and Standard of England, into that his Realm of Ireland is
severely forbidden under great penaltie^; perceiving also by experience in some
part heretofore, but more fully and apparently now of late years, since the
last Rebellions (which have caused Her Majesty to send great sums of money
into that Realm for the payment of her Army, and for other services) that a
great part of such moneys into that Realm sent, do either come into the hands
of the Rebels, by diverse slights and cunnings of theirs, who by the use and
means thereof, trafficking in foreign Count^ies, do relieve themselves with
such warlicke provisions as they need; as with Powder, Lead, Match, Armor and
Weapons of all sorts, and with Wines, Cloth, and other necessaries; without
which they could not possibly so long subsist in their treasonable courses, and
bring so huge Calamities to the rest of her good Subjects, and waste the whole
Realm; or else the said sterling moneys, as well in respect of their goodness,
being better then the moneys of other Countries, is also for want of
merchandise wherein to employ them; which that Country now specially since the
Rebellion does not yield, are partly by Merchants Strangers, and partly by the
natural Merchants of the Country (using trade in foreign Count^ies)
transported from thence into the said Countries, to the inestimable loss and
impoverishment as well of that Realm of Ireland, as also chiefly of this Her
Majesty's Realm of England: Has therefore in Her Majesty's princely wisdom,
entered into consideration with the advice of her Privy Council, how these
great inconveniences might be avoided; and found after long and serious
debating, that the readiest way to prevent the same, is to reduce the State of
her Moneys and Coins, to the ancient course of her Progenitors, that is, to a
difference in finenes, between the moneys of this Realm of England, and that
her Realm of Ireland: And for that purpose has caused great quantities of
moneys, according to the ancient Standard, which was in use for that Realm in
the days of Her Majesty's Father, Brother, and Sister, to be coined here into
several pieces of shillings, sixpences, and pieces of threepence, stamped with
Her Highness Arms crowned and inscription of her usual style, on the one
side, and on the other with the Harp crowned, being the Arms of that her
Kingdom of Ireland with the inscription, Posui deum Adjutorem meum, and also
certain pieces of small moneys of mere Copper of pence, halfepence, and
farthings, for the use of the poorer sort, stamped on each side as the other:
And the same moneys so coined has sent into her said Realm of Ireland* there
to be established, as the lawful and current moneys of that Realm, and so
to be uttered and issued as well to the Armies and Officers in payments to
them, as also to all other her Subjects of that Realm and others there,
abiding or thither resorting for traffic, and intercourse of buying, selling,
and all other manner of trading amongst themselves; which said Coins, as well
of Silver of three ounces fine, as also of mere Copper for small Moneys, her
Majesty does hereby publish and make known to all men, to be from
thencefoorth, immediately after the publishing of this Pro^lamation, her Coin
of Moneys established and authorized to be lawful and current within that her
Realm of Ireland, and proper to that Kingdom, and does expressly will and
command the same to be so used, reputed, and taken of all her subjects of that
Realm, and of all others conversing there; And does expressly charge and
command, that they, nor any of them, shall not after the day of the publishing
hereof, refuse, reject, or deny to receive in payment of Wages, Fees,
Stipend, or in payment of Debts, or in Bargain, or for any other matter of
Trade, Commerce or dealing between Man and Man, any of the said Moneys of
either kind, either mixed of Silver, or pure Copper, but that they shall receive
and accept the same at such values and rates as they are coined for, viz.
shillings, for shillings, pieces of sixpence for sixpence, and so of all other
the several kinds of that Coin respectively; Denouncing hereby to all such as
shall be found wilfully, and obstinately to refuse the said Moneys of this New
Standerd, being tend^ed unto them in payments, or in any dealings between
party and party, that they shall for that their contempt, receive such
punishment, as by her Majesty's Prerogative Royal, may be in^licted upon
persons contemning pu^lique Orders established for the universal good of that
her Realm: And to the end the said Moneys may the better have their due
course and passage among her Majesty's subjects of that Realm, and the good
intended to both the Realms, the more speedily take place: Her Majesty does
hereby also publish and make known, that her pleasure is, that after the day
of this present Proclamation, all other Moneys heretofore established,
tolerated, or used as lawful or current Moneys within that Kingdom, shall
be decryed, anulled, and called down, and no other Moneys, of what Coin,
Nature, Mixture, Allay, or Finenesse, now used in that Realm of Ireland, be
they either Moneys of her Majesty's own Coin and stamp, current here in her
Realm of England, or if any her Predecessors, or of any foreign Realms
permitted heretofore to be current there, shall be any longer current within
her Realm of Ireland, nor offered, nor received by any person there
inhabiting, or there conversing in any manner of dealing amongst men, but that
all such Moneys be from that day forward held and esteemed for Bullion only,
meet to be moulten down and brought into her Majesty's Mint, or Exchange,
there as heretofore is expressed; And although this open and public
notification of her Majesty's pleasure, be and ought to be to all her
Subjects, and others being in that her Realm, a sufficient declaration and
warning, as well of the authorizing of the New Moneys of the New Standerd, now
appointed to be current, and also the calling down, and decrying of all other
Moneys whatsoever, from any use there either public or private: Yet her
Highness being a Prince, that in her gracious disposition, does ever affect to
make all her Actions clear and allowable, in their own nature, rather then in
the power of supreme authority, intending in this cause to give to all
persons such satisfaction as is reasonable. And in the days of Her
Progenitors, when such Moneys were in use, was not offered, does likewise
hereby make known, that she has established an Exchange to be had and
maintained in convenient places, in both her Kingdoms of England and Ireland;
as namely in Ireland, a^ Dublin, Cork, Gallway, and Carrigfergus; and in
England, at London, Bristow, and at Chester, at which places shall be from
henceforth continually resident, Officers of her appointment, and in other
places also of both the Realms, where it shall be found convenient for the
ease of her Subjects; At which places, and by which Officers, all her Subjects
of either her Realms of England and Ireland, and all others resorting into her
said Realm of Ireland, in trade and Merchandise, and otherwise, shall and may,
from time to time, exchange and commute, as well Moneys current of England,
into Moneys of this new Standerd of Ireland; as also Moneys of this Standerd of
Ireland, into Moneys of the Standerd of England, at their pleasure, in manner
as is hereafter expressed.

First all persons being either Her Majesty's Subjects, or the Subjects of any
Prince or State, in amity with Her Majesty, who shall bring to any place of
Exchang^, within Ireland any moneys of the Coin of her Realm of England, or
of the Coins of any foreign Countries, or any plate or bullion, being of the
Standard of England, or better, desiring to receive for the same in England,
now is current of England, shall receive from the Officer in Ireland a bill
directed to such place of Exchange in England, where the party shall desire to
have his payment: By which bill he shall receive of the Officer in England,
not only moneys of England, value for value, by tale or by weight, of the
Moneys, Plate, or Bullion delivered in Ireland, but also an overplus of six
pence English money upon every twenty shillings English, by him delivered, by
tale, or of eighteen pence English upon every pound weight of such Moneys,
Plate, or Bullion delivered by the party by weight; and after the same rate
for more or less, in quantity or number, delivered by weight or tale.

Item, all persons being Her Majesty's Subjects, or the Subjects of any Prince
or State in amity with Her Majesty, which shall have in their hands any
quantity or sum of the moneys of this new Coin appointed for Her Majesty's
Realm of Ireland, and shall be desirous to receive for the same in England,
moneys current of England, and thereupon shall deliver to any of Her Majesty's
Officers of the Exchange in Ireland, such sums of money as he is desirous so
to exchange, he shall receive of the said Officers in Ireland, a bill directed
to such place of Exchange in England, as shall be desired by the deliverer, by
which Bill he shall receive of the Officer in England, to whom the same is
directed, the like sum of moneys of England by tale, as by the Bill it shall
appear, he shall have delivered in Ireland wanting only twelve pence in the
pound: So as for every twenty shillings of the new Coin of Ireland, delivered
in Ireland, he shall have in England nineteen shillings, current money of
England, and after the same rate for more or less in quantity delivered in
Ireland.

Item, if any such person having in his hands, within the Realm of Ireland
moneys current of England, shall be desirous to exchange the same there for
moneys now appointed to be current in Ireland* the Officers of the Exchange
there to whom he shall bring any sum of English money to be exchanged,
shall deliver to him for every twenty shillings of English money received, one
and twenty shillings of the Coin of Ireland, and after that rate for more or
less in quantity received.

Item, if any person being Her Majesty's Subject, or otherwise, having cause to
resort into the Realm of Ireland, shall be desirous to exchange moneys curant
of England into moneys current of Ireland for his use there, and shall deliver
to that end any English moneys, to any of Her Majesty's Officers of exchange
here in England, the said Officers shall deliver unto the said person, a bill
directed to such place of Exchange in Ireland, as the deliverer shall require,
by which Bill the Officer of the Exchange in Ireland receiving the same, shall
deliver to the Bringer thereof for every twenty shillings English, delivered in
England, one and twenty shillings of the new Coin of Ireland, in Ireland, and
after the same rate for more or less in quantity delivered.

And whereas there are at this present, diverse old Coins of base allay within
that Her Majesty's Realm of Ireland, used and passed in payments between men,
which being now decryed, adnulled, and called down, Her Majesty does think
fit, to have the same brought in and reduced to one uniform Coin of this new
Standard; Her Highness is therefore pleased that every person who shall have
in his hands any quantity of such base Coin, and shall bring in the same to
any of her Officers of her Exchange there in Ireland, that the Officer
receiving the same, shall deliver to the Bringer, money for money, or value for
value, of the moneys of this new Standard, now appointed to be current in
Ireland.

And forasmuch as this notorious inconvenience aforesaid, cannot be prevented,
without there be a due observation of such Laws of this Realm of England, as
heretofore have been made, restrayning the transporting of the moneys current
in England into that Realm of Ireland, in Specie, wherein great disorder has
been of late years committed, and thereby great inconveniences ensued; Her
Majesty does straightly charge and command, all Magistrates and Officers, to
whom it shall appertain, to see severe execution of such Laws as do prohibit
the transportation of her Coin of England into Ireland; and namely one Statute
made in the nineteenth year of the reign of Her Majesty's Grandfather of
famous memory King Henry the seventh. Her Majesty's purpose being (by this
Proclamation) to admonish all her Subjects of both her Realms, and all others
trading in her Realm of Ireland, that they shall from henceforth forbear all
transportation of moneys of England into Ireland, for that Her Majesty will
cause the former Laws (prohibiting the said transportation of money) to be so
straightly looked into and executed, as the penalties thereof, shall fall heavy
upon the Offenders against the same without any hope of remission.


The Copy of certain Articles contained in the Indentures, between Her
Majesty, and Sir George Carry, Treasurer of Ireland, touching the Exchange
established upon the alteration of Moneys.
ITem, the said Sir George Carry does covenant, Arti^les between her Majesty
and the Treasurer at wars for Ireland concerning base Moneys.
etc. That he shall and will mainetaine for the better exercise of the said
Exchange, according to her Majesty's princely meaning, three Officers at the
least within the Cities of London, Bristoll and Westchester, or so many, and in
such convenient places as he shall think meet, discreet persons to be there
continually residing by themselves, or their sufficient deputies to attend the
said Exchange, and to perform the same according to the establishment. And
other officers also in other parts of this her Majesty's Realm of England (if
cause shall require) and likewise to place and mainetaine at four several
port Towns within her Majesty's Realm of Ireland, viz. Dublin, Cork, Galway,
and Car^igfergus, or at such of them as shall be found requisite other officers
who shall be there continually resident by themselves, or their sufficient
deputies to attend her Majesty's subjects for the exchange of their moneys
according to the establishment; and if cause shall require, other officers also
or under ministers in other places of the said Realm of Ireland, for the ease
of her Majesty's subjects.

Item, the said Sir George Carry does covenant, etc. to discharge and acquit
her Majesty of all Fees, Allowances, and wages, needful for any of the said
Officers, or Vnder-ministers above mentioned, and them to maintain,
entertain, and wage at his own costs and charges, for and in consideration of
a sum of two thousand pounds of the Moneys of this new Standerd of Ireland,
mentioned in another Article of this Indenture, to be by her Majesty allowed
unto him for the Fee of himself, and all other Officers necessary to be had
and used for and about this Exchange, as well in England as in Ireland; The
said allowance of two thousand pound per annum, to take beginning, and to be
due unto him, from the first day of May now next ensuing the date hereof, and
to continue during the time of the Exchange* And the Queens Majesty our said
Sovereign Lady, does covenant and agree to and with the said Sir George Carey,
that he as (...) of her Highness said Exchange, shall have full power,
authority, and liberty, to make choice of all Officers, and under officers,
needful to be had and employed, for, and about the exercise and maintenance
of his Exchange, as well within this her Highness Realm of England, as in
Ireland, and them and every of them to nominate and place, and to them to
assign such Fees and entertainments as he shall think convenient, and all
and every the said Officers to remove, alter, or displace, as often as to him
shall be thought good, and others in their places and rooms to substitute
without any interruption of her Highness, in or concerning the same.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does covenant and agree, to and with the said
Sir George Carey, and by these presents does give him power and authority, in
and for performance of one breach of her Highness Proclamation above
specified, whereby all persons are invited to bring in all manner of sterling
Moneys, or of any other Standerds, or like finenesse, or better, into her
Exchange in Ireland, that he the said Sir George Carey, shall and may allow to
all bringers in of such Money, Plate, or Bullion, above the just and true value
thereof, the ^umme of eighteen pence current money of England, upon every
pound weight, or sixpence upon every twenty shillings by tale; the ^ame to be
taken, defaulked, and allowed by the said Sir George Carey, out of such profits
as do arise unto her High^esse upon this Exchange.

And our Sovereign Lady does covenant and agree, to and with the said Sir
George Carey, and by these presents does warrant and authorize him, that to
all her subjects of her Realms of England and Ireland, and to all Strangers,
Merchants, or others, being subjects of such Princes or States as are in amity
with her Highness, which shall bring to any place, for the Exchange appointed
within the Realm of Ireland, any Moneys of this new Standerd of Ireland, and
desire to receive for the same, moneys current of England here within this
Realm of England, That the said Sir George Carey, may deliver unto them and
every of them here in England, moneys current of this her Realm, by tale, for
tale, vi^. twenty shillings sterling, for every twenty shillings of her new
Coin, detaining only, and rebating to her Highness use, twelve pence sterling
upon every twenty shillings so to be delivered for twenty shillings of her
said new Coin, and after the same rate for more or less in quantiti^.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does covenant and agree, etc. That he shall
and may to all persons which within her Highness realm of Ireland, shall at
any of the places for the Exchange appointed, deliver to him or his Deputies,
the value of twenty shillings sterling, in money, plate, or bullion, and desire
to receive for the same, moneys Irish of this new coin, for every value of
twenty shillings, the sum of one and twenty shillings eight pence Irish by
tale, and after the same rate for more or less in quantity.

And our Sovereign Lady, etc. That he or his Assigns shall or may to all
and every persons, which at any of the places for the Exchange appointed, here
within this Realm of England, shall deliver any Moneys, Plate, or Bullion of
the Standerd of England, to the end to receive for the same, within the Realm
of Ireland, moneys of the new Coin of that Realm, pay, or deliver unto them
for the value of every twenty shillings sterling, one and twenty shillings
Irish by the tale, and after that rate for more or less in quantity.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady, etc. That he shall and may, to all and every
persons, bringing into any place for the exchange appointed in Ireland, moneys
of base allay, heretofore current, or now used within the Realm, deliver by
himself or his deputies, like quantities by weight of the moneys of this new
Coin, as he or his deputies shall receive of any such old base moneys by
weight.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does, etc. That she will allow unto the said Sir
G^o* Carry, or his Assigns for the charges of transportation of the moneys of
this new Coin, from her Tower of London into her Majesty's said Realm of
Ireland, as well to the City of Dublin, as to any other places where Exchanges
are to be established, or payments to be made for her service, after the rate
of twenty pounds of this new Standard, upon every thousand pound of the same
coin, the same to be allowed unto him upon his account, as her Majesty's
Treasurer at wars in Ireland.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does, etc. That whenever and as often as any
of the moneys of this new Standard of Ireland, after their first uttering, in
payment to her Highness Army there, being brought back again to the
Exchange to be converted in sterling, or otherwise shall by her Majesty's
commandment be (...) again for her Highness service in payment of her
Army, or otherwise: That so often her Highness will allow to the said Sir
George Carry or his Assigns, after the (...) of ten pounds of this new
Standard, upon every thousand pounds of the same coin by tale, the same to be
allowed unto him, upon his account as Treasurer of her Highness wars in
Ireland.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does, etc. That she will allow unto the said
Sir George Carry for all such sums of money, as shall by her Highness from
time to ^ime, be^ sent or delivered out of her Exchequer, for the furnishing
and m^intenance of this Exchange after the rate of (...) upon every thousand
pounds by ^ale. The said Sir George C^^y taking upon him the charges and
expense, of conveying her Majesty's said Treasure unto the plac^s where the
same shall be used for the exchange.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does, etc. That all hazard and danger happening
in the transportation of this her Majesty's moneys, out of her Realm of
England into Ireland, either by wrecke of Sea or tempest, or by violence of
enemies, shall be at the only peril of our said Sovereign Lady her Heirs
and Successors, as heretofore it has been in like cases; the said Sir George
Carry making proof, that he his deputies or Assigns, having charge of the
said transportation, have used all such care, heed, and diligence, for the safe
conveyance thereof, as they would or might have done for the assurance of their
own goods, or as heedfull provident men use to do for the safety of their
goods in like adventures.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does, etc. That she shall and will from time
to time, furnish and deliver to the said Sir George Carey, or his Assigns, all
such sums of money as shall be requisite and needful for Exchanging, and
converting of this new Irish Coin into moneys of the Standerd of England,
according to her Majesty's Proclamation, after the rate of one fourth part at
the least, of such quantities of this Irish moneys, as her Majesty shall cause
to be coined from time to time, or after a greater rate (if it shall appear by
experience) that a greater portion then a fourth part of the same shall be
returned to the Exchange.

Item, our said Sovereign Lady does, etc. That if at any time hereafter her
Majesty shall think good to cease the Exchange, and not to continue the
converting of Irish moneys into sterling, and that it shall happen, that at
such time there shall be remaining in the hands of the said Sir George Carey,
any quantities of Irish Moneys, great or small, not issued for her Majesty's
service, that in such case her Highness will accept, and allow unto the said
Sir George Carry upon his account all such sums of money at such ra^e, and
value as the same were delivered unto him, to be issued in payment for her
service.

And further, her Majesty does covenant, etc. That for the defraying of all
Wages, Fees, and Stipends, as well to him the said Sir George Carry as (...) of
the Exchanges, as also to all other Officers needful to be established for
the exercise of the same, either within the Realm of England or in Ireland,
wheresoever her Highness does, and will, allow unto the said Sir George Carry
the sum of two thousand pounds of the moneys of this new Standard, by the
year to be taken unto him and stayed in his own hands out of such profits,
as upon the exchange does arise unto her Majesty: The said allowance of two
thousand pounds per annum, to take beginning the first day of May now next
ensuing the date hereof, and to continue during all the time that the Exchange
shall be upheld.


CHAP. V.
A Regiment sent by the Lord President into Connaght. Intelligence of the
Spaniards coming for Ireland, brought to the Lord President sundry ways.
James fits Thomas his report of Florence Mac Cartie. Dermond Mac Awlies report
of the Counsel held in Vlster for the Spaniards landing.
THE Affairs of Mounster thus digested, A Regiment sent by the L. President
into Connaght.
the President, according to the Lord Deputies directions, expedited (with
munition and victuals) one thousand Foot into Connaght, under the command of
Sir Francis Barkley.

The List of the Captains and Companies, were as follows, viz. Sir Francis
Barkley, 100. Foot. Sir Richard Percie, 150. Sir Gerrard Harvie, 150. Sir
Edward fits Gerald, 100. Sir John Dowdall, 100. Captain John Bostocke, 100.
Captain George Kingsmill, 100. Captain George Blunt, 100. Captain William
Power, 100.
Besides fifty Horse under the command of Captain Richard Greame; which
Regiment was sent to give countenance unto the service of Ballishanon, intended
by Sir Henry Docwray, although the President was very loath to spare them at
this time, for the rumor of Spanish preparations for Ireland, (which had been
secretly whispered all this Spring) was now strongly conceited, Intelligence of
the Spaniards coming for Ireland brought the Lo. Presi^ent sundry ways
and confidently believed by all the Irish; And moreover, certain Advertisment
hereof was daily brought unto the President from the Irish Merchants Factors in
Spain, from the Priests in Italy to the Irish Lords; from the English in
France to their private friends, all of them agreeing in one; add heereunto
the constant Asseverations of James fits Thomas the titulary Earl, then a
condemned prisoner, who after his apprehension and condemnation, being often
examined, was still confident of the Spaniards coming; and being demanded his
cause of knowledge, answered, That the Spanish Friar Don Matheo de Oviedo,
(whom they call Archbishop of Dublin) did assure him of the Kings pleasure
therein, and to hasten the same, he took his journey from Spain in February
last, leaving great store of plate and other riches for a pledge behind him.

And being farther examined concerning Florence Mac Carty, Iam. fits Tho^^ his
^eport of Flo. Mac Carty.
he answered that the said Florence, did ever by sight (or otherwise) acquaint
him with what the President wrote unto him, and did continually swear,
protest, and give all outward assurance, never to desist in this action, but to
persevere therein to the end; and that the Spaniards and Rebels of Vlster did
build their principal hopes of Mounster, upon himself and Florence Mac Carty:
all this was also verified by certain intelligences, which the Lord Barry
received from Dermond Mac Awley lately come from the North, the effect whereof
was thus much: When the Spanish Archbishop was to return into Spain in
February last, there was a Council holden in Vlster by Tyrone Odonnell, The
report which Dermond Mac Awley made of the Council held in Vlster about the
fittest place for the Spaniards landing in Ireland.
the said Bishop, and all the chief Traitors of those parts, John of Desmond,
Lixnaw, Pierce Lacy, Donoghe Mac Cormock, and this D^rmond Mac Awley, being
called thereupon; the chiefest matter debated in this consultation was, what
place of Ireland was the most convenient, where the Spanish forces should make
their arrival. It was without much difficulty or gainesaying resolved, for all
respects Mounster was the fittest Province to be invaded; then it remained to
consider what place in that Province they should first attempt; and concerning
this point the Mounster men were required to deliver their opinions: Pierce
Lacy began and urged certain reasons, why he thought it most requisite for
them first to gain Limerick, and plant there, because the Provinces of
Connaght and Linster were near at hand, to minister aid to the Spanish Army,
and Vlster was not far distant, being also the place most remote from
England, especially for shipping: All the rest being induced by these reasons
to subscribe unto his opinion, Donoghe Mac Cormock stood up, and withstood this
Council, saying that Mac Cartie More (from whose mouth he said he spoke it)
upon mature deliberation, Meaning Florence Mac Carty.
did advise their coming to Cork; for the taking of that place would be of
most importance, as well for the countenancing of the action (where the
President most resided) as the magazins of victuals and munitions were placed
there, and also it being a far better outlet then the River of Limerick, the
City weaker and sooner forced: And lastly in landing there, they should border
upon Barry, Roche, Cormock Mac Dermond, and Mac Carty Reughe; all which for
fear of their estates, were partially affected to the English, and by that
means, either constrain them to conjoyne with them in the action, or else to
make their Country and people a prey unto the Army. After long disputation the
Council of Florence delivered by Donoghe Mac Cormock was most applauded, and
so they concluded to land the Spanish Army in the River of Cork.

CHAP. VI.
Florence Mac Cartie is by the Lord President committed to prison. A brief
Collection of Florence Mac Carties treasons and practices with the Rebels; not
touching any thing formerly related.
UPON these and many other reasons (that shall hereafter be alleged) the
President thought that he could not possibly accomplish a service more
acceptable to her Majesty, nor profitable for the State, and more availeable
to divert the Spanish preparations, then to commit unto prison and safe custody
the body of this Florence, which was accordingly effected about the beginning
of June, one thousand six hundred and one, Florence Mac Carty by the Lord
President committed to prison.
a man so pernicious and dangerous to the State, which had sundry ways broken
his several protections; upon his apprehension (which was in Cork) the
President took present order that search should be made in the Palace (his
chief house in Desmond) and other places of his abode, for all such Letters
and writings, as could therein be found, whereby was discovered such a Sea of
rebellious and traitorous practices, as her Majesty and her ho^ourable
Council (being acquainted therewith) thought good that he should be sent into
England with the Arch-traytortitulary Earl of Desmond, James fits Thomas. The
conduction of these two firebrands of Mounster upon the fourteenth of August,
1601. was committed to the charge of Sir Anthony Cook, who brought them to the
Tower of London, where they yet remain. But for as much as this Florence, has
sithence his commitment, insisted upon his Justification, complaining of hard
measure offered him, by her Majesty and her Officers: I am therefore
constrained (though much against my will) for satisfaction of all indifferent
men, Welwillers, and confutation of all malicious Cavillers, to lay open
briefly (as I may) his whole carriage and conversation, Here follows a brief
collection of Flor. Mac Carties treasons and practices with the Rebels, and
continues unto the end of the chapter not touching anything formerly related.
since his late landing within this kingdom, forbearing to insist upon such
points, as have already bin touched in this relation. Thou may be pleased
therefore to understand gentle Reader, that the rebels of Mounster being grown
to such an exceeding strength as you have heard; and amongst these Donnell Mac
Cartie, Florence his base brother in Law (one of the chief) her Majesty
thought good to diminish their forces, with sparing as much blood, and
expending as little treasure as conveniently might be; and therefore knowing
that Florence Mac Cartie was better beloved in the Country then Donnell,
having made many solemn vows, and taken many voluntary oaths for his
continued loyalty, was dispatched into Ireland in the month of May, 1599. and
to the end he might be the more encouraged, and better enabled to do her
Highness service, it pleased her Majesty to direct her favorable Letters to
Robert Earl of Essex (then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) authorizing him to give
order for Letters Patents to be made, containing an effectual grant to the
said Florence Mac Cartie, and Ellen his wife, and to the Heirs males of their
bodies lawfully begotten, of all the Country of Desmond, and such other Lands,
whereof he had any estate of inheritance: but withal authorizing the said
Lord Lieutenant and Council, to stay those Letters Pattents in the Hamper, or
deliver them (according as they should see cause) in the proof they should
make of the behavior of the said Florence: Now that ye may see in what
dutiful manner he requi^ed this trust, in what grateful manner this
kindness, and in what religious manner these oaths; I will recite a part of
the examination of John Anias taken before Sir Nicholas Welsh, and Justice
Comerford, which may explain the same, the thirteenth of October, 1600.

He says, The examination of John Anias.
that in May last, Florence Mac Cartie sent one Maur. More to him, wishing him
to repair to his Lodging at Cork, and that Florence was desirous to be
acquainted with him; whereupon he came to Florence, and in Florence his
Chamber, he the said Florence, (and none other but they two being present)
said that he understood that this Examinate was an Enginer, and one that had
skill in devising and erecting of Fortifications, and that he would willingly
employ him in the like. Anias demanding of Florence, what or where he would
have his Works raised? He answered, at Dunkerran, wherein he might upon any
occasion of extremity defend himself, and James fits Thomas against the
English, and also wherein he might give succor to such Spaniards as should
come to their aid, etc.

Whereby the indifferent Reader may perceive with what prepared hatred, and
prepensed malice this Gallant was affected, even in this first scene of his
devilish Tragedy; that there might be no indecorum, Collections out of the
examination of Owen Osulevan.
his subsequent proceedings were in all points correspondent to these timely
beginnings: For having now left Cork, and gotten footing in his (supposed)
Country of Desmond, he wrote several Letters to the Gentlemen near
adjoining, namely the O Sulevan, Mac Finnin, the two Odonoghs, and others, to
assemble at a time and place appointed, to create him Mac Cartie More; Florence
assumed the title of Mac Carty More
and whosoever he was that refused to come, he persecuted as his mortal
enemy; and hereof Owen Osulexan, (eldest son to Sir Owen Osulevan Owen
Osulevan preyed.
deceased) had woeful experience: for upon his absence from his meeting, he
caused the Bonoghs (which he had now entertained) to prey and rob the said
Owen, and some of his Tenants, taking one John Oge prisoner; and when the said
Owen made suite unto him for release of the prisoner, he answered, that he
would keep him as his Pledge, to be true to him as Mac Cartie More, to follow
his war, and keep his peace. But when he found that this course would not
establish and secure unto him that Dignity and high Title (after which he so
greedily gaped) then he solicited Tyrone by frequent Letters, and importunate
Messengers to come for Mounster, pretending many furtherances that thereby
should arise to the Catholic cause, but desiring the same chiefly to his own
end, that he might be by him and the Romish Clergy saluted Mac Cartie More;
He joyneth with Tirone, and is confirmed by him Mac Carty More.
and therefore Tirone coming into the Province about the first day of March,
Florence posted with all speed to his Camp, and the fourth of the same he
combined with him, and was sworn upon a Mass Book, to be true to Tirone,
and prosecute all hostility and cruel war against the English; Ex
examinatione Owen Osulevan. And to the intent it may appear that this was no
fained or counterfeit Narration of Owen Osulevan, you shall in part perceive by
his own Letters written to Donogh Moyle Mac Cartie, A letter from Florence to
Donogh Mo^le Mac Carty.
upon this occasion: This Donogh (whether grown weary of the wars, or for
some other cause (I know not) determined to continue himself and his followers
in subjection, and for the same cause had submitted himself to Sir Warham St
ledger, and Sir Henry Power, Commissioners appointed for the government of that
Province, until the coming of Sir George Carew to be President; Florence Mac
Cartie, either to advance the Catholic cause, or else desirous that all his
neighbors should run with him to the like excess of riot, joining with Owen
Mac Eggan, a Popish Priest, and most infamous rebel, and Odonevan, sent
Letters to the said Donogh Mac Cartie, as follows.

The Letter.
Cosen Donogh, we have us commended to your self, and to your brother
Florence: I have (I assure you) taken the pains to come hither to Tyrone, not
so much for any danger of my own, as to sau^ the Country of Carbery from
danger and destruction, which if it be once destroyed, your living (in my
opinion) will grow very scarce. These two Gentlemen, your Brother Odonevan,
and Owen Mac Eggan, are very careful with me of your good. Therefore if ever
you will be ruled by us, or tender the wealth of your self and your Country,
we are hereby earnestly to request you, to come and meet us to morrow at
Clo^dghe; and so requesting you not to fail hereof in any wise, to Gods
keeping I commit you.

Oneales Camp at Iniscare, Martij 2. 1599. subscribed Your very loving
Friends, Florence Mac Cartie. Owen Mac Eggan. Donnell Odonevan.



Tyrone finding that Florence was not only forward in his own person but also
a fartherer of others, making new Proselites the children of perdition, as well
as himself, by the consent of all the Popish Bishops, Friars, and Jesuits, and
all the Irish Nobility there assembled, created him Mac Cartie More, using in
this creation all the Rites and Ceremonies accustomed amongst the ancient Irish.

Tyrone having left the Province in the latter end of March, this new Mac
Cartie More did so well remember his vows made to Tyrone (although he quite
forgot those that he formerly made to her Majesty) as in the very next
Month, namely in April, 1600. he used all his policy, He fought with her
Majesty's forces.
power and industry, to defeat the Queens forces, under the command of
Captain Flower, but because I have formerly touched his proceedings therein, I
will not trouble the Reader again with vain tautologies, and needless
repetitions.

In the Month of May, immediately following, by the importunate mediation of
the Earl of Thomond, He gave intelligence unto James fits Thomas.
and John fits Edmonds, he came to the President at Cork, but he had no
sooner left the Town but he sent present word to the Arch-rebell James fits
Thomas, as well of his particular proceedings with the President, as of all such
intelligence (as he could possible understand) to give impediment to the
service, all which may appear by a Letter remised from the said James unto
him, the true Copy whereof here ensues.

James fits Thomas his Letter unto him.
MY good Lord and Cosen, your Letters of the eighteenth of May, I received the
five and twentieth of the same, wherein you relate the manner of your
proceedings with the President at Cork, and also of his determination toward
the West of my Country: I thank God I prevented that which he expected here,
for all the good pledges of the Country are committed to Castlemange, for
their constant behavior in this our action; the President with his force is
come to Limerick, and intended presently to draw toward Askeiton, where I
purpose with my Army to resist him, I pray you the better to further the
service, and the more to cool the bloody desire of our Enemy; let me entreat
you to put in effect, the meaning of my last Letters, by drawing your forces to
join with me here, which being done, I doubt not under God to perform
service, that shall redound to the general quiet of our Country, and so
referring the due consideration hereof (to your Lordships careful usage) I
commit you to the most Mighty:

From the Camp at Adare this first of June, 1600. Your very loving Cosen,
James Desmond


In the foresaid Month, the said Florence sent Teg Oholloghan and Donoghe
Offaly to Owen Osulevan, His farther practices related by Owen Osulevan.
using many strong Motives and forcible persuasions to him, that he should
join with them (in action) against her Majesty, assuring him, that all the
Osulevans would presently show themselves publicly for the Catholic cause, if
they might perceive that he would partake with them, and afterward James fits
Thomas being taken Prisoner by Dermond O Conner toward the latter end of this
said Month, Florence came in person to his rescue unto Castle Lyshin.

Also Owen Osulevan being with Florence Mac Cartie at the Palace, His
malicious speeches.
heard him say, that he had almost as willingly die, as come under the English
government, and persuaded all those he spoke with, to be obstinate in action,
telling him how long Ireland had been tyrannically governed by English men:
All which Osulevan aforesaid did relate unto the President, and thereto took
his corporal oath the one and twentieth of March, 1600.

In July, he taking upon him regal authority within Desmond, He instituted a
Sheriff of his own making in Desmond.
as Mac Cartie More sent first to ne Donnell F^rrers to be Sheriff of that
Country, persuading him that it would be very beneficial unto him, which the
said Donnell refused, answering that he would not take that authority upon
him, except he could show him a warrant from the President, authorizing him to
make such election, as he knew the like heretofore granted to the Earl of
Clancare in the times of trouble; whereupon he appointed another, named
Muriertagh Mac Teg to the same office. Ex Examinatione Donnell F^rrers.

In August, Sir Charles Wilmot first planted his Garrisons in Kerry, and how
glad this dissembling hypocrit was of his neighborhood; besides his own
manifold Letters sent to Sir Charles (full of God damme him) if he were not
heartily glad of his good success here; you shall perceive partly by the
examination of the said Ferrers, The examination of Donnell Ferrers.
in haec verba: When the President in August, 1600. settled Garrisons in Kerry,
Florence caused the Castle of Killorglan appertayning to Master Ienkin Conway,
an Undertaker, to be burned, fearing lest Sir Charles Wilmot should plant
himself there; and when as the Governor afterward placed this Examinat
therein, he sent some of his kerne and took all his prey, threatening to pull
them all out by the heels, having no other quarrel against him, but only
because he repaired the same Castle: He also releeved the Knight of the
Valley at his house of the Palace: And after (the said Florence was protected
by the President) he releeved likewise Thomas fits Maurice the Barron of
Lixnaw, and ceased his Bonoghs in Desmond; but more plainly by examination of
James Welsh taken the tenth of May, 1601. as follows.

When James fits Thomas was in Kerry in September last, Florence Mac Cartie
persuaded him to remain there, The examination of James Welsh.
promising him all the aid that he could give him, and being in his departure
toward Arlogh, he sent Thomas Oge after him, praying him to return, and he
would bring him to the killing of Sir Charles Wilmot, and the Garrison of Traley
that was with him, etc.

And when he saw that James fits Thomas would not follow his Council, but
would needs go to take Arlogh Mountains for his refuge; he wrote a Letter in
Irish (which the said James Welsh read) directed unto Cahir Mac Shane Glass
Omulrian in Ormond, desiring him to levy for him in those parts six hundred
Foot, which if he could not do, then to procure Redmond Burke to get so many
for him; and if he failed, then to deal with Captain Tirrell, and that he
would pay them upon Desmond. About this time also he sent a traitorous message
to the White Knight (by his daughter) Mac Donoghes wife, together with a
cunning Letter, written in Irish and translated as follows.

A Letter from Florence to the White Knight.
DAmnation, I cannot (...) ^^^mend me heartily unto you, as bad as tho^ art,
and do also most heartily commend m^e to your wife, and to your two Sons, I
would be very glad to speak with you for your good; and because I cannot
speak with you my self, yet I would ha^^ (...) in any wi^e credit your
daughter Mistress Mac Donoghe concerning me, and to believe from me, whom she
sends, or what she sends you word of, by a trusty Messenger; I would have you
to determine about Pierce Oge, and that I may speak with you, I mean about
Gor^^et^berd, or Tullylease, send word to Pierce, and Dermond of the day with
him, and send me word, and I will come without all fail: In the mean time I
leave you to God,

Palace this seven and twentieth of August, 1600. Your assured loving Friend.
Florence Mac Cartie.


This Letter was delivered, The message he sent by mistress Mac Donogh.
and expounded to the President by the White Knight: Pierce Oge before
mentioned, was Pierce Lucy, the message which he sent by Mac Donoghs wife, was
to reprove him for his submission to the Queen, and to incite him to enter
again into rebellion, and if he would not be advised by him, and himself
not able to mainetaine the action, that he purposed to agree with Donell Mac
Cartie his brother in Law, and to leave the County of Desmond, and the
Followers in his hands, and to imbarke himself into Spain, to procure and
hasten the long expected aid. In October, after many and infinite delatory
excuses, and protracted delays, he submitted himself to the President,
putting in such pledges as before you have heard, and received a Protection for
ten days, before the expiration, whereof he earnestly labored Cormock Mac
Dermond about the marriage betwixt the Arch-rebell James fits Thomas and his
Sister, He practiced a m^riage for James fits Thomas.
promising to the said Cormock, all the Lands that he had in Carbery, and
undertaking that the said Earl should give farther unto him, such portions of
Lands as should be to his own content, so that he would consent to this
marriage, and join in this wicked combination.

The next Month, diverse means were made to Thomas Oge, Constable of
Castlemange, His practice to hinder the rendering of Castlemange, and (...)
Lacies children to her Majesty.
by the Governor of Kerry, and the young Earl of Desmond (lately come out of
England) about the delivery of that Cast^e to her Majesty's use; Florence
receiving notice hereof, made many journies to the said Thomas Oge, urging him
with forcible persuasions not to relinquish the said Castle to the English,
promising that he would undertake upon his own charge and peril, to see him
furnished with victuals (and all other necessaries) from time to time, whereof
he should stand in need; and when he perceived an inclination in the said
Thomas Oge (notwithstanding his persuasions) to yield the Castle, he assayed
by a crafty wile, to have conveyed away the two Sons of Pierce Lacy, which
were held as pledges for Ia^es fits Thomas within that Castle; but the plot
being frustrate (by mere accident) the children and Castle were within short
time after delivered to the State.

When Sir Charles Wilmot came into Kerry with her Majesty's forces, Florence
Mac Cartie (as Thomas Oge, The examination of Thomas Oge.
upon his examination confessed) entreated James fits Thomas to make the war
there, whereunto he assented: But James could not persuade the Bonoghs unto
it; Also after that Dermond O Conner had enterprised the taking of James fits
Thomas, he did then promise him to enter into open action of Rebellion, and to
that end he solicited Dermond Mac Owen, Mac Awley, Okeefe, Mac Finnin, Owen Mac
Teg Carty and others. And when Tyrone was in Mounster, Florence desired him to
make it known to the King of Spain, that he would serve him faithfully; for
the assurance whereof, the said Florence wrote a Letter to the King, and gave
it to Tyrone to be sent into Spain: And also took his corporal oath to
perform his promises; whereupon Tyrone styled and confirmed him Mac Carty
More; he also told the said Thomas Oge, that if the Spaniards did not land by
May next, he would go into the North, and from thence into Spain. And after
that James fits Thomas was broken, he told this examinat, that if James could
get Forces out of Vlster, the said Florence would join with him. Farther,
Florence intised Connocke Mac Dermond to enter into rebellion, and marry his
Sister to James fits Thomas, who should give unto him Kerry, whereby that his
eldest Son should marry Cormocks Daughter, and Cormocks eldest Son to marry
his daughter, who in marriage with her would give Carrigenesse with twelve
Plow-lands; which marriage, he proposed for their firmer union in their
rebellious enterprise: And that he had laden a Barque with Irish commodities
to be sent beyond the Seas, which should return him munition, etc. Many other
treasonable actions, and traitorly speeches, acted and spoken by the said
Florence; the same Thomas Oge related unto the Lord President, which for
brevities sake I have omitted, which was taken at Moyallo by the President in
January, 1600.

The President not holding himself sufficiently assured of Florence with his
two pledges, He recals his Son that should have been his pledge, upon
advertisements from Tyrone.
his base brother and kinsman, still importuned the bringing of his eldest
Son, according to his promise upon his first protection; he having no
pretext for his longer stay, sent to Owen Mac Teg Mergagh in Desmond to carry
his said Son to Cork, there to be left as a pledge for him; within a few
days after this message sent, Florence receiving advertisement from Tyrone, of
certain Spaniards landed in the North, and hearing continual rumors of
Northern forces, to infest the Province, dispatched a Messenger to the said
Owen Mac Teg mergagh to make stay of his Son for a longer time; viz. until
he might perceive what would be the issue of those preparations; but before
the Messenger could come, the said Owen was with the child upon his way, and
come to Cork, before the said Messenger overtooke him, but had not as yet
delivered the child out of his own custody; wherefore receiving this
countermand, he secretly conveyed the child out of the City, and returned
with him again into Desmond, where he was kept as before, until Florence had
seen that there was neither Irish nor Spaniards appeared to his aid, succor
and comfort.

In the Month following, He writes Letters to the Traitors in Vlster.
namely in January, he sent diverse Letters to Tyrone and other his fellow
traitors in the North, and from them received several answers, whereof some
part chanced to come to our hands, which we will here insert; and first there
does offer it self, one Letter written by Donogh Mac Cormock to the King of
Spain, in the name of Florence Mac Cartie, the tenor whereof was as follows.

A Letter from Donoghe Mac Cormock in the name of Florence to the King of
Spain.
HAving received direction from the Earl of Clan-Care, I would not omit this
opportunity; at the departure of the Archbishop of Dublin, and Don Martin de La
Cerda, to make known to your Majesty, how the said Earl has written to your
Majesty by two or three ways; but understanding that these Letters came not
to your Royal hands, he has now again written by me to your Majesty,
making offer as well of his person and lands, as of his vassals and Subjects to
your Royal service; humbly beseeching your Majesty to receive favor, and
aid him with your power and liberal hand, seeing there is no other that can
and will assist us better against these Heretics in this holy Enterprise:

From Donegall the fifth of January 1601. Your Majesty's loyal Vassal to kiss
your Royal hands, Donoghe Cartie.


This Letter as it should seem was originally written (and the Copy sent to
Florence) by one Thomas Shelton, who wrote herewith other Letters unto him of
his own as follows.

A Letter from Shelton to Florence Mac Carty.
MY honorable Lord, by direction of the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, and at the
request of Mac Donogh (your agent here) I did write a Letter addressed to the
King of Spain, subscribed by him; In which was signified ^ow by your
directi^^, he had made offer of your service to his Majesty; the Copy of
which Letter go^th here enclosed: what the news and hopes of Spain are, the
bearer will fully inform you. This only rests; that as I have ever desired to
serve your Lordship, so finding now the opportunity of this Bearer, I would not
omit so fit an occasion to kiss your honorable hands, and signify that
respect I have ever borne toward you; God preserve and assist yo^ in all your
designs, that we may live to see accomplished by you, these things (whereof
your noble beginnings give an assured hope.)

Donegall I^^^ary the sixth, sub. Your most affectionate Friend. Thomas Shelton.


He received also at the same time other Letters in Spanish (thus Englished)
from the said Archbishop, subscribed, To the most Excellent Earl, Florence Mac
Cartie.

A Letter from the Spanish Archbishop of Dublin, to Florence Mac Cartie.
RIght Honorable Lord, God is my witness, that after my arivall in Ireland,
having knowledge of your Lordships valor and learning, I had an extreme
desire to see, communicate, and confer with so principal a personage; but
the danger of the way would not permit me: I am now departing into Spain,
with grief that I have not visited those parts; but I hope shortly to return
into this Kingdom, and into those parts to your satisfaction; and be assured,
that I will perform with his Majesty, the office that a Brother ought to do,
that he should send from Spain. Because by letter I cannot speak any more, I
leave the rest until sight. The Lord have your Lordship in his keeping
according to my desire.

From Donegall the sixteenth of January, 1601. Yo Mateo Arcobispo de Dublin.


After all this, namely in February next following, the said falsehearted
Florence, H^ wr^te to O D^nnell.
wrote certain Letters to O Do^^^ll, the contents whereof may be gathered by
the answer, that the said O Donell remised in Irish thereunto, and therefore I
have thought good to remember the same (translated) in this place.

O Donnels Answer.
Our commendations to you Mac Cartie: We have received the Letter you sent the
fourteenth of October, and we swear by our word, that you are no less
grieved, for that you see us not, then we our selves, and it was not more your
mind to have aid, then ours to send unto you, if we could for the great
trouble it would be to our selves, to intend you, and by your hand, there was
not many in Ireland more of the mind then mine own person, to have gone to
visit you, had not the strangers neighboured upon my Country, and (as you
know) my Country lying on the Sea, and they having the secrecy thereof to do
their endeavors, to conquer what they may upon the same, which they would not
do upon a Country not lying upon the Sea: You shall receive what News of
Spaniards came to these parts by John fits Thomas, and Donogh Mac Cormock, and
whatsoever they brought with them, we impart with you, and do provide for the
same, men to send unto you, if they may be had. Our Commendations to Patrick
Condon, and to the rest of our friends in those parts.

Your very assured Friend, Hugh Odonnell.

The Earl of Thomond, at the request of the Lord President, The examination of
Teg Man Gillipatrick.
sent a Priest called Teg Mac Gillipatrick, as a Spy into Vlster, to learn
what news he could get among the Rebels there, returned the one and twentieth
of February, 1600, and came to the Lord President at Moyallo, reporting that at
his being at Donegall, in the Christmas Holy days, Tirone, Odonnell, and most
of the Northern Captains being there present, made a new combination to
continue the Rebellion; at which assembly, the Spanish Archbishop of Dublin was
present, then ready to depart for Spain, with sixteen Irish Priests in his
company: for the better assurance of their confederacy, the Sacrament was
solemnly received by them all. At the same time, Teg Mac Gillipatrick (the
Priest aforesaid) did see a Letter of Florence Mac Carties, lately sent to
Tirone by a Messenger of his own, which he heard read openly, the Contents
whereof was, That he protested he was not fallen from them, but had made a
peace with the Lo: President of Mounster, until May next, and that then he was
at liberty.

One Dermond Mac Cartie, a kinsman and dependan^ upon Florence, and by him (as
is supposed) was sent into Spain, where he continued his Intelligencer many
years, and by the Spaniards called Don Dermutio Cartie, wrote a Letter unto
his Master Florence, dated at the Groyne the ninth of March, 1600. A long
letter in Spanish, the material points whereof are thus abstracted and
Englished:

That he was glad to hear that his Lordship upon the fift^enth of December
last, A letter abstracted w^itten out of Spain from Dermond Mac Carty unto
Florence
was landed at Cork, after his eleven years restraint in England, whereof
three of them in the Tower of London; that his Imprisonment was not for
marrying of the Earl of Clan Cares daughter without leave, as was pretended,
but upon suspicion which the State had of his loyalty, which he understood by
Letters written from the Lord Deputy, and Treasurer of Ireland to the Queen,
(which was intercepted and brought into Spain) wherein it was suggested, that
he having so many kinsmen, friends, and followers, and himself (who was
known to bear affection to Spaniards) it were fit he were restrained; and
that this only was the cause of his eleven years restraint. Wherefore he
advised him, not to put any confidence in the English: for if they once again
lay hold upon him, they would never enlarge him.

He advised him to certify his Majesty, how much he was his Servant, what
Towns and places he could put into his hands, what number of men of war
he could serve him withal; and if he could surprise Cork, he should be well
supplied by the King of Spain.

That he might send his Letters (written to the King) unto Don Diego Brochero,
(who is a great favourer of the Irish Nation, and in great credit with the
King) by which means they would be safely delivered, as also his Letters unto
him, for the solicitation of his business. That within three days he might
send him answer from the Groyne, which he could not do unto Oneale, and O
Donnell, who were so far off in the North of the Kingdom, and advised him to
write unto them, that they in like manner should direct their Letters to Don
Diego Brochero; but if he would not write unto him, he would advise with Don
Diego, and repair himself unto him into Ireland.

Lastly, he hoped that the King of Spain would the next Spring send an Army
into Ireland.

It would be too tedious to set down at large all the manifest proofs of
Flor^^ce his juggling Treasons; wherefore I will for brevitie sake, relate but
a few more Abstracts of Letters and Examinations which here ensue.

The thirteenth of May 1600. Tirone wrote to Florence.
Florence received Letters from Tyrone, wherein he prays him, that he would
constantly presevere in the Catholic cause, as he had promised, that aid
should come unto him from the North by Lammas next: That he had written in his
favor to the King of Spain, commended his service, and prayed the King to
give him assistance.

Tyrone wrote unto both the Osulevans* Tyrone wrote to the Osulevans to obey
Flor.
requiring them to give obedience unto Florence; for he had complained of
them. Tyrone threatening the said Os^levans, that if they did not obey him (as
they ought) he would with his forces come into Mounster to destroy them: Dated
the thirtieth of October, 1599.

Tyrone to Florence, Tyrone to Florence.
dated the seventeenth of April, 1600. that according to the trust and
confidence he had in him, and his Confederats in Mounster, they should fight
valiantly against the English, whereunto they were bound in conscience and for
their Countries good.

Another from Tyrone to Florence Mac Cartie, Tyrone to Florence.
dated the second of May 1600. wherein he signifies unto him of the arrival
of the Popes Archbishop of Dublin: And of present aides from Spain, he thanked
God that the Earl of Ormond is taken, he incited him to entertain as many
Bonoghs as he^ can against their enemies, that he has acquainted the King of
Spain of his service, unto whom he has sent his Son Henry Oneale, and that
he would shortly send him aid.

Garret Liston of Skehanaghe in the County of Limerick Gentleman being examined
upon oath said, The examination of Garret Liston.
that Florence Mac Cartie met with James fits Thomas at Belaghafenan two miles
from Castle Main, where James challenged him for not coming unto him with his
forces, to fight with the Lord President as he had promised, whom after he had
with smooth language pacified* he protested solemnly, and took his oath in
the presence of James fits Thomas, Mac Awlife, Thomas Oge, Muriertaghe Mac
Shihie, John Vlicke and this Examinat, that he would continue with James fits
Thomas in this action. And although James should give over the rebellion (which
he termed a just warte) yet he himself would keep life in it, so long as
he could get any to follow him, etc. This examination was taken by the Lord
President the twentieth of August, 1600.

Another from O^e^le to Florence Tyrone to Fl^rence.
dated the sixth of February 1600. wherein he exhorts him to serve valiantly
against the Pagan Beast; That before he did write unto him again, he should
see trouble enough in England it self; and that yea^e, May ensuing, the wars
of Ir^land would be easy. And for that the cause of Mounster was left unto
him, he wished that no imbecility should be found in him, and that the time
of help was near.

Florence Mac Carties wife told Sir Charles Wilmot, His wifes report to Sir
Charles Wilmot.
that her husbands heart was malicious to the State, and that he would never
come in, but upon necessity, and that all he did intend, or make show of to
the President was but to gain time.

Shilie wife to Osulevan More, and Sister to Florence Mac Cartie, in September,
1600. speaking with the Lord President, His Sisters report of the Lord
President.
exclaimed upon her Brother, as the cause of her Husbands imprisonment with the
Rebels, and praying his advise and help for his enlargement; he told her
there was no way to obtain his liberty, but to give his oath and promise, to
enter into action of rebellion, and persuaded her to give him that advise.

Thomas Oge being examined, The examination of Thomas Oge.
said that Florence Mac Cartie told him, upon the delivery of his first pledge;
that if all the children living were in her Majesty's hands for his loyalty,
or any other Follower, he would loose no opportunity, if Tyrone were able to
assist his enterprise with any sufficient forces, or if Spaniards did ^and.

James fits Thomas upon the eighteenth of June, The examination of James fits
Thomas.
1601. being examined by the Lord President, said that Florence Mac Carty did
evermore acquaint him with all that passed between him and the President, and
did continually swear and protest, that he would persevere in the action to
the end; and that the principal hopes of the Spaniards and Vlster Rebels, were
built upon the help and succor of himself, and Florence Mac Carty. And to
what purposes he employed himself in the times immediately following, until
the time of his imprisonment, may be gathered as well by that which has
heretofore been delivered, The examination of Gillernow Okelly.
as by the examination of one Gillernow Okelly, a Connaght man, taken by Sir
Francis Barkley, who being deposed; said that Florence Mac Carty sent his
Letter and promise to Tyrone, to give Bonnogh to Redmond Burke, and six
hundred men upon Desmond and Carbery, and himself with one thousand more of
his own, would meet the said Redmond Burke in Arloghe; and at the same time
he saw four and twenty Letters written by Tyrone, directed to Florence, and
the Traitors in Mounster. You have already perceived that this cunning
hypocritical Traitor, has written Letters to the Arch-traytors, James fits
Thomas, Tyrone, and Odonnell; and besides has sent, or at the least procured
Letters to be sent to the King of Spain; moving and entreating him to invade
her Majesty's kingdom: And now for a perclose of all you shall behold, ( Ne
quid desit ad summam impudentiam) that he might equal, if not exceed the most
impudent and barbarous Traitor; his Letters sent to his holy Father the Pope,
the contents whereof are as follows.

A Letter from Tyrone, James fits Thomas, Florence Mac Carty, and Mac Donogh to
the Pope.
SAnctissime Pater, cum superioribus annis Dei summi nutu and voluntate
excitati ad recuperandum Hoc regnum ab Anglorum gra^issimo jugo, qui and
Religionem and Regionem vi and tyrannide multis seculis occupa^ere, id
nunctandem post multa pericula exantlata, pro majore part excussimus,
sanctitati vestrae exponimus, quod prima nobis and praecipua fuit cura
perpetuoque erit, statum Ecclesiae, hic fere extinctum in integrum restituere
and collapsum redintegrare, ita apud nos judicantes nostrarum partium esse,
vitam ipsam omnemque substantiam nostram in eo augendo impendere, id quod
libentiori animo praestare conamur (ut non dicamus cogimur) quia nisi
tempestive communi malo in utroque statu occurserimus nobiscum deterius long
actum fuisset quam Turcae solent agere, cum sibi subditis Christianis adeo ut
vel fugae esset consulend' vel hic mors obeunda. Rebus itaque in angustias has
redactis, ad quem majore spe jureque accedere cujusque opem implorare possumus,
ac dobemus, quam ad te Pater spirituum in terris, ut filijs spiritualibus
misere adhue afflictis jugoque long graviore and crudeliore quam Pharaonico
attritis adsis. Quod nos speramus a pietate tua consecuturos exemplo omnium
afflictorum, qui ad sedem tuam in talibus aerumnis accedentes opem atque
desider atiorem exitum fuerunt consecuti. Ad te igitur communem omnium
afflictorum, praesertim fidei causa laborantium pium and been volum Patrem,
tanquam a^ unicum nostrum refugium and tutissimum asylum confugimus, fusisque
lachrimis humiliter petimus, ut nostros gemitus audiat, vota suscipiat, ac
postulatus concedat, ut eorum ora obstruantur franganturque vires qui oderunt
Sion, ac impediunt diruta Jerusalem denuo reaedificari Maenia, ubi si nobis
credere dignetur tua Sanctitas; Nunquam antecessores nostri ex tempore quo
Regnum hoc in manus Anglorum devenerat, adjutores fuerant quam nos sumus ad
fidem a nostro Apostolo Sancto Patricio, traditam suscipiendum ad eamque (proh
dolor) in his partibus fere e^tinctam hactenus and pene sepultam excusso jam
pro part Anglorum jugo exsuscitandam, promovendam, augendam, and
amplificandam; Quia nihil aliud in his votis habemus quam videre Dei gloriam
and sidei orthodoxae propugnationem: annuere itaque dignetur vestra sanctitas
nostris petitionibus, qui spretis honoribus and commodis quibuscunque diem
ulteriorem vivere non desideramus, quam videre Dei Ecclesiam toto orb
^^orentem: petimus autem inprimis, ut ad majora fidei incrementa illis sedibus
vacantibus in hoc Regno ij qui vita moribus and literatura sunt conspicui,
quique in negotio fidei promovendo plurimum nobiscum laborant praeficiantur,
quosque nobiscum Reverendissimus Corcagen' ac Cloanen' Episcopus nominavit ac
comm^ndavit tanquam idonei Pastores ad Dei gregem verbo et exemplo instruendum,
ne indignis qui sine ordine and fortasse summ^ cum authoritate and ambitione
sese animarum curae ingererent, nisi occurreretur aditus pateat. Quod ut
petamus movemur propter summam animarum jacturam, quam ob Pastorum paucitatem
in vtraque Monioniae provincia qui undecim Episc^patus sub Metropoli Cassilensi
complectitur: excipimus enim Reverend' Corcagen' and Cloaneum qui senio and
labor jam pen^ est confectus, nostri potiuntur, and hoc eo confidentius
petimus, quia qui electi consecrati, and ad nos dimissi fuerunt a vestra
sacrosancta sede ad vacuas hijs in partibus seeds occupandas a nobis pro
viribus in ijsdem Deigracia defendantur, ut gregibus sibi Commissis tuto
invigilare queant. Insuper desideramus ut quemadmodum felicis recordationis
Pius Quintus, Pontifex Maximus contra Reginam Angliae ejusque fautores Bullam
excommunicationis ediderat; Necnon Gregorius 13. eandem continuaverat, ac vim
habere in bello Giraldinarum indicavit; similem quoque sententiam ad hoc bellum
promovendum, and ad felicem exitum deducendum, Sanctitas vestra emittere
dignetur ac generatim sanctitati vestrae affectu quo possumus maximo regnum hoc
vestrum a te solo post Deum dependens nosque humiles tuos subditos una cum
procuratoribus praesentium latoribus quos pro nobis and nostro nomine
deputamus, quique fuse and veraciter omnia quae in hoc bello gessimus adjuti
eorum opera and doctrina viva voce aperient before. Deprecantes ut Sancta
vestra indubiam illis fidem dignetur adhibere eidem committimus and commendamus.

Dat' in Castris nostris Catholicis 30. Martij 1600. Sanctitatis vestrae
Obedientissimi filij and fidelissmi subditi, Oneale. James Desmond. Mac Cartie
More. Dermond Mac Cartie, Tyr^ne. Ia. fits Them. Flor. Mac Cartie. Dermond Mac
Owen Cartie.
alias Mac Donogh.



I will not trouble the understanding Reader with any long Commentary upon this
plain Text; but only will demand one question, whether that man which shall
suggest, that her Majesty's Subjects are in worse case then the Christians
under the Turks, that her Majesty's government is more tyrannical then that of
the Egyptian Pharaoh, that shall prefer a supplication into the Court of Rome,
to have his anointed Prince excommunicated as an Heretic, and deposed as an
Usurper; whether this man may be adjudged to carry a loyal heart to that
Prince, or deemed worthy to live in that Common wealth. For my own part I
cannot suppose his leprosy like that of Naaman which may be cleansed with
washing seven times in Jordan; but like that of Gehezi, which will stick to
him and his posterity for ever, and that he may ingeniously confess with
evercursed Cain, Peccata mea majora sunt quam condonari queant, my sins are
greater then can be forgiven; but fearing lest this digression will be as over
tedious to thee in reading, as it has bin unpleasant to me in writing, I will
now proceed in my purposed relation.

CHAP. VII.
Dermond Mac Owen, Teg Mac Dermond, and Moyle Mo Omaghon arrested. Dermond Mac
Owens answer to the Lord President. The services which the Mounster Regiment
performed in Connaght, under the conduct of Sir Francis Ba^kley.
THE Lord President, notwithstanding all these intelligences of Spanish
succors, had conceived a good hope, that so soon as the present State of the
Province should be known in Spain; namely that the Chieftains were
apprehended, and the rest generally appeased, it would be a good means to
divert the intended preparations; and yet farther, to secure the Provincials
(so far as the wit of man could devise) he called a general Sessions of
Goal delivery in Cork, to be holden about the eight and twentieth of July,
whither all the Freeholders in that Country were to make their repair, where
he intended to lay hold of all such persons, as had been most pernicious in
the former wars, and likely to prove most dangerous in after times; Dermond
Mac Owen Teg Mac Dermond Moil Mo Omaghon arrested.
these were principally four, Dermond Mac Owen Cartie, alias Mac Donoghe, that
was a Partaker in the petition to the Popes sanctity; an other Teg Mac Dermond
Cartie, brother to Cormuck Lord of Muskerry, the third Moil Mo Omaghon, chief
of that Sept of the Omaghons in Kinalmekeghe, and the fourth and last was
Dermond Moil Mac Cartie, brother to Florence Mac Cartie so much spoken of. The
three former making their appearance at the Sessions, Dermond Moil Mac Cartie
fled.
were apprehended and committed Prisoners to the gentleman Porter; the fourth
knowing himself guilty of many treacherous practices plotted by his brother
Florence, durst not adventure himself within the City walls, but kept aloof
in Carbery till he heard how the other sped, and then conveyed himself into
the North amongst his fellow Rebels.

I may not here omit to relate unto you a passage which passed between Dermond
Mac Owen aforesaid (the first of the four aforementioned) and the Lord
President; The answer of Dermond Mac Owen to the Lord President.
when he was first taken in upon protection, did swear and protest that he
would remain a good Subject; but (said the President) what if the Spaniards
invade Ireland, what would you do then? your Lordship puts me (said he) to a
hard question; for if that should happen, let not then your Lordship trust me
or the Lords Barry and Roche, or any other whatsoever, that you have best
conceit of, for if you do, you will be deceived; this was plain dealing, and
in diverse it proved true, as hereafter you shall hear.

Upon the determination of these Sessions aforesaid, namely in the beginning of
August, the President dispatched his Letters to the Lord Deputy, and the
Council at Dublin, signifying the restraint of these men, and the reasons
inducing him thereunto; for they all (being men of turbulent spirits,
discontented minds, and ill affected to the English government) could not but
prove very dangerous to the State in these doubtful times, foreign invasions
being daily expected; and although they had lately submitted themselves, yet
was it sufficiently made known unto him, as well by the confe^^ion of the
condemned titulary Earl, as from other of good credit, that it proceeded not
from any loyal or dutiful disposition, but by the necessity of the time
being constrained, and by the Popish Priests being licensed, they were
contented for a time to live in subjection, being no longer able to hold out in
rebellion: But yet notwithstanding, he determined to proceed, either in the
retayning or releasing of them, as he should be directed by their graver
wisdoms: The Lord Deputy and Council approved of his proceedings, referring
the farther pursuit of these affairs, together with all other matters within
his government to his own discretion.

You have formerly heard how Sir Francis Barkley was sent with Regiment into
Connaght: and although I do confine my self to speak chiefly of the
services of Mounster, yet this Regiment being still upon the List of Mounster,
I do not think that I shall err in setting down of any accident of note
which it performed. The nineth of August, 9. August.
Sir Francis with his Troops lodged at Alphine in the County of Roscoman; the
morning following was dark and misty, Odonnell, Orwrk^, Tirrell, and the
traytorly Confederats, being fifteen hundred Foot and three hundred Horse,
quartering not far from us, presented themselves close to our Camp; Sir
Francis Barkley The services which the Mounster Regiment performed in Connaght
under the conduct of Sir Francis Barkley.
finding that his store of munition was but weak, resolved not to fight, but
the Enemy growing bold upon our slacknesse, pressed so boldly upon us, as we
were forced to draw out; for two hours there was a hot skirmish, wherein our
men served exceeding well, forcing them to retire to their quarter: Of our side
there was lost a Gentleman of Captain Kingsmils Company, and four and twenty
hurt: Of the Enemy not so few as eighty slain and hurt.

CHAP. VIII.
Six thousand men demanded by the Lord President to be sent into Mounster to
withstand the intended invasion of Spain. The Lord Presidents opinion sent to
the Lords of the Council, of the likeliest place where the Spaniards would
attempt to land their Forces in Ireland. The effect of the Lords of the
Councels answer to the Lord President. A branch of the Lord Presidents Letter
t^ Master Secretary Cecill. A Letter from Master Secretary Cecill t^ the Lord
President. The intelligence had of the Spanish fleet coming for Ireland, and
by him sent t^ the Lord President. A branch of Master Secretary Cecils Letter
t^ the Lord President.
THE Lord President from time to time, certified as well the Lords of her
Majesty's privy Council in England, as the Lord Deputy and Council at
Dublin, of all such intelligences as he received, and probabilities as he
conceived of the Spanish preparations: yet long it was before he could induce
them, to conceit any such thing: But now at the last, even as a vehement and
violent Tempest, Six thousand men demanded by the Lo. President to be sent
into Mounster, to withstand the intended invasion from Spain.
sometimes resoundeth in the air for a good space before it falls, and the
nearer it approaches, the more palpably and senseably is perceived; such was
this tempestuous storm of the Spaniards intended invasion, which was now so
universally seconded from all places, that it was generally expected both in
England and Ireland; and for this cause the President did earnestly solicit
the Council of England that six thousand men might be levied for this
service; whereof two thousand to be sent presently for Waterford, and the rest
to be in a readiness at an hours warning, to make speedy repair to the
Seacoast; upon the first notice of this invasion.

The President also thought fit to deliver his opinion to the Lords of the
Council, The Lo. Presidents opinion sent to the Lords of the Council of the
likeliest place which the Spaniards would attempt to land their forces.
what places within the Province were most likely for the Spaniards to attempt,
and most necessary for her Majesty both in policy and honor to defend: for
to prevent their descent in any place, (where themselves thought meet) was by
him deemed impossible. But it was to be presumed, that they would attempt such
a place, as should be honorable for them to gain, and disadvantagious for
her Majesty to loose; And therefore he thought that their descent (most
likely) would be at Limerick, Waterford, or Cork; as for the other Towns,
they were neither worth their labor to win, ^nor her Majesty's charges to
defend: Limericke was far seated within the land, neither could they
disimboge from thence without an Easterly wind, (which being rare) it was not
likely that they would hazard their Fleet upon such disadvantage: Waterford
(though weak and commodious for them) it was so near to England, and
especially lying so conveniently for her Majesty's Forces, within that
Kingdom, the Deputy on the one side, and the President on the other, being so
near at hand, as it was not likely that they would land there: Cork therefore
he supposed to be most convenient for them to assail, and most necessary for
her Majesty to defend for these reasons: First, because those that had been
the greatest dealers about this Invasion in Spain, namely one Dermond Mac
Cartie, a near kinsman to Florence, called by the Spaniards, Don Dermutio, did
advise (as aforesaid) Florence by Letters, (which were intercepted) to surprise
Cork; Secondly, the said Florence did advise the Spanish Archbishop, by his
Agent Donogh Mac Cormock, (as you have heard) that Cork was the fittest place
for this design; Whereunto both Tyrone and all the Northern Rebels did
subscribe. Lastly, her Majesty's Magazines of Victuals, Munition, and Treasure
residing there in great quantities, could not without infinite trouble, and
great danger be remooved: for besides, if they should be removed, either to
Limrick or Waterford, neither of those were altogether secure, yet it would
give an apparent testimony of fear, conceived of their coming, which would
not only amaze the best affected subjects, through the Province, but give
occasion to the rest generally to revolt: upon these reasons the President
thought fit to assemble all the forces within the Province, (which was then but
1300 Foot, and 200 Horse in List) unto Cork or the places near adjoining,
for the manning and making good of that City, which in it self, by the
natural situation thereof, was very weak, and of small defense.

The Lords by his Lette^s understanding his resolution, The effect of the Lords
of the Councels answer to the Lord President.
by their Letters dated the twentieth of July (which he received in August
following) wrote unto him to this effect; that they would presently send unto
him 2000 Foot for his supply: That they would not direct him what he should
do if the Spaniards landed, leaving it to his own judgment, as occasion
should be offered; saying farther, that where by his own Letters they
perceived, (whereunto al men's judgment did agree with him) that Cork was a
weak town, and not tenible against a powerful enemy, they thought fit to
give him this general rule, that in case he should see such forces arrive,
applying themselves to a place of weak defense, (which in his judgeme^t must
in the end be carried, that nothing can be more pernicious to her Majesty's
cause, and therefore he should not do well to venture his small Forces, where
they, with Her Majesty's provisions, were sure to be lost, howsoever he might
peradventure think to dispute it for some few days: But the President to make
good his resolution, answered their Lordships, and maintaining the same (as by
his Letters of the sixth of August may appear) wherewith the Lords rested
satisfied, and left him to his own judgment; wherein it seems he did not
err, for their intention of landing at Cork prooved true, (as hereafter shall
appear) whereof for farther testimony of the same, all the Letters which were
sent from Spain to Don Joan de Aquila, after his landing in Ireland, were
directed to Cork, which is an evident argument, that Cork was their design,
and that in Spain it was conceived that Don Iuan was possessed of it, A branch
of the L. Presidents Letter to M. Secretary C^cill.
and also at the same time he wrote to M. Secretary Cecill upon the same
subject, his very words were as follows. The resolution I held, I still hold,
which is to defend and keep Cork, the reasons (in my Letters to the Lords) I
have at large discoursed, if Her Majesty shall relinquish any of her walled
Cities, (as I am advised to do) all will be lost, and a general revolt will
ensue, wherefore it were better to put somewhat in hazard, then apparently to
lose all: The town I know to be infinite weak, but many hands is a strong
defense, and when the 2000 aides shall come, the enemy shall find it a tough
piece of work ^o gain it: To remoove the Queens Magazines, of victuals,
Munition, and treasure, (as some do advise) into the Country, I know no place
capable of it, nor yet is there any means of carriage (especially in this
Harvest time) to convey it away between this and Michaelmas, and to send it by
sea, must be either to Waterford or Limricke, (which as far as I know) may
prove no less dangerous then at Cork, no man certainly knowing where the
Enemy will make his descent: But if the worst should happen, that the Town
must be los^, the treasure (at least) shall be saved, and the rest, the Enemy
shall never enjoy. The rasing of Shandon is to no purpose, for every Hill and
Ditch (near the Town) commands the City no less then it, the defenses of
earth (which by my directions are in making) are only made to win time; and
I have so provided, that the charge of the workmen is borne by the Town and
Country, the Queens expenses is no more, but the use of her Shovels, Spades,
Pickaxes and Whildebarrowes, etc.

Now we may see how true a Prophet the President was, that the Spaniards would
invade Ireland; but like unto Cassandra, until this time could never be
believed, which proceeded out of the defects (which both the Lords in England,
and the Lord Deputy of Ireland) had of good intelligence, whereof the
President was better stored then either of them: of the undoubted likelihood of
their coming; Sir Robert Cecill her Majesty's Secretary wrote to the President
as follows.

A Letter from Master Secretary Cecill to the Lord President.
SIr George Carew, on Wednesday last, certain Pinnaces of her Majesty's met
with a fleet of Spaniards, to the number of fifty sail, whereof seventeene
are men of war, the rest are transporting Ships, as by this Note enclosed
does appear, which my Intelligencer sent me at their going out. These Ships
cannot be but for Ireland, from which Coast the storm kept them, unless it
should be said, that the King will land them in the Low Countries, which I
will never believe he durst adventure, knowing how long we have expected
them; and have fourteen good ships out, which if you compare with the note
enclosed of his, you shall find that we might be ashamed to suffer his Fleet
to land so quietly, and our Fleet in the tail of them; but (which is more
certain) to confirm my opinion ever for Ireland, this proportion is fit for
Ireland, there it may work mischief; and besides, that they which met them,
saw them set their course from the mouth of the sleeue (where they were on
wednesday) just for Ireland, and (as I verily think) they will fall for
Limerick; for in Spain it was advertised me, that their Rendezvous was for the
Blaskys, which you know is on that Coast, about the Dingle or the Ventrey:
Lastly, if they had meant to have come hither, they would have been here
before this time, being on wednesday at Silley, and the wind having been
South-west since fair. If therefore they be not in Ireland, they are
certainly put Roomer with Spain again; but that I dare not hope. Now Sir,
what my Lord Deputy and you shall do there, is not our parts to tell you,
only we desire you to propound us possible things, and then shall you have
them; two thousand we have sent already into Mounster, at least the want of
wind hinders them, in the imbarquing Ports: if we know once where they are
landed, then must you also tell us, where you will have us second you: for if
you look for our supplies to come to you, in the West side of Mounster, or
South parts, then can we put them by Sea more properly, and land nearer the
parts of Accon, then to send them to Dublin, or to Cork, but all this to you
must be referred, to whom I wish as great happiness as I wish to my own
heart: And so I end

from the Court at Windsore this twelfth of August, 1601. Your loving and
assured Friend, Robert Cecill.


From Lisbona the five and twentieth of July, 1601.
Here at Lisbon, The intelligence M. Secretary Cecill had of the Spanish fleet
coming for Ireland, and by him sent to the Lord President.
there are stayed about two hundred Sails of Ships; out of which number, five
and forty only are selected for transportation of Soldiers.

The number of Soldiers are six thousand, whereof three thousand are here
kept aboard the ships, left they should run away; the other three thousand
are a coming from Andaluzia and those parts, in a fleet of ships and galleys,
under the conduct of the Ad^l^ntados son unto Lisbon.

The ships which carry the Soldiers are of the burden of one hundred, one
hundred and fifty, and not above two hundred Tuns: The Spaniards do refuse
greater ships of the East Countries, which are stayed at Lisbon, and make
choice of the smallest Vessels they have for their purpose.

Of their five and forty Sail of ships, seventeene sail only are fitted
for men of war, whereof eleaven of them are but small ships, the other six
are Gallions* the Saint Paul, the Saint Peter, the Saint Andrew, and three
smaller Gallions of the Kings, whose names I know not.

For the manning of their ships, fifteen hundred Sailors were sent hither out
of Biskay.

The Marquis of S.ta Croce, goes Admiral in the Saint Paul, Sibiero alias
Seriago Viceadmirall in the Saint Peter, they make account to be ready by the
last of July, and ride with their yards a Cross.

The two ships of Dunkerke (which have remained long at Lisbon) do make ready
to come away with the Fleet.

By this Letter it appears that they in England now were awake, and confident
of the Spanish invasion* until which time (notwithstanding, the Presidents
daily calling upon them for Men, Munition, and Victuals) they gave a deaf
ear; also he received an other of the same date, a fragment whereof I think
it not unnecessary to relate, as well to show the assurance which was held in
England of the invasion, as the tender care her Majesty's principal Secretary
had of the President, and of the dear affection he bare him.

My dear George, A branch of M. Secretary Cecils Letter to the Lord
President, dated the 12. of August. 1601.
now will I omit all the petty particulars of many things, because the great
storm (which I presume is fallen upon Mounster) drownes all my petty cares,
and wounds my soul for care of you, of whom I know not what to expect, but as
a lost child; for though I know you are not so mad as to run to the enemies
mouths, with a dozen persons in comparison; yet I am desperately afraid that
the Provincials should betray you; even those I mean that must or will seem
to be principally about you, etc.


CHAP. IX.
The cross Accidents which happened to make the Lord Deputy to be offended with
the Lord President. The Lord Deputies Letter to the Lord President* A
satisfactory Letter from the Lord Deputy to the Lord President.
AS is formerly related, The cross accident which happened, to make the Lord
Deputy to be offended with the Lord President.
Sir Francis Barkley being in the Province of Connaght with one thousand Foot
and fifty Horse of the List of Mounster; when the President sent him thither,
among other instructions which he gave unto Sir Francis, was that he should
not (upon any direction) go out of that Province, until he first heard from
him; the reason which moved him to insert this clause into his instructions,
was the confident assurance he had of the Spanish invasion: But yet to prevent
the worst, left the Lord Deputy might peradventure command him to march into
Vlster, or Linster; he presently dispatched a Letter to the Lord Deputy,
signifying unto him, what direction he had given unto Barkley, and the reasons
that moved him unto it, beseeching his Lordship to allow thereof: But see the
mischief, before the Presidents Letters came to the Lord Deputies hands, he
had sent Captain Henry Cosby with a peremptory commandment to Sir Francis
Barkley, to march to Ballisheman in Vlster: Sir Francis being perplexed what
course to take, at last resolved to obey his instructions, hoping that the Lord
President would be able to make his peace with the Lord Deputy; but so slow
and negligent was the Presidents Messenger (which afterward was excused by
sickness) as the Lord Deputy had received Sir Francis Barklies refusal,
before he had knowledge of the Presidents Letters: whereupon he stormed at
the President, and dispatched presently his Letters to the Lords of the
Council, complaining of the President, not sparing to tell them, that rather
then he would undergo so great an indignity (by any man that served
underneath him) he would quit his government: And at the same time it fell out
so crossely, that another accident did no less move the Deputy to be enraged
then the former; for of the two thousand supplies which were to come into
Mounster, the President (to give contentment to many worthy men, that without
charge had followed him in the former services) had obtained from the Lords in
England, that six hundred of them should be bestowed upon such as he should
make choice of, to be their Captains; this added to that aforementioned, did
so much increase his Lordships indignation to the President, (whereunto many
ill disposed, to increase the flame gave fuel) as his Lordship wrote this
ensuing Letter to the President.

The Lord Deputies Letter to the Lord President.
MY Lord, as I have hitherto borne you as much affection, and as truly as ever
I did profess it unto you; and I protest rejoiced in all your good successes
as mine own; so must you give me leave, since I presume I have so just cause,
to challenge you of unkindnesse and wrong, in writing into England, that in
preferring your Followers, Sir Henry Dockwray has had more power from me then
your self; and consequently, to solicit the Queen to have the nomination of
some Captains in this kingdom: for the first I could have wished you would
have been better advised, because upon mine honor, he never without my
special warrant, did ap^oint but one, who I after displaced, and I do not
remember that ever since our coming over, I have denied any thing, which you
have recommended unto me, with the mark of your own desire to obtain it; and
in your Province I have not given any place (as I think) but at your instance.
For the other, I think it is the first example, that ever any under an other
General, desired or obtained the like sui^e. And although I will not speak
injuriously of your deserts, nor immodestly of mine own; yet this disgrace
cannot make me believe, that I have deserved worse then any that have been
Generals before me: But since it is the Queens pleasure, I must endure it, and
you choose a fit time to obtain that or anything else against me: Yet I will
concur with you in the service, as long as it shall please her Majesty to
employ us here: but afterward, I doubt not but to give you satisfaction that I
am not worthy of this wrong: The Council and my self upon occasion of
extraordinary consequence, sent for some of the Companies of Mounster out of
Connaght, when we heard you were to be supplied with two thousand out of
England, but we received from them a flat denial to come, and the copy of
your Letter to warrant them therein. If you have any authority from the Queen
to countermand mine, you may very well justify it, but it is more then you
have vowed to me to have, when I (before my coming over) protested unto you,
that if you had, I would rather serve the Queen in prison, then here. My Lord
these are great disgraces to me, and so conceived, and I think justly, by all
that know it, which is and will be very shortly all Ireland. My allegiance, and
own honor are now engaged with all my burdens, to go on in this work,
otherwise no fear should make me suffer thus much; and what I do, it is
only love does move me unto it: For I know you are dear to one, whom I am
bound to respect with extraordinary affection. And so my Lord I wish you well,
and will omit nothing (while I am in this kingdom) to give you the best
contentment I can, and continue as,

Your assured Friend Mountioye.

In this mean time, before these storms came to the Presidents knowledge (for
yet he had not received the Lord Deputies sharp Letter, hoping that the time
of the Spaniards coming, would admit Sir Francis his Regiment some longer
absence, sent him word to march to Ballishenan, or elsewhere (as it pleased the
Deputy) and withal by his Letters, he acquainted his Lordship of his
directions, and beseeched his Lordship to have a care of Mounster, which he
was no way able (his places of Garrison guarded) with his small forces
remaining, to confront Terrill, and the Vlster aides, then ready to enter into
it, much less to defend the Cities of Cork, Limerick, and Water^ord against
the Spaniards, whose arrival he daily expected: After this second dispatch to
the Lord Deputy, the President received his Lordships thundering Letters; but
when the Lord Deputy by his answer saw, how much he was mistaken, and had
well considered upon what good ground the Presidents instructions were given to
Sir Francis Barkley, and also that he had retrenched the same before he knew
that his Lordship had sent for them: And that although he had gotten the
favor to bestow six of the Companies that came out of England, he knew that
they could stand no longer then he pleased, and so left them to be disposed of
at his will, he not only blamed himself, but wrote a satisfactory, kindly
unto him, which to show the good nature of that Nobleman, I think I should
do him wrong if I did not relate it.

A satisfactory Letter from the Lord Deputy to the Lord President.
MY Lord, if my Letter did express some more then ordinary passion, I will now
desire you, if you have any opinion of my judgment or honesty, to believe me,
that at that time I had so much reason to be so moved, as I presume, when I
next speak with you, I shall induce you to confess, that my expostulation did
neither proceed from undervaluing you, or overvaluing my self, private respect
to my own ends, vanity in desire of preheminences, nor lightness, or evil
nature in quitting slightly so worthy a friend; and if I can farther persuade
you by the effect it took with me, I protest the miserable tragedy of those I
held here my dearest friends, the unkindnesse I took by their showing
themselves my most mortal enemies, the danger that I knew they brought my
fortune into, nor any thing which has been much, that has happened to me since
my coming into this kingdom, did ever so much move me, as this, and the
circumstances that did accompany it; the which being unfit to be trusted either
to paper, or at the least to this passage; I will reserve for my own defense
till I speak with you, or may send a more safe and assured Messenger unto you,
and so leave my case, Sub judice, but in the mean time absolve you from any
wrong or unkindne^^e you have done me, with this assurance, that the desire you
show to give me satisfaction, has, and shall increase that affection I have
borne you; and in the world you shall not find for ever hereafter a more just,
and sure friend and this much for your own sake, but for his unto whom I know
you are so dear, I am so much in my heart a servant to the worthiness that
he has showed in his kindness unto me; that if he should desire me, to
traile a Pike under a far meaner friend unto him then you; I would do it
willingly, because my fortune does otherwise so little enable me, to show my
thankfulness unto him, and this I do not write out of my base observation of
his fortune; but upon my Christianity, I do acknowledge him to have deserved
more of me, then all the world besides, and I do truly think him to be the
most honorable man, that ever (in this unworthy world) my fortune was to have
any thing to do withal. And therefore noble Lord, of all these things I will
write as I have read in my dunses of Logic, Sustine pro nunc* Only I beseech
you dispose of the Companies, and all things else to your liking* which shall
be (I assure you) to mine, but to the great trouble I have in hand, I must
confess, was never more pusselled in my Councels, for many just respects; but
especially by an intelligence I have received this day: And if I would like
Diogenes, take a Candle in my hand, to seek a wise man in this kingdom, unto
whose judgment I would trust to assist mine (in the case in question) I know
not where I should find any except it be you; and therefore if it be possible,
send me word, where I may speak with you presently, though I come as far or
farther then Kilkenny, for I would feign resolve with you of all, and jointly
with you make a present dispa^ch into England; I pray dispatch a speedy
Messenger, though it be a Horseman, and I will lea^e all things so, as I will
be prepared to go on a sudden, and so I commit you to God, whom I beseech to
send us a happy meeting:

The fifth of September, 1601. Your most assured Friend Mountioye.


What an opinion of wisdom and worthiness the President had now gained by
his painful and politic proceedings, I cannot but remember, the same being
acknowledged by so many and worthy persons of her Majesty's Privy Council:
for if that be vera laus which proceeds a viro laudato; or if that rule of
Aristotle be true, viz. That thing is justly to be preferred, quod a pluribus
and sapientissimis approbatur, then may I without flattery conclude, that his
dese^^s were Honorable, and his wisdom was in such great esteem, as his
Counsels were so well allowed of the Lords of the Council, as never doubt
was made of them, and all things concerning that Province was left to his
discretion, as occasions with their circumstances happened.

Lastly, the Lord Deputy, whose judgment was second to none for the
prosecution of the war in Ireland, being now mightily distracted betwixt the
Northren prosecutions, and the Spanish preparations, did write to the
President, that there was no man, that could so well assist him in this
doleful case, and upon whose judgment he would so much rely (in all that
kingdom) as upon his, and therefore requested him earnestly, to repair
speedily to Kilkenny, (near to his Province) for so ^arre would he come to
meet him.

CHAP. X.
Intelligence of the Spanish invasion. Two thousand Foot sent to the Lord
Pr^side^^. The Spanish Fleet discovered at Sea by Captain Love, whereof the
Lord President advertised the Lord Deputy. The Lord Pr^sident makes a Journey
to the Lord Deputy. The Lord Deputy and the Lord ^resident meet at Leighlyn.
Sir Charles Wilmot advertis^th the Lord President of the discovery of the (...)
fl^^te, at the mo^th of the Haven of Cork. The Spaniards ^and at Kinsale. A
Proclamation made in Kinsale by Don Iuan de Aquila, to give contentment to the
Inhabitants. A list of the Captains in the Spanish Army. Don Iuan his
Certificate into Spain after his l^nding at Kin^ale.
THE President addressed himself forthwith to attend his Lordship, but was
suddenly stopped by a double occasion. First Sir Francis Barkley being at
Galway with one thousand Foot, Intelligence of the Spanish invasion.
and fifty Horse of the Mounster forces, sent him certain word, that a
Spanish ship was landed at Sleigo, which brought assured news that six
thousand men were assembled in Spain ready to be imbarqued, and with the
first wind to come for Ireland, Two thousand Foot sent into Ireland to the
Lord President.
which caused him to recall the said Sir Francis Barkley again into Mounster,
and Sir Charles Wilmot from Kerry, and to take order for the two thousand
supplies, that were now landed out of England; and before he could fully
determine these affairs, there arrived one Captain Thomas Love at Cork
Haven, in the West of Ireland, who sent him word by Letter dated the thirteenth
of September, 13. Septem.
that he had been upon the Coast of Spain in a small man of war, and had
discryed five and forty sail of the Spanish fleet at Sea, to the north of
Capefinister, standing to the Northward, The Spanish fleet discovered at Sea
by Captain Love, whereof the Lord President advertised the Lo. Deputy.
by which he conjectured, that they shaped their course for Ireland; whereupon
the President sent a speedy dispatch to the Lord Deputy, being then at
Kilkenny, certifying his Lordship, by what sudden occurrents he was diverted
from his intended journey, where receiving notice thereof (having for a short
time reposed himself there) returned toward Dublin: These rumors being now
noysed throughout all Ireland, every man was in daily expectation of the
Spanish fleet, and no sooner could there a ship appear upon the Coast, but
presently it was supposed to be a Spaniard* but there none appeared before the
seventeenth of the same Month, Sept. 17.
which the Lord President perceiving, and that the winds still were contrary,
and the weather very stormy and tempestuous, remembering how ea^^estly the
Deputy solicited his Company, for causes very important, The Lord President
takes his Journey toward the Lo. Deputy.
appoynting Sir Charles Wilmot Governor of Cork; and having set all things in
good order as the time would permit; notwithstanding the indisposition of his
body being very much distempered, at that time with long and weary journies,
made toward the Deputy, and through weakness not able to pass beyond
Leighlin, there he stayed, advertising the Lord Deputy (who was then at
Rheban of his being there, which was the nineteenth of September: 19. Sept.
His Lordship being very glad of his coming, when he least expected his
Company repaired unto him; after congratulations, The Lord Deputy and the L.
President meet at Leighlin.
his Lordship consulted with the President, about such services as he thought
most necessary at that time, in which consultation they spent some hours; and
that night they went to Kilkenny, both of them being lodged by the Earl of
Ormond in his house. The morrow being the twentieth of that month of
September, 20. Sept.
toward night, the Sovereign of Kinsale sent a Messenger to Sir Charles
Wilmot then in Cork, with Letters importing that there was a fleet of five
and forty ships discovered from the old head of Kinsale, 23. Sept.
and that they were past the river of Kinsale, bea^^ng toward the harbor of
Cork, Sir Charles Wilmot advertiseth the L. President of the discovery of the
Spanish fleet at the mo^th of the Haven of Cork.
the Inhabitants likewise at Cork Harbor, brought him word that the said
fleet was discovered before that Havens mouth, and ready as they thought to put
into it: Sir Charles incontinently dispatched a Horseman with Letters to the
President who came unto him the three and twentieth, and also sends for all
the forces of the Province, and Gentlemen of the Country, to repair unto him.
The Spaniards being close at the Havens mouth, the wind suddenly scanted,
whereupon they tacked about, and made for Kinsale. Within the Town Captain
William Saxeys Company lay then in garrison; but because the Town was of small
strength, unable to withstand so powerful an Enemy, order was given to Sir
Charles Wilmot that they should quit the same, and retraite to Cork. Upon the
three and twentieth of this instant, the Enemy landed their forces in the haven
of Kinsale, 23. Sept.
and marched with five and twenty Colors toward the Town; The Spaniards
land at Kinsale.
upon their approach the Townsmen not being able to make resistance (if they
had been willing thereunto) set open their Gates, and permitted them, without
impeachment or contradiction to enter the Town: The Sovereign with his white
rod in his hand, going to billet, and cease them in several houses, more ready
then if they had been the Queens forces.

To encourage them to persevere, to banish fear, and to win their love by
gentle and mild usage, Don Iuan de Aquila, the Spanish General, promised this
which insueth, published the same, and confirmed it with his hand and Seal,
which is thus Englished.

A Proclamation made in Kinsale by Don Iuan de Aquila, to give contentment to
the Inhabitants of Kinsale*
We Don Iuande Aquila, General of the Army to Philip King of Spain; by
these presents do promise, that all the Inhabitants of the Town of Kinsale,
shall receive no injury by any of our retinew, but rather shall be used as our
brethren and friends, and that it shall be lawful for any of the Inhabitants
that list to transport, without any molestation in body or goods, and as much
as shall remain, likewise without any hurt.

Don Iuan de Aquila.

For testimony, that the forces which the said Spanish General, were no less,
but rather more then is reported; I thought it not impertinent for the Readers
better satisfaction, to set down the names of all the Commanders, Officers,
and Captains that landed with him at Kinsale, and afterward.

The names of the Spanish Commanders and Captains.
Don Iuan de Aquila Maestro del Campo General. A List of the Captains of the
Spanish Army.
Don francisco de Padilla maestro del Campo, Antonio Centeno maestro del Campo.
Capitan Don Pedro Morijon. Captain Francisco de Pinuoll. Captain Pedro Munnez
de Xaer. Captain Miguel Caxa de Cuellar. Captain Andres Leal. Captain Don
Luis de Vela. Captain Don Gomez de Vargas. Captain Don Pedro Zuazo. Captain
Saint Vincente. Captain Don Gasper de Guevarra. Captain Diego Gonzales
Sigler. Captain Marcos de Porras. Captain Cascarro. Captain Don Philippo de
Camonde. Captain Pedro de Chauves. Captain Don Diego de Viezina. Captain
Luis de Carrera. Captain Francisco de Muniosa. Captain Pedro Enriques de
Tejada. Captain Don Christouall de Ayala. Captain Iuan Ymonez de Carata.
Captain Alonso de Zaramelle. Captain Don Pedro de O Campo. Captain Luis Diaz
de Navarra. Captain Alonso de Motina. Captain Diego Palomeque. Captain
Maldonado. Captain Iosepho Escobar. Captain Antonio de Tufo Italiano.
Captain Orlando Italiano. Captain Christouall de Cardenosa. Captain Y
quartel Maestro Miguel Briena. Captain Diego de La Villa. Captain Hernando
Borragan. Captain De O Campo. Captain Francisco Ruiz de Vellasco. Captain
Pedro de Saavedra. Captain Graneros. Captain Andreas de Arve. Captain
Albornoz. Captain Martin Ruyz Sarjento Mayor. Captain Luis de Aquila Sarjento
Mayor. Pedro Lopes de Soto Veador Y Contador de la infanteria. Iuan Ocho a
Devasterra Contador de La Artilleria. Diego Ruyz de Salazar Pagador.
After that Don Iuan was landed and settled in the Town of Kinsale, by the
shipping which returned, he sent into Spain a relation of his present estate,
which is as follows, translated out of the Original under his own hand.

A Discourse of the estate wherein Don Iuan de Aquila does remain, with the
appointment of such things as he advertiseth to be needful or his succor,
and good effect of his voyage; translated out of a Spanish discourse.
ON the first of October he arrived at the Haven of Kinsale, Stilo novo.
and the day following, Don Iuan Don Iuan his Certificate into Spain after his
landing in Kinsale.
landed all his Soldiers; whereof framing two squadrons, he marched toward
the said Town, out of which there issued fifty Foot and forty Horse, who
leaving the place free, went toward the Town of Cork; the persons of better
sort going with them, with all their goods; whereupon there were presently sent
in two Companies, and the day following entered all the rest of the Army, and
lodged there, to the end to shelter the Troops and munitions under covert,
although with great straightness, the place containing not above two hundred
houses.

The seat and foundation of Kinsale is in a side of a River, environed with
hills, and without any kind of defense, in so much as Don Iuan is of the mind,
if the Enemy should come (to quarter himself near his front) to try his
fortune, because otherwise he should not be able to make good the place.

There were disembarqued two Field-Peeces, and two Demie-Cannons, leaving the
rest of the Artillery unlanded, not having Munition sufficient for so much
Artillery, for that the Powder and Match which remains is little, and the
greater quantity came wett, as well as not to be encombred with so much
Artillery, without Horses to draw it, since that with the next succors may be
sent Munition enough.

There is in the middle of the Haven of Quinsale, a certain (almost an) Island,
on the which it seems good to Don Iuan to have a Fort made, to secure and
defend the Haven; yet is there no convenient place to do it: for on the part
that looks toward the place, an Arm of the Sea divides it from the land,
continued somewhat upwards into the land, without having Pinnaces, Boats, or
other means to cross it: and for that the Town Quinsale is of so great a
Seat, and open in so many parts, and so weak, that it is needful to have
half the Troops in guard at least, whenever they should be forced to draw
out to some good effect, which notwithstanding would not be in good security,
the place (almost an Island) not having sufficient water, nor is there any place
of those adjacent, that yields means to fortify it, so that it is necessary
to go elsewhere for it, having here nothing to make Cisterns nor Pinnases for
a passage, or to bring bavins and faggots, the River being somewhat farther
upwards into the land.

He sent to tell Don Diego Brochero, that because the way remained so ill, he
should assist him before he went, in causing to be disimbarqued the Bisquet,
and afterward, that all the boats should make three or four voyages for
bavins or gabions, whereof he had great need; the River as is aforesaid, being
somewhat far above, he answered that he could not attend to this, or
disimbarque the Biskets which came in the hulke, which were there, but to
return presently, and so with great haste caused the munitions to be landed,
which they left upon the shore, without account or reason; the Accounter and
Steward of the Artillery remaining, which would not undertake to account for
it; and such was the haste, that on the dirt and Ooes of the shore they were
ill handled, and wet, as if the Enemy had been already playing with their
Artillery on their ships. So soon as Don Iuan had lodged himself in the
place, he dispatched to the Earls several times, Tyrone. Odonnell.
advising them of his arrival; yet in nine days that passed until I was
dispatched into Spain, they received no answer: There is from Kinsale to the
place where the Earls abide seventie five Leagues; the naturals of the
Country report the forces of the Earls to be much less then was given out
to us, and that the Enemy does hold them in with forts: The enemies have drawn
together all their Cattle and Corn, and with their Cavallerie break the
Mils, and because we have no Horse, they presume to come every day up to our
Walls, not being able to avoid or hinder it; notwithstanding our sallies against
them, insomuch that from without, we receive neither flesh nor any other
thing, except some few Cowes from the poor people of the place, which they
sell the rather unto us, because we pay them what they demand, yet within few
days there would be no flesh had, by reason of the English, who have
engrossed and gathered the Crets together, and burned the houses of the
naturals.

Don Iuan does procure to draw from the Country people, by love and rewards
all that he can; yet withal this, finds no assistance from them, neither
dare they declare themselves, and the greater part have no will, seeing the
small forces which have been landed, but seeing that there are more, they will
be still coming, and some of them receive pay, it is very re quisit to pay
them and arm them; because till now many of them are past to the Enemy: Since
the writing of this by Don Iuan de Aquila, there came a spy from Cork, where
the Enemy does join together, who says that the Viceroy had already together
more then four thousand Foot and four or five hundred Horse, and that the
Queen of England had received advertisement of the coming of the Spaniards
into Ireland, whereupon were great preparations made for the expulsing them;
the Soldiers which were disimbarqued, marched to the number of three thousand
and four hundred; besides those which came in a hulke, now arrived three
Leagues from hence, but making a squadron of them, there was a less number
found, so that it is thought fit to take the first muster with much rigor,
taking note of the boys, and such besides of the rest as are Besognies, who
not knowing the use of their Piece, nor how to discharge them, are drawn out
to exercise their Arms daily, many fall sick, and are already more then one
hundred: It is fit that the succor which his Majesty means to send, should
be dispatched with speed, because the Enemy may not have power to engage the
places which Don Iuan has designed to fortify: It should be a matter of
great importance, and the Whole for Horse, by reason of the difference of the
Cavallerie, which comes out of England and that of the Earls, for all that
can be leavied in Ireland, or that they have are small Horses, and the
Soldiers are unarmed, which do only fight with half Pikes, and Saddles
without stirrops.

Of powder and matches as is aforesaid, there is small store, so that it is
necessary to send some good quantity together with Lead, because there passed
but little.

Bisquet and some wine is necessary for the sustenance of our Troops, because
there came not such a quantity of Bisquet as his Majesty commanded, and was
not more then for two Months or little more.

It is likewise convenient, that there come a great sum of money, for it
imports much to pay well, for want whereof, there rise no disorders, that of
friends we gain not enemies.

That others may come in the place of the Accounter, and overseer that brought
us to the Groyne.

It is convenient to send two Doctors, because there is none in the regiment of
Spaniards.

Likewise that an Auditor General be sent to serve here, because there is
none.

It behooveth also to send Carpenters and Smiths, or Farriers being very
necessary.

And that his Majesty be served, that there might remain here three or fo^re
ships to give advise of whatsoever shall succeed, there being none left here at
this present.

The next day after Don Iuan was landed, Sir Charles Wilmot sent Captain
Francis Slingesby with his ^oote Company, and Sir Anthony Cooks Horse, with
directions to take the best view he could of their fleet and forces, who at
his coming thither, found them possessed both of the Town of Kinsale, and of
the Castle of Rincorran near adjoining unto it; and to bid him welcome, they
drew forth a Company or two of Foot, and a skirmish for a little space was
entertained, wherein there were some hurt, but none slain; Captain Slingsby
having performed his directions returned to Cork.


CHAP. XI.
Second Letters from Sir Charles Wilmot of the arrival of the Spaniards in
Kinsale. Debate in Council what w^^ meetest for the Lord Deputy to do. The
Lord Deputy assented to the Lord Presidents advise. The Lord Presidents
providence. A dispatch into England of the Spaniards arrival. The Lord Deputy
goes with the Lord President into Mounster. None of the Provincials of
Mounster did adhere to the Spaniards as their first landing. The report of a
Master of a Scottish Barque concerning the strength of the Spaniard. Captain
Flower sent to view Kinsale. Direction given for the burning of the Corn near
Kinsale. A Letter from the Archbishop of Dublin, and Don Iuan de Aquila unto
Tyrone and O Donnell. The Lord Deputy and Lord President etc. went to view the
Town of Kinsale. The Lord Deputy with the Army marched toward Kinsale.
AT the instant when Sir Charles Wilmots Letters of the Spaniards arrival came
to Kilkenny, which was upon the three and twentieth of September, as before
mentioned; the Lord Deputy, the Earl of Ormond, the Lord President, Sir
Richard Wingfielde Marshall of the Army of Ireland, and Sir Robert Gardener the
chief Justice, were in Council, advising what course was fittest to take if
the Spaniards should land: But now Sir Charles Wilmots Letters gave them cause
to advise what should be done, they being landed, and to confirm the same;
while they were in Council, second Letters came from Sir Charles Wilmot,
Second Letters from Sir Charles Wilmot of the arrival of the Spaniards at
Kinsale.
and the Major of Cork, that the Spaniards had quitted the harbor of Cork,
and were all at an Anchor in the haven of Kinsale: The question was then, what
the Lord Deputy should do: The Earl of Ormond, the Marshall, and the chief
Justice were of opinion, that he should do well to hasten to Dublin, and
there to assemble his forces together; It was debated in Council upon the
receipt of the Letters aforesaid, what was meetest for the Lord Deputy to do.
and whilst they were drawing to a head, to give order for supplies, of
victuals and munitions to be sent to Cork; and that the President should
presently be dispatched into the Province, to defend the City of Cork,
until the Lord Deputy came to his relief, wherein all expedition was to be
used; for their reasons were, that if the Lord Deputy presented himself in
the Province with small forces, it would encourage the Enemy, and put distrust
and fear in the Provincials, which were either well affected or neutrals.

The Presidents advise was opposite to theirs, The Lord President differs in
opinion from the rest.
beseeching the Lord Deputy to go presently into Mounster, although he had no
more then his Page with him; for said he, if the Provincials shall see that you
turn your back toward them, they will conceive it proceeds of want of force,
and then undoubtedly a general revolt will ensue, but when they shall see you
personally amongst them, that doubt will be removed; and besides, the Army
(now dispersed) will make more haste after you, then they would do if you
attended their coming to Dublin.

The Lord Deputy inclined to the Presidents Council, The Lord Deputy assented
to the L^. Presidents advise.
but said he, what should I do there, not being able to mainetaine the Army
with victuals for the space of a week, nor to furnish it with munitions, of
both which there is no remain in the Magazines in Dublin: The President willed
him to take no care for those wants, for he would furnish him, and the whole
Army for two or three months, which indeed he was able to do, The
providence of the Lo^d President.
for he had spared the expense of victuals, not consuming so much as a
Bisquet, for more then six months, giving the Soldiers money, and having
been evermore confident of the Spaniards arrival, had procured good supplies
of munitions, which were frugally and sparingly issued: The Lord Deputy like
unto one that was overjoyed with such unexpected provisions, rose from his
Chair, embraced the President, and said, that if he had not been more then
provident, that himself did not know what to have done, and that his honor
had been endangered, and ascribed to him what he well deserved.

In conclusion the four and twentieth, the Marshall Sir Henry Davers, 24. Sept.
and Sir John Barkley were dispatched into Linster and to Armaghe, to assemble
the Army, and to bring it withal possible expedition into Mounster, and
Letters were dispatched to Sir Charles Wilmot to be well upon his guard, and
dispatches sent into England by Captain John Roberts of the Spaniards
arrival: A dispatch into England of the Spaniards arrival.
All things being thus ordered, doubt was made how the Lord Deputy could be
conveyed safely to Cork, being attended by no other then his household
servants in that dangerous time, The Lord Deputy goes with the Lord Prsident
into Mounster.
which was satisfied by the President, who had then with him there one hundred
Horse, and for the furnishing of the Lord Deputies house at Cork, with stuff
and vtensils he undertook the care. The same day the Lord Deputy and
President, Sir Robert Gardener departed from Kilkenny, and the same night they
lodged at Kilkenan the Lord Dunboynes house, the next night at Clonmell, the
six and twentieth at Glanogher the Lord Roches house, 26. Sept.
and the next day following they came to Cork.

Now are we come to siege of Kinsale, a place ordained, wherein the honor and
safety of Queen Elizabeth, the reputation of the English nation, the cause of
Religion, and the Crown of Ireland must be by Arms disputed; for upon the
successes of this siege, as these great and important consequences depended:
And here the malice of Rome and Spain (if they had prevailed) would not have
ceased, for their purposes did extend it self; (Ireland having been
conquered) to make it their bridge to have invaded England, the conquest and
ruin whereof was the maine mark, whereat they aimed.

It was generally expected, Not any of the Provincials of Mounster adhered to
the Spaniards at the first landing.
that upon the first landing of the Spaniards, that the greatest part of
Mounster would have presently relapsed, and have declared themselves Spanish;
but the President had so well established the Province, by the apprehending of
all the Principals which he mistrusted, and by taking good pledges of the
rest; that when the Lord Deputy came to Cork, he presented unto him all the
men of living, and quality in the Province, who stood firm until the coming
of supplies to Castlehaven, as hereafter you shall hear.

The eight and twentieth the Lord President brought the master of a Scottish
bark to the Lord Deputy which came from Lisbon, 28. Sept.
who confidently reported, The report of the master of a Scottish barque
concerning the strength of the Spaniards.
that the Spaniards (when they were embarked for Ireland) were six thousand
strong* And the same day we heard that none of the Irish had repaired to
Kinsale (to tender their service to the Spaniards) but only some dependants of
Florence Mac Carties, and that Don John and his Captains were much grieved
that Florence was sent prisoner into England, of whose restraint they
understood nothing until they were arrived: And also we were advertised, that
at Kinsale five and thirty ships arrived with Don John, and that the rest of
his fleet were driven into Baltimore, having in them seven hundred Soldiers,
and that they brought with them sixteen hundred Saddles, hoping (as they were
promised) to find horses in Ireland, and a great surplus of Arms to furnish
the Irish; and the Companies with Don John, for most part were old Soldiers
taken from the garrisons of Italy, and the Terceras, and that there was but a
few Besognies among them.

The same day 28. Sept.
Captain George Flower (Sergeant Major of the Province of Mounster) was sent
with certain Companies to view the Town of Kinsale, Captain Flower sent to
view Kinsale, where he skirmished with the Spaniards.
to see what countenance the Enemy did hold, he no sooner approached the
Town, but the Spaniards sallied, our men beat them into the Town, and were
so eager in pursuit, as they came to the Port, and would have set fire unto it,
if Flower had not drawn them off; in this skirmish we had some men hurt, and
the Enemy both slain and hurt: Also the same day, certain Companies were
directed to march into Kinaley, The Corn near adjoining to Kinsale burnt by
direction.
to burn and spoil all the corn in that Country, and within five miles of
Kinsale, and to command all the Inhabitants in those parts, to bring their
Cattle on this side the river of Awneboy and Cork, whereby the Enemy should
want relief near unto them.

To hasten the coming of Tyrone and Odonnell, the Spanish Archbishop of
Dublin, and Don Iuan de Aquila wrote unto them as follows.

A Letter from the Archbishop of Dublin, and Don Iuan de Aquila, unto Tyrone
and Odonnell.
PErvenimus in Kinsale, cum class and exercitu, Regis nostri Philippi;
expectamus vestras excellentias qualibet hora, veniant ergo quam velociter
potuerint, portantes equos, quibus maxim indigemus, and jam alia via
scripsimus, non dico plura. valete.

Frater Matheus Archiepiscopus Dublinens.

A Qui estamos guardando a vuestras Senorias illustrissimas Como largamente
otra via hemos escritos, Stil^ novo.


A Dios. 12. October. 1601. Don Iuan de Aquila.
Excellentissimis Dominis Don Oneale and Odonnell.

This day the Lord Deputy, 29 September.
the Lord President and Council, with diverse others went to Kinsale to take a
view thereof, The Lo. Deputy etc. went to view the Town of Kinsale.
and found at their coming thither that the shipping had newly left the
harbor, and were under sail for Spain, so as they saw nothing was further to
be done till the coming of the forces.

The third of October 3. October.
Sir William Fortescu with his Company of Foot, and Sir Benjamin Berry with the
Lord deputies came to Cork.

The Marshall (who was sent from Kilkenny to draw Companies out of the Pale)
came this day with Sir George Bourchier to Cork, 8. October.
where at that time remained the Lord Deputy, the Lord President, Sir Robert
Gardener, and Sir Nicholas Walsh, Counselors, expecting them and others; Sir
John Barkley came that day also.

The Companies came to Cork, 9. October.
that Sir John Barkley had brought with him.

Sir Henry Davers, 10. October.
who was sent for the Forces about Armaghe, came to Cork with Sir Henry
Folliet, captain Blany and diverse other Captains.

Master Marshall and Sir John Barkley with some Horse and Foot went to
Kinsale, to view a fit place to encampe in.

The Companies that Sir Henry Davers went for, 11. October.
came this day to Cork. Some Horse and Foot sent forth to keep the Spaniards
from Victuals.

Two Frenchmen were voluntarily taken, 12. October.
that ran away from the Spaniards, who confessed their numbers to be three
thousand five hundred, besides those that were not yet come in.

It was resolved to take the field, 13. October.
but no great Ordnance came yet to enable us thereunto.

The weather fell out so rainy, 14. 15. October.
as it was unfit to rise.

The Lord Deoutie left Cork, 16. October.
and encamped with the Army at a place called Owneboy, The Lo. Deputy with the
army marched toward Kinsale.
five miles from Kinsale; the Artillery, Munition, and Victuals which were to
come from Dublin was not yet arrived; yet was it thought fit, (being thereof
supplied by the Presidents store) to take the field, rather then the Country
should discover those wants, and so fall away.

CHAP. XII.
The Lord President requires the Towns of Mounster to send Companies of Foot
to the Camp. Don Iuan de Aquila his Declaration in answer of a Proclamation
published by the Lord Deputy and Council. The Army encamped at Knockrobyn
near Kynsale. The enemy attempted to disturb our Quarter, but were repulsed.
A skirmish between us and the Spanyard. Captain Button arrived with Munition
and Victuals. A Skirmish in the night, wherein twenty of the Spaniards were
slain. The Army encamped close to Kynsale. A prey of Cowes taken from the
Spaniards.
THE Lord President (in his providence) before the Army was ready to march to
Kinsale, The L. President required the towns of Mounster to send Companies o^
foot to the Camp.
acquainted the Lo: Deputy, (which he well approoved) that he had sent to
the Cities and great Towns of Mounster, that every of them, (according to
their proportions) should send Companies of Foot from their several
Corporations, to strengthen her Majesty's Army, which they accordingly (but
with some grudging) did perform. This he did, not for any opinion he had to
receive fruit by their services, but their being in the Camp, was a good
Pledge upon the Towns (in these doubtful times) for their better loyalties,
the Lord Deputy not being able to spare any Companies to secure them.

The Lord Deputy and Council, before the Army marched from Cork, doubting
(as they had good cause) that the Priests would leave no practices unattempted,
that might animate or confirm the Irish in their Rebellion, thought it
necessary to give notice to the world, how unjust the pretended causes were,
that the Irish had taken Arms against their true anointed Sovereign; and
also how unjustly the same was maintained by the Pope and the King of Spain,
which by Proclamation was divulged in the City of Cork; In answer whereof
Don Iuan de Aquila (as soon as it came to his ears) did likewise Proclaim
this Declaration, or Apology in Kinsale, and dispersed Copies thereof into
sundry places, the tenor whereof ensues.

Don Iuan de Aquila his Declaration in answer of a Proclamation published by
the Lord Deputy and Council, translated out of the Latin.
DOn Iuan de Aquila, General of the War, and the Catholic King of Spaines
chief Commander in Gods war, which is made in Ireland for defense of the
Faith. To all the Irish Catholics living in Kinsale, the City of Cork, and
in all other Villages, Cities and Castles, wishes health in him who is the
true happiness. There is come unto our ears a Proclamation, or certain
Libell made in the City of Cork, in the Name of the Deputy; which because it
contains many untruths, and such things as offend the ears of honest men,
lest they may lead and seduce the minds of simple men into errors, and turn
them from the truth, I am compelled to show their falsehood, to lay open the
truth, and in few words to signify the pretense and intention of our most
Excellent King Philip, in this War, which is with the Apostolic Authority,
to be administered by us: and (to speak the truth) I could very easily retort
upon them those reproaches which they object to us, and make them lose the
pleasure which they have taken in ill speaking, by hearing of the like;
Notwithstanding, we will not (like unto weak and unarmed women) go to
reproachings* but setting these things aside, answer to those that are objected
with sound truth and Christian modesty.

First of all, ye feign that we would lead away the pretended Subjects of
the Queen of England from their, obedience, to bring them under our yoke,
which is a very untruth; for we endeavor not to persuade any body, that he
should deny due obedience (according to the word of God) to his Prince: But ye
know well that for many years since, Elizabeth was deprived of her kingdom,
and all her Subjects absolved from their fidelity by the Pope, unto whom, he
that reigns in the heavens, the King of Kings, has committed all power, that
he should root up, destroy, plant, and build in such sort, that he may
punish temporal Kings (if it shall be good for the spiritual building) even
to their deposing, which thing has been done in the kingdoms of England and
Ireland, by many Popes, viz. by Pius quintus, Gregory the thirteenth, and now
by Clement the eighth as it is well known. Whose Bulls are extant amongst us;
(I speak to Catholics, not to froward Heretics, who have fallen from the
faith of the (Roman Church) seeing they are blind Leaders of the blind, and
such as know not the grounds of the truth, it is no marvel that they do also
disagree from us in this thing: But our brethren the Catholics, walking in the
pureness of the faith, and yielding to the Catholic Church (which is the very
Pillar of the truth) will easily understand all those things: Therefore it
remains that the Irish (which adhere to us) do work with us nothing that is
against Gods Laws, or their due obedience, nay that which they do is
according to Gods word, and the obedience which they owe the Pope.

Secondly, ye affirm that we Spaniards go about to win the Irish with
allurements, and (...) (which is a thing far from our nature) and that we
do it but for a while; that after we have drawn the minds of simple men unto
us, we might afterward (exercising our truelty toward them) show our bloody
nature* O the immortal God! who does not wonder at your bitter and
unexpressible cruelty, your boldness showed in these words: For who is it that
does not know the great cruelty which you English have exercised, and cease not
to exercise toward the miserable Irish: You I say go about to take from their
souls the Catholic faith which their fathers held, in which consists eternal
life; truly you are far more cruel then Bears and Lions, which take away
the temporal life, for you would deprive them of the eternal and spiritual
life. Who is it that has demolished all the temporalities of this most
flourishing kingdom except the English? look upon this and be ashamed:
whereas on the other side we commiserating the condition of the Catholics
here, have left our most sweet and happy Country Spain, that is replenished
with all good things; and being stirred with their cries, which pierce the
heavens, having reached to the ears of the Pope, and our King Philip: They
have (being moved with pity) at last resolved to send unto you Soldiers,
Silver, Gold, and Arms with a most liberal hand, not to the end they might
(according as they feign) exercise cruelty toward you, O Irish Catholics, but
that you may be happily reduced (being snatched out of the jaws of the
devil, and free from their tyranny) unto your own pristine ingenuitie, and
that you may freely profess the Catholic faith: Therefore my most beloved,
seeing that which you have so many years before desired and begged for, with
prayers and tears; and that now, even now, the Pope Christ's Vicar on earth,
does command you to take Arms for the defense of your faith: I admonish,
exhort, and beseech you all; all I say unto whom these Letters shall come; that
as soon as possibly you can, you come to us with your friends and weapons;
whosoever shall do this, shall find us prepared, and we will communicate unto
them, those things which we possess; And whosoever shall (despising our
wholesome council) do otherwise, and remain in the obedience of the English,
we will persecute him as an Heretic, and a hateful Enemy of the Church even
unto death.

The Army nose and marched within half a mile of Kinsale, 17. Oct.
where they encamped under a hill (having not means to entrench) called Knock
Robbin Captain The Army encamped at Knock-robin near Kinsale.
Morgan came out of England, and Jolly the Master ^unner from Waterford,
whither some shipping was come from Dublin, with part of the provisions, but
enforced to stay there, the wind being Southerly; some few shot offered to
disquiet the Camp, but were soon beaten back with very little disturbance.

The Army lay still there, many places viewed to sit down fitly before the
Town, 18. October.
but the Artillery not yet come, no place was agreed upon.

An other offer made by the Enemy to disturb the Camp that night, much
greater then the former; but being readily answered, were soon repelled
without hurt on our side.

We lay still there expecting the Provisions, 19. October.
some slight skirmishes in viewing of the Town: Sir John Barkley was this
night appointed to give an Alarm to the Town, who beat in all the guards
(without the Town) into their trenches.

This night one thousand of the Spaniards, 20. October.
(or as some that came from them say, The enemy attempted to disturb our
quarter, but were repulsed
fifteen hundred) were come to the top of the Hill near the Camp, to cut off
some of the Scouts or Guards, or to attempt somewhat upon that Quarter; but
being discovered by a party of ours, (not much exceeding two hundred that were
of purpose sent out to lie between the Town and our Camp, commanded by Sir
John Barkley, who had with him Captain Morris) they set upon them, killed
four dead in the place, diverse hurt, took some Arms, and other good spoil,
and beat them back to the Town; without loss of any one of our men, and not
above three hurt.

Cormocke Mac Dermond, 21. October.
chief Lord of a Country called Muskery, coming with his Country rising
out, A skirmish between us and the Spaniards.
to show them to the Lord Deputy, was in his return directed to march hard by
the Spaniards trenches, which they had made upon the Hill without the Town for
their guards, which he was willed to do, the rather that the Spaniards might
see the Irish serve on our sides. For this purpose were good seconds appointed,
yet out of ^ight of the Enemies: The Irish at the first went on well, and beat
the Spaniards from their ground to the Towneward, but according to their
custom soon fell off; by which means a Horseman (called Courcy) of the Lord
Presidents, who had charged two Spaniards upon some advantage, was engaged, and
unhorsed before he espied himself in danger; which Sir William Godolphin
seeing, who had the command of the Lord Deputies Troop, charged one way upon
their whole Numbers, and Captain Henry Barkley, Cornet of the same Troop,
another way at the same instant, and (notwithstanding their many Shot) drane
them out of their Trenches, rescuing the Horseman and horse; and to the marvel
of all the beholders, (considering the multitude of shot made at them, even
upon the edge of the trench) came off without hurt, save only one horse
killed, and one man slightly shot: of the enemies were killed four, left dead
in the place, and diverse seen carried off, besides many other hurt.

Captain Thomas Button, 22. October.
who had the wafting of the victuals with Munition from Dublin with the
Queens Pinnace, Capt. Button arrived with munition and victual.
the Moon, arrived at Cork, and came to the Lord Deputy at the Camp,
signifying the rest of the Shipping was coming from Dublin, that had layen at
Waterford: He was that night sent away to bring his Ship about into the Harbor
of Kinsale, and with Captain Wards ship, which was directed to accompany him,
whom we were enforced to make use of before to guard that Victual and
Munition in Oyster Haven, which we had brought with us from Cork, they were
willed to try if they could annoy the Castle of Rincorran, seated close upon
the Harbor, and possessed by the Spanyard. But after they had spent many shot
upon the Castle, and found they did them little hurt, their Ordnance being but
small, they lay still only to keep the Harbor, that neither the Castle nor
the Town might be relieved by water, which was the chief cause of their
sending thither, and which Captain Thomas Button, notwithstanding many
attempts made by the Spaniards and Natives, very valiantly to his high
commendations performed.

We had News of the shipping that came after Captain Button from Waterford,
23. October.
that they were put into the Harbor at Cork, who presently had direction to
work about to another Creake, More Munition and victual arrived.
called Oyster Haven, lying between Cork and Kinsale, from whence they might
more commodiously unlade their Artillery and provisions, for the speedy use of
the Army.

We resolved to rise and lie before the Town; 24. October.
but the shipping being not yet come about with the Artillery, and other
necessaries, that day was spent in dispatching into England, and making all
things fit to remove. This night Captain Blaynie, and Captain Flower were
sent out with five hundred Foot upon Discovery that the Spaniards were drawn
out of the Town, and so lay ready for them, if they had come toward our
Quarter, but they came not on.

The Army was ready to rise, 25. October.
but the weather falling out very foul, direction was given to dislodge: four
natural Spaniards came this day from the Enemy, choosing rather to put
themselves upon the mercy of the State, then to live under the tyranny of
their own Commanders, A skirmish in the night, wherein 20 of the Spaniards were
slain.
who the next day were sent to Cork. This night Sir John Barkley went out with
some three hundred Foot, having with him Captain Flower, Captain Morris, and
Captain Bostock, out of these were chosen sixty Pikes and Targets, to be the
better undiscovered, who fell into their trenches, beat them to the Town, and
fell into the Gate with them, they killed and hurt above twenty of the
Spaniards, between the Inner and the owter Gate, and returned having but three
hurt.

The Army dislodged early, 26. October.
and encamped on a hill on the North side before Kinsale called the Spittle,
The Army enca^ped close to Kinsale. A prey of Ki^^ taken from the Spaniards.
somewhat more then musket shot from the Town, and there entrenched strongly:
when we sat down, we discovered that the Spaniards had gotten a prey of two
or three hundred Cowes, and many sheep, which were (in an Island as it seemed)
upon the Southside of the Town beyond the water, which we could not come at,
but by sending eight or nine miles about, where there was a neck of Land to
go into it; Captain Taffe being sent with Horse and Foot, used such
expedition in that business, as he attained the place before night, and by
hot skirmish recovered the prey, save only some two hundred Cowes that the
Spaniards had killed, although they were under the guard of a Castle, called
Castle Ny Park, which the Spaniards had manned to defend those Cattle.


CHAP. XIII.
The Castle of Rincorran guarded by the Spaniards, besieged; and the Spaniards
repulsed. The Castle of Rinco^ra^ battered by the Lord President. A remarkable
skirmish between us and the Spaniards that attempted to rel^^ue Rincorran. The
Lord Awdley, Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn, and Sir Garret Harvy hurt. A Spanish
Commander taken prisoner. The Enemy demanded a parley, but the Lord President
refused to treat with the Messenger. The Commander parlied, but his offers were
not accepted. The Enemy endeavored to make an escape, wherein many were s^aine
and taken prisoners. Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn sent from the Lord Deputy with
direction to the Lord President. The reasons that induced the Lord President to
receive the Spaniards that were in Rincorran to mercy. The agre^ment between
the Lord President, and the Spanish Commander that was in Rincorran.
We attended all that day for the landing of the Artillery, 27. October.
and perfected the intrenchment about the Army, which was left unperfected the
day before through the extreme fowlenesse of the weather; and at night Sir
John Barkley, Sir William Godolphin, and Captain Bodly were sent to view the
most commodious place to plant the Artillery, for the battering of the Castle
of Rincorran, which was situated upon the River of Kinsale, The castle of
Rincorran guarded by the Spaniards
something more then a quarter of a mile from the Town, very convenient to
forbid our shipping to ride near the same, wherein Don John de Aquila the
Spanish General, had placed a Captain with one hundred and fifty Soldiers,
whom he promised to relieve if they were assailed, or bring them off in boats.

The two Culverings were landed, 28. October.
and all means used to mount them, but it could not be done till the next
day, so ill was every thing fitted, by reason there had been no use of them of
a long time.

These two Pieces were mounted, 29. October.
and all things put in a readiness to batter the next day, The Spaniards
repulsed.
the Spaniards in the Town discovering our purpose, did that night assay to
relieve the Castle by Boats, and were valiantly repelled by Captain Button,
with shot out of his ship.

30. October.
The two Culverings began to play upon the Castle of Rincorran, The Castle of
Rincorran besieged.
but within two or three shot the carriage of the better Culvering brake, and
about two of the clock in the afternoon, the other received a flawe, and by
that means made unserviceable, so all that could be done that day, was to
mount the whole Culvering upon her carriage.

The same day they gave an Alarm to our Camp, drawing Artillery out of the
Town, and with it played into our Camp, killed two near the Lord Deputies tent
with a Demi Cannon shot, and through the next tent to it, brake two Hogsheads
of the Lord Deputies beer, The Spaniards repulsed by Sir Richard Percy.
and every shot that was made fell still in the Lord Deputies quarter near his
own tent. Don Iuan de Aquila perceiving the Castle would be distressed,
attempted to relieve it by Boats, but Sir Richard Percy beat them off, who had
the command of the Lord Presidents regiment, that this night was appointed to
guard.

The Culvering in the morning began to play, 31. October.
and about nine of the clock, The castle of Rancorran battered by the Lo.
President.
the Demi Culvering was mounted, which after a few shot brake her Axeltree;
before three she was remounted, and by that time a Cannon likewise planted, and
all the three Pieces without intermission played: The Lord President misliking
the manner of the making of the battery, not being constantly made upon one
place, but upon the Spikes of the Castle, requested the Lord Deputy to leave
that service to his care, whereunto he easily assented.

To show that he was well experienced in the profession of a Cannonier,
wherein he had been (by reason of his employments) long practiced, he
performed the office of a Master-gunner, making some shot, and that the
Artillery might play as well by night as day, himself did take and score out
his ground-markes, and with his Quadrant took the true level, so as the want
of daylight was no hindrance; but in doing thereof he fairly escaped two
Musket shot: for as he was standing at the Breech of a Cannon busy about his
work, the one lighted upon the muzzle of the Piece, the other upon the
Carriage close to the Trunnions: While we were busy attending the Battery, A
fair escape.
five hundred of the principal men drew out of Kinsale, with show to go to
relieve Rincorran by land, toward a guard we kept between Rincorran and the
Town, leaving a great gross for the seconds under the walls, and under that
color to gain a safe passage for their Boats thither; whereupon out of the
Regiments (being then in Arms in the Camp) diverse broken Companies drew that
way, among which Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn sent Captain Roe his Lieutenant
Colonel, A remarkable skirmish between us and the Spaniards that attempted to
relieve Rincorran.
and Sir Arthur Savages Lieutenant with one hundred men, and seeing them likely
to draw on a round Skirmish, took thirty Shot of his own Company, and went
up to them, where he found Captain Roe, and Carbery, (Lieutenant to Captain
Thomas Butler) skirmishing with Shot, the Enemy being hard by them with some
two hundred men, and another gross near toward the Town to second them. The
Lord Audley who drew some of his Regiment out of the Camp, was then coming
up; as soon as Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn came where the skirmish was, he saw the
Enemies drawing up to give a charge, coming close with their Pikes, whom they
presently encountered, and beat them back toward their seconds, and made them
retreat apace; Notwithstanding they played upon them with their small shot out
of every house in that quarter of the Town, being full of Towers and Castles.

In this Charge, Sir Oliver received on his Target and Body diverse thrusts with
the Pike, whereof one gave him a very small hurt in the thigh; he killed a
Leader, and one other with his own hands. The Lord Audley coming up to the
charge, was shot through the thigh, The Lord Awdley, Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn and
Sir Garret Harvy hurt.
Sir Garret Harvie hurt in the hand, and his horse killed under him, Captain
Butlers Lieutenant was slain, and four other, Sir Arthur Savages Lieutenant
shot through the Body, and thirty other hurt; the Enemy left ten or eleven
dead in the place, besides those that were hurt, which in all likelihood were
many, by reason of the neernesse of the shot; and as one reports, (that came
the next day from Kinsale, and had bin in the Ghesthouse amongst them) 70 were
brought thither hurt, whereof eight dyed that night: In this skirmish was taken
prisoner Iuan Hortensio de Contreras, A Spanish Commander taken prisoner
that had been Sergeant Major of the forces in Brittany, and diverse very good
Arms, and Rapiers gotten from the Spaniards.

All this while the three Pieces played upon the Castle, until six of the
clock at night, at which time they in the Castle founded the Drum, The Enemy
demands a parley, but the Lo. President refused to treat with the messenger.
and prayed admission of parley, which the Lord President, (whom the Lord
Deputy had left there, himself returning to take care of the Camp) accepted,
there came with their Drum an Irish man borne in Cork, who prayed in the name
of the rest, that they might be licensed to depart to Kinsale with their
Arms, bag and baggage; this being denied by the Lord President (who would not
conclude with any, but the Commander of the place) he returned the Messenger,
willing him to tell the Commander that no other but himself should be heard,
and that he had no commission to grant them any other composition then to
yield to her Majesty's mercy: Then immediately they sent the Drum again, and
with him a Sergeant called Pedro de Herodiay cuacola whom the Lord President
refused to speak withal, A second messenger likewise refused.
upon whose return the Commander himself called Bartholomeo Paez de Clavijo
an Alfero, The Commander parlied with the Lord President, but his offer
rejected.
came to the Lord President, but not agreeing upon the conditions, for he
still insisted to depart with their Arms to Kinsale (being put safe into the
Castle) the battery began afresh, and the Defendants bestowed thicker vollies
of shot then at any time before; at length about two of the clock, when they
found the weak estate the Castle was grown into by fury of the battery, A
parley the fourth time demanded and rejected.
they sounded again their Drum for an other parley, which not being
accepted, many of them endeavored to escape under the Rock close to the water
side, which being espied by us, The Enemy endeavored to make an escape, wherein
many were slain and taken prisoners.
our men ran presently close to the Castle walls, and if the Lord President had
not forbidden them (although the breach was not sufficiently assaultable) they
would have entered the house; of those which attempted to escape, there were
three and twenty Spaniards taken; and of this Country birth a great multitude
of Churles, women and children, there was likewise slain of the Spaniards
toward thirty; all this while the Enemy shot not a shot, but as men amazed
lay still; of the Irish there was not a man taken that bare weapon, Dermond Mac
Carty alias Don Dermutio taken prisoner.
all of them being good Guids escaped, only one Dermond Mac Cartie, by them
called Don Dermutio was taken, who was then a pensioner to the King of Spain,
and heretofore a servant to Florence Mac Cartie.

A good while before day, the Lord Deputy sent Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn to the
President, Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn sent from the Lord Deputy with direction to
the Lord President.
to signify his pleasure unto him; which was if they would render themselves,
he should accept of their offer, excepting the Irish; not long after Sir
Oliver Saint-Iohn was departed (that no error might be committed;) toward the
morning the Lord President went to the Lord Deputy, to make relation of that
nights proceeding, and upon deliberation, it was thought convenient, if the
Spaniards would quit their Arms and render the place, with promise of life
only to be sent into Spain, that they should be received to mercy; The
reasons that induced the Lo. ^Deputy to receive the Spaniards at Rincorran to
mercy.
the consideration whereof grew upon these reasons; the one because in forcing
a breach, it was likely many good men should be lost, and also to entice
others that are in Kinsale to leave the place (wherein they felt misery) by the
example of this merciful dealing with those of Rincorran, but especially
because expedition in the taking of this Castle had many important consequences.

About one hour after day, the Commander sent word to the Lord President that
he would render the place, and quit all their Arms, so as they might be sent
to Kinsale, which being refused, he entreated only that himself might hold
his Arms, and be sent to Kinsale, which also being denied, he resolutely
determined to bury himself in the Castle, The agreement between the L.
President, and the Spanish Co^mander of Rincorran.
and not to yield: his Company seeing his obstinacy, did threaten him to cast
him out of the breach, so as they might be received to mercy; in the end it
was concluded that all his people should be disarmed in the house, which was
done by Captain Roger Harvie, Captain of the Guards that night, and himself
to wear his sword until he came to the President, and then render it unto
him, which being performed upon his knees, they were brought prisoners into the
Camp, and from thence immediately sent unto Cork.

The last of October, the President received a gracious Letter from her
Majesty, all written with her own hand, it was short, but yet therein is
lively expressed in what a thankful sort his service was accepted, the true
Copy whereof here ensues.

CHAP. XIIII.
Her Majesty's Letter to the Lord President. A supply of Munition and victuals.
A resolution in Council that Forces should be sent to encounter O Donnell. The
Lord President of a contrary opinion, and his reasons. The reasons why this
service was imposed upon the Lord President. The Lord President marches
toward O Donnell. O Donnell lodges near the Holy Cross, and the strength of
his Quarter. O Donnell by the means of a great Frost, p^ssed over the
Mountain of Shewphelim, whereby he escaped from fighting with the Lord
President. O Donnels hasty March. The principal men that were in O Donnels
Army. The principal men in Tyrones Army.
Her Majesty's Letter unto the Lo. President.
MY faithful George, if ever more service of worth were performed in shorter
space, then you have done, We are deceived; among many eyewitnesses, We have
received the fruit thereof, and bid you faithfully credit, that what so Wit,
Courage, or Care may do, We truly find, they have been all truly acted in
all your Charge, and for the same believe, that it shall neither be
unremembered, nor unrewarded: And in mean while believe, my Help nor Prayers
shall never fail you.

Your Sovereign that best regards you, ELIZ. R.

The second of November 2. November.
the Ordnance was drawn from Rincorran to the Camp.

The third, 3. Novem.
the Spanish Sergeant Major which had been taken prisoner upon the last of
October, and the Alferes, which rendered himself upon condition of life at
Rincorran, obtained license to write to Don Iuan, and one of our Drumme^ was
sent to carry their Letters.

The fifth, 5. Nov.
four Barques with Munitions and Victuals from Dublin, arrived in the Haven of
Kinsale. A supply of munition and victuals.


The sixth, 6. Nov.
upon certain knowledge that Tyrone and O donnell were drawing toward
Mounster, the trenches of the Camp were made deeper and higher.

The seventh, 7. Nov.
the Lord Deputy having Intelligence, that O donnell with a great part of the
Northren Forces was advanced near unto the Province, It was concluded in
Council that forces should be sent to encounter Odonnel.
to join with the Spaniards, and that Tyrone was but a few days journeyes
short of him, it was debated in Council, whether it were necessary that Forces
should be sent toward him, to divert his intention: It was agreed by the
greater part, that two or three Regiments of Foot, and some Horse should be
employed in that service. The President was of a contrary opinion, alleging
for instance, The Lo. President was of a contrary opinion, and his reasons.
that Tyrone at his late being in Mounster, at whose return the Earl of
Ormond having good Especials, and very desirous to fight with him, yet could
never have sight of him, or of any of his company; and the reasons (said he)
are very apparent, for they are sure to have the Country to friend, to give
them howerly intelligence of our lodging and marches, and they are so light
footed, as if they once get the start of us, be it never so little, we shall
hardly or never overtake them. Notwithstanding these reasons, it was concluded
that Forces should be sent; and for so much as the Country would be more
willing to give assistance to the Lord President, then to any other; The
reasons why this service was imposed upon the Lord President.
as also because he was best acquainted with the passages, and places of
advantage, to give Odonnell impediment: He was commanded with his own
Regiment, and Sir Charles Wilmots, which were in List two thousand one hundred
and fifty, but not by pole above one thousand, and three hundred and fifty
Horse in List, which were by pole two hundred and fifty) to undertake the
Service; and for his better strength Sir Christopher Saint-Laurence (who with
his Regiment was coming into Mounster, and was to meet him upon the way)
should join with him, and also the Rising out of the Country. The President
in Obedience, though without hope to meet with an Enemy, The Lo. President
marches toward Odonnell.
that has no will to hazard his Troops in fight, (for so he conceived of
Odonnell) the seventh of November left the Camp, and never ceased traveling
until with long and weary Marches he came to Ardmaile in the County of
Tipperary. Odonnell with his sharking Troops, lodging not far from the Holy
Cross, Odonnell lodged near to the Holy Cross.
their Camps not being distant the one from the other above four miles: But
the Country stood so partially affected to the Traitors, as by no promise of
reward, or other satisfaction could they be induced to draw any draught upon
them: by reason whereof, (but with great disadvantage) no probable attempt of
good success could be made upon them, being lodged (as they were) in a strong
Fastness of Bogg and Wood, The strength of his quarter.
which was on every quarter plashed: For avoiding of confusion, I must ask
some pardon of the Reader, to continue the Discourse of the Presidents Journey,
until I speak any more of the siege at Kinsale: Odonnell on the other side
fearing our forces, (which were increased by a Regiment of Foot, and some
Horse, which Sir Christopher Saint-Lawrence brought with him, durst not enter
farther into the Country, because he could not avoid us, and at that time he
had no other way to pass; for the Mountain of Slewphelim (which in Summer
time is a good ground to pass over) was by reason of great raines, so wett and
boggye, as that no Carriage or Horse could pass it.

This Mountain is in the county of Typperarie, toward the Shenan, and from
thence to come into the county of Limerick, the passage is through a straight,
near to the Abbey of Own^y, which Abbey, from the place where Odonnell
encamped in Omaghers Country, is at the least twenty Irish miles, having (as
we thought by lodging where we did) prevented his passage, there happened a
great frost, the like whereof has been seldom seen in Ireland, and the
Enemy being desirous to avoid us, Odonnell by the means of a great frost
passed over the mountain of Slewphelin whereby he escaped from fighting with
the Lord P^esident.
taking the advantage of the time, rose in the night and marched over the
Mountain aforesaid; whereof as soon as we were advertised, we likewise rose
from Cassell, whither we were drawn (mistrusting that they would take the
advantage of the frost) four hours before day, in hope to cross him before
he should pass the Abbey of Ownhy, supposing that it had not been possible
for him to have marched farther (with his carriage) without resting: The next
morning by eleaven of the clock we were hard by the Abbey, but then we
understood that Odonnell made no stay there, but hastened to a house of the
Countess of Kildares called Crome, Odonnels hasty march to escape the Lord
President.
twelve miles from the Abbey of Ownhy, so as his march from Omaghers Country to
Crome (by the way which he took) without any rest was above two and thirty
Irish miles, the greatest march with carriage (whereof he left much upon the
way) that has been heard of: To overtake him we marched the same day from
Cashell to Kilmallock, more then twenty Irish miles, but our labor was lost:
The morning following, Odonnell with all his forces rose from Crome, and lodged
that night in the straight of Conneloghe, where he rested a few days to
refresh his tired and surbated Troops: The President seeing that this
light^ooted General could not be overtaken, thought it meet to hasten to the
Camp at Kinsale to prevent his coming thither, wherein we used such
expedition, as (if he had done his uttermost) we were sure to be there before
him, or enforce him to fight with us, for we took the next direct way, and he
for his safety (to avoid us) marched a farther way about through Dowalla, and
Muskry, which was very troublesome to pass with Horse and Baggage: the time of
our return to the Camp was the five and twentieth of the same Month: In our
retreat toward Kinsale, between Kilmallock and Moyallo, we overtooke the
Earl of Clanricard (with his Regiment) marching toward the Camp, and also
between Moyallo and Cork, we met with the Earl of Thomond, who was sent by
the Lord Deputy with his Troop of Horse to follow the President.

There came into Mounster with Odonnell, The principal men that were in
Odonnells army.
these principal Gentlemen of Vlster and Connaght, viz. Orwrke, Mac Swiny ne
Doa, Odogherty, Oboyle, the two Mac Donoghes, Mac Dermond, Okellie, Obirne, O
Conner Roes two sons, Odonnels two brothers, Donnell O Conner Sligoes
brother, the two Oflares, William Burke brother to Redmond, and Hughe Mostian,
besides of Mounster men, the Lord of Lixnaw, John fits Thomas, brother to the
counterfeit Earl of Desmond, the Knight of the Valley, Dermond moyle Mac
Cartie, brother to Florence, and many others: his whole number consisted near
unto four thousand Foot and three hundred Horse; this was related unto the
President by one James Welsh, who was with Odonnell, when he fled the
incountering of the Presidents forces; The principal men in Tirones armi^.
he also affirmed that Tyrone had in his Army, Mac Genis, Mac Guire, Mac
Maghon, Randell Mac Lorly, Oneale, and all the chiefes of Vlster with their
forces.

CHAP. XV.
A part of Don Dermu^io his Examination concerning a practice for the taking or
killing of the Lord President. A Sally made by the enemy in Kinsale. A Spanish
Captain slain. Master Hopton dyed of a ^urt. The Earl of Thom^nd landed at
Castlehaven with supplies of Horse and F^^t. Supplies of Horse and Foot landed
at Waterford. The Quee^es Fleet, and supplies of Foot with munitions, etc.
arrived at Cork. Castle Ny Park attempt^d to be taken by us, but the
Enterprise failed. A Co^ncell of War called by the Lord Deputy.
THE dangerous hazard which the President was in, A part of Don Dermutio his
examination concerning a practice for the taking or killing of the L. President.
in this journey I may not omit to relate, as well for the peril he ran, as
for his temper; in not seeming to see that which he perfectly knew, and
despising it; for D^rmond Mac Cartie called by the Spaniards Don Dermutio,
taken as you have heard at the siege of Rincorran, (being examined by the
Council) confessed to them, that Cormuck Mac Dermond Lord of Muskery, had
intelligence with Don John, and certain presents had been mutually given and
received, and that the said Cormuck had undertaken, and faithfully promised, to
deliver up the President to Don John alive or dead; the President was himself
present at this examination, which notwithstanding, he took the said Cormuck,
and ten Horsemen his Followers along with him; rode with him, eat and drank
with him, and many times had private conference with him; not seeming to take
notice of any treacherous intent; besides his Army consisting of three thousand
or there abouts, what with Country risings out, and under Captains in pay,
two thousand of these were of Irish birth, no less affected to the Rebels then
to themselves; and I can well assure the Reader upon good grounds, that if our
forces had received any disaster, they would all have turned Turks, and cut
the throats of their own Commanders.

The eighth, 8. Nov.
certain Ships to the number of thirteen, were discovered, passing by Kinsale
to the Westward, but afterward it prooved to be the Supplies sent out of
ENGLAND with the Earl of Thomond.

The Spanyard by that time had gotten knowledge of the departure of a good part
of our Forces, 10. Nov.
and thereupon supposing us to be much weakened, A Salley made by the Enemy.
(as it cannot be denied but we were) and inferior to them in the Town in
bodies of men, they drew out (about noone) the most part of their Forces, and
anon after sent some threescore Shot and Pike to the foot of the hill close by
our Camp, leaving their Trenches very well lyned for their seconds: Some of
ours were presently drawn out to entertain the skirmish with those that came
up, and another strong party was sent out toward Rincorran, who from the
Bushie hill played in flancke upon their trenches, and beat them from the
same; so as they that were first sent out close to our Camp, being beaten
back by our shot, and thinking to find the seconds they left behind them, were
disappoynted by the quitting of their trenches, and by that means driven to
follow the rest to the succor of the Town; our men following them with much
fury, hurt and killed diverse, amongst whom they brought off the body of a
Sergeant, and possessed the enemies trenches, the which the Enemy (being
re-enforced) made many attempts to regaine, but were repulsed and beaten back
into the Town; we heard by diverse that Don John committed the Sergeant Major
(who commanded then in chief) presently after the fight, and threatened to take
off his head, commended highly the valor of our men, and cried shame upon the
cowardice of his own, who he said had been the terror of all nations, but now
had lost that reputation, and he gave straight commandment upon pain of death
(which he caused to be set upon the Town gates) that from thenceforth no man
should come off from any service, until he should be fetched off by his
Officer, though his powder were spent or his Piece broken, but make good his
place with his sword; Captain Soto, one of their best Commanders was that day
slain, A Spanish Captain slain.
for whom they made very great moan, and some twenty more besides were hurt,
which could not but be many; on our side only some ten hurt and three killed;
among whom Master Hopton a Gentleman of the Lord Deputies, was sore hurt, Mr.
Hopton dyed of a hurt.
and since dyed thereof: If this skirmish had not bin readily and resolutely
answered on our part, the Spaniards had then discovered the smalnesse of our
numbers, and would no doubt have so plied us with continual sallies, as we
should hardly have been able to continue the siege.

The same day we had News of the Earl of Thomonds landing at Castlehaven,
The Earl of Thomo^d landed at Castle haven with supplies of horse and foot.
with one hundred horse, and one thousand foot of Supplies out of England in
thirteen Ships, which by violence of foul weather had been driven to the
westermost part of Ireland, and with great difficulty recovered Castlehaven
aforesaid, from whence the fifth day following he came with Horse and Foot to
the Camp at Kinsale; 11. November.
The next day being the eleventh, we were advertised that Sir Anthony Cook,
Supplies of horse and foot landed at Waterford.
and Patrick Arthur were landed at Waterford with two thousand foot, and some
horse.

The twelfth, The Queens fleet, and supplies of foot with munitions etc.
arrived at Cork
Sir Richard Levison, Admiral, and Sir Amias Preston, Vice Admiral of the
Queens Fleet for Ireland, with ten Ships of War, arrived at Cork with two
thousand Foot, besides Munitions, Cannoniers, Carpenters, Wheele-wrights,
Smithes, etc.

presently the Lord Deputy sent them direction to come for Kinsale.

The thirteenth, 13. Novem.
nothing was done either by us or the enemy.

The Queens Ships with much difficulty recovered the harbor of Kinsale, 14.
Nov.
the Admiral Sir Richard Levison, and the Vice Admiral Sir Amias Preston,
came to the Lord Deputies Camp: That day and the next day, the two thousand
Landforces were put on shore, and before that we had certain news of the
arrival of the other Forces from Barstable, and Bristoll, at Waterford, and
Castlehaven: but they were not then come to the Camp, nor in many days after.

The Lord Deputy coming from aboard the Ships, 15. Nov*
a great shot was made at him from the Town, A fair escape.
from whence they might discern him in the head of a Troop, and yet missed
him very little.

Some of the Queens Ships (having direction) began to play upon a Castle in
the Island, 16. Nov.
called Castle Ny Park, held fit next to be taken, to invest the Town on
that side; they brake off some part of the top, but finding that they did it no
greater hurt, they left shooting, and the rather because that day and the two
next prooved so extreme stormy and foul, as the Ordnance could not be
landed, nor any thing else well done; yet out of an extraordinary desire to
effect somewhat, 17. Nov.
the seventeenth being the most happy day of her Majesty's Coronation, which
we meant to have solemnized with some extraordinary Adventure, if the weather
would have suffered us to look abroad* we sent at night when the storm was
somewhat appeased, the Sergeant Major, and Captain Bodly, with some four
hundred Foot to discover the ground of Castle Ny Park, Castle ny Park
attempted to be taken by us, but the enterprise failed.
and to see whether it might be carried with the Pickaxe, which was accordingly
attempted* but the Engine we had gotten to defend our men while they were at
work, being not so strong as it should have been, they within the Castle
having store of very great stones on the top, tumbled them down so fast as
brake it, so as they returned with the loss of two men, and proceeded no
further in that course.

The same day, A Council of War called by the L. Deputy.
the Lord Deputy called a Council of war, wherein it was propounded, that
now that her Majesty had plentifully furnished us with men, munition, and
victuals, we wereto consider of our own strength, and the best way either to
attempt the Town or to continue the siege, we were also to consider of the
force of the Enemy within Kinsale, and what aides they were like to have out of
the Country, and of all other commodities, or incommodities that were to
happen on either side: The conclusion and resolution was, that we should
invest the Town with all celerity, to keep it short of relief, and before
the making of a breach to break their houses, that they might find no safety
in them, and thereby to be exposed to the like incommoditie of cold and rain
as we felt in the Camp; in doing whereof it was conceived that many would be
slain, and endanger the destroying their magazines of powder and victuals; for
if presently we should make a breach and attempt it by assault, there was no
difference, between a weak place (stored with bodies of men) and a strong
fortified Town; besides the Enemy had ground sufficient (if a breach were
made) to cast up new earth works, which would put us to more toil and loss
of men then an old stone wall; and (in the opinion of all the chiefest of the
Army) it was concluded, that we could not do the Enemy a greater pleasure,
or unto our selves a greater disadvantage, then to seek to carry it by a
breach, before the forces in the Town, either by sword or sickness were
weakened.

CHAP. XVI.
The Earl of Thomond with his supplies came to the Camp. Castle ny Park
rendered by the Spaniards. A Spanish Captain wounded whereof he dyed. A brave
Act of a private Soldier. Approaches made nearer to the Town. The Lord
President with the Earls of Thomond and Clanricard returned to the Camp. A
sally made by the Spaniards.
THE Earl of Thomond The Earl of Thomond with his supplies came to the Camp.
also with one thousand Foot, and one hundred Horse (having been by force of
weather driven far to the Westward, and with much difficulty had recovered
Castle-haven) came thence by Sea to the port of Kinsale: The Lord Deputy to
refresh his men and horses, sent them to Cork, for in their healths they were
impaired; and that evening some Spaniards fled from Kinsale, and voluntarily
came to our Camp.

A Demi Cannon was unshipped as soon as it was calm, 19. Nov.
and placed on this side the water, which played most part of that day upon
that Castle, and brake many places, but made no breach that was assaultable: In
the night they of the Town attempted to relieve the Castle by boat, but were
repelled by Captain Tolkern, and Captain Ward, who lay with their Pinnaces
between the Island and the Town.

The Demi Cannon played again, 20. Nov.
and a Cannon then landed and placed by it (with some Ordnance also out of the
Ship) though they served to small purpose; Castle Ny Park rendered by the
Spaniards.
about noone one hundred men were sent with Captain York and Captain Smith,
to view if the breach were assaultable, and though they found it was not, yet
the Spaniards within being no longer able to endure the fury of the shot, hung
out a sign for parley, (upon the first show of our men) and yielded themselves
and the Castle upon promise of their lives only; which being accepted, they
brought them presently to the Camp, being in number seventeene: Before the
Castle was yielded, the Spaniards in the Town made diverse shot at Captain
Tolkernes Pinnace, with a piece of Ordnance which they mounted a day or two
before close to the gate of the Town, but did no hurt at all unto her; the
Pinnace warping nearer to the other side under the hill, and at last rode
safely without danger of the shot: The same day a Platform was made upon a
ground of advantage, (not far from the Camp) that commanded one part of the
Town, that under the favor thereof we might the better make our nearer
Approaches, which at that time we could hardly have done, by reason of the
great extreme frost, and a Demy-cannon mounted upon it, with which some shot
was made at the Town, and a Sentinel taken anon after affirmed, that the
first Piece shot off went through the house that Don John was in, and did
otherwise great hurt.

An other Cannon was brought up, 21. Nov.
and planted by the Demycannon, which the night before was brought from the
Ship, and this day the Lord Deputy went over into the Island, to view how from
thence the Town might be best annoyed and invested.

Also the Prisoners which were taken at Castle Park, were sent to Cork, with
direction to the Major, to send them, and all the former prisoners into
England, the Sergeant Major, and the Commanders of Rincorran, and Castle Ny
Park excepted; and this day a great number of Irish women and children were
put out of Kinsale, to try their fortunes in the Country.

Four other Pieces were planted by the Cannon and Demi Cannon, 22. Nov.
which altogether played into the Town; A Spanish captain wounded whereof he
dyed.
one of those short killed four men in the Market place, and struck off a
Captains leg, called Don John de Saint-Iohn, who is since dead of the hurt.

That Evening one James Grace, an Irishman, ran out of Kinsale, assuring the
Lo. Deputy that Don John at his landing was five thousand men, and that he
was yet three thousand strong; that he had four Pieces of Ordnance well
mounted; that the Irish which were with him were so much affrighted with our
Artillery, as Don John had much to do to hold them, whose departure, (if it
should happen) would be a great want unto him, for by them he received ease
and comfort; and that Don John's house where he lodged, had been shot through
with a great shot.

The six Pieces began again about ten a clock to batter upon the Town, 23.
Nov.
and so continued till night, in which time, and in all men's judgments, as by
report of the Prisoners we took, they did great hurt to the Town. A bra^e
act of a private Soldier.
This day, while the Lord Deputy, the Marshall, and the Sergeant Major were
viewing the ground where the Approaches were intended, a private Soldier of
Sir Francis Barkleyes, in the face of the Guards, attempting to steal, (as he
had done diverse times before) a Spanish Sentinel, who was seconded with four
that he saw not, fought with them all five, whereof one of them was the
Sergeant Major, whom he had almost taken, and when he had found he could do no
good upon them all, he came off without other hurt, then the cutting of his
hand a little with the breaking of a thrust, which one of them made at him, and
hurt the Sergeant Major. Approaches made nearer to the town.
The Lord Deputy this night began to make his approaches nearer the town, and
for that purpose caused some 1000 Foot to be drawn out by Sir John Barkley,
Sir Benjamin Berry, and Captain Bodley, who continued the work all night, and
although the ground were extreme hard, (by reason of the frost) and the night
very light, yet they brought the work to very good perfection; the Enemy
played all the night upon them with great Volleyes, but hurt but three men,
neither in the Trenches, nor in diverse Sallies they made, in the one whereof a
Squadron of our new men beat them back to the gates: In the Evening his
Lordship sent direction to Sir Richard Levison to land three Culverings this
night, and to plant them in the Island, about Castle Ny Park, that from thence
they might likewise make Battery upon the Town, and Sir Richard drew in the
Admiral, and Vice Admiral between the Town and the Island, from whence they
did great hurt in the Town the next day. 24. Nov.


All the Artillery still played; 25. Nov.
but because the shot from the ships did but little hurt, The L. President with
the Earls of Thomond and Clanricard, returned to the Camp.
(save only upon the base Town) the Lord Deputy gave direction to make very
few shot, except it were at the high Town. In the afternoon, the Lord
President, the Earls of Thomond, and Clanricard, Sir Thomas Burke, and diverse
others returned to the Camp, Odonnell with his force being stolen by them;
This night direction was given to have a Plat-forme made for the Artillery,
upon the trench which was made on Monday night; somewhat after midnight the
Spaniards made a sudden salley, A sally made by the Spaniards.
with purpose to force that trench, but were quickly repelled by Sir Francis
Barkley, who commanded there that night.

The Companies that went with the Lord President returned, 26* Nov.
and with them two other Regiments of the Earl of Clanricards, and Sir
Christopher Saint-Lawrence* the Regiments were that night quartered by
themselves, upon the West side of Kinsale to invest the Town, and keep the
Spaniards and Odonnell from joining. This night the three Culverings from the
Island were planted on the point of the hill, near the water, on this side
behind the last trenches: This morning the Spaniards played with a Demi Cannon
(from the Town) upon the Admiral, which was twice shot, and the Viceadmirall
once; they riding both close by the Town, and shot being made from those
ships, they dismounted the Spaniards Piece within, and hurt their chief
Gunner, so as it played no more.

Betimes in the morning those three Pieces from the point of the Hill, 27. Nov.
near the water played upon the Town, doing great hurt, by reason they were
so near planted, but because the day fell out extreme windy and rainy, they
were enforced to leave, and spent the rest of the day in drawing down some
other Pieces, that were planted upon the first platform.

CHAP. XVII.
The Town of Kinsale summoned, and Don Iuan his Answer. The Spaniards beaten
out of their trenches. The Marshall went to view the Town, to discover a fit
place to batter. A skirmish entertained for the viewing of the breach. An
intrenchment made on the West side of the Town. A bold attempt of a Sergeant
of ours, wherein he was slain. A Soldier slain standing between the Lord
Dep^^y and Lord President. The great sally made by the Enemy with a furious
charge, both upon the plat form where the battery was placed, and upon a new
entrenchment on the West side of the town; the Enemy repulsed and beaten. The
Enemy gained our entrenchment on the West Side of the town. The entrenchment
recovered from the Enemy. The loss on the Enemies part, and on our part.
IN the morning a Trumpeter was sent to summon Kinsale, 28. Nov.
who was not suffered to enter into the Town, The town of Kinsale summoned,
and Don Iuan his answer.
but receiving his answer at the Gate, viz. that they held the Town first for
Christ, and next for the King of Spain, and so would defend it, Contra tutti
inimici: upon his return with this answer, the Lord Deputy gave direction to
begin the battery with all the Artillery, who continued in shooting upon the
Gate till toward night, and brake a great part thereof, during the time the
Ordnance played; Sir Christopher Saint-Laurence drew out from the other Camp
some Foot, and gave upon the Spaniards trenches, The Spaniards beaten out of
their trenches.
which they possessed (with great numbers;) at the other end of the Town being
enforced to go thereunto, through the fury of the shot, which they could not
endure in that part of the Town, where the Ordnance played, at his first
giving upon them, he beat them out of the trenches, following them to the
very Gate of the Town, and killed some of them returning, without loss on our
side save only some hurt.

All the Artillery still played, 1601.
and brake down most part of the Gate, 29. Nov.
and some part of a new work made before the Gate.

The Marshall taking some fifty shot, 30. Nov.
went to the wall of the Town to view, which was the best place to make a
breach, and found the wall close to the Gate on the right hand to be the
fittest; The Marshall went to view the Town, to discover a fit place to batter.
after he had taken view, and made a slight skirmish with the Spaniards, he
returned without any loss, saving some three hurt, and caused the Artillery to
beat upon that place, who played upon it (without any intermission) and brake
down before night, a very great part of the wall, which the Enemy attempted to
make up in the night, but were beaten from it by our Guards, who played upon
them most part of the night: A Spaniard ran away this day from Kinsale, who
reported to the Lord Deputy, that our Artillery had killed diverse Captains in
the Town, besides private Soldiers.

Resolved in Council (and by the Council of war) that some Foot should be
drawn out of the Camp to give the Spaniards a bravadoe, 1. December.
and to view whether the breach was assaultable, and to cause the Spaniards to
show themselves, A skirmish entertained for the viewing of the breach.
that our Artillery might the better play upon them; whereupon two thousand
Foot commanded by Sir John Barkley and Captain Blaynie were presently put in
Arms, and drawn near the walls of the Town, who entertained a very hot
skirmish with the Spaniards, that had lodged themselves in a trench close to
the breach without the Town; during the continuance of this skirmish, our
Artillery played upon those that showed themselves, either on the breach or in
the trench, and killed many of them, besides such as were killed and hurt by
our small shot; after an hours fight (or thereabouts) when full view was
taken, in what manner the breach was, and found not to be assaultable, our men
were drawn off with little or no hurt on our side, saving some three hurt, and
Captain Guests horse killed under him, who before killed two or three with his
own hands: This night the Marshall, Sir John Barkley, Captain Blaynie, and
Captain Bodly (the Lord Deputy leaving the President in the Camp, being
almost all night present) drew out five and twenty of every Company, An
entrenchme^t made on the West side of the town.
and entrenched themselves on a Hill, on the West side of the Town, within
less then half Callivers shot of the same, and cast up a small fort, to lodge
some Foot to serve as seconds for the Artillery (that was to be planted) not
far from it; our men being at work, the Spaniards about midnight began to
play upon them from the walls, and from a trench, they possessed close to the
West gate, and so continued very hotly till the morning; our men (that guarded
the Pioners) playing likewise upon them, and diverse hurt and killed on either
side.

Our men continued still in that work, 2. December.
and brought the same before night to very good perfection, though the
Spaniards (from their high Castles, and other places of the Town) sought to
annoy them what they could. While our men were thus at work, a Sergeant of
Captain Blaynies drew out some seven or eight shot, and suddenly fell into a
trench (that the Spaniards possessed) close to the town, A bold attempt of a
Sergeant of ours, wherein he was sl^ine
wherein were some nine or ten Spaniards, of which the Sergeant killed two with
his own hands, and the rest every man one; Not being contented therewith, he
attempted to give upon another Trench possessed by the Spaniards some good
distance from it; but in going on, the Sergeant was shot through the body, and
his company in bringing him off had two hurt, and returned without any more
loss.

The same day the Lord Deputy, A Soldier slain standing between the Lo.
Deputy, and the Lord President.
and the Lord President came to see the new Work, and as they were discoursing
very near together, a Musket shot from the Town passed between them, and
brake the back bone of a Soldier that stood close by them, whereof he dyed.

This night the Trenches where the Cannon was planted, The great sally made by
the enemy, wherein they gave a furious assault, both upon the platform where
the battry was placed, and upon a new entrenchment on the West side of the
Town.
being manned with the Lord Deputies Company, (commanded by Captain James
Blunt) Sir Thomas Burkes, commanded by his Lieut^nant, Sir Benjamin Berries,
commanded by his Lieutenant, Captain* Rotheram himself, and Captain Hobbie,
Captain Muses commanded by his Lieutenant, and Captain Roger Harvie
commanding in chief, being Captain of the Watch: in a fort on the West near
the Town between the two Camps, that was made the morning before, being
manned by Captain Flower, with Sir Arthur Savages Company, Sir John Dowdalls
Company, Captain Dillon, Captain Spencer, Captain Mastersons Lieutenant, and
Sir William Warrens Lieutenant, with certain Squadrons out of the Earl of
Thomonds Quarter, who stood in guard without the Trenches: The Enemy sallyed
about eight of the clock in the night (being extreme dark and raynie) with
about two thousand men, and first gave slightly toward the new Trenches upon
the West side, and presently after with a great gross upon the trench of the
Cannon, continuing their resolution to force it with exceeding fury, having
brought with them tools of diverse sorts, to pull down the Gabions and
Trenches, and Spikes to cloy the Artillery: The Alarm being taken in the
Camp, the Marshall with Sir John Barkley, and Sir William Fortescue, Sir
Francis Rush, and Captain Roe, with some five or six hundred sallyed
presently toward the Cannon for their seconds, and Sir Benjamin Berry fell out
with some hundred directly toward the Port of the Town next to the Camp, to
whose seconds the Lord Deputy sent Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn: Upon the arrival of
the Marshall with his Forces the enemy brake, and our men did execution upon
them; Sir Benjamin Berry fell directly upon the Enemies seconds, whom he
presently charged and brake, The enemy repulsed and beaten.
killed many of them, and took the Commander of that body, being an ancient
Captain of chief account with the enemy. At the same time the enemy gave upon
our new Trenches, and continued the attempt a long time with great fury, till
Captain Flower sallying out, and beating back part of their forces, The Enemy
gained our entrenchment on the west side of the Town.
the enemy entered before his return, and were possessed of the Trenches, in
which time Sir William Godolphin gave many charges, for the seconding of our
men, which continued fight in the field until the Earl of Clanricard, (being
sent for their second) with Captain Shipwith, Captain Slingsby, Captain
Clare, Captain Boise, and Captain Thomas Burke, with some sixty men, for the
rest of his Regiment was not advanced, so far charged a gross of the Enemies
without the sort, brake them, and did execution upon them toward the Town,
and returning entered the fort again (which the Enemy abandoned) with little
resistance, The entrenchment recovered from the Enemy.
and made it good till he was releeved: In this sally the Enemy left behind
them above sixscore dead bodies, besides such as were killed near the Town,
and we took nine prisoners, of whom there was a Captain, a Sergeant, and a
Drum; but since we heard out of the Town that they lost dead above two
hundred of their best men, and two Captains, and two Alfeeroes, The loss on
the Enemies part.
and the Sergeant Major, being the second Commander to Don John, and Don
Carloes Carty, and above two hundred hurt; of our part were hurt Captain
Flower, The loss on our part.
Captain Shipwith (slightly in the face) the Earl of Clanricards Lieutenant,
Captain Dillon killed, Captain Spencer, Captain Flowers Lieutenant, and some
five and twenty private Soldiers; the Enemy at the Cannon, cloyed a Demi
Culvering, which being a little crased was left without the fort, but the next
morning it was made serviceable again. There were some of them killed upon the
Cannon, and upon the powder, and the trenches (in some places) filled with
their dead bodies, and in that attempt (of the Cannon only) seventy two dead
bodies (were left in the place) of the best men the Spaniards had, whereof many
of them were found with Spikes and Hammers, to cloy the Cannon: The Captains,
Officers, and Soldiers that defended the Cannon acquitted themselves
singularly well.

CHAP. XVIII.
A supply of Spaniards landed at Castle-haven. A Council of war held. Good
service done by a Scottish man Odonnell joined with the Spaniards at
Castle-haven. All the Irish in the West of Mounster, and some of the English
race, revolted and adhered to the Spaniards. Sundry Castles rendered by the
Irish into the Spaniards hands. Diverse of the Irish had Companies in pay given
them by Don Iuan. The Castle of Carigfotle taken and the Ward murdered. Tyrones
Army discovered near to our Camp.
INtelligence sent to the Lord Deputy, 3. December.
that six Spanish ships were put into Castle-haven, A supply of Spaniards
landed at Castlehaven.
and that six more were sent with them from the Groyne, but in coming were
severed by tempest, and no certainetie what is become of them; in these were
said to be two thousand Spaniards, come with great store of Ordnance and
munition, and that two thousand more were coming presently after.

A confirmation of the Spaniards being at Castlehaven, 4. December.
and that they were landed, whereupon it was resolved in Council, A Council
of war h^ld.
that our Camp should be strengthened, and the Artillery better entrenched and
guarded, and to leave battering: the other Camp to rise and sit down close by
the Town, between the North and the West gate, adding one Regiment more to
it, and all the Horse to be drawn into our Camp; a Drum was sent to Don John,
to offer him to bury his dead bodies, which he took thankfully, praying that
we would bury them, and that he would do the like for any of ours, if they
happened in his power. And this day Sir Charles Wilmot with his Regiment, was
commanded for the better strengthening of the Earl of Thomonds quarter, to rise
out of the Lord Deputies Camp and lodge there. 5. December.
Sir Richard Levison, with a good part of the Fleet with towing got out of the
harbor, to seek the Spanish fleet at Castle-haven, to take them if he
could, or otherwise to distress them as much as he might.

A Scottishman that had some eighty of those Spaniards aboard, 6. December.
put into Kinsale harbor in the morning, and getting a boat, acquainted Sir
Amias Preston (the Viceadmirall) therewith, and put them into his hands; Good
service done by a Scottishman.
whereupon the said Scottishman, and four of the chief Spaniards (being
Officers) were brought to the Lord Deputy, and examined before his Lordship,
the Lord President, and diverse others of the Council, their examinations were
sent into England; the Ships were heard to be in fight that day. This day our
Ordnance was drawn from the old platformes into our Camp, the better to
intend the service of the Field, and to place them more commodiously toward
the West side of the Town, Odonnell joined with the Spaniards at Cast lehaven
if we should see cause. News came this Evening, that Odonnell was joined
with the Spaniards landed at Castle-haven, and that Tirone with his Force was
very near us.

The same day, the Ditches and Trenches of the Lord Deputies Camp, and the
Earl of Thomonds Quarter, were cast deeper and higher, and it was resolved,
that two small Forts should be raised between the Earl of Thomonds Quarter,
and the water side, so that the Town might be wholly invested, to forbid any
access to or from it.

Until this time none of the Provincialls of Mounster, All the Irishry in the
West of Mounster and some of the English race revolted and adhered to the
Spaniards.
that had been either protected or pardoned, relapsed; but now upon the
coming of these seconds to Castlehaven, Sir Finnin Odriscall, and all the
Odriscalls, Sir Owen Mac Carties sons, and almost all the Carties in Carbrie,
Donnell Osulevan Bear, Osulevans Mores eldest son, Donnell Mac Cartie, the
Earl of Clan-Cares base son, with all the Carties of Desmond, John O Conner
Kerry, the Knight of Kerry, all the protected and pardoned men in Kerry and
Desmond, and all else from Kinsale and Limericke westwards, joined with
Odonnell and the Spaniards; whereat little wonder is to be made, considering
what power Religion and Gold has in the hearts of men; both which the
Spaniards brought with them into Ireland. The supplies of Spaniards were but
seven hundred, but more were promised to follow; which moved the wavering
Irish to conceive, that now the time was come for their deliverance from the
English Government; whereupon they cast themselves into the Spaniards arms,
Sundry Castles rendered by the Irish into the Spaniards hands
and for testimony of their truths, Donogh Odrischall delivered unto them his
Castle at Castle-haven, which commanded the Harbor, Sir Finnin Odrischall,
(who never in the course of his whole life had been tainted with the least
spot of disloyalty) rendered unto them his Castle of Donneshed at Baltimore,
and his Castle of Donnelong, in the Island of Inisherkan, between which Castles
all entrances into that Haven was debarred; and Donnell Osulevan surrendered
unto them his strong Castle of Dunboy, which absolutely commands Bear Haven;
these three Harbors, being without all exception the best in the West of
Mounster: For the guard of those places Don John assigned, that one hundred of
the late supplies should remain at Castle-haven, with a Magazine of Victuals
and Munition, and eight Pieces of Ordnance; unto Donneshed and Donnelong he
sent one hundred Foot, fifty for each of the Castles, and two Pieces of
Artillery; and unto Dunboy he also sent one hundred Foot, and ten great
Pieces: And to confirm these revolters by liberality unto his Master the King
of Spain, he bestowed upon Donnell Osulevan two hundred foot in the Kings
pay, Diverse of the Irish had Companies in pay given unto them by Don Iuan.
unto Donoghe Moyle Mac Cartie, son to Sir Owen Mac Cartie Reughe one
hundred, upon Finin Mac Cartie his brother one hundred and twenty, and upon
Phelim Mac Cartie one hundred, and to Odonevan one hundred; in all six hundred
and twenty in the Kings entertainment, and upon others he bestowed certain
sums of money. The Castle of Carrigfoile taken and the Ward murdered.
About this time also (not many days after this defection) John O Conner
Kerry, found the means to betray the Castle of Carrigfoyle which was his, and
then guarded for her Majesty by a Sergeant, and twelve Soldiers of Captain
Saxies company.

The other Camp strengthened their trenches, 7. December.
and a resolution to make two small forts beyond the Camp Westward, wholly to
invest the Town, the forts and the Camp one to flancke another.

The Artillery was planted in several places of the Camp, 8. December.
for the best defense thereof, Tyrones Army discovered near to our Camp.
and a fort almost made near the Town, a slight skirmish toward night,
wherein Sir Francis Barklies Ancient, and some other were hurt: In the evening
the rebels Horse were descried about two miles off, and (after supper) all the
Army drawn into Arms, upon notice (given us by the skout) that the rebels
were discovered.

CHAP. XIX.
A brief report of the good service done by Sir Richard Levison, upon the
Spanish fleet at Castle haven. A Letter from Don ^uan de Aquila to Tyrone and
Odonnell. A Letter from Don Iuan to Captain Iuan de Albornes y Andrada. A
Letter from Odonnell Osulevan Bear to the King of Spain.
THIS night late, 9. December.
Sir Richard Levison returned into the harbor of Kinsale, A brief report of
the good service done by Sir Richard Levison upon the Spanish fleet at
Castlehaven
and the next day came to the Lord Deputy, unto whom he imparted, that the
sixth day, with the Warrespit, the Defiance, the Swiftsure, the Marlin, one
Merchant, and a Carvill, he arrived at Castle-haven about ten of the clock in
the forenoone, before four a clock the same day, one ship of the Enemy was
suncke, the Spanish Admiral with nine foot water in hold drove to the shore
upon the rocks, the Viceadmirall with two others drove likewise a ground, most
of the Spaniards quitting their ships; the seventh of December the wind being
extremely at South-east, he rode still at Castle-haven, the night following,
with wind at West South-west, he warped out with the ships, the eighth at
night he returned as aforesaid.

Since we are informed by the Lord Coursie, that they are all sunck but one
ship, and great harm done both to their provisions and men.

The Spaniards after their coming to Castle-haven, understanding the Queens
fleet was at Kinsale, expecting their coming thither, to make themselves as
strong as they could, landed five Pieces of Ordnance which they planted close
by the water side for the securing the harbor; but Sir Richard Levison did so
ply the shipping, that he suncke and drive a shore as is related, and having
effected as much as might be done by Sea, was willing to have left the harbor
and return to Kinsale; but the wind being contrary, he was not able to get
forth, but was forced to ride four and twenty hours within the play of those
five Pieces of Ordnance, and received in that time above three hundred shot,
through Hulke, Mast and Tackle being by no industry able to avoid it, until
some calmer weather came, where by the help of some warpes laid forth by
their boats, not without great danger and some loss, he came to set sail and
returned for Kinsale. All the shot were made particularly at his ship, except
some few at a Pinnace of the Queens, wherein Captain Flemming was Commander.

All the time spent upon the nine ten and eleaven, was in erecting the two
forts formerly resolved upon, also in casting up of trenches, between the
Earl of Thomonds quarter, and the said forts, being more then thirty score in
length, and making of trenches near to the Lord Deputies Camp: The Spaniards
as well to interrupt, as to view our works, made certain light sallies, but
they were easily beaten back without any hurt on our side.

The twelfth, 12. December.
the Enemy sallied again, but altogether fruitless.

The thirteenth, 13. December.
the weather fell out to be extreme foul and stormy; and because of Tyrones
drawing near with all his forces, it was thought meet, not to attempt any
thing of great moment, more then the removing of some Pieces of Ordnance, to a
new platform made on the West side of the Town close unto it, to play upon
the Castles, which might most hinder our works, when we should resolve to
make a breach.

The fourteenth foul weather, 14. December.
wherein nothing was performed.

The fifteenth, 15. December.
our Artillery on the West side of the Town did much annoy the enemy, in
breaking down the houses, wherein many were slain.

The sixteenth, 16. December.
the Ordnance played into the Town, as the day before.

The seventeenth, 17. December.
foul and stormy weather; nevertheless at night the Enemy sallied, and brake
down a new platform which we had made.

The eighteenth 18. December.
the Cannon (as in former days) played into the Town, and annoyed the Enemy
very much: And the same day, a Letter was intercepted, written from Don John to
Tyrone and Odonnell, which is here inserted: And also a Letter to Captain Iuan
de Albornoz y Andrada, both which were thus translated.

A Letter from Don Iuan de Aquila, to Tyrone and Odonnell.
I Was confident your Excellencies would have come upon Don Richardo his going
unto you, because he had order from you to say that upon the Spaniards joining
with you, (from Castle haven) you would do me that favor. I beseech you so
to do, with as much celeritie, and as well furnished as you possibly may: for
I do assure you, the enemies are wearied, and but few, and that they cannot
furnish (with Guards) the third part of their Trenches, which shall little
avail them, their first fury resisted, all is ended. In what manner your
Excellencies will come on, is better known to you there, then unto me here; I
will give them enough to do this way, being ever attending to give the blow in
all that I can and with some good resolution, that your Excellencies fighting
as you are accustomed, I hope in God the victory shall be ours, for that the
cause is his: I do as much desire the victory for the interest which your
Excellencies have in it, as for my own. There is nothing now to be done, but
that you would bring up your Troops, come well appointed, and in close Order,
and being once mingled with the enemies, their Forts will do them as much
harm as us. I salute Don Ricardo, the Lord preserve your Excellencies.

From Kinsale the 28. of December. 1601. Stilo novo.
Postscript.
Though you are not well prepared, yet I beseech your Excellencies to hasten
toward the enemy, for it imports much: I think it needful to be all at
once on horseback: the greater haste you make, it is so much the better.

Don Iuan de Aquila.




A Letter from Don Iuan to Captain Iuan de Albornos y Andrada.
I Was extreme glad of your Letter, and of the health of your person; when Don
Ricardo went, he brought for resolution, that when the Earls had met with the
Spaniards, they would come; the ill passage for Messengers is the cause that
you have had no Letters from me: Hasten their coming, they know there (better
then we do) the ways and the news: I am ever in readiness; the enemies are
few, and wearied, and by good resolution (from thence) their Trenches shall not
avail them, nor can they maintain so much ground as they lodge in: I will
give them their hands full from the Town, and their first fury resisted all
is ended. Ricard Owen
Commend me to Don Ricardo, and to Captain Rius de Velasco, to whom I write
not, because the Messenger should not carry too great a Packet. I have written
to the Earls to hasten hither before the enemies have bettered their Quarter,
it would profit much, and we being once mingled with them, their Forts will
do them as much hurt as us:

From Kinsale the eight and twentieth of December. 1601. Stilo novo.
Don Iuan de Aquila.


The nineteenth by reason of stormy and foul weather, 19. December.
nothing on either side was performed; but the same day Donnell Osulevan Bear,
in thankfulness to the King of Spain, and to endeare himself the more into
his favor, wrote unto him this ensuing Letter, the original was in Irish, and
thus translated: but the Reader may understand, that it was long afterward
before it came to the Lord Presidents hands, yet here inserted in regard of the
date thereof.

A Letter from Donnell Osulevan Bear unto the King of Spain.
IT has been ever, most mighty and renowned Prince, and most gracious
Catholic King, from time to time, manifestly proved by daily experience among
us the Irish, that there is nothing works more forcibly in our hearts, to
win, and to draw our love and affection, then natural inclination to our
Progeny and Offspring, and the memorial of the friendship, which sticks still
in our minds; chiefly the same being renewed, cherished and kept iu use by
mutual affection, and by showing like friendship to us also; We the mere
Irish long ^ithence deriving our root and original, from the famous and most
noble race of the Spaniards: Viz. from Milecius son to Bile, son to
Breogwin, and from Lwighe, son to Lythy, son to Breogwin, by the testimony
of our old ancient books of antiquities, our Petigrees, our Histories, and our
Cronicles: Though there were no other matter, we came not as natural branches
of the famous tree, whereof we grew, but bear a hearty love, and a natural
affection, and entire inclination of our hearts and minds, to our ancient most
loving kinsfolks, and the most noble race whereof we descended: Besides this
(my Sovereign) such is the abundance of your goodness, and the bounty or
greatness of your liberality, now every way undeserved of our parts, as tokens
of love and affection by your Majesty showed unto us, that it is not fit nor
seemly for us, but to bestow our persons, our men, and our goods, in the
service of a Prince, that deals so graciously with us, that sends forces of
men, great treasure, victuals and munition for our aid, against our Enemies,
that seek to overwhelme and extinguish the Catholic faith diabolically, put
to death our Chiefetaines tyrannously, coveting our Lands and Livings
unlawfully: For the foresaid considerations, and for many other commendable
causes me moving: I bequeath, and offer in humbleness of mind, and with all my
heart, my own person with all my forces, perpetually to serve your Majesty,
not only in Ireland, but in any other place, where it shall please your
Highness: I commit also my Wife, my Children, my Manors, Towns, Country,
and Lands, and my Haven of Dunboy, called Biara-haven (next under God) to the
protection, keeping and defense, or Commericke of your Majesty, to be and
remain in your hands, and at your disposition: Also at your pleasure be it
(my Liege Lord) to send defense and strong keeping of the haven of Dunboy,
first for your self (my Sovereign) to receive your ships; and for me also as
your loving servant, so that the Queen of Englands ships may not possess the
same before you, while I follow the wars in your Highness behalf: I pray
Almighty God, to give your Majesty a long life, health of body and soul, with
increase of grace and prosperity: So I betake you to the keeping of God:

From the Camp near Kinsale the nine and twentieth of December, 1601, Stilo
novo. Stilo novo.
Your most dutiful loving Servant Donnell Osulevan Bear.


This morning being fair, 20. December.
the Ordnance played oftener, and brake down a good part of the wall; and to
the end we might proceed the more roundly, (if Tyrones force came not the
sooner upon us) another great Trench was made beneath the Platform; to hinder
which, the Enemies made very many shot, but all would not serve: for by the
next morning that work was brought to good perfection, though the night fell
out stormy, with great abundance of thunder and lightning, to the wonder of
all men, considering the season of the year. This night came certain
Intelligence, that Tyrone would be the next night within a mile and half of us.

CHAP. XX.
Tyrone with his Army approached within view of our Camp, but could not be
provoked to fight. The enemy sallyed out of the town. The Irish Army as before
present themselves. The Enemy from the town make another sally. Intelligence
of the Enemies designs brought to Captain Taffe.
Toward night Tyrone showed himself with the most part of his Horse and Foot,
21. December.
upon a hill between our camp and Cork, Tyrone with his Army approached
within view of our Camp, but could not be p^ovoked to fight.
about a mile from us, and on the other side of the hill encamped that night,
where he had a Fastness of wood and water.

Two Regiments of our Foot, and some Horse being drawn out of our Camp, made
toward them; and when they saw our men resolved to go forwards, they fell
back toward the place where they encamped. This night the Spaniards sallyed
again, and gave upon a new Trench made a little beneath our Camp, The Enemy
sallied out of the Town.
but were the sooner repelled, because that night we kept very strong Guards,
and every man was in a readiness to be in Arms, by reason of Tyrones being
so near unto us.

Tyrones Horse and Foot kept still in sight in the place where they showed
themselves the day before, 22. December.
and many Intelligences affirmed unto us, The Irish Army as before presents it
self.
that they had a purpose to force our Camps. That night some of their Horse,
and five hundred of their Foot were discovered searching out a good way to the
Town, which was not made known unto us until the next day. The Enemy from
the Town made another sally.
The Spaniards sallyed this night hotly, and gave upon a Trench, so as a
Sergeant that had the guard thereof, quit it: But Sir Christopher
Saint-Laurence coming to his second, beat them back before they did any great
hurt.

Our Artillery still played upon the Town, (as it had done all that while)
that they might see we went on with our business, 23. December.
as if we cared not for Tyrones coming; but it was withal carried on in such
a fashion, as we had no meaning to make a Breach, because we thought it not
fit to offer to enter, and so put all in a hazard, until we might better
discover what Tyrone meant to do, whose strength was assured to be very
great, and we found by Letters of Don John's (which we had newly intercepted)
that he had advised Tyrone to set upon our Camps, telling him that it could
not be chosen, but our men were much decayed by the winters siege, and so that
we could hardly be able to mainetaine so much ground (as we had taken) when
our strength was greater, if we were well put too, on the one side by them, and
on the other side by him, which he would not fail for his part to do soundly.

Tyrone accompanied with Odonnell, Orwrke, Mac Guire, Mac Maghon, Randell Mac
Sorly, Redmond Burke, O Conner Sligoes brothers, 24. December.
and Captain Tirrell; with the choice force, and in effect all the Rebels of
Ireland being drawn into Mounster, and joined with Spaniards that landed at
Castle-haven, who brought to Tyrones Camp six Ensigns of Spaniards, and the
greatest part of the Irish of Mounster, who being revolted, were joined with
them; and entertained into the Kings pay in several Companies, and under their
own Lords, resolved to relieve the Town of Kinsale, and to that purpose sat
down the one and twentieth of December, a mile and a half from the Town,
between the English Camp and Cork, and on that side of the Army, kept from
them all passages and means for forage, the other side, over the River of
Ownybuoy, being wholly at their disposition, by reason of the general revolt
of those parts, it seemed they were drawn so far by the importunity of Don
Iuan de Aquila, as we perceived by some of his Letters intercepted, wherein
he did intimate his own necessity, their promise to succor him, and the
facility of the Enterprise; our Army being weak in numbers, and tired (as he
termed us) with assurance from himself, that whenever he should advance to
our Quarter, he would give the blow soundly from the Town; during the abode
of the Rebels in that place, we had continual intelligence of their purpose
to give Alarmes from their party, and sallies from the Town, but to little
other effect then to weary our men, by keeping them continually in Arms; the
weather being extreme tempestuous, cold and wet; on the three and twentieth of
December, late in the night, Captain Taffe informed the Lord Deputy,
Intelligence of the Enemies design brought to Captain Taffe.
that one of the Rebels sent him word (and confirmed it by a solemn oath) to
the bearer, that the resolution of the Rebels was either that night, or
between that and the next, to enterprise their uttermost for the relief of
the Town, with some particulars, in what sort they intended to give upon our
Camp: The intelligence which Captain Taffe had was upon this occasion.

CHAP. XXI.
The means whereby Captain Taffe had his Imelligence. The Battle of Kinsale,
wherein the Rebels were overthrowen. The Lord President directed by the Lord
Deputy to guard the Camp, against any attempt to be made by the Spaniards. A
glorious Victory. An old Irish Prophecy proved true. Two sallies made by the
Spaniards.
TVesday the two and twentieth of December, The means whereby Captain Taffe
had his Intelligence.
Brian Mac Hugh Oge Mac Maghon, a principal Commander in the Irish Army, whose
eldest son Brian had many years before been a Page in ENGLAND with the Lord
President, sent a Boy unto Captain William Taffe, praying him to speak unto
the Lord President to bestow upon him a bottle of Aquavitae, which the
President for old acquaintance sent unto him; the next night being the three
and twentieth, by the same Messenger he sent him a Letter, praying him to
recommend his Love unto the President, thanks for his Aquavitae, and to wish
him the next night following to stand well upon his Guard, for himself was at
the Council, wherein it was resolved, that on the night aforesaid, (toward
the break of day) the Lord Deputies Camp would be assaulted, both by Tyrones
Army, (which lay at their backs) and by the Spaniards from the Town, who
upon the first Alarm would be in a readiness to salley: Whereupon the Lord
Deputy gave order to strengthen the ordinary Guards, The Battle of Kinsale,
wherein the rebels were overthrown.
to put the rest of the Army in a readiness, but not into Arms, that about
the falling of the Moon, the Regiment volant, (commanded by Sir Henry Power,
and appointed only to answer the first occasion without doing any other
duties) should draw out beyond the West part of the Camp, and there to stand
in Arms, not far from the maine guard of Horse: A little before the break
of the day, the Lord President went to the Lord Deputies house, and as they two
and the Marshall were in Council, one of the Lord Presidents horsemen came to
the door, and calling upon him said, My Lord, it is time to arm, for the
enemy is near unto the Camp; and immediately Sir Richard Greame, who had the
guard of Horse that night, sent word to the Lord Deputy, that the Scouts had
discovered the Rebels Matches in great numbers; whereupon the Lord Deputy
caused the Army to draw presently into Arms, sent a Corporal of the field,
to cause the like to be done in the Earl of Thomonds quarter, and that from
thence they should draw out three hundred choice men, between that quarter and
the Fort, built upon the West hill, near a Barricado made (cross a high way)
to stop the Enemies sudden passage in the night, and himself accompanied
with the President, and the Marshall advanced forwards toward the scout, and
having given direction to Sir Henry Davers (who commanded the Horse under the
Marshall) for the ordering of the Troops, sent the Marshall to take view of
the Enemy, who brought him word, that Horse and Foot of theirs were advanced;
whereupon the Lord Deputy with Sir Oliver Lambert rid to view a piece of
ground, between that and the Town, which had on the back of it a Trench,
drawn from the Earl of Thomonds quarter to the West fort: on the front a
boggish Glyn, and passable with Horse only at one ford, which before he had
entrenched: the ground whereupon the Enemy must have drawn in gross, to force
the passage, was flankerd from the Earls quarter by the Cannon; it was
resolved to make that ground good, being of greater advantage for Horse and
Foot, both to be imbattled, and to fight: upon view whereof the Lord Deputy
sent the Marshall word, that on that place he was resolved to give the Enemy
battle, and sent the Sergeant Major (Sir John Barkley) to draw out Sir Henry
Folliots, and Sir Oliver Saint-Iohns Regiments to that place: O Campo (that
commanded all the Spaniards that came last out of Spain) desired Tyrone that
he might imbattle his men, and presently give on, to join that way with Don
Iuan, for their purpose was at that time, by that means to have put into the
Town all the Spaniards with Tirrell, and eight hundred of their chief men,
and the next night from the Town, and their Army to have forced both our
quarters, of the success whereof they were so confident, that they reckoned us
already theirs, and were in contention, whose prisoners the Lord Deputy should
be, and whose the President, and so of the rest: But Tyrone (discovering the
Marshall, and Sir Henry Davers to be advanced with all the Horse, and Sir
Henry Powers squadron of Foot) retired beyond a ford at the foot of that
hill, (with purpose as he fained) till his whole Army were drawn more close;
instantly the Marshall sent the Lord Deputy word by Sir Francis Rush, that the
Enemy retired in some disorder; whereupon the Lord Deputy came up unto him,
and gave order that all the Foot should follow; when we were advanced to the
Ford (but our Foot not wholly come to us) the Enemy drew off in three great
bodies of foot, and all their horse in the rear: The Lord Deputy asked of
some that understood the Country, whether beyond that ford, The Lo. President
di^ected by the L. Deputy to guard the Camp against any attempt to be made by
the Spaniards.
there were near any ground of strength for the Enemy to make advantage of;
but being answered that there was none, but a fair Champion, he drew after the
Enemy, and then desired the Lord President to return from thence, and secure
the Camp, and attend the sallies of Don Iuan, which he did, with whom the
Lord Deputy sent the Earl of Thomonds Horse, Sir Anthony Cooks, and Sir
Oliver Lamberts, and only took with him between three or four hundred Horse,
and under twelve hundred Foot, but being drawn out some mile farther, we
might perceive the Enemy to stand firm, upon a ground of very good advantage
for them, having a bog between us, and a deep ford to pass, and in all
appearance with a resolution to fight: the Marshall being advanced with the
Horse near unto the Ford, sent unto the Lord Deputy, that he perceived the
Enemy in some disorder; and that if he would give him leave to charge, he
hoped to give a very good account of it; the Lord Deputy left it to his
discretion, to do as he should find present occasion, out of the disposition
of the Enemy; whereupon the Earl of Clanrickard that was with the Marshall,
importuned him exceedingly to fight, and the Lord Deputy sent to draw up the
Foot (with all expedition) close together, who marched as fast as it was
possible for them to keep their orders; the Marshall as soon as a wing of the
Foot of the Vaunt-guard was come up unto him, and Sir Henry Power with his
Regiment drawn over the Ford, advanced with some hundred Horse, accompanied
with the Earl of Clanrickard, and gave occasion of skirmish upon the bog side,
with some hundred hargubisheers; the Enemy thereupon put out some of their
loose shot from their battle, and entertained the fight: their three battalions
standing firm on the other side of the bog, at the first our shot were put
close to the Horse, but with a second they beat the enemies loose shot into
their battle; and withal the Marshall, with the Earl of Clanrickard, and Sir
Richard Greame, offered a charge on a battle of one thousand Foot, and finding
them to stand firm, wheeled a little about: by this time Sir William Godolphin
with the Lord Deputies Horse, and Captain Mynshall with the Lord Presidents
Horse, (who were appointed to keep still in gross, to answer all accidents)
was come up, and Sir John Barkley with two of our three bodies of Foot:
whereupon the Marshall with the Earl of Clanrickard, united themselves with
Sir Henry Davers, Captain Taffe and Captain Fleming, charged again the
Horse, and the rear of the same battle, who presently thereupon, both Horse
and Foot fell into disorder and brake.

All this while the Vantgard of the Enemies in which was Terrill, and all the
Spaniards, stood firm upon a Bog on the right hand, unto whom, within
Calievers shotthe Lord Deputy had drawn up our Rear upon a little hill, and
willed them to stand firm, till they received direction from him: but
perceiving the gross drawing between our men that were following the
execution, and the other Bodies of foot, he drew up that squadron, (commanded
by Captain Roe) to charge them in Flanck; whereupon they presently drew off,
and in a great gross marched to the top of the next hill, and there for a
little time) made a stand; the Rear of the Enemy being in their retreat, the
Van went off with few slain, but with the loss of many of their Arms, A
glorious victory.
their Battle (being the greatest Body) was put all to the sword, and not
above some sixty escaped: The Vantguard who went last off, were broken on the
top of the hill; the Irish for the most part quit the Spaniards, who making a
stand, were broken by the Lord Deputies Troops, and most of them killed, O
Campo the chief Commander taken prisoner by the Cornet, John Pykman, two
Captains 7. Alferoes, and 40. Soldiers taken prisoners by such as followed
the execution, which continued a mile and a half, and left there, only tired
with killing: There were of the Irish rebels twelve hundred dead bodies left
in the place, and as we heard from themselves, about eight hundred hurt,
whereof many of them dyed that night: they lost above two thousand Arms, their
Powder, Drums, and nine Ensigns, which was more then ever they had together
before; of Captains, (besides other men of mark) fourteen were slain, and
on our side only Sir Richard Greames Cornett was killed, Sir Henry Davers
hurt with a sword slightly, Sir William Godolphin a little rased on the thigh
with a Halbert, Captain Crofts the Scout-Master with a shot in the back, and
not above five or six common Soldiers hurt, many of our horses killed, and
more hurt: The Earl of Clanricard had many fair escapes, being shot through
his Garments, and no man did bloody his sword more then his Lordship that day,
and would not suffer any man to take any of the Irish prisoners, but bad them
kill the Rebels. After the Retreit was sounded, the Lord Deputy did give the
Order of Knighthood to the Earl of Clanricard, in the field in the midst of
the dead bodies, and returning back to the Camp, drew out the whole Army,
and gave God thanks for this Victory with their prayers; At the ending
whereof, and a volley of shot for joy discharged, Don Iuan (who was attentive
to hear of the Spaniards approach) hearing the volley, and conceiving that his
Ayds were in fight with us, made a salley out of the Town; but when he
perceived the Spanish Colors to be carried by Englishmen in triumph, he made a
speedy retreit. The Enemies Army, as Alonso de o Campo does assure us, was
six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse; there were some of the Irish taken
Prisoners, that offered great ransomes, but presently upon their bringing to
the Camp, they were hanged.

Although no man is less credulous then my self is of idle Prophesies, An old
Irish prophecy proved true.
the most whereof are coined after things are done, yet I make bold to relate
this which succeeds, for long before the thing I speak of was brought to
light: my self was an eye witness when it was reported; in concealing it I
should wrong the truth, which makes me bold to remember it: Many times I did
hear the Earl of Thomond tell the Lord President, that in an old Book of
Irish prophesies which he had seen, it was reported, that toward the latter
days there should be a battle fought between the English and the Irish, in
a place which the Book names, near unto Kinsale. The Earl of Thomond
coming out of England, and landing first at Castle-haven, and after at
Kinsale, as aforesaid: in the time of the siege, my self and diverse others
heard him again report the Prophecy to the President, and named the place,
where (according to the Prophecy) the field should be fought: the day
whereupon the victory was obtained, the Lord President and the Earl rode out
to see the dead bodies of the vanquished, and the President asked some that
were there present, by what name that ground was called; they not knowing to
what end he did demand it, told him the true name thereof, which was the same
which the Earl so often before had reported to the President. I beseech the
Reader to believe me, for I deliver nothing but truth: but as one Swallow
makes no Summer, so shall not this one true Prophecy increase my credulity in
old Predictions of that kind.

The five and twentieth in the afternoon the Spaniards made a sally, 25.
December.
but they were enforced to retreat into the Town; Two sallyes made by the
Spaniards.
at nine in the night they sallyed again to hinder our works in the Trenches,
the skirmish continued two hours, in the end they were repulsed: on our side
the Ensigns of Captain Roper and Captain Gh^st were hurt; what harm they
received, we know not.

The six and twentieth in the night they gave again upon our Trenches, 26
December.
and enforced a Lieutenant (with his Guard) to quit them; Another sally
and from thence they went to a little Fort of ours on the west side of the
Town: but there they found so good resistance, as they were enforced to
retreat with the loose of four men slain, and eight hurt.

The seven and twentieth nothing was done, 27. December.
and that whole day was (by the Lord Deputy, the Lord President, and the rest
of the Council then in the Camp) spent in making of Dispatches into ENGLAND.

CHAP. XXII.
Zubiaur arrived at Castlehaven, and immediately returned* O Donnell, Redmond
Burke, etc. imbarqued for Spain. The names of such of the Irish as fled into
Spain. The loss which the Rebels had in passing through Mounster, after the
battle of Kinsale.
THE eight and twentieth, 28. December.
intelligence was brought to the Lord President, who related it to the Lord
Deputy, that Pedro Zubiaur Zubiaur arrived at Castlehaven, and immediately
returned.
(who was (as is said) a great Commander in the Spanish fleet that came to
Kinsale) was lately landed at Castlehaven, and hearing of Tyrones overthrow,
he made no stay but set sail for Spain, carrying with him O Donnell, Redmond
Burke, Hugh Mostian, Odonnell, Redmond Burke, etc. imbarqued for Spain.
with others of their train, whose names I will omit; but for the better
satisfaction of the Reader I think it meet, to set down the names of sundry
other Mounster men, who not long after fled into Spain, whose names ensue.

A List of the names of such of the Irish as have shipped themselves for Spain
out of Mounster, besides diverse others which attended these, and whose names
are not known, all which set sail since December, 1601.
From Castlehaven in December, 1601. The names of such of the Irish as fled
into Spain.

Odonnell. Redmond Burke. Hugh Mostian. and their train.
In a Pinnace of advice that brought the Kings Letters, which were intercepted
by the President in February, 1601. Osulevan Bears sons, and with him one
Trant of Dingle. Donnell, Son to Sir Finin Odrischall,
From Ardea in a Patache the seventh of June, 1602.
Donoghe, Bastard brother to Florence Mac Cartie. Donoghe Mac Maghon Obrien Mac
Enaspicke. Brian Okelly.
From Kinsale with Don Iuan de Aquila, in March, 1601.
Teg Mac Donnell ne Contie. William Mac Shane, the Seneschals Son of
Imokillie. Dermond Mac Conoghor Odrischall of Castlehaven, together with his
Brother and Sons. Thomas Omoroghoe alias Thomas Keughe Mac Edmond of Muskry.
Richard Meaghe, Son and Heir to James Meaghe of Kinsale. Dominicke White of
Kinsale, a Capenters Son. Melaghlen More of Kinsale, borne in Connaght.
Conoghor Omonowe of Kinsale, and there borne. Edmond Mac Shane of Kinsale.
Dermond Mac Shane of Kinsale. Donoghe Deasoghe of Kinsale. Andrew Butler a
kerne borne at Galway. William Butler a kerne. Brothers.
Maghon Mac Donogh Olery under Barry Oge. Dermond Mac Owen. David fits Garret
Barry, and his wife and children dwelling at Rincorran. Garrot Barry Nicholas
Barry John Barry David oge Barry sons to David ^its Garrot aforesaid.
William Hartilige of Rincorran. John Hartelige, son to William aforesaid.
Dermond oge Osulevan of Rincorran. Dermond Ogriffien of Rincorran. John Mac
Donnell Kedie of Rincorran, Dermond Mac Donell Kedie. Brothers.
Maurice Roch fits John of Ellinfinchstowne in Kinal^y, John fits John Roche.
Brothers.
Conoghor Mag Donogh of Rathmore in Kinaley. Donogh Gowe, a Connaght man,
dwelling at Rathmore in Kinaley. Hugo Ohellie, a Connaght man. Donogh Moel mac
Enessis, Dermond Moel mac Carties man, Owen mac Donogh mac Finnin Cartie of
Curowrane, Donel oge Mac Donel Carty, brother to Don Carlos slain at Kinsale.
Finnin oge Cartie, an other brother to Don Carlos. Brothers
Conoghor o Cullenan of Rathmore in Kinalley. Donell Ogriffien of the same.
William mac Cormock, a Connaght man. Dermond mac Shane, a Connaght man. ^dmond
Olavien, William Mac Ricard, Cormocke Olanahie, all Connaght men.
Dermond Deaserghe, a Connaght man. Dermond Olongie of Muskry. Richard Cogan
fits Philip of Barnehelly in Kerry-wherie. Finin Mac Donoghe Cartie, a Cosen to
Don Carlos. Dermond Mac Finin Cartie, of Skeaghe in Carbry. Donnell Mac Finin
Cartie of the same. Donnell Mac Teg Cartie of the same. David Skemnehan of
Rincorran. John Mac Dermond Mac Shane, a Connaght man. Cormocke the Lord
Presidents Footeman, of the Birnes in Leinster. William Mac Shane of Rathmore,
in the County of Limerick. Donnell Mac Shane O Cullenan of Rathmore in Kinaley.
John Oge Olenssie, a Connaght man. Teg Welsh, alias Teg Brenaghe. Cormocke Mac
Donoghe ne Mroen Oriardane. Dermond Mac Donoghe ne Mroen Oriardane. Owen Mac
Donoghe ne Mroen Oriardane. of Muskry, brothers.
Donnell Mac Shane Oriardane of Muskry. John Field fits Maurice of Tracten
Abbie. John Roe Mac William, of the County of Limericke. Donnell O Sissuane of
Kinsale. Teg O Sissuane, Son to Donnell aforesaid. Hugo Lacy. Walter Ley of
Kilkenny. Richard Stacboll. One Master Fits James a Pensioner. These came out
of Spain with Don Iuan, and returned with him.

From Ardea with Connor Odrischall and Archer, the seventh of July, 1602.
Conner Odrischall, eldest Son to Sir Finin Odrischall. James Archer Jesuit.
Collie Mac Swine Mac Edmond, of the Mac Swines of Carbry. his Son was hanged
at Donboy in June, 1602. Cormocke Mac Donoghe, vic' Donnell Rabaghe one of the
Carties. Donoghe Mac Conner, of Castlehaven, and owner of it. Donnell Mac
Connor, vic' Dermond Odrischall. brothers.
Mac Con Mac Iffie Odrischall. Teg Mac Iffie Odrischall. Morriertaghe Mac Iffie
Odrischall. Brothers.
Dermond Mac Conner of Kilkoe, Dermond Oge of the same, of the Carties,
brothers.
Shane Mac Dermond Iholonghane of Bantrie. Shane Mac Gillicuddie Iholoughane of
Bear. Teg Oge ne Mockloghe. Owen Mac Teg ne Mocklog^e. of the Carties,
brothers.
Finnin mac Brown of the Odrischals. Conner Omaghon of Lem^on, one of the
Omaghons of Ivagh. One of the sons of Gilliduff of Clear, and one of the
Odrischals. Dermond Oge mac Dermond Odrischall. Conner mac Finnin Roe of
Bonnanie in Bantrie. Tirlogh son to Teg Reugh mac Maghon of Thomond, who slew
his Father when Donboy was besieged, his lands her Majesty has given to the
Earl of Thomonds brother. Dowaltagh mac Morogh Icorromanie, foster-brother to
Odonnell. Elline ny Donogh, late wife to Dermond Moel mac Cartie, brother to
Florence. Finnin Kearigh of the Fioll, one of the Carties. Dermond mac
Shannaganie, a Rimer. Gilliduff, a Thomond man. Two Soldiers of Thomond which
served Conner Odrischall. David mac Shane of the Dingle, servant to James
Archer the Jesuit. Shane mac Dermond, vic' Donogh Oge o Cullenan, Archers boy.
Conner Oge Odrischall, heir to Conner Sir Finnins son, nine years of age.
Thomas, son and heir to the Knight of the Valley, 14 years old. Donnell
Omaghon, a Mariner that came in company with Owen mac Eggan. Five Frenchmen
that were taken by Teg Reughe, when they took the Ship and Merchant of
Gallway.
The nine and twentieth, 29. December.
the Lord Deputy, and the Lord President (from sundry persons, The loss which
the Rebels had in passing through Mounster after the battle of Kinsale.
and diverse ways) were advertised, that Tyrone in passing the broad water,
lost many of his Carriages, and one hundred and forty of his men drowned;
those which took their way through Connologh, (for they brake into many parts)
had also loss of men and Carriages in the river of May, and the like at the
Abbey of Ownhy in Omulrians Country; so as they lost of all sorts above two
hundred: The Footmen wearied in the flight, (to go the lighter) cast away
their Arms, and their hurt men (carried upon weak and tired garrans) were by
their fellows left upon the way, where they dyed; their tired horses were
slain by their Masters, and the Country Inhabitants (for spoils sake) upon
advantages would not spare to take some of their heads, but not in that
proportion as they might have done, if they had been sound Subjects. Lastly, it
was reported, (but how true it is I am somewhat doubtful) that Tyrone
himself, and Mac Mahon were both hurt in the battle, and carried away on
Litters. To conclude, never men were more dismayed with extremity of fear,
then these light-footed Traitors were.

CHAP. XXIII.
A Parley desired by Don Iuan, and granted by the Lord Deputy. Don Iuan his
Pr^positions, with their Answers, and his Reply. The Reasons which moved the
Lord Deputy and Council to yield to a Composition. The Articles of the
Composition.
THE last of December Don Iuan offered a parley, sending the Drum Major out of
the Town, with a sealed Letter to the Lord Deputy, A Parley desired by Don
Iuan and granted by the Lord Deputy.
by an Alfeeres, by which he required (as by the Copy thereof conveyed in the
dispatch by Sir Richard Morison into England may appear) that some Gentleman
of special trust and sufficiency, might be sent into the Town from his
Lordship to confer with him, whom he would acquaint with such conditions as
he then stood upon; which being granted by his Lordship, Sir William Godolphin
was employed in that negotiation; which in what sort it was carried, because it
imports much, in respect of many particularities of special moment to be
considered; it is thought necessary it should be here more largely delivered,
his first conference with Sir William Godolphin tends to this: Don Iuan his
propositions,
That having found the Lord Deputy (whom he terms the Viceroy) although a
sharp and powerful Opposito, yet an honorable Enemy, and the Irish not only
weak and barbarous, but (as he feared) perfidious friends, he was so far
in his affection reconciled to the one, and distasted with the other, as did
invite him to make an overture of such a composition, as might be safe and
profitable for the State of England, with less prejudice to the Crown of
Spain, by delivering into the Viceroyes power the Town of Kinsale, with all
other places in Ireland, held by the Spanish, so as they might depart upon
honorable terms, fitting such men of war, as are not by necessity enforced
to receive conditions, but willingly enduced for just respects, to disengage
themselves, and to relinquish a people, by whom their King and Master had been
so notoriously abused, if not betrayed: That if the Viceroy liked to entertain
further parley touching this point, he would first be pleased to understand them
rightly, and to make his propositions such, as might be suitable to men
thoroughly resolved, rather to bury themselves alive, and to endure a thousand
deaths, then that to give way to one Article of accord, that should taste of
baseness or dishonor, being so confident of their present strength, and the
Royal second of Spain, that they should make no doubt of yielding good
account of themselves, and their interest in this kingdom: But that a just
disdain, and spleen conceived against the nation, dissuaded them from being
further engaged for it, then of force they must: Sir William Godolphin being
commanded by the Lord Deputy only to receive Don Iuans propositions and
demands, having made his Lordship and Council this relation, The Answer.
was by them returned with the Answer following. That howbeit the Lord Deputy
having lately defeated their succors, did so well understand his own strength
and their weakness, as made him nothing doubt of forcing them within a very
short time, whom he did know to be pressed with (...) difficulties, how much
soever they labored to cover and conceal the same: Yet knowing that her
sacred Majesty, out of her gracious and merciful disposition, would esteem
the glory of her victory to be blemished by a voluntary effusion, and an
obstinate expense of Christian blood, was content to entertain this offer of
agreement, so as it might be concluded under such honorable articles of her
Highness, as the advantage she had against them gave reason to demand, being
the same, which are sent with this dispatch Signed by Don Iuan, the leaving of
his Treasure, Munition, Artillery, and the Queens natural Subjects to her
disposition only excepted: All which points he did peremptorily refuse, with
constant asseveration, Don Iuan his reply.
that both he and all his would rather endure the last of misery, then be
found guilty of so foul a treason, against the honor of his Prince, and the
reputation of his profession, though he should find himself unable to
subsist, much more now, when he might not only hope to sustain the burden of
the war for a time, but with patience and constancy in the end to overcome
it: That he took it so ill, to be understood in having Articles of that
nature propounded unto him, as were they but once again remembered in the
capitulation, the Viceroy should from henceforth use the advantage of his
sword, and not the benefit of his former offers; adding that the Viceroy might
rather think to have made a good and profitable purchase, for the crown of
England, if with expense of two hundred thousand Ducats, he had procured Don
Iuan to quit his interest and footing, but in Baltimore, to say nothing of
Kinsale, Castlehaven, and Beere-haven; for (said he) suppose that all we (with
the rest of our places here) had perished, yet would that Pen-Insula (being
strong in its own nature) bettered by our art and industry, provided (as it
is) of victuals, munition, and of good Artillery, preserve unto the King of
Spain, a safe and commodious por^ for the arrival of his fleet, and be able
to maintain it self againt a land Army of ten thousand, until Spain (being
so deeply engaged) did in honor relieve them, which would draw on a more
powerful invasion then the first, being undertaken upon false grounds, as the
instance of a base and barbarous people, who in discovering their weakness,
and want of power, have armed the King my master to rely upon his own
strength, being tied in honor to relee^e his people that are engaged, and to
cancel the memory of our former disaster: But this was spoken (said he) in
case the Viceroy were able to force this Town, as I assure my self he
cannot, having upon mine honor within these walls, at this instant above two
thousand fighting men, that are strong and able, besides those which having
been sick and hurt, recover daily: The greatest part of these composed of old
Soldiers, which fall not but by the sword, and those that were new, being now
both trained to their Arms, and grown acquainted with the Climat, are more
able to endure then at the first; our means are good as it has been, anytime
these two months; such as the Spaniards can well away withal, and thereof to
suffice us for three months more; we lodge in good warm houses, have store of
munition, and (which is best of all) stand well assured that our succors will
be shortly here; to be plain, we preserve our men, and reserve our strength
the best we may, hoping to front you in a breach, which if our hearts fail us
not, we have hands and breasts enough to stop against treble your forces;
though I will give the Viceroy this right, that his men are passing good, but
spent and tired out with misery of a winter siege, which he has obstinatly
mainetained beyond my expectation, but with such caution, and upon so good
guard, as having nicely watched all advantages; I could never fasten a salley
yet upon him, but with loss to my self, wherein I must acknowledge my hopes
deceived, that grounding on some error in his approaches, promised my self the
defeat of at least one thousand men at one blow; but when we meet on the
breach, I am confident (upon reason) to lay five hundred of your best men on
the earth, and rest hopeful that the loss of those will make a great hole in
an Army, that has already suffered so much extremity; but to conclude our
business, the King my master sent me to assist the Condees Oneale and Odonnell,
presuming on their promise that I should have joined with them, within few
days of the arrival of his forces; I expected long in vain, sustained the
Viceroyes Arms, saw them drawn to the greatest head they could possible make,
lodged within two miles of Kinsale, reenforced with certain Companies of
Spaniards, every hour promising to relieve us, and being joined together to
force your Camps, saw them at last broken with a handful of men, blown
asunder into diverse parts of the world; Odonnell into Spain, Oneale to the
furthest part of the North, so as now I find no such Condee^ in rerum Natura
(for those were the very words he used) as I came to join withal; and
therefore have moved this accord the rather to di^ingage the King my master,
from assisting a people so unable in themselves, that the whole burden of the
war must lie upon him, and so perfidious, as perhaps might be enduced in
requital of his favor, at last to betray him.

Upon relation made by Sir William Godolphin to the Lord Deputy and Council
of these offers of Don Iuan, The reasons which moved the Lo. Deputy and
Council to yield to a Composition.
which at several Conferences had been brought to such heads, as by the
Articles between them is more particularly specified, it was thought good (for
diverse important reasons) to proceed roundly to the agreement: for whereas in
the Propositions by him made, there was not any thing that admitted exceptions
on our part, but only that he required to carry with him his Ordnance,
Munition and Treasure, that being no way prejudicial to the maine scope, or
drift of our Treaty, which chiefly respected the common good, and safety of
the Kingdom, deserved not almost to be thought upon. Besides that, the
Treasure being at first but one hundred thousand Ducats, with four months
payment of so many men, and other necessary deductions, could not be but very
near wasted, and that little remainder more fit for a prey to the poor
Soldiers, (after this tedious travel) then for a clause in the Composition.
Furthermore, how needful it was to embrace this accord, may clearly be seen
by whosoever considers the state of our Army, almost utterly tired, how full
of danger and difficulty it was to attempt a Breach, defended by so many
hands; how long time it might have cost us (if we had lodged in the Breach)
before we could have carried the Town, being full of strong Castles; how her
Majesty's Ships, and others being in the Harbor, should have been forced
speedily to forsake us for want of victuals; how our selves were not provided
for above six days at the time of this parley; that we had neither Munition,
nor Artillery, but for one Battery, in one place at once, five of our Pieces
being before crazed: And finally, that if we had missed of our purpose, the
whole Country had been hazarded: Furthermore, that which seemed of greatest
consequence to enduce his Lordship to this agreement, was, that the Spaniards
in Baltemore, Castlehaven, and Beerehaven, Build your enemy a silver bridge to
waft him away, if he be potent, or not hopeless of supplies.
by virtue of this Contract, were likewise to surrender those places, and
depart the Country, which how hard a matter it would have prooved, and how
long and dangerous a war it would have drawn on, to root them out, they being
strongly fortified, and well stored with victuals, Munition and Artillery, may
easily be conjectured, for that of necessity the Army (for some space) must
have rested, and in the end have been constrained after a new supply of
necessaries, (to her Majesty's intolerable charges) to transport themselves
thither by Sea, the way by land being unpassable, in which time their Succors
out of Spain, in all likelihood would have been come unto them; the King being
so far engaged in his Honor to second his enterprise, and we barred of that
prosecution of the Rebels, which now by this Agreement we may wholly intend.

For which considerations, the Lo: Deputy and Council thought it in their
wisdoms meet, to condescend to more indifferent conditions, which being
propounded and agreed upon by Don Iuan, these Articles ensuing were signed and
sealed on both parts.

The Articles of Composition between the Lord Deputy and Council, and Don
Iuan de Aquila.
Mountjoy.

In the Town of Kinsale in the Kingdom of Ireland, The ^rticles of the
Composition.
the second day of the Month of January, 1601, between the Noble Lords the
Lord Mountjoy, Lord Deputy, and General in the Kingdom of Ireland, and Don
Iuan de equild. Capta^ne and Campmaster General, and Governor of the Army of
his Majesty the King of Spain, the said Lord Deputy being en^amped, and
besieging the said town and the said Don Iuan within (...) respects, and to
avoid shedding of blood, these Condi^ions following were made between the said
Lords Generals, and their Camps, with the Articles that follow.

FIrst, That the said Don Iuan de Aquila shall quit the places which Don Iuan
with them may go for Spain, if he can at one time, if not in two shippings.

Item, That the Soldiers at this present being under the command Don Iuan in
this Kingdom, shall not bear Arms against her Majesty the Queen of
England, wheresoever supplies shall come from Spain, till the said Soldiers
be unship^ed in some of the Ports of Spain, being dispatched (as soon as may
be) by the Lord Deputy, as he promises upon his Faith and Honor.

Item, For the accomplishing whereof, the Lord Deputy offers Don Iuan and
his Army, as well Spaniards as other nations whatsoever, that are under his
command, and that he may depart with all the things he has, Arms,
Munitions, Money, Ensigns displayed, Artillery, and other whatsoever
provisions of war, and any kind of stuff, as well that which is in
Castlehaven, as Kinsale and other parts.

Item, That they shall have ships and victuals, sufficient for their money,
according and at the prices which here they use to give, that all the people
and the said things, may be shipped (if it be possible) at one time, if not at
two, and that to be within the time above named.

Item, That if by contrary winds, or by any other occasions, there shall arrive
at any Port of these kingdoms of Ireland, or England, any ships of these (in
which the said men go) they be entreated as friends, and may ride safely in
the Harbor, and be victualled for their money, and have moreover things which
they shall need, to furnish them to their voyage.

Item, During the time that they shall stay for shipping, victuals shall be
given to Don Iuans people, at just and reasonable rates.

Item, That of both parts shall be cessation of Arms, and security that no
wrong be offered any one.

Item, That the ships (in which they shall go for Spain) may pass safely, by
any other ships whatsoever, of her Majesty's the Queen of England; and so
shall they of the said Queen, and her Subjects by those that shall go from
hence, and the said ships being arrived in Spain, shall return as soon as
they have unshipped their men, without any impediment given them by his
Majesty, or any other person in his name, but rather they shall show them
favor, and help them (if they need any thing;) and for security of this, they
shall give into the Lord Deputy hands, three Captains such as he shall
choose.

Don Iuan offers that he will confirm, and swear to accomplish this
agreement: And likewise some of the Captains of his Charge shall swear and
confirm the same in a several writing.

Item, that he in person shall abide in this Kingdom, where the Lord Deputy
shall appoint, (till the last shipping) upon his Lordships word: And if it
happen that his people be shipped all at once, the said Don Iuan shall go in
the same Fleet, without any impediment given him: But rather the Lord Deputy
shall give a good ship, in which he may go; and if his said men be sent in
two shippings, then he shall go in the last.

and give his word in the behalf of her Majesty the Queen and his own, to
keep and accomplish this agreement, and jointly the Lord President, the Lo.
Marshall of the Camp, and the other of the Council of State, and the Earls
of Thomond and Clanricard, shall swear and confirm the same in a several
writing.

I do promise and swear to accomplish and keep these Articles of Agreement,
and promise the same likewise on the behalf of his Majesty Catholic, the
King my Master.

George Carew. Thomond. Clanricard. Richard Wingfield. Robert Gardener. George
Bourchier. Richard Levison. Don Iuan de Aguila.



CHAP. XXIIII.
The names of the Hostages delivered by Don Iuan. Don Iuan his demand of
victuals for the transpor^ation of his men. The victuals which was delivered to
Don Iuan, and their rates. The number of Spaniards which were transported out
of Ireland. The Lord Deputy brake up his siege and returned to Cork. Captain
Harvies Commission for his government.
THE day the Articles were Signed, Don Iuan dined with the Lord Deputy, and
the next day after, the Lord President (having Sir Richard Levison and Sir
William Godolphin in his company) was sent into the Town of Kinsale, where he
dyned with Don Iuan to treat with him, about such shipping and victuals as he
would demand, for the transportation of his men, and at what rates, for the
which ready money was to be paid: And also to demand of him, the three
Captains which the Lord Deputy had made choice of, which were Don Pedro
Morijon, The names of the hostages delivered by Don Iuan.
Captain Pedro Suaco, and Captain Diego Gonzales Sigler, to remain Pledges
until the return of the ships: The demands he made of victuals, and tonnage
for the victualling and transporting of three thousand and two hundred men
(remaining in Kinsale, Castlehaven, Baltimore, and Donboy, whereof two thousand
and six hundred in Kinsale, and six hundred at the places aforesaid) were as
follows.

First his demands was six weeks victuals, Don Iuan his demand of victuals
for the transportation of his men.
in form following.

For every week four days flesh, three days fish.

For every flesh day, bread four and twenty ownces for a man, and six of
Beef.

For every fish day, four and twenty ounces of Bread, six ounces of fish, and
one ounce of Butter.

For every hundred men, one Pipe of wine, besides water.

For shipping for every three men, two Tuns, and he to give forty shillings
le Tun, and his men to be landed at the first Port they can touch in Spain.

For the expediting of these demands, the Lord Deputy gave present direction
to all the Ports within the Province, for the taking up of shipping, and
warrant to Allen Apsley (the Commissary for the victuals in Mounster) to issue
out of the Queens store, according to the demands made: These quantities of
victuals ensuing, for the which he should receive money of Don Iuan, whereby
the Magazine might be supplied.

Toward the accomplishing whereof, The victuals which was delivered to Don
Iuan, and their rates.
the Comissary of the victuals delivered this ensuing proportion, viz. Bisquet
186052 li. 2067 4 8 Butter 6304 157 12 3 Flesh 47394 789 18 00 Fish 18339 305
13 00 Ryce 1235 30 17 6 Summa tot. 3351 5 5

Which being with all possible conveniencie despatcht, The number of the
Spaniards which were transported out of Ireland
haste was made for their Embarquing at two sundry times: There was shipped at
Kinsale, (the care whereof was committed to Captain Francis Slingsbye) 2070:
at Baltimore, and at Castlehaven by Captain Roger Harvie 415, in all 3025,
besides Captains, inferior Officers, Priests, and religious men, and a great
Company of Irish.

The fourth of January a Spanish ship appeared by the old Head of Kinsale,
hovering before the Harbor mouth. The Lord Deputy having concluded the
Composition with Don John, for the rendering of the Town of Kinsale, sent a
Boat with some men in her to let them know that Don John and he were good
friends, and therefore he might safely come in without any danger, (in which
Boat was one Thomas Foster, a Nephew to Sir Anthony Cook) which message
as soon as it was delivered, the Captain of the ship took in all the men,
hoysed sail, and stood away with all speed for Spain. This might seem to be
an action performed with no good approbation, in putting those men into their
power; but whether it be justifiable or no, the success prooved it to be of
very great consequence: for though the news of the defeat of the Irish Army
were come into Spain by O Donnell, and those with him, yet Don John stood
firm in Kinsale without danger to be much pressed by the Deputy, soliciting
new forces, hoping thereby to repair their former losses, to reunite their
dispersed Companies, and to overthrow the English forces, being much spent and
sore weakened by their Winter siege: Before the arrival of O Donnell Seconds
were in preparing, and after his arrival both increased, and much hastened, as
may appear by the Letters intercepted, which came out of Spain to Don John,
when he was at Cork, both from the King of Spain, the Duke of Lerma, the
Secretary Ibarra, and others: But when they understood by those men, that Don
John had compounded for the rendering of Kinsale, and for their returning into
Spain, it then put them to a stand for their proceedings, and at last
concluded to give over the attempt, finding so little assistance either in the
power or courage of the Irish: And if this had not fallen out thus, and that
those seconds had come and landed in Ireland, it might have been much doubted,
or rather positiuely believed the contrary, that those Spaniards would not have
been bound by Don John's Articles, but have taken their best opportunity of
their force and power, in kindling a new flame, and making that Kingdom again
in as desperate an estate as ever heretofore it has been, if not worse.

These things being thus ordered, and no cause appearing of longer stay in the
Camp, the ninth of January 9. Ianuar.
the Lord Deputy rose, and the same day he rode to Cork, The Lo. Deputy brake
up his siege and returned to Cork.
having in his company Don Iuan de Aguila, and many of the Spanish Captains,
the gross of his companies being left in Kinsale. The Lord Deputy lodged in
the Bishop of Corkes house, Don Iuan in the City, and the President at Shandon
Castle. 10. Ianuar.
The day following the Captains received directions to repair to sundry
Towns in Mounster appointed for their Garrisons: And the same day Captain
Roger Harvie, and Captain George Flower were dispatched with certain
Companies to go by Sea, to receive the Castles of Castle-haven, Donneshed, and
Donnelong at Baltimore, and Dunboy at Beerehaven in the West, all which were
then in the possession of the Spaniards. Also the said Captain Harvie had a
Commission granted unto him, for the government of all the Countries between
Rosse in Carbery, and the Bay of Bantrye, as follows.

A Commission from the Lord Deputy and Council unto Captain Roger Harvy, for
the government of Carbry.
Mountioye.

We greet you well: Whereas we have thought it very expedient for the
furtherance of her Majesty's service, and the drawing and settling the
Inhabitants of the Western parts* of the Province of Mounster (which lately
revolted) into her Majesty allegiance again, Captain Harvies Commission for
his government.
which in regard that diverse the Rebels which were united to Tyrone, and the
Spaniards, upon the overthrow given them, made escape, and are drawn to
Baltimore, Castlehaven, and those other Western parts: For the better
prosecution, cutting off, and apprehension of those, and of all other Rebels,
Traitors, Fellons, and other capital Offenders, by all the best and speediest
means that may be: We have thought it good, in regard of the great knowledge
and experience, we have had and found in your faith and valor, and in respect
of the special trust, confidence, and sufficiency, we repose in you, We
have thought it good to grant and commit unto you, (during our pleasure) the
command and authority (by the power granted us by her Majesty) over the
Castles of Baltimore, and Castlehaven, and the whole Country of Carbery, and
over all the Countries, territories or places of Collemore, Collibeg, Ivagh,
Mounterbarry, Slewghteagibane, Slewghteage, Roe, Cloncahill, Clondermot,
Clonloghten, and Coshmore, and over all the other Countries, territories,
places by what name or names soever they be called, from the Town of Rosse,
to the hither parts of the Meares, and bounds of Beer and Bantry, and so in
compass Northwards, to Muskery: And we do give you power and authority over
the Queens people and her Subjects, and Inhabitants, in all, or any the said
Countries, appoynting and authorizing you hereby, to prosecute with fire and
sword, all Rebels, Traitors, or other capital Offenders, and all their Ayders,
Releevers, Maintayners, Receivers, and Abettors, or any other Offenders
whatsoever that are not ameanable to her Majesty's Laws, or have combined, or
adhered themselves, to any her Majesty's enemies, or to any now in actual
rebellion against her Highness, and to make ceasure of all their goods and
chattles to her Majesty's use: And for the better effecting of this her
Highness service, and the special trust reposed in you, we do hereby give
unto you liberty, to employ, or send among the Enemies, or Rebels (now in
action) such Messengers and Espialls, as you s^all think fit to use, and to
write, to parley, confer, or treat with them, or any of them, and to receive
Messengers or Letters from them, and to keep any of them in your company
fourteen days, to procure the doing of service, or to gain intelligences
from them; and upon assurance and good hopes, that any of the said Rebels will
do service to her Majesty: We do hereby authorize you to safeconduct them
by warrant under your hand, for the like space of fourteen days, so as in the
mean time you send them unto us, or to the chief Governor of the Province
(for the time being) which your safeconduct shall be duly observed, to all
those you grant it unto. And for the better and speedier clensing, and purging
the Country from Rebels, and Malefactors; We do hereby give, and commit unto
you, full power and authority to execute by Marshall Law, all notable and
apparent Offenders and Malefactors* that can neither dispend forty shillings
in Lands per Annum, nor are worth ten pounds in goods, and as for such Rebels
and Malefactors, as are not within compass of Martial Law, them to apprehend,
and commit to the Sheere Goal, there to remain and attend their trials by due
course of her Majesty's common Laws: And for the better advancement of her
Majesty's service, we do hereby authorize you, to go aboard any Ship,
Barque, or other Vessel, that shall be, or arrive in those parts, and to make
search in them for Traitors, Jesuits, Seminaries, Letters, or prohibited wares,
and to make stay of them, if just occasion so require, and to press, and take
up any the Boats, or Vessels, that are or shall be within the compass of your
command, and them to send and employ, to such place or places, as her Majesty's
service shall give you occasion, or otherwise to use and dispose of them, as
you in your discretion shall think meetest. And this our authority and
Commission to you granted, to have continuance during the pleasure of us the
Lord Deputy; and if we shall not recull the same during our abode in this
Province, then the same to be in force during the pleasure of the Lord
President, and no longer. And therefore we do hereby straightly charge and
command all her Majesty's Officers. Ministers, and loving Subjects, to be unto
you (in the due execution of the premises) aiding, obedient, and assisting at
their uttermost perils; and for such your whole doings herein: These shall be
unto you sufficient warrant and discharge:

Given under her Majesty's privy Signet, at the Camp before Kinsale, the
seventh day of January, 1601. George Carew. Richard Wingfield. George
Bourchier.



To our well beloved Captain, Roger Harvy.
The eleaventh, January 11.
the Lord President had intelligence from England, that James (the late
restored Earl of Desmond) was dead, and that eighteen hundred quarters of
Oats were sent into Mounster for the relief of our horses.


CHAP. XXV.
Don Iuan his request to the Lord Deputy. A resolution in Council to erect
certain Forts in Mounster. The request of the Inhabitants of Kinsale to the
Lord President. Certain Companies cashiered. A Letter from the Lord President
to her Majesty. The Examination of Richard Owen. Richard Owen his Message from
Tyrone to the Lord Deputy. Instructions for Captain George Blunt.
THE fourteenth, 14. Ianuar.
Don Iuan wrote to the Lord Deputy, Don Iuan his request to the Lord Deputy.
to pray his Lordship, that expedition might be made in taking up of shipping
for his transportation, and that his Lordship would commiserate the poor
Spanish Prisoners in Cork, who were like to perish for want of food: During
the siege there had been taken at Rincorran, Castle Ny Park, in sallyes, and
in the overthrow of Tyrone, together with some runawayes that voluntary came
unto us, about two hundred, rather more then less, whereof some of them had
been sent into ENGLAND. About this time the Lord Deputy, and the Lord
President went by Boat to an Island in the River of Cork, called Halbolin, A
resolution in Council to erect certain forts in Mounster.
six or seven miles from the City, which upon view they thought fit to be
fortified, being so seated, as that no shipping of any burden can pass the
same, but under the command thereof: Whereupon direction was given to Paul Ive
(an Ingeneere) to raise a Fortification there, and also another at Castle Ny
Park, to command the Haven at Kinsale. Furthermore it was resolved in
Council, that Forts should have been erected at Baltimore, and Beerehaven, as
also Cittadells at Cork, Limrick, and Waterford, to keep the Citizens in some
awe; but none of these works were performed, save only the Forts at Halbolyn,
and Castle Ny Park aforesaid.

And the same day the better sort of the Burgesses of Kinsale came to the Lord
President, The request of the Inhabitants of Kinsale to the Lo. President.
to beseech him to render unto them their Charter, Seal, Mace, and Standard,
which some of them, upon the Spaniards a^^ivall at Kinsale, had delivered unto
him (to be safely kept) (...) the Spanish storm was past; which they did not
deliver unto him as a Surrender, but to show and manifest their Duties: The
President acquainted the Lord Deputy with their Petition, and be agreement, the
answer (which the President made) was, That before (...) he might not restore
their (...), for that he conceived that they were forfeited: But he would
(...), and so he did; And not long after he had direction to redeliver them,
but with this caution, That they should at their own charges reedifie their
walls, and give help of Laboueres toward the finishing of Castle Ny Park,
which they promised to perform.

From the fourteenth of January unto the last of the same, Certain Companies
cashiered.
no matter of any consequence happened, all which time was spent in civil
causes, in sending of dispatches into England (as occasions did result) in
discharging of Companies which were grown weak, whereof two thousand in List
were casheerd, in hastening away of the Spaniards, and in settling of Garrisons in
the East part of Mounster, among other private dispatches, which the Lord
President sent into England; he wrote this Letter unto her Majesty.

A Letter from the Lord President to her Majesty*
SACRED MAJESTY,
NOw that it has pleased the omnipotent Director of all things to bless you
with a happy Victory over the m^licious Traitors, and for rain enemies, which
endeavored with all their forces to draw from your Imperial Crown, this
Realm of Ireland, in the which by your Majesty's express Commandment, I have
been (though far unworthie) employed in a Charge, wherein ^y weakness does
too much appear; yet since out of your Princely favor, your Majesty has
been pleased to accept of those poor services, which by your Forces, I have
formerly performed, and with your royal hand (to my unspeakeable comfort) unto
my self have witnessed the same, I am emboldened (under the assurance of your
gracious Pardon) to present before your gracious eyes, these unworthy Lines,
unworthy of your view, as well in regard of him that writes them, as the form
wherein they are written. Since the victory aforesaid, the face of this
Kingdom is strangely altered; The Rebel (formerly proud) is now become a
dismayed fugitive, the neutrall Subject which stood at a gaze, better
confirmed, and the Spanyard, (which promised unto himself no less then a
Conquest) is glad to entreat Composition to depart: This wonderful work of
God, (for unto him it is wholly to be ascribed) has brought this Realm, (so
far out of order) in a fayrer way of reduction then ever I knew it. When your
Majesty employed me in this Service, I then feared it was (as now I understand
it to be) a secret punishment from God for my sins, for unto my self I had
propo^^ded that happiness (which others have) never to be far distant from
the comfort of your royal eyes, which adds fullness of joy with admiration to
the beholders. Wherefore gracious Sovereign, commiserate my exile, and let me
your poor Servant, (rich in faith and loyalty unto you) be partaker of
others happiness, that the remainder of my life therein may be blessed: But if
I be not capable of such abundant grace in so great measure, (which my Soul
desires) yet let my humble suite thus far prevail, that in your Princely
favor you will be pleased to give me leave for a few months to behold that
Majesty which is envyed, but not equalled by any earthly Prince.

From your Majesty's City of Cork the nineteenth of January, 1601. Your
Sacred Majesty's vassal and creature, GEORGE CAREVV.


The fourth of February, 4. February.
one Richard Owen an ancient and inward Servant of Tyrones, came unto Cork,
with a message from his Master unto the Lord Deputy; but before I speak of
his Negotiation, I think it convenient to fall back to the sixth of January,
at which time he made means to have access unto the President; for (you must
understand) he had been with Don John in Kinsale: The President acquainting
the Lord Deputy with it, he was called before them both; and was examined by
them, whereunto he made answer as follows.

He says he went out of Ireland with Sir William Stanley, The examination of
Richard Owen.
and was employed by him in the rendering of Deventer to Taxis.

He left Sir William upon a coffeehouse (about four years after being
then a Lieutenant) because Sir William did advance the English, and not the
Irish to charges, and then put himself into the Kings pay as a Pensioner, and
there remained in the Low Countries, and France, until about three years
since; he came over into Ireland by the way of Scotland, and landed at Dunluce,
with purpose to serve Oneale, whose kinsman he is by his mother, and remained
with Tyrone, until by him, he was employed to carry his Son into Spain.

He had Letters from Tyrone and Odonnell, to the King, and from Tyrone unto
Don Iuan Idiaques, the Duke of Lerma, to Fray Gaspar de Cordoua, the Kings
Confessor, the Secretary Prado, and to the Secretary Estevan de y barra.

The contents of the Letters, were to pray Aides to subsist the war,
according to the promise made by the old King; if the aides were sent for
Vlster, then Tyrone required but four or five thousand men, if the King did
purpose to send an Army into Mounster, then he should send strongly; because
neither Tyron^ nor Odonnell could come to help them.

He says, that Fray Matheo de Oviedo (the Archbishop of Dublin) out of an
ancient knowledge which he had in this kingdom, having been before in this
Realm, in James fits Maurice his rebellion, did solicit the sending of forces
hither, and came into the North, purposely to see, and understand the state of
the Country.

He also says, that Tyrone sent his Son into Spain, to be there brought
up, not being demanded of the King as a Pledg^.

He says, that all the Kings Council were very forward to thrust on the
invasion, and for his own particular, he advised that the Spanish forces
should land at Carling^ord, and if that Council did not like them, then he
persuaded that the forces should land at Galway, or Sligo.

He says, that Oneales Son has two hundred ducats pension of the King,
per mensem.

He says, that when the Army came for Ireland, out of a desire to establish
religion, and to procure to the Irish Lords some greater government in the
Realm, he came voluntary hither, without pay, but protests that he never
wished that the Crown of Ireland should be taken from the Queen: He says,
he never heard of any of Ireland, that by Letters did solicit this invasion,
but James Mac Sorley, who (as he heard) writ to the King; that Florence did
write unto the King he knows not, but Tyrone did write unto this Examinat
that Florence would be in Arms with him against her Majesty.

He says, that he thinks, that if the Spaniards had prevailed in this
Enterprise, that their meaning was not to possess themselves of Ireland, but
from hence to have invaded England, and to have entertained the Irish Nation in
that enterprise.

Being demanded, if the English had been beaten out of Ireland, what
government should have been here established, and who should have governed;
he answered that therein he is wholly ignorant, but when Tyrone did write for
aid, he says (that he thinks) that when the English were banished and
expelled, that then he would submit himself to be dealt withal as pleased
the King.

He says, that in March next, he thinks that supplies should have been
sent to Don Iuan, but now he is of opinion, that never any more will be sent
into Ireland.

He says, that the reason, that now he desired the President to bring him to
the Lord Deputy, was because he was altogether weary to serve with the Irish,
and also commanded so to do by Tyrone after his overthrow.

He was commanded by Tyrone (the next morning after the overthrow) to repair
to the Lord Deputy, and to tell his Lordship, that he was willing and
desirous to become a Subject, if he may be received, and justly dealt
withal; and to redeem his errors past, he professed to do all possible
service to her Majesty, but that he would not leave his Son hostage for him.

He says, that he thinks upon his conscience, that Odonnell went into
Spain without any advise of Tyrones, and that Redmond Burke and Captain
Mostian went likewise without his consent.

Which done, being sorry, as he protested, of his traytorly life, he humbly
craved her Majesty's gracious protection, promising to merit the same with
future loyal service; which being granted, he departed. Upon the fourth of
this month 4. Febr.
(as aforesaid) having been in the mean time with Tyrone, he made his second
addreffe to the President, the Lord Deputy then being in Cork, and being
called before the Lord Deputy and the President, Rich. Owen his message from
Tyrone to the Lord Deputy.
he dlivered unto them a Message from Tyrone, the effect whereof was, that he
would be glad to be received into her Majesty's mercy, being heartily sorry
that he had given her so just a cause of offense, and likewise grieved in his
soul, that he had been the cause of the effusion of so much blood, the
exhausting of her Majesty's Treasures, and the ruin of his native Country;
Nevertheless this pretended grief and humility was farced with some
exorbitant conditions, unmeet for him to demand from his Sovereign, (whom he
had highly offended) or for a Monarch to grant to a vassal: Notwithstanding
it was thought good to take hold of the occasion; for although it should not
work the end desired, (which was to settle the Kingdom in tranquillity) yet
a motion only of submission, proceeding from the capital Rebel, would work
in the minds of the inferior Traitors, a mistrust of their estates, and seek
by his Example, to sue for grace while there was time, wherein they might hope
to obtain it: Upon these considerations the Lord Deputy was willing (after
he had showed his dislike to the Conditions) to embrace the motion; And
because that he might be assured to have a true report returned, Captain
George Blunt (who had been a familiar and inward friend unto Tyrone, when he
was a Subject) was employed in this business; and for his manner of treating
with him, he had these Instructions following, subscribed by the Lord Deputy,
and the Lord President.

When you speak with Tyrone, Instructions for Captain Geo: Blunt.
you shall tell him, that you understand that Richard Owen came from him to the
Lord Deputy, with Commission from him to tell his Lordship, that he desired
to be received into the Queens mercy, if his life might be secured.

Whereupon you finding in him such conformity (out of your ancient love, which
in former time you bare him) were glad of the alteration, and therefore as his
friend did now undertake this long Journey, to persuade him to those courses
which might best answer his duty to his Prince, and repair his estate, which
in your opinion is desperate.

If you find him desirous to be received to mercy, you shall give him hope of
it, and promise him furtherance for the effecting of it, upon these conditions:
That he shall in token of his penitency, and according to the duty of a
Subject to his Natural Prince, first under his hand write a letter of
submission to the Lord Deputy, humbly craving in the same her Majesty's mercy,
with promise to redeem his errors past by his future service; That likewise
he shall write a public Submission to her Majesty, imploring at her hands
forgiveness of his faults, and likewise promise amendment of his life, with a
willing desire to do her some acceptable service, in recompense of his
transgression, in the same protesting to serve her Majesty against all men,
either of Ireland, or Forreiners that shall endeavor the disturbance of this
Country.

That he shall put into her Majesty's hands his eldest Son, for the assurance
of his future loyalty, and four principal Gentlemen of his blood, as he
formerly promised.

That he shall at his charge find workmen to build such Forts in the Country
of Tyrone, and in such places as the Lord Deputy shall think fit.

That he shall permit throughout Tyrone, her Majesty's Officers of Justice, as
the Sheriffs and others, to have free liberty to execute their Offices, as is
accustomed in other Provinces and Counties of the Realm, and answer all other
duties formerly promised.

That he shall only undertake for himself, and his Pledges to lie for no
more, then those that dwell upon that land only that is contained in his
Letters Patents, not any way undertaking for the rest of Tyrone, as Tirlogh
Brassiloes sons, Mac Maghon, O Can^, Mac Guire, Mac Genis, the two
Clandeboyes, and all of the East side of Ban. That if any of his neighbors
shall continue in rebellion, none of their people shall be harbored in Tyrone,
and likewise that none of Tyrone shall (by his consent or knowledge) succor
any Rebel, or give assistance to them; and if any such offender shall happen
to be discovered, either by himself, or any other her Majesty's Officers, upon
knowledge thereof, that he shall do his best endeavor to prosecute the
parties offending, and either take them, whereby they may be tried by the Laws
of the Realm, or kill them, if they may not otherwise be had, and shall
assist her Majesty's Officers, in taking to her use the goods and chattells of
the Offenders, and their retinues: That he shall not only truly pay all her
Majesty's Rents and Duties from this time forward, due unto her out of Tyrone,
but also pay the Arrerages, that for many years have been by him detayned.

That in respect of the great charges that he has put her Majesty unto,
(although it be not the thousand part of her disbursements) In nomine paenae
(which in all such great offenses is accustomed) toward the victualling of her
Majesty's Garrisons, he shall pay two thousand Cowes within six months: That
the Country of Tyrone may be limited, and no more, by him to be possessed,
then is contained in his Letters Pattents: That the territory of Tyrone might
be divided into shieres, and have Goales as he has formerly desired: That
he put at liberty the Sons of Shane Oneale; and all other prisoners, English
and Irish: These things you shall only propound as from your self, yet as
conceiving that they will be demanded at his hands, if he be received, and to
draw as large an overture from him, of what he will agree unto, as you can
persuade him, telling him, that the greater assurance he does give the estate
of his loyalty, the greater will be his safety, for we shall conster his
good meaning, by his free offer thereof, and after we shall have the less
reason to be jealous of him.

Mountioye. George Carew.
CHAP. XXVI.
The King of Spaines Letters intercepted. A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to
Don Iuan de Aguila. A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to the Archbishop of
Dublin. A Letter from the Secretary Ybarra to Don Iuan de Aguila. A Letter from
the Secretary Fragursa to Don Iuan de Aguila. A Letter from the King of Spai^e
to Don Iuan de Aguila.
ABout the tenth of February, 10. Febr.
Dou Iuan de Aguila residing in Cork, The King of Spaines Letters intercepted.
whilst his Troops were preparing to be embarked for Spain; In this
interim, a Spanish Pinnace landed in the Westermost part of the Province, and
in her, there was a Messenger sent from the King to Don Iuan de Aguila with a
packet of Letters: The President having knowledge thereof, told the Lord
Deputy, that if he had a desire to know the King of Spaines intentions, there
was a good occasion offered, the Lord Deputies heart itching to have the
Letters in his hands, prayed the President to intercept them if he could
handsomely do it; the President to undertook it, and having notice that the
next morning the Messenger would come from Kinsale to Cork, and knowing that
there was but two ways by the which he might pass, called Captain William
Nuce unto him (who commanded his foot Company) to make choice of such men as
he could trust to lie upon those passages, and when they saw such a Spaniard
(whom he had described unto him) to seize upon him, and as thieues to rob him
both of his Letters, horses and money, not to hurt his person, but to leave him
and his Guide bound, that he might make no swift pursuit after them, and when
they had delivered him the Letters to run away: Captain Nuce so well
followed his instructions, as the Spaniard was taken in a little Wood, and the
Letters brought at dinner time; Don Iuan (if I do not mistake) that very day
dyning with him, who instantly carried them to the Lord Deputy, where at good
leisure the packets were opened and read, which done the President went to his
house, leaving the Letters with the Lord Deputy: the same evening, the Spanish
Messenger having been unbound by passengers, came to Don Iuan de Aguila
relating his misfortu^ne, in being robbed not five miles from the Town: Don
Iuan de Aguila went immediately to the Lord Deputy, grievously complaining that
the Messenger was robbed by Soldiers (as he alleged:) The Lord Deputy
seemed no less sorry, but (said he) it is a common thing in all Armies to have
debaucht Soldiers, but he thought it to be rather done by some of the
Country thieues; but if the fact was committed by Soldiers, it was most like
to be done by some Irish men, who thought it to be a good purchase (as well
as the money) to get the Letters, to show them unto their friends in rebellion,
that they might the better understand in what estate they were in: Don Iuan not
being satisfied with this answer, desired the Lord Deputy to enquire of the
Lord President, (for of his intercepting of them he had a vehement suspicion)
whether he had any knowledge of the matter, and so they departed. The next
morning the Lord Deputy related to the President the complaint, and his
answers: Don Iuan eager in the pursuit of his Letters, came to know of the
Lord Deputy what the President answered: The Lord Deputy answered him upon
his faith, that he was sure that the President had them not; which he might
well do, for they were in his own possession: In conclusion, a Proclamation
was made, and a reward (in the same promised) for him that could discover the
Thieves, and a pardon for their lives granted that committed the fact, if they
would come in and confess it; with this Don Iuan rested satisfied: How much
the intercepting of these Letters did import her Majesty's Service, (not one
Spanyard being then embarked, but remaining in a Body at Kinsale) may appear
by these ensuing Letters (Englished) taken at that time. unto, (although it be
not the thousand part of her disbursements) In nomine paenae (which in all such
great offenses is accustomed) toward the victualling of her Majesty's
Garrisons, he shall pay two thousand Cowes within six months: That the
Country of Tyrone may be limited, and no more by him to be possessed, then is
contained in his Letters Pattents: That the territory of Tyrone might be
divided into shieres, and have Goales as he has formerly desired: That he
put at liberty the Sons of Shane Oneale; and all other prisoners, English and
Irish: These things you shall only propound as from your self, yet as
conceiving that they will be demanded at his hands, if he be received, and to
draw as large an overture from him, of what he will agree unto, as you can
persuade him, telling him, that the greater assurance he does give the estate
of his loyalty, the greater will be his safety, for we shall conster his
good meaning, by his free offer thereof, and after we shall have the less
reason to be jealous of him.

Mountioye. George Carew.
CHAP. XXVI.
The King of Spaines Letters in^ercepted. A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to
Don Iuan de Aguila. A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to the Archbishop of
Dublin. A Letter from the Secretary. Ybarra to Don Iuan de Aguila. A Letter
from the Secretary Fragursa to Don Iuan de Aguila. A Letter from the King of
Spai^e to Don Iuan de Aguila.
ABout the tenth of February, 10. Febr. The King of Spaines Letters intercepted.
Do^ Iuan de Aguila residing in Cork, whilst his Troops were preparing to
be embarked for Spain; In this interim, a Spanish Pinnace landed in the
Westermost part of the Province, and in her, there was a Messenger sent from
the King to Don Iuan de Aguila with a packet of Letters: The President having
knowledge thereof, told the Lord Deputy, that if he had a desire to know the
King of Spaines intentions, there was a good occasion offered, the Lord
Deputies heart itching to have the Letters in his hands, prayed the President
to intercept them if he could hansomely do it; the President undertook it,
and having notice that the next morning the Messenger would come from Kinsale
to Cork, and knowing that there was but two ways by the which he might
pass, called Captain William Nuce unto him (who commanded his foot Company)
to make choice of such men as he could trust to lie upon those p^ssages, and
when they saw such a Spaniard (whom he had described unto him) to seize upon
him, and as thieues to rob him both of his Letters, horses and money, not to
hurt his person, but to leave him and his Guide bound, that he might make no
swift pursuit after them, and when they had delivered him the Letters to run
away: Captain Nuce so well followed his instructions, as the Spaniard was
taken in a little Wood, and the Letters brought at dinner time; Don Iuan (if I
do not mistake) that very day dyning with him, who instantly carried them to
the Lord Deputy, where at good leisure the packets were opened and read, which
done the President went to his house, leaving the Letters with the Lord
Deputy: the same evening, the Spanish Messenger having been unbound by
passengers, came to Don Iuan de Aguila relating his misfortune, in being robbed
not five miles from the Town: Don Iuan de Aguila went immediately to the Lord
Deputy, grievously complaining that the Messenger was robbed by Soldiers (as
he alleged:) The Lord Deputy seemed no less sorry, but (said he) it is a
common thing in all Armies to have debaucht Soldiers, but he thought it to
be rather done by some of the Country thieues; but if the fact was committed
by Soldiers, it was most like to be done by some Irish men, who thought it to
be a good purchase (as well as the money) to get the Letters, to show them
unto their friends in rebellion, that they might the better understand in what
estate they were in: Don Iuan not being satisfied with this answer, desired the
Lord Deputy to enquire of the Lord President, (for of his intercepting of them
he had a vehement suspicion) whether he had any knowledge of the matter, and
so they departed. The next morning the Lord Deputy related to the President the
complaint, and his answers: Don Iuan eager in the pursuit of his Letters, came
to know of the Lord Deputy what the President answered: The Lord Deputy
answered him upon his faith, that he was sure that the President had them not;
which he might well do, for they were in his own possession: In conclusion,
a Proclamation was made, and a reward (in the same promised) for him that could
discover the Thieves, and a pardon for their lives granted that committed the
fact, if they would come in and confess it; with this Don Iuan rested
satisfied: How much the intercepting of these Letters did import her Majesty's
Service, (not one Spanyard being then embarked, but remaining in a Body at
Kinsale) may appear by these ensuing Letters (Englished) taken at that time.

A Letter from the Duke of Lerma, to Don Iuan de Aguila.
NOt many days past I wrote unto you, and now I make answer to those which I
received from you the thirteenth of the last October* assuring you, that his
Majesty puts great confidence in your care and valor: As touching the men, and
other things which you demand, there is dispatched a good quantity, and more
is in preparing, and make you no doubt, but still more shall be in sending, as
much as may be: for his Majesty has it before his eyes, and I have taken in
hand the soliciting thereof; Wherefore you may be assured, that you shall not
want any thing which may be sent that is needful: There is now in readiness,
150 Lances, which shall be presently embarked, and more men are in levying
with expedition, with whom Money shall be sent: And so referring my self (for
the rest) to his Majesty's Dispatch, I will say no more, but to assure you,
that in all things which may concern you, esteem me ever to be your
Solicitor. God keep you.

Valladolid* the fourth of December. 1601. Stilo novo.
El Duque de Lerma, Marquis de Denia.
To Don Iuan de Aguila, Master of the Camp, General of the men of War in
Ireland.

A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to the Archbishop of Dublin.
I Have received your Lordships Letters, giving thanks to God for the success
of your journey, for by it it appears, that there is a way and door open for
many good purposes for his service, and his Majesty has much confidence of
the care and zeal* which your Lordship has for the progression in the same.
Now we send you a good Body of men, with such things as is necessary, and more
shall be prepared, and so continue sending as much as we may, whereof you need
not doubt: for his Majesty (whom God preserve) holds it before his eyes,
forasmuch as the most important thing (appertaining to this business) is the
joining of the Earls with Don Iuan de Aguila: his Majesty commands your
Lordship to do in it your uttermost endeavor* according to the confidence he
has in your zeal. God preserve your Lordship.

From Valladolid the fifth of December. 1601. Stilo novo.
El Duque de Lerma Marquis de Denia.
Let not your Lordship be we^ried with your travells, I hope in God they will
be full of good successes. Al Ar^obispo de Dublin.

A Letter from the Secretary Ybarra to Don Iuan de Aguila.
BY Captain Albornoz I wrote unto your Lordship, and I wish that this dispatch
may overtake him (at the Groyne) according to the desire I hold, that it, and
that which goes with it, were with your Lordship, certifying you that as much
is done (as may be) for your supply in all things: I wrote unto your Lordship,
that there were two Companies of Horse ready to be sent unto you, but now I say
there is three, and in them two hundred and twenty Soldiers well armed, and
horsed; and it please God they shall be all embarked in this Month, God in
his divine mercy guide them: There is men levied in all Castile and Portugal,
and shipping embarg^d to transport them, victuals, and other necessaries in
providing; and now at this instant there is embarked in Lisborne, in the
Groyne, and Saint Ander a more then six thousand Hanegas of Wheat, and three
hundred pipes of Wine, and some Beans and Rice, and six hundred Arrobas of
Oil; and moreover, besides this which I say is embarked, there are
Commissaries taking of more up, and no care shall be wanting to ^asten them
away: I have spoken with Captain Moreles, and of that which he has told me
of the seat of the place, and of the small number of men your Lordship has, I
feel my self grieved; but when I call to mind, what a person Don Iuan de
Aguila is, the way is open unto me, to expect great matters, and I hope God
will grant the same according to the worth of your Lordship, against your
wicked enemies: Let your Lordship hasten the joining of the Earls with you,
for of all things that is most important, which being done, before the Queen
can reenforce her Army all is accomplished; I am desirous to hear that the
excellent good Horsemen were with your Lordship, that with them your Lordship
may win honor in the field, etc.

From Valladolid this seventh of December, 1601. Stilo novo.
Estevan de Ybarra.
To Don Iuan de Aguila, General Master of the Camp.

A Letter from the Secretary Franquesa, to Don Iuan de Aguila.
HIs Majesty is much satisfied of the good government (in those occasions) of
your Army; and I hope in God, that with the succors, which now shall be sent
unto you, it will be bettered, in such sort, that you will not only be able
to defend your self from the Enemies, but also to chastise them, the means to
effect the same, is for you to hold your self as you are, until the succors
aforesaid do ^ome; in the mean time, the more you are pressed upon, the more
will be your reward and recompense, which his Majesty will confer upon you,
the which I will thrust on, as occasion shall offer it self, and be always
vigilant in these things which shall concern your Lordship as I have been:
God preserve your Lordship according to my desire: From Man^illa the thirteenth
of January, Stilo novo.
1602.

To Don Iuan de Aguila, Master of the Camp, General of his Majesty's Army in
Ireland.

A Letter from the Duke of Lerma to Don Iuan de Aguila.
BY that which Zubiare and Pedro Lopez de Soto has written, and by the coming
of the Earl Odonnell, who is now in the Groyne, we have understood of the
overthrow of the Earls, and from thence is gathered, that all the forces are
now bent against you, and that your only valor and wisdom has been able
to resist them; and let the great estimation his Majesty holds of you,
mitigate the care which this business may bring you; his Majesty has
commanded me speedily to prepare gallant succors, both by Land and Sea, which
is done, and shall be presently dispatched, and this ship is only sent to
advertise you thereof, to the end that you may with the more courage defend
your self, and to bring a true report in what state you stand, which may more
particularly appear unto you by his Majesty's Letter, which with this you
shall receive, whereunto he has commanded me to add this, that he has in
his favor made you one of his Councellers of his council at wars, which I
congratulate with you; assuring you on his part, that God willing he will
confer greater favors upon you, wherefore proceed cheerfully, as both now
and heretofore (in the course of your life) you have done, taking every
occasion to strengthen your self in this siege, and to endammage the Enemy
that he may not hinder you, and to assure the Army, no man living has
received greater rewards from his Majesty then you shall; I take upon my self
the care of it, and I pray you to write me such good news as I desire, whereof
I hope in God:

In Man^illa the thirtieth of January, 1602. Stilo novo.
El Duque de Lerma Marquis de Denia.


God is my witness, Postscript.
I neither eat nor sleep with less care then any one of them that are with
you, and I would willingly be in the peril of every one of you, and if the
shedding of my blood might be advantageous, I would readily give it for you all
that have such need: Do your endeavors, for presently succors shall be sent
unto you.

To Don Iuan de Aguila, Master of the Camp, General of the men of war in
Ireland*

A Letter from the King of Spain to Don Iuan de Aguila.
EL REY.

DOn Iuan de Aguila Master of the Camp, General of my Army in Ireland; by
that which Pedro de Zubiare, and Pedro Lopez de Soto have written unto me, I
have understood of the defeat of the Earls, Oneale and Odonnell, and likewise
I now see that all your hopes remains in your valor and wisdom; wherein I
have such confidence, that I hope in the midst of so many dangers and labors
(wherewith you are environed) that you will preserve the Army, until more
succors of shipping, men, arms, and munitions be sent unto you, which are
with all possible expedition in preparing, and shall be speedily dispatched:
You may make use of them, and take revenge of the Enemy, and until they come,
which shall be (as I have said) with celerity, preserve your self: I do not
advise you of any particulars, because I assure my self of your judgment and
experience, that knows how to make your advantage of such occasions, as the
Enemy shall give for the benefit of the siege: And your self and the Army
(which is with you) shall have good testimony of my bounty, thankfulness, and
honor I will do unto you all: and so much do you signify unto the Army from
me. The Duke of Lerma shall write more unto you

from Man^illa, the one and thirty of January, 1602. Stilo novo.
Yo El Rey.
To Don Iuan de Aguila, Master of the Camp, General of our Army in Ireland.
Don Pedro Franquesa.

Not long after most of the Spaniards were imbarqued in Kinsale, only a few
remaining which were to pass with Don John; the day before his departure, the
Lord Deputy showed him the copy of the Letters, saying that they were sent
unto him out of Vlsterby a Priest, who was his spy about Tyrone, unto whom the
Letters had been carried; Don Iuan (taking this for good payment) thanked the
Lord Deputy for his favorable care: All the while Don Iuan was at Cork,
every day the President and he had familiar discourse together, but for the
most part their passages in speech was between jest and earnest, somewhat
sharp, and especially when they spoke of religion, their Sovereigns, or the
Nations: But it seems that he carried a good respect of the President, as by
writing and presents sent, which shall in its due place appear.

The fifteenth, 15. Feb.
the Lord Deputy and the President, having acquainted the rest of the
Council, with the effect of the Spanish Letters, (intercepted as aforesaid)
though not with the manner how they were gotten, they thought it meet to write
unto the Lords of the Council in England this ensuing Letter, whereby they
might understand how things stood for the present, as also to provide for the
future, since by the intercepted Letters it appeared, that the King of Spain
had set his heart upon the war of Ireland.

A Letter from the Lord Deputy and Council, to the Lords in England.
MAy it please your Lordships: The fourteenth of this Month we dispatched Sir
Richard Morison with our Letters to your Lordships from this place, and the
nine and twentieth we wrote again by Captain Butler, yet to this day the wind
has continued still so westerly, as since the departure of Sir Richard, no
shipping is come to us, either out of England from your Lordships (as we
desired) or from Waterford, Wexford, and those parts (as we directed) to carry
away the Spaniards hence; nor yet until Sunday the seventh hereof, could those
ships stir, that lay ready at Kinsale, to be sent to Baltimore, Castle-haven,
and Beere-haven; but now they are gone, We hope that the Service to be done
by them, (which is the possessing of the Castles, and sending away of the
Spaniards in them) will be presently accomplished, although the wind has
served them so scantly, as we fear they will hardly recover all the places
whereunto they are directed: There is only one Scottish ship gone from Kinsale
for Spain, which carried one hundred and sixty Spaniards, with part of the
Artillery, but there lies now ready at the Harbor for the first wind, so
much shipping as will carry away fifteen hundred more: so as there will be
yet remaining in Kinsale above one thousand more, which with the first shipping
that comes from the other Ports, shall be (...). Don Iuan stays to go last:
It appears by some Letters intercepted, which we send her e^ithall unto your
Lordships, that the King of Spain purposes in send a larger supply hither
with all expedition: Don Iuan ass^res (...) to do the best ^ee can to stay
them, and if he arrive first in Spain^, hec makes no doubt to dissuade their
coming; but if they should come before his (...), he promises to return
them according to his Covenant in the (...), if they do not come under the
command of some other, that has a (...) from his, from the King: The Irish
have of late received Letters from Odonnell, to encourage the Rebels to
persevere in their (...) the^ of present aid from Spain, in the mean time,
the (...) of their^ all do but temporize, being ready to assist them when
they come, especially if they come in any strength, as it is to be thought in
all reason they will, having found their first error: Her Majesty must
therefore be pleased to ^ee at some charge to erect Fortifications at
Beere-haven, Kinsale, and this place, the Commodities and weakness of these
places being as well known to the Spaniards, as to us, and further withal to
erect Cittadels at Limerick, Cork, and Waterford, though it be only to
assure the Towns from revolt. It appears by the King of Spaines Letter, (and
so by the Duke of Lermaes, that his heart is very much set upon the enterprise
of Ireland, and therefore it is not unlike but that he may send more supplies,
after or before Don Iuans arrival in Spain, either under him, or some other
Commander; which if he do, it is also likely the same will be sent shortly:
For prevention thereof (if in your Lordships wisdom it shall be thought meet)
we do humbly beseech, that the four thousand supplies heretofore desired, and
by your Lordships intended, may be presently sent hither, whereof two thousand
to be erected in Companies, and their Captains to be named here, and the
other two thousand for the supplies of the Army, which is exceeding weak; for
our men die daily in greater numbers then they dyed in the Camp, the infection
being greater, and by some thought, a kind of plague, (for the people in the
Towns dye in far greater numbers then the Soldiers) though we hope the
contrary: And we do further desire, that her Majesty will be pleased to
hasten her Fleet to the coast of Spain, which coming timely, will in our
opinions hinder any enterprise for Ireland; But lest that should fail, we
renew our former motion, that the Tremontania and the Moon may be returned to
serve upon the coast of Mounster, that the proportions of Munition and Victuals
desired in our former Letters, may speedily be dispatched hither, and that
victuals without impediment may come for all places to relieve us: for already
a very great dearth is begun, and a famine must ensue, the rates of all things
being incredible, and the new Money much repyned at, which notwithstanding we
do our uttermost endeavors to advance it. But in a matter of so great
importance, we humbly desire your Lordships to give us leave to deliver our
opinions freely, having so assured ground for it, that if the King of Spain
continue his War in this Country, it will be hard to preserve her Majesty's
Army and kingdom, without the altering of the current money, so general is
the dislike thereof, and so insolently do they begin already to refuse it; but
if there come no other foreign aid, her Majesty (as we think) may securely
continue it as it is: For all we that are of the Army, whom it most concerns,
(in regard we live wholly upon our entertainment) will (God willing) endure it
for the advancement of the service, though we are sensible of our loss, by
the excessive enhansing of the prizes of all things that we are to live upon,
which cannot be helped so long as this new Coin continues current. Of Tyrone,
since his overthrow and departure, we hitherto have heard little, neither do
we think he will be able to do any great harm, without the aid of new
supplies from Spain. And so we humbly take leave, etc. From Cork. 15.
February. 1601.

Among many Letters and papers which were found in the Castle of Dunboy (of the
winning whereof you shall after hear;) Odonnels landing and reception in
Spain.
there was one written bearing date the fourth of February, 1602. Stilo novo,
by Patrike Sinnet an Irish Priest, remaining in the Groyne with the Earl of
Caracena to Dominick Collins a Jesuit, who was taken at Dunboy and executed;
sundry other things he related of Odonnels landing in the Asturias, who with
the General Pedro de Zubiare embarked at Castle-haven the January, the next
day after he came to the Groyne, where he was nobly received by the Earl of
Caracena, who invited Odonnell to lodge in his house; but he being Sea sick,
in good manner refused his courtesy; wherefore the Earl lodged him in a very
fair house, not far from his; but when his sea-sicknesse was past, he lodged
in the Earls house; and upon the twenty seventh of January, Odonnell departed
from the Groyne, accompanied by the Earl and many Captains, and Gentlemen of
quality, who evermore gave Odonnell the right hand, which within his government
he would not have done to the greatest Duke in Spain; and at his departure,
he presented Odonnell with one thousand ducats, and that night he lay at
Santa Lucia: the Earl of Caracena being returned, the next day he went to
Saint James of Compostella, where he was received with magnificence by the
Prelates, Citizens, and religious persons, and his lodging was made ready for
him at Saint Martins, but before he saw it, he visited the Archbishop, who
instantly prayed him to lodge in his house; but Odonnell excused it: The nine
and twentieth the Archbishop saying Mass with pontifical solemnity, did
minister the Sacrament to Odonnell, which done he feasted him at dinner in his
house; and at his departure he gave him one thousand ducats: The King
understanding of Odonnels arrival, wrote unto the Earl of Caracena concerning
the reception of him, and the affairs of Ireland, which was one of the most
gracious Letters that ever King directed; for by it, it plainly appeared that
he would endanger his kingdom to succor the Catholics of Ireland, to their
content, and not fail therein; for the perfecting whereof, great preparations
were in hand: Odonnell carried with him to the Court, Redmond Burke, Father
Florence, Captain Mostian, and nine Gentlemen more, where they were nobly
received; although the knowledge of the reception of Odonnell in Spain, was
not well known by me until after the taking of Dunboy, yet I thought it
requisite to insert it in its due place, according to the time of his being at
the Groyne: But now let us return to the affairs of Mounster.

Captain Roger Ha^^ie (according to his directions) being come to
Castle-haven, Castle haven rendered by the Spaniards.
Pedro^Lop^z do Sot^ the Veador, who had the chief command thereof, after the
receipt of Don Iuan de Aguila his Letters and messages, entertained him with
great humanity, and upon the twelfth of February rendered the Castle unto him,
receiving an acknowledgement under his, and his brothers Captain Gawen Harvies
hands in writing for the receipt thereof, which done they embarked their
victuals, baggage, and Ordnance; lastly their men to the number of one hundred
and forty by pole, and four Spanish Captains; Captain Roger Harvie
delivered the charge of the Castle unto his brother Captain Gawen Harvie,
there to remain in garrison with his Company of one hundred foot: The same day
that Captain Harvie came to Castle-haven, the Odrischals (who had the
inheritance of the same) by a slight got into the Castle, and had made
themselves masters of it; the Spaniards to recover it again assaulted it, and
were undermining the same when Captain Harvie was entering into the Haven; but
upon the sight of his ships the Irish by composition (to depart in safety)
rendered it to the Spaniard, who had lost two of their Soldiers in the
attempt. The one and twentieth, Captain Harvie having in his Company the
Veador, and some other Spaniards, The Castles of Doneshed and Donelong rendered
by the Spaniards.
set sail for Baltimore, whereupon the three and twentieth they went on land,
and were feasted in the Castle of Donelong by the Governor thereof, called
Andreas de Aervy, and the next day (by the direction of the Veador) their
Ordnance (being seven in number in the Castle) were shipped: And the six and
twentieth the said Castle, and the Castle of Donneshed, were with Spanish
gravitie rendered to her Majesty's use. The second of March following they were
all embarked, and set sail for Spain: while these things were in doing,
Captain Roger Harvie sent a party of men to Cape-Cleere, the Castle whereof
was guarded by Captain Terrils men, which they could not gain, but they
pillaged the Island, and brought from thence three Boats; and the second day
following, the Rebels not liking the neighborhood of the English quitted the
Castle, wherein Captain Harvie placed a Guard: The Castle of Cape-Cleere
guarded by Captain Harvy.
at this time Sir Finnin Odrischall came to Captain Harvie and submitted
himself: The tenth of the same Month, the Lord Barry, Captain Taffe, and
Captain John Barry, chanced to light upon Donoghe Moyle Mac Carties men, and
slew eighteen of the best of them.

From Baltimore Captain George Flower was shipped in a Hoy of one hundred and
twenty Tuns, The illsuccesse of Captain Flowers employment.
with two Companies of two hundred in list, (but weak by pole) to receive from
the Spaniards the Castle of Dunboy, but do all he could, by reason of foul
weather and contrary winds, he could never (although he was at the mouth of
the Haven of Beer) recover the Land, and so enforced to return, effecting
nothing, in this short Navigation fifty of his Soldiers by infection dyed,
and but seven of the Sailors living.


CHAP. XXVIII.
The Spaniards imbarqued at Kinsale. The Spaniards dispossessed of Doxboy by
Osulevan Bear. A Letter from Osulevan Bear to the King of Spain. A Letter
from Osulevan Bear to the Earl of Caraze^a. A Letter from Osulevan Bear to
Don Pedro de Zubeaur.
THE twentieth of February, Spaniards embarked at Kinsale.
twenty Spanish Captains with one thousand three hundred seventie four
Soldiers, set sail from Kinsale for Spain.

The Composition which Don Iuan did make when he surrendered Kinsale, The
Spaniards dispossessed of Du^boy by Osulevan Bear.
did infinitely grieve and offend the Irish, and especially those who had
voluntarily delivered into his hands their Castles, but especially Donnell
Osulevan, who considering, that if his Castle of Donboy should be in the
possession of the English, he was like to be banished his Country, not having
any hope of favor from her Majesty, unto whose Crown and Dignity he had
manifested himself to be a malicious Traitor, resolved to set up his rest in
regaining of it out of the Spaniards hands, and afterward to defend it against
her Majesty's Forces as well as he might: For accomplishing whereof, they
watched a fit opportunity, and surprised it in this sort: Although the
Spaniards were the Masters of the Castle, yet evermore he had recourse into it,
and lodged therein with such of his men as he thought good: In the dead time
of the night, when the Spaniards were soundly sleeping, and the key of the
Castle in the Captains custody, Osulevan caused his men, (amongst the which
there were some Masons) to break a hole in the wall, wherein fourscore of his
men entered, for by appointment he had drawn that night close unto the Castle,
Archer the Jesuit with another Priest, Thomas fits Maurice the Lord of Lixna^,
Donnell Mac Cartie, Captain Richard Tirrell, and Captain William Burke, with
a thousand men: When day appeared, Archer prayed Francesco de Saaredra the
Spanish Captain to go with him to Osulevans chamber, unto whom he made
relation, that his men were entered the Castle, that he meant no personal hurt,
either unto him, or to any of his, and that he would keep the same for the
King of Spaines use; and also told him, that he had one thousand Foot within
Harquebusse shot of the Castle. The Captain seeing himself surprised, made
no resistance, and willed his men to do the like: But the Spaniards in fury
discharged a few Musket shot amongst the Irish, and slew three of them, and
hurt one: but by the mediation of Osulevan, and Francesco de Saavedra, the
Captain, all was pacified, Osulevan being very careful that no hurt might be
done to the Spaniards: Afterward Osulevan disarmed them all, kept the Captain,
and a few of the better sort, with three or four Gunners, in the nature of
Prisoners, and the rest he sent to Baltimore, to be imbarqued into Spain: He
also seized upon all the Spanish Ordnance, Munitions, and Victuals, which was
there in store. The Captain not long after was set at liberty, and returned
with the Veador from Baltimore into Spain, and with him the other soldiers
which were detained, but the Cannoniers Osulevan reserved.

When report was brought to Don John de Aguila (then in Cork) of the surprise
of Dunboy, he took it for a great affront, and would presently have drawn
from Kinsale (the Spanish Companies there yet remaining) and march to Dunboy to
regaine it by force, and to deliver it according to the Composition into her
Majesty's hands: But the Lord Deputy and the President, (who were desirous to
see his heels toward Ireland) wished him not to trouble himself with that
business; and when he was gone, the President should take order for the
reducing of it into his hands: the Castle of Dunboy was surprised (as
beforesayd) in this month of February, 1601, and held by Osulevan to the use
of the King of Spain: but yet to excuse himself unto the King, and to make it
appear unto him how much he was his servant, he wrote unto him, to the Earl
of Carazena, and to Pedro de Zubiare, there being at that present in
Beerehaven, the Spanish Pinnace, which brought the Packet from Spain
(intercepted between Kinsale and Cork) as aforesaid.

A Letter from Osulevan Bear to the King of Spain.
My Lord and my King.
OVt of his love to your kingly greatness, your humble steadfast servant
Donnell Osulevan Bear, enforced through peril and constraint, does make bold
to inform unto your greatness, that upon the landing in Castle-haven, in the
West of Ireland, your General Pedro de Zubiar, and Pedro Lopez de Soto, with a
fleet and men from your Greatness, according to the inward conceit of mind I
always held, which I manifested in my young years, and would have still
followed, unless disability had constrained me to the contrary; finding a
happy and good opportunity (as I imagined) I I came to their presence,
tendering my obeisance unto them in the name of your Highness, and being with
four hundred men at my own cost, toward your service, I yielded out of my
mere love and goodwill, without compulsion or composition, into their hands in
the name of your Majesty; not only my Castle, and Haven called Beerehaven,
but also my Wife, my Children, my Country, Lordships, and all my possessions
for ever to be disposed of at your pleasure. They received me in that manner,
and promised (as from your Highness) to keep, and save the said Castle, and
Haven during the service of your grace: Notwithstanding my gracious Lord,
conclusions of peace were assuredly agreed upon, betwixt Don Iuan de Aguila and
the English, a fact pitiful, and (according to my judgment) against all
right and humane conscience. Among other places whereof your greatness was
dispossessed in that manner, which were neither yielded nor taken to the end
they should be delivered to the English; Don Iuan tied himself to deliver my
Castle and Haven, the only key of mine inheritance, whereupon the living of
many thousand persons does rest, that live some twenty leagues upon the Sea
Coast, into the hands of my cruel, cursed, misbeleeving Enemies, a thing I
fear in respect of the execrablenesse, inhumanity, and ingratefulnesse of the
fact if it take effect, as it was plotted, that will give cause to other men
not to trust any Spaniard hereafter, with their bodies or goods upon these
causes. My Lord in that I judge this dishonorable act to be against your
honor and pleasure, (as I understand by your last Letters that came into
Ireland) considering the harm that might ensue to the service of your
Majesty, and the ever lasting overthrow that might happen to me, and my poor
people, such as might escape the sword of our Enemy (if any should) I have
taken upon me (with the help of God) to offer to keep my Castle and Haven
from the hands of mine Enemies, until further news, and order come from your
Highness: I have sent my Son and Heir (being of the age of five years) as
a Pledge for accomplishing your will in this behalf, and for the performing of
my promise past unto your Greatness: I would not omit my self in person to
come and visit your Highness, but that I fear our wars here would grow
weak in respect of my absence, for which cause my self, and the rest of our
men of worth have sent in haste with Intelligence unto your Greatness, our
loving Friend Dermond Odrischall, in respect of our confidence in him, our
knowledge of him, and the continual endeavors we see in him toward this
Catholic War, as from us all: And for as much as we could not conveniently
write all that we wish unto you, we humbly beseech, that he may be heard as
from us all, as if our selves were present, and to hasten helping News, that
shall rejoice us and our people, and afterward to speed your gracious help
unto us, for the sooner the better, whilst our enemies are not in readiness;
and until the coming of news from your grace unto us, I will have in a
readiness where the service shall require, the number of one thousand men; and
I will upon my knees pray the merciful God, to give unto your Grace long life,
with health of body and soul, and all happiness, and so do commit you to the
safeguard of the Omnipotent.

Donboy, viz. Beere-haven, the twentieth day of February, 1602. Stilo novo.
Donnell Osulevan Bear.


A Letter from Osulevan Bear to the Earl of Caracena.
MY duty remembered: It may please your Lordship to understand, that according
to my former Letters, it has manifestly appeared, here the resolution of Don
Iuan de Aguila to have been (by his composition with the English) to yield unto
the Enemies hands, all the Forts, and Havens voluntarily delivered by the Lords
and Gentlemen of this Land for his Majesty's service, which will be to the
dishonor of the King, the prevention of his most godly attempt, and the utter
ruin and destruction of thousands of this Country Gentlemen and Catholics,
who without compulsion entered into this Action: All which having considered, I
have of mere affection to my Religion, his Highness service, and love to my
people and Country, so endeavored the recovery of my Castle, as I did draw
into the same some hundred of my followers, whom although the Spaniards have
attempted to resist, and killed three of my best Gentlemen, yet durst none of
my people kill any of them, but without harm forced them out of my said
Castle, saving their Captain, with five or six unto whom I have allowed
certain rooms in my House, to look to the Kings Munition and Artillery:
which Castle and Haven I do detain, and will evermore, for his Majesty's
Service, to defend, until his Highness pleasure, and your Lordships
resolution unto me shall be further known: And for manifestation of my
loyalty, and faithfulness to his Majesty, I have sent my Son and Heir
thither, whom I hope ere this time is present before your Lordship, and have
cess^d all the Captains Company upon my own people and charges, humbly
beseeching it may please your Honor, to be a mean unto his most Catholic
Majesty, that he may vouchsafe speedily to relieve this place, where many of
his Royal Ships in time of service may be kept in safety; Or otherwise to
send some small Ship toward this coast, for to receive me and the rest of my
Family, and Children, for to be carried into Spain, for the saving of our
lives out of the hands of these merciless, Heretical Enemies, making choice
rather to forsake my ancient Inheritance, Friends, Followers, and Goods, then
any way to trust to their most graceless Pardon or Promise. Thus much I hope
your godly charitable Nature will draw you to do for such a one as I am, who
hazarded Life, Lands, Goods, and Followers for the Catholic Faith, and the
Kings Majesty's Service: All which, leaving to your Honorable Discretion,
through whose virtuous means I chiefly hope to receive comfort, I humbly take
leave.

From Beare-haven Castle the last of February, 1602. Stilo novo.
Your most Faithful and bounden, Donnell Osulevan Bear.
To the Earl of Caracena, Governor and Captain General for his Majesty in
the kingdom of Galitia.

A Letter from Osulevan Bear to Don Pedro Zubiaur.
MY honorable good friend, your kind letters I have of late received, and for
your careful furtherance, I cannot but rest beholden and thankful as before:
Our state sithence your departing, notwithstanding many crosses was reasonable
well; partly because of the weakness of the English forces, until a brute
came unto us credibly, that Don Iuan de Aguila did not only agree and compound
to yield the Town of Kinsale, but also the other Castles and Havens, delivered
voluntarily by the owners unto you, and the Veador to the King his use, during
the occasion of service: which notwithstanding (being delivered to the Enemies
hands) would mightily discourage and weaken all the Kings friends in Ireland;
namely my self, who by keeping my possessions belonging to my Castle, and
Haven of Beere-haven, and able (God be thanked) and ready at all times to find
out for his Majesty's service, upon warning and necessity one thousand men,
besides the ward of my own Castle, where loosing the same so unexpected, and
surrendered to the hands of most heretical enemies, I am not only
disappoynted of all power, but also driven to run to the Mountains, there to
live like Woolfes, for the safety of my life, and to leave to their merciless
discretion all the poor men, women, and children within the length of twenty
Leagues containing of my ancient inheritance under my jurisdiction: I pray you
as you have begun, and in his Majesty's name, past your promise unto me, to be
a mean unto his Majesty, that such shameful composition void of lawful
ground, may not be an overthrow and disgrace to the Kings service, and a
perpetual destruction to my posterity for ever, whose Ancestors maintained the
credit and calling of great Gentlemen these two thousand and six hundred
years, sithence their first coming out of Spain: I have made offer to the
Veador to mainetaine all the Spaniards that were at Castlehaven, Baltimore, and
here, with Beef, Fish, Corn and Salt, till his Majesty pleasure were known,
and to find upon my own charges one thousand men to defend them: I would
personally have repaired thither, to make relation hereof to the King, his
Majesty, but that I do fear the wars might have the worse expedition here
by my absence; although you might think, I would for a while use some
resistance against the Englishmen, with my people and the Fastness of my
Country, Odrischall.
yet I know you will pity old Sir Finnin, forced by this composition to yield
his body to the merciless butchery of our Heretical enemies, which leaving
partly to be prevented by your good means to the King his most Catholic
Majesty: I take leave, committing you to God:

Beare-haven the twentieth of February, 1602. Stilo novo.
Donnell Osulevan Bear.


It was first much doubted and feared, that the Castle of Dunboy had been
voluntarily, not without the privitie and consent of the chief Commanders
amongst the Spaniards, delivered unto Donnell Osulevan, there being such an
excellent Haven for the Kings ships, if he should send forces to repair the
ruins of his honor, so much shaken by the former proceedings; but afterward
understanding that the Castle was not surprised without some blood, and also
intercepting those Letters which verified the contrary, it cleared the
Spaniards of that suspicion; but howsoever, the holding of this Castle gave
occasion to the country more obstinately to stand out in the action, because
Osulevan Bear (for defense hereof) against the English, had according to the
contents of these Letters, entertained Tirrell, William Burke, and others with
one thousand Bonnoghs, which were by course employed about the fortifying of
this Castle. Near unto the mouth of the Haven of Bea^e, there is a small Island
called the Durses, which is very strongly seated by nature, by reason of the
difficulty of landing (which is conveniently) but in one narrow entrance, which
may be defended with a few hands, and besides it is impossible for any Boat to
arrive at this entrance, except it be in a dead calm, the least gale of
wind, raising such billows, as do endanger any Boat as shall come near the
shore: this impregnable place, was elected for their extreme refuge, if Dunboy
should be won by the English; and therefore the custody thereof was
committed to Conner Odrischall, Son and Heir to Sir Finnin before mentioned,
who procuring three Pieces of Spanish Ordnance to be convayed into the Island,
with certain quantity of powder and shot, and having sixty choice men,
fortified the same (as they thought) against the most potent Enemy; but we
leave these Rebels busying their brains, and wearying their bodies about these
fortifications, and return to Captain Harvie, who while the Veador Pedro
Lopez de^Soto, remained at Baltimore, many courtesies and familiar conferences
passed between them, wherein he showed himself to be a man of great
humanity, and a good statesman, able to relate many things, both concerning the
State of England, and particularly of the Nobility in the same, as well as some
that had spent their whole lives in that Realm; but the end of all his
conference, still tended toward a peace between our Sovereign and his
Master, whereby it may be gathered, that the King of Spain was weary of the
war, which himself had injuriously begun: The substance of their discourse
Captain Harvie related to the President, and also showed him a Pasport of the
Veadors, and a Letter which he sent unto him after his arrival in Spain, all
which are thus Englished.

CHAP. XXIX.
(...) discourse between Captain Roger Harvie, and Pedro Lopez de Soto Pedro
Lopez de Soto his Pasp^^^. Pedro Lopez de Soto his Letter to Captain Roger
Harvie.
A Discourse that passed betwixt Captain Roger Harvy, An interloqu^tory
discourse between Captain Roger Harvie and Pedro Lopezde Soto.
and Pedro Lopez de Soto the Spanish Veador, the six and twentieth of F^bruary,
1601, in the Island of Innysharkin, whilst the Spaniards were embarquing their
Munitions and Artillery, from thence the effect as follows.
Soto. SIR (says he) is it not a miserable and lamentable thing (in any
honest man's conscience) to see the daily effusion of blood and infinite expense
of treasure, that this war betwixt Spain and England does daily bring forth
and consume?


Harvie. I told him it was too high a mystery for me to censute, but I
thought it to be the judgment of God, for we must understand that Princes are
Gods Ministers, and Agents upon earth, and what they do is beyond our lymits
to look into: Notwithstanding I thought the pride of his Masters gold, so
puffed him up, as either he must have all the world or nothing can content
him, or else his King would never have sought out such a place as Ireland is,
to have buried so many Crown in, besides the loss of no small number of his
Subjects, but it may be hereafter he will know us better, and perchance think
our nation fitter to conquer, then to loose what we have.


Soto. But do you think that Gold is so abundant with us?


Harvey. The Indian world which you possess^, makes us believe so.


Soto. Well, be not deceived, for my self have been a dealer these many
years in great Affairs for the King, and by that I do some what understand
his Hazienda, which I must confess to be very great, and yet not so exceeding
as the world thinks: But if (...) were far greater then it is, I assure you,
the infinite number of Garrisons which he is daily forced to maintain, would
devour another such Indies, if he had them: for do but look into how many
several Branches his Treasure is divided into, and then you will believe me;
but yet of all the rest, his expenses in the War^es of the Low Countries is
most chargeable, and of greatest import unto him, and for the which he may
thank your Queen of England; for had not she assisted those Traitors, they
long since had borne the yoke of their deserts, and neither Ireland nor England
had ever been looked into, or offended by us.


Harv. Why then I perceive it is not Religion, or Conscience that has brought
you hither to relieve the Irish, but only Revenge, for ayding of the States of
the Low-Countreyes against the Cardinal.


Soto. But did you ever think otherwise? I know you did not; and if you say
so, I know you dissemble with me: for the place where you have been brought up
in, has better discipline.


Har. Why, where have I been brought up?


Soto. I hear that you are near in blood unto the President, and that from a
child you have followed him; and I know that you are better instructed then you
make show of.


Har. I must thank you for your good opinion of me: but have you ever seen
the face of the President?


Soto. I assure you no, and which I am very sorry for: for I hear that he is a
worthy Gentleman, and one of the wisest men in Ireland; and if I would take the
Irish opinions for my belief of him, (they confidently believe that he has a
familiar) for they say he knows all things, and that nothing can be hidden from
him, besides he is so inward with the Secretary of England, as his power
thereby is the greater, (which strengthens much my belief of his worth;) but
I pray you Sir, is it so?


Har. Truly I must confess, that I am nearly allied unto him, and that I am
wholly his Creature from my Childhood; But for your better satisfaction of what
you have heard of him, unless in modesty I should wrong him, I cannot do
less then maintain the same opinion, which the world holds of his worth and
sufficiency: but for any familiar that he has, more then a noble Spirit and
Judgment, and as the long experience of this Nation may sufficiently give him
understanding (I assure you he has not any) and therefore the Irish in that
do wrong him: And as for the greatness with the Secretary of England, I know
in his Affections he has been very near him these many years, and to his
uttermost has wholly devoted himself unto him; and in any reasonable matter I
think, Master Secretary will as soon hearken unto his Counsel, (as unto any)
if he were in England.


Soto. But why would not the Secretary keep him still with him, but suffer him
to spend his time among this Nation?


Harvie. I cannot say but you object well; but I assure you the necessity of
his coming hither was such, as for the public good he was enforced unto it,
besides her Majesty's opinion of his experience is such, as she knew he was
able to end all the wars in these parts with Expedition, which in four
Months my self can testify he had finished: and had not your Armies coming
hither caused a new rupture, he had good hopes to have been called (long
since) home again, which I know nothing under Heaven he desires more.


Soto. That makes me think that he is weary of the wars, and would be
contented now to live in peace.


Harvie. I think not so, unless it were a very happy peace, otherwise wars
is far more welcome unto him (although I thought not the Irish wars) but I
thought a Spanish Journey royally undertaken, would please him so much almost
as to be seven years younger.


Soto. Since your President loves a hot Clymate so well, I would to God he
would be a means to make a peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, and then he
might take his choice in whether of them he would live, and be a welcome man
unto both: but was not he in France with Master Secretary, when that business
was a treating?


Harvie. Yes.


Soto. And were you there likewise?


Harvie. No.


Soto. I assure you there was excellent juggling of your side, and will be still
where great personages are the Actors, otherwise I imagine there had fallen out
better success: but we have some Spirits in Spain, will never rest, until
they have either ruined the kingdom or themselves: but dare you Sir impart
this Conference unto the President?


Harvie. I promise you if I live I will.


Soto. It may be out of this, may proceed some good effect, for of less
beginnings then this have greater matters risen.


Harvie. I believe you, although I have small hopes of this.


Soto. And why? Cannot England stand without the Low Countries?


Harvie. Yes against all the earth, but not so quiet if that were yours.


Soto. Why? we will not ask any assistance from the Queen, but only have
her stand a Neuter, and for her safety and the kingdoms, we will put in
pledge twenty of the best houses in Spain; such as your State will choose;
and if the State of England will (...) look judicially into it, they shall
find the offer honest, and fit to be accepted: Considering that the Queen of
England is by nature as mortal as others of less quality: and if she were
dead I know the next that shall succeed will afford it, and be glad of it upon
less conditions, or else I am deceived.


Harvie. But God be thanked we have no cause in England to dream of
succession, but hope she shall be eternal unto us.


Soto. That were ill news unto him, who looks to succeed.


Harvie. But Sir to the matter, because I have promised you to impart this
conference unto the President, let me entreat you to have somewhat under your
hand to justify it.


Soto. You shall have a Pass (either for your self or any other) from me to
come into Spain, touching this business: The effect whereof I most humbly
refer unto God, and so bid you farewell.


Pedro Lopez de Soto, Pedro Lopez de Soto his Passeport.
Overseer general of the Army of my Sovereign the Catholic King, etc. For
certain due respects behoofull for his Majesty's service, this free Pasport
(in his royal name) is assured for any English Ship, which shall bring any
dispatch from Roger Harvie Governor of the Garrisons at Castlehaven and
Baltimore, directed and superscribed to me, which shall happen to arrive in
any Port in Spain, from the date hereof unto the end of July next: By virtue
whereof, his Majesty's chief^ Officer that shall govern the Province, or port
where the said Ships shall arrive, shall give commandment for the service of
his Majesty, that both it, the S^^f^ring men, and all other persons with their
goods, shall be freely received and entertained, and accommodated to their
liking and content, until the dispatch in the said ship, directed unto me, be
sent unto Don Pedro Franquesa, the said ship with her men and goods, may not
only, freely return to these Northren parts, without any impediment, but
rather to be entreated with all possible courtesies: And if any of his
Majesty's ships of war, or any of his Subjects ships, shall meet with this
English ship, either outward or homeward bound, they shall permit her to pass
without any detention, it being convenient for his Majesty's service so to do:

Written at Baltimore the nineth of March, 1602. Pedro Lopez de Soto.


Pedro Lopez de Soto his Letter to Captain Roger Harvie.
ALthough you be an Englishman, and my self a Spaniard, nevertheless (finding
you to be (as it appears unto me) a man of honor in all your actions) I
cannot but assure you that I am extremely affectioned unto you, and the cause
that moves me to desire your friendship and correspondence, is the just respect
I have to the good proceedings of the Lord Deputy, and the Lord President, and
their Ministers toward the King my Master, as also of you, and the rest (in
the service of your Prince) which has obliged us to a good correspondence: The
Pasport which I left with you, shall be always faithfully accomplished when
occasion shall serve, and of the same you may be confident, for we will fully
observe it: And so God keep you:

From the Groyne the nineth of April, 1602. Stilo novo.
Pedro Lopez de Soto.
To Captain Roger Harvie, Governor of Castle-haven and Baltimore.

CHAP. XXX.
Don Iuan imbarqued at Kinsale. The Lord Deputy departed from Cork toward
Dublin. A Letter from the Lord Deputy and Council to the Lords in England.
The Lord Deputy sickned in his Journey to Dublin. The Lord President surprised
with a Fever in his return to Mounster.
THE eighth of March Don Iuan being at Kinsale, 8. March.
hourly expecting a wind to be gone, Don Iuan imbarqued at Kinsale.
and finding a flattering gale went aboard: The Lord Deputy on the other side,
as desirous to be at his work in Vlster (for the prosecution of Tyrone;) the
day following he began his Journey toward Dublin, on whom the Lord President
attended, until he had brought him out of the Province: But Don John for want
of a fair wind, departed not from Kinsale until the sixteenth of the same
Month: The Lord Deputy departed from Cork toward Kinsale.
The day before the Lord Deputies departure, or the same day (I know not
whether) his Lordship being mindful of the sufficiency, blood, and valor of
Sir Richard Percy, caused him to be sworn a Councellor of the Province of
Mounster, and the night that he left Cork he lodged at Clone, a Town and
Manor house sometimes belonging to the Bishop of that Sea, but now passed in
Fee farm to Master John Fits Edmonds, who gave cheerful and plentiful
entertaynment to his Lordship, and all such of the Nobility, Captains,
Gentlemen, and others as attended upon him. The Deputy as well to requi^e his
perpetual loyalty to the Crown of England, as also to encourage others in
the like, at his departure, did honor him with the Order of Knighthood, and
then continued his journey toward Waterford, where he bestowed the like honor
upon Edward Gough, and Richard Aylward, two ancient and well deserving Citizens.

The President having attended the Lord Deputy to Kilkenny, where they lodged
in the Earl of Ormonds house, and all things considered of, which concerned
the State of the Kingdom, upon the four and twentieth of March, the last day
of the year, 1601, the Lord Deputy and Council made a Dispatch into ENGLAND,
24. March.
which here ensues.

A Letter from the Lord Deputy and Council to the Lords in England.
IT may please your Lordships, having certain intelligence since our coming
to this place, that Don Iuan and all the rest of the Spaniards departed from
Kinsale on Tuesday the sixteenth hereof, and that the wind since that time has
served them so well, as we assure our selves by this, they are nee^e the Coast
of Spain; we thought fit hereby to give your Lordships notice thereof; that
you may know that we are free now of them all. Since our being ^ere, there
has been br^ught in a notorious Rebel, one William Mac Hubbard, lately taken
in Vpperossery* who of late has done great spoils and murders in these parts,
more then any other, so as we have caused him to be executed in this Town to
the great terror of many: About the same time that he was executed, a Son of
Garret Mac Mortaghes, named Moris Mac Garret, dyed of a hurt lately given him
in fight, who was a most dangerous young man, like to trouble all the Country:
The death of these two Rebels, as also of a notorious Rebel by birth, of
Mounster lately slain (called Dermot Mac Awley) who was an inward man, and a
great practicing instrument with Tyrone) will greatly quiet these parts, and
your Lordships can hardly think, what a great change we find already by their
^o happy and timely cutting off. As for Sir Finnin Odris^hall, (...), and the
two Sons of Sir Owen Mac Cartie, they and their Followers since their coming
in, are grown very odious to the Rebels of those parts, and are so well
divided in factions amongst themselves, as they are fallen to preying and
killing one an other, which we conceive will much avail, to the quieting of
these parts. I the Deputy am this day going toward Dublin, from whence your
Lordships shall hear from me, according to the directions given me by your
Lordships: And I the President am returning into Mounster, to attend my charge
there. We have been much importuned by the Army in general, touching an
abatement of half a pound of Beef upon every flesh day, from every particular
Soldier, and of two Herrings every fish day, and the Horse troops likewise
find themselves agrieved, that the Victualler charge them with two shillings
six pence increase in the issuing of every Barrel of Oats, without any other
Warrant then a private Letter from Master Wade, Clerk of the Council; which
although we conceive Master Wade has signified over upon such purpose of your
Lordships, or other good ground, yet in regard of importunities of the
Captains, and to prevent a general mutiny of the Army, in regard the
Soldiers are weak, and much infeebled, by the last siege of Kinsale, and that
the prices of all things are increased above all measure; by reason of the new
standard Coin, and that the Country is generally much harried and wasted, and
thereby great scarcity and wants grow here; we hold it meet, and accordingly
gave direction to the Commissary of the victuals, to issue Oats (as formerly)
at six shillings the barrel, and allow the Soldier two pound of Beef, and
eight Herrings a day, according as it was formerly accustomed, till your
Lordships resolution were returned in that behalf, which we humbly pray and
expect. And so having no other matter at this time worthy the presenting to
your Lordships, we most humbly take leave.

The same day after this Letter was signed, The Lord Deputy sickned on his way
to Dublin.
the Lord Deputy took his Journey toward Dublin, but being surprised with an
ill disposition of health, which so increased upon him, as that the next day he
was enforced to be carried in his Horse litter, and so continued until he
arrived there. The Lord President surprised with a fever in his return to
Mounster.
And the President the aforesaid day returned toward Cork, surprised with the
like accident, in so much as he was not able that night to journey any farther
then unto Master Geralt Com^rfords house, not distant from Kilkenny above three
miles, and there it appeared that he was in a burning fever: Nevertheless
being transported with a desire to be in his Province, the next day he
remooved, and so by easy journeyes, resting some days upon the way, at last
upon the third of April he came to Cork, but exceeding weak, and in many
men's opinion in danger of death.

The Actions, Accidents, and Services of mark related in this second Book,
for the Readers better memory, I will briefly recount, which were as follows:
viz. The sending of Forces out of Mounster into Connaght, to withstand the
entrance of Connaght and Vlster men into Mounster: The taking of James fits
Thomas, the reputed Earl of Desmond: The apprehension of Florence Mac Cartie:
The sending of a Regiment into Connaght for the service of that Province: The
sending of James fits Thomas and Florence prisoners into England: The restraint
of certain principal Gentlemen of Mounster that were apt to rebel: The
arrival of the Spaniards at Kinsale: The Lord Deputies coming into Mounster:
The siege of Kinsale: The landing of seconds from Spain at Castlehaven: The
remarkable Sea Fight in that harbor: The revolt of diverse of the Provincials:
The coming of Tyrone and Odonnell to raise the siege at Kinsale: The famous
victory obtained against them, and the Spaniards: The flight of Odonnell,
Redmond Burke, etc. into Spain: The honorable and advantageous Composition:
The rendering of Castle-haven, and the Castles at Baltimore unto her Majesty:
The surprising of the Castle of Donboy by Osulevan Bear: The transporting of
the Spaniards into Spain: And the departure of the Lord Deputy out of
Mounster.


The end of the second Book.
PACATA HIBERNIA. THE THIRD BOOK OF THE WARS IN IRELAND, Whereby that
Country was reduced to Subjection and Obedience.
CHAP. 1.
The estate of the Province of Mounster after the siege of Kinsale. The War
of Ireland censured to be lawfully maintained by the Rebels, in the opinion
of the learned men of Spain. The Names of the Doctors of Salamanca, who
censured the lawfulness of the Rebellion in Ireland. 1602

ALthough the Spaniards, In what estate the province of Mounster was in after
the siege of Kinsal.
as is related, were sent away out of Ireland, and the Province of Mounster
cleared of strangers, yet to regulate and draw into order the Provincials,
which were revolted, was a task (of no small labor) for the President to
undergo, being not unlike unto the state of men's bodies, wherein Relapses are
far more dangerous then the first sickness. Before the coming of these
Castillians, the Province (as you have heard) was in so good conformity, as the
civil Justice (without all contradiction) had as current passage as in any of
the former years of Peace, and every man's cattle (without loss or danger)
lay day and night in the fields: But now the Rebels, and their hired Bownoghs
swarmed every where, and especially in Carbery, Bear, Desmond, and Kerry, in
so much as there was no place in them, or adjoining unto them, free from these
Catterpillers, who beholding the grievousnesse of their offenses, grew to be
desperate, concluding themselves to be the children of perdition, and not
capable of her Majesty's gracious mercy, whereby their obstinacy was
increased. In the tract of Land aforementioned, there was no Castles which
which held for the Queen, but those which the Spaniards rendered, and guarded
by the two Captain Harvies, and Castle Mange in Kerry, (wherein a Guard of Sir
Charles Wilmotts had continued all the time of the siege at Kinsale) all the
rest were in the possession of the Rebels: In this distemper the Province
remained, when the Lord Deputy left the same.

But before I enter further into the progression of the affairs of Mounster, I
beseech the Reader to pardon me for this ensuing digression, in the which he
may perceive how the learned men of Spain at Salamanca, did maintain and
approve the Rebellion in Ireland, which was handled upon the seventh day of
March, 1602. Stilo novo.

IN the Name of God Amen: The war of Ireland censured to be lawfully
maintained by the rebels, in the opinion of the learned men in Spain.
The most renowned Prince Hugh Oneale does make war for the Defense of the
Catholic faith with the Queen of England, and the English people; that is to
say, that it may be lawful for him, and the Irish freely to profess the
Catho^^que Religion, which liberty the Queen of England does endeavor to
take from them by force and Arms. There are two matters now in question about
this war: The one is, whether it be lawful for the Irish Catholics to
favor the foresaid Prince Hugh with Arms, and all other means in this war:
The other is, whether it be lawful for the same Catholics, to fight against
the foresaid Prince, without deadly sin, and to favor the English in this
war, either with Arms, or by any other means, especially when as if they
deny this kind of help unto the English, they expose themselves to a manifest
danger of their life, or of loosing all their temporal goods: And furthermore,
since it is permitted by the Pope, that the Irish Catholics may obey the
foresaid Queen of England, and acknowledge her as their lawful Queen, by
paying tribute unto her; for it seems that what belongs unto Subjects to
do, may be performed, that is to say, to fight against the Queens Rebels,
which deny their due obedience to her, and seem to usurp the Land which is
subject to her Dominion.

That both these questions may be decided, we must hold it as for certain,
that the Romish Bishop has power to bridle and suppress, such as forsake the
faith, and those which oppose themselves with Arms against the Catholic
faith, when other means is not ministered to overthrow so great an evil: And
further it must be concluded for infallible, that the Queen of England does
oppugn the Catholic Religion, neither does permit the Irish publicly to
embrace the Catholic faith, and that for the same cause, the foresaid Prince
and others before him, of whom the Letters Apostolical of ^lement the eighth
make mention, did make war against her* These being thus set down, the first
question is easily resolved, for it is qustionlesse, that any Catholics
whatsoever, may favor the said Prince, Hughe Oneale, in the foresaid war,
and the same with great merit, and hope of most great and eternal reward; for
seeing that the foresaid Prince, does make war by the authority of the high
Bishop, for the defense of Catholic religion, and that the Pope does exhort
all the faithful by his Letters thereto (as by his Letters is manifest) and
that he will extend his graces upon the Favorers of the Prince in that war,
in as ample manner, as if they did make war against the Turks, no man will
in equity doubt, but that both the present war is just, and that to fight for
defense of the Catholic religion, (which is the greatest thing of all) is a
matter of great merit: And concerning the second question, it is most certain,
that all those Catholics do sin mortally, which do follow the English
Standard against the foresaid Prince, neither can they obtain eternal
salvation, nor be absolved of their sins by any Priest, except they first
repent and forsake the English Army, and the same is to be censured, of those
which in this war favor the English, either with Arms or Victuals, or give
them any thing of like condition, besides those accustomed tributes which it is
lawful for them by virtue of the Popes indulgence and permission, to pay unto
the Kings of England, or their officers, (so long as Catholic religion shall
flourish in the same.) This assertion is confirmed by this most manifest
reason, because it is sufficiently proved by the Letters of the high Bishop,
that the English make unjust war against the said Oneale, and those that
favor him: For seeing that the Pope does declare, that the English do fight
against the Catholic Religion, and that they should be resisted, as much as
if they were Turks, and that he does bestow the same graces upon those which
do resist them; who doubts the war which the English make against the
Catholic Army to be altogether unjust? But it is not lawful for any to favor
an unjust war, or to be present thereat under the pain of eternal
damnation. The Catholics do therefore most grievously offend, which do bear
Arms in the Camps of Heretics, against the foresaid Prince, in a war so
apparently impious and unjust, and all those which do assist the said war,
with Arms, Victuals, or by any other means, which of themselves do further
the proceedings of the war, and cannot give account of their indifferent
obedience, neither does it any thing avail them to scandal the Apostolical
Letters of Surreption, for Surreption cannot happen where no petition of them
is declared, in whose favor they were dispatched. But the high Bishop does
openly teach in those Letters, that he and his Predicessors, had exhorted the
Irish Princes, and all faithful men, to make that war, and to provoke them
the more thereto; he does enrich them with great favors, and indulgences: How
may it then be, that those Letters were surreptiue, which only contain in
them an exhortation, strengthened with many great favors, for such as did
fulfill them; neither therefore can the Catholics which assist the English,
defend themselves by the reasons alleged in the second question, for no
mortal sin is to be committed; although either life or goods stand
thereupon: but those things which further and help to execute an unjust war
are manifestly deadly sins. It is permitted likewise to the Catholics, to
perform such kind of obedience to the Queen, as does not oppugn Catholic
religion, neither ever was, or could it be the meaning of the Pope, to allow
them to use that obedience toward the Queen, which does manifestly disagree
with the end and scope, which he had to spread the Catholic faith, and
religion in Ireland; but that it was his meaning and scope, his Letters do
manifestly declare. By all which it remains sufficiently apparent, that the
most famous Prince Hugh Oneale, and other Catholics of Ireland, making war
against an heretical Queen, who opposes her self against the true faith,
and no Rebels at all, neither do deny due obedience, nor usurp unjustly the
Queens Dominions, but rather that they do revenge themselves and their
Country, from impious and wicked tyranny by a most just war, and defend and
mainetaine the holy and right faith, with all their power, as becomes
Catholics and Christians. All and every of which, we underwritten, do judge
and approve, as most certain and true. Salamanca the seventh of March, 1602.

I John of Segvensa, The names of the Doctors of Salamanca who ce^sured the
lawfulness of the rebellion in Ireland.
Professor of divinity in the College of the society of Jesus, of this famous
City of Salamanca, do so censure.

I Emanuell of Royas, Professor of divinity in the said College of Jesus, do
agree in the same.

And I Gaspar of Mena, Professor of divinity and holy Scripture in the said
College, do hold with the opinion of these Fathers, as being altogether true.

I Peter Osorius, Expounder for the sacred Canons in the same College of the
society of Jesus, am altogether of the same opinion, with the foresaid Fathers.

The President as is said, being returned to Cork, after a few days, began to
recover, and finding his strength increased, and consequently his health, began
to apply himself to his business: But before I speak farther o^ his
progressions, I must look a little back, to say somewhat of things past.

CHAP. II.
The Earl of Thomond directed to march with an Army into Carbery, and his
Instructions. The Castle of Donboy fortified by the Rebels. The Earl of
Thomond having placed convenient Garrisons in the West, returned to Cork. The
Lord President resolved to besiege the Castle of Donboy. The List of the Army
in Mounster. The Lord President advised not to enterprise the winning of the
Castle of Donboy, and the reasons why. The Lord President perseueres in his
resolution, and ca^seth the Army to march toward Donboy.
TO make trial whether the Rebels in the Country of Carbery, would submit
themselves upon the sight of an Army, having been lately wasted and spoiled by
the Garrisons at Baltimore, The Earl of Thomond directed to march with an Army
into Carbery.
Castle-haven, and Bantry; upon the ninth of March (which was the day the Lord
Deputy departed from Cork;) the President directed the Earl of Thomond with
two thousand and five hundred Foot in List (which were by the Pole but twelve
hundred Foot, and fifty Horse) to march into Carbery, and from thence into
Bear, thereto view in what manner the Castle of Donboy was fortified, of the
incredible strength whereof much was noysed; many other directions he had,
which for the better satisfaction of the Reader, I do here insert the
instructions themselves.

Instructions given to the Earl of Thomond, the nineth of March, 1601.
FIrst as soon as possible you may, His Instructions.
your Lordship is to assemble your forces together, consisting of two thousand
and five hundred foot in List, and fifty Horse; and because they lie
dispersed, for the more expeditions sake, to take them in your way Westward, as
they are garrised.

The service you are to perform, is to do all your endeavor, to burn the
rebels Corn in Carbery, Bear, and Bantry, take their Cowes, and to use all
hostile prosecution upon the persons of the people, as in such cases of
rebellion is accustomed.

Those that are in subjection, or lately protected (as Odrischall, Odonevan,
and Sir Owen Mac Carties Sons, to afford them all kind and mild usage.

When you are in Bear, (if you may without any apparent peril) your Lordship
shall do well, to take a view of the Castle of Dunboy, whereby we may be the
better instructed how to proceed, for the taking of it, when time convenient
shall be afforded.

Captain Flower as I think is now in Bantry, very weakly accompanied, for
his relief, you are to hasten toward him, and for your better understanding
to know in what state he is, to send presently unto him, and accordingly to
proceed.

There is direction to the Victualler, to send three months Victuals for five
hundred Foot to Baltimore, and the like proportion for Bear, and to the Master
of the Ordnance, to send to either of those places, one Last of Powder, with
Lead and Match proportionably; your Lordship is to call upon the Ministers of
those Offices, to see the same presently sent away. The Powder and Victual
sent for Bear, is directed to Baltimore, there to stay until the place be
(...) where Captain Flower rests, and from then^e to be (...) ^^^rected by
your Lordship.

When your Lordship has met with Captain Flower, (...) from him, you are to
leave with him five hundred Foot (or more) if in your judgment you shall
think it requisite, and likewise the like proportion of strength to Captain
Harvie, (more or less) as in your opinion shall be thought meet.

If the Abbey of Bantrey be the place found fittest for Captain Flower to
remain in, and that the same be so ruined, as of necessity (for the safe and
well keeping of the Victuals and Munitions) cost must be bestowed, whatsoever
your Lordship shall lay out for the repairing of it, upon your bill of
disbursements, it shall be forthwith repaied unto you, always praying you to
use as little charge as possible you may: money to intelligencers, and
messengers is likewise allowed.

For the Garrison at Kinsale, Victuals is likewise ordained to be sent,
whereof the Victualler must be remembered.

The capital Rebels that are to resist you, is Osulevan, and Tirrell, your
Lordship must leave no means unassayed to get them alive or dead; the way (in
my judgment) how that service may be effected, I have already made known to
your Lordship, wherein I pray you to use your best endeavors.

^iue all the comfort you may to Owen Osulevan, by whose means you know the
affairs of those parts will be best composed.

Dermond Moyle Mac Cartie is most ass^sted by the Ocrawlyes, have a special
care to prosecu^e and plag^e him and his assistants, and if you can find any
good means to work upon him, spare not your endeavor: Sir Owen Mac Carties
sons (if they be well handled) will prove the best means, knowing as you
do, that he stands between them and the Lord of the Country.

If T^g On^rsies Castle, and Rannell D^ffes, shall in your opinion be meet for
the Service, do you take them into your hands, and leave wards in them; but
let not you^ intent be discovered, until you be possessed of them.

The like you are to do with (...), Sir F^nnin Odrischalls house, in the which
(of necessi^ie) I think the store of Victuals and Munitions for the garrison
of Baltimore, must be laid for the Castle of Donnelong, where Roger (...) is,
(...) too little for that purpose.

Lastly, I pray your Lordship, of all your proceedings in give me as often
advertisement as you may, and have (...) with Sir Charles Wilmot, for between
your two Forces, all the Mo^nster Rebels remain.

The Earl being gone with his Army, (...) the Abbey of Bantrie, about
threescore miles (...) ^orke* and there had notice, The castle of Dunboy
fortified by the Rebels.
that Donnell (...) (...) and his people, by the (...) of two Spaniards, an
Italian, and a Friar called (...) did still continue their works about the
Castle of Dunboy; the Barbican whereof being a stone wall of si^teene foot in
height, they faced with soddes intermingled with wood and faggots (above four
and twenty foot thick) for a defense against the Cannon ^ they had also sunk a
low Plat-forme to plant their (...) for a counterbattery, and left nothing
undone, either within or without the Castle, that in their opinions was meet
for defense* But when it came to trial, it appeared that their Iudge^^^^^
^ayl^d* (as after you shall hear) For the Barbican was not above six or eight
foot distant from the Castle, the height whereof (...) ^^ceeding high, not
remembering that the ruins thereof would quickly fill the void space between
them, and make a fair assault when a (...), whereby all their earth and sodd
works prooved vain^ and (...), not so much as one Cannon shot being bestowed
upon them, but as near as the Cannoni^rs could take their ay^^^ above it* ^s
the President had directed. Tirrell in this mean time with the other ^ownoghs
had so well placed themselves in the moun^aines of Bear, that he could not
with his Army pass any farther without apparent danger: Hereupon the Earl
left with Captain George Flower, The Earl of Thomo^d having placed convenient
garrisons in the West, returned to Cork.
besides his own Company, the Companies of Sir John Do^dall, the Lord Barry,
Captain Francis Kingsmill, Captain (...), and Captain Bradbury, which were
seven hundred (...) in List, in the Whiddy, (an Island lying within the Bay of
Bantrie) very ^onvenient for the Service, and himself with the rest of his
Forces ^^^^^ned to Cork, where having made relation of the partic^lars of
(...) journey, The L. President resolved to besiege the Castle of Do^boy.
it was found necessary that the President without any protrac^ions or delay,
should dr^w all the Forces in the Province to a ^ead against them; And alt^ough
the time of the year was no^ so convenient, (the Spring being newly begun) yet
present order was taken for all the Army to repair unto Cork, except those
which Sir Charles Wilmott did employ for the reduction of K^rry: Upon a long^r
delay a double inconvenience depended: First, her Majesty should be burdened
with a greater charge* and secondly, though the Spaniards had an intention of
sending another Army, yet if they might be certified that the Castle of Donboy
was taken, which was the only possession which they had in Ireland, and the
Country reduced to her Majesty's Obedience before they were put to Sea, it
might peradventure persuade them to new Councels, and alter the former
Determinations.

But before I proceed any farther, it is pertinent to set down the Forces
which the Lord Deputy le^t for the prosecution of the war in Mounster, which
as they stood in List, (but very weak by the Pole) was as follows:

of Horse.
The Lord President. A List of the Army in Mounster.
100 The Earl of Thomond. 100 Sir Charles Wilmot. 25 Sir Anthony Cook. 50
Captain William Ta^^e. 50
Of Foot.
The Lord President. Note that the names thus marked, were Colonels of foot
Regiments.
200 The Earl of Thomond. 200 The Lord Barry. 100 The Lord Audley. 150 Sir
Richard Percy. 150 Sir Charles Wilmo^. 150 Sir George Thornton. 100 Sir Gerard
Harvie. 150 Sir Franci^ Barkley. 150 Sir John Dowdall. 150 Sir Samuel Bagnall.
150 Sir Anthony Cook. 150 Sir Alexander Clifford. 150 Sir Arthur Savage. 150
The White Knight. 100 Captain Roger Harvie. 150 Captain George Flower. 150
Captain William Saxey. 100 Captain Francis Slingsby. 100 Captain Henry
Skipwith. 100 Captain Francis Hobby. 100 Captain Francis Kingsmill. 100
Captain William Power. 100 Captain George Kingsmill. 100 Captain Robert
Collome. 100 Captain John Bostock. 100 Captain Gawen Harvie. 100 Captain
Charles Cook. 100 Captain William Stafford. 100 Captain John Owsley. 100
Captain George Blundell. 100 Captain Edward Dodington. 100 Captain Ralfe
Sidley. 100 Captain Thomas Bois. 100 Captain Holcroft. 100
In all Horse 325 Foot 4400

The enterprise of the siege of Donboy was by the best Subjects of the land,
The L. President was advised not to enterprise the winning of the Castle of
Donboy, and the reasons why.
and by the Presidents particular friends dissuaded; the one in regard of the
public, and the other in the love they bare him: and also out of England had
he advice, that he should be very wary how he proceeded, le^t he should
^aile in the enterprise; whereby the Queen and State, should undergo a
fruitless charge and scorn; for by all men it was thought, that the place was
impregnable, by reason of the situation of it: Whereunto no approach by land
forces could be made, nearer then the Bay of Bantry, being short of Donboy
four and twenty miles, the ways being in many places so impassable for horse
and cariages, and in some places such straights and craggie rocks, as it was
impossible for men to march but in file, whereby one hundred that were to make
defense, might forbid an Army to pass: if he purposed to transport his Army
by Sea, that he should find no landing place for his Ordnance near unto it,
and being landed, the wit of man was not able (without an infinite number of
Pioners) to draw them unto the Castle; for all the grounds near unto it, were
either bog, or rocks, and also that there was no conveniencie of ground to
encampe in, no good water near, not wood for necessary use, or gabion stuff
within three miles of it: The Ea^^^ of Ormond in his love both* ^o the service,
and to the President, ^rote unto him a dissw^ding (...) for the causes before
recited, The L. President perseveres in his resolution.
(...) therefore advised him to (...) the Enterprise: But the President
^oreseeing the importance of the service, and prophsying (as it f^ll out) that
the wi^^ing of that place would discourage the Spani^rds from any new invasion,
gave but a (...) ear to all persuasions ^oping that he should find ^he
difficulties less then they were bele^^^d or related unto him* The well
affected Irish (fearing the ev^^t) solicited him vehemently not to at^empt it;
his answers were, that bogs nor rocks, should forbid the draught of the Cannon;
the (...) he would make passable by Faggots and Timber, the other he would
break and smooth with pyoners tools; and with this constant resolution he
caused the Army to be assembled, which at Cork was in list near three
thousand, but by pole not exceeding fifteen hundred, by reason the Companies
had been extremely weakened, by the long cold and hungry winter siege: The
President (though feeble and weak in his own estate of health) drew forth of
Cork the three and twentieth of April, 23. April. the Army began to march
toward Donboy.
1602. and encamped that night at Owneboy, being the very place where Tyrone
lodged, at such ^ime as he received the great overthrow near Kinsale.

The four and twentieth we rose and marched to Tymolegge, 24. April.
where the Army lodged, and three Rebels that were taken, and (...) before the
Lord President were executed.

The five and twentieth we drew to Roscarbry, 25. April.
where our Army lodged*

The six and twentieth we departed Rosse over the Leap to 26. April.
Glanbarahan near Castle-haven, where the Army encamped, and the Lord
President went to Castle-haven to view the Castle and harbor, not removing
Captain Ga^en Harvie his Company (who had the guard thereof) from thence.

The seven and twentieth the Army dislodged, 27. April.
and the Lord President with his Regiment drew to Baltimore, and the Earl of
Thomond and Sir Richard Percy, with their Regiments drew to a Castle called the
Old court, three miles from Baltimore, where (by reason of revictualling of
the Army) we lodged two nights, in which time the Lord President took view of
the Harbor thereof, and was ferried over into the Island of (...), where he
likewise took view thereof, and sent to the Island of Clear, and the Sound
between them not removing Captain Roger Harvies Company thence, they being
divided to guard the Castles of Donneshed, Donnelonge, and Cape-Cleere.

The nine and twentieth we encamped on the Mountain at a 29. April.
place called Recareneltaghe near unto Kil^oa, being a Castle wherein the
Rebel Conoghor eldest Son to Sir Finnin Odrischall Knight held a Ward.

The thirtieth the Army dislodged, 30. April.
and drew to Carew Castle, built in ancient time by the Lord Presidents
Ancestors, and by the Irish called Downe-marke, or the Marquis his house, being
two miles distant from the Abbey of Bantry, where we sat down, as well to
give annoyance to the Rebels, as to tarry the coming of the shipping with
victuals, munition, and Ordnance; at which place Captain George Flower with
his Garrison (left there by the Earl of Thomond) f^ll in unto us.

C^AP. III.
Diverse spoyl^s done to the Enemy. A Letter from the Lord President to the
Spanish Canno^iers in Donboy. Captain Bostock and Captain B^rry sent to Sir
Charles Wilmo^. A Digression of Sir Charles Wilmots proceedings in Kerry.
Diverse Rebels slain. A traitorly Soldier hanged. A Ward put into C^rig^oile.
The Castle of Lixn^w taken by composition. The Castle of Balli^ow taken, and
the Knight of Kerry defeated. Castle Gregory and Rahane taken.
THE first of May, 1. May.
Captain Taffes troop of Horse with certain light foot were sent from the
Camp, Preyes taken from the Enemy.
who returned with three hundred Cowes, many Sheep, and a (...) number of
Garrans they got from the Rebels.

The second Captain John Barry brought into the Camp five hundred Cowes, 2.
May.
three hundred Sheep, three hundred Garrans, An other prey.
and had the killing of five Rebels; and the same day we pro^ured skirmish in
the edge of their Fastness with the rebels, but no hurt of our part.

The third Owen Osulevan and his Brothers, 3. May. A third prey^
Sons to Sir Owen Osulevan (who stand firm, and deserved well of her
Majesty, being Competitours with Osulevan Bear) brought some fifty Cowes,
and some sheep from the Enemy into the Camp.

The fourth, 4. May.
Odalie was convented before the Lord President and Council, and in regard it
was proved that he came from the rebels, with messages and offers to Owen
Osulevan, to adhere and combine with the Enemy, which the said Owen did first
reveal to Captain Flower, Sergeant Major of the Army, and after publicly
justified it to Odalies face; the said Odaly was committed to attend his trial
at the next Sessions.

This Odalies Ancestor had the county of Moynterbary given unto him by the Lord
Presidents Ancestor, many hundred years past, at which time Carew had to his
inheritance, the moity of the whole kingdom of Cork, which was first given by
King Henry the second unto Robert ^its Stephen; the service which Odaly and his
Progeny were to do, for so large a proportion of Lands unto Carew and his
successors, was (according to the custom of that time) to be their Rimers, or
Chroniclers of their actions.

The fifth and sixth, 5. May.
the weather was so tempestuous, that we could not stir out of the quarter.

The seventh, 7. May
the Lord President understanding that the Spanish Cannoniers were still in
Donboy, as well in regard they were strangers, but especially to deprive the
Enemy of their service; he wrote a Letter in Spanish unto them, to persuade
them to relinquish the Rebels, assuring them, that they should not only come
safe, and remain safely with him, but that he would embarque them for Spain.
This Letter by the means of Owen Osulevan, was delivered unto them; but as it
appeared, they little deserved the favor proffered; for if they had pleased
they might have made an escape: but at last when the Castle was taken, they
paid the price of their inconsiderate obstinacy: The Letter (Englished) was
thus.

A Letter from the Lord President to the Spanish Cannoniers in Dunboy.
^Hen Don Iuan de Aguila (General for the Spanish Army for his Majesty in
Ireland) departed from the City of Cork, having a care of your safeties,
requested me to favor you, saying, That contrary to your wills the Traitor
Donnell Osulevan (by force) held you in his Castle of Dunboy, there to serve
him as Cannoniers: I now calling to mind his desire, (in the love I bear him,
being so great a Captain, and so honorable a Person as he is) and in
consideration of the promise I made him, do write this Letter unto you,
promising (for the reasons before mentioned) that when I shall sit down (with
my forces) before the castle (where you are) if then you will quitt the same
and come unto me, I will, by the faith of a Gentleman, and a Christian, make
good my promise to Don Iuan de Aguila; not only to secure you in coming to
me, and in the like safety to be with me, but also to relieve and supply
your wants, and likewise at your pleasure, to accommodate you with a Ship, and
my Pasport, safely to pass into Spain, in such manner as has been already
accomplished to the rest of the Spaniards that are returned to their Country:
This above written I am obliged by my promise to Don John to fulfill. But if
you have a desire to find or receive further favors at my hands, you may with
facility deserve it, that is, when you leave the Castle to cloy the Ordnance,
or mayme their Carriages, that when they shall have need of them, they may
prove useless, for the which I will forthwith liberally recompense you
answerable to the quality of your merit. Lastly, if there be in your
companies any strangers, (English and Irish excepted) which are likewise by
force held (as you are) these my letters shall be sufficient to secure their
repair to me, and also to depart, as has been before mentioned,
conditionally, that you and they present your selves unto me, before our
Ordnance shall begin to batter the Castle of Donboy aforesaid: But if on your
part default be made, I hold my self clearly acquitted of my promise made to
Don John, and to be free from breach of faith on my part, and you ever after
incapable of this favor of my promised offer. Return me your Answer by this
Bearer in writing, or by some other in whom you have more confidence.

From the Camp near Bantrie the seventh of May, 1602. To the Spaniards held
by force in the Castle of Dunboy.

The eighth, 8. May.
the Lord President sent forth three hundred light Footmen secretly by night
through the Enemies Fastness, Cap. Bostock and Captain Barry sent to Sir
Charles Wilmot.
under the command of Captain John Bostock, and John Barry, with
commandment that they should make their repair to Ardentully, Mac Fi^nees
house, and there join those Forces with Sir Charles Wilmotts Regiment; who
being united, Terrill and the rest of the Irish Rebels, (who before had
vaunted, that they would keep our Army from joining together, and lay in a
place of advantage fit for that purpose) were so discomforted, as they did quit
the strength they possessed, and sought only to avoid our Forces, but no way to
resist or interrupt them.

But now leaving the progression toward Donboy for a while, A digression of
Sir Char* Wilmots proceedings in Kerry.
expecting fair weather and prosperous winds, to bring our provisions from
Cork by Sea: We will by way of digression say somewhat of Sir Charles Wilmots
proceedings in Kerry, before his coming into our Camp: It may therefore
please the Reader to understand, that the Army being risen from before Kinsale,
the Irish defeated, the composition made with the Spanish General, and the
forces returned to Cork* The Lord President about the beginning of February
dispa^ched Sir Charles Wilmot with a Regiment of one thousand and seven hundred
^oote in list, but by pole very weak, and a troop of Horse, into his former
government of Kerry, not doubting but he which had the skill to cure the
former rebellious diseases o^ that Country, could also recure the residuation
thereof: In his passage between Askeiton and the Glen* Hugh Mac S^^ne (with
the Oconners and Oneales) possessed a place through which he must necessarily
pass, whereof being advertised, he lodged short of the Wood an English mile,
Diverse rebels slain by Sir Charles Wilmot.
and rising before day light, he assailed them in their quarter, where he
slew t^elue of their men, took all their baggage and horses, with fifty of
their Arms, and chased them three miles, but they were too swift of foo^e; had
it not been for a Connaght man of the White Knights company, who purposely
discharged his Piece to give them warning, whereat they took an alarm, they
had been (as it was afterward confessed) all (to the number of two hundred)
surprised sleeping: The Traitor A tra^torly Soldier hanged.
(as he well deserved) was hanged for his labor: The Castle of Carrigfoyle A
Ward put into Carigfoyle.
he found empty and ruined* nevertheless be left a Ward in it, and gave the
charge thereof unto Captain Collum: when he came to the river of Cassan,
which he passed the same day with some difficulty, being enforced to swim his
horses: At which time John fits Thomas, young Captain Tirrell, Hugh Mac Swyne,
Owen Omaylie, Rori^ Oconnor, Phelim O Connor, and Gerald fits Maurice, Brother
to Fits Maurice the Barron of Lixnaw with five hundred foot and a few horse,
assembled at Lixnaw near unto it, to have stopped his passage over the Cassan;
Fits Maurice himself being then gone into Desmond, to persuade Donell Mac
Cartie, Donell Osule^an, and William Burk^, to draw to the rest, to hinder his
passage as aforesaid; but before they had knowledge of his being near unto
them, he made such expedition as he was gotten over the River.

And within a few days after, hearing that the Lord of Lixnaw was in Lixnaw
Castle he marched thither, The castle of Lixnaw taken by Composition.
and ere he was ^et down before it* Fits Morris fearing to be shut up in his
Castle, although he had a strong Guard of five and forty good men well
victualled in it, leaving his Brother for his Constable, he posted into Desmond
to procure aids from Osulevan Bea^e, for the relief of the same: The Castle
stands close to the rivers side, there being but a Pikes length of ground
between them, which made the Ward negligent to have any store of water
aforehand, thinking they might fetch it at their pleasure: Sir Charles having
knowledge thereof, by a woman which came from them, he found the means to
place a choice part of men upon that little plot of ground, whereby the Ward
could get ^o water* in which attempt, Lieutenant Russell who served under
Captain William S^^ey, and one Soldier was slain: The Ward by this means
debar^ed of water, rendered the place upon composition, which Sir Charles
yielded unto, that he might prosecute services of more importance.

And being now come to Castle^ mang^, wherein he had left a Ward before the
siege of Kinsale, sent the one half of his Companies of horse and foot) into
the Knight of Kerries country (who as the rest in those parts were relapsed
into rebellion) to prey the same, and to drive the cattle (they should take) to
the Dingle; and for their succors (if need required) himself with the
remainder of his forces marched after them, as far as Ballyhow, ten miles from
Castlemange, where he found the Knight of Kerry The Castle of Ballihow taken
and the Knight of Kerry defeated.
with one hundred of his own Followers, and two hundred Bonoghs, upon a bog
not half a mile from the Castle, where the Knight had a Ward: To draw him to
hard ground, in his sight a few men were appointed to assault the Castle,
himself with his foot and horse standing in a body without moving; the
Soldiers fired the Castle door, and within three hours possessed themselves of
it: The Knight all this while stood at gaze: the Castle being won, Sir
Charles drew toward him, to procure him to fight, he finding the advantage of
the ground he was in, where the Horse could not harm him, charged our
troops: Sir Charles seeing himself engaged, and in danger if he should
retraite, drew up his Colors to the head of his Pikes, and joined with the
Enemy; it was long disputed whether should have the better, and with pike and
sword, between them twenty were hurt and slain; the Horsemen seeing how
doubtful the success was, valiantly and resolutely alighted from their
horses, upon whose coming the Enemy fled, and were chased more then a mile,
but their footemanship was too good for us, and in the chase very few of them
were slain: in this Encounter Phelim Oconnor was killed, and all the Chiefes
amongst them (the Knight excepted) were hurt* the next day Sir Charles leaving
his foot at Ballihow, rode to the Dingle, at whose coming thither, numbers of
people repaired unto him, humbly imploring her Majesty's gracious protection*
The fifth of March he also took from the Knight of Kerry, Castle Gregory,
Castle Gregory and Rahane taken.
and the Rahane his chief manor house: And lastly hunting him as a Fox,
(whose earth is stopped) pursued the sent so freshly, that he constrained him
to a new covert, following the Lord of Lixnaw into the Mountains of Desmond.

CHAP. IIII.
The forces which the Rebels had in Kerry in bonaght. The voluntary submission
of Donnell Mac Cartie. Sir Charles Wilmot req^ired by the Lord Pre^ident to
come to the Camp at Carew Castle. A great prey taken from Osulevan Mores
sons. The Knight of Kerry upon humble suite protected. Sir Charles Wilmot
with the forces of Kerry, and the munitions and victuals from Cork arrived at
the Camp then at Carew Castle. Munition and victuals sent by the Lord
President to the Lord Deputy. Dermond Moyle Mac Cartie brother to Florence Mac
Cartie slain.
AFTER these good successes many of the Co^ntrey (as their manner is to take
part with the strongest) submitted themselves unto the Governor, the
principal amongst whom, was Dermond Osulevan, brother to Osulevan More, by
whom he understood the force of the Rebels there, The forces which the rebels
had in Kerry in bonaght.
namely the Barron of Lixnaw, in his Country of Cla^morri^, had entertained
William Burke with three hundred Bonn^ghs, the Knight of Kerry as many under
Mac Cabs Sons, and the Mac S^ynes, and Donnell Mac Cartie (usurping again
the title and posses^ions of Mac Cartie More, with the help of the Osulevans)
gave bonnaght to Captain Tirr^ll with four hundred men, so that their forces
were one thousand strangers.

At this time Sir Charles Wilmot had certain traffic with William Burke, The
Lord of Lixnaw banished out of Kerry.
who seemed very desirous to become a Subject: The Governor required him to
do such service, as might merit both his pardon and reward, which he yielded
unto, yet with limitations, namely that ^ee would never betray the lives of
any, but he would undertake to get into his hands all the prey of Kerry and
Desmond, and deliver the one half to the Garrison, so that he might have
license to (...) into Connaght with the re^t.

The Governor in the interim of this intercourse surceased not to follow the
pr^secution of ^i^s Morris* and prevailed so well therein, that ^aving slain
many of his ke^ne, and gotten all his Tenants into subjection, he banished him
the Country of Clanmorris, and caused him to fly for his safety into Desmond:
Hereupon Donnell Mac Cartie, The voluntary submission of Donnell Mac Cartie.
who bare a good affection to the Lord President (since his former submission)
and relying much also upon the Governors kindness, whereof before times he
had good experience, without any ^apitulation or protection, came in his own
person to Sir Charles, and brought with him five thousand Cowes, besides sheep
and garrans in great numbers: The Governor hereby perceiving his loyal
simplicity, would take no advantages against him, but gave him all countenance
and contentment that his place could afford.

The Governor having cleared all Kerry, so that no Enemy was left upon his
back, drew the forces toward Desmond about the middle of April, to pursue
such Services as that Mountainous and desolate Country would permit him to
effect* But by reason of the dangerous passages (the whole Country being
nothing else but mountains, woods, and boggs) he thought it not safe to
adventure any further then Listree, a Castle seated twelve miles within
Desmond; whilst he remained there in camp, he received Letters from the
President, giving him to understand of his journey to Donboy, and how far he
was proceeded therein, willing him to take the best order that he could for
the speedy settling of those parts, that he might repair unto him (upon a day
assigned) to Carew Castle. Sir Charles Wilmot required by the Lo. President to
come to the Camp at Carew Castle.
The Rebels receiving also notice, that the President was marched so near to
the Country of Bear, withdrew themselves out of Desmond (as before) into
Glangarve, whereby opportunity was offered to the Governor of performing some
good service: For Donnell Osulevan, Son to Osulevan More, a malicious Rebel,
remained with great store of cattle, and certain Kerne in Iuragh; which being
made known to Sir Charles, upon the fifth of May he secretly dispatched a
party of men, A great prey taken from Osulevan More his son.
which burnt and spoiled all the Country, and returned with four thousand
Cowes, besides Sheep and Garrans. The Knight of Kerry finding that the Queens
forces prospered so well, and that the Rebels were daily impouerished and
distressed, sought in all humble and submissiue manner for protection,
promising the best security that could be devised for his future loyalty, The
Knight of Kerry upon humble suit protected.
which the Governor was the more willing to accept, because those parts should
enjoy thereby a more quiet establishment during his absence with the President.
These things thus ordered, he only intended his meeting with the Presidents
Army; many difficulties appearing to give impediment thereunto: for the
Rebels knowing that these forces should join, and that there was no way for
Sir Charles to march, but by the Abbey of Erillah, and so over the Mangart, a
most hideous and uncouth Mountain, they plashed and manned all the places,
straights and advantages thereof, giving forth, that they would set up their
rest, and either kill, or be killed, before they would permit him to pass:
But to proceed.

The ninth, 9. May.
the Lord President went over into the Island, Whiddy, to take view thereof, and
returned to the Camp that night, and the tenth rode toward the mouth of the
harbor, to see the entry thereof.

The eleventh, 11. May.
the President drew forth all the Regiments, leaving only a competent number
to guard the Quarter in his absence, and marched two miles from the Camp,
beyond Carrig^esse, to the edge of the Straight, where Tirr^ll with the Rebels
were lodged, to give disturbance to Sir Charles Wilmotts coming to the Camp,
to the intent if the Enemy had given upon Sir Charles, he might give him
Seconds: But the passage was quitted, and the Forces came through the same
without any blow; and the very same day the Ships arrived in the Harbor,
which brought about the Victuals, and Munitions from Cork, Sir Charles Wilmot
with the forces of Kerry, and the munition and victuals from Cork arrived at
the camp, remaining then at Carew castle
it breeding great gladness to the Army, then being in so great want, as that
we must have been enforced within two days to have returned toward
Baltimore.

The twelfth, 12. May.
the Lord President received Letters from the Lord Deputy by John Pavie his
servant, whereby he was required to send a great proportion of Munition and
Victuals out of his Province to his Lordship, Munition and victual sent by
the Lord President to the Lor. Deputy.
which he performed accordingly, and returned his man: The same day also the
Hoy which brought about the Ordnance, and the Trinity, (belonging to James
Goagh of Waterford) with the remainder of the Munitions and victuals, which was
left for her Guard, both safely arrived at Carew Castle, where we still
encamped.

The thirteenth, 13. May.
whilst we were thus detained by unseasonable weather, there was a notorious
Rebel accidentally slain upon this occasion: The President at his coming
from Cork, had commanded all the Subjects in Kina^mecha, Kirrywherry, and
Kinaley, to draw the Cattle Northwards, into the plain toward Yoghall, and
Castle^lyons, because if the Rebels should draw thitherwards, while he was at
the siege of Donboy, they might not receive any relief from those parts,
amongst the which Mac Cartie Reugh would not drive away his cattle, pretending
to keep them secure from the Rebels, under the garrison of Kinsale; and
indeed the reason was, because the principal Rebels in Carbery, being his
dear friends, and near kinsmen, he did not stand in fear to receive any
damage from them: But it fell out, that Dermond Moyle^Mac Cartie, Florence his
brother, being distressed for want of Victual for himself and his followers,
having no other means to supply his wants, Dermond Moyle^ Mac Carty, brother
to Florence, slain.
thought to make bold with his Cozen Mac Cartia for a few Cowes, and therefore
came amongst his Tenants with thirty men in his company, and seazing upon some
part of their prey, offered to retire toward his Fa^^nesse. The Churles that
attended those cattle, ray^ed the cry, whereupon some forty of the Country,
with such furniture as ^ame next to ^and, speedily followed in rescue of their
goods. The Rebels not fearing any Enemy, made no great haste away, and thereby
being soon overtaken; these sought to rescue their prey, and they to defend
them, in such sort, that in process they fell to a light skirmish, and not
many shot made before one lighted upon the chief Rebel Dermond, and killed
him dead in the place: which being known, it bred no less astonishment in the
one party, then in the other, all the Country being equally grieved for the
loss of such a principal Pillar of the Catholic Cause, and therefore
conveying his corpse to the Abbey of Timoleg, was there interred by a Fryet, in
great solemnity: Mac Cartie Reugh sent present Letters hereof to the
President, signifying the vigilant care, and unpartiall regard that he carried
against the Rebels, which his Lordship might well perceive by his service
against his nearest kinsman, and the President was content to give him thanks,
although he knew how little he had deserved the same.

CHAP. V.
(...)
THE (...) straights, as the Enemy being first possessed thereof, they might with
the twentieth part of the force they had there, give annoyance and impediment
to the greatest Army: for which and other reasons it was resolved by a general
consent, that the Army should be transported over the Arm of the Sea, to the
great Island, and from thence to pass to the Maine. It was resolved in
Council, that the army should be tra^sported by sea to the great Island, and
from thence to the Ma^n:


The fifteenth, 15. May.
the Traitor Tirrell sent two of his most trusty friends into the Camp, as
Messengers to the Lord President, The rebel Tirrell desired a parl^y with the
Lo. President.
to invite and pray a parley the day following with his Lordship, which he
refused; then he desired that he might speak with the Earl of Thomond, which
was granted at a place upon the edge of a River, about a mile distant from our
Camp: And the same day Captain Taffe with his troop of Horse, All our horse
were sent from the camp, and certain foot to guard Kinsale.
all our carriage, gerrans and drivers, and one hundred choice foot, selected
out of all our Regiments were sent back to the Castle ny Park to guard the
Town of Kinsale, and the Ordnance there; Captain Hobbie, and Captain
Skipwith being there before with their two weak Companies, not thought
sufficient in this uncertain time to secure those places.

The sixteenth 16. May.
the Earl of Thomond, well attended, drew forth his Regiment, and went to the
assigned place: but Tirrell failing to be there, excused by his former
Messengers his not coming, by the approach of the evening, praying his
Lordships patience, promising there to attend his Lordship the next morning.

The seventeenth, 17. May.
the Earl the second time (according to promise) drew down to the appointed
place, where Tirrell only made a show of his whole force on the other side the
River, in the view of our Army, Tirrel failed twice to parley with the Earl of
Thomond, and the cause why.
but never came to the place where the Earl was, whose treacherous intent the
Earl perceiving, and scorning to expect any other issue returned to the Camp:
Tirrell as afterward we understood would feign have gone to the Earl, but
the Iusuit Archer, Fits Morris, and Donnell Osulevan would not permit him.

From the seventeenth to the six and twenty nothing happened worthy note, only
we were detayned in our Camp with contrary winds, and with strange
unseasonable and tempestuous weather.

The six and twentieth 26. May.
the wind turned fair, and the shipping drew forth, but immediately the weather
proved so tempestuous, that they were constrained to return to their former
rode; and the same day a Sergeant of the Earl of T^omonds, Aprey taken
with a party of his Company drew to Down-Manus, whence he brought a prey of
threescore and six Cowes, with a great many of Garrans.

The seven and twentieth, 27. May.
the eight and twentieth, the nine and twentieth and the thirtieth, we were
detayned with like contrary winds, and unseasonable foul and stormy weather.

CHAP. VI.
The Army dislodged from Carew Castle. The Regiments transported into the great
Island. Teg Keugh Mac Maghon slain. The Castle of Donm^n^s surprised. A Spanish
ship arrived. The conf^rence be^^eene the Earl of (...) and Richard
Mac-Goghagan. The Lord President rides to the place where the forces were to
land. The vigilant care of the Lord President. Two Regiments directed to land
in the little Island, the other two to make to the Maine. The Rebels deceaved.
The Rebel defeated, and Captain Terrell (...).
THE one and thirtieth, 31. May.
the weather grew fair, and we took advantage thereof, and drew forth, which
day our Army dislodged from Carew Castle, The Army dislodged from Carew Castle
leaving our sick men (which were many) with a strong guard in the Island of
Whyddy, and marched to Kilnamenoghe on the Sea side in Mountervarry, where we
encamped that night.

The first of June, 1. June.
the Earl of Thomond and his Regiment were embarked for the great Island, The
Regiments transported into the great Island.
as also Sir Charles Wilmo^s and his Regiment, after whose departure, the Lord
President remooved his camp to a head-land, three parts whereof were environed
with the Sea, and the rest was entrenched.

The second 2. June.
Sir Richard Percie and his Regiment followed the other two; and lastly the
Lord President with his landed in the great Island, where the other Regiments
were formerly arrived.

The Lord President being wearied with his long stay there, spending the time
without advancing the service, for that the Hoy wherein the Pieces of Battery
was, could not so well (...) to windward as the rest, without which he could
effect nothing of his intended service, sent Captain Slingsby aboard, (who had
before been conversant in Sea-affaires) to use his best diligence in getting
those vessels to the great Island near to the Castle of Donboy, which with
towing the Hoy at the S^erne of the Trinity of Waterford, and other diligence
used, he effected the service, and arrived at the great Island.

The third, 3. June.
T^g Ke^gh Man Maghon, Teg Ke^gh mac Maghon slain.
a principal Rebel (in an Island adjoining to the Dorseys) was casually shot
through the body by his own son, whereof he dyed the third day following.

The fourth, 4. June.
Owen Osulevan, and two of his brothers with a party of men, went to the
Castle of Donmanu^, The castle of Donmanus surprised.
which was held and guarded by the Rebels, which they surprised, and kept the
same, killed four of the Guard, and took the prey and spoil of the Town.

The fifth, 5. June.
a Spanish ship arrived at the Bay of Camnarra, A Spanish ship arrived.
near Ardea in Desmond.

And the same day Richard Mac Goghagan A conference between the Ear. of
Thomond, and Ric. Mac Goghagan.
(being the Constable of Dunboy) came into the great Island, and spoke with the
Earl of Thomond; but whether he were sent by the Presidents entreaty, to see
whether he could persuade with Mac Goghagan upon promise of reward, to render
the Castle to the Queen, or whether Richard Mac Goghagan did entreat the
Earl, that he might have a Safe Conduct to speak with him, I am uncertain,
but of this I am sure, that the Earls meeting with him, was not without the
Presidents knowledge and allowance: All the Eloquence and artifice which the
Earl could use avayled nothing; for Mac Goghagan was resolved to persevere in
his ways, and in the great love which he pretended to bear unto the Earl,
he advised him not to hazard his life, in landing upon the Main: for I know
(said he) you must land at yonder Sandy Bay, where before your coming, the
place will be so trenched and gabioned, as you must run upon assured death:
The Earl disdayning both his obstinacy, and his vainglorious advice, brake
off speech, telling Mac Goghagan, that ere many days passed, he would repent
that he had not followed his counsel.

The sixth 6. June.
being Sunday, a foul and stormy morning, the Lord President very early
taking but one Footman with him, rode two or three miles from the Camp, The L.
President rode to view the place where the forces were to land.
to the place where the Boats were assembled to pass the Army (which that day
was to rise) over into the Maine: The cause which moved him to be stirring so
timely, was to view the landing place, which was less then half a mile from
the place of the embarquing, from whence he might easily discern a low sandy
Bay, between high ground, of a very little capacity, where the descent was to
be made, which was entrenched and barricad^ed with gabions of earth; in the
which trench and behind the gabions, the enemies had placed there Musketeers,
and their gross at hand, to give them seconds: But not contented with a view
so far off, the Queens Pinnace the Merlin, riding not far from him, he
commanded Captain Flemming to pass him over into a little Island, called
Donghe Irish, Donghe Irish.
which lay between the great Island and the Maine, and some part of it not
twelve score from the sandy Bay aforesaid: When he came into the said Island,
and taking an exact view of the landing place, and how the rebels Army lodged
to forbid our descent, and the apparent danger he saw would ensue in the
attempt, he rounded all the small Island, and at last he found a convenient
place to land in the Maine* and the same (by reason of a rising ground in the
midst thereof) was out of the sight of the sandy Bay: The vigilant care of
the Lord President.
presently he commanded Captain Fleming to land (out of his Pinnace) in the
Island two falcons of brass, and hailed them upon their trunks to a place
naturally formed like a platform, and parrapetted with an old ditch, as if it
had been fashioned to that purpose: In this place the Pieces were planted;
from it to the Maine land, it was not above one hundred paces; and although the
distance from the sandy Bay to this place, was not four and twenty score, yet
to come unto it was more then half a mile, by reason of a Gurt, or cleft Rock,
made by the Sea; which ran up far into the land, which the Enemy must
compass before he could come unto it: By that time that the President had
performed as much as he intended in the small Island, Two Regime^ts landed in
the little Island.
the Presidents and the Earl of Thomonds regiments were embarked, and under
sail, whom the President (when they came near unto him) caused to land where
he stood in the small Island, and drawing them to that end of the same which
faced the sandy Bay to amuse the rebels, being not distant from them (as is
said) a Musket shot, he formed them into a battallion* and so stood firm
confronting the Enemy, as if from thence he would pass them into the Maine:
Sir Richard Percy, and Sir Charles Wilmot with the rear Regiments (by this
time) were likewise embarked.

For you must understand that we had not Boats sufficient to transport all our
Regiments at once, The two (...) there Regiments landed in the Maine.
and they likewise made to the small Island, but in steed of landing in the
same, the President directed them to pass by the end of it (when he had
placed the faulcons) and to land directly in the Maine; before the Rebels found
themselves deceived, the two rear Regiments were landed, and formed into order
ready to fight; The Rebels deceived.
then the President drew his own, and the Earl of Thomonds regiments to the
boats, not twelve score from them, which the Rebels preceiving, and too late
finding their error, in a disordered manner made toward our landing place, but
before they could compass the fret, or cleft rocky ground as aforesaid, all
our Army was landed: Nevertheless they came on bravely, but our falcons made
them hault; our Vanguard made toward them, and a good skirmish ensued, which
continued until the other Regiments came up, but then they brake, and ran
faster then we could follow: upon the place eight and twenty of them was
slain, whereof two were officers, and thirty wounded, whereof Captain
Tirrell was one, The Rebels defeated and Captain Tirrell wounded.
shot in the body but not deep enough: There was only two prisoners taken,
and presently hanged, whereof a servant of James Archer (the infamous Jesuit)
was one, and with him his masters sword and portace: And if the Jesuit himself
had not been a light footed Priest, he had fallen into our hands, and yet as
nimble as he was, he escaped with much difficul^ie, and besides him, great
numbers of them would have passed the edge of the sword, had not they had a
boggie Wood at hand, wherein they were sheltered: The loss of our side was
only the hurting of seven men, but none of mark* the skirmish being ended,
we lodged that night upon the same ground near unto Castle Dermond.

CHAP. VII.
The Spanish ship which arrived near Ardea bro^ght Passengers, Munition, and
Money to ^he Rebels. The distrib^ters and distribution of same of the money. A
Letter from Owen Mac Eggan unto Richard Mac Goghagan at Donbay. A Letter from
James Archer Jesuit to Dominick Collins Jesuit at Donboy. A Letter from John
Anias to Dominick at Donboy. A Letter from John Anias to the Barr^n of Lixna^ a
little before hi^ execution.
WITHIN two hours after the skirmish aforesaid was ended, the Rebels had
intelligence that there was a Spanish patach landed the night before at the
haven of Kilmokilloc, not far from Ardea, The Spanish ship which arrived near
to Ardea, brought passengers, munition, and money to the Rebels.
in the Bay of Camnarra* she was purposely sent from Spain, to know the
estate of the Castle of Donboy, whether it held still for the King of Spain;
some Irish passengers was in her, namely a Friar James Nelane, a Thomond man
belonging to Sir Tirlogh Obrian, who had the charge of the treasure; Owen Mac
Eggan the Popes Bishop of Rosse, and his vicarius Apostolicus, with Letters to
sundry Rebels, and twelve thousand pounds, as the President was credibly
informed by one called Moylmurry Mac Edmond Boy Mac Swyny, then a Rebel, who
saw it, besides munition, which did put such a fresh spirit into the Rebels,
(who formerly were advising rather to break and disperse then to endure a
siege) as they solemnly vowed to persevere in the defense of the Castle,
assuring the Messenger (which they confirmed by their Letters) that they would
hold the same until Michaelmas, within which time they prayed aid, which the
Messenger confidently promised; for (said he) two thousand men were drawn to
the Groyne, before I departed thence: And the next morning being the fifteenth,
he set sail for Spain, carrying with him Brian Okelly, and Donnagh Mac Mahon
Obrian: The distribution of the money by appointment in Spain (as Moylemurry
aforesaid affirmed) was left principally to the disposition of Donnell Oulevan
Bear, The distributers and the distribution of some of the money.
Owen Mac Eggan, James Archer and some others* and Ellen Cartie, wife to Owen
Osulevan then a prisoner with Donnell Osulevan Bear, did see some part of that
treasure disbursed in manner following. To Donnell Osulevan Bear. 1500. li. To
James Archer Jesuit. 0150 To Donoghe Moyle Mac Cartie. 0160 To Finnin Mac
Cartie. To Dermond Moyle, Florence his Brother. 0300. li. To Odonevan. 0200 To
Sir Finnin Odrischall, and Conner his Son. 0500 To Conner Mac Nemarra. 0100 To
Richard Blake. To the Lord of Lixnaw. 0100 To John fits Thomas. 0200 To O
Conner Kerry. 0100 To the Knight of the Valley. To Donnell Mac Cartie the Ba^t.
0400 Sum. 3710. li.

And likewise the said Moilmurry, saw four great Boat loads of wine, munition,
and money, taken out of the patach, and carried on shore by Osulevan Bear, into
the Castle of Ardea; but how much munition was brought he did not know, part
thereof was presently sent to Donboy, to encourage the Rebels in the Castle;
Owen Mac Eggan wrote a Letter to Richard Mac Goghagan, which is here ensuing
truly related, and an other written by Archer the Jesuit, to Dominick Collins
the Friar, and a third from John Anias, who conceived himself to be a good
Ingeniere: All which Letters do here ensue.

A Letter from Owen Mac Eggan to Richard Mac Goghagan at Donboy.
MAster Richard, I commend me unto you, being very glad of the good report I
hear of you, whereby I cannot but expect much (with God his assistance) in
that lawful and godly cause of you: I am sorry, but it was my luck to
confer with you, and with the rest of your company, and inform you of all
the State of the matters of Spain* but upon my credit, and conscience, there
is no piece of service now in hand in all Christendom for the King of Spain,
then the same that ye have: How great it is to God, and necessary for our
Country affairs you know: Moreover within few days you shall have relief of
men come to help you thither out of Spain: the great Army of fourteen
thousand men are forth coming, you shall all be as well recompensed, both by
God and by the Kings Majesty, as any Ward that is in all the world again;
have me I pray commended to all, and especially to father Dominick, and bid him
be of good courage; there comes with the Army a father of the company an
Italian, for the Pope his Nuncius, in whose company I came from Rome to the
Court of Spain, and there he expects the Armies coming hither, he shall
give all a benediction, yea I hope within your Castle there, spite of all the
devils in hell:

From the Catholic Camp this present Wednesday. 1602. Your assured Friend,
Owen Hegaine.


In my sacrifice and other poor prayers I will not fail, Postscript.
but commend you and your good cause to God; our ship did arrive three days
agon, and our Letters is come to the King by this time, Nisi Dominus
custodierit civitatem, etc.

A Letter from James Archer Jesuit, to Dominick Collins, Jesuit, at Donboy.
YOur Letters of Thursday last came to our hands, but our disagreeing in some
matters, makes to be slack in performing your desire, yet you must take
better order for the premises; in the mean while, how ever becomes of our
delays, or insufficiencies, be ye of heroical minds, (for of such
consequence is the keeping of that Ca^tle, that every one there shall surpass
in deserts any of us here; and for Noble valiant Soldiers shall pass
immortal throughout all ages to come; for the better encouraging, let these
words be read in their hearing: Out of Spain we are in a vehement expectation,
and for Powder, Lead, and Money, furnished: Now to come to more particular
matters, understand that there are but two ways to attempt you, that is,
scaling with ladders, or Battery: for scaling, I doubt not but your own wits
needs no direction; and for Batte^y, you may make up the breach by night. The
higher you raise your works every way the better, but let it be thick and
substantial: raise of a greater height that work Captain Tirrell made,
betwixt the house and the cornell: make plain the broken house on the South
side: For fire-worke direction do this, prime the holes, and stop in the balls
with powder mixed through the material well, and some powder uppermost that
shall take fire; the rest you know, as you have heard me declare there: by all
means possible send me one Ball, and the rest of the Saltpeeter.

This in haste till better leisure: Camp this Thursday. Your loving Cosen,
JAMES ARCHER.
To Father Dominicke Collins, these in haste.

A Letter from John Anias, to Dominick Collins, Jesuit, at Donboy.
BE careful of your fortifying continually, with a most special care raise in
^eight the West side of your Port; fill your Chambers on the South and North
side with Hides, and earth; what battery is made suddenly repair it like
valiant Soldiers; make plain in the South side the remnant of the broken
houses; make ways out of the Hall to scower and cast stones upon the Port, and
if the Enemy would attempt the like, dig deep that place we first begun, and
a trench above to defend the same, as I have said unto you. Although we expect
speedy relief out of Spain, yet be you wise to preserve the store of
Victuals discreetly: Devise your selves all the Invention possible to hold out
this siege, which is the greatest honor in this Kingdom: with the next I
shall prepare shoes for you: send me the cor^ or long line, and the rest of
the Saltpeter, withal the iron borriers, (...) pieces in all. Salute in my
name Richard Maghoghegane, praying God to have of his special Grace that care
of your success.

From the Camp, the (...) of June, 1602. Your loving Cosen, John Anias.
To Father Dominick, Beere-haven, these.

In November following, this John Anias, (who in October was taken prisoner by
John Berry, the Constable of Ca^tle Mange) was executed by Martial Law:
Whether he was a Priest or no, it was held doubtful: The day before his
execution ^e wrote this ensuing Letter to the Lord of Lixnaw.

A Letter from John Anias to the Baron of Lixn^^ a little before his execution.
IN trust is treason: So Wingfield betrayed me; my death satisfies former
suspicions, and gives occasion hereafter to remember me; and as ^^er I aspire
to immortallize my name upon the earth, so I would request you by virtue of
that ardent affection I had toward you in my life, you would honor my death,
in making mention of my name in the Register of your country* Let not my
servant Cormock want, as a faithful ^ervant unto me; let my Funeral and
Service of the Catholic Church be observed for the Soul. Here I send you
the Pass, and Letter of that faithless Wingfield, having charged the Bearer
upon his duty to God, to deliver this unto your hands. Osulevan was strange
to me, but inures himself to want me. Commend me to Captain Tirrell,
Oconnor, your si^ter Gerode Oge. This the night before my execution, the eight
day of November, 1602. and upon this sudden I cannot write largely.

Your loving Bedfellow sometimes, Ismarito.

CHAP. VIII.
The Lo. President vieweth the Castle of Donboy. The Lord President finds good
ground to ^ncampe in, and to plant the battrey contrary to all men's opinions.
Two Espials of the Rebels hanged. The Artillery landed. The Camp entrenched,
and the Artillery drawn into the Market place. Our Approaches begun. The Island
of the D^rsies taken, and in it diverse Rebels slain and taken prisoners
besides Artillery, Munition, and much other spoil. The Rebels taken in the
Dorsies executed, and the fort rased. Captain Kingsmill maimed with a shot. An
attempt of the Rebels given on our Camp. Sir Samuel Bagnall brings Letters to
the Lord President from the Lord Deputy, and from Don Iuan de Aguila. A fair
escape. The Artillery planted before Donboy. Donboy battered and a breach made.
The breach assaulted. Diverse of the Rebels slain in seeking to escape by a
salley. Others slain in the water. The Lord Presidents colors placed on the
top of the Castle, but the Vault st^^ mainetayned by the Rebels. Sundry Rebels
voluntarily yielded themselves. The remaynder made election of a new Captain,
whose resolution was extraordinary. A battery made upon the Va^lt. The
restrendered themselves. A desperate resolution of Richard Mac Goghagan. Eight
and fifty Rebels executed, the rest reserved for a time. The whole number of
the Ward in Donboy. The loss we received in the siege. Captains, men of
quality and others wounded. Artillery, Munition, and spoils gotten in the
Castle.
THE seventh, 7. Iunij.
the President drew his forces to a neck of land within a mile of Donboy, The
Lo. President vieweth the Castle of Donboy.
opposite against it, an Arm of the Sea passing between the Castle and the
Camp: from whence the President taking Sir Charles Wilmot, and one hundred
Foot for a Guard with him, stole out of the Camp, and marched directly to the
Castle to view it, and the grounds adjoining; in doing whereof some small short
was bestowed upon them, but none other hurt done then Sir Cha^^es Wilmots horse
shot in the foot: There they found (contrary ^o the ^eports of all men that had
seen the same) a fair place of good ground, and of capacity sufficient to
encampe in, Contrary to all men's opinions the Lo. President found both good
ground to encampe in, and to plant the battery.
within tweluescore of the Castle, and yet out of the sight of it, by reason of
a rising ground interjacent, and also upon the top of a small ascent in the
midst of the rocks, a fair green plot of ground, not an hundred and forty
yards distant from the Castle, like unto a natural platform, of a just
largeness to plan^ the Artillery* upon: At their return the report being
made, it was hardly believed* For the Lord Barry, the white Knight, Cormuck Mac
Der^^ond, Captain John Barry, and Owen Osulevan, who was borne and (...) in
the Castle, all of them being in the Camp, did evermore constantly aver, that
there was no other then rocky ground near unto it, and s^rely I conceive they
did think it to be so, supposing that the plots of ground before mentioned,
were too little to lodge in, and to plant the Artillery. Further the President
assured them, (with Gods favor) he would plant the Ordnance without the loss
of a man, and wi^^in seven days after the battery was begun, to be m^ster of
that place, here at the whole Army much rejoiced: for the general opinion was,
(...) it would be along siege, but afterward (as you shall (...)) the
President kept his promise aforesaid* The same day, seven great shot was made
from the Castle to the Camp, but no har^e done.

The eighth 8. Iunij.
we planted two Falcons taken ^ut of the Queens Pinnace, upon a point of
land, on the North side of (...), hard by our Camp, which beat upon the
E^emy, who were then carrying of turffe, and earth to advance their works: And
the same day, the Hoy was brought a ground, and ^wo Culverings un^^hipt, and
put into boats, Two Espials of the Rebels hanged.
and two spies sent by the Enemy into our Camp were taken and hanged: (...)

^

^

The Ordnance was not possible to be (...) from the place where we landed,
unto the place where we made our Qua^^er, but there was a small Creek very
near unto the Castle of D^^boy, which being once entered into, they might ride
in safety, b^ing then covered with a hill between them and the Castle, but
all the way of their coming thither, was open to the play of the Ordnance of
the Castle, until they were within that Creek, whose mouth was not above
forty yards distant from the Castle: The President commanded the Ordnance to
be shipped into Boats, and to carry them into that Creek, which by the help
of dark nights, and still rowing, was effected undiscovered: But the Cannon
and Culverings were of that weight, that no Boat there could carry them, and
none durst adventure in the Hoy to carry them by night. In this difficulty
Captain Slingsby did desire the President, that he would commit that to his
charge, and give him but thirty Shot, and he would (by Gods grace) carry that
Ordnance by day light into that Creek, or sink by the way, if his Lordship
would please to adventure the Ordnance; which was accepted and performed the
same day without the loss of any man, though many shot were made from the
Castle: for he had placed all his Shot in the hold upon the Ballast, so that
the Deck was breast high above them, so that they had only their Pieces and
head and shoulders above the deck, to play with their small shot, and he that
steered the Hoy, might be in safety, (which much concerned the effecting of
that service by his safe conducting) he placed him in the hold, and ordered it
so, that with two takles be might steer the Hoy either to Starboard, or to
Port, as he was willed above by the Captain, who stood aloft by the Misen
Maste to order her course as he saw cause: but it was so fine and fresh a gale
of wind, that though they sailed above half a league in play of the Ordnance
and small shot of the Castle, yet she made that way, that they could not above
twice discharge and lade their Ordnance, before she attained the Creek, where
she was then in security from any further annoyance of the Castle.

The eleventh, 11. Iunij.
we entrenched our Camp, mounted our Ordnance, and drew them all into the
market place; The Camp entrenched, and the Artillery drawn into the market
place.
and the same day about eight of the clock in the evening, the Lord President
gave direction to have a Demi Culvering drawn within shot of the Castle, which
made but two shot that night, and was withdrawn: The Spanish Cannoniers
finding the shot, willed the Irish to be of good courage, for that Piece would
do them no harm: He also caused two Minnions to be landed out of the
Queens ship, and placed them upon a point of ground on the Northwest side of
the Castle, which overlooked it, The approaches were begun to be made.
to annoy the Rebels; whilst we were about our work, the same night we began
our approaches: the care whereof the President imposed upon Captain Francis
Slingsby, a discreet and dexterous Gentleman, making him Trench-master, who
performed with commendations the charge which was laid upon him, having all
the day before employed a great party of men to the Wood (which was a long
mile and half distant from the Camp) to fetch more wattle, to make Gabions,
and was constrained to send a strong guard with them for their defense: This
day the Enemy out of the Wood made a salley upon some of our guards, but were
immediately repulsed.

The t^elfth 12. Iunij.
of the same, understanding that the Enemy had fortified the Island of the
Dorsies, The Island of the Dorsies taken, and in it diverse rebels slain and
taken prisoners, besides munition, artillery, and much other spoil.
and carried thither three Pieces of Spanish Ordnance, and placed a strong Ward
of fou^^ie choice men in the same, rese^ving that as their last and surest
refuge: The Lord President made special choice of Captain John Bostock, and
sent him with (...) to Sir Francis Barkley) and gave them (as also to Captain
Thomas Fleming, who had command of her Majesty's Pinnace) secretly in charge;
(that now whilst their Army was occupied in besieging Dunboy, and making their
trenches and approaches, and the Enemy secure from any suspicion, that we
would give any attempt else where) that they should presently take her
Majesty's Pinnace and four boats, and put into them one hundred and sixty
foot men, and set sail for the Island of the Dorsies, which charge they
affected accordingly, and arrived there with the forces early the next day in
the morning, and being on land drew to the North point of the Island, where they
found the walls of a ruined Chapel; Captain Bostocke under the safety
thereof lodged Lieutenant Downings, and a party of men, and then returned
aboard the Queens Pinnace, to give direction what he would have done, and
thence took the Boat of the Pinnace and ^owed about the Island, to discover a
fit landing place for himself, and the rest of his Soldiers, then coming
back to the Pinnace (so soon as the tide served) caused the Pinnace to warpe
up nearer the place, and appointed thirty Soldiers and a Sergeant to attend
her, and sent unto Lieutenant Downings a shore, advising him, that at the very
instant that he should land in the East part of the sort, that he should give
an attempt on the North side: Then he divided his men into three Boats, and
the Pinnace beating upon the ^ort with her Ordnance; he and Lieutenant
Downings (at the other two places first agreed upon) assailed the uttermost
fort, which after a good defense made, their resolution and valor carried it,
and there they possessed themselves of three Iron Pieces of the Spanish Ordnance,
and forced the Rebels into their second fort, where they entertained a good
fight for the space of two hours: But our men being encouraged with their
first good fortune, gave on them so eagerly, as the Enemy amazed rendered
themselves, and presently all the weaponed men came forth, and delivered him
possession of the fort, which (...) earth upon them. The President glad to see
them past danger, laughing, said, That if they had been as good Mechanical
Cannoniers, as they were Commanders, they would have stood firm as he did.
Also this day a whole Culvering was drawn out of the Camp, and certain shot
was made; the Bullets being found, the Gunners liked it not, and began to fear
their success. The day following, the whole Culvering having been formerly
withdrawn, certain shot was made out of the Demy-culvering aforesaid; Upon
sight of the shot they much rejoiced, supposing that our Culvering had received
some mischance, and scorned at any offense we could do them.

The sixteenth, 16. June.
the Gabions, Trenches, and Platformes were finished, and in the night the
Demy-Cannon, The artillery planted bef^^e Donboy.
and the two Culverings were drawn down, and planted against the Castle,
within 140 yards.

The seventeenth, 17. June.
about five of the clock in the morning, our Battery consisting of one
Demie-cannon, two whole Culverings, and one Demy-culvering, began to play,
which continued without intermission till toward nine in the forenoone, Donboy
battered.
at which time a Turret annexed to the Castle on the Southwest part thereof,
was beaten down, in which there was a Falcon of iron placed, upon the top of
the Vault, that continually played at our Artillery, which also tumbled down;
with the fall of that Tower, many of the Rebels were buried therein: That being
ruinated, the Ordnance played on the west front of the Castle, which by one of
the clock in the afternoon, was also forced down; Upon the fall whereof the
Enemy sent out a Messenger, offering to surrender the place, if they might have
their lives, and depart with their Arms, and a Pledge given for the assurance
thereof; Nevertheless they continued shooting all the while the Messenger was
coming between them and us, whose Message being delivered, the Lord President
turned him over to the Marshall, by whose direction he was executed; And then
the Breach being in our appearance assaultable, A breach made.
the Lord President gave commandment to have it entered: Whereupon the
Captains of the Lord Presidents Regiments, which were commanded by Captain
Henry Skipwith, Lieutenant Collonell thereof, who were to give the assault,
and cast the Dice for the point, and who should give seconds; and it fell to
Captain Dodingtons chance, and to be seconded by Sir Anth. Cook their
Lieutenants, Francis Kirton, and Thomas Mewtas, to give on first, and the rest
of the Regiment to second them. The Earl of Thomonds Regiment was to second
the Lo. Presidents, and during the assault, the two Regiments of Sir Richard
Percy, and Sir Charles Wilmot, were commanded to stand in Arms in the market
place, as well to assure the Camp, as also to answer all other occasions; all
things being thus disposed of, Lieutenant Kirton according to the direction,
The breach assaulted.
giving on first, in entering the breach was at the push of the Pike, on the
top of the same; who although he received three shot and hurt in the right
arm, yet with valor and resolution he kept the place and made it good, till
Lieutenant Mewtas came up to his second, and both they, until the Lord
Presidents colors and the rest did clime up, and placed their Ensigns upon a
turret of the barbicon, reinforced with earth and faggots of great thickness,
unto which was added a large spur on the South west part of the Castle, of
the hight of sixteen foot, as in like manner all the Turrets and Curtains of
the Barbicon were reinforced, at the top whereof they barricadoed themselves
with barrels of earth, and at the first approach there was within it, some of
the Enemy with a Faulcon of Iron, whom our men forced to quit the place, and to
retreat themselves into a Turret adjoining upon the South side, which was
rampiered with earth some sixteen foot high; flanking the first, it being
well manned, and therein a Demi Culvering and a Saker of brass, laden with
hail shot; the one whereof they presently discharged upon our men that were
possessed of the South-west Turret and Spur, and going to lade her again,
their Gunner was slain at his Piece; whereupon they being for the present
deprived of the use of those Ordnance, and the place we possessed playing
directly into it, they were forced to retreat under the safety of the East
part of the Castle, which was standing, where the Enemy had placed Pikes at the
corners of the walls, to receive them; (the way between it, and the Curtain of
the Barbicon, being but six or eight foot broad, which passage they so well
defended, as we could neither annoy them, nor go betwixt the two Turrets
aforesaid, without disadvantage and apparent danger of great loss, where the
shelter of the wall, and the narrowness of the passage deprived both us and
them of all use of shot, and there for the space of an hour and a half, it
was disputed with great obstinacy on either side; the Enemy still making good
defense, and beating with shot and stones upon us, from the stairs and
likewise from that part of the Castle, which stood from the top of the Vault,
and from under the Vault, both with pe^ces and by throwing down stones, Iron
bullets and other annoyances, wherewith many of our men were slain and
wounded, and we oppressing them in all those places by all means we might,
and still attempting to get up to the top of the Vault by the ruins of the
breach, which was maintained by the Enemy, as we were diverse times forced
down again: And whilst in each of these places, our men were thus employed,
Captain Slingsbies Sergeant who had gotten to the top of the Vault of the
South-west Tower (by clearing the rubbish thence) found out that the ruins
thereof had made a way, that leads to a spike or window that looked into it,
and commands that part of the barbicon of the Castle, which the Enemy possessed
and defended (he having been there two hours before he discovered the
same,) by which passage our men making their descent to the Enemy, and gayning
ground upon them, they being then in desperate case, some forty of them made
a ^alley out of the Castle to the Sea side, Diverse of the rebels slain, in
seeking to escape by a Salley.
whither our men pursuing them on the one side, and they being crossed by
Captain Blundell with a small party of men (on the out side of the Barbi^on)
on the other side we had the execution of them all there (saving eight which
leapt into the Sea to save themselves by swimming: Others that recovered the
river, were slain in the water.
But the Lord President supposing before that they would in their extremity
make such an adventure to escape, had appointed Captain (...) Harvie, and his
Lieutenant Thomas Stafford, with three boat^ to keep the Sea, He which pulled
the Ear, of Ormond from his horse (when he was taken prisoner) was slain.
who had the killing of them all, other three leapt from the top of the Vault,
where our Soldiers killed them, amongst which a notable Rebel called
Mellaghlen Moore, (being the man that laid hands first upon the Earl of
Ormond, and plucked him from his horse, when he was taken prisoner by Owhny
Mac Ro^ry) was slain.

After this, the courage of the Enemy decreasing with their Numbers, and not
able, nor daring to make such defense as they did before, we gave a new Assault
to the top of the Vault, where having a difficult ascent, the shot from the
foot of the Breach giving good assistance, (after some hours assault and
defense, with some loss of both sides) we gained the top of the Vault, The L.
Presidents Colors placed on the top of the castle, but the vault was still
maintained by the rebels.
and all the Castle upwards, and placed our Colors upon the height thereof,
the whole remaynder of the Ward being threescore and seventeene men, were
constrained to retire into the Sellors, into which we having no descent, but
by a straight winding stony stayre, they defended the the same against us, and
thereupon upon promise of their lives, they offered to come forth, but not to
stand to mercy. Notwithstanding immediately after, a Friar borne in Yoghall,
called Domnicke Collins, who had been brought up in the Wars of France, and
there under the League had been a Commander of Horse in Brittany, (by them
called Captain Le Branch) came forth, and rendered himself, the Sun being
by this time set, and strong guards being left upon the Rebels remaining in the
Celler, the Regiments withdrawn to the Camp.

The eighteenth 18. June.
in the morning, three and twenty more likewise rendered themselves simply to
Captain Blundell, Sundry of the rebels voluntarily yield themselves.
who the night before had the guard, and after their Cannoniers being two
Spaniards, and an Italian (for the rest were slain) likewise yielded
themselves: Then Mac Goghegan chief Commander of the place, being mortally
wounded with diverse shot in his body, the rest made choice of one Thomas
Tailor, The remainder of them made election of a new captain, whose resolution
was extraordinary.
an English man's Son (the dearest and inwardest man with Tirrell, and married
to his Niece) to be their Chief, who having nine barrels of powder, drew
himself and hit into the Vault, and there sat down by it, with a light match
in his hand, vowing and protesting to set it on fire, and blow up the Castle,
himself and all the rest, except they might have promise of life, which being
by the Lord President refused; (for the safety of our men) his Lordship gave
direction for a new battery upon the Vault, A Battery made upon the vault.
intending to bury them in the ruins thereof, and after a few times
discharged* and the bullets entering amongst them into the Celler, the rest
that were with Tailor, partly by intercession, but chiefly by compulsion, For
fear of b^ing buried in the ruins of the vault, the rest of the rebels
re^dred themselves.
(threatening to deliver him up if he were obstinate;) about ten of the clock
in the morning of the same day, constrained him to render simply, who with
eight and forty more being ready to come forth; and Sir George Thornton, the
Sergeant Major, Captain Roger Harvie, Captain Power, and others entering the
Vault to receive them, Captain Power found the said Richard Mac Goghegan lying
there mortally wounded (as before) and perceiving Tailor and the rest ready to
render themselves, A desperate resolution of Mac Goghegan.
raised himself from the ground, snatching a light Candle, and staggering
therewith to a barrel of powder (which for that purpose was unheaded) offering
to cast it into the same, Captain Power took him, and held him in his arms,
with intent to make him prisoner, until he was by our men (who perceived his
intent) instantly killed, 58. executed, the rest of the Rebels reserved for a
time.
and then Tailor and the rest were brought prisoners to the Camp.

The same day fifty eight were executed in the Market place, but the Friar,
Tailor, and one Tirlagh Roe Mac Swiny, a follower unto Sir Tirlagh O Brian, and
twelve more of Tirrels chief men, the Lord President reserved alive, The whole
number of the Ward in Donboy.
to try whether he could draw them to do some more acceptable service the^
their lives were worth: The whole number of the Ward consisted of one hundred
forty three selected fighting men, being the best choice of all their Forces,
of the which no one man escaped, The loss we received in the siege.
but were either slain, executed, or buried in the ruins; and so obstinate
and resolved a defense has not bin seen within this kingdom. On our part we
lost in the place Thomas Smith, Captain Francis Slingsbies Lieutenant, and
some others; many of our men were burnt with Powder and Fireworks, Captains,
men of quality, and others wounded.
which the enemy cast amongst them as they were in fight: Men of note hurt,
Captain Dodington shot with two Bullets in the body, but not mortal, his
Lieutenant Francis Kirton shot in the arm and thigh, diverse (...)

CHAP. IX.
(...)
^

(...) (...) The services propounded to Tirrell he refuses.
(...) The reasons of his refusal
he would never: upon which answer this twelve Men (before respited) two days
after were executed. The cause wherefore he so suddenly swar^ed from his first
promise of service, was the hopes which he received by Owen Mac Egan the Popes
Bishop of Rosse, lately arrived at Ardea, in the Bay (as aforesaid) of
Cla^marrah. The President therefore perceiving that they conceived great hope
of Spaniards, advised the day following with the chiefes of the Army, what
course was best to be taken with the Castle of Dunboy half ruined, who were
all of opinion, that a Garrison which should be left there could not defend
themselves, or give any great annoyance to the Spaniard, if they should fortune
to land there; for being so remote from all Seconds and succors, were
unavoydably left to ruin: And besides (though the Spaniards came not) the
service that they could do in that Country, would not countervaile Her
Majesty's charge in maintayning them: Therefore they resolved to bestow the
Powder which was recovered in the Castle to blow up the same; committed to the
charge of Captain Slingsbie.

The two and twentyeth, 22 Iunij.
the Castle of Dunboy was accordingly blown up with Powder, the out-Workes and
Fortifications utterly destroyed, The Castle of Donboy blown up with powder.
Tirrells men which were respited, executed.
and the same day Lieutenant Downings, with our men and Boats returned from
the Dorses to the Camp, as also twelve of Terrills chief men, formerly spoken
of, were executed.

But Tailor, and Dominicke Collins the Friar, were carried Prisoners to Cork,
where being found by due proof, that Tailor was one of the principal
murderers of his Captain, George Bingham at S^igo, besides an infinite number
of other foul and traytorly (...), he was shortly after without the City of
Cork (not far from the North Gate) hanged in chains; and the Friar, in whom
no penitence appeared for his detestable treasons, nor yet would endeavor to
merit his life, either by discovering the Rebels intentions, (which was in
his power) or by doing of some service that might deserve favor, was hanged at
Youghall, the Town wherein he was borne.

The same day also all our carriage and baggage laid aboard, at the entrance
into our boats, because we were not able to carry the Cowes, Horses, and Mares
which we had taken, being at least six or seven hundred heads, the President
commanded they should be killed, which was performed.

The three and twentieth 23. Iunij.
we shipped our whole Army back from Dunboy, who all arrived that day in the
great Island, The Army shipped and transported into the great Island.
and from thence the Earl of Thomond, and Sir Charles Wilmot, and both their
Regiments were transported by shipping to Killaminog, being the place we
encamped in (as we went) in Mainterbaie.

The same day the Lord President was advertised by Lieutenant Saunders, that
he had taken a great boat belonging to Teg Mac Connor Odriscall, brother to
Connor Oge Odriscall, The Downings taken.
of the Downings, wherein there was slain Dary Mac Connor his brother, and
three more of his best men, and that two days after, he took the strong
place of the Downings, which is seated upon a high rock in the Sea, disioyned
from the land, so as there is no coming unto it, but over a little draw bridge
of wood, resembling the seat of Dunluce in Vlster.

The four and twentieth 24. Iunij.
the Lord President, and Sir Richard Percy with their Regiments were embarked,
and they arrived in the evening at the Island of Whiddy, where we had no means
for want of boats to unship our men, and the night approaching were enforced to
leave our two Regiments a shipboard, and the Lord President lay that night in
the Island.

The five and twentieth, 25. Iunij.
the Earl and Sir Charles with their Regiments marched by land from Killaminog
to the old camping place at Carew Castle, whither when the boats came to us,
we unshipt the remain of the Army, and there we encamped all that night.

The six and twentieth, 26. Iunij.
the Companies required by the Lord Deputy were assigned, and commanded to
prepare themselves and attend Sir Samuel Bag^all till he brought them to his
Lordship: and the same day the Castle of Leam^con Lea^-^on Castle taken.
near Crook haven which the rebels warded, was recovered from them, by an
officer and party of men, of Captain Roger Harvies Company.

The seven and twentieth, 27. Iunij.
the Earl of Thomond, and Sir George Thornton were embarked in the Queens
Pinnace, to go for England, and the Army dislodged from Carew Castle, and
marched to a place in the Mountain called Becarien Eltagh, where we encamped
that night.

The eight and twentieth 28. Iun^j.
the Lord President departed thence, taking the Captains and Officers of those
companies that were to go into Vlster, along with him, that they might
perclose their accounts, and dispatch all things at Cork, against their
Companies should come thither, and by the way the Castle of Lettertinlesse, The
Castle of Lettertinlesse taken and burnt.
belonging to Conogher Sir Finnin Odriscals Son, where the Enemy had a ward
of seventeene men; after some defense made and shot discharged, when they saw
the Army draw before the Castle, they sued for their lives, which granted them
they yielded it up; and after the Soldiers had made pillage of the goods, we
burned and destroyed the Castle, and stone hall, and rod thence to Tymolagg,
leaving the Army behind us that night in Rosse.

The nine and twentieth the Lord President went to Kinsale, 29. Iunij.
and took view of the fortifications at Castle-Parke, and gave order and
direction for the better forwarding and ending of the works there, and thence
rode that night to Cork, The Lord President returned ^o Cork.
appoynting the Companies that were to depart the Province, to march the
shortest way, and to lodge at Downdanyer, Donnell Mac Cartie Reughes Castle,
and the rest to come to Kinsale.

The thirtieth, 30. June.
those Companies which were to go with Sir Samuel Bagnall came to Cork, The
Companies sent for by the Lord Deputy delivered over to Sir Samuel Bagnall.
and had their supplies delivered them, with order for their present departure.

The first of July 1. Iulij.
the Captains that were to go along with Sir Samuel Bagnall, spent the day
in staying for their sick men, which were coming after, and preparing
themselves for their journey; and the day following they arose all from Cork,
and marched thitherwards.

The President in his return from Dunboy (as is said) passing through Carberry
where many were still in action, not doubting but now they would have submitted
themselves, seeing their supposed impregnable Cittadell was destroyed, and
Dermond Moyle Mac Cartie their Ante-^ignane slain, he found it much
otherwise, for those which before offered to do service for their pardons,
stood aloof, The confidence which the Irish had of supplies from* Spain, made
them obstinate.
and those which before were distracted, and prepared to fly either to Spain
or Vlster, had received new life, and made fast combinations to hold out, till
their expected aids from Spain should arrive; yea and some also who before
were Subjects, and forward to give the best intelligence, did now palpably
bewray both by their countenance, their words, and their actions, that their
hearts were otherwise affected: All which alteration did arise from the
arrival of Owen Mac Eggan so often mentioned, who not only bestowed the
Spanish treasure, which he brought with him bountifully amongst them, but put
them in hope of more, with full assurance of a fresh Army to come to their
succors; his credit, the feeling of a few ducats, and his persuasions so
prevailed, as they verily believed, that they should within a few months, be
so reinforced with Spanish aids, as to be enabled to drive the English our of
Ireland.

CHAP. X.
Supplies of a thousand Foot sent out of England for Mounster. Sir Charles
Wilmot with his Regiment sent into Kerry. James Archer, and Con^or Odriscall
fled into Spain. Sir Owen Mac Carties sons revolt. Diverse Castl^s taken in
Carbery by the Garrisons there. The description of Beare^haven. The description
of Baltimore-haven. The description of Castle haven. The Spanish hostages
licensed to depart. A Letter from the Lord President to Don Iuan de Aguila.
THE President being come to Cork, Supplies of a thousand foot from England
for Monster.
he found Sir Edward Wing field with a thousand supplies lately come forth of
England, all which were disposed in the weak Companies that came from Dunboy;
in the taking whereof, and the marching thither with the return, ten weeks
were consumed, many men lost by the way, and by sickness very much weakened:
Notwithstanding so many of the Army, as were above the old List of Mounster
were presently sent to the Lord Deputy by Sir Samuel Bagnall, who came for
them (as aforesaid) whilst the President was at the ^iege of Dunboy; Sir
Charles Wilmot with his Regiment was sent again into Kerry Sir Charles Wilmot
with his Regiment sent into Kerry.
(which Country having therein great store of Corn and Cattle, would
otherwise have been left open to the Rebels relief) with direction to remove
all the Inhabitants with their goods and cattle, over the Mountain into the
small county of Limerick, and such Corn as could not be presently reaped and
convaied (as aforesaid) he was commanded to burn and spoil the same; the
reason whereof was, forthat the President having occasion of service near the
heart of the Country, as you shall hereafter hear; and also receiving daily
intelligence of a great Army provided in Spain, did not think it safe nor
convenient, to empoly so great a part of his forces in places so remo^e,
considering that good and strong Garrisons were needful in the chief Cities
of the Province, which otherwise would be open to the Enemy that should
attempt them. But in effecting hereof, the Governor found great difficulty;
for the harvest (by reason of that winterlike summer) was very backward, and
(besides the Irish) the Bishop of Kerry, and certain English families, which
had of late planted themselves there (whose whole estate consisted in that
Summers profit) importunatly solicited some longer stay: The President being
acquainted herewith, unwilling to give any just occasion of grievance to the
Irish, and loss to the English, consented to tolerate their stay for the
present, requiring the Governor (in the mean while) to put in execution such
services upon the Rebels, as occasion might minister: The fifth of July, James
Archer the Jesuit, and Connor Odriscall, the eldest Son of Sir Finnin
Odriscall, 5. Iul.
having gotten a small Brake fled into Spain. James Archer and Conner
Odriscall fled into Spain.


The two Captain Harvies were le^t at their old Garrisons in Carberie,
Captain Roger at Baltimore, the Lord Presidents Horse there, Captain Gawin at
Castlehaven, the Lord Barries Company at Litter^onlesse, the Treasurers
Company, at the Abbey of Strory, Captain Stafford at Old Court, Captain
Slingesby at the Church of Shadone, where they wasted and forraged the
Country, as in a small time it was not able to give the Rebels any relief,
having spoiled and brought into their garrisons the most part of their corn
being newly reaped; from whom the President was certified that the Carties of
that Country did daily relapse, Sir Ow^n Mac Carties sons revolt.
insomuch as Don^a^ Moyle Mac Cartie, and Finnie his Brother, with their
followers, (who at^ended the President at the Siedge of Dunboy (had received
three hundred pounds Impresse, from Owen Mac Eggan, (commonly called the A
postolicall Vicar) in the name of the King of Spain: They I say upon the tenth
of July 1602 joined with the Rebels; 10. July.
but in the end they could not greatly vaunt of their winnings, for Captain
Roger Harvy got several Draughts upon them, whereby he took their* preyes,
and had the killing of many of their men* besides he took from them diverse
Castles strongly seated, near unto the Sea, where Ships might safely ride, and
fit places fot an Enemy to hold, as namely, the Castle of Donmanies, Leam-con*
Donnegall, the Downings, Rancoliskey, Diverse Castles taken in Carbery by the
Garrisons.
and Cape Clear, and in a word, all that stood upon the Sea cost, between
Dunboy and Castlehaven, except only the Castles of Kilkoe and Cloghan.

But because we have had often occasions in this relation to speak of the
three famous Harbors of Beerehaven, Baltemore, and Castlehaven, it seems to
me necessary in this place to speak something more particularly thereof,
according to an exact view taken by the Lord President, and by him remised to
the Lords of Her Majesty's Privy Counsel. First therefore, the Haven of Beer
is fituated twelve Miles to the Northward of that Promontory, The description
of Bear-haven.
or fore-land (so well known by the name) of Mys^enhead, or Caronhead* That
which we properly call Beere-haven, is the Sea which enters between the
great Island (before mentioned) and the Maine, or Country called Beer, or
Osullevans Country: At the entrance of the Harbor, it is not above a Musket
shot over, I mean from the Castle of Dunboy to the great Island, being entered;
the Tides are slack, good Anchorage, and convenient places to bring ships on
ground, smooth water, five fadomes deep at low water mark; toward the North
end it grows much larger, at the least a league over, and of capacity
sufficient to contain all the Ships of Europe.

The great Island and the Maine as aforesaid makes the Haven, which Island is
seven miles in length, at the South end whereof it joy^eth with the Bay of
Bantry: When Donboy was unruined, it commanded this spacious and goodly Haven,
which affords no small profit to Osulevan ^eare, whilst his Castle was
standing: for the coast yields such abundance of Sea fish, as few places in
Christendom do the like, and many Ships, whereunto at the season of the
year, (I mean at the fishing time) there was such a resort of Fishermen of
all Nations, as Communibu^ A^nis, (although the duties which they paid unto
osulevan was very little) yet at the least it was worth unto him five hundred
pounds yearly.

The second of these Harbors nominated, is Baltimore The description of the
haven of Baltimore.
called by the Spaniards Valentimore, which is likewise caused by an Island
called Innisherkan, two leagues to the Eastward of Cape-cleere, the Havens
mouth (at the South end of the Island aforesaid) ten fathom at low water, but
exceeding narrow, by reason of a great Rock that lies in the same (always
above water) which being within half Calliver shot of the better shore,
giv^^h good opportunity to secure the port; after you are entered, there is a
poole about half a league over, where infinite numbers of ships may ride,
having small tides, deep water, and a good place to Carene ships; at the other
end of this Island (with good pilotage) a ship of two hundred Tun by day may
safely come in, but by reason of many ^uncke Rocks, that lie in this entrance,
it is not possible for the best Pilot in the world (by night) to assure his
entrance. The President for the safety thereof, thought it mere to erect
Blockhouse^ there, which undoubtedly he would have done, if he had continued
any longtime in Mounster, being so exceeding dangero^s to fall into the hands
of a powerful Enemy, as it would be a work of much difficulty (after it were
once fortified) to displant him, besides an Enemy there seated would command
the best part of Carbery, the soil whereof is good, whereby he might furnish
himself with victuals at easy rates.

The last, The description of Castle haven.
and indeed the least of these three Havens, is Castlehaven, by the Irish
called Glanbaraghan, renowned for that memorable Sea fight (lately acted there)
by Sir Richard Lewson against Pedro de Zubiaur (commonly called Suryag^) the
Spanish Admiral: the passage into the Harbor is so narrow, that a ship of
great burden, especially in a storm, cannot safely enter, and being entered,
there is no great space for any number of ships to ride in; but for all other
commodities like to the Havens before mentioned, for there is eight faddomes at
low water mark, the Castle aptly commands every part of the Harbor, but the
grounds round about it, so commands the Castle, as it can by no reasonable
charge be made teneable against the Cannon: but to proceed.

When the composition was made with Don John de Aguila, for the rendering of
Kinsale, among other Articles it was agreed, that the Spaniards should be
shipped away in English or Irish Bottomes, and for the safe return of the
Ships into Ireland, there was three Spanish Captains (as is formerly declared)
left in Cork as Hostages: The Spaniards being all safely arrived at the
Groyne, and the Ships returned, the Lord President according to the
Composition, set the Pledges at liberty, The Spanish Hostages licensed to
depart.
and having provided a Barque for their transportation, he wrote unto Don John
de Aguila, which letter (Englished) was as follows.

A Letter from the Lord President to Don Iuan de Aguila.
ACcording to the agreements made at Kinsale, between the Lord Deputy and
your Lordship, these two Captains, Pedro Suaco, and Diego Gonzales Sigler,
(which remained in Cork Pledges for the security of the Ships, and the
Subjects of the Queen my Mistress, which transported the Spaniards to the
Groyne, are now in this passage in a Ship called the Marie of Cork) returned
into Spain: The third Pledge Don Pedro Morijon, went with the Lord Deputy to
the City of Dublin, from whence (as I understand) he is departed into his
own Country. Now the agreements which were made between the Lord Deputy and
your Lordship is on either part fully accomplished; your Lordships Letter of
the second of April I have received, but the Wine and Fruits came not to my
hands: Nevertheless I acknowledge my self much obliged, and render your
Lordship humble thanks for your favors, and especially in that I am retained
in your memory* the occasion I did not receive them, was my being at that time
at the siege of the Castle of Beerehaven, which I thank God is taken, as also
many others possessed and held by the Rebels, and the Defendants of them
chastised, as appertains to Traitors: Your Lordships Present unto me was
delivered by the Messenger to the Lord Deputy, he conceiving that it had
been directed to his Lordship, whereof I am extreme glad, and am as well
satisfied with it, as if it had come to my own hands, for the love I bear
unto his Lordship, is no less then unto my self: I am much grieved, (and at
nothing more) then to see that this Country produces not any thing worthy to
be presented to your Lordship, that I might in some proportion manifest in
what esteem I hold the favor of a man of your quality, Honor, and Merit.
If Ireland may yield any thing which may be to your Lordships liking* you may
be assured that your Lordship has power (at your pleasure) to command both
it and me: So being ready to do your Lordship all the possible service I may,
the differences between our Sovereigns reserved, in the which both your
Lordship and all the world shall evermore find me to be a true Englishman,
and a faithful servant to my Queen and Mistress: I recommend your Lordship
to God, b^seeching him to preserve you.

Cork, the thirteenth of July, 1602. Muy Illustre Sennior. Beso las Manos de
V. S. Su Servidor, GEORGE CAREVV.


CHAP. XI.
The taking of the Castle of Dunboy was the cause that the Army prepared in
Spain for Ireland was stayed. Two thousand supplies of foot were sent out of
England for Mo^^ster. John fits Thomas his practice to deceive the Lord
President* but failed. A false rumor of a Spanish fleet on the Coast of
Mounster. Sir Samuel Bagnall with his Regiment commanded to stay in Mounster.
THE President daily received advertisement, as well by some of the Country
that had conference with Owen Mao Eggan, as also by Merchants and their Agents
out of Spain, which did all agree in one, that succors being prepared and
ready to embarque for Ireland; The taking of Donboy was the cause that the Army
which was prepared in Spain for Ireland was stay^d.
(understanding the loss which the Rebels had received in Beer, and the
Castle of Dunboy rased, where they purposed to secure their landing) new
directions were brought from the Court of Spain to the Earl of Carra^ena,
Governor of the Groyne, to stay their proceedings in the voyage, till the
Kings pleasure were father known, but yet the Army was not dissolved: the
examinations sent by the Lord President into England to the Lords, were found
to agree with the intelligence which was sent to her Majesty out of Spain;
wherefore to prevent what danger hereby might ensue, it pleased her Majesty to
take present order, that the fleet of ships, some her own, and some
Merchants, that had been upon the Coast of Spain (the most part of all the
Summer) should be revictualled, and lie off and on* in the height of
Cape-finister, till toward Michaelmas; that if they proceeded in the intended
invasion, either they might fight with them at Sea, or at least follow them to
such Harbors of Ireland, where they should arrive, and there distress them*
but he happy success in the siege of Dunboy altered the Spanish Councels, for
now they had no place in Ireland that held for them: Nevertheless the coming
of new forces from Spain for Ireland, being still doubted, there was sent from
England two thousand foot for the supplying of the List. By this time Sir
Charles Wilmot, 2000. Supplies of Foot for Mou^ster.
as he was directed, was come out of Kerry, and all the Subjects with their
goods and Cattle, were drawn on this side the Mountain of Slewlogher, whereby
the Bonnoghs that had lived these five months, principally upon Osulevan
Bear, (and by that means eaten him up) began to consult about leaving of the
Province, there being no man now in action that was able; (for the Carties in
Carbery had been so much wasted and impoverished by the two Harvies) as though
their hearts were good, yet their means failed them to uphold a war, or any
long time to hold them together: Therefore John of Desmond, brother to the
Sugan Earl, (prisoner in the Tower of London) labored Terrill very instantly,
to take Bonnaght of them in Connilogh, and for that purpose had inveighled
Morris fits Thomas, called the Lord of the Clenlis to deliver unto him the
strong Castle of Glancoyne, the custody whereof (to save her Majesty's charge)
had been committed to him the year before, and because no suspicion might be
conceived of the said John fits Thomas practice, Ioh. fits Thomas his practice
to deceive the Lo. President, but failed in the same.
he now became a suitor by James Walsh (who had been his brothers Secretary)
for a protection, desiring, as he pretended, to become a Subject upon these
conditions: First, if his brother James (the titulary Earl) might be set at
liberty, he would be content to become a Pledge for him, either in the
Castle of Dublin, or else where the State should appoint; which being refused
and rejected, he offered to do service, so that he might have his pardon,
and some means to relieve him in the future: But as the President would not
be drawn to accept any of these conditions; so it was thought he would have
flyen back if they had been accepted: But all this Negotiation was but to
color his practice laid for Glancoyne, which Castle and the Fastness near
adjoining would have commanded a great part of that Country. But all these
Iuglings were discovered by one V. B. whom the President without suspicion
maintained amongst them: Wherefore he sent Philip Northcot, the Sheriff of the
County of Limericke, with private Instructions, to surprise both Maurice fits
Thomas, and the said Castle, but either to take both (at one instant) or to
meddle with neither. The Sheriff watching many opportunities, and not speeding
of his purpose; the President to prevent future danger, committed the custody
of the said Castle to Sir Francis Barkley, and so disappointed the Rebels of
that hope.

About the latter end of this month of August, a rumor was generally divulged
through the Province, A false rumor of the Spanish fleet, on the coast of
Mounster.
that the Spaniards were upon the coast, and that certain Ships were
discovered from the old Head of Kinsale, and presently after that four and
twenty sail were arrived at Bearehauen, and hereupon you might see Horsemen
galloping this way, and that way, to and fro, with such signs of gladness and
apparent joy, as though the day of their deliverance were near at hand; but as
it fell out, this was but a false alarm, the Ships that were discryed being a
Fleet of Easterlings bound to the Southward. The President hereby discerning
with what assured hopes they apprehended their coming, and with what glad
hearts they should be welcome, (being come) he became an earnest and humble
suitor to the Lord Deputy: That Sir Samuel Bagnals Regiment lately called out
of Mounster, Sir Samuel ^agnal with his Regiment commanded to stay in Mounster.
(by his Lordships Command) might with his favor be returned again. The Lord
Deputy taking an honorable care of that Province, finding by his own
intelligence, that the Spaniards were purposed to make their descent, either in
Mounster, or in the parts of Connaght, (not far dis-joyned) condiscended unto
the Presidents request, whereupon the said Colonel with his Regiment were
directed to Limrick, there to remain in Garrison.

During the siege of Kinsale, there was a young Gentleman of the Carties,
called Teg Mac Cormock, son to that well deserving Gentleman, Sir Cormock Mac
Teg, who being of the Presidents Troop of Horse, through the inticements of
the Rebels, and promises of the Spaniards, was induced to combine with the
Enemy, and stealing away his Horse and Hackney, entered into action; But the
success of his Confederates not prooving so fortunate (as they hoped) he grew
weary of the Rebellion, and made himself a Suitor to the President to be
received to mercy, as may appear by his Letter here ensuing.

CHAP. XII.
A Letter from Teg Mac Cormock Cartie to the Lord President, entreating the
remission of his offenses. Cormock Mac Dermond Cartie accused of sundry
treasons. Cormock Mac Dermond committed. The Castle of Blarny in the custody of
Captain Taffe. The Castle and Abbey of Kill^rey rendered to the Lord President.
Mocrumpe besieged. Cormocks Wife and Children imprisoned. Cormock Mac Dermond
plotted his escape.
A Letter from Teg Mac Cormock Cartie to the Lord President, entreating the
remission of his Offenses.
RIght Honorable, my duty most humbly remembered; Having long forborne, though
thereby disquieted in mind, and ashamed of my self to send unto your Honor:
Yet presuming upon her Majesty's mercy and your favor, I have made bold to
become a Petitioner to your Honor, that it may please you to admit me
thereunto, and to forgive and forget my faults, considering they were not
malicious, but youthful, and not of pretense to hurt her Majesty or her
Subjects, but in hope to recover against my Cosen Cormock Mac Dermody, some
means to maintain my decayed estate, and still likely to be suppressed by his
greatness, who will by no means give me a portion of Land to live upon, as
was promised upon the delivery up of Kilcrey by your Honor, wherein as of the
rest, I do again humbly beseech your favor, and so as with a repentant and
penitent transgressor of the Laws, I do humbly submit my self to her
Majesty's grace, and will endeavor my self hereafter by my good deeds and
services, to wipe out the memory of my former follies: Expecting your
favorable Answer, I most humbly take my leave.

From Carrigifuky this ninth of June, 1602. Your Honors most humble to
command, Teg Mac Cormock Cartie.


But the President had conceived such a deep displeasure (and not undeserved)
against him, as he protested against all favor to be extended toward him,
except he did merit and deserve the same by some signal service. This young
man finding himself exposed to a desperate fortune, and abandoned to ruin,
unless he could work his reconciliation; and besides bearing no goodwill to
his cosen Cormuck Mac Dermond the Lord of Muskerry, for some controversy about
title of Lands between them, desired a safe conduct to come to the President,
promising to reveal unto him, such matters of importance, as might happily
make satisfaction for his former offenses; his motion was hearkened unto, and a
protection granted for three days, within which time he presented himself
before his Lordship, and delivered to him in private, that he was able to
avouch and prove diverse capital matters of notorious treasons, in his kinsman
Cormock Mac Dermond: Cormock Mac Dermond Cartie accused of sundry treasons.
First that he had underhand traffic with Don John de Aguila, Letters
ordinarily passing between him and the said Cormock, and in particular, he
averred, that he saw Don John himself to deliver unto James Galde Butler,
(Cormocks wives brother) two Letters, the one from the King, and the other from
the Church; but from what particular Churchman he could not certainly
affirm, but by all probability it should seem to be from the Pope; these two
Letters were by him sent, to be delivered to Cormock aforesaid, together with
his own commendations in these words: Commend me to your brother in law
Cormock, and deliver him these two Letters, the one from the King, and the
other from the Church, which were the same night delivered: Moreover he was
deposed (by virtue of which oath he affirmed) that upon his knowledge, Cormock
had secret conference with Owen Mac Eggan, since his last arrival out of
Spain, and that from him he had received eight hundred ducats impresse, and
thereupon had accorded to yield into the Spaniards hands (immediately upon their
landing) his strong Castle of the Blarny, situate within two miles of Cork,
which deposition was afterward confirmed by the testimony and evidence of
sundry other credible personages: these informations concurring with the
examinations o^ Dermond Mac Cartie, by the Spaniards called Don Dermutio
(executed at Cork, of whom before you have heard) and also manyfold proofs,
existing of his often combination with Tyrone, Odonnell, Florence Mac Cartie,
and James fits Thomas, with other trivial treasons, ordinary amongst these
Provincials: The President with the advice of the Provincial Council, thought
it a matter of very dangerous consequence, to permit such gross and palpable
treasons to escape unpunished, the tolleration whereof might breed such
intolerable boldness in these people, that her Majesty's politic
government, and authority temporal, would grow no less contemptible then the
Ecclesiasticke; against the which the best seeming Subjects were refractory; to
prevent therefore such future mischief as might ensue by longer protraction,
it was thought fit, that during the time of these Sessions (then in hand) the
said Cormock should be apprehended, and committed to safe custody, until such
time as the original and depth of his offenses (being found out) he might be
brought to his trial, according to due course in Law: the day and time
therefore being appointed for his commitment, which was about the eighteenth of
August, 18. August.
the President the same morning (to avoid all suspicion, took a journey to
Kinsale, to view the fortifications in Castle ny Park, leaving behind him
double directions concerning Cormock; first for his Castle of Blarney, which is
one of the largest and strongest Castles within the Province of Mounster, for
it is four piles joined in one, seated upon a maine Rock, so as it is free
from myning, the wall eighteen foot thick, and well flancked, at each corner
to the best advantage: considering therefore the difficulty that might grow in
taking this Castle by force, the President gave direction to Sir Charles
Wilmot, and Captain Roger Harvie (taking for their guard a Sergeant with four
and twenty foot) to make show of going only to hunt the Bucke in the parts
near adjoining, and being hot and weary, between the hours of ten and
eleven of the clock in the forenoone, to take the said Castle in their way
homeward, and calling for wine and vsquebagh (whereof Irish Gentlemen are
seldom disfurnished) should (if it were possible) themselves first, and their
Soldiers afterward draw into the Castle, and gain possession thereof; and the
chief Justice Saxey likewise had direction to call Cormock before him in the
public Sessions; and taking occasion of defect and delay, about certain
prisoners, whom he should have forth coming at these Assizes, should at the
same hour (before appointed) commit him to the Gentleman Porter, till the
Presidents pleasure should be farther known at his return from Kinsale: this
later order concerning his person was accordingly effected, but the former
stratageme about the Castle was frustrated; for the Warders, whether out of the
jealous custom of the Nation in general (which is not to admit any strangers
in their masters absence to come into their Castles, Cormock Mac Dermond
committed to prison.
) or whether Cormock in his guiltiness had given them such directions, I know
not, but sure I am that neither Sir Charles, though he much importuned to see
the rooms within) nor any of his company were permitted to go into the Gate
of the Castle, nor hardly to look within the gate of the Bawne: The President
was no sooner returned to Cork, but one of Cormocks Followers, saluted him
with a Petition, relating at large the hard measure that his Master had
received from the chief Justice, to whom answer was made, that he would call
for the chief Justice before him, and being satisfied from him of all
particulars, order should be taken that no unjust, nor sinister proceedings
should be taken against him; in the mean time he must be content to submit
himself, and be menable unto Law: Now did the time better permit the offenses
formerly committed, to be pursued by course of Justice, for could he but have
gathered by probable conjecture, of the discovery of any part of these
treacheries (before his apprehension) he had in readiness one thousand men of
his own Followers) well armed to have stepped with him into action upon the
first alarm.

The combination lately by Cormocke contracted with the Priest Owen Mac Eggan,
being manifestly prooved by several witnesses, subject to no Exceptions, the
Gentleman Porter, (called Master Raph Hammon) was commanded to bring the
Prisoner before the President and Counc^ll, which were assembled at Shandon
Castle, who making his appearance, was charged with the several Treasons before
recited, who insisted very much upon his Justification, pretending that those
accusations were injuriously devised, and slanderously suggested by his
Enemies, especially for the last Article concerning the Conspiracy with the
Priest Mac Eggan, (which indeed was so cunningly and secretly carried, as he
supposed, that it was rather presumed then prooved against him; He renounced
all favor and pardon, if it would be justified by lawful testimony. The
President replied, that this was the only matter of substance that he was
charged withal, the former being pardoned since the perpetrating thereof,
being only inducements and presumptions whereby they were the rather moved to
give ^are and credit to the latter accusation: But he still persisting in his
Innocence, was at last urged with this Dilemma, namely, that either he should
confess his fault, and so entreat her Majesty's mercy, or else in token of his
loyal and guiltless heart, he should deliver unto the State his Castle of
Blarney, upon condition, that if the fact whereof he was charged, were not
evidently prooved against him, the said Castle should be redelivered to him or
his assigns by a day appointed. At first he seemed very inclinable to the
motion, but in process it was perceived that he intended nothing but juggling
and devices; wherefore a Warrant from the whole Body of the Council, was
directed to the said Gentleman Porter, straightly charging and commanding that
he should be kept in yrons closer then before, until he should demean
himself in more dutiful conformity; And besides, they appointed Captain
Taffe, (in whom Cormock reposed much trust) to persuade him to surrender the
said Castle into the Presidents hands, undertaking upon his credit, to retain
the same, and all the goods in it, or near thereunto, belonging either to
himself or his followers, from loss and danger, either by Subject or Rebel.
Cormocke at last finding that the President was resolved either to make him
bend or break, caused his Constable, (though much against his will) to yield
the said Castle to Captain Taffe, The Castle of Blarney in the custo^y of
Captain Taffe.
so that no other (whatsoever) might have the charge or custody thereof. The
Prisoner besides the Castle of Blarney, had two places (kept by his Dependants)
of good importance to command the Country; the one an Abbey called Kilcrey,
distant from Cork six miles, and the other a Castle called Mocrumpe, sixteen
miles distant from Cork; the former situated upon the South, and the latter
upon the North side of the River of Lee. The Castle and Abbey of Kilcrey The
Castle and Abbey of Kilcrey rendered to the Lo. President, but the Castle of
Mocrumpe was detayned from him.
was rendered to Captain Francis Slingsbie, sent thither by the President; But
Mocrumpe seated in the heart of Muskrey, and environed round about with woods
and bogges, could not be gotten without the countenance of an Army; therefore
the President sent first Captain Flower, and afterward Sir Charles Wilmott,
with competent numbers of Foot and Horse to lie before it, until such time as
they might gain it by Sapp or Mine, Mocrumpe besieged.
or by some other stratageme, as time and occasion should minister opportunity.
During this siege the President cast about for his wife and children, Cormocks
wife and children imprisoned.
and having gotten them likewise into his hands, confined them within the
walls of Cork. These things thus accomplished, the President dispatched
Letters both to the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council of England, and also
to the Lord Deputy and Council of Ireland, relating unto them the
apprehension of Cormocke, and the reasons inducing him thereunto, desiring also
to receive their Lordships pleasures for his further proceedings in this
business; but before answer could be returned, an unfortunate accident
unexpected altered the whole platform of this intended service: For Cormocks
followers had plotted his escape, and likewise to procure Cormock Oge his
eldest son, Cormock Mac Dermond plotted his escape.
(who was then a Student in Oxford) to be convayed secretly out of the
University, and to be brought into Ireland, or as some thought to be sent
into Spain; for effecting whereof, John O Healy, one of Cormocks old thieves,
was (the next passage) to be sent into England: Advertisement hereof was
brought to the President, who for preventing of both these Designs, first sent
for the Gentleman Porter, delivered unto him at large the great prejudice that
should arise to her Majesty's Service, if the prisoner should escape, that the
Queens charge, and his own pains and laborious travel, were all frustrated:
yea if the Spaniards should arrive (as they were expe^^ed) the whole kingdom
of Ireland should receive hazard and prejudice by it: Wherefore he charged him
upon his duty to the State, his allegiance to her Majesty, and in the love he
bare unto himself, that he would be no less careful of his safe keeping,
then of his own life, which in some sort depended thereon: Answer was made by
Hammon, that his Lordship should not need to trouble his mind with any such
imaginary doubts: for if shackles of iron, walls of stone, and force of men,
(for he had certain Soldiers allowed him for a Guard) could make him sure,
then should the Prisoner be forthcomming, whenever the State should be
pleased to call for him, and for John O Healy, the President held a watchful
eye over him but it was not thought good to make stay of him until he should
be aboard the ship, that such Instructions and Letters as should be sent by
him, might with himself be apprehended, whereby the whole circumstance of
these plots, and the chief Agents therein might be discovered: to make short,
the wind was fair, the Master hastes aboard, the Mariners and Passengers
purposing to set sail the next tide; amongst the rest John O Healy unregarded
(as he thought) is also on shipboard, but he was much deceived in his
opinion, for presently a Messenger sent from the State, found him in the hold;
when he began to search him for his Letters, he making show to deliver them
willingly (upon a sudden) threw both his Letters and money into the Sea;
which although it did plainly demonstrate apparent guiltiness, yet could he
never afterward be wrought to confess either the contents of the one, or the
sum of the other, pretending ignorance in both, whereupon he was committed
to the common Goal.

But let us leave Cormock for a while with the Gentleman Porter, and his man in
the Goal, and speak of other accidents and matters of State, which at this
time were handled.

Upon the second of September, 2. September.
the Lord President received Letters from the Lords of the Council, wherein
they signified unto him, how well her Majesty and themselves liked of his
services performed in Mounster, with many other things worthy to be remembered,
which imports me in this place to relate the true copy of the original
Letter.

CHAP. XIII.
A Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord President. Instructions
for Captain Harvie to write into Spain. A Letter written by her Majesty's
own hand to the Lord President. A Letter from the Lord President to her
Majesty. A Letter from Captain Harvie to Pedro Lopez de Soto, the S^anish
Veador. A Letter from O Donnell to O Connor Kerry. A Letter from Don Iuan de
Aguila to the Lord President. A Letter from the Lord President to Don Iuan de
Aguila. Captain Harvies Passeport sent to the Vead^r. The Lord Presidents
Passeport for Captain Edny into Spain. Spanish intelligence sent from Master
Secretary Cecill to the Lord President. The Lord Presidents opinion sent to
Master Secretary of a defensive war in Ireland.
A Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord President.
AFTER our very hearty Commendations: We have (according to our duties)
imparted to her Majesty your dispatch of the seven and twentieth of July, who
has conceived so great liking of your proceedings, as she has commanded us to
take notice of the same, in the most gracious terms that our own heart could
wish, being likewise most desirous that the Army (under you) as well in
general, as those Gentlemen and Officers in particular, who have so valiantly
exposed themselves to danger (as appears by your particular relation) may
know, that they have ventured their lives for a Prince, who holds them so
dear, as if she could preserve her estate and them, without the loss and
hazard of them, there is nothing which she possesses (of her own) which she
would spare to redeem their trouble and danger. It remains now that we
acquaint what is done by her Majesty, to prevent the purposes of the King of
Spain, wherein we cannot but much commend the apprehension you take of those
advertisements you have, and the judgment you use in applying the same, for
the safety of that Province, the defection whereof, as we are sorry to find
by so understanding a person as you are: So do we hope when it shall appear
(as it does daily in all parts of Ireland) that God does bless her Majesty's
Army against the Rebels, and that the King of Spain shall find himself not so
at ease, as to employ any Army there in haste, that, that lack of duty and
ingratitude (which does now live in them) will either dye in it self, and
turn to the contrary, or else that God will (as he has begun) confound them
in their own malicious inventions: It is very true, that her Majesty's own
advertisements do confirm, that a Pinnace of fifty Tun, was sent with some
of Odonnels Followers, and some tr^asure, to assure the Rebels of an Army to
come into Ireland, which Pinnace being once put to Sea, was forced back again
to Vinera, but they parted thence again within three or four days after,
which is the same that landed at Ardea, whereof your Letters make mention: We
have also assured advertisements that her Majesty's fleet, (being kept on the
Coast) has much hindered the Spanish de^ignes, not that they were fully ready
to come forth, but because the fleet kept their preparations from drawing to a
head, for this next month is the time, which is the fittest for them to put to
Sea, if her Majesty's fleet do not hinder them: For which purpose, though now
most of her ships (being long at Sea, and come in with the carrick, yet they
are going out again with all possible speed. You shall further understand,
that her Majesty has been acquainted of the Letters of complements, between
Don John and you, the Copies being sent over by the Deputy, by Sir Oliver
Saint-Iohn, whereof you now send the original. At which time, he sent her
Majesty his own and kept no counsel, that ^ee had intercepted your great
bribe: we have also seen the Letter of Soto, to Captain Harvie, Instructions
for Captain Harvie to write into Spain.
and the Passeport of whose conference (from which Passeport also proceeded)
her Majesty conceives that you may make some good use for her service, in this
form following: Where it does appear by Odonnels Letter to O Connor Kerry out
of Spain, that he is desirous to understand the State of Ireland; but so as
if thee be any bad, it may be concealed from the Spaniards; Captain Harvie
may in requital of the Veadors courtesy toward him use this freedom (of a
Gentleman) though an enemy, to let him see how much the King of Spain is
abused by the Rebels, who seek to engage him upon false hopes, and conceal
just causes of doubts, for which purpose he shall send him Odonnels own
Letter, which he cannot deny, and withal in any case (it being well over^eene
by you) make him a relation of the successes of her Majesty's Army; now if it
may be said, that they will think this Letter is aposted, and take this to be
a finenesse in Harvie; the worst that can come, is, that this good may ensue:
That under color of sending that to him, there may some person go in the
ship, who may discover what preparations there is in that place; for the better
coloring whereof, he may reply, that where he has sent him a Passeport for
the safe conduct of any person whatsoever, he should send to negotiate in the
matter (which passed between them in conference) that he looked rather to have
received from him, (who was the Propounder of the same) with so great
affection, some such overture from that side, as might have given him
foundation to break with the Deputy, or your self, to send over to her
Majesty about it, for which purpose he may offer him, as good a Passeport for
any of his Messengers, as he has sent to himself, it being very great reason
that such a motion should prooceed from that side rather, which has opened it
self with greatest violence, then from any of her Majesty's ministers, who
have in steed of their malicious attempt, performed all offices of honor and
humanity. And so much for answer of that point.

For your opinion concerning such places as are fit to be fortified, her
Majesty does very well approve the reasous whereupon the same is grounded,
being such indeed as ought to sway her Majesty's Judgments either one way or
other; for as it is true, that charge is well forborne which draws with it
peril, so it is a double danger to spend in any place, where safety follows
not such a charge: And therefore if you do continue in the mind, that
Baltimore is like to be of greatest use to the Enemy, both in regard of the
Haven it self, and of the Country adjoining, and that some such Fortification
may be raised as may command the Haven, without any great charge, her
Majesty is content that you do proceed; Otherwise if you do think that
whenever any forces shall descend, that the place so fortified cannot hold
out for any time, then her Majesty does like it better, both there and
elsewhere, that those Castles which you do win from the Irish, seated upon
the Sea, be utterly demolished, rather then to be left for the Rebels to
nestle in at their first arrival, and easier to be furnished by them for their
great advantage. In which point of Fortifications, because you may ^ee the
temper of her Majesty's mind, that uses mean in all things, and knows when
to spend, and when to spare, in both which never Prince was so little subject
to private ^umour, either one way or other, further then stood with the safety
of her state and people, over which her care is rather to be admired then
matched: We do send you an extract of her own Letter to the Lord Deputy,
how he should govern himself in that point, whereof we fear you have not
yet had notice, in respect that the distance between you and him, is well
near the longitude of Ireland. For the Artillery which you have taken, if you
find them necessary for that Kingdom, she is well pleased that they be
detayned, as well to serve for a scourge to them that brought them, (if again
they renew their attempt) as to prevent the inconveniencie and charge of their
transportation hither* But if you find them not necessary for that place, but
that Iron may do as good service, you may transport them in some of the
Victuallers, when they do return from that Province; And so we do commit
you to Gods protection.

From the Court at Greenwich this eighteenth of July, 1602. Your very loving
Friends, Thomas Egerton. C. S. Notingham. Robert Cecill. Thomas Buchurst. John
Stanhope. John Fortescue.



At the same time also he received a gracious Letter written by her Majesty
with her own hands, which multiplied his comforts, thinking all his laborious
endeavors to be fully recompensed, in that they were so graciously accepted.

A Letter written by her Majesty's own hand to the Lord President.
Your Sovereign, E. R.
MY Faithful George,
how joyed We are, that so good event has followed so toylesome endeavors,
laborious cares, and heedfull travells, you may guess, but We can best
witness; and do protest, that your safety has equalled the most thereof:
And so God ever bless you in all your actions.


Not many days after the receipt of this gracious Letter, the President in his
next dispatch into England, wrote unto her Majesty this Letter following.

A Letter from the Lord President to her Majesty.
SACRED MAJESTY,
IF I could sufficiently express the Joy which my heart conceived, when I
beheld a Letter written by your Royal hand, and directed unto me, (who in
your service have merited little, though in zeal, faith and loyalty equal to
any) your Majesty would not in your more then abounding Charity, mislike your
pains, having thereby ^aysed the dejected spirit of a poor Creature, exiled
from that blessing which others enjoy in beholding your Royal Person, whose
beauty adornes the world, and whose wisdom is the miracle of our age.
Gracious Sovereign, three years are now almost fully expired, since my
imploiment (into this kingdom) took his beginning; during which time, rest in
body and mind has been a stranger unto me; and overwearied in both, I do
most humbly beseech your Majesty, (if this Realm be not invaded from Spain,
whereof in a few days true Judgment may be made) to grant me leave, but
only for two months this Winter to attend you in your Court; which small time
of respiring, and at that time of the year, can be no hinderance to the
Service, and yet sufficient to relieve my mind, and enable my body, which now
is not so strong (as I could wish) to do^ your Majesty that service I ought.
Ireland is destitute of learned men of English birth, and with Irish Physicians
(knowing the good will they bear m^^) if they were learned I dare not
adventure: The longer I am without remedy, the less, and the less time I
shall be able to serve you: But as I am your Majesty's Creature, so I do
submit the consideration of my humble and just suite to your Princely
consideration, at whose Royal feet, and in whose Service I am howerly ready
to sacrifice my life.

From your Majesty's City of Cork the nine and twentieth of September. 1602.
Your Sacred Majesty's most humble Vassal and Servant, GEORGE CAREVV.


After the President had received their Lordships instructions (in their
Letters before mentioned) he framed an answer for Captain Harvie, written in
French to the Veador; and also a French Passeport, the copies whereof
Englished, I think it meet to relate, and with them the Letter from Odonnell,
formerly touched by their Lordships.

A Letter from Captain Harvie to Pedro Lopez de Soto, the Spanish Veador.
SIr, after your departure it pleased God to visit me with such extreme
sickness, as all my thoughts were fixed upon another life, supposing that my
days had been determined: By reason whereof, together with my feebleness and
absence, I had not the means to acquaint the Lord President, with the passages
betwixt us until now, that the time prefixed in your Passeport is almost
expired, which I could not by any means remedy: Sir I have of late received a
Letter from you, dated the ninth of April, 1602. by the which I perceive, that
you are desirous that I should send a Messenger, to give you a taste (as I
conceive) concerning the discourse which passed between us, which truly I
would willingly have done, if I had not been visited with sickness: But now
finding by the opinion of all men, that his Majesty is resolved to continue
the war against the Sacred person of my Sovereign: Although in my heart (as
a Christian) I wish a firm unity between their Majesty's, the which by their
Ancestors has been so long time (to the comfort of their Subjects)
religiously continued: Yet now understanding of the great preparations which
the King is in making, for the invasion of her Majesty's Dominions: I confess
I am not so passionate for the peace as I was, and I have no reason to make any
overture of your discourse to the Lord President, there being so little
probability of a peace to ensue: Wherefore if you think it good, that the
matter we speak of, should be set on foot, because you were the first mover
of it (wherein you manifest your zeal) I pray you to write unto me, that I
may understand, whether his Majesty will give ear to a peace or no, whereof
you need not be scrupulous to speak freely, since you see by experience, that
when your design did give us cause of revenge, we did entreat you with honor
and humanity: when I shall know your answer, I will deal effect^ally with the
Lord President; with whom as well in kindred as in affection, I have such
interest as you have heard, and of whose worth and sufficiency you have bin
well informed, assuring you that if he will put his hand unto it, it will much
advance the business: I am not in despair of his inclination to a peace, if by
your answer he may perceive, that you proceed roundly: I marvel much that his
Majesty and the Lords of his Council, lends their ears so much unto this
traitorly barbarous nation, who from their Cradles have been nourished in
falsehood and treasons, masking (of late) their actions under the veil of
religion, whereof the truth is, that in their hearts they have neither fear of
God, nor faith to men: And that from henceforth you may not be blinded, and
see their fraud, wherewith they beguile his Majesty, unto whom they protest
sincerity. I do send you here enclosed a Letter signed by the hand of the
Traitor Odonnell, written to a friend of his in this Province of Mounster,
called O Connor K^rry, which was found in the Castle of Beerehaven, the which
by her Majesty's forces (under the conduct of the President in person) was
within the space of seven days taken and razed, and the Rebels put to the
sword, their Companions with all their forces lodging near unto them, but
(according to their custom) they durst not second nor aid them, but left them
to destruction: By the which Letter you shall see (as clear as the day) how
this Traitor Odonnell only tempers a bait to deceive the King your Master,
like unto all the rest of this nation, who do but temporize to work their
advantage by it: To relate unto you truly in what estate these Rebels live at
this present, howsoever they may protest and dissemble their affairs, or write
from hence, I protest upon my soul, that Tiron^ works all he may to be
received into the favor and mercy of our Sovereign, and that all the Lords
and Chiefs of the North that followed him on the day of the rowt at Kinsale,
and others of those parts have submitted themselves to the Lord Deputy, and
for security have put in their Pledges for their future loyalties: And Tirone
(with his weak Troops) have been so sharply prosecuted, that as a fugitive
(being enforced to quit his own Country) he seeks out Coverts, Bogges, and
Woods; The Lord Deputy without impeachment passes from place to place, and
holds all Vlster in subjection: The other Provinces of Leinster and Connaght,
are reduced to obedience, and the Province of Munster (where I remain) is so
much at the commandment of the Lo. President, as if he would receive to mercy
all the Traitors that seek to be received, and promise to live as good
subjects, there would be no rebels left; And amongst others, Osulevan, who
has given you the best assurance, and of whom (as I think) you have most
confidence, does daily make suit to be restored to the Queens favor, and this
I assure you from the mouth of the Lo. President. Moreover (as the vulgar can
inform you) the President absolutely commands in this Province, and the
traitors (whose requests he rejects) are so few and so weak, as they live like
unto wolves and foxes, flying from one place to another, only to assure their
lives, which kind of life cannot long endure. But if the King your Master will
persevere to aid these poor traitors, you shall see us (when you shall
enterprise it) in better point then we were, it not being in your power to
surprise any Port or place of importance; and if it be your chance to come
hither in person, you shall find it to be true, whereof in my particular (in
regard of the honor I bear you) I should be exceeding sorry. The Bearer hereof
Walter Edney my Lieutenant, whom you know by sight, in his fatherly love to his
dearest Son, whom he placed in the service of Captain Pedro Enriques de
Tejada, lately deceased, has entreated the Lord President to license him to
see his son, to the end that he might supply his necessary wants, for default
whereof he may otherwise perish; which occasion I willingly embraced, whereby I
might write unto you, and by that means receive your answer, beseeching you to
extend your favor unto him, during his abode in Spain, I will do the like
for all such as depend upon you, if they shall happen to arrive in this
Kingdom. And to the end that I might the more fully know your answer, and
have the better means to treat the more effectually in these affairs, which
are of such consequence, I pray you to send one from you well instructed, that
I may bring him to the Lo. President, which will much advance the business you
desire. And as you have given me a Pasport for such as I should send unto you,
(whereof by reason of my sickness I could make no use) I do send you the like
here enclosed, which shall be of force until the end of February 1602: Even so
Sir, being ever ready (my allegiance to my Sovereign excepted) to do you all
friendship and service, I pray God to preserve you in health according to your
own desire.

From Cork the 17 of September. 1602. Yours affectionatly to do you Service,
Roger Harvie.
A Monsieur, Monsieur Pedro Lopez de Soto, Veador general for his Majesty of
Spain, deliver these at the Groyne.

Sir, I had forgotten one thing, which is to pray you to afford your favor to
my Lieutenant, that he may vent his Merchandises transported thither, and
return others, which he carries only by the means of Traffic, for the
defraying of his charges. I will do the like for any of yours that you shall
send hither.

Roger Harvye.

A Passeport of Captain Harvies sent to the Veador.
I Roger Harvie, Captain of a foot Company, and Governor for her Majesty of
Castle-haven and Baltimore, etc. For certain causes concerning her Majesty's
service, I do give this free Passeport to such ship and Messenger as Don Pedro
Lopez de Soto (Veador general for the King of Spain) shall send into this
Province of Mounster in Ireland, between the date of this present, and the
last of February 1602. And if it shall happen that any of her Majesty's ships,
or any other of her Subjects, shall meet with the said Ship, or that by force
of wind they shall be enforced upon the Coast of England, or into any part
within the Realm of Ireland: In her Majesty's name I pray and require every of
tbem, that they may be friendly entreated, and that the Messenger without any
impediment, may b^^ permitted to have free recourse unto me, and to vent their
merchand i^e, being requi^ite for the Queens service:

Dated at Cork the seventeenth of September, 1602. Roger Harvie.
To all Admirals, Vi^eadmirals, Governors, Magistrates, and Officers, and to
all other her Majesty's loyal and obedient Subjects, unto whom this shall or
may appertain.

A Letter from Odonnell to O Connor Kerry.
What news are here, the Doctor and Dermond Odrischal may largely report unto
you; but of this one thing you may be fully assured; that the King will not
omit the winning of Ireland, if it cost him the most part of Spain: His
Majesty does send you money and munition. I pray let our enformation of you
be found true, and your service enco^rage our King to further merit you: I
pray you send me the relation of the news of our Country, in such sort, as
if there be any bad, it be concealed from the Spaniards, and known to me*
where the Deputy with the Queens forces are occupied, or where they are in
^arrison:

At the Groyne the four and twentieth of May, 1602. Your loving Friend Hugh
Odonnell.
To his loving Friend O Connor Kerry, these give in Ireland.

At the same time, when Pedro Lopez de Soto the Veador, wrote to Captain
Harvie, Don John de Aguila, did write unto the Lord President, and sent him a
present of wines, Lymmons, Orenges, etc. And to do him a farther courtesy, he
gave him assurance, that his Passeports should be sufficient for any man, that
he would employ into Spain, if he had any cause to send thither: This Letter
the President sent to the Lords of the Council in England, who authorized him
both to write unto him, and to return him a Present, if he were so disposed:
The copy of Don John's Letter, and the Presidents unto him translated out of
the Spanish do here en^ue.

A Letter from Don Iuan de Aguila to the Lord President.
MVy illustre Sennor: To say the truth, I am very glad that I am in Spain, and
that the passage was good which I was to make. I confess unto your Lordship,
that I am so much obliged, for the honorable and good terms, which the Lord
Deputy and your Lordship used there in the service of your Prince, in all
things which concerned me, that I desire some apt occasion to manifest my self
to be a good Paymaster (as I ought) for those courtesies, and for the assurance
thereof, your Lordship may send securely to me, to command any thing you please
for your service: And that your Ship and Passeport shall be friendly received:
And for that in this Country, there is no fruit of more estimation then Wines
of Ripadavia, Limmons and Orenges, these few are sent to make a proof thereof,
and the willingness I have to serve your Lordships; whom I commend to God:

From the Groyne the second of April, 1602. Muy illustre Sennor. Beso las
manos a V. S. Su Servidor. Don Iuan de Aguila.


A Letter from the Lord President to Don Iuan de Aguila.
MVy illustre Sennor, I doubt not but that your Lordship has received my
Letters of the thirteenth of July, sent in answer of yours of the second of
April, by the Captains Suaco and Sigler, and I rest so well satisfied of the
good terms, wherein we stand, as I am desirous to do your Lordship some
agreeable service; at that time there was no occasion for me to make use of
the Passeport, and offer your Lordship made me, for security of that man or
ship which I should send into those parts: But now this bearer Captain Walter
Edney, whose Son served Captain Pedro Enriques de Tejada (lately deceased)
having prayed me to give him license, and my Passeport to see his Son: To
supply him of his necessary wants, I beseech your Lordship that he may
(according to your promise) safely and securely pass and return, which favor
I shall thankfully acknowledge: And whenever your Lordship shall have
occasion, to send any of yours into these parts, he shall be used with the
like courtesy: I have received profit by the book of fortification which your
Lordship left me at your departure, and hold it as a Relic in memory of you,
and as a good Scholar I have put some things in practice, whereof your
Lordship at your return hither again (which I hope in God will be never) may
be a witness, whether I have committed any error in the art o^ no. My greatest
defect has been the want of the help of so great a Master as your Lordship
is, of whom I am desirous to learn, not only that art, but in all else
concerning military profession, in the which I do give your Lordship the
pre-eminence: To conclude, I rest in all I may (my duty reserved to the Queen
my mistress) affectionatly ready at your Lordships service, and so kissing
your hands. I beseech God to preserve you with many happy years:

From Cork the seventeenth of September, 1602. Muy illustre Signior, Beso las
manos a V. S. su Serridor. GEORGE CAREVV.
Although here is nothing to be had worthy the presenting unto your Lordship,
yet I make bold to present you with an ambling Hackney.




The man whom the Lord President made choice of, to carry these Letters to
Pedro Lopez de Soto, and to Don John de Aguila, was Walter Edney, Lieutenant
unto Captain Harvie, who was an ingenious man of good discretion, and well
experienced, as well in Land as Sea service, and the better to disguise his
employment, he had a Son in Spain, a Page unto Captain Pedro Enrique, who
after rendering of Kinsale (the Captain aforesaid) casting an affection to the
boy, moved Don John, to entreat the President that he might have the youth to
serve him, which was granted, and within a few months after the Spaniards
return the Captain dyed* and to put a farther mask upon his employment, the
President fraighted a small Bark laden with Irish commodities, and in it a
choice Irish horse, with a rich pad and furniture, and some other trifles which
he sent to Don John de Aguila: and for his safety he had two Passeports with
him, the one from Captain Harvie, the other from the President; the Presidents
Passeport ensues.

By the Lord President of Mounster in Ireland.
I Sir GEORGE CAREVV, The Lord Presidents Passeport for Captain Ed^ie into
Spain.
Lieutenant general of the Artillery, for her Sacred Majesty the Queen of
England, in that her kingdom, and her Highness Lord President for the
Province of Mounster in Ireland, do certify that I have licensed Captain
Walter Edney to go into Spain, to visit his Son remaining there, and to
return hither within two months after* the date hereof; this being agreeable
with the allowance and power which Don John de Aguila did give me (at his being
here) the copy whereof is heereunto annexed.

Given at Cork the seventeenth of September, 1602. G. C.


Of these dispatches for Spain enough being said, it is time to re^^^ne to the
passages in Mounster, but first I must relate unto you, the news from Spain
sent in a Letter from Sir Robert Cecill unto the Lord Deputy, and the same
transcripted (by master Secretaries direction) unto the President: the Letter
bare date the seventh of August, and arrived at Cork the second of September
following, whereby the Reader may see, that the King of Spaines eyes were yet
still (notwithstanding the rowt at Kinsale, the dishonor he received in the
returns of his troops, and the loss of Dunboy, whereby his footing in
Ireland was merely lo^t) open upon that kingdom.

Although Queen Elizabeth of happy memory was dead before Lieutenant Edney
returned, yet I hold it not impertinent in this place to (...) his suc^esses*
When he was landed at the Groynt, he understood that Don John de Aguila, by
the accusation of the Irish Fugitives, was in disgrace confined to his house,
where (of grief) shortly after he dyed. His Letters and Pasports were taken
from him by the Earl of Carazena, and sent to the Court, and himself stayed
until the Kings pleasure was known. The Irish Traitors inveighed much against
him, ^aying, That under pretext of Trade, and bringing of Presents, he came as
a Spy; Nevertheless he was well entreated, and had the liberty of the Town,
and to wear his Sword, with allowance from the King of a Duccat per diem for
his diet: His goods were sold for the best advantage, and his Barque returned
into Ireland; But the Presidents present to Don John, the Earl of Carazena
detayned to his own use; And after nine months restraint, Edney was enlarged,
and returned into England in July, 1603.

A little before this time Sir Robert Cecill, Spanish intelligence sent from
Master Secretary Cecill to the Lord President.
her Majesty's principal Secretary, wrote unto the Lord Deputy the News of
Spain, a branch of which he also sent to the President* dated upon the
seventh of August, and received the second of September, I hold meet to insert,
whereby the Reader may understand that the King of Spain had still his eyes
open upon Ireland.

One great cause of my writing this private Letter, is this, that where I see
how much it does distract your mind to think of Spain behind you, and of the
North before you, fearing to be diverted from the conclusion of your labors,
you may perceive in what estate the preparations of Spain are now, as I am
certainly advertised by one of mine own, who is newly arrived from the Port of
Lisbone, where he took shipping the 21 of July.

There are two great Ships, each of them of a thousand Tons, one called the
Andrew, and the other (which shall be the Viceadmirall) the name forgotten:
Besides, there are twelve ships of two hundred tons and downward, in which
it is resolved to send some fifteen hundred men, to have releeved the siege at
Bearehaven* the News of the taking whereof was first known by a Ship from
Waterford to Lisbon, and not before: Of the fifteen hundred men, eight hundred
came from the Groyne, being part of those which were transported out of
Ireland. In the Groyne remains Odonnell, and there is only the great Saint
Philip, with ten small Barques, with which he mightily importuned to be sent to
the North. If these had been sent unto Beerehaven in Mounster, hoping upon his
arrival with some fifteen hundred men, to have raised the siege, possessed
some parts, and made a beginning of a plantation, hereof great benefit must
needs have grown to the Rebels: for as those small numbers which should have
been landed at Mounster, with the brute of the rest to follow, (which is
always multiplied) would have made a distraction of the Vlster prosecution,
etc. Lastly, in the said Letter he prayed the President to set down his
opinion, what course were best to be taken in a Defensive war, if the King of
Spain did invade Ireland with a Royal Army. The next passage, to give Master
Secretary satisfaction, the Lord President wrote unto him a long Letter; but
because many private things were handled in the same, I will only relate so
much of it, as concerns his opinion, touching a defensive war in Ireland.

The Lord Presidents Opinion sent to Master Secretary, of a Defensive War in
Ireland.
GRanting that the Enemy will come no less powerful then is reported, and
that the Irish will join with them (whereof there is no doubt) then
consideration is to be had, what in such a Sea of troubles, is meetest to be
done, that may best preserve the Queens army with lest charge, and the way to
weary the enemy and the country. Because my opinion may perchance differ from
other men, whose Authority, Greatness, and better judgment (in the worlds
opinion) bears more sway, I will forbear to deal in so weighty a business
any farther, then to your self, using the liberty you have ever given me, to
say what I conceive to be the best Counsel, if the army of Spain be so great
as is both reported by those that come from thence, and expected here, let us
make no doubt, but he will be Master of the field (for the present) and will
so hold himself, except the Army of Ireland be reenforced to a far higher
Li^t, the charge whereof will make (if I be not deceived) both England and
Ireland to groan: Wherefore the best way (in my conceit) to moderate such huge
Expenses, is for the present to be careless of the Countries generally
throughout the kingdom; for in seeking both to defend them, and to make head
against the Enemy, will be too heavy a burden. The principal regard which we
ought to have, is of the Cities, in every of which I do wish a strong Garrison
both of Horse and foot, able to defend a siege: when the Enemy shall see that
we are dispersed into Garrisons, either he will presently (in his best
strength) go to besiege one of those places, or else disperse, (because he
has the Country to friend) as we do, if he attempt the besieging of any of
our places aforesaid, there is no doubt, but in such a business he will unite
all his forces in one, then may we be bold to draw all our forces from their
several Garrisons, to a head to relieve that place; and with Gods favor make
no doubt but to enforce the Enemy to rise; if he disperse, then those
Garrisons will be able to master the Countries about them, and leave no
habitation to relieve either Spanyard or Irish; and upon occasion two or more
of these Garrisons may assemble and meet, to effect greater services, then
otherwise can be done: This fashion of a war will in a short time destroy
all the Country, make the Irish to curse the Spaniard and themselves, for
drawing them hither, drive the King to an inestimable charge, and hazard by
Sea, to victual and relieve his Army, which otherwise will perish, ease the
Queens charge, and secure the chief Towns, which is chiefly (and above all
other things) to be respected. Supposing the Army would land in Mounster, in it
I would have principal regard of Cork, Limerick, and Waterford, in either of
which Cities I do wish there might be a strong Garrison of three thousand
foot and three hundred horses, one thousand foot more to be dispersed for
some poorer places meet to be kept, so as the Queens forces should consist of
ten thousand foot and one thousand horse; the rest of the kingdom (where the
Spaniards are not) may be held in awe with some Garrisons upon them as now
they are: This manner of war (in my conceit) would little or nothing increase
the charge the Queen is now at, and in a short time weary both the Spaniard
and the Irish.

To make it appear more probable unto you, that these Garrisons will be able
to ruin all the Country at their pleasures, although the Enemy be never so
strong: it cannot be denied but six thousand foot and six hundred horse may
be drawn from the Garrisons; and yet those left against the Irish, and
Townsmen sufficiently guarded; with such a light Army, the Commander may go
where he list, and lodge as near the Spaniard (without harm) as he thinks
good: for we have the same advantage upon them, as the Irish in lightness
have of us, and with such an Army (of the Irish) there is no doubt to be made,
then it follows that we shall be able to go into every part of the Province,
and retreat at our pleasures: To the contrary, if the Spaniard be strong, and
we in his strength do fight with him, the event of battles (being dangerous
and uncertain as they are) the loss of one field or one days disaster, would
absolutely loose the kingdom, if he come with like numbers as he did the last
year, (which I cannot believe, because the example has taught him more wit)
yet I do not wish that we should (do as we did) presently besiege him; for
Kinsale was bought at so dear a rate (as while I live) I will protest against
a winter siege, if it may be avoided: I do speak within my compass, I do
verily believe, that at that siege, and after (the sickness there gotten) we
lost above six thousand men that dyed: Thus may your honor see what a
fashioned war, I do conceive to be least in charge and most of use; but for
a farther help, it will be needful for some of the Queens ships, to be
evermore upon the coast, to keep the Spaniard from relief of victuals; and
then there is an apparent hope, that a Spanish Army cannot any long time
subsist in Ireland, for between us and them, and the swarms of Irish^ie that
will draw into Mounster, the Province will be so harassed, as neither the
Spaniards or Rebels can avoid starving. I protest unto your Honor, I do not
project this manner of a war for any particular respect unto my self, hoping
thereby to have the managing of it, being unmeet for the Lieutenant of the
Kingdom, to be where there is not a royal Army in the field, to confront an
Enemy; and therefore lest I may be mistaken, if the motion be liked of, let
it not be mine: But the Reason that leads me to that opinion, is, because I
am sure it is the easiest war for charge, the surest from hazard, and in the
end must prevail.

Dat' 11. August, 1602. G. C.


CHAP. XIIII.
Cormock Mac Dermond makes escape. The Castle of Mocrumpe taken, and most of
the Ward put to the sword. Osulevan and Tirrell repair with their forces into
Muskrey. Cormock Mac Dermond makes means to be received to her Majesty's
mercy. The Reasons that moved the Lord President to accept of Cormocks
submission.
COrmock Mac Dermond being all this time in the Gentleman Porters custody, and
his intended escape (as has been said) made known to the Lo. President, the
same also came after to the ears of the Lo. Bishop of Cork, who according to
his duty both of a subject and a Councellor, acquainted the Lord President with
it, who made answer, that himself heretofore having Intelligence thereof, and
had seriously admonished the Gentleman Porter to take an extraordinary care of
his Prisoner: Yet because that could not be too often repeated, that can never
be too sufficiently learned, he entreated the Bishop that he also (for Abundans
cautela non nocet, would call for Hammon, and give him warning to be vigilant
and circumspect in his charge, knowing how much it concerned both himself and
the State. The Bishop having performed gravely and pathetically the Presidents
desire, left the execution thereof to his future care. Lastly, Dominicke
Sarsfield (the Queens Attorney for that Province) came to the President upon
the same errand, agreeing in all Circustances with the former Intelligence:
whereupon the said Officer was again called, the practice revealed unto him,
and for a perclose, commanded to keep him close prisoner in an Hand-locke,
either with his own Servant, or some Soldier of especial trust: 29. September.
Notwithstanding all these repetitions, and reiterations of warnings, Cormocke
Mac Dermond made an escape out of prison.
within two days this last caution given, namely upon Michaelmas day between
seven and eight of the clock at night, Cormock having no other attendant, but
his trusty Servant Maghon Oge Olyne, who had broken up a window that looked
into the Street, stripping himself forth of his clothes, creeps in his
shirt out of the window, where were diverse mantlemen waiting of purpose to
receive him; an English woman coming along the street (in the very instant)
while he was ^^eeping forth, perceived his white shirt, and thereupon raised
the cry, they within the house (hearing the cry) looked for the Prisoner, and
finding the window open, and Chamber empty follow the pursuit, but all in
vain, for he having the dark night, the Town and Country to friend, was
convaied over the City walls and so escaped. The President although infinitely
grieved with this unfortunate accident, yet thought it more necessary to
prevent future dangers, then to lament passed disasters, and therefore wrote
presently, first to Sir Charles Wilmot (being still before Mocrumpe;) that if
he could not gain the Castle that night, he should raise his siege, and
retreat with his forces the next morning, for nothing was more certain, that
now ( Cormock being escaped) all his Followers and Dependants (who did
infinitely love him) would presently turn Rebels, which if they should, and
join with Tirrell, and Donnell Osulevan (as most likely) they would intercept
the places and passages twixt him and Cork, that he should not be able to
retire without great danger and loss: These being sent away by a Horseman,
other Letters were instantly written to the Lord Barry, and the Lord Roch, that
they should make stay of all Cormocks Followers and goods, that were as yet
residing in their Countries, not suffering either the one, or the other to
start aside, till from himself they should receive farther directions.

Sir Charles was exceeding much distracted with these News, The castle of
Mocrumpe taken, and most of the ward put to the sword.
being exceeding sorry to raise his siege before the work were finished, yet
purposed to obey his directions; behold a mere casualty gave him opportunity
to effect his desires: for the Warders having killed a Swine for their
provision, and having no plenty of water to scald the same, were constrained
to singe her (as the manner of some Countries is) with straw, fear^e, and such
like, as they had within the walls. This fire not carefully regarded, took
hold upon a Cabin within the Bawne adjoining to the Castle wall, and the thatch
thereof (fired and flaming aloft) happened (through a window) to catch hold of
certain tallow, and such combustible matter within the Castle, raging so
violently withal, that the Rebels were constrained to quit it, and to make the
Bawne their last refuge, wherein they had little hope of safety: for they saw
the two Captain Harvies, brethren, and Captain Thomas Boys, ready to assault
it, wherefore (mistrusting that weak defense, which could not be maintained)
they resolved to sally, and to adventure the recovery of the woods adjoining;
in which attempt, about fifty of them were put to the sword, the rest were but
few, who by favor of the dark night escaped; at length the violence of the
fire being somewhat appeased, all industry was used to make the Castle tenable,
and a Company being left within, well victualled and furnished with all
necessaries, the Army the next day returned toward Cork: the rumor of
Cormocks escape being come to the ears of Osulevan Bear, Osulevan and Tirrell
repair with their forces into Muskry
and Captain Terrill, they incontinently drew their forces forth of Kerry and
Desmond into the borders of Muskerry, to confer and join with Cormock,
making no question but their decayed party should receive great strength and
encouragement by the Lord of Muskerry, his strong Country, and multitude of
dependants. The President both to terrify Cormock, and to secure the goods of
the Subjects in the Lord Roches Country, sent for Sir Samuel Bagnall with his
Regiment from Lymrick, to lie upon the confines of Muskerry, not making any
other account, but to begin a new war, chargeable to her Majesty,
painful to himself, and nothing profitable to the Captains or Soldiers,
the Country being already much impoverished with the former siege, the Corn
destroyed, and the Cattle fled into places of greatest strength, when as it
pleased God contrary to all expectation, to give this turbulent beginning a
short and peaceable end, considering that the hopes of Spain began to be
desperate and calm: For this Irish escaped Lord having conferred with Terrill
and his associates, and discerning that they being very needful and half
hungerstarved, (having been shut up so long within the Mountains of Bear and
Desmond) required bonnaght upon his Country, which was grievously wasted
already by the English, found the unavoydable ruin and destruction of himself
and his followers, if he entertained that course; and secondly, finding the
English possessed of all his strong holds, both on the sides, and in the very
heart of his Country; and lastly, his eldest son then by the procurement of
the President prisoner in England, and his younger son, with his wife, daughter,
and some of his most respected followers close prisoners in Cork, thought it
his wisest course to adhere unto the State, if his humble submission might be
accepted. 12. October.
Upon this resolution the twelfth of October, Cormock mac Dermond made means
to be received to her Maj^sties mercy.
he wrote several Letters to the Bishop of Cork, to the Chief Justice, and
to Captain Taffe, earnestly soliciting every of these that they would become
Mediators and Intercessors in his behalf to the Lord President, that license
might be granted unto him to make his repair unto his Lordship, protesting
that he would do any thing within his power to redeem his former offenses.
The whole body of the Council adjudging his suite reasonable, the President
would not dissent from their unanime opinion, and therefore his request was
granted. The one and twentieth of October 21. October.
he came to the President, He made his submission to the L. President.
falling down upon his knees, he humbly (and indeed more passionately then I
have seen any) besought her Majesty's mercy, no way standing upon his
Justification, but promising that his future Services should deserve her
gracious favors; only thus far in modest terms he alleged for his
Excuse, (although he knew his Offenses great, and himself thereby subject to
Law) yet that in his heart he still retained the duty of a Subject, and
therein would remain so long as life and breath should remain within his
body. The President and Council beholding the man, and weighing his words,
which proceeded from him not without evident testimony of inward grief, and
unfeigned sorrow, (although peradventure arising like Esaus tears from the
sense of his loss, more then from Conscience, and feeling of his folly)
thought good (upon advised deliberation) to receive him into her Majesty's
grace and favor: And as you have already heard the Motives inducing him to
demand it: so shall ye briefly understand the reasons, by the weight and
validity whereof the State was persuaded to grant it. The reasons that moved
the Lo. President to accept of Cormocks submission.
First, considering the insupportable loss which he had sustained since his
imprisonment, in the taking of two, and burning his third Castle, wherein (as
being the place of his most especial abode) his best mooueables (whereof he
was very well furnished) were consumed and burnt; and that the harvest of his
Country, between her Majesty's forces, and the Rebels, (for in the same they
had made their abode for a whole month) was valued as might be esteemed at
five thousand pounds, which as a just punishment was fallen upon him.

Secondly it was well weighed, what a help and courage his combination would
have afforded to the Rebels, if he had obstinately run a rebellious course,
for he was at that time the strongest man of Followers of any one of the Irish
in that Province, and his Country in strength and fastness equal with the
worst part of the same, and that which required no less respect was the
situation of his Country, reaching even to the walls of Cork, whereby the
greatest part of her Majesty's forces, must of necessity have been employed in
Muskerry, which would have given great impediment to the prosecution of the
service in other parts, whereas by receiving him the war would be removed
farther off, and the greatest tempest of disturbance avoided: that he was
deeply infected, and fowly staind with manifold treasons was too manifest, yet
this difference was made between him and others, that they were in public
action professed Traitors, and he a Iugling Traitor; and though he had joined
with a foreign Enemy, yet not in so heinous a manner as some other: for they
solicited strangers to invade the kingdom, but strangers having invaded the
kingdom, solicited him to partake with them; the three Castles (before
mentioned) no doubt were great bridles upon him, and in time (no doubt) would
have wrought the effects desired, which was to banish him out of his Country:
But considering the charge and encumbrance subject to some loss, that would
grow in victualling of them, and many lewd and unsettled persons ready to join
with him (if they had perceived him inclinable to continue a Rebel) which
might have bred new broils, and protracted the wars of Mounster in
infinitum: Again the benefit, that by his prosecution and extirpation might
have redounded to her Majesty, was that thereby his Land should have excheated
unto her, which in the opinion of all wise men would have proved too dear a
purchase: Farther, besides his submission and his Son that was prisoner in
England, his second Son also and his Castle of Blarney were held as pledges
upon him: And whereas the L. Deputy had devised the form of an oath for the
Northren Protectees, he was content to swear and subscribe to the same oath,
and lastly himself with four of the best Barons of Parliament in Mounster,
were bound in three thousand pounds for his future loyalty and subjection, so
that he was bound in heaven and in earth, before God and before man, by Law
and by Nature, and nothing but only hell was remaining for his farther
assurance.

CHAP. XV.
The Lord President offers the Lord Deputy to send him of his List one or two
Regiments. Odonnels death. Tirrels quarter assailed by Sir Samuel Bagnall. The
loss on the Rebels part. Tirrell rages in fury against the Inhabitants of
Muskry, and retireth into Bear and Desmond. The death of Captain Harvie.
Captain Flower succeeded Captain Harvie in the government of Carbry. Cloghane
summoned. The Constables brother hanged, and the Castle rendered.
COrmocke being now reduced, the Lord President wrote to the Lord Deputy, The
L. President offers the L. Deputy to send him of his li^t one or two regime^ts
signifying him thereof; and withal, that if his Lordship had any use in
Connaght for the forces of Mounster, that he might dispose of one or more of
the regiment of the same as he pleased: And also he certified him, that o^e
called James Blake, of Galway, lately arrived from Spain, did constantly
affirm, that Odonnell was dead, He advertiseth of Odonnels death.
both which you may believe was welcome News unto the Lord Deputy.

The morning immediately following the day of his submission, which was the two
and twentieth of October, 22. October.
Sir Samuel Bagnall Tirrels quarter assailed by Sir muell Sagnall.
placed (as you have heard) with a Regiment of Foot, and one hundred Horse on
the borders of Muskrey, had occasion of service by this means: Tirrell with
eight hundred Foot, and forty Horse, was still remaining in the westermost
confines of Muskrey, environed with such fastness of woods and boggs, as he
thought himself secure: The cause of his stay was, for that he expected the
return of Cormock, by whom he made account to be waged, for Cormock indeed
had not acquainted him with his intent of submission: Sir Samuel Bagnall
therefore conjecturing, that so soon as he should hear this Lord of Muskery
to become a Subject, he would then retire himself to his old haunt in the
Mountains of Bear and Desmond, thought the time either now or never to do
service upon this lightfooted Enemy, and therefore he called upon Owen Mac Teg
of the Drisshan, one of the Mac Carties of Muskery (whom the President had
appointed to attend his directions) and requested him (in the edge of the
evening) to make trial if he could go unperceived to Tirrels Camp, and
bring him word in what place, and in what manner the Rebels were lodged: This
Owen Mac Teg very willingly and faithfully performed his employment, and about
midnight returned, and reported, that he had found the Rebels secure (as he
imagined) from all fear or suspicion, and would undertake to conduct, and guide
the forces directly to their Camp: upon this intelligence it was not long
before Sir Samuel and his Companies were all in Arms, disposing them into two
bodies, Captain Sidley (who had the point) had five and twenty out of every
Company, with officers proportionable for his numbers, and Sir Samuel himself
with the rest marched close up after them, and the Horse came in the rear, for
the night was dark, the ways deep and woody, in this manner they held on
till they came so near to the Rebels quarters, as that they might discern
their fires, then they made halte, and sent Owen Mac Teg, with his cosen Owen
Olough one of the Mac Swynes, to discover whether they could perceive any
stirring amongst them, and to descry more particularly the manner of their
encamping; they gathering courage by the countenance of the Army, which
approached so near, as they precisely viewed every part thereof, and returning
to the Colonel, certified him that they were lodged in three quarters, a
little distant the one from the other, at their back a strong wood, before
their face a maine bog half a mile broad, and on either side cragged and rocky
Mountains: The Colonel therefore directed Captain Sidly with the Vanguard to
divide his troops, and to give on upon all the three quarters at one instant,
and commanded the Sergeant Major, Captain William Power, and Captain Bostocke
with the battle to be his seconds; to make good their undertakings, himself
marched in the rear, a very small distance from them; and because there was no
ground for the ^orse to serve in near the Camp, therefore they were commanded
to attend Captain Minshaw (Lieutenant of the Presidents Horse troop) upon the
farther side of the bog to intercept them in their flight: These forces
marshalled into this order, the foot were come up within less then a furlong
of the Rebels quarter, and no doubt had surprised them unperceived, if a Piece
by mischance had not fired by the stumbling of one of the new supplies, which
giving the alarm, some of them drew speedily into Arms, yet ou^ men killed
eighty of them dead in the place; The loss on the Rebels part.
Tirrell ran away in his shirt, leaving both his garments and weapons behind
him, and his wife followed no better clothed: our men got fifty horses and
^acknies, one thousand Co^es, sheep and garrans, great store of Arms and
baggage, and that which seldom has been seen in Irish spoils, some
remnants of Velvet, Holland, Gold, and silver Lace, English apparel of Satin
and Velvet* and some quantity of Spanish coin, amongst the rest there was a
Portmantua found by the Soldiers, wherein Tirrels Spanish money was confessed
to have bin, but they that got it had more wit then to proclaim it in the
market place: But whosoever sweetened their mouths with these Spanish drugs,
sure I am that the Soldiers came all with good courage, well pleased to Cork,
except only seventeene which were hur^ in the ski^mish, all our Captains and
Commanders deserved well, and particularly Captain Minshaw, who had his horse
slain under him, and himself wounded with a Pi^e: Tirrell finding himself to
have sustained this irrecoverable loss of men, money, clothes and arms, and
hearing withal that Cormock was with the President at Cork, imagining that
this plot had been contrived by him; Tirrell rages in fury against the
inhabitants of Muskery,
(in revenge of this defeat) wreaked his anger upon diverse Churles and poor
people in those Fastness: First burning their corn and cabbines, and
afterward put them to the sword, wherein he little offended the State; these
being only ^uch as had fled from the Garrisons into those Fastness, because
they would not be subject to Law, and this was toward the latter end of
October: Tirrell having found by this woeful experience, that the ^astnesse of
Muskery could not secure him from the purs^^t of the English, retired himself
into his old lurking dens, in Bear and Desmond, He retireth into Bear and
Desmond.
not fearing but that he might quietly spend the remainder of this winter in
those desolate parts, and the rather because he committed no outrage upon the
Subjects adjoining.

The President perceiving their resolution, being now freed from the cloud (he
formerly conceived) of foreign Invasion, and knowing them to be much
discouraged, and out of heart, by reason of their late overthrow, which now was
past hope to be recovered, either by Spain or Cormocke, thought it a fit time
(in these respects) to make a speedy prosecution, foreseeing, that the former
good fortune effectually pursued, might strike a good stroke to break the
heart of the Rebellion in Mounster; toward the effecting whereof he
incontinently resolved to inviron them with Garrisons: but the difficulties
that did encounter him in this business, were many and great: the long ways,
being near fourscore miles English from Cork to Bear, the Plains so deep
and boggie, the Mountains so ^ough and craggie, and the carriage, Garrans,
that are never strong, were not able to travel six miles a day; and besides
E^sterly winds are so seldom upon this coast, as it would ask a long time to
transport their Victuals and Munitions by Sea. Notwithstanding, wading through
all those inconveniences with industrious travel, and laborious diligence, he
had planted Sir Charles (...) with one Regiment at Donkerran, Sir Richard
Percie at Kinsale, Captain George Flower, the Sergeant Major at Bantry, and
Captain Roger Harvie at Baltimore. But the present service received no small
prejudice by means of the untimely departure of Captain Roger Harvie, The
death of Cap Harvie.
whose heart being overwhelmed with an inundation of sorrows, and
discontentments taken, (though in my Conscience not willingly given) by one
that had been his honorable Friend, as his heart blown like a bladder, (as
the Surgeons reported) was no longer able to minister heat to the vital
parts, and therefore yielded to that irresi^table fate, which at last
overtaketh all mortal creatures: The untimely death of this young Gentleman
was no small occasion of grief to the Lord President, not only that Nature
had conjoined them in the nearest degrees of Consanguinitie, but because his
timely beginnings gave apparent demonstration, that his continual proceedings
would have given comfort to his Friends, profit to his Country, and a deserved
Advancement of his own Fortunes. Great were the services which these Garrisons
performed: for Sir Richard (...) George Flower with their Troops, left neither
Corn nor (...) house unburnt, between Kinsale and Rosse, Captain (...) who
had with him his brother Captain (...) Francis Slingsbie, Captain William
Stafford with their Companies, and also the Companies of the Lord Barry, and
the Treasurer, with the Presidents Horse, Cap. Flower succeeded
did the like between Rosse and Ba^^ry.

Not many days after the death of Captain Roger Harvie, Capt. Harvy in his
government.
Captain George Flower having the charge of Baltimore, and the commanding of
the Garrisons thereabouts, which formerly was under Harvies direction,
understanding that the Castle of Cloghan The Castle of Cloghan summoned.
was guarded by the Rebels, and that in the same there was a Romish Priest
lately come from Rome, taking with him Captain Francis Slingsbie, and Captain
William Stafford with their Companies of Foot, (besides his own) he marched
unto it, in hope to gain it, the rather, because he had in his hands one
called Donnell Dorrogh, a traitor, brother to the Constable that had the charge
thereof: Upon his summons they refused to yield; then he told the Ward, that
if the Constable did not presently render the Castle unto him, that he would
hang his brother The Constables brother hanged.
in their sight: they said the Constable was gone abroad (but therein they said
untruely as afterward it was proved) in conclusion to save the Priest (whose
life they tendered) they per^evered obstinatly not to yield; whereupon Captain
Flower in their sight hanged the Constables brother: Nevertheless within four
days afterward the Priest being shifted away in safety, the Constable sued
for a Protection and rendered The castle of Cloghan rendered.
the Castle to Captain Flower. I do relate this accident to the end the
Reader may the more clearly see, in what reverence and estimation these
ignorant superstitious Irish do hold a Popish Priest, in regard of whose
safety the Constable was content to suffer his brother to perish.

CHAP. XVI.
A Branch of a Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord President. The
Ensigns of Magistracy redelivered to the Corporation of Kinsale. Of Spaniards
defeated at Kinsale, in the time of King Richard the second. The Rising out of
the Country committed to the charge of the Lord Barry. The Lord Deputy requires
the Lord President to meet him at Galway. Sir George Thornton appointed to
join with the L^. Barry. A Messenger from the Rebel Tirell to the Lord
President, and his Answer. The Knight of Kerry defeated. The Knight of Kerry,
Thomas Oge, and Osulevan Mores Son make their submission. A foul murder
committed by Osulevan Mores Son.
THE Lords of the Council, A branch of a Letter from the Lords of the Council
to the Lord President.
by the Letters dated the sixteenth of December, signified their pleasures unto
the President; that in regard Florence Mac Cartie was a prisoner in the Tower,
his children (to avoid her Majesty's charges) should be set at liberty, and
also the children pledges of others (except the President saw cause to the
contrary) to be enlarged: That her Majesty was pleased that the President
should deliver unto the Corporation of Kinsale, their Charter and other
Ensigns of Magistracy, and to impose upon them in stead stead of a fine, the
reedifying of their walls at their own charges, and certain workmen toward
the finishing of the Fort of Castle ny Park: That her Majesty was pleased at
the Presidents request, that a fair and strong house should be built for the
President, where he thought it convenient, to be defrayed upon the fines and
casualties of the Province: That the fort of Haleboling should be presently
finished: Lastly, thanks in her Majesty's name for his services, liking well
of his proceedings with Cormock Mac Dermond, and for the courses he had taken
in his return from Donboy, and of the well disposing of the Garrisons, and his
raising and making of fortifications, etc.

By this Letter it appears that the President was directed to redeliver unto
the Burgesses of Kinsale their Charter, and other their Ensigns of
Magistracy, The Ensigns of Magistracy redelivered to the Corporation of
Kinsale.
among the which there was a fair large Standard of Damask with the Arms of
England in it: This Standard aforesaid was first delivered unto them (by the
commandment of King Henry the eight) by Sir George Carew, the Lord Presidents
cosen german, when he arrived at Kinsale, who not long before the siege of
Bollogne) was Admiral of some of the Kings ships: Into the hands of Sir George
it was left in safe keeping, when the Spaniards arrived there; and by the same
Sir George Carew, by Queen Elizabeth's commandment, it was (as is said)
redelivered unto them again: although this petty note may seem to some scarce
worth the relating, yet for the rareness of the accident, I thought it meet to
be remembered: And that the Reader may also understand what a fatal place
Kinsale has been unto the Spaniards in former times (as well as now) I think
it not impertinent to relate, what happened unto them in that port, in Anno 1380.
and the fourth year of the Reign of King Richard the second: My Author is
Thomas of Walsingham, who lived in those days, and thus Englished in
Hollinshed.

IN this mean while that the Earl of Buckingham was passing through the
Realm of France, The Spaniards defeated at Kinsale in King Richard the seconds
time.
the French and Spanish galleys did much mischief on the Coast of England, but
about the later end of June, by a flecte of Englishmen of the West Countries,
part of them were forced to retire, and take harbor in an haven in Ireland
called Kinsale, where being assailed by the Englishmen and Irishmen they were
vanquished: so that to the number of four hundred were slain, and their
chief Captains taken, as Gonzales de vorse, and his brother Martin de
Motrigo, Turgo Lord of Morrans: Also the Lord of Reath, Peers Martin of Vermew,
John Moditt of Vermew, the Seneschall of Wargarie, the Seneschall of Saint
Andrews, Cornellis of Saint Sebastiano, Paschale de Biskaya, John Martinez,
Sopogorge of Saint Sebastiano, and diverse others: There were taken four of
their Barges, with a Ballenger, and one and twenty English vessels recovered,
which they had robbed and taken away from their Owners: There escaped yet four
(of their notable Captains) from the hands of our men, Martin Grantz, John
Perez Mantago, John Husce Gitario, and one Garcia of Sebastiano: Thus far
Hollingshed, ^raving the Readers patience, for to some, this old story may
seem to be a needless curiosity, but to proceed.

The President to make the speedier prosecution, and expedition in the affairs
of the Province, caused the Rising out of the Country to be assembled to the
number of sixteen hundred (at their own charges) under the conduct of the
Lord Barry: The Rising out of the country committed to the Lord Barries charge.
These Provincial Forces were not prepared for any great need that was of
their service, it was thought meet to draw as many hands together as
conveniently might be, who according to their manner, for spoils sake, would
not spare their dearest friends. And also it was thought no ill policy to make
the Irish draw blood one upon another, whereby their private quarrels might
advance the public service. The President had first determined himself in
person with five hundred English, (joined to the Provincials) to have taken the
field; but his intentions were casually diverted by Letters from the Lord
Deputy, who signifying that his Lordship purposed to be at Galway The L.
Deputy requires the L. President to meet him at Galway.
about the two and twentieth of December, required him (all other business set
apart) immediately to repair thither, to consult about certain affairs much
importing the service of the State, by reason whereof the President appointed
Sir George Thornton Sir George Thornton appointed to join with the L. Barry
with 500. English Soldiers, Inhabitants as Undertakers in Mounster, to
accompany the Lord Barry with the Provincialls, and all these to meet together,
about the twentyeth of this present, at Donkerran, which was the place of their
rendevous.

In this mean time the Rebel Tirrell, not liking to stay any longer in the
Air of Mounster, wherein he had run many dangers, bethought himself of a
retreat out of the Province, hoping that the President would condescend to any
composition, rather then to be troubled with his company, A message from the
rebel Tirrel to the L. President, and his answer.
whereupon he sent his inward servant Laghlin Odallye (before mentioned in this
discourse) unto Cork, who coming to the President, told him, that his
Captain (meaning Tirrell) would be content to leave the Province, and would
hereafter this, (so as he might have a Pardon, a Pension, and a Company of
Foot in her Majesty's pay) serve the Queen, and deserve the reward demanded
by his future services. The President knowing that for want of food he would
be forced ere the spring of the year to depart; And also assuring himself
(within that time) to get some good draught to be drawn upon him by some of
the Provincial Rebels, who now being heart-broken, would do any thing for
their Pardons, or for a little money, not only slightly rejected his offers,
but bid Odalley tell him, That although he were never so wary, yet he
doubted not before it were long, to have his head sent unto him in a bag,
willing him to forbear to send any more unto him.

While these forces aforesaid were gathering according to the directions
afore-recited, the Governor of Kerry losing no opportunity, and forbearing no
labor, had the like fortune upon the Knight of Kerry, The Knight of Kerry
defeated by Sir Chapter Wilmot.
as Sir Samuel Bagnall had upon Tirrell; for being conducted to his Quarter in
the night, killed forty of his men, and took from him all his whole
substance, which consisted of five hundred cowes, two hundred garrans, and two
months provision of Meal and Butter for his Soldiers; which small spoil was
a great loss to the poor Knight: for thereby he being disfurnished of all
his provision, and disabled to minister entertainment to his followers, and
having no Castle whereunto he might safely retreat, was constrained (like a
Wolf) to shelter himself in waste woods and desolate mountains, until he
could work means with Sir Charles to accept his humble submission, which
incontinently (upon his defeat) he earnestly solicited, by the means of
Osulevan More. And surely this Service was of good consequence for the settling
of Kerry: for Thomas Oge, induced by the example of the Knight, and likewise
Donnell Osulevan, Son to the said Osulevan More, did all jointly submit
themselves, The Knight of Kerry* Th. Oge, and Osulevan Mores son, make their
submissions.
and her Majesty's Protection granted them: The former performed as much as
was promised; but the latter, in the interim that he should have put in
Sureties for his loyalty, (according to a Clause inserted in his Protection)
did in the malice of his heart to our Nation, commit a most base and traitorous
murder upon a Sergeant and ten Soldiers going after Sir Charles toward
Donkerran, who not suspecting any false measure at his hands, being lately
protected, were most cruelly but chered by that inhumane perjured Rebel: His
father, old Osulevan A foul murder committed by Osulevan Mores son.
conceived so great coffeehouse against him for his damnable fact, as he
threatened to withdraw from him his favor, Blessing and Birthright: But of this
sufficient.

CHAP. XVII.
Sir Charles Wilmot chief Commander of the forces in the absence of the Lord
President. The Rebels make three divisions of their forces. Tirrell afraid
flies the Pr^vince. The Lord Barry and Sir George Thornton join their f^rces
with Sir Cha^les Wilmot. A skirmish entertained. A prey taken from the Rebels
out of the Fastness. Diverse Rebels submitted themselves. William Burke, John O
Connor Kerry, and Osulevan Bear with the Bownoghs fled out of the Province.
The Rebels loss in their passage through the county of Cork. And the hard
shift they made ^ver the Shenan. The good service done upon the Rebels by the
Sheriff of the county of Typperary. Captain Henry Malby slain. Bear, Bantry,
and Dorsies spoiled, and the Castles of Ardea and Carrignesse rendered Captain
Taffe employed against the Rebels in Carbry. The Popes Vicar slain, and the
Rebels defeated. The Carties of Carbry submit themselves to the Lord President.
THE Lord Barry, Sir Charles Wilmot chief Commander of the forces in the
absence of the Lord President.
and Sir George Thornton were now upon this their march toward their rendevous
at Donkerran, there to attend the directions of Sir Charles Wilmot, who in the
Presidents absence (for by this time he was upon his way to Galway) did
command all that Army in chief, composed of the Garrison of Kerry, and of the
Garrisons of Bantry, Kinsale, Baltimore, etc. aforementioned, who with great
valor and discretion discharged the same: The Rebels understanding by
continual advertisement of the great preparations made, to rouse and hunt them
out of their Fastness, thought fit in their Councels to divide themselves in
three several parts, The Rebels make three divisions of their forces.
to the intent that her Majesty's forces then united, might likewise be
severed and divided in several prosecutions, whereby each party might be the
less endangered: For if the English should neglect any one part of them, they
might harrasse and spoil the Subject, for whose defense a good part of the
Army must be withdrawn: This resolution being taken, Osulevan Bear and
William Burke with seven hundred men were appointed to remain in Bear, other
four hundred was appointed for Carbery, to be commanded by Sir Owen Mac
Carties sons, and the third division (which was five hundred strong) and
commanded by Captain Tirrell, were to go with the Lord Fits Maurice into
Kerry: Tirrell afraid fled out of the Province.
But Tirrell being upon his pretended march for Kerry, fearing to run so hard
a fortune, suddenly altered his former determinations; and notwithstanding that
he had lately received a great impressed of Spanish money from Osulevan Bear,
and farther he promised unto him 1500. hundred more in good rials of plate, and
one thousand Cowes to stay with him but three months longer, resolved with all
possible expedition to leave the Province, and therefore acquainting the Lord
Fits Maurice with his intention, without farther consultation, giving a deaf
ear to any contrary persuasions, leaving all his carriages, sick men, and
other impediments behind him, set forward on his hasty Journey, and never
looked back till he came into O Carrels Country, which is from the Mountain
of Shewlogher (where he began his march) no less then sixty Irish miles, and
this his departure was the same day that our forces should meet at their
rendevous, whose defection from the rest, made the work in hand much more
easy to be effected.

Our forces under the Lord Barry and Sir George Thornton met with Sir Charles
Wilmot, upon the seven and twentieth of December; 27. December.
the thirtieth 30. December.
we camped in Glangarrem, The Lord Barry and Sir George Thornton join their
forces with Sir Charles Wilmot.
on a little plot of dry ground, (environed with woods and bogs) of so small
capacity, as most of our Guards and Sentinels were held either on the bog or
in the edge of the wood, and yet was there not so much firm ground together,
within five miles of that place; within two miles thereof encamped Donnell
Osulevan, and William Burke with his Bonnaghts: Before the Camp was settled,
the Rebels entertained a skirmish for an hours space, A skirmish.
and hurt three of our men, whereof Captain Staffords Lieutenant, William
Ieffries was one; the same night they gave us an alarm, and powered into our
quarter a volley of shot, but being encountered with our Guards adjoining were
repulsed, and driven into the wood.

The one and thirtieth, 31. December.
there was a Convoy sent to Donkerran for Victuals; and the same day Sir
Charles Wilmot sent four hundred of the risings out under the command of
Captain John Barry, and two hundred of the Army in List under the command of
Thomas Selby, Lieutenant to Captain Francis Slingsbie, to beat the Fastness
where the Rebels with their cattle lodged: their quarter was entered by our
men, and their cattle seized, whereupon ensued a bitter fight, maintained
without intermission for six hours, A prey taken from the rebels out of their
Fastness.
nevertheless they kept the prey they had gotten; the Enemy not leaving their
pursuit, until they came in sight of the Camp: for whose relief two
Regiments were drawn forth, to give countenance, and Downings, Lieutenant to
Sir Francis Barkley, was sent with one hundred and twenty choice men to the
succor of Barry and Selby, who in the rear were so hotely charged by the
Rebels, that they came to the Sword and Pike, and the skirmish continued till
night parted them: many were slain on either side, but the greatest loss fell
upon the Traitors: there was taken from them in that days service, 2000 Cowes,
4000 Sheep, and 1000 Garrans.

Immediately upon this Defeat, many of the Country that escaped, leaving the
Rebels, having before lost all their goods, submitted themselves to the
Governor, and obtained mercy; Hugh Man Swine and Owen Granye, Diverse Rebels
submit themselves.
with eighty of their followers, and other of the Bownoghs likewise became
suitors for her Majesty's protection, (which to weaken the adverse party) was
also granted; whose revolt, or rather return, so disturbed and distracted
William Burke, the chief Commander of Osulevans forces, who did his endeavor,
(by assaulting them in their way to Sir Charles) to resist their submission,
wherein some men were lost; and not prevayling in the same, purposed to follow
the steps of Tirrell his forerunner; and therefore wished Osulevan Bear,
either instantly to rise with him, or else to shift for himself as well as he
could: for a longer stay in those parts could promise him nothing but apparent
ruin and destruction. And when the other urged the intertainment that he had
given unto him and his Company before hand: Burke answered, that he had
already lost, not that only which of him was received, but whatsoever else he
either brought into the Province, or gained therein, besides the slaughter of
many his Followers and near kinsmen, whom he prized and valued (in his
affection) above all the King of Spaines treasure; and therefore with extreme
passion (as was reported) cursing and damning himself for staying so long in
Mounster; William Burke, John O Conn^r Kerry, and Osulevan Bear with their
Bonnoghs fled out of the Province.
in all have with two hundred men (for the rest were all either slain or
protected) he fled and followed Captain Tirrell into O Carrols Country:
Osulevan finding his estate desperate, that either he must starve in Mounster,
or beg in Vlster, made choice of the less evil, and therefore himself and
John O Connor Kerry kept Company with the Bonnoghs, content to partake with
their fortunes, till he might get to Tyrone.

As they passed by the skirts of Muskery, they were skirmished withal by the
sons of Teg Mac Owen Cartie, The losses which they sustained in their passage
through the County of Cork.
where they lost some of their men, and most of their carriage; in passing by
Liscarcell, John Barry, brother to the Vicecount, with eight Horsemen and
forty foot charged their rear at the foord of Bellaghan, where he slew and
hurt many of them, and of his part one Horseman was slain.

When they came to the River of the Shenan, they finding the River high, The
hard shift they made to pass over the Shenan.
and no boats nor troughs to pass them over into Connaght, they killed many of
their horses, and made shift with their hides to make certain little boats,
called in Irish Nevogs, in the which they transported their men and baggage:
Nevertheless before all were past the River, the Sheriff of the county of
Typperarie, The good service done upon them by the Sheriff of the county of
Tipperary.
fell upon their rear and slew many of them; being in Connaght they passed
safely through the county of Galway, nntill they came into the Kellies
Country, where they were fought withal by Sir Thomas Burke, the Earl of
Clanriccards brother, and Captain Henry Malby, who were more in number then
the Rebels: Nevertheless when they saw that either they must make their way by
the sword or perish, Captain Henry Malby slain.
they gave a brave charge upon our men, in the which Captain Malby was slain,
upon whose fall Sir Thomas and his Troops fainting, with the loss of many
men, studied their safeties by flight, and the rebels with little harm marched
into Orwrkes Country.

The next morning being the fourth of January, 4. Ianuarij.
1602. Sir Charles coming to seek the Enemy in their Camp, he entered into
their quarter without resistance, where he found nothing but hurt and sick
men, whose pains and lives by the Soldiers were both determined: The
governor sent the Lord Barry with some of his light foot after them, but all
in vain, for they flew so swift with the wings of fear, as passing by many
preyes directly in the way (as they passed) yet they never made so much stay as
to molest either the Cattle or their Keepers.

Hereupon Sir Charles with the English Regiments overran all Bear and Bantry,
Bear, Bantry, and the Dorsies spo^eled and left wast.
destroying all that they could find meet for the relief of men, so as that
country was wholly wasted: He sent also Captain Flemming with his Pinnace, and
certain Soldiers into Osulevans Island; He took there certain Boars, and an
English Bark, which Osulevan had gotten, and kept for his transportation into
Spain, when he should be enforced thereunto; they took also from thence
certain Cowes and Sheep, which were reserved there as in a sure storehouse,
and put the Churles to the sword that inhabited therein. The Warders of the
Castles of Ardea, and Carricknesse The Castles of Ardea and Carricknesse
rendered.
on the sixth 6. Ia.
of the same month dispayring of their Master Osulevans return, rendered both
their Castles and their lives to the Queens mercy: so that although he should
have Animum revertendi, he had neither place of safety whereunto he might
retire, nor Corn or Cattle to feed himself, much less to uphold or renew
any war against the State.

The sharpness of this Winter journey did exceedingly weaken our* Companies:
for the Mountains of Bear being at that time quite covered with snow, tasted
the strong bodies, whereby many returned sick, and some unable to endure the
extremity, dyed standing centinell: But whilst this service was in
prosecution in Bear, the President on his journey toward the Lord Deputy,
chanced to meet with some of the Country risings out, to the number of four
hundred foot or thereabouts, that came short of the rest, that were under the
commands of the Lord Barry, and Sir George Thornton: And understanding that the
Sons of Sir Owen Mac Cartie, and Donnogh Keugh, brother to Florence Mac
Cartie, were retired with their Creats and Followers into the strengths of
Carbery, his Lordship commanded Captain Taffe (with the said risings out)
forty of Sir Edward Wingfields Company, Cap. Taffe employed against the
Rebels in Carbry.
and his own troop of Horse to draw into those parts, and to endeavor the
best service he could upon them: Whilst the rest were busied by the Governor
of Kerry in Desmond as aforesaid, wherein it pleased God to give him good
success, for on the fifth of January, his foot entering their Fastness,
took a prey of two or three hundred Cowes and Garrans; the Rebels in pursuit
of their Cattle, gave them so brave a charge, as they were disordered, whereby
some of them were slain, which Captain Taffe perceiving, being in the head of
his Horse troop, in the skirt of the Fastness, and espying some of their
Horsemen to do much hurt upon our foot, charged them into the wood, slew
four of their Horsemen, and put all the rest to rout, wherewith our men being
encouraged pursued them: Owen Mac Eggan (the Popes Apostolic Vicar The Popes
Vicar slain, and the Rebels defeated.
so often before mentioned) to put fresh heart into his Company, with his sword
drawn in one hand, and his portius and beads in the other, with one hundred
men led by himself, he came boldly up to the sword, and mainetayned a hot
skirmish, until he was slain with a shot, whereupon his men (together with a
fresh charge of our horse) were so amazed and terrified, partly by his death,
and partly by their own danger, that they brake instantly, and for better
expedition throwing away their Arms, leaped into the river Bandon, hoping by
that means to escape, but that little availed them, for they all for the most
part were either killed or drowned in the river; there were slain in this
service (besides Owen Mac Eggan, who was of more worth then all the rest) above
one hundred and twenty Rebels, and of the Provincial rising out of our part, a
good number lost their lives, and many of Captain Taffes horses hurt, we got
the Arms of 100. and forty, and all their horses, cowes, sheep and garrans,
that were in the Country near adjoining: There was also taken a Papist
Priest, being as it seemed a Chaplain to Mac Eggan, whom the President
(shortly after) caused to be executed in Cork.

Upon this discomfiture, the Carties who formerly had been Petitioners to the
President for protection, but denied, became suitors to Captain Taffe in the
like, who not knowing of the good success, that the Governor had against the
other Rebels (according to direction before given him by the President, that
he should accept their submission, after a blow given them, if it were humbly
sought) did grant protection to them and their Followers; and upon the
Presidents return from Galway, Captain Taffe having then in his company upon
the high way, not far from Moyallo, presented them to his Lordship, The
Carties of Carby submitted themselves to the Lord President.
who with great show of unfayned penitence, desired his allowance, and
acceptance of their submission, who to gratify the service of Captain Taffe,
and to ratify his promise assented thereunto, whereby all Carbery (a very
large and spacious Country) was wholly reduced to subjection, no one open
Traitor remaining therein. A principal means of this sudden and universal
reduction, was the death of that traitorly Priest Owen Mac Eggan, which
doubtless was more beneficial to the State, then to have gotten the head of
the most capital Rebel in Mounster, for the respect that was borne unto him
(by reason of his authority from the Pope) and the credit which he had
obtained in Spain, was so great, as his power was in a manner absolute over
them all, and he only was the means of their obdurate obstinacy: his dignity
in being the Popes Vicarius Apostolicus, did hold them in vassalage unto him,
and the livings given him in Mounster by the Popes grant, were to be valued (if
he might quietly have enjoyed them) at three thousand pounds per Annum. And
farther to engage the Popish Clergy of Ireland unto him, he had power to
dispose at his pleasure of all the spiritual livings in the Province of
Mounster, by which authority, together with the credit he had gotten with the
King of Spain (well testified by the trust committed to him in transporting
and disposing the Spanish money, last brought into Ireland) he had obtained in
a manner all power, both over the temporality and spirituality of Mounster, and
to depaint him in his true colors, a more malicious Traitor against the State
and Crown of England, never breathed, which well appeared by the barbarous
tyranny he exercised upon his own Countriemen; for as soon as any prisoners
were taken (though of his own Country, birth and religion) yet if they had
served the Queen, he caused them first (in piety as he pretended) to be
confessed and absolved, and instantly (in his own sight) would he cause them
to be murdered, which religious tyranny in him was held for sanctity. The
President upon his return to Cork, employed certain Messengers whom he
might trust, into the Country to make search in such places as Mac Eggan
usually resided, for such books and papers as were belonging unto him: diverse
books of school divinity (for the most part) were gotten, all which by the
Presidents gift fell to my share, and certain papers, amongst the which I will
only insert three in this present relation; the first containing large
indulgences, granted by P. Clemens the eight, to such of the Irish as should
bear Arms against Gods chosen Servant, and their anointed Sovereign the
Queens Majesty, the tenor whereof here ensues.

CHAP. XVIII.
Pope Clement the eighth his Indulgence to the Irish that were in Rebellion. A
Letter from Pope Clement the eighth unto Tyrone and the Irish Rebels, animating
them to persevere in Rebellion. Pope Clement the eighth his Bull for the
granting of spiritual livings unto Owen Mac Egan.
Pope Clement the eighth his Indulgence to the Irish that were in Rebellion.
CLemens P. 8. Vniversis, and singulis vener abilibus fratribus,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and Prelatis, nec non dilectis filijs, Principibus,
Comitibus, Baronibus, ac populis Regni Hiberniae salutem, et Apostolicam
Benedictionem: cum jam diu, sicut accepimus, vos Romanorum Pontificum
Praedecessorum nostrorum, ac nostris and Apostolice sedis Cohortationibus
adducti, ad vestram libertatem recuperandam, eamque adversus Hereticos tuendam
and conservandam, bonae memoriae Iacobo Giraldino (qui duru^ servitutis jugu^
vobis ab Anglis sanctae ecclesiae desertoribus impositum, summo animi ardore
depellere dum vixit pro viribus procuravit) Deinde Iohanni Giraldino ejusdem
Iacobi Consobrino, and novissime dilecto filio nobili viro Hugoni principi
Onel, dicto Comiti Tironensi, Baroni Dungenaniae, et Capitaneo generali
Exercitus Catholici in Hibernia conjunctis animis et viribus presto fueritis,
ac opem et auxiliu^ prestiteritis: ipsique Duces and eorum Milites, nostrum
Domini exercitum illis assistentes progressu temporis plurima egregia facinora
contra hosts viriliter pugnare perstiterint, et in posterum praestare parati
sunt; Nos, ut vos, ac Dux, et Milites praedicti ^lacrius in expeditionem hanc
contra dictos Hereticos open in posterum etiam praestare studea^is,
spiritualibus gratijs et favoribus vos prosequi volentes, eorunde^
Praedecessorum nostroru^ exemplo adducti, ac de Omnipotentis Dei misericordia
ac beatorum Petri et Pauli Apostolorum ejus authoritate confisi, vobis omnibus
and singulis qui praedictum Hugonem Tyronensem ducem ejusque exercitum
Catholicae fidei assertores and propugnatores sequimini, acillis vos
adjunxeritis, aut Consilio, Favore, Commeatibus, armis, alijsque bellieis rebus
seu quacunque ratione ^is in hac expeditione operam dederitis, ipsique Hugoni
Duei ejusque exercitus Militibus vniversis and singulis, si vere poenitentes
and confessi, ac etiam si ^ieri poterit, sacra Communione referti fuertis
plenariam omnium peccatorum suorum veniam and remissionem, ac eandem que
proficiscentibus ad bellum contrae Turcas, and ad recuper ationem Terrae
sanctae per Romanos Pon^ifices concedi solit^ est, miserieor diter in Domino
concedimus, non obstantibus, si opus ^it, nostris Decretis de non concedendis
indulgentijs ad instare, ac susceptionis Indulgentiarum occasion anni Iubilaei
alijsque constitutionibus et ordinationibus Apostolicis caeterisque contrarijs
quibuscunque. Verum quia difficile foret praesentes nostras ad omnium quorum
interest noticiam pervenire volumis, ut earum exemplis etiam impressis manu
alicujus Notarij publici subscriptis ac Sigillo personae in dignitat'
Ecclesiastica Constitutae munitis eadem fides ubique habeatur quae ijsdem
praesentibus haberetur. Datum Romae apud Sanct^m Petrum, sub annulo Piscatoris,
die decimo octavo Aprilis, 1600. Pontificatus nostri, Anno Nono Subscrip.


The second which was found among Mac Egans Papers, was a Letter written from
the holy Father Pope Clemens the eighth, unto Hugh Oneale Earl of Tyrone, to
exhort him and all his Adherents, to persevere, (for the defense of the
Catholic cause) in their unnatural Rebellion; from the Original whereof
this following Copy is extracted.

A Letter from Pope Clement the eighth unto Tyrone, and the Irish Rebels,
animating them to persevere in Rebellion.
DIlecte Fili Nobilis vir Salutem et Apostolicam benedictionem cognovimus ex
literis nobilitatis tuae and ex hijs quae dilectus filius Petrus Lombardus
Civis nostrae praepositus Cameracensis nobis coram exposuit sacrum foedus, quod
tu and quamplures Principes and proceres, and Nobiles primarij regni istius Dei
benignitate iniistis charitatis glutin^ Colligatum conservari and augeri
quodque eiusdem Domini exercitum open and virtute prospere a nobis pluries
pugnatum est adversus Anglos Ecclesiae and fidei desertores magnam ex his
voluptatem in Domino cepimus, ipsique Patri miserecordiar' Deo gratias egimus,
qui adhuc in regno istoreliquit sibi multa millia virorum qui non curvaverint
genua sua ante Baal. Hi enim impias haereses, and prophanas novitates non sunt
sequuti, imo eas detestati fortiter pugnant, pro haereditate maiorum suorum,
pro fidei salute, integritate et unitate cum ecclesia retinenda, qua unae est
Catholica et Apostolica extra quam non est salus; laudamus egregiam pietatem et
fortitudinem tuam fili and principum, et caeterorum omnium quitecum juncti ac
federati nulla pro Dei gloria pericula recusant, seque majoribus suis qui
bellicae virtutis and Catholicae Religionis studio, ac laud imprimis
floruerunt dignos nepotes and justos Successores ostendunt et palam
profitentur: conservate ^ilij hanc mente^, conseruate vnionem, et consensionem
vestram, and Deus Omnipotens, Deus Pacis and Concordiae erit vobiscum, and
pugnabit pro vobis, and quemadmodum fecit prosternet inimicos suos ante faciem
nostram; Nos autem qui Nobilitatem tuam and vos omnes avitae fidei and gloriae
imitatores paternae, amamus and gerimus in visceribus Jesus Christi, non
cessamus Deum orare nostrum pro vestrafelicitate and salute, vestrique soliciti
sumus and erimus semper quant^m cum Deo poterimus, atque ubi opus fuerit
scribemus efficaciter ad Reges and Principes Catholicos filios nostros ut vobis
and causae vestrae omni opesuffragentur: Cogitamus etiam propediem mittere ad
ros peculiarem Nuntium nostru^, and huius sanctae sodalitiae, in qua Deo
authore meritis licet imparibus praesidemus vestrum, pium, prudentem, zelo Dei
predict' et nobis probatu^, qui nostri erga nos honoris testis sit vobisque
omnibus in rebus ubi usus venerit adjumento sit ad salutarem and necessariam
Vnionem vestran conservandam, ac Catholican fidem propagandam, ac omnia denique
pro sui muneris Officio, officianda, quibus Dei honor and cultus in regno isto
augeatur. Interea placuit has nostras literas ad vos praemittere testes amoris
nostri, in vos et Regnu^ istud, et ut vos omnes tanquam filios nostros in
Christo dilectos paterno a^^ectu consolaremur; ipsum vero Petrum Lombardum,
quem Nobilitas sua oratorem and negotiorum gestorem constituit apud nos, et jam
libenter audivimus, et deinceps audiemus, tibi vero et caeteris qui tibi
unanimes pro fidei Catholicae propugnatione adhaerent, nostram and Apostolicam
benedictionem benign impartimur; Denique precamur ut Angelos emittat in
circuitu vestro, and pios conatus vestros sua coelesti gratia dirigat vosque
dextra suae potentiae perpetuo tueatur.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, sub Annulo Piscatoris, die 20. Ianuarij, Anno
1601. Pontificatus nostri anno 9. Silvius Antonianus Cardinalis.
Dilecto Filio Nobili viro Vgoni Principi Naelio, Exercitus Catholici in
Hibernia Duci, and Capitaneo Generali.

The third, is an instrument here immediately following, comprehending the
prescript form of the Popes Bull, usually granted in the presentation to
spiritual dignities, together with the oath to the Popes supremacy, and of
the Articles of faith, whereunto the Popish Clergy are enjoined to subscribe:
All which things being not so familiar in this land (thanked be God) as in
former ages, and many no doubt desirous to be made acquainted with the
particulars thereof, although it may seem somewhat tedious, by reason of the
prolixitie, yet have I thought good in this place, to transcribe the same
verbatim according to the original.

Pope Clement 8. his Bull for the granting of spiritual Livings to Owen Mac
Egan.
CLemens Episcopus servus ser^orum Dei: Dermitio episcopo Corrag' salutem and
Apostolicam benedictionem: Romani ponti^icis providentiam circumspecta
Ecclesijs and Monasterijs singulis, quae vacationis incommoda deplorare
noscuntur: vt gubernatorum vtilium fulciantur praesidio prospicit diligenter,
and personis Ecclesiasticis quibuslibet, vt in suis opportunitatibus, Congruum
suscipiant relevamen subve^tionis auxilio, prout decens est, providet
opportune. Cum itaque sicut accepimus Monasterium Abbatia nuncupatum loci de
Namona sancti Benedicti, vel alterius ordinis, Corrag' Dioc'. certo modo
vacaverit, and vacet ad praesens, licet quidam Larcus schismaticus authoritate
pretensae Reginae Angliae, jam a multis annis citra Monasterium illiusque
fractus redditus, and proventus vsurpaverit, and in suos damnabiles vsus
converterit, and adhuc and convertit: Nos volentes tam eidem Monasterio, de
gubernatore vtili, and idoneo per quem circumspecte regi, and salubriter dirigi
valeat, quum dilecto filio Eugenio Mac Egan dictae Dioc' Bacchalaureo in
theologia, et magistro in artibus apud nos de literarum scientia, vitae ac
morum honestate alijsque probitatis, ac virtutum meritis multipliciter
commendato, vt commodius sustentari valeat dealicuius subventionis auxilio
providere ipsumque Eugenium praemissorum suorum meritorum intuitu favore
prosequi gratioso, and a quibus vis excommunicationis suspensionib' and
interdictis; alijsque Ecclesiasticis sententijs censuris a jure, vel ab homine
quavis occasion vel causa latis, si quibus quomodolibet acco^modatus existat
ad effectu^ praesentium duntaxat conseque^dum harum serio absolventes, and
absolutum fore censentes, nec non verum and vltimum dicti Monasterij vacationis
modum, et si illo quaevis reservatio generalis, and in corpore juris clausa
resultet, praesentibus pro expresso habentes fraternitati tuae per Apostolica
scripta mandamus oftendamus, si per diligentem examinationem dictam Eugeniique
idoneam repereris ad ipsum Monasterium in commendam obtinendum, super quo
conscientiam tuam oneramus, Monasterium praedict' quae cura and conventu curet,
ac cujus and illi for san annexorum fructuum redditus, and proventus centum and
quinquaginta marcharum sterlingorium, secundum communem ^estimationem valorem
annuu^, vt dictus Eugenius asserit non excedunt quovismodo, and excujuscunque
persona seu per liberam cessionem cujusuis de illius regimine and
administratione in Romana curia, vel extraeam, and coram notario publico et
testibus fide dignis sponte factam vacat, et si illius provisio ad sedem eandem
specialiter vel generaliter pertineat, et super eodem regimine administratione
inter aliquos bis habita, cujus statum etiam praesentibus haberi volumus pro
expresso penderit indecisa Domini de tempore dat', presentium eidem Monasterio
de Abbate prouisum, aut illud alteri commendatum canonice non existat, cum
annexis hujusmodi ac omnibus juribus, and pertinentijs suis eidem Eugenio
quatenus illud commendari consueuerit per cum quoad vixerit, tenendum,
regendum, gubernandum, ita quod liceat eidem Eugenio debitis and consuetis
ipsius Monasterij supportatis oneribus, ac tertia part illius fructuum
redituum and proventuum restaurationem ipsius fabricae, seu ornamentorum
emptionem, vel fulcimentum, aut pauperum alimoniam, prout major suaserit aut
exegerit necessitas omnibus alijs deductis annis singulis impertita; de
residuis illius fructibus, reditibus, and proventibus disponere and ordinare,
sicuti ipsius Monasterij Abbates qui pro tempore fuerant, de illis disponere
and ordinare potuerunt, seu and debuerunt, alienatione tamen quorumcunque
bonorum immobilium, and preciosorum mobilium dicti monasterij sibi paenitus
interdicta authoritate nostra commendes curam ipsius Monasterij, ac hujusmodi
regimen and administratione^ eidem Eugenio in spiritualibus and in temporalibus
plenarie committendo. Ac illi in adipiscenda possessione, seu quasi regimini
and administratione, bonorum Monasterij hujusmodi assistendo facias sibi a
dilectis filijs, vassalis, and alijs subditis ejusdem monasterij consueta
servitia, and jura sibi ab eis debita, integre exhiberi contradictores
authoritatis nostrae predicta appellatione postposita compescendo: Non
obstantibus foelicis recordationis Bonifacij, P. 8. predecessoris nostri and
alijs apostolicis constitutionibus, ac monasterij and ordinis praedict' etiam
juramento confirmatione apostolica, vel quavis firmitate alia roboratis
statutis and consuetudinibus contrarijs quibuscunque. Aut si vassalis and alijs
subditis prefatis, vel quibusvis alijs communiter, vel divisim ab eadem sit
sede indultum quod inter dici, suspendi and excommunicari non possint per
literas apostolicas, non facientes plenam and expressam, ac de verbo in verbum
de indubitato hujusmodi mentione^. Volumus autem quod propter commendam
monasterij hujusmodi monasterium predictum in spiritualibus, non laedatur and
in temporalibus detrimenta non sustineat, sed illius congrue supportentur onera
consueta, vtque postquam dictus Eugenius repertus fuerit idoneus, and antequam
dictum monasterium ei commendetur fidem Catholicam iuxta articulos pridem a
dicta sede propositos, in manibus tuis juxta vnam profiteri omnino teneatur,
alioquin prese^s gratia, and omnia que inde sequentur nulla sint, tuque aliter
commendans acollatione beneficiorum suspensus sis eo ipso, sicque suspensus
remaneas donec relaxationem suspensionis hujusmodi a sede predictamerueris
obtinere, ac quod antequam dictus Eugenius regimini, and administrationi
predictis se in aliquo misceat in eisdem manibus tuis nostro and Romanae
Ecclesiae nomine fidelitatis debitae solitum prestet iuramentum iuxta altera^
formis presentibus adnotatur, ac professionis quam idem Eugenius faciet, et
iuramenti quod prestabit formas huiusmodi; nobis de verbo ad verbum per eius
patentes literas suo sigillo immunitas per proprium munitium quantocius
destinare procures. Et insuper si dictus Eugenius ad hoc repertus idoneus
fuerit, vt prefertur, ei nunc perinde irritum de^ernimus, and mane si serius
super bis a quoquam quavis authoritate, scienter vel ignoranter attentari
contigerit, ac si die dat' presentium eidem Eugenio ad id reperto idoneo
monasterium predictum cum interpositione decreti huiusmodi mandavimus
commendari: Forma autem iuramenti hec est. Ego Eugenius Abbas Monasterij,
Abbatiae nuncupati loci de Namona sancti Benedicti, vel alterius ordinis
Corragen' dioc' ab hac hora ni antea fidelis ero obediens beato Petro
sanctaeque Apostolicae Romanae Ecclesiae, and Domino nostro Domino Clementi
Papae octavo eiusque successoribus canonice intrantibus: Non ero in consilio
aut consensu vel facto ut vitam perdant aut membrum, seu capiantur aut in eos
violenter manus quomodolibet ingerantur vel injuriae aliquae infera^tur quovis
quesito color; co^silium vero quod mihi credituri sunt per se aut Nuntios seu
literas ad eorum damnum me sciente nemini pendam. Papatum Romanum and regale
sancti Petri adjutor eis ero ad retinendum and defendendum contra omnium
hominum legatum Apostolice sedis in eundo and redeundo, honorifice tractab^ and
in suis necessitatibus adiuvabo. Iura, honores, privilegia and authoritatem
Romanae ecclesiae Domini nostri Pape et successorum suorum conservare et
defendere, augere et promovere curabo. Nec ero in consilio vel facto seu in
tractatu in quibus contra ipsum dominum nostrum vel eandem Romanam Ecclesiam
aliqua sinistra seu prejudicialia personarum nostri honoris status et
potestatis eoru^ machinentur, et si talia a quibuscunque tractari novero, vel
procurari impediam, hoc pro posse et quanto citus potero co^mode significabo
eidem domino nostro vel alteri per quem ad ipsius notitiam possit pervenire
Regulus sanctorum patrum decreta, ordinationes, sententias, prov^siones,
reseruationes, et mandata apostolicatotis viribus observabo, et faciam ab alijs
obseruari. Hereticos, Schismaticos, et rebels domino nostro, vel
successoribus predictis pro posse persequar, et impugnabo, vocatus ad Synodum
veniam nisi propeditus fuero Canonica praepeditione; possessiones vero ad
mensam meam pertinentes, non vendam, neque donabo, neque impignorabo, neque de
nouo infeudabo, vel aliquo modo alienabo, and cum consensu conventus Monasterii
mei inconsulto Romano Pontifice, sic me Deus adiuvet and haec sancta Dei
evangelia. Forma vero professionis fidei talis est. Ego Eugenius firma fide
credo and profiteor omnia, and singula quae continentur in Symbolo fidei, qua
sancta Romana Ecclesia utitur, viz.

Credo in unum Deum Patrem Omnipotentem factorem Coeli and terrae visibilium
omnium et invisibilium, et in unum Dominum Iesum Christum filium Dei
unigenitum, et ex Patre natu^ ante omnia secula, Deum de Deo, Lumen de lumine,
deum verum de Deo vero genitum non factum, consubstantialem Patri, per quem
omnia facta sunt, qui propter nos homines et propter n^stram salutem descendit
de coelis, et incarnatus est de spiritu sancto ex Maria Virgin, et homo factus
est, crucifixus etiam pro nobis sub Pontio Pilato, passus et sepultus est, et
resurrexit tertio die secundum Scripturas, et ascendit in Coelum, sedet ad
dextram Patris, et iterum venturus est cum gloria judicare viuos et mortuos,
cuius regni non erit finis; et in spiritum sanctum dominum and vnificantem, qui
ex patre, filioque procedit, qui cum patre and filio simul adoratur, et
conglorificatur, qui locutus est per Prophetas, et unam sancta^ Catholicam et
Apostolicam ecclesiam; Confiteor unum Baptisma in remissionem peccatorum, et
expecto resurrectionem mortuorum, et vitam venturi saeculi, Amen; Apostolicas
et Ecclesiasticas Traditiones reliquasque ejusdem Ecclesiae observationes et
constitutiones firmissime admitto et complector. It e^ sacram Scripturam iuxta
^um sensum quem tenuit et tenet sancta Matter Ecclesia, cuius est judicare de
vero sensu et interpretatione sacrarum Scripturaru^ admitto, nec eam unquoa^
nisi juxta unanime^ consensum patrum accipiam et interpretabor; profiteor
quoque vere et proprie septem esse Sacram enta novae Legis a Jesus Christo
Domino nostro instituta, atque ad salutem ^umani generis licet non omnia
singulis necessaria, viz. Baptismum, Confirmationem, Eucharistiam,
Poenitentiam, extremam Vnctionem, Ordinem and Matrimonium; illaque gratiam
confer, ex his Baptismum, Confirmationem and Ordinem sine sacrilegio
reiterari non posse. Receptos quoque and approbatos Ecclesiae Catholicae Ritus
in supradictorum omnium Sacramentorum solenni administratione recipio, and
admitto omnia and singula quae de peccato originali, et de Iustificatione in
sacro sancta Tridentina Synodo definita, et declarata fuerunt amplector, et
recipio; profiteor pariter in Missa offerri Deo verum proprium and
propitiatorium Sacrificium pro vivis and defunctis, atque in Sanctissimo
Eucharistiae Sacramento esse vere realiter and substantialiter Corpus and
Sanguinem vna cum Anima and Divinitate Domini nostri Jesus Christi fierique
conversionem totius substantiae Panis et Corporis et totius substantiae Vini in
sanguinem, quam conversionem Catholica Ecclesia Transubstantiationem appellat.
Fateor ut sub altera tantum specie totum atque integrum Christum verumque
Sacramentum sumi constanter teneo purgatorium esse animasque ibi detentas
fidelium suffragijs iuvari, similiter et sanctos una cum Christo regnantes
venerandos atque invocandos esse eosque orationes Deo pro nobis offerre, atque
eoru^ reliquias esse venerandos; firmissime assero imagines Christi et Deiparae
semper Virginis, nec non aliorum Sanctoru^ habendas et retinendas esse ac eis
debitum honorem and venerationem esse impartiendum, Indulgentiarum etiam
potestatem Christo in Ecclesia relictam fuisse, illarumque usum Christiano
populo unanimi salutarem esse affirmo sanctam Catholicam et Apostolicam Romanam
Ecclesiam omnium Ecclesiarum Matrem et magnam agnosco; Romano Pontifici beati
Petri Apostolorum principis successori ac Jesus Christi Vicario veram
obedientiam spondeo ac Iuro. Caetera item omnia a sacris Canonibus and
Oecumenicis Consilijs, ac praecipue ^ Sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo tradita,
definita, and declarata indubitanter recipio; profiteor simulque contraria
omnia atque Haereses quascunque ab Ecclesia damnatas and anathematizatas, ego
pariter damno rejicio and anathematizo. Hanc veram Catholicam Fidem extra quam
nemo salvus esse potest, quam in praesenti sponte profiteor, and veraciter
teneo eandem integram et inviolatam, vsque ad extremum vitae spiritum
constantissime Deo adjutante retinere, and confiteri atque a meis subditis, vel
illis quorum cura in munere meo spectabit, teneri, doceri, and praedicari
quantum in me erit curaturum. Ego idem Eugenius spondeo, voueo, and juro, sic
me Deus adjuvet, and haec sancta Dei Evangelia. Dat' Romae apud Sanctum Petrum
Anno Incarnationis Domini, 1595. Pridie Calend. Novemb' pontificatus nostri
Anno quarto.


Let the understanding Reader now surcease to marvel, that the Bishop of Rome
does strive and struggle to depose Princes, and to animate and encourage
Subjects to heathenish and inhumane murders, and rebellions, since he dares
(like the ancient Giants) to attempt and assault Heaven it self, and to
displant and displace from the Throne of his Majesty Christ Jesus himself,
who is God to be blessed for evermore: what is it else, but to make the
Precepts and Traditions of men, equivalent with the doctrine and Commandments
of God? what is it else but to usurp an absolute and universal power and
authority over the flock of Christ, (as his Lieutenant and Vicar) for the
warrant whereof he has no Commission, nor was he called thereunto as Aaron
was? Lastly, what is it else, but to remove and pull down the Son of God from
his triumphant glory, where he sits at the right hand of his Father, (and
where he must abide, (the holy Apostle bearing witness) till all his enemies
be subdued under his feet) and to bring back his glorified body, and Deified
soul, at the beck and word of every hedge Priest, into their sacrilegious
Sacrament of the Altar; Surely a man need go no further for testimony, seeing
the Antichristian lowing of this profane Bull, does lively delineate, and
plainly demonstrate that purple Harlot, which has made all nations drunk
with the dregs of her fornication, having seated her self upon the seven hills
of Rome: I should be over troublesome to the Reader, to shake up all the
trumpery, and rake in all the dirt contained in his Bulls belly: yet one thing
more I cannot pass over with silence, namely for as much as the Pope
perceives that his kingdom cannot long stand, but that Babell must fall, and
Antichrist must be consumed with the breath of the Lords mouth; therefore with
prudent care, and politic circumspection, he suffers none to be initiated
into his holy Sacrament of orders, nor preferred to any Ecclesiastical
promotion, but he is first bound by his hand, word, and corporal oath, to
mainetaine and defend the pomp, honor, privileges, prerogatives, and
doctrines of the Sea of Rome, especially and namely such as are contradictorily
repugnant to the written word of God: And that they shall persecute and impugn
all those (whether Prince or people) that shall be adjudged Heretics or
Schismatikes in the Popes consistory: Consider therefore I beseech thee gentle
Reader, whether any Priest that takes this oath (for they all take it) can be
accounted a good Subject to the Crown of England, but to proceed.

Many of the Traitors being put to the sword, the strangers banished, and the
Provincials protected, as you have heard; there were still remaining in action
within Mounster (left for example to perdition) Fits Maurice the Lord of
Lixnaw, John fits Thomas, the brother of James, the late titulary Earl, the
Knight of the Glynn, and Thomas Oge, a Geraldine, all which with their forces
joined in one, were not able to make two hundred men, lurking about the
Mountain of Slewlugher, and in the Fastness of Clanmorris.

CHAP. XIX.
False rumors divulged of the State of Mounster. The Lord President sent one
thousand foot munitioned and vict^a^^ed to the Lord Deputy. A Letter from her
Majesty t^ the Lord President concerning the Earl of Clanricard. A Letter from
John Burke to the Lord President. A Letter from John Burke to Sir George
Thornton. A Certificate from a Popish Bishop in the behalf of John Burke.
THE President therefore, as well to debar these straglers from relief, as to
prevent all means of succors to Osulevan, if he should return with new
forces, ca^sed all the county of Kerry and Desmond, Bear, Bantry, and Carbery,
to be left absolutely wasted, constrayning all the Inhabitants thereof, to
withdraw their Cattle into the East and Northern parts of the county of Cork;
these things thus effected, his Lordship signified by his Letters to the Lords
of her Majesty's privy Council in England; that although the hearts of the
Irish were no less corrupt then heretofore, and that nothing but the sword
held over their heads could contain them in subjection: yet would he
undertake (God assisting) that no rebellion should arise in the Province,
except the Towns (who grew daily into more deeper discontentments, False
r^mours divulged of the State of Mounster.
by reason of the new Standard) should peradventure revolt, which in his
judgment was unlikely. About this time it was vulgarly reported in England, by
some who had their tongues poynted with slander, and their hearts stuffed with
malice, that Mounster was newly burning with fresh flames of rebellion, that
the Vicount Roch, the Lord of Cahyr, and Cormock Mac Dermond had entered into
open hostility, and that Tirrell was come again into the Province, and had
taken the prey of Moyallo from the Garrison at noone day; although the world
may be satisfied concerning these slanderous reports, by that which has
been already delivered, yet to give more particular satisfaction to all, or to
any that should make question hereof. First the Lord Roch he was never touched
with the least spot of disloyalty against her Majesty, yea such loyal
constancy did he always embrace and practice, that in the universal
inundation of treasons, when all the Province in general, and his father in
particular, did combine against their anointed Sovereign, at that time, and
ever since did he continue himself within the lists of an obedient Subject,
so that his Lordship herein was much wronged. Then for my Lord of Cahir; (...)
it be true indeed, that at the first he did run the common (...) of the rest,
and peradventure would do so again if the (...) occasion were offered, yet
that he did ever relapse since the (...) government, is merely false and
untrue; yea such outward obedience has he professed, that he has brought to
execution some notorious Traitors. And as for Cormock Mac Dermond, since his
submission, he was himself in person with Sir Charles Wilmot, at the late
service in Glangarue, and lost thirty of his best men in her Majesty's service
in Carbry with Captain Taffe. Lastly for the burning of Moyallo, there was no
Rebel that ever durst attempt any thing against that Town, or any part of the
Cattle thereunto belonging, since the Presidents first coming into the
Province, and to demonstrate the fear that the Rebels ever lived in since the
siege of Kins^le; I can assure the Reader upon certain knowledge, that all the
spoils that the Traitors have taken from the Subjects, Conju^cti^^ or
Divissim, do not amount to three hundred Cowes, but have lived in their
strength, spending upon the Spanish wines, and their own victuals.

The Lord Deputy having occasion to employ more forces into Connaght, The Lord
President sent one thousand foot munitioned and victualled to the Lord Deputy.
he with the Council of estate, upon the eight^e^th of January, wrote unto
the President, to pray and require him to spare out of his List of Mounster (if
he might conveniently do it) one Regiment of one thousand foot, with a
competent proportion of victuals, which not many days after was accomplished:
Also about this time, the President received a Letter from her Majesty, which
although it does concern the Earl of Clanricard in his p^rticular, yet that
the Reader may inform himself, how much that noble gentleman was esteemed
(and that worthily) of his Sovereign Mistress, I do think it meet to be
related.

A Letter from her Majesty to the Lord President concerning the Earl of
Clanrickard.
Your most assured constantly affected Sovereign, E. R.
RIGHT trusty and well beloved,
We greet you well, we need not use many arguments to you, when we resolve
to recommend either man or matter, seeing you have made so good demonstration
of your obedience, and entire affection to perform our will and pleasure, much
less then the person or causes of this nobleman (our cosen Clanriccard) whose
carriage here does challenge our extraordinary good opinion, as his merit
there procured your own plentiful testimony of the same; even when all trees
aid show what fruits they bare: His coming over was to do his duty to us,
where he was desirous (as other Noblemen have done) to have stayed some time,
unless some occasion for our service should necessarily require his return:
Of which kind, because the one has presented it self, by the going of our
Deputy into that Province, where his possessions lie, and that the weak estate
of his mother likewise falls out to be such, as (if Almighty God should call
her before the same were better settled) many inconveniences might fall to the
house by his absence, he is now returned back, with as much expedition as he
can: And therefore we do (as to one of our principal Counselors in that
state) recommend him to you to be furthered and assisted in all his occasions,
wherein as we know that public trial which he has made of himself (to the
honor of the Nobility of that kingdom) whereof so many scandalous rumors
have been spread, only to invite our Enemies under that opinion of their ill
affection, both has, and will invite you to love him, so we do think that
we have missed our marks in George, if he shall not have the best fruits,
which either your public credit, or private friendship may afford, whosoever
we shall recommend as now we do this Nobleman (besides his public desert)
for many other constant professions of his humble and reverent affections
toward our self: Let this therefore suffice for him, and for your self, of
whom we can say no more, then heretofore we have done, either of our good
opinion of you, or of our gracious thanks, for all your great and honest
services: Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the seventeenth
of December, 1602. in the five and fourtieth year of our Reign.


Now although the present estate of this Province, did promise a present
reduction and future quiet, yet to make it appear, that the false hearts of
the superstitious Irish were no way addicted and inclined thereunto, omitting
many instances that I might remember; I will recite only certain particulars
concerning John Burke, a gentleman of the county of Limerick, of whom we have
spoken before in the beginning of the first book, who much grieved (as it
should seem) that their expectations had been frustrated concerning Spanish
hopes; this last Summer would therefore take a Journey to the Court of Spain,
as a general Agent to solicit the King for supplies against the next spring:
And therefore suddenly leaving his wife (which was one of Sir George Thorntons
daughters) and family, abo^^ the midst of December last fled to the r^b^ls
Camp, not doubtin^ but from them to be furnished with all necessaries for
this his employment: at his departure he left certain L^tters with his wife
to be delivered to the President, and Sir George T^ornton his Father in law,
declaring his intention for a Journey into Spain, but to disg^i^^ his reasons
he made Religion a mask, by pre^^nding a ^^lgrimage to Saint-Iames, of
Compostella and Rome; but because his dissembling may the better appear, I
will (...) down the word^ of his own Letters written to the Lord President and
Sir George.

A Letter from John Burke to the Lord President.
IF you remember Right Honorable (and my very good Lord) the (...) time I met
your honor, how desirous I was to forsake (...) world, and to follow the
service of God, from which determination I was ((...) weakness of my spirit)
restrained by the simple (...) my friends; sithence which time I have been so
inamoured with the (...), that I did not spare to walk in all the ways where
he lead me either of envy, malice, deceit, flattery or falsehood (as I doubt
not but your Lordship in some degree noted, when through envy and hatred I
have (for to procure their deaths) accused the Lord Burke and othe^s (...) of
treason, and now being (...) to satisfaction, (...) speaking evil of my (...)
with the world; so that by seeking to make my self a (...) unto the world, I
was thereby made an enemy unto God, (...) ^^pentance by the especial grace of
God, I (...) of Rome and Saint James; and do assure unto (...) carry always
as faithful (...) wish all honor, dignity, and prosperity) as any other of my
calling* (...) desire your Lordship not to believe any thing which should be
said to the contrary: I have left the little Land^ and goods I had (...), and
do desire your Lordship to mainetaine her in the same until my coming: I
would never come amongst these fellows, but for fear my friend^ would
p^^swade your Lordship not to grant me your Passeport for to go* (...) seeing
it has pleased your Lordship to grant me her Majesty's protection, I will
remove from this company, desiring your Lordship to send me your Passeport for
to go to this pilgrimage, the which I will expect near Cork. And now taking
my leave with your Lordship, I rest.

Your Lordships loving Friend John Burke.

A Letter from John Burke to Sir George Thornton.
RIght Worshipful, and my very loving Father, for that I know you would be
much troubled in mind to think, what should move me to depart thus from my
wife, friends and lands, I thought good to tell you the very truth, which I
desire you without any scruple to believe; I have taken upon me to be a
Pilgrim for the space of two years. First I must visit Saint Iago in Spain,
and from thence to Rome: I have sought the Letters of favor from certain
Priests in this Country, to their fellows beyond the Seas: You nor my Lord
President may not think, that I go to procure any mischief to the English
State, to whom I should be more willing to do good, then able to do harm, I
do not now speak unto you in the spirit of flattery or fear, falsehood, or
deceit, or for any worldly policy; I speak before God, (and God knows that
I speak the truth;) I do not go with any intent to harm any person, but
only to do judgment upon my self, for a satisfaction unto God for my
sins; the little living I have, I do leave with my wife, the which and her
self I do leave to your fatherly care: And so I rest.

Your Son John Burke.

Some man peradventure giving credit to these colorable protestations, would
persuade himself that this professed Pilgrimage was the true and only end of
this his journey, and so should I, were not these vizards dismasked, and these
frauds detected, by certain Letters from sundry Priests, and Popish Clergy
men, found and convaied to the President. I will not trouble the Reader with
needless transcripts of these several Letters, I will only relate one or
two, which may apparently convince his deep dissembling, written from a Popish
Bishop.

A Certificate from a Popish Bishop in the behalf of John Burke.
NOs Mallachias Dei et Apostolicae Sedis gratia Duacensis in Hibernia
Episcopus, notum facimus Catholico ac invictissimo Hispaniarum Regi Philippo,
Domino Matheo de Oviedo, Archiepis^opo Dublinensi, et Metropolitano Hiberniae:
Omnibusque Christi fidelibus, tam spiritualibus, sive regularibus, quam
secularibus personis ac si proprio nomine nominare Horum Latorem Iohannem Burk,
Nobile^ praestant' virtutis virum propugnatore^ Haereticae pravitatis
acerrimu^, refugium, ac defensor' religiosarum personarum esse, and ob id
versari inter Anglos verae fidei d^sertores, in maximo vitae and bonorum quae
hereditario jure non sine multorum praesertim Catholicorum commendo, and
vtilitate adhuc possidet, terras peter^ alienas, eo animi decreto vt aliquando
in propriam reversus patriam, and patriae miles and decus esse possit.

Proinde vos omnes pietatis et verae religionis a natores, Cathol cum Regem
Philippum, Dominum Matheum supra dictos caeterosque cujuscunque nationu^
conditionisue sitis, quos vnafides, vnum baptisma, vnus spiritus adjunxit*
Oramus, obsecramus, and obtestamur in Christi visceribus, vt eum praedictum
Iohannem Burke, omni fide, omni auxilio, omni farore, dignissinum Catholicum,
de repub' optime meritum, accipiatis, benigneque tractetis.

In cujus rei fidem and testimonium, Sigillum ac Chirographium apposui, etc.
Mala^hias Duac' Episcopus.


Another that calls himself Friar Simon de S. S^^. has these words, writing
to the said supposed Archbishop of Dublin.

A Certificate from a Popish Priest in the behalf of John Burke.
NOtum tibi facio, vt hoc invictissimo Regi notum facere cures harum Latorem
Iohannem Burke, relictis bonis paternis te adire, quo illi ad Regem aditum
praebeas sui temporis opportunitatem, ad peragenda negotia maximi ponderis and
momenti, quae vnanimis hujus regionis saluti conducunt, etc.


If then as in the former Letter he took upon him this Journey, to make
himself an expert Soldier, whereby he might prove in time a Champion, and
ornament to his Country, or if the allegation of the later may be credited,
namely that he has business with the King of Spain, about affairs of great
moment and consequence, for the good of this nation, then are his own pretexts
of religion, vows and pilgrimages, devised only for a blinder to conceal his
traiterous complots: To prevent therefore such mischiefs as might grow unto
the State, from his solicitations in Spain; the President was content, that
Sir George Thornton should send a messenger unto him (being then in the Rebels
Camp) to revoke and recall him if it were possible, from this irreligious
expedition, which at last was effected by the persuasions, which his mother,
wife, and friends used unto him.

CHAP. XX.
The Lord Deputy sent to the Lord P^esid^n^ for men and munition, and himself
to (...) unto him. The List of her Majesty's forc^s in Mounster. Sir Edward
Wingfield sent by the Lord President with five hundred foot into C^^^aght. The
Lord of Lix^aw defeated by Captain Boys. The Castle of Kilco t^k^n by Ca^taine
Flower. The Castle of Berengary taken by Sir Charles Wilmot. Sir Charles Wilmot
and Sir George Thornton left by the Lord President Joint Commissioners for the
government of Mounster. A Letter sent by the Lord President from the Lord
Deputy to the Lords of the Council.
THE Lord Deputy understanding now in what state the Province of Mounster
stood, The Lo. Deputy sent to the Lo. President for men and munition, and
himself to repair unto him.
directed his Letters to the President, requiring of him, that if necessary
occasions of present service did not forbid, he would fend to Athlone (for the
war of Connaght) certain foot Companies and a proportion of victuals from
Limerick, so much as forth of her Majesty's store, there might conveniently be
spared, and withal to repair himself unto Dublin, from whence he was to
take his Journey into England: The list of Mounster consisting at that time of
Horse and Foot as follows.

The List of Mounster as it stood.
Of Horse.
Lord President. The List of her Majesty's Forces in Moun^^er.
100. Earl of Thomond. 50. Captain William Taffe. 50. 200.

Of Foot.
Lord President, 200. Earl of Thomond, 200. Lord Audley. 150. Sir Charles
Wilmot, 150. Sir Richard Percye, 150. Sir Francis Bar^^ley, 150. Sir George
Thornton, 100. Captain Francis Kingsmill, 100. Captain^ George Kingsmill, 100.
Captain George Flower, 100. Captain Charles C^ote, 100. Captain Gawen
Har^^e, 100. Captain Thomas Boyce, 100. Captain Francis Slingsby, 100.
Captain William Stafford, 100. 1900.



Although there was never weary Mariner in a violent and tempestuous storm,
more desired to arrive into his wished Harbor, nor a virgin Bride, after a
lingering and desperate love, more longing for the celebration of her nuptial,
then the Lord President was to go for England, yet was he content to defer
his private affections, in regard of the public charge committed unto him; and
therefore first he sent for Sir Charles Wilmot out of Kerry, acquainting only
him with that Journey, because his purpose was, having before hand had good
experience of his sufficiency, to leave him in special trust with the
government in his absence. Then he took order for the satisfying of the Lord
Deputy his demands, and therefore, appointed Sir Edward Wingfield with five
hundred foot, Sir Edward Wingfield sent by the Lord President with five
hundred foot into Connaght. 23. Febr.
the three and twentieth of February to take his Journey into Connaght: And
lastly, having taken order, how the other forces should be disposed, he took
his Journey from Cork toward Dublin; about the beginning of February being
newly come to Dublin, he received Letters from Sir Charles Wilmot, that the
Lord of Lixnaw having assembled some two hundred foot and twenty horse, in his
Fastness near Listall, Captain Thomas Bois The Lord of Lixnaw defeated by
Capt. Bois.
left by Sir Charles to command the Garrisons in Kerry, drew upon his quarter
in the night, killed eighty of his men, took all his substance of Cowes,
Hacknies, Garrans, and all his provisions of Wheat, Oatemell, and Butter; so
that although his Company, was not all slain, yet were they for ever after
unable to assemble together in any number: about the same time also Captain
George Flower took in the Castle of Kilcow, The Castle of Kilcow taken by
Captain Flower
being a place of great strength, and the only Castle in Carbery that held out
in rebellion; presently after this defeat, Captain Bois was advertised that
the Lord of Lixnaw his brother, Garret Roe Stack, and some other Provincial
rebels were in the Castle of Berengary: whereupon that night he blocked up the
Castle with a sufficient guard of men, that none should issue forth, until the
Governor his Collonell might be acquainted therewith: Sir Charles receiving
intelligence hereof, being then holding the Sessions at Limerick, instantly
left the City, and taking with him by Sea two small Pieces of Ordnance,
presented himself before the said Castle; the Warders and the rest within,
perceiving no possible means to escape, yielded themselves to her Majesty's
mercy: The Castle of Berengary taken by Sir Charles Wilmot.
But the advertisement concerning the Lord of Lixnaw, himself failed, the
remainder were all taken, the principals presently executed, and the rest were
pardoned by the Lord Lieutenant at his coming to Cork: The Lord President
having thus left Mounster, Sir Charles Wilmo^ and Sir George Thornton left by
the Lo. President Joint Commissioners for the government of Mounster.
reestablished in a firm and universal peace, by the assent of the Lord
Deputy, having appointed Sir Charles Wilmot, and Sir George Thornton (Joint
Commissioners) for governing the Province, prepared himself for England; but
before his departure, he made an ample relation to the Lord Deputy and
Council, in what estate he had left his Province, and the Lord Deputy and
Council having likewise declared unto him, the present estate of the whole
kingdom, and also they gave him large instructions, to negotiate with her
Majesty and the Lords touching the affairs of Ireland, which done, the Lord
Deputy upon the six and twentieth day of February, 26. Febr.
took his Journey toward Drogheda, to parley with Tyrone, and to receive his
submission as he promised, and performed, and at his taking of his leave with
the President, he delivered unto him this Letter directed to the Lords of the
Council.

A Letter sent by the Lord President from the Lord Deputy to the Lords of the
Council in England.
MAy it please your Lordships; Although I am unwilling to inform you often of
the present estate of this kingdom, or of any particular accidents or
services, because the one is subject to so much alteration, and the other
lightly delivered unto all that are not present, with such uncertaintie, and
that I am loath to make any project unto your Lordships, either of my requests
to you, or my own resolutions here, since so many things fall suddenly out,
which may alter the grounds of either; yet since I do write now by one that
can so sufficiently supply the defects of a Letter, I have presumed at this
time to impart unto your Lordships that I think fit to be remembered, or do
determine on: most humbly desiring your Lordships, that if I err in the one,
or hereafter alter the other, you will not impute it to my want of sincerity,
or constancy, but to the nature of the subject whereof I must treat, or of the
matter whereon I work: And first to present unto your Lordships the outward
face of the four Provinces, and after to guess (as near as I can) at their
dispositions. Mounster by the good government and industry of the Lord
President, is clear of any force in rebellion, except some few unable to make
any forcible head. In Leinster, there is not one declared Rebel: In Connaght
there is none but in Orwrks Country: In Vlster none but Tyrone, and Bryan Mac
Art, who was never Lord of any country, and now does with a Body of loose men,
and some Creaghts continue in Glancomkynes, or near the Borders thereof.
Cohonoght Macguyre sometimes Lord of Fermannagh, is banished out of the
country, who lives with Orwrke, and at this time Connor Roe Macguire is
possessed of it by the Queen, and holds it for her. I believe, that generally
the Lords of the Countries that are reclaimed, desire a peace, though they
will be wavering, till their Lands and Estates are assured unto them from her
Majesty, and as long as they see a party in rebellion to subsist, that is of
power* to ruin them if they continue Subjects, or otherwise shall be doubtful
of our defense. All that are out, do seek for mercy, except Orwrke and
Osulevan, who is now with Orwrke; and these are obstinate only out of their
diffidence, to be safe in any forgiveness. The loose men, and such as are
only Captains of Bonnaghts, as Tirrell, and Brian Mac Art, will nourish the
war as long as they see any possibility to subsist, and like ill humors,
have recourse to any part that is unfound. The Nobility, Towns, and English
Irish, are for the most part as weary of the war as any, but unwilling to
have it ended, generally for fear that upon a peace will ensue a severe
reformation of Religion; and in particular, many bordering Gentlemen that were
made poor by their own faults, or by Rebels incursions, continue their
Spleen to them now they are become subjects; and having used to help
themselves by stealths, did never more use them, nor better prevailed in them,
then now that these Submittees have laid aside their own defense, and betaken
themselves to the protection and justice of the State; and many of them have
tasted so much sweet in Entertainments, that they rather desire a war to
continue them, then a quiet Harvest that might arise out of their own honest
labor: so that I do find none more pernicious Instruments of a new war,
then some of these. In the mean time, Tyrone while he shall live, will blow
every spark of discontent, or new hopes that shall lie hid in a corner of the
Kingdom, and before he shall be utterly extinguished, make many blazes, and
sometimes set on fire, or consume the next subjects unto him. I am persuaded
that his combination is already broken, and it is apparent, that his means to
subsist in any power, is overthrown: but how long he may live as a woodkerne,
and what new accidents may fall out while he does live I know not. If it be
imputed to my fault, that notwithstanding her Majesty's great Forces, he does
still live, I beseech your Lordships to remember how securely the Banditoes of
Italy do live, between the power of the King of Spain and the Pope. How many
men of all Countries of several times, have in such sort preserved themselves
long from the great power of Princes, but especially in this Country where
there are so many difficulties to carry an Army, in most places so many
unaccessable strengths for them to fly unto; and then to be pleased to
consider the great work that first I had to break this maine Rebellion, to
defend the Kingdom from a dangerous Invasion of a mighty foreign Prince,
with so strong a party in the Country, and now the difficulty to root out
scattered Troops, that had so many unaccessable Dens to lurk in, which as
they are by Nature of extreme strength and peril to be attempted: so it is
unpossible for any people Naturally and by Art to make greater use of them; And
though with infinite dangers we do beat them out of one, yet is there no
possibility for us to follow them with such agilitie, as they will fly to
another; And it is most sure, that never Traitor knew better how to keep his
own head, then this; nor any Subjects have a more dreadful awe, to lay
violent hands on their sacred Prince, then these people have to touch the
person of their Oneales, and he that has as pestilent a judgment, as ever
any had to nourish and to spread his own infection, has the ancient swelling,
and desire of liberty in a conquered Nation to work upon, their fear to be
rooted out, or to have their old faults punished upon all particular
discontents, and generally over all the kingdom, the fear of a persecution
for religion, the debasing of the Coin (which is grievous unto all sorts) and
a dearth and famine which is already begun, and must of necessity grow shortly
to extremity; the least of which alone, have been many times sufficient
motives, to drive the best and most quiet estates into sudden confusion:
These will keep all spirits from settling, breed new combinations, and (I
fear) even stir the Towns themselves to solicit foreign aid with promise
to cast themselves into their protection: And although it be true, that if it
had pleased her Majesty to have longer continued her Army in greater strength,
I should the better have provided for what these clouds do threaten, and
sooner and more easily, either have made this Country a rased Table, wherein
she might have written her own Laws, or have tied the ill disposed and
rebellious hands, till I had surely planted such a Government, as would have
overgrowne and killed any weeds that should have risen under it: Yet since the
necessity of the State does so urge a diminution of this great expense, I
will not despair to go on with this work, through all these difficulties, if
we be not interrupted by foreign Forces, although perchance we may be
encountered with some new irruptions, and (by often adventuring) with some
disasters, and it may be your Lordships shall sometimes hear of some spoils
done upon the Subjects, from the which it is impossible to preserve them in all
places with far greater forces then ever yet were kept in this Kingdom: And
although it has been seldom heard, that an Army has been carried on with
so continual Action, and enduring without any intermission of Winter
breathings, and that the difficulties at this time to keep any Forces in the
place where we must make the War, (but especially our Horse) are almost
beyond any hope to prevent, yet with the favor of God, and her Majesty's
Fortune, I do determine my self to draw into the Field, as soon as I have
received her Majesty's Commandments by the Commissioners, who it has pleased
her to send over, and in the mean time I hope by mine own presence or
Directions, to set every party on work, that does adjoyne, or may be drawn
against any force that now does remain in rebellion. In which Journey the
success must be in the hands of GOD; but I will confidently promise to omit
nothing that is possible by us to be done, to give the last blow unto the
Rebellion. But as all pain and anguish impatient of the present, does use
change for a remedy: so will it be impossible for us to settle the minds of
these people unto a Peace, or reduce them unto Order, while they feel the
smart of these sensible griefs, and apparent fears which I have remembered to
your Lordships, without some hope of redress or security. Therefore I will
presume, (how unworthie soever I have been) since it concerns the Province her
Majesty has given me, with all humbleness to lay before your grave
Judgments, some few things which I think necessary to be considered of.

And first, whereas the alteration of the Coin, and taking away of the
exchange in such measure as it was first promised, has bred a general
grievance unto men of all qualities, and so many incommodities to all sorts,
that it is beyond the Judgment of any that I can hear, to prevent a con^usion
in this Estate, by the continuance thereof, that (at the least) it would please
your Lordships to put this people in some certain hope, that upon the end of
the war, this new Standard shall be abolished or eased; And that in the
mean time the Army may be favorably dealt with in the Exchange, since by
the last Proclamation your Lordships sent over, they do conceive their case
will be more hard then any others: for if they have allowed them nothing but
indefinitely as much as they shall merely gain out of their Entertainments,
that will prove nothing to the greater part: For the only possibility to
make them to live upon their Entertainment, will be to allow them Exchange
for the greatest part thereof, since now they do not only pay excessive
prizes for all things, but can hardly get any thing for this Money; And
although we have presumed to alter (in show, though not in effect) the
Proclamation in that point, by retayning a power in our selves to proportion
their allowance for Exchange: yet was it with a mind to conform our
proceedings therein according to your Lordships next directions, and therefore
do humbly desire to know your pleasures therein. For our opinions of the last
project it pleased your Lordships to send us, I do humbly leave it to our
general Letters: Only as for my self I made overture to the Council in the
other you sent directly only to my self; and because I found them generally
to concur, that it would prove as dangerous as the first, I did not think
it fit any otherwise to declare your Lordships pleasure therein. And whereas it
pleased your Lordships in your last Letters to command us to deal moderately
in the great matter of Religion, I had before the receipt of your Lordships
Letters presumed to advise such as dealt in it, for a time to hold a more
restraynt hand therein, and we were both thinking our selves what course to
take in the Revocation of what was already done, with least encouragement to
them and others, since the fear that this course begun in Dublin would fall
upon the rest, was apprehended over all the Kingdom: So that I think your
Lordships Direction was to great purpose, and the other course might have
overthrown the means to our own end of Reformation of Religion: Not that I
think too great preciseness can be used in the reforming of our selves, the
abuses of our own Clergy, Church Livings, or Discipline; nor that the truth
of the Gospel can with too great vehemency or industry be set forward in
all places, and by all or^inarie means most proper unto it self, that was
first set forth, and spread in meekness; not that I think any corporal
prosecution or punishment can be too severe for such as shall be found
seditious Instruments of ^orraine, or inward practices, not that I think it
fit, that any principal Magistrates should be chosen without taking the Oath
of Obedience, nor tolerated in absenting themselves from public Divine
Service, but that we may be advised how we do punish in their bodies or
goods, any such only for Religion, as do profess to be faithful Subjects
to her Majesty, and against whom the contrary cannot be prooved. And ^ince,
if the Irish were utterly rooted out, there was much less likelihood that this
Country could be thereby in any time planted by the English, since they are
so far from inhabiting well any part of that they have already; and that more
than is likely to be inhabited, may be easily chosen out and reserved in such
places by the sea side, or upon great Rivers, as may be planted to great
purpose, for a future absolute reducement of this Country, I think it would
as much avayle the speedy settling of this Country as any thing; that it would
please her Majesty to deal liberally with the Irish Lords of Countries, or
such as are now of great reputation among them, in the distribution of such
Lands as they have formerly possessed, or the State here can make little use
of for her Majesty; If they continue as they ought to do, and yield the
Queen as much commodity as she may otherwise expect, she has made a good
purchase of such Subjects for such Land. If any of them hereafter be
disobedient to her Laws, or break forth in Rebellion, she may when they
shall be more divided, ruin them more easily for example unto others, and (if
it be thought fit) may plant English or other Irish in their Countries: For
although there ever have been, and hereafter may be small eruptions in some
places, which at the first may easily be suppressed, yet the suffering them to
grow to that general head and combination, did questionless proceed from
great error in the judgment here, and may be easily (as I think) prevented
hereafter. And further, it may please her Majesty to ground her resolution for
the time and numbers of the next abatement of the List of her Army somewhat
upon our poor advise from hence, and to believe, that we will not so far
corrupt our Judgments with any private respects, and without necessity, to
continue her Charge, seeing we do thoroughly conceive how grievous it is unto
her Estate, and that we may not be precisely tied to an Establishment that
shall conclude the payments of the Treasure, since it has ever been thought
fit to be otherwise, till the coming over of the Earl of Essex; and some
such extraordinary Occasions may fall out, that it will be dangerous to
attend your Lordships Resolutions, and when it will be safe to diminish the
Army here, that there may be some course thought of by some other
Employment, to disburthen this Country of the idle Swordmen, in whom I find
an inclination apt enough to be carried elsewhere, either by some of this
Country of best reputation among them, or in Companies as now they stand under
English Captains, who may be reinforced with the greatest part of Irish; That
it may be left to our discretion to make Passages and Bridges into Countries,
otherwise unaccessable, and to build little Pyles of stone in such Garrisons as
shall be thought fittest, to be continual Bridles upon the people, by the
commodity of which we may at any time draw the greatest part of the Army
together, to make a Head against any part that shall first break out, and yet
reserve the places only with a Ward to put in greater Forces as occasion shall
require, which I am persuaded will prove great Pledges upon this Country,
that upon any urgent cause the Queen may safely draw the greatest part of her
Army here out of the Kingdom, to be employed at least for a time elsewhere,
wherein I beseech your Lordships to consider, what a strength so many
experienced Captains and Soldiers would be, to any Army of new men erected
in England, against an Invasion, or sent abroad in any offensive war: But
until these places be built, I cannot conceive how her Majesty (with any
safety) can make any great diminution of her Army. Lastly, I do humbly
desire your Lordships to receive the further explanation of my meaning, and
confirmation of my reasons that do induce me unto these propositions: for the
Lord President of Mounster, who as he has been a very worthy Actor in the
reducement and defense of this Kingdom, so do I think him to be the best
able to give you through account of the present Estate, and future providence
for the preservation thereof; wherein it may please your Lordships to require
his opinion of the hazard this Kingdom is like to run in, if it should by
any mighty Power be invaded, and how hard it will be for us in any measure to
provide for the present defense, if any such be intended, and withal to go
on with the suppression of these that are left in rebellion, so that we must
either adventure the kindling of this fire that is almost extinguished, or
intending only that, leave the other to exceeding peril. And thus having
remembered to your Lordships the most material points (as I conceive) that are
fittest for the present to be considered of, I do humbly recommend my self
and them to your Lordships favor. From her Majesty's Castle of Dublin the six
and twentieth of February, 1602.

After the Lord Deputy departed, by reason of Easterly winds the President was
stayed above three weeks in Dublin, during which time, every day Posts were
employed between them, until the twentieth of March, which was the day the
Lord President set sail for England; the day following he arrived at
Bewmarris: at his coming to Chester, he met with the lamentable news of the
decease of his good and gracious Mistress Queen Elizabeth, for whom, (as he
had good cause) he extremely mourned; But two days following (being at
Lichfield) he assisted the Major in the proclaiming of King James, which gave
him new life, whom I beseech God long to preserve and continue his Posterity
for ever, over his triumphant Monarchy of Great Britain and Ireland.

Although my Work be finished, yet according to the course I have held in
the end of the two former Books, I may not omit to recount to the Reader the
most memorable Services, and accidents which happened in this year, 1602. In the
Catalogue whereof I must first begin with the forces sent into Carbery with the
Earl of Thomond; The sending of Sir Charles Wilmot with his Regiment into
Kerry: The Lord Presidents departure from Cork, with the Army toward Donboy:
His long abode at Carew Castle, expecting Munition and Victuals: The difficulty
he had in his approaching toward Donboy: The defeat given to the Rebels: The
arrival of a Spanish Caravell in Bear, with Letters of Comfort, Money, and
Munition from Spain: The siege of Donboy, the winning and rasing of it: The
Presidents return to Cork, and Sir Charles Wilmots into Kerry: The flight of
James Archer the Jesuit, and Connor Odrischall into Spain: The relapse of Sir
Owen Mac Carties Sons: The Spanish Hostages returned into Spain: The
restraint of Cormock Lord of Muskery: His escape and reduction: The winning of
the Castle of Mocrumpe: The defeat of Tirrell and his Bonnoghs in Muskery: The
sending of Sir Samuel Bagnall with fifteen hundred men to the Lord Deputy:
The Service done upon the Knight of Kerry: The flight of Tirrell with his
Bonoghs out of the Province: The defeat of the Rebels in Glangarne: The flight
of William Burke with his Bonoghs, Osulevan Bear, and Connor Kerry out of
Mounster: The overthrow of the Cartyes in Carbery, And the killing of the Popes
Apostolic Vicar, Owen Mac Egan: The sending of a Regiment with Munition and
Victuals for the service in Connaght: The defeat of the Lord of Lixnaw: The
final Reduction of Mounster: The appointing of Sir Charles Wilmot, and Sir
George Thornton joint Commissioners for the Government of Mounster: And the
departure of the Lord President into ENGLAND.


FINIS.

