THREE SERMONS: TWO OF THEM APPOINTED FOR The SPITTLE, preached in St. Paul's
Church,

BY JOHN SQUIER, Vicar of St. Leonards Shoredich in Middlesex:

AND JOHN LYNCH, Parson of Herietsham in KENT.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Young for Humfrey Blunden, near the Castle Tavern
in Corne-Hill. 1637.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Edward Bromefield KNIGHT, Lord Mayor of London.
SIR,
We are Brethren both by nature and affection; but (in this) toward your
Lordship especially. We desire to set out these Sermons, as some small
signification thereof. Your Call did cause the Preaching of them, we crave that
your Countenance may further the Printing of them. The Defects in either of
them, shall be acknowledged by either of us, to be our own. But if there be
in them ought worth the owning, by the approbation of the charitable Reader;
that shall be readily ascribed to our Incourager, by

Your affectionately devoted in all humble and hearty service, JOHN SQUIER.

For the Spittle, 1637.
ECclesiastes 12.10. does show the direction of The Preacher to all Preachers:
he did, we should seek out acceptable words. But Quis idoneus ad haec? what
Preacher can preach in this manner? Peradventure no Preacher, This Preacher
cannot perform it without all peradventure. I hope (by Gods gracious
assistance) to prepare for my Honorable and Honored guests, (...), food which
shall be wholesome; but (...), that it shall be Toothsome, I do not say it, I
dare not say it. No Christian Sermon can be like the Jewish Manna (according to
that Jewish Legend, Aug. Retract. 2.24.
to savor unto all men according to their several appetites. Your Preacher is
far from that faculty of St. Peter in his Sermon upon The Whitesunday, Acts 2.6.
to speak to every hearer (...), in his own Idiome and proper language,
Acceptable words. If my words be Accepted, nay if they be not Excepted against,
it shall be both above my deserts, and beyond my expectation.

If I pitch upon a point of Popery, I know learned men who would have all
Controversies confined to the Chair, not once to appear in the Pulpit: ne
Suitor ultra crepidam, that rural Ministers should not climb above the Sphere
of their Activity, but keep themselves within the compass of the Catechism,
or of Cases of Conscience at the highest. If I preach for Peace in the Church,
and Conformity to the Discipline of the Church, this discourse, doubtless,
will displease the Disciplinarians. If I call upon you to render unto Caesar
what belongs to Caesar, Luc. 20.25.
to submit your selves to the supreme Authority, some will whisper, this is
ambitious Flattery: and if I exhort the Country to write after that Copy
which is set them by this City, and to imitate the works of charity and piety
performed by many worthy Londoners, others would condemn me for as pernicious
Popularitie. If my Text should lead me to avouch the dignity and authority of
the Superiors in our Clergy, I should not escape that brand, (...), behold a
Time-servant, and a Man-pleaser: and if I plead for the Liberty of the
Inferior Ministry, I may sink under the censure of that (which my soul
abhors) favoring or savouring of Schism and Disobedience. If I persuade
the Duty Of Ministers, some will say, I lay a burden on my Brethren, which
neither they nor their Forefathers were ever able to bear: and if I plead for
the Duty To Ministers, I know the aspersion, that I am an excellent Advocate in
mine own cause, and that we take too much upon us we Sons of Levi.

If I should pray you (with Saint Peter) that you would become a chosen people,
Zealous of good works, the Antinomians would be Antagonists, my Adversaries;
saying, that all sound preachers edify the hearers by preaching points of
Faith, and do not dwell upon the Works of the Law, which are not pertinent to
Good Christians, and to Men grown in Religion. If I should show what sort of
Good works I would persuade you principally to practice, namely all, but
especially those of Piety to the Church, I suppose some expert Linguists would
translate that Greek sentence, (...), in the words of their Apostle, Ad quid
perditio haec? all Cost is Lost which foolish Prodigals cast away on works of
that nature. Or finally, if I should instance in an Individuum, in a Particular
object, which my persuasion did propose unto your Piety, as that Church which
is consecrated to the Service of God by the memorial of St. Paul; there want
not Auditors who will avouch, that this exhortation is superfluous, where a
Plerophory of practice is already precedent; that the bags for that Building
are like to the Pitchers at the Marriage of Cana, (...), Full to the Brim; that
there is no room for the Rich to cast in their gifts, no not for the poor
widow to thrust her Mite into the treasury for the building of the Temple. O,
sit Veritas in ore Prophetae! O, may my Exhortations be always answered by
such a True Anticipation!

But now, since the words of your Preacher are but wind, and that out of what
Corner of his mouth soever they shall blow, some hearers cannot, or will not
sail according unto them, how shall I steer betwixt Scylla and Charybdis,
without striking upon the Sand or the Rock? I have a Cynosura, a Star to lead
me, which (...) Ecclesiastes, the grand Preacher does point to, to all
Preachers, Luke 4.23. Physician heal thy self.

Certainly there is no Patient but will be patient, when he shall see his
Physician sup up that bitter potion, which he was afraid had been prepared for
his queasie and reluctant stomach. I will therefore lay my finger upon mine
own sore, your infirmities shall be a Noli me tangere, I will not touch them.
I will preach To you, but Of my self, This way, if any way, I shall not
offend. And if this way any benefit shall arise from you to me by the action,
or from me to you by the reflection, then for you and me, I shall bless my God
and your God, with unfeigned thanksgiving from the bottom of mine heart. Hear
therefore (right Honorable, right Worshipful, and right dearly beloved in the
Lord) the word of the Lord with reverence and attention.

LUKE 18.13. God be merciful to me a sinner.
MY Text is a Prayer: a Publicans Prayer, so it was; a public Prayer, so it
is, so (I am sure) it should be: a Catholic Prayer, every particular Christian
should have a personal share therein, every one should also pray, God be
merciful to me a Sinner.

For God is the Father of All, Sin is the Quality of All, Mercy is the Desire
of All, and Me should be the Application of All. Therefore, (...), let All men
pray as One man, as This man, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Again, here we have the universal Object of prayer, God: the universal
Subject of prayer (all men employed in one man) Me: the universal Necessity to
pray, Sin: and the universal Motive to pray, Mercy. Therefore Hujus ad
exemplum totus componitor orbis, let this One man be a Tutour to the whole
World; all should pray as here he does pray, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

This is a General Prayer, and a Special Prayer. It is General for all
Times, and for all Actions; but it is most Special for This Time, and for This
Action above all other. Because of our concurrence and confluence in this holy
action of Speaking and Hearing Gods holy word, now Specially are we bound to
use this Prayer, God be merciful to me a sinner.

I presume that you will permit the Speaker to Speak this phrase; considering
that I am a man of polluted lips, and an unpolished tongue; of a shallow
judgment, and a short memory: yea, (...), I feel that within me which may
justly dismay me from delivering this Embassage, from Speaking For God, and
Before God. Therefore Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero, vae mihi si non Oravero:
Woe be to that Preacher which makes not This Prayer a Preface to his Sermon,
God be merciful to me a Sinner.

God be merciful to ME; yea, God be merciful to YOU Sinners also. I conceive
this transition to be no transgression: for, Hom^ sum, and nihil Humanum a me
alienum esse puto: ye are Men, and therefore also Subject to Humane Frailties.

Notwithstanding this godly goodly appearance, may not some appear in this
place with Partiality to the Cause, or Prejudice to the Person? May not some
Zelotes be Prodigal in Hearing, and but Sparing in Practicing? Nay, Ille alter
ego Sosia qui sum domi: Is it impossible for an Hearer to have his Ear in the
Church, and his Heart at his House, or in a worse place, in the same season,
and at the same Sermon? Jam sumus ergo pares. Well may we therefore all
concur to elect this Prayer of the Publicane to be our Prolocutor to that
High House. Here we are in the Sight of God to Speak and Hear the Word of
God; in the Speaking and Hearing whereof, God be merciful to Me, God be
merciful to You, yea, God be merciful to us All miserable Sinners.

The Object of our Prayer must be the Subject of my Sermon, I mean of the
first part thereof. Prayer is Peculiar unto God. We may conceive this truth, if
we consider these three Properties, which are Peculiar both to God, and to the
Proper Object of Prayer. He is Enter, Potenter, Praesenter: God is Omniscient,
Omnipotent, Omnipraesent. God Knows all Things, Rules all Men, and Fills
all Places. God is All in All; per essentiam, because in him We live, and move,
and have our being; per potentiam, because whatsoever God Will, that he Does in
Heaven and in Earth; and per praesentiam, because there is no creature which is
not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked, and opened to the eyes of
him with whom we have to do. In a word, God is in all places, with all
persons, at all seasons, and therefore the Absolute and Only Object of our
Prayer.

If you would have it yet more plainly, No Man can say more in his Sermon, than
every Child does speak in his Catechism. God is Pater Coelestis, our Heavenly
Father: a Father which Will, and an Heavenly Father which Can hear and help
us. This is his Property, Soli ac Semper, Proper to him alone, and to None but
him. God therefore must be adaequatum Objectum Orationis: Invocation is his
Roialtie, and whosoever does trench into this Prerogative, he is guilty of
High Treason against the Heavenly Monarch. Give therefore unto Caesar that
which belongs to Caesar. Let our Prayers be directed to the right Object: God
be merciful to me a Sinner.

We must Pray to God, but not as the Athenians did, Sacrifice to God, (...), to
the Unknown God. We must not be Samaritans to worship we know not what, but
we must be Israelites, we should Know what we worship. For the attaining of
this Knowledge, as the Eye of our Body is to the Sun, so is our Understanding
the Eye of our Soul to God. If the Eye of a man shall Directly look upon the
Sun, the Sun will dazzle it, and blind it: but cast down your Eye into the
Water, and therein you may see the Shape of the Sun. So God does inhabit,
(...), God is a Light man cannot look upon: but reflect our cogitations to the
Waters, to his Creatures, to that Sea of Glass, to his Scriptures, in these we
shall See our God Shadowed unto us, in these shall we See that which will be
Sufficient for, and Efficient of our Happiness in general, and our Holiness
in this particular, in the performance of this work of piety; when we go to
Speak Of and before God, by Preaching: and To and with God, by our Prayer and
Invocation.

I shall not take Gods Name in Vain, if I use it to this purpose, by it to
shadow out Gods majesty to our apprehension.

Gods Name, according to the Hebrew, has two roots, signifying one, but
implying three things; (...) Jehovah is derived of (...) or (...) both
signifying to Be: because God is, 1. The Being, 2. Gives Our Being, 3. Makes
his Promises to Be infallibly; without any Variableness or Shadow of Turning.


1. The Name of God Jehovah, signifying Being, by the change of three letters,
does imply God to Be the Being, according to the threefold distinction, of
time, or Being. From his Name Jehovah, withdraw the letter Jod; and it
signifies the time Past, Fuit, he has been: Change in the same Name, another
letter, Camets into Cholem, and it signifies the time Present, Ens or
Existens, he that is now Being: and Jod, and it is the Future, the Time to
Come, Erit He that Will Be. Hence God himself said that his Name was (...)
Ero, which the Septuagints translate (...), and Plato does term (...), the
Person or Thing which has a Perpetual Being. St. John more clearly, (...),
He who Was, Is, and is to Come. To which that inscription of the Egyptians in
their Temples, to their God, is answerable, (...): I am (says God) He that
ever Was, that Is, and Ever Shall be. By Name Jehovah: The God of Eternal and
everlasting Being.

2. From (...) to Be, God is called Jehovah; because he Gives Being to All,
(...) The Lord made all Things, and formed Thee from the Womb. The Egyptians
emblematically express him by an Egg: that as all Fowls are bred of it, so
all Things are made by Him. He is our Father, He is our Jehovah, in him we
live, and move, and have our Being.

3. From (...) to Be, God is called Jehovah, because he does give a Being to
All his Promises, and makes them All Yea and Amen. He is known to us, not
only by the Name (...) of God Almighty, but also by the Name Jehovah, that
is, he who Promises us Deliverance from Egypt, and Pharaoh; from the
Spiritual Egypt, and Eternal Pharaoh; both from the Sin of Man, and from
That Man of Sin. And his Promises are like the Capitol, built upon immobile
Saxum, a stone that will never shrink: like the Center, they are immovable:
like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, they can Never be Altered: like the
Angel to Sarah, at the Time appointed they will come: and like the Law, not
(...) nor (...), not one Jote or Title of them shall fall. In thee O God
(Jehovah) do we put our trust: O Lord (Jehovah) let us never be put to
confusion.

Here in the Greek, he is called (...), God; of (...) to Run, or of (...),
Fear* because in our Fear, we must run to Him; He will be our Asylum, our
Sanctuary; none can pluck us out of his hand. If God be on our Side, we will
not fear what man can do unto us.

The Latins term him Deus, of Dedit he Gave, because he Gave all things to
all men. Man is made by God; like that Woman Pandora; all indowments are his
Gifts. From the Hair on our Heads, to the Blood in our Hearts; from the
latches of our shoe, to the Inheritance of our Ancestors; from the Labor of
of your Hands, to the Study of our Minds; from the Policy of Statsemen, to
the Simplicity of Christians: both the Spirit of Wisdom, and the Wisdom of
the Spirit; of All, we must say, what that Prophet did of his Hatchet, Alas it
is but Borrowed: Deus Dedit, God is the Fountain of all our Abilities.

In our own language, his name is God, because he is the Efficient of all
Good. God does feed us with his Good Creatures, guard us with his Good Angels,
instruct us with his Good Word, comfort us by his Good Spirit, and preserve,
prevent, sanctify, and save us by his Good Grace. This is our Good, this is
our God. O my soul rest and rejoice in him.

Since then, God is Jehovah; he who is all. Being Originally in Himself, and
Derivatively to all Persons, by his Promises: He is (...), to whom we must
run, in all our fears, and afflictions: He is Deus, the Giver of all we have,
and Are: And finally, he is our Good; all the Good our head can look after,
or our heart can long after: oxternall, internal, eternal: Certainly we
should Pray, and Pray perpetually, to that Person, proposed here in our text;
God, yea God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Now this God, this Jehovah is One, or rather very Oneness, and mere Unity,
having nothing but is self, in it self, and not consisting (as things do
besides God) of many things. Howbeit this One, is Three: One Substance, Three
Persons: The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; Co-equall, and Co-eternall;
the Unity in the Trinity, and the Trinity in the Unity, to be worshipped
and glorified.

If any would know more; know moreover, that God being a Pure Act, is most
knowable in Himself; yet least knowable to us: because he must be known to us,
by our Intellect or Understanding; but the Object, to be Understood, by its
excellence, does exceed our Faculty of Understanding. As the Sun is Visible
in it self, yet it makes it Self to be invisible, and not to be seen or
looked upon by Bats, and Owls, by the luster and excellent Light thereof: So,
both because of the Abstrusenesse of the Object, and Obtusenesse of the
Subject; it is impossible that there should be a perfect knowledge of God in
Man.

I remember, I have read that Hiero the King, demanded of Simonides, the
Philosopher Quid est Deus, what is God? That learned man Petebat Diem, craved a
Day for to shape him answer. The second day he demands the second time; Quid
est Deus, what is God? He begged Biduum, two days to answer him. The third
Day, Three Days: till in the conclusion he ingenuously confessed, that the
More he studied, the Less he was enabled to declare, What God it.

And indeed, according to the Vision of that Father, it is easier for a Child
to take up the Ocean in a Shell; than for any man to comprehend in his Scull,
What God is.

Tu es interior intimo meo, and superior summo meo, said the holiest of the
Fathers. God is more inward than our most inward Cogitations: God is more high
than our most high Speculations. The God of Peace, is like the Peace of God;
He passes all Understanding.

Wherefore our safest eloquence concerning God is silence, when we confess
without confession, that his goodness is inexplicable, his greatness above
our capacity and reach. He is above, we upon earth: there fore it behooves our
words to be wary and few.

I soar too high, I will be (...), I will stoop to the Ground; and build the
conclusion of this point upon the Grounds of Religion, upon the Principles in
our English Catechism. Quid Deus, what is God? God is our Father, which is in
Heaven: God is the Almighty maker of heaven and earth. O Father in heaven, O
Maker of heaven, O God (yea) God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Here we may cast both our eyes, on two notes: yet neither shall be able to
discern, whether is most noteable. Our incomparable Necessity To Pray, and
our incomparable Commodity, if we Do Pray. Both these are inferred from this;
that God is the Object of Prayer, or the Person which is only to be Prayed
unto. But let this Isis and Them, fall into one Thamisis: let this Jor and
Dan, fall into one Jordan. Let both these notes be handled in one: that their
confluence may make the fuller fountain, streaming out the more plentiful
instructions.

The ground work whereof I suppose be, and so propose this proposition; Jovis
omnia Plena, our God is in every Place: and therefore our Prayer should be so
also.

1 Our Prayer should be as our God is, in temple Cordis, and in cord Temple,
both in the Temple of our Heart, and in the Heart of our Temple. In our Heart
God is inthroned, tanquam Rex in Throno, like a King in his Tribunal, where
each oppressed Subject ought to exhibit his Petition, with all submissure
supplication. This place the Church is (...) and, (...) here it t^^ chiefest
part of Gods People, and the chiefest part of Gods Temple: here then we should
especially endeavor to make our Prayers ascend like incense, and the lifting
up of our hands to be as the Evening sacrifice.

2 In your Journies from the Church to your houses, or to any place from your
houses, he who is Via, the Way, cannot be out of your company: your duty
therefore is to crave (...) to be (...), to Pray God to be your Guide, and to
Bless you in all your undertakings.

3 If your Callings call you into the Market, conceive that he who is Veritas,
the Truth, cannot be excluded out of your presence, although he may be abused
in his own presence. Let Prayer therefore open thy heart, that God may open
thy mouth, that thou may nor Lie nor Swear in thy buying and selling.

4 If you glance an eye into a Shep (as you proceed) it is not impossible to
suppose that you see our invisible God, even there also. He that is Vita, Life
it self, must give (...) Maintenance to their life, if any Thrift grow in that
Garden. Their pain therefore would not be much more, nor their gain much
less, if Tradesmen should bless their labor with a short ejaculation,
Prosper thou the works of our hands upon (...), O Lord; O Lord prosper Thou our
handy worker.

5 When you arrive at your own House, know that Domus Tua is Domus Dei: that
if God had not built thy house, their labor had been but in vain that built
it. Know moreover, that if he be not every moment the grouncell, beam, and
buttrice to support it, the next minute should not see one stone upon another.
If therefore Thine House be Gods House, use Gods phrase, Domus men domus
Oration is vocabitur, My House shall be called an House of Prayer. Prayer
should be Seranoctis; he who shuts up the Evening without saying Prayers,
he does Bolt out God, and let in the Devil; a fearful Sojounar. Prayer
should be Clavis diei, he who speaks to God by Prayer in the Morning, is sure
of (...) good morrow. At Meals, have Grace before (...) grace after meat: and
let gracious discourses be the salet, sauce, and salt to season your banquet;
that Cibus mentis may seem more savourie to thy Soul, than Cibus ventris to
thy appetite. Happy is that Feast where God is a Guest, there cannot but be a
blessing at such a meeting. Proceeding from your repast to your Rest: thy
Chamber should be to thee as Bethel was to Jacob; Surely God is in that place,
though some men do not know it. O, may Prayer then (be your Caduceus) close
your eyes! happy is that man who so goes to Bed, that God is in his
Bedchamber, and Prayer his Bedfellow. Finally, honest Alipius, powered out his
holy Prayers, in a more homely Place: knowing that the Sun can shine on a
Dungbill, without contracting any thing that is unsavory to the impassible
Beams thereof.

Thus the first word of my text does show what must be the first word in our
Prayers: We have the Publican for our Precedent, and he Prayed thus, God be
merciful to me a Sinner.

5 To return and review all these Places and Prayers, ordine retrogrado; first
of the last. Some need not be dainty of their devotion, no not in that place,
as though the Place did pollute their Prayers, when it may be feared that their
Prayers pollute the Place. If not the Prayers, yet the Thoughts of some men are
more foul than the (...), the very Draught into which they disburden the Filth
of nature. But ascend we to the Chamber, there peradventure we shall meet with
(...), some foot-print of Prayer. Alas it is suspected, that even when they go
to Sleep, the Husband is like Tyrannous Lamech, and the Wife like querulous
Zipperah: Hos Deus conjunxit? Can such Dream of God, when the Devil causes
them to Sleep in such unseemly contention? From the Bed descend unto the Board:
there indeed we shall hear formal Prayers, both before and after meat; but
the Interim is oftentimes interlarded with such discourses and disgraces, with
such censuring and judging, as if they indevoured that their Tongues should
tear the names of the absent into smaller pieces, than their Teeth can their
Meat in their mouths. Surely if God be Charity, God cannot be present at such
uncharitable eating.

4 When they arise and walk, egredientem armat Oration? regredienti occurrit
Oration? Do some by their prayers say so much as God speed to their Journey? If
there be no invocation, how can there be any expectation of Gods blessing upon
their going out, or coming home again.

In the Market, that Old lying Legend has a true moral, of an old Devil
lying on his elbow fast asleep in the Market place, because (said he)
temptations in this place are superfluous. For such Buyens and Sellers, such
Liars and Stealers, will to Hell (...), of their own good nature and prompt
inclination, without any external or infernal provocation.

^ And some say the same of some Shep keepers, that they concur in the same
kind also, by way of Retaliation. Because Christ did once whip the Buyers and
Sellers out of the Temple, therefore Buyers and Sellers do now every day whip
Christ out of their shops and markets. O unchristian dealing! what advantage
will it be for a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his own soul?

1 But our meditations being come hither, we cannot but conceive here, etiam
faciem Dei vider, God to be present in a more illustrious manner. For if in any
earthly place, where can we look to find the Lord of the Temple, if not in the
Temple of the Lord, in our congregations and Churches: But alas, posteriora
tantum, his glorious presence is infinitely eclipsed by our infinite
infirmities, admitted even in these holy meetings. God indeed is here speaking
in our Sermons, hearing in our Prayers, seeing in both: but our behavior
acknowledges his presence in neither, we have so little baring of the Head at
the one, and bending of the Knee at the other. I have seen as much Reverence
(and more) performed by servants to their Mastar, at his Table, and in his
Kitchen, than by, professors to their God, in his Temple. Now I persuade my
self, that if we were persuaded that God were indeed present amongst us at our
meetings in our Churches, we would signify it by a more reverent gesture.

Finally, Gods residence is in the Sanctum sanctorum, in our Heart no qu^stion.
Blessed is the Heart which knows it so. Blessed is that man which can speak
that language, My Heart is prepared, my Heart is prepared: in utrumque paratum,
both for Hearing and Praying. Then should we not fear such Detractions for our
Sermons, nor you feel such Distractions in your Devotions. But I fear our
Heart does know that God is not, and God does know that our Heart is not
always present in these holy places, at these holy exercises.

To contract all our omissions into one compendium. Thus we see, that from our
Bed to our Board, from our Shops to our Markets, from our Houses to our
Churches, from the Action in this Place to the Affection of our Persons, God
and Prayer are too often Absent from us.

Surely that in all these things we forget God, we are most miserable: but if
in all these God did forget us (to be Merciful) we were more than most
miserable. Let therefore our solid Hearts be like the hollow Mountains,
Echoing out One word, the first word of my Text, God, God, yea God be merciful
to us miserable Sinners.

Here conceive me aright: I do not pry to spy a Mote in your Eye, and wink
at a Beam in mine own Soul. I ingenuously confess I do but see but the
Shadow of these Sins in you by my Contemplation, but I feel the same, or
some such, in my self, the Body of Sin, in my Conversation.

Diogenes conculcabat Platonis fastum, at fastu majori: I trample (said
Diogenes) on the Pride of Plato; but (replied Plato) with a greater Pride. I
acknowledge I would trample down these your Sins, forgetting of God to be
always Present, and forgetting of Your Selves, that You are so Irreverent at
your Prayers in his Presence, but with a Greater Sin.

I confess that I have not that awful apprehension of Gods dreadful (...),
of his Perpetual Presence in my Church, in my Chamber, in my Closet and
closest Conclave, not in my Heart, which is due to our Great Jehovah.

I confess Prayer does dwell with me as St. Peter did with the Tanner, (...),
it does but Sojourn with me, and God knows it is too often Absent from me.

I am not to that holy Devotion as Saint Peter was to Tabor: bonum est nobis
esse Hic: I do not delight to Dwell there. I do not say, alas, I cannot say,
Faciamus tria Tabernacula, O let us build three Tabernacles one for God, one
for Prayer, and one for Thee, O my Soul, that we might Dwell perpetually
together, as St. Paul once persuaded the holy Thessalonians.

Alas, from my Study to my Church, from my Studies to my Employments, in my
Vocations and Recreations, alone and in company, by Day, by Night, I have
little acquaintance with those holy and heavenly soliloquia and colloquia,
sudden short Ejaculations, and solemn Invocations, (...), persevering in
Prayer, with Watching and Fasting, which were so familiar with the blessed
Saints, now at rest from their labors.

Here, here is (...), I indeed am that Physician who have prescribed to you,
but cannot heal my self; yet that I may yet search out (...), a Medicine to
heal me in neglecting Prayer, and (...), a Cordial to strengthen you in
affecting Prayer, I will have recourse to Luke that beloved Physician, who
prescribes unto us a most sovereign medicine by the mouth of this Publicane
in my Text, the Balm of Gilead, the mercy of God, God be merciful to me a
sinner.

Abyssus Abyssum invocat, one Deep calls upon another.

The Object of Prayer, God, which is Infinite, does direct my discourse unto
the Necessity to Pray, which is Infinite in like manner: God be merciful to
me a Sinner. That Sin is Infinne, we may conceive, if we consider the
Denomination, Description, Division, Object, Attribute, and End thereof.

1 (...), a Sinner in the concrete, has near affinity with the abstract Sin,
(...). The Etymologists pronounce (...), as it were (...), a straying or
wandering. (...) is to go the right way, and (...) is to goethe wrong way.

This Denomination of sin declares the Nature thereof. It makes men Cains,
Fugitives, and Vagabonds, Jews, coeli ac soli sui profugos, Stragglers which
have no home nor house to put their heads in. Sodomites smote with blindness,
which cannot hit the Door to Heaven, though they should weary themselves to
find it. And Gentiles, sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death.

Now a solicarie person straggling in the wide Wilderness, among the Wild
Beasts, in the dark, and out of the way, having neither Light nor Guide, how
would such a poor wight be perplexed? The same is the perplexity of every
Sinner. He does (...), Wander amongst the Dangers of the World, indeed amongst
a World of Dangers. It stands him the refore in hand to pray that God would
send him a Guide in so desperate a pilgrimage, that God would be merciful to
him a Sinner.

2 Next, (...), is (...), Sin is the transgression of the Law: so that (...),
sin, makes a Sinner (...), an Out law or Rebel.

Sin makes the Sinner to be to God like Absalom to David, he may not dare to
see the Kings face. And like David, Sheba, and Joab, not his own House; no
City, nor Sanctuary, may shield him from the sword of the Executioner.

Think now how a guilty Traitor, a Bandido, a proscribed and proclaimed
Rebel, how he flees from the City to the Country, from the Towns to the
Fields, and from his House to some Cave: if he remains, he starveth; if he
returns, he dies with torment and ignominy. And in that breathing time
before Death he Dies a thousand times, he quaketh at every shadow, as if it
were an Officer, and starteth at every Wind, as if it were an Hue and Cry.

Think I say, on this amazed wretch, and withal think on the amazement of
every wretched Sinner. No mean Necessity to make men Pray, God be merciful
to me a Sinner.

3. Sin is factum, dictum, cogitatum: either infused to our thoughts, or
effused by our Words, or diffused in our Deeds. Our Hearts are Hives; if
examined, they contain examen, a Swarm of sinful Cogitations: and withal a
Master Be, a Bosom Sin, which trumpetteth out, We have no inheritance in
the Son of Jesse. The Sins on the lip of a Man, are like the Sands on the lip
of the Sea, ((...)) infinite and innumerable: yet must every one of us give an
account for every one of them. And all our Deeds also, which we have done,
either like Absalom in the sight of the Sun, or like Sarah behind the Door:
all our actions Public or Private, are registered, and must be remembered. All
these Sins therefore considered, our Thoughts, our Words, our Deeds: it may
be concluded, that a Sinner should be like Stentor, he should Have a Voice; or
rather like the Night-Bird, that he should Be a Voice: that he should Pray,
nay Cry, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

4 Moreover, which is yet more fearful, all these Sins, all these Thoughts,
Words, and Deeds, are acted, uttered, and effected against God, an infinite
Majesty; which does infer an infinite Iniquity: we use it as a proverb,
Peccatum Minimum, est Maximum, quia in Maximum. The least Sin may be termed
an infinite Sin, because an infinite Person is offended by it. But some Sins we
may pronounce infinite both extensive, and intensive; both in regard of their
Object, and Subject also. The Desires of the Covetous, are as Broad as the
World; of the Libidinous as Long as Eternity; of the Ambitious, as High as
Heaven; and of the Malicious, as Deep as Hell. The Heart of an habituated
Sinner, is like the Mare Mortuum; though whole Rivers of profits, pleasures,
preferments, and passions fall into them, they are not one jot the fuller; but
have a (...), an insatiable appetite to swallow more, if either God, or the
Devil would exhibit them. Therefore such infinite sins, against so infinite
a God, cannot but cause an infinite necessity, (if it were possible) even to
an infinite prayer: Who can now silence the Publicans petition? God be
merciful to me a sinner.

5 Thus we see that sin is an heavy case: yet one attribute does add to the
weight thereof. It is termed a Burden. A burden over the head, by holy David;
and a burden over the heart, by Saint Paul: The burden of Dumah, the burden
of Ammon, the burden of Moab: indeed every sin, to every sinner, is an heavy
burden.

Three sorts of ways is sin said to be a burden, to three sorts of Persons.
It is a burden to God, to Man, and to God and Man: Sin is a burden to God,
onus displicentiae and indignationis, a burden of wrath and indignation. To
Man it is a burden, onus reatus and miseriae, a burden of guilt and
condemnation. And unto God and Man, (...), to Jesus Christ our sin is an heavy
burden, onus supplicii and satisfactionis, of affliction and satisfaction.

Sin being such a burden, let the phrase put us in mind of those miserable
Malefactors; who our of a sudden obstinatenesse, in their apparent and
impenitent wickedness, refuse to be tried by the Country. These Caitives,
having a sharp stone under them, and a great plugge over them; Their crying and
roaring will tell us that they feel a burden: and yet, as a Pound weight is
to a Talent of Lead; such is the burden of their Bodies, compared to this
burden of our Souls. Al^^ then, what will betide us under such a Load?
Certainly, Come unto me all ye that are laden, says Christ. And let every
Christian go unto him, in the voice of this Publicane, saying: God be
merciful to me a Sinner.

6. Finally, the end of sin is pain without end: a double pain: Poena sensus,
and Damni: both a pain privative, and positive.

The privative, is (Soleme mundo) to lose the sight and light of him, who is a
thousand times more illustrious than the Sun, when the beams thereof are a
thousand times multiplied: Sinners shall be cast By God, and from God into outer
Darkness.

The Positive is both of Body and Soul in Hell; and both of them suffering two
strange Extremities, and Contraries; extreme Heat, weeping: and extreme Cold,
gnashing of Teeth.

Now, if the sight of the Rack (to which Hell is like Nebuchadnezzars Furnace,
compared to the stinging of a Gnat) will constrain Rebels to confess and
repent their Rebellion: certainly the very imagination of those infernal,
eternal tortures, will extort a (...): though we were Tongue-tied like the
son of Croesus, or Tongue-lesse like the Eastern Confessors, it will
compel us to speak, and in the language of this Publicane, God be merciful
to me a Sinner.

To run over all these particulars, with a general review. Since sin does make
us straggling Vagabonds, Traitorous Rebels, in thought, word, and deed, (...)
perpetually fighting and smiting against God Almighty, as a Body and
unsupportable Load, sinking both bodies and souls to the bottom of Hell:
Therefore we may Pray, God be merciful to Us Sinners: Yea, God be merciful
to us all Miserable, Miserable Sinners.

But now! What aylest thee, O my Soul, Appl.
and why art thou So disquieted within me? Nay, What aylest thou, O my Soul,
that thou art no More disquieted within me? Shall Sheba be in Abel, and shall
not the inhabitants thereof be in a confusion? shall Sin dwell in thee, O my
soul, and shall not thy thoughts be confounded? Do thou not feel these
sins? O quid miserius est misero non miserante seipsum? What is more
miserable than a sinner that is unsensible? Can Aetna lie on thee, nay, fry in
thee? Do thou sin, and yet feel neither the weight nor heat thereof? Do
not the wounds vex thee as a thing that is raw, which thou have so often
received from that old Serpent called Satanas, from that Amphisbaena ore
trisulco, with a threeforked sting? Art thou not inveighled by, if not
entangled with Voluptuousness, Covetousness, Ambitiousnesse? Does not thy
hand reach after Pleasure? Did not thy heart long after Profit, and thy head
look after Preferment?

1. As far as thy Means will permit, do thou not tread that path, wherein
Dives did travel before thee: Rurple to thy Back, and for thy Belly,
deliciousness? Excess both in food and apparel, both in the quantity and
quality thereof? In raiment to rejoice in the excrements of dumb dead
creatures: In diet to delight in that which perishes with the Using, nay with
the eating: A true Ad quid Perdi^io h^^^? This might have been sold, and given
to the poor. Thy superfluity might have supplied their necessity: but that
thou dare not displease Isis and Osyris, those grand Egyptian (in truth,
English) Idols, thy back and thy belly. Yet all the carnal Indulgences are
but (...), the pleasure of sin for a season: and thou know not how soon the
Worm will come, and then thy Goodly gourd will w^ther in a moment: Galen,
Paracelsus, no, Aesculapius himself cannot prevent it.

2 Moreover, have thou not taken care, not only what thou shall put on thy
back, and put in thy belly; but also what thou shall put up for thy Posterity,
that thou might have much goods, laid up for many years, for thy self, and
for thy Children? For thy (...): for thy Children, yea for thy Childrens
Children after thee, to the third and fourth generation? Vah parvum est: To
thousand thousands in them thou would provide for by a perpetuated intaile
of an uninterrupted inheritance, so long as the Sun and Moon should have
endured. Spurred on by the promises, if God had not put his bridling Grace into
thy mouth, by this time thy desires had galloped as far as Ophir or India:
where thou had been Bagging up Gold and Silver, and piling up one Bag upon
another, betwixt thee and thy salvation, till thou made the Way to Heaven as
narrow as the Eye of a Needle: And verily a Camel laden with Gold, cannot enter
at that Port of the new Jerusalem.

3 Finally, did never the Prince of the Air prompt thee to build castles in
the Air, to climb after that peremptoriam altitudinem, that perilous
promotion, which (not seldom) draws the ambitious higher, to hurl him down
lower? But if thou had been sure to have had such fast footing and
hand-grasping, that thou should never have slipped from the Ladder of
preferment; yet so much as thou had added to thy honors, thou had added to
thy Stewardship also: Et quicquid tihi impensum est, exigetur a te qualiter
expensum est, every mite, every minute, every title, every tittle of dignity
must be accounted for. Thy ambition would have added to thy accounts a
thousand for one, when thou should not have been able to answer one for a
thousand. Good men do save themselves and those that hear them; Great men do
account for themselves, and for those that serve them. Honors being achieved,
if Maximus and Optimus could meet in one man, yet even He shall be glad,
while he lives, to use this prayer of this Publican, God be merciful to me a
sinner: and when he dies, to pray as a great and good man of this kingdom
did pray dying, Lord forgive me Mine-Other-mens sins.

Now all these groundless, boundless, endless, fruitless, unlawful,
unlimited, sinful desires of pleasure, profits, and preferment, whither did
they, do they, would they lead thee O my miserable soul? to be a Cain,
Homicida, a killer of a man? to be an Absalom, parricida, a supplanter of thy
father? to be a Baanah, regicida, a rebel against thy King? yea yet more
execrable, to be one of those (...), to fight against thy God.

For what is all this, but an aversion from the Creator, and a conversion to
the creature? a trampling on the instruction of his precepts, a spurning at the
direction of his providence? To resist Jehova my Maker, Jesus Christ my
Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost my Paraclete, my Sanctifier, and blessed
Comforter? Oh ure, seca in hoc saeculo, ut parcas in futuro: nay, Ure, seca in
hoc saeculo, ne peccem de futuro; Lord wound, burn my body, so that my soul
may not sin: lay upon me obscurity, infamy, ignominy, poverty, weakness,
sickness, death, any thing but sin and hell; but sin the cause of hell,
and hell the effect of sin.

If now that eternal Judge should injoine me (...), not (...). but (...), an
eternal silence for my eternal demerit, I would beg but one word, to be
left to the liberty of mine utterance, which should never be out of my mouth,
nor out of his Ears.

PECCAVI, I have sinned: Peccavi, I have sinned, against heaven and against
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: Peccavi, I have sinned,
Lord I have sinned, and these sheep what have they done? Peccavi, I have
sinned, but Propitius peccatori, God be merciful to me The sinner.

By this second point I have showed sin to be a burden, indeed Such a burden
as neither we nor our Forefathers were ever able to bear. Howbeit, hitherto I
have only touched that Burden with my little finger. In the third point,
following, I will set my shoulder to it, and then my heart shall tell you how I
feel the weight of it.

We see thus, that sin is a burden, yet ordinary sinners feel it not. For
(where sin is grown into a custom) Mulus mulum scabit, the sinner reaches
a cushion to the devil, and (by a reciprocal courtesy) the devil reaches a
cushion to the sinner. The sinner bids the devil take his ease, and spare
his temptation; the devil bids the sinner take his ease, and fear no
damnation: for sin must be freely and secarely committed.

Your Urinatores, expert Swimmers, being under water, feel not the weight of a
full fraighted ship, of a thousand runs, riding perpendicularly over the very
head of them: But so soon as they put their heads above water, the least touch
of the least part of the ship will stem them, and tumble them headlong into
the bottom of the Ocean. So whilst miserable men swim in the custom of any
pleasing or profitable sin, they are insensible of the burden of any crime,
though it be as big as a Carrick, or as one of those vaste Sea-carts at
Lepanto: But so soon as they shall begin but to lift up their heads out of the
Ocean of their habitual offenses, but to look toward heaven, they will be
ready to sink with fear to be drowned in despair, at the very apprehension
thereof.

This applicative phrase, Mihi peccatori, to Me a sinner, will instruct us to
ponder this point. Here I propose My self Your looking-glass. The sight of my
frailties may reflect to you your infirmities, either the very same or some
very like, shadowed by this example. Irrideant me arrogantes, ego tamen
confitebor tibi dedecora mea, in laudem tuam: although confession to God
produce derision from man, yet will I say, Mihi peccatori, to Me the sinner;
and let me have the shame, God the glory, and you an Item for your
conversation.

To look back to the very Aest of my Nativity, and lower also: I was a sinner
before I was, I was borne in sin, and my mother conceived me in iniquity.

In my swaddling clouts, those cradle-cryings, and inarticulate complainings,
were the actual froth pumped from the dregs of my original pollution.

Afterward, being but Infans, Mendaciis Paedagogum fallebam, and pomorum furta
faciebam: being not able to speak plainly, nor to go strongly, yet then I
had a tongue to tell a lie for fear of the rod, and an hand to pluck other
men's fruit, for the love of my palate. These little sins showed, that being
but a little child, I had too little regard (or knowledge at the least) of our
great God, and his holy commandments.

My careful parents putting me to School, how did I play away that price
less Treasure, my Time, (...), how often did my sports add feathers to those
nimble hours? and afterward, how feign would I have clipped the wings of
those birds, which (God knows) were then flowne away too far from being
caught again?

At the University, I had no lips to kiss those hands which clothed and fed
me there. I did not only want a purse, but (which is worse) an heart also to
be sufficiently thankful to those instruments (now with God) which gave me
that blessed education.

Being chosen Fellow in our College, and taking Pupils, I gave them too much
liberty, and took my self too little pains: I was an Heli, when I should
have been a Gamaliel; I considered not that University Tutors should be like
the Latin Tutores, Tuitores, Defenders of younglings against barbarismes in
their language, and barbarousnesse in their lives: I considered not that the
inde fatigable industry of vigilant, diligent Tutors, should make every
College both like Athe^^, which taught men to know well, and like Lacedaemon,
which taught men to do well.

When the University had fitted me for the Ministry. I entered that Calling
with joy and hope, fastening my expectation on the Honos, rather than the Onus;
on the honor of the Ministers, rather than the labor in the Ministry: but
since I have found that the best man which breathed since the Apostles, did
weep when he entered into Orders, as truly sensible of the truly
insupportable burden.

In that Calling, too long, too often did I too much repine atomy maintenance,
that I fed other men's souls plentifully, but they fed my body too sparingly:
that a little wages was an unjust proportion to my great labor: A foul fault,
perhaps overvalewing the one, and undervaleming the other; but without
peradventure forgetting the work that God will do, that he will reward his
laborers; and the work which Gods children should do, If they cannot have
means according to their minds, then to frame their minds according to their
means.

But of all, in the discharge, and for the discharge of my Calling, when,
because of my industrious, ingenuous, and impartial labors, I felt my self
whipped on both sides; by the Rapists with scourges, and by others (who
profess themselves Professors) with scorpions: Etiam tu fili! even Israelites
to smite innocent Jeremy with the tongue! I want a tongue to tell you what a
swarm of discontents did sting my soul with impatient cogitations. O poor
pusillanimity! and far from the Heroical patience of those Worthies, who
being whipped for speaking in the name of Jesus, departed from the Council
Rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name.

Besides my public, in my private Calling also, in my poor cottage, in my
small Family, what great rivers of omissions have passed unseene by the eye of
the poor man that is the Head thereof? At home in defect, nothing so careful
for the souls, as every Mamonist is for the bodies of their servants, of their
children especially: abroad in excess, using my friends kindness, and Gods
creatures too plentifully, when as it may be others of Gods children, more
dutiful than my self, wanted that surplusage for their extreme necessity.

Nay my splendid a peccata, my best actions, in my preaching and hearing, my
praying and fasting, my giving and forgiving, yea in the composing of this very
Sermon, I have been sensible of my affections, infections, imperfections, yea
interfections, that I need a Sursum corda, one to cry continually, Lift up thy
heart in thy devotions.

And I profess it, Verebor omnia opera mea, I am afraid of All my actions,
that either superbia or desidia, either pride of them, or sloth in them, will
be a worm to make them rotten at the very core.

My life past I have somewhat spent in reading books; if the remnant of my
mortality I should employ only in writing books, I ought to compose them only
of two kinds, after the president of that great man of God, only Confessions
and Retractations; only to repent all my doings, and to recant all my sayings;
I mean the infinite infirmities which do twinne in the very birth of my best
endeavors. Me me, adsum qui feci, I have sinned, Lord I have sinned, but these
people what have they done? What you have done, your selves do know, and your
God does know; therefore to your repentance, and to his indulgence I remit it.

But for my self, O that I had the Heart of this Publican, to pronounce the
words of this Publican, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori, God be merciful
to Me a sinner.

Yet you will say, Appl.
but which is the greatest sin in the catalogue of thy personal
transgressions? I say, my first and greatest sin is my sin of thought; the
second is like unto this, concerning my Calling: and upon these two hang all my
offenses.

Gods Grace (blessed be my God for his Grace) has preserved me from
presumptuous sins, that they have not got the dominion over me: Qui facit
peccatum ex diabolo est. God Grace has prevented me from doing those
notorious sins, which make a man a servant to the devil. Howbeit there is
another kind of sin, which some call Limen Inferni, the very brink of Hell;
this is the sin of thought. Now this sin of thought I think (nay I know)
to be My sin.

Whereas every Christian should be, and many a Christian is, Nun quam minus
solus quam quum solus, when they are most solitary, then are they best
employed, in holy invocations, and heavenly contemplations; for my self, I
find my private cogitations to be aut malae, aut otiosae: im^ mulae quia
otiosae: to be either Evil, or Idle: indeed to be Evil because Idle.

My idle evil Thoughts are like Camomile, the more they grow, the more I
trample on them; and yet the more I trample on them, the more they grow. Like
that Serpent Hydra, when I out off one Head of an evil Cogitation, instantly
two other sprowt up, nay, sprowt out in the place of it. Like the Second Beast
in the thirteenth of the Revelations, my Thoughts arise our of the earth,
Earthly cogitations. And like the First Beast in the same Chapter, although I
give a Deadly wound to the Head of one of those Beastly Thoughts, yet it will
not Die notwithstanding.

My Thoughts, like Davus in the Comedy, like Doeg in Souls Family, and like
the Materia Prim^ in Philosophy, semper machinantur male fierum, they always
make some Mis-rules, and meditate some Mischief.

Than Thought can hardly be thought a more Necessitating motive to perpetuate
the Prayer of this poor Publicane in my Text, God be merciful to Me a Sinner.

But now I show you that Saul who would Hide himself, that Sin which is Higher
than all my rest, by the shoulders upward, my Defects in my Calling, the
Ministry, so many in number, so mighty in nature.

The Ministry. For the Matter thereof, we are conversant about the Word of
God, both audible and visible, both the holy Scriptures, and the heavenly
Sacraments. For the Form, we do it authoritative, we are Dispencers of them.
Our Efficient isntrumental is the Church of God, and the Efficient principal
is God Himself, who did Thrust me forth to be a labourer in his Harvest, when
as some of my most foolish friends, and some of my more foolish fancies, did
whisper me in the ear to divert me to some more profitable Vocation. And the
end is, (...), a Great Reward, yea a greater than that, to save Souls; nay,
the greatest of all, to be (...), to Do service unto God, whether it be by
being the savor of Life to the children of Obedience, or the savor of Death
in those that Perish.

For the Effect. At these extraordinary times, we hope, when we cast our Bread
upon the Waters, and deliver our Sermons amongst a Multitude of People, who are
like many Waters, that through Gods extraordinary grace, there may be one
soul hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, which will vouchsafe to take
one morsel of that we set before them. If not, we hope for an ordinary
blessing among the Flocks over which the Holy Ghost has made us Overseers. If
not so, but that in this time of Plenty we bring our Corn into the Market, but
find it slighted both by Forreiners and Inhabitants, then (...), Poor despised
Husbandmen, we will carry it home to feed our own Families. Nay, if Pride,
Idleness, and Fullness of Bread should reign under our own roofes, though a
Minister cannot have Curam animarum, yet if he can have but Curam Animae: if
through my Foolishness of Preaching I have saved but one Soul, but mine Own
Soul: this certainly is a precious Effect of a most pricelesse Vocation.

Now, that in such a Calling there should be any such Defect, of Conscience,
not to be instant ((...),) in season, out of season: of Commodity, not to
conceive this Godliness to be great gain: of Content, since God has said it,
he will never Forsake us: or of Courage, God is on our side, we need not care
what Man can do against us.

That we should but from a corner of our eye cast but a glaunce upon the Riches
of the City, the Honors of the Court, the Reputation of the Lawyers, Common
or Civil, the Esteem of the Physicians, or the Quiet of the Gentry. So that
we should not commend this while we live, as the only Treasure to our Souls;
and when we die, as the principal Legacy, Portion, and Inheritance to our
Sons.

That we should not Delight to discharge this blessed Function with all our
Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Mind, and with all our Strength; but
that we should leave any crannie in our Hearts either for Discontent at home,
or for Envy abroad; either for Wishes of Additions to our Temporalls, or for
Fear of Opposition to our Ecclesiasticalls: that we should not be (...) and
(...), always (...), Content, and prompt, and provided to publish Gods truth
by our preaching, pens, and protestation.

(...), I confess and profess it before God, Men, and Angels; Here, This is
My Sin, and herein God be merciful to Me a Sinner.

Extremes. more distant than the Antipodes, or than the Xenith and the Nadir,
than the most severed Paris of the Earth, or the two more contrary Points of
Heaven, God, and sinful Man. And the word remaining (Mercy) is the Communis
terminus, is the Knot where these two terms do meet.

Mercy is that miraculous Medium which does alter the Color, yea, and the
Nature of the Visible Object. Sinful man in himself is Red, red as Skarlet;
but God, looking through Mercy, apprehends him to be White, white as the
Snow in Salmon. God in regard of Sinful man is a Judge and Revenger; but
through Mercy, even sinful man looks upon him as upon a Savior, a
Redeemer, yea, as upon an indulgent Father. This Collyrium cleared the dull
sight of this devour Publican. Being himself, he did not so much as lift up
his eyes to heaven; but through this Medium he durst look God in the very
face, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Merciful to a Sinner! Sin is the sickness of the Soul, and Mercy is the
Medicine thereof. As a Medicine, so Mercy is Sanativa, Praeservativa, and
Promotiva: it is a Purge to Cure Sickness, a Cordial to Strengthen Weakness,
and an Antidote to Anticipate Relapses. There is a Pardoning, a Preserving, and
a Preventing Mercy: a Mercy pardoning our sins Past, preserving us against
sin Present, and preventing us from sin to Come.

1 The first the Woman had taken (...) in the act of Uncleanness: I condemn
thee not* go, sin no more. 2 The second God gave to Paul; My Grace is
sufficient for thee, and, my strength is made perfect in thy weakness. 3. And
the third, rejoiced the Heart of holy David: Blessed be God, and blessed be
thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from avenging my
self with my own hand.
And this Publican desired, needed, hoped all these three: Mercy to pardon him
for the time past, to preserve him for the time present, and to prevent him for
the time to come. This threefold mercy, gave this prayer to the soul of the
Publican; and the soul to this prayer of the Publican. Hence he prayed, God
be merciful to me a Sinner.

Those are lame Christians, who tread not in the footsteps of this Publican:
Parallel the particulars.

First look back-ward; Remember the mispending of our time, means, and
callings.

1 Our time was all from God. But to God what time have we returned? the
seventh? the seventeenth? yea or the seventieth? What one here dare say, that
in his whole life he has given but One whole imire year unto Gods service? 2
Our means. God i^ the Fountain issuing forth those also. But return we any
Rivers, for the Oceans we have received? the tenth? nay the tenth of the tenth?
How much, how much have we employed on our selves? How little, how very little
have we set apart for our God? 3 Our Callings. Have we used them as Gods
talents? to Gods glory? Have we not used them as Rakes to draw riches to us?
or as Stirrups to raise us to promotion? What then would become of us, if it
were not for Gods pardoning mercy: if God would not be merciful to us
miserable Sinners?
Next let us look inward, indeed downward, and blush at the infinite frailties
of our best abilities.

1 Our Faith is sicut Luna, nunquam Una: in many Warnes, Cloudings, and
Eclipses. 2 Our Hope is like an anchor of reed, apt to be torn up with every
trivial temptation. 3 And our Charity like the Cypress tree, very tall, but
bearing little fruit. Our souls have need of a Cordial, of a preserving
mercy: That God would be Merciful to us sinners, by his strengthening Grace,
and gracious assistance.
Finally, let us look forward, yea backward, yea inward also: let all men, at
all times, look all ways. And if we can, let us turn our eye from some
preventing mercy: which is the mercy of mercies.

1 Full often shall we, have we, do we swell with prosperity; but that Gods
mercy does send us some moderate adversity, to prick that windy bladder, and
to prevent us from security. 2 As often are we dejected with adversity; but
then Gods mercy does raise us with some prosperity, to prevent as from
impatience and blasphemy. 3 Nature makes us prone to superstition; but Gods
mercy has given us birth in a blessed Land (which is the kingdom of the
Gospel, and has the Gospel of the kingdom) to prevent us from Idolatry. 4
Company allureth us many times, to bestow Gods Day on their Society; but Gods
mercy, in giving us customarie Sabbath Sermons, does draw us to Church for
shame, and preventeth us from that too frequent, and public profane impiety.
5 Our people are apt enough to act the part of those Boys of Jericho, to have
a bald-head, some scornful nickname, for the Prophets of the Lord: but the
mercy of the Lord has a little prevented them, and a little touched their
hearts (as he did the heart of Lidia) that they do in some sort esteem them
to be the Horsemen of Israel, and the Chariots of the same.
Have we not been angry too often, too suddenly, too much? And this is a
prologue to Murder. But blessed be that mercy, which as often prevented us.
Immoderate diet, fantastical fashions, too loose speeches, if Gods mercy
prevented not, who dare say that they might not lead us to uncleanness? Ye
know our desires, cares, and endeavors to thrive our selves, and to raise our
Posterity: if we do this without covetousness, admire Gods preventing mercy,
indeed beyond admiration. Corrupt nature has framed us with broad ears, and
wide mouths, with a strange aptness to speak of the absent, more than
becomes the innocent. Have we learned the lesson of holy David in any
measure? so to take heed to our ways, that we offend not with our tongue?
Reverence Gods preventing mercy, as our only instructor in that singular
virtue. And that our Bosom Aetn^, our continual concupiscence, if we can
(...), quench those desires in any degree, that they Flame not forth into
actual Ambition, Covetousness, and Voluptuousness; the voice of our Praise
and Prayer, must ascribe all this to Gods preventing mercy, in the phrase of
this Publican: God is, ever has been, and ever may he be a God merciful to
us miserable Sinners.

The consideration of Gods mercy in general, but of his preventing mercy in
especial, may incline our hearts, to treasure up this precious Prayer, for our
perpetual practice. It were well, if like the Israelites, we could write it
as a select Scripture, in our Phylacteries and verges of our garments. It were
well, if like that Emperor we could paint it as a choice sentence, in our
windows and Walls of our houses. It were well, if like that Father we could
carry it as an Obvious Poesy, on our Tables and Trenchers. All this were well:
but it were far better, if with the blessed Virgin, we could Lay it up in our
Hearts, (...), Written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not
in the tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the Heart. That Nulla dies
sine linea, that every hour we may utter this Prayer; God be merciful to Me a
Sinner.

God be merciful to us! Surely God Has Been, Appl.
and Is Merciful unto us already. That we are here, now met together at this
time, in this place, it is the Lords mercy.

It is Gods mercy, that the substance of this Text, which is writ in this
verse, was not written upon all our Houses, as it was upon some of our poor
Neighbors: LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US.

What am I, that I did not fall amongst those eight hundred which died this
year in my own poor Parish? and what are you, that you servive those eight
and twenty thousands which were buried within the circuit of your famous
City? That our eight hundreds arose not to eight thousands: and that your
eight and twenty thousands did not multiply to eightscore Thousands: and that
we were made but Ciphers among those numbers appointed to die: that the Lord
swep us not All away with that besome of his indignation, the Plague: that they
were scopae dissolutae, that we escaped, this was Gods mercy, Gods great mercy.

That the Tower of Siloam fell upon eighteen, and upon no more of the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem: it was Gods mercy unto them. That the Plague has
destroyed so many of the Inhabitants of London, but no more: this is Gods
mercy unto us. Yea, Gods mercy was to us, as preferment should be to men of
merit, Fugientem sequitur, it did follow us when we did flee from it. Stulti
Stoici cum misericordiam quasi vitium devitabant: when the foolish people did
forsake their own mercies, and did pluck down Lord have mercy upon us, from
their Doors; even then God did write over their Heads; Miserebor cujus
miserebor, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy: and preserve many from
the Plague. Gods mercy, Gods miraculous mercy.

Nay, whilst our provoked Judge did destroy us with the plague, even then also
he showed mercy in his Judgments. That in our parish, and in your City,
there dyed so many, it was too many, had not God designed it to be so; but
that there dyed no more, this was citra condignum, less than we did deserve,
Gods mercy: and that I and you were Titiones ab incendio, Brands snatched out
of that fire, that we dyed not of the plague, this was supra condignum, more
than we did deserve, Gods gracious mercy. Carnal consultations, it may be,
may conclude, that so many children died of the plague, this was a cruel
affliction: But I say, Deus fecit nihil inaniter, nihil inhumaniter, that these
judgments were not without wisdom, they were not without mercies. That
Infants were destroyed, carnal men may call it cruelty, but it was crudelitas
parcens, in verity very mercy. Although they did not know their right hand from
their left, yet God (it may be) did know that they would patrizare, imitate the
sinister dealings of their naughty Parents, and therefore to withhold them from
a sinful life by a timely death; this was Gods mercy: and we who have escaped
the plague, if we continue in our sins, it is misericordia puniens, to
incur greater judgments, if we be not prevented by Gods mercy.

But now, if the Lord would be pleased to say a Consummatum est to our Cross,
to say of the plague, It is finished, that our inhabitants might safely and
securely return to their houses, follow their trades, and frequent their
Churches, in the fear of God, without fear of one another: that we might no
more be destroyed by the plague, devoured by poverty, afflicted for our
friends, affrighted in our minds, and (which is most miserable) hindered from
coming to Church; this would be the mercy, the tender mercy of our God,
whereby from on high he has visited us, and delivered us from that heavy
visitation. Then, as the last year in the plague, the heart of every good
Christian was like Aristotle book, rasatabula, a Fair folio, wherein the
letters of this text were written in text letters, God be merciful to me a
sinner: so this year, being freed from the plague, we should be (...), all of
us should be one heart, to be one book, that book of Ezekiel, scriptus intus
and foris, written within and without, like Psalm 136. every line, For his
mercy endures for ever.

Now that God may cease plaguing, and that we may cease sinning, God be
merciful to us All for Evermore, Amen.

Finally, to make my Exordium my Conclusion, I may re-enforce this exhortation
from this present occasion of hearing and speaking.

In hearing, if you have offended either in regard of your attention to the
speaking, or of your intension to the practicing of Gods word, give me leave
to be your poor Orator: God be merciful to you sinners.

If in speaking your judgment does apprehend or reprehend any errors in my
discourse, I beseech you to intercede for me to our great intercessour; that
Christ's mercy may pardon me what I have done, prevent me what I shall do, and
preserve me in all my doings of this nature.

O pray for Me that I may pray for my self, in all my actions, but in my
Sermons especially. God be merciful to me a sinner.

(...)

PASCHA CHRISTIANUM; THE CHRISTIAN PASSOVER.

A Sermon appointed for the SPITTLE, but preached at St. Paul's on Wednesday in
Easter Week, 1637.

BY JOHN LYNCH, Parson of Herietsham in Kent, and Chaplain unto the R. Reverend
Father in God the Lord Bishop of SARUM.

Coloss. 2.17. The body is CHRIST. August. contra Adiman. cap. 16. Non Signa
and umbrae salutem dederunt, sed ea quae his significabantur. LONDOM, Printed
by ROBERT YOUNG, for Humfrey Blunden, 1637.

PASCHA CHRISTIANUM, THE CHRISTIAN PASSOVER.
1 COR. 5.7.8. 7 Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: 8 Let us therefore
keep the Feast (or the Holy Day) etc.
THe subject matter (if you note it) of this my text, here, is an Apostilicall
indiction (you shall find) of a Feast; together with a specification both of
the cause why we must, as also a particular direction touching the manner how.

The indiction we have in these words, (...), Epulemur: that is, as it is in
the text and margent of our English Version, Let us keep the Holy Day, Let us
keep the Feast. Where I pray take notice by the way, how that this our Easter
feast is not like that same heresy of the Acephali, a certain blind custom,
brought in amongst us no man living can tell by whom: neither like those Feriae
domesticae amongst the Romans, is it of private institution, of which kind
were those of the Cornelian family, taken up only by some few: no, it is
Festum publicum (you see) and stativum, a feast that is founded upon the Word
of God; and therefore S. Augustine tells us in a certain Epistle of his,
viz. in his 119. ad Jan. how that by the express authority of divine
Scripture it is, that yearly about this time we do keep a feast.

Yea, but why now do we keep a feast (you will say)? This my Text here will
tell you why: Christus Pascha nostrum immolatus est pro nobis, Christ our
Passover was now sacrificed for us. And all these circumstances being duly
weighed by us, have we just cause to keep a feast now?

Yea, I trow; yea, and so to keep it too, not as it shall seem best unto our
corrupt fancies, as they of Syracuse in Livie kept the festivals of their
Diana, for three whole days together lewdly addicting themselves unto naught
but drunkenness and all excess; as if for our parts so the feast be kept by
us, we need not to pass (we think) for the manner how: No, sancta sancte and
therefore, the feast we keep now being the feast of Passover, in such sort
only are we to keep it, as with the nature of a Passover shall be most
suitable.

Would you know how? Why not with leaven then (as you may read in Exodus 12.)
non in fermento veteri, not with that old sour bread, which we usually fed
upon whilst we were in Egypt; no, Haud est conveniens Paschati iste panis: and
therefore if we will keep this feast here, according to the prescribed rites
thereof, we must utterly exterminate from us all leaven: during the whole time
of this festivitie of ours, we must not so much as harbor leaven in our
houses; much less then (if we will keep this feast aright) may we knead and
mould it up in our bread.

Yea, but if not with leavened, with what bread then is it St. Paul his will
that we do keep the feast? for with some bread or other we must needs keep it
(I am sure) if his meaning in earnest be that we do keep it at all.

The truth is, a thing so necessary is bread to the substance of every feast,
as that to imagine a feast to have no bread in it, is to imagine a feast to be
no feast. This St. Paul knew well enough, being himself an Hebrew; he knew
well enough, how that ab esu panis Hebraei totum convivium denotarunt, how that
the Hebrew idiome it was under the term [Bread] to comprehend usually the
whole banquet. This he knew, I say, and because he knew it, though he bars us
one sort of bread, yet he allows another; though he restraines us from bread
that has any leaven in it, yet unleavened bread he allows our fill. What say
I? does he allow it us do I say? nay, to speak truth, he does injoine it us:
for this word (Let) here (you must know) in our English Version is not barely
permissive, but imperative, and strictly bind us it does, as to keep the feast,
so though not thus to keep it, yet thus; though not in fermento, yet in azymis,
though not with leavened bread, yet with unleavened.

Yea, but what then? Shall we untombe the Synagogue (you will say?) Shall we
Deum colere per escas? And those very ceremonies, which for so many hundred of
years have lien buried, and are quite putrefied, is it St. Paul his will (may
we think) in this my Text here, that we should now rake them up again, and
bring them in use?

Far be it from us to have the least thought, that Saint Paul should play
here the (...), that he should prevaricate, say and unsay; or that he should
build anew what he erst destroyed: that he should build anew here at Corinth,
what he destroyed (we read) at Colossi: or that he should teach one thing
here unto this people, and quite another thing there unto that. You must know
therefore how that by this leavened and unleavened bread here spoken of, Saint
Paul means not the leavened or unleavened bread of paste: no, himself has
taught us how that Gods Kingdom is not Esca and Potus; Romans 14.17.
himself has taught us how that it is not what we eat that commends a man
to God: 1 Cor. 8.8.
neither if we eat such sweet bread are we ought the better for it (can we
say) neither if we eat such leavened bread are we ought the worse. It is the
corruption (says Isodore Hispalenfis) of the old man that is the leavened
bread that is here spoken against. Again, it is the conversation (says he)
of the new man that is the sweet bread that is here called for: Let us keep the
feast, not with leavened bread, i.e. not with malice (says Saint Paul) and
wickedness: Again, Let us keep the feast with sweet bread, i.e. with
sincerity (says Saint Paul) and truth.

As the Text consists of two Verses, so do the Verses branch themselves into
two parts, viz. into Beneficium and Officium, into a doctrine of faith, and a
rule of life: into Beneficium or Credendum, a thing done for us on Good Friday;
and into Officium or Agendum, a thing to be done by us now at Easter; yea not
at Easter only, but every day, during the whole seven days of our life. The
Beneficium we have in these words: Pascha nostrum, etc. The Officium in these:
Itaque epulemur. The thing done for us we have in the seventh Verse, Christ our
Passover is sacrificed: the thing to be done by us in the eighth, Let us
therefore keep the feast.

In the Beneficium, which I call the doctrine, the Credendum or thing done,
there are four things which do voluntarily offer themselves in several to be
observed, and all they too (if we well consider them) of such singular moment
and importance, as that even in several they may afford us matter enough,
every one of them to keep a feast for. Here of the first is Paschanostrum, that
even we Christians have also a Passover. The second is Christus, that our
Passover is Christ. The third is Sacrificatus est, that Christ is sacrificed.
The fourth and last is Pronobis, that he is sacrificed for us. Of these in
order, and first of Pascha nostrum, that even we Christians have also a
Passover; we that are Abraham's seed by faith, as well as they that are
Abraham's seed by flesh: we of the new Covenant Our's, as well as they of the
old Covenant Their's.

Exodus, cap. 12. ver. 26.) it is Gods command (you shall find) that every
Israelite so punctually should understand, as that if a child (they say) were
but once able to eat so much bread as an olive, and were but of strength once
holding his father by the hand to go from Jerusalem gates unto the Temple, the
father of that child was bound to cause him to go up that he might there
catechize him in this ceremony. Where by the way, I pray tell me, did God so
strictly bind the Jews to instruct and edify their children in the grounds
and principles of religion; and is it a matter (may we think) that he left
freely unto the choice and liberty of us Christians, whether we for our parts
in these things will inform our children now or not? How comes it to pass
else (I would feign know) that some amongst us, who are past sucklings (I am
sure) yea or weanlings either, yea or striplings either, being in truth many of
them (we see) men grown, and therefore able (we may think) to eat more bread
than comes to the quantity of an olive, and to go further without a fathers
hand than from Jerusalems gates unto the Temple, than from the street unto the
Church (I mean) than from their own houses unto Gods, how comes it to pass
(I say) that some amongst us, who are now altogether (I am sure) past children
(unless you will make such children as the Prophet Isaiah does, Isaiah 63.20.
children well nigh an hundred years old) are yet more grossly ignorant in
most Christian principles, than are even the most ignorantly ignorant amongst
the Romanists? But of this Obiter, and but by the by only (as we say) (...),
to our shame, to the end, that if possible, I might in these things provoke us
of the Church of England unto emulation. To answer at length therefore unto the
question, touching the sense and meaning of a Passover.

The word Pascha here in the original is by birth an Hebrew (you must know)
not a Greek; neither (as some Monks have sung) does it derive its pedigree
from (...), to suffer: but sicut perhibent qui hoc sciunt (says Saint
Augustine) as men skillful in that language have delivered, Ab eo dicitur quod
transitur, it is deduced in Hebrew from the word Pasach, which is as much (you
must know) in our native English, as to fare, leap, or to pass over: and
therefore some have thought how that even from this very root not only (...)
has sprung amongst the Greeks, but even amongst the Latins also Passus, and
here in our own country dialect a Pase. Now the transitus or passage here
alluded unto by Saint Paul, is that which in the 12. chapter of the book of
Exodus we do find described to the very full: where the destroying Angel by
Gods appointment being to pass quite through the land of Egypt, and to smite
impartially all the firstborn in the land, even from man unto beast (even
from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat upon his throne, unto the firstborn
of the captive that was in the dungeon) he yet spared (we read) Gods own
people, he in mercy passed over them, God having appointed them to this
purpose with the blood of a certain Lamb to all-besprinkle both the two
side-posts, and the upper doore-post of their houses, that the Exterminator
seeing the blood thereon, might not pass in thither to destroy them. The
remembrance of this destruction, thus passing over them, were the children of
Israel every year in most solemn manner to celebrate, both by the killing of a
certain Lamb, selected by them to this purpose, as also by performing duly
certain other rites prescribed unto them by God. This Lamb thus slain by them
in memory of what had once passed them, did the Jewish people by a Metonymie
call Pascha suum, their Passover, and the slaying and the eating of this
Lamb, the slaying and eating of their Passover. Thou shall sacrifice the
Passover at even (says God, Deuteronomy. 16. ver. 6.) Where will thou (say the
Disciple, Matthew. 14.) that we go and prepare that thou may eat the
Passover? The Passover! that is, the Lamb, whereby the Angels passing over
them was commemorated; it being no unusual thing amongst sundry other kinds of
sacramental predication, to speak that of the thing signified, which is true
most properly of the sign only, and to ascribe that again unto the sign,
which is due only in truth unto the thing signified: and all this by reason
altogether of that spiritual union and conjunction which in every sacrament of
either Covenant is betwixt the Relatum (as they call it) and the Correlatum,
betwixt the corporal substance and the spiritual, betwixt the outward
element, and the inward grace.

Well, you have seen by this time (I suppose) what a Passover is, what in it
self, what in its sign, what in rei veritate, what in significante mysterio;
what in the truth of the thing done, what in figure also of that same truth. In
it self, it was the passage (you have seen) of a destroying Angel over the
Israelites; in it is sign it was a sacrifice offered in remembrance of that
same passage: in the truth of the thing done, Isreal's firstborn you see were
preserved; in figure of that same truth, a certain Lamb, you see, was slain.
Yea, but in the mean while, where is nostrum (you will say?) Where is that
same Passover which I said was Ours? For all this while have we been only in
Israel, you know: and what is Isreal's, I am sure, is naught to us.

True, it is not (I must confess:) but yet for all this have but patience (I
beseech you) for a little time, and I nothing doubt but with Gods assistance to
repay with interest, what erst I promised, and to make it clear unto you how
that, as well as Israel, even we Christians also have a Passover, a passage
over from as great an evil, a passage over to as great a good. For proof
hereof, I pray tell me what think you (I beseech you) of our soul? Is not that
a thing we must needs grant every whit as dear unto us as our first borne?
Yea, a thing in truth for whose salvation, for whose safe passage (I mean)
from hence to Heaven, there is no man (I think) so devoid of reason, that will
not give both first borne and all he has too. Again, what think you (I
beseech you) of Gods vengeance continually hovering over us, for our sins,
and every hour, every moment ready to power us down to hell? Is not that a
thing as much to be dreaded by us, as that destroying Angel was by the
Israelites: yea and by so much the more too, by how much we are to fear
eternal death, more than temporal? But now when by reason of Adams sin we
were all liable to condemnation, expecting hourly when Gods justice should
have ceazed upon our souls, that God in mercy was then pleased not to destroy
us with the Egyptians: that is (as S. Paul phraseth it) not to condemn us with
the world, but to pass over us, to spare us (as he did his own children some
times the Israelites) not suffering the Exterminator to have any power at all
upon us; that thus it was, what is more plain (I beseech you) throughout the
whole body of the New Testament? Where read we not (if you have observed it)
in many places of our being delivered from wrath? 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
Of our being freed from the Law? Romans 8.2. Gal. 3.13. Ephesians. 2.5.
Of our being redeemed from the Curse? Of being saved by Grace? And in the fifth
of St. John the 24. verse. (where we have both the terminos of this happy
passage of ours) read we not expressly how that each true believer is already
passed from death to life?

Well then, that a Passover we have, that is most certain (you see) even we
Christians, as well as the Jews: yea and that such a Passover in truth (if
we well examine it) as wherewith the Jewish Passover must not compare: No,
neither in respects of that evil which in either Passover was avoided, the
evil in theirs being only a bodily danger, whereas it was a spiritual danger
(you see) that we escaped in ours: nor yet in respect of that good which in
either Passover was effected, the good in theirs being only a temporal
deliverance; whereas it was an eternal deliverance, you see, that was wrought
in ours. What will you say now unto the means ordained by God in either
Passover for the effecting of this good, for the avoiding of this evil, for
the working of this deliverance, for the escaping of this danger? Even in this
respect too is not their Passover far inferior (alas) to ours? even as far
as the earth is inferior unto the heavens? even as far as the creature is
inferior to the Creator? Yes: for whereas the means in theirs was only agnus,
as says Saint Ambrose, irrationabilis naturae; behold in ours it was agnus
divinae potentiae: whereas the means in theirs was only a lamb that was taken
by them out of the fould; behold in ours it was that Lamb that descended for
us down from heaven, even that very Lamb which both S. Peter speaks of and S.
John the Baptist points at, namely Christ; Pascha nostrum Christus est, 1 Pet.
1.19.
our Passover, says my text, is Christ.

2 And the truth is, if we well consider with our selves what was to be done
for us in our Passover, what the state we were to pass from, what the state
we were to pass unto, we must needs grant how that in all reason none could
have been our Passover, save only Christ alone; none the means of our
passage from the state of wrath to the state of grace; none the means of our
passage from the state of death to the state of glory, save only that Lamb,
qui tollit peccata mundi, even that Lamb of God, Joh. 1.36.
qui in sinu Patris est; that most holy immaculate Lamb Christ. For alas,
alas, in the case we were in, could any other lamb have served the turn,
think you? could a lamb out of the stock have been a sufficient ransom for a
man's soul? for that which is of more worth than all the lambs in the whole
world are? yea, in truth than the whole World it self is, or a whole world of
worlds besides? Why, (...), (says Proclus of Constantinople) (...): the
redemption of a soul is a greater purchase, than either the wealthiest Saint
could have compassed, or the mightiest Angel; how much less then could a
common lamb, trow you, have a considerable recompense, and counterprice, I say
not for all the souls in this or that only particular Kingdom, but even for
all the souls of all the people in all the Kingdoms under Heaven? But now
such a Lamb it was that we wanted; such a Lamb that we stood in need of,
even a Lamb by whose means and merit the destroying Angel might be made
pass over, not the souls only of some few Israelites, in our little Angle
only of the Land of Egypt; but over all the souls of all mankind, that either
are or have been since the world began. Why, and blessed be God (and we have
cause to feast for it I think) such a Paschal Lamb it is that we now have, God
in mercy having so provided for us, that even his only Son, you see, should be
our Lamb; for Pascha nostrum Christus est, our Passover, says my text, is
Christ.

Christ (I say) and in very deed such a true Paschal Lamb is Christ, such a
perfect Passover our Passover, such a complete Passover ours, as that to
ours the Jewish Passover was but as the shadow unto the substance, the Jewish
Lamb to ours but as the type unto the truth. For proof hereof, do but see
the Parallels, I beseech you, betwixt their Passover and ours, betwixt (...),
as they call it, and (...), betwixt our crucifigible Passover, and their
legal one: and I pray tell me what think you? was there ought typified can we
say in theirs, which in every respect, if we search the Gospel, was not fully
verified (we shall find) in ours? First, their Lamb was one of the flock,
we read; in like manner so was ours, even (...), (says Eusebius Caesariensis)
one that was made of a woman (says St. Paul) that was true man. Secondly, Gal.
4 4.
Secondly, their Lamb was without blemish, we read; Exodus 12.5.
in like manner so was ours, even (...), (says Proclus) one that knew no
sin, says S. Paul, that had no guile. Thirdly, their Lamb was to be
offered, we read; in like manner so was ours, Oblatus est quia ipse voluit,
says the Prophet; through the eternal Spirit, says S. Paul, Heb. 9.14.
he offered himself. Fourthly, and last of all, their Lamb, we read, was to
be sacrificed; in like manner so was ours, Christus Pascha nostrum immolatus
est, Christ our Passover, says my Text, is sacrificed.


3 The word in the Original is (...), which is rendered by diverse diversely: Mr
Beza reading it, sacrificatus est, Christ our Passover is sacrificed, whereas
in the Vulgar Latin we find it, immolatus est, Christ our Passover is
slain. To speak properly, it is the word sacrificed that in my judgment does
here fit us best; that importing unto us not only the slaying of a thing, but
also the slaying of a thing offered; without either of which, in true
propriety of speech, Christ could never have bin a sacrifice, and therefore
consequently never Pascha nostrum, never in all reason our Passover. This is
evident by that difference which has been observed by the learned, betwixt
what is offered, what is sacrificed, and what only upon some common ordinary
occasion is slain: because whereas a thing may be offered (they tell us) that
is not slain, as the firstborn were amongst the Israelites; and slain that
is not sacrificed, as the calfe was by the Witch of Endor: yet truly
sacrificed they say a thing cannot be, unless both offered it be, yea and
slain too, either analogically or really, either in proportion or in truth.
Christ was both, to show in every respect the truth and verity of his
sacrifice, and oblatus est, and immolatus, Christ our Passover, I say, was
both. In Isai. 53.3. there the Prophet tells us that Christ was offered: in
Dan. 9.26. there the Prophet tells us that Christ was slain: again, in Heb.
9.28. there the Apostle tells us that Christ was offered: in Rev. 5.12. there
the Apostle tells us that Christ was slain. Oblatus est, he was offered, say
Divines, in vita, in his life: Occisus est, he was slain, say they, in cruce,
upon the cross. Oblatus est, he was offered that his slaughter might be a
sacrifice: Occisus est, he was slain that his sacrifice might be complete. One
thing I am sure of, so sanctified was Christ his slaughter by his being
offered, and on the other side again, so accomplished was Christ his sacrifice
by his being slain, as that not without cause it is, if we well consider it,
that St. Paul says not in this my Text here, (...), Christ our Passover is
offered, or (...), Christ our Passover is slain; no, but to make it plain unto
us how that slain he was, not (...), upon any common usual occasion, but
(...), in honor only of our God (which the learned observe to be the maine and
only difference between (...) and (...):) (...), therefore, (...), says he,
Christ our Passover is sacrificed. Yea but to sacrifice is a Church-worke, you
will say, not to be done but by some Priest only; it would not be amiss
therefore to make enquiry here by what Priest it was that Christ was sacrificed.

Surely by none other Priest, save only by himself alone; it was himself
only that here gave himself to be a sacrifice unto God now: Ephesians. 5.2. Heb.
9.14.
Tradidit hostiam semetipsum, says Saint Paul, Christ did offer up himself.

Ipse semetipsum? did Christ sacrifice himself? why, (...) (as I have showed
you) what ever is sacrificed is destroyed; and did Christ destroy himself, you
will say? did he semetipsum interficere, slay himself?

For answer: Though precisely necessary it be unto every sacrifice that the
thing offered be destroyed, yet it is no way material at all by whom destroyed
it be, whether by him that offers it, or by some other, provided always
that the party offering it, do willingly yield thereunto his consent. But now
that Christ consented to his own death, at least wise that he did not hinder
it, neither potentiae obicem opponendo, nor objectum actui subducendo, this is
so plain, as that to doubt thereof is to doubt whether there be a Sun or no
at noonday. For proof hereof, in Joh. 10. does he not lay down his life
(he tells us) of himself? yea, says he not plainly, that no man takes it
from him whether he will or no, but that freely, voluntarily, of his own
accord he does lay it down of himself? Yea. Hence is it that through the
eternal Spirit he is said to offer up himself. Neither wonder hereat, as at a
thing unlikely, that in one and the same action, the same person, at the same
time, should be both sacrifice anc Priest too; for I will tell you more than
this (and it is matter of wonder indeed) when Christ our Passover was now
sacrificed, (...) says Epiphanius, (...), that he might show from henceforth
how that all other sacrifices were for evermore to be abolished, and that
together with his, all other, with all appendices of theirs, were to expire
their last. Idem and ipse Pontifex, says Origin, idem ponatur and hostia: both
the sacrifice was the Priest, faith Epiphanius, and the Priest the Lamb, and
the Lamb the Temple, and the Temple the Altar, and the Altar God, and God Man:
(...). Christ being made all in all things, and all purposely for us,
sacrificatus est pro nobis, Christ is sacrificed, says my Text, for us.

Well then, that we have a Passover, you have seen (as I suppose) and that
this Passover of ours is Christ: you have seen also how or when it was that
Christ here was Our Passover, viz. not as he was slain without being
offered; nor yet as he was offered without being slain: no, but as he was
both slain and offered too, and so sacrificed: Christ our Passover (says my
Text) is sacrificed. The last circumstance that now presents it self in this
first part of my Text to be entreated of, is the finis cui, the person for
whose sake it was that Christ was sacrificed; Sacrificatus est pro nobis,
Christ was sacrificed (says my Text) for us.

For us! Not for himself then: no, there was no cause of death (God wot) in
him: Ipse non meruit si non pro pietate mori, even his very Judge himself
being his witness, there was nothing worthy of death to be found in him. (...)
(says Theodoret in the person of Christ) (...): he that owed not a death,
took death now upon himself, and he subjected himself unto death here, over
whom death in truth had not any right at all. And to speak sooth, well for us
was it that Christ suffered not for himself; well for us, yea very well that
he was not sacrificed for himself. For if the way of that old Serpent had been
ever found upon this rock, Prove. 30.19.
if this our Lamb had had any spot in him, and so had deserved death in
himself, could he ever then have been a fit Passover, to have now been
sacrificed (as he was) for us? No, Si ipse indebitam mortem non susciperet,
(says Gregory) nunquam nos a debita morte liberaret: if Christ (I may say) in
any respect had bin sacrificed for himself, impossible then had it been that
in any respect he should have thus satified (as he did) for us: but now so it
is, that in this my Text here, Christ was sacrificed (we read) for Us.

For Us! Not for Angels then: no, as not for himself, so not for them neither;
their nature he assumed not, their person he sustained not, he for them was
not sacrificed, they by him were not delivered. It was for Us, for us men
(says our Creed) that the Son of God came down from heaven, that he was
incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, that he was made man: for us
men, for us it was that he was made lower than the Angels, quod expertus
infirma, quod passus indigna, and quod demum per mortem crucis ad sua reversus;
and that at the last he was thus sacrificed according to this Scripture. The
truth is, had this my Text here been either penned or spoken unto us by some
Angel, why then questionless as well for Angels as for Us might we have said
that Christ was sacrificed: but now the words (you know) are Saint Paul's, and
Saint Paul (you know) was a man, why then for us men it was that Christ was
sacrificed (you see) for us men, I say, for us.

Yea, but Saint Paul (you will say) was a Jew, and if Christ was sacrificed for
Jews only, very little (God knows) will be the benefit that will arise from
hence to us. True, he was so indeed, himself has told us, how that he was an
Hebrew of the Hebrews: but here is the comfort yet, and without this, small
heart should we have to keep the feast now; here is the comfort (I say) that
this Epistle of his, whereof this my Text here is a part and portion, is not
beati Pauli ad Hebraeos, the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle unto the Hebrews;
no, but ad Corinthios prima, his first Epistle unto the Corinthians. Now the
City of Corinth stood in Greece (you must know) above seven hundred miles from
Judea, and therefore questionless the people wrote to here were merely
Gentiles, no Jews. Why, and so they were indeed, and because they were so, we
may from hence gather therefore to our comfort, how that for us Gentiles it was
that Christ was sacrificed, for us Gentiles, for us.

For us! (...)! Romans 11.
O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and goodness of our God! how
unscarchable are his judgments? how his ways past finding out? Could it ever
have been believed that Christ should have been thus sacrificed (as he was) for
us? for us sinners of the Gentiles? for us that were far off? for us that
were without God in the world, that the Son of God should be thus slain for us?
Indeed, had it bin for the Jews only that Christ had died here, the wonder
questionless had not been so great, for they were Gods inheritance, Gods
chosen, the seed of Abraham Gods friend; and if for a friend a man may chance
to die sometimes, why not sometimes then for a friends seed too. But now as for
us, we were not only abalienati a Deo, not only quoad statum externum,
strangers; but we were also (we must remember) hosts, quoad dissidium
internum, enemies: yea, and that as well in an active as in a passive sense, as
well directly as by interpretation, as well for that we rebelliously hated Gods
rule over us, as for that we were in all things contrary unto his will: and is
it not most strange and admirable (in this case we were in) that Christ should
be sacrificed yet for us? the innocent for the guilty? the home-borne for
strangers? the only Son for enemies? Christ for us? Yet so it was, and that now
it was so, it was no more than was foretold, no more than in Numb. 9. ver.
10.11. God himself had signified that so it should be. For besides that first
Passover there in the first month, read we not also of a second Passover
(if you mark it) in the second month? of a Passover allowed by God to be
slain purposely for those persons, who during the celebration of the first
Passover were in a journey a far off)? Yes. But now, if you will but suffer
S. Paul to unvaile Moses his face, if you will but expound the Law there by the
Gospel, Number. 9. ver. 10. by Ephesians. 2. ver. 14. you shall then find how that not
without a mystery it is, that the Hebrew of this word far off is observed by
the learned for some special consideration to have extraordinary pricks over
it; because by that second Passover there permitted by God to those in a
journey far off, God did prefigure unto us Christ here sacrificed (you see)
for us, even for us Gentiles in the flesh, strangers, for us who at that time
were far off, both from the kindred of the Jewish nation, and from the
Covenants also of the promise, Sacrificatus est pro nobis, Christ is sacrificed
(says my Text) for us.

Well then Christ died not (you have seen) for himself here, nor yet for
Angels; no, nor yet only for Jews neither: for Saint Paul writing (you see)
unto Gentiles, says, that Christ is sacrificed for us. For us he says; not
for some few of us, under such a Roman Prelate only, or of such a faction:
for us within the verges only of the Romish Hierarchy, or for us of the
Congregation only in New England: No, sanguis Christi pretium est (says St.
Augustine) the Lamb here sacrificed (you see) is Christ; and therefore at too
high a rate do they value themselves, and the blood of Christ do they prize
too low, qui dicum aut illud tam parvum esse, ut solos Afros emerit; aut se tam
magnos pro quibus solis illud sit datum: who being themselves (God he knows)
but a sorry handful of men, if they compare themselves with the whole world,
do yet think that this common Passover of ours should be slain
incommunicably for none but them alone. In Hebr. 2. ver. 9. Christ tasted death
(we read) for every man: in 2. Corinthians. 5. ver. 14. he died Saint Paul tells
us for all: so that when in this my text here we do read of Christ our
Passover, how that he was sacrificed for us, it is in effect (you must know)
but the very same with that in Romans 8. ver. 32. where God delivered up (we
read) his own Son, pro nobis omnibus, for us all. Howbeit, I would not that
you should here mistake me, as if the benefit of Christ his passion (I
thought) should redound to all men, and as if because in Heb. 2. Christ tasted
death for every man, I might therefore hold, that every man should reap the
fruit of it unto salvation. No, however it was that sufficienter (as we say)
and in respect of the dignity of the price paid, Christ was sacrificed, we may
say very well, for every one of us in the whole world: for, Tanti quid valet
(says Saint Augustine?) Quid, nisi totus orbis? Quid, nisi omnes gentes? what
one worldly thing, except the whole world it self, could be worth the
bloud-shedding of the Son of God? yet because the Jewish Passover was never
killed (if you have observed it) but for such only as were made count of (as
in Exodus 12. ver. 4. you may read, if it please you, more at large:) for this
cause therefore (I say) only for them amongst us was Christ slain efficienter
(says Estiu^) to purpose: I mean for them only simpliciter (says Topporus)
for them only with effect, whom God having chosen from before all eternity to
be Sons (as we may call them) of the society, shall now eat this Lamb in
their several families, shall apply Christ unto themselves by faith. So then
the reason why all are not saved is not want of merit in Christ, but of faith
and grace in them that perish. That thus it was, what is more plain (I beseech
you) than that in Galat. 3. ver. 27. where read we not how that the promise of
the faith of Jesus, is given to them only that believe? Yes: and therefore, Si
non credis (says Saint Ambrose) non tibi passus est Christus: never dream
thou (O man) that Christ was sacrificed for thee, in case it be so that thou
do not believe. The truth is, did Saint Paul write here unto an infidel
people, not converted, some ground then might profane miscreants have, to hope
that Christ was sacrificed here for them: but the endorsement (if you mark it)
of this Epistle runs, not unto all at Corinth without exception; no, but
Ecclesiae Dei quae est Corinthi, unto them that call there on the name of
Christ: now, Quo modo invocabunt in quem non crediderunt? how possibly can men
invoke him in whom they have not as yet believed? Why then for Us believers it
was that Christ was sacrificed (you see) for Us believers, I say, for Us.

For Us (I say) and for such of us two ways may we say that Christ was
sacrificed: for us, for our good; and for us, in our stead: for us, for our
behoof; and for us, in our behalf. First, for our good: for we must not
think that Christ our Passover was slain in vain here; that the Son of
God did dye gratis (as we say) that the sovereign fountain of Christ his
blood was let out to run at waste: we must not think that this box of
ointment, far more precious than that of Spikenard elsewhere, was broken,
spilt, and powered forth here (...), to no purpose. The good questionless is
most infinite that does redound unto us from Christ his sacrifice; yea so
infinite, as that here in this life we cannot perfectly conceive it, because
(alas) here in this life we do not perfectly receive it; the greatest part of
what we enjoy, being the least part of what we expect: the greatest part of
what we have in re, the least part of what we have in spe. Indeed, we may
here meditate perhaps on some few particulars of what Christ has gained for us
by this his sacrifice, but the exact knowledge, as well as the full fruition of
such benefits, being reserved especially for the life to come, beyond the
faculty it is of our best Arithmetic to recount the sum of them, to compute
them all.

One thing I am sure of, the sole benefit that does now accrue unto us by
Christ his sacrifice, is not only, as some fond miscreants have dreamed, our
confirmation in the Gospel: no, if this were all, I would gladly know then in
what one particular above the rest, the death of Christ here does more
advantage us than the death might have done of some other man? Does not S. Paul
tell us of himself, how that what he suffered was for Gods chosen sake, the
Elect? that is (as it is Col. 1.24) for Christ his body sake the Church? Well,
but how for the Elect? how for the Church it would be known? Mary (as my Lord
of Sarum cleeres it in that most excellent exposition of his) non pro illis
redimendis, non expiandis; not that he might satisfy for their sins, nor
((...), St. Paul had not wherewith to pay his own scores, much less then
would his stock hold out to defray the debts of other men) sed pro illis
confirmandis and adificandis in doctrina Evangelica, but that by his sufferings
he might confirm and stablish them in the truth and certainty of what he had
preached; and that by this means they being strengthened in the faith and
verity of the Gospel, salutem consequantur quae est in Christo, they might
obtain that salvation which is in Christ.

But now did St. Paul do this by his death, 2 Timothy 2.10.
and did Christ may we think no more by his? did the Disciple do this by his
death, and did the Lord, may we think, no more by his? nay, in truth did
Christ here no more for us now by his death, than what by his miracles (if we
do but well bethink our selves) he had done formerly (we shall find) in his
life time? and what very well he might have done for us, though he had never
tasted death at all? Why suppose, I beseech you, that after a long time spent
amongst us here in this world, in all piety, innocence, and demonstration of
the Spirit, our blessed Savior at last, like the Prophet Eliah elsewhere,
should have been charioted up into heaven without death, and from heaven
should have given a specimen of his power and majesty unto us on earth here:
might not even this alone have been enough, we may think, to have established
us in the Gospel? this alone have been abundantly enough to have confirmed and
strengthened us in the truth? Yes, I trow. Why then it is clear, I think, how
ever some heretics have broached the contrary, that the good benefit and
emolument which does redound unto us by Christ his sacrifice, must surely in
reason be somewhat else needs, besides our confirmation in what h^e had taught.

Why and somewhat else also must it needs be, besides our institution in
holiness, and besides our instruction by his example, in obedience, patience,
and brotherly love. For, as St. Bernard sweetly, Quid prodest, says he, quod
nos instituit, si non restituit? wherein are we profited by Christ his
instruction, if we be not also rescued by him from destruction? Indeed Christ
his cross (I must confess) was our copy, Christ his passion our pattern;
and therefore St. Peter tells us how that Christ did suffer for us, 1 Pet. 2.21.
leaving us (...), an Example, ut nos vestigia ipsius insequeremur, that we
might tread in his steps, Phil. 2.5.
both incheerfully submitting our selves unto Gods appointments, and in
enduring patiently all wrongs, as also (which St. John points at) in
effectually loving one another, even unto the death. 1 John. 3.16.
Well, but if Christ his passion does no way benefit us at all, but by way of
pattern only and ensample, what then shall we say of infants? very hard
surely must it go with them needs, little fruit, little profit will there from
Christ his death here arise to them: for can they conform themselves unto
Christ his death, who have never heard as yet of Christ his life? or can they
imitate, may we think, their Saviors virtues, who have never imitated as yet
their first parents sin? In all likelihood, pro qualitate vulneris allata est
medicina; in all probability, by the nature of the wound it is, that we can
give the best guess at the plaster. But now sure I am some way else it was
that Adam damnified us by his transgression quam ex sola ostensione peccati,
than only by opening a gap before us unto all lewdness, and therefore
questionless some way else it was that Christ did benefit us now by his
passion quam ex sola ostensione virtutum, than only by chalking out a way
before us unto all goodness.

Why and so it was indeed: for the truth is Christ our Passover (we may say)
was sacrificed for the remission of our sins, for our reconciliation with the
Father, and, which follows necessarily upon these two, for our redemption
from hell. Whence else is it (I would feign know) that Christ his blood in holy
scripture, is styled our ransom, our atonement and the propitiation for our
sins? Is is not to make it plain unto us, how that Christ his death here was
as well expiatorie as exemplarie? and that Christ our Passover was now slain
(we must know) as well ut daret justitiam, as ut doceret; as well ut infunderet
charitatem, as ut ostenderet? pro nobis redimendis, or (as it is in one of our
Church her collects if you have observed it) that he might be a sacrifice for
sin, 2. Sunday after Easter.
as well as pro nobis instituendis, that he might be an ensample unto us of
godly life?

But now if any shall question us how Christ his death here could be the
expiation of our sins, and not rather intruth (being so execrable a
sacrilege as it was) a further aggravation of our guilt* it cannot be
improbable, since God was so highly offended with our first parents, and in
them with the whole world, only for the eating of that forbidden fruit; that he
has far greater cause (we must think) in all likelihood to be much more
enraged now against mankind for this so horrid, this so inhumane a murder
acted upon the person of his only Son? For answer hereunto, know thus much,
that Christ his death here, we say, was our atonement, not as out of malice
and most unjustly it was procured by the Jews, but as most obediently and in
mere love it was taken upon him by himself, Christ his charity being of more
force, we are sure, to acquire and purchase for us Gods favor, than the spite
and rancour of the whole world could be to incense against us Gods wrath. To
this purpose what says S. Bernard in his 119. Epist. against Abailardus? Mary,
Non mors (says he) sed voluntas placuit sponte morientis: it was not simply
death that did here so please God, but the will of him that so freely died, and
that by death did both unsting death, and work salvation, and restore
righteousness, and ransack hell, and enrich heaven, and vanquish
principalities, and subdue powers, and pacificantis omnia quae in coelo sunt
and quae in terra, and that did gather together in one all things both which
are in heaven and which are in earth.

By all this it is most clear and evident, as I suppose, that Christ was
sacrificed here for our good; yea for our good, not as some hell-bred heretics
have vented, of edification only and instruction, but of remission also, and of
reconciliation, and of redemption from hell. Yea but what then? is this all
(you will say?) No marry is it not, you must know; this is not all yet: for
what think you, I pray, of that in Virgil? Unum pro multis dabitur caput? Is
it not a phrase, I beseech you, of the same force with unum multorum loco
dabitur caput? What again of that in Terence, I will marry thee for him? Is it
not as much in every respect as if he had said in other words, I will marry
thee in stead of him? In the 9. to the Romans St. Paul wishes, that for his
brethren he were cursed: for his brethren does he say? pro fratribus? that is,
fratrum loco, in his brethrens place. Again in the 2. to the Corinth. S. Paul
tells us, how that for Christ we are ambassadors: for Christ does he say?
pro Christo? that is, Christi vice, in Christ his stead. But the truth is, if
in this my text here Christ were not sacrificed for us now in this sense, how
comes it to pass then that by one of the Fathers he is said nostro nomine
suscipere supplicia? how, that by an other he is said nostra pro nobis luere
debita? yea how comes it to pass then that he is styled (...), the pledge
and hostage for our souls? Does not all this make plain unto us what himself
has taught us in S. Matthewes Gospel, viz. that he did (...); stake his soul
down in the roomth of ours, and so by consequent that Christ was sacrificed,
we may say very well for us? for us? that is, vice nostra, by way of
commutation in our stead.

But now, that to be sacrificed in our stead, is more than to be sacrificed for
our good, this is plain, because whereas he that dies for our good, may yet
not die perhaps in our stead; on the other side he that dies in our stead,
cannot but die also for our good, we may be sure we have even 'the whole army
of noble Martyrs bearing witness with us unto this truth, who all in their
several orders having died for our good, yet amongst them all, was there any
one of them that ever died we can say in our stead? No, acceperunt justi, non
dederunt coronas: how precious so ever all their deaths were in the sight of
their Creator, yet for all that (says Leo in his 12. sermon upon the passion)
nullius insontis occisio propitiatio fuit mundi: the very best of them all
could never say, how that he died in the behalf of the believing world.
Singulares in singulis mortes fuerunt, each man of them in particular died in
particular to himself alone. How rich so ever they all were in the gifts and
graces of the Spirit, yet hand alterius quisquam debitum suo funere solvit, yet
for all that could not any one of them undertake the ransom of his enthralled
brother. It was only Christ (says one) amongst the sons of men, in whom all
of us we may say did suffer; in whom all of us we may say were crucified, in
whom all of us we may say did die; Christ only, Christ in whom all of us we
may say were slain, and of whom therefore we may say very well how that he was
sacrificed here for us: for us? in our steed, as well as for us, for our good;
for us, in our behalf, as well as for us, for our behoof.

Yea but why Christ thus for us (you will say?) why not we rather for our
selves? Cum sis ipse nocens moritur cur victima pro te? since we men were they
that had offended, why should Christ an innocent thus die for us?

Why? why not? If God had so determined, why not? Cum aliunde reatus, cur non
aliunde justitia? since by another it was that we were engaged, why by another
also may we not be enlarged? An justitia justi super eum erit (says Saint
Bernard) and impietas impii non erit super eum? shall the righteousness of the
righteous be upon him alone; and shall the wickedness of the wicked be not
only upon him, but upon us too? It was by Adam (you know) that we were made
sinners, and why by Christ therefore may we not be made righteous? It was by
Adam (you know) that we were all addicted, and why by Christ therefore may we
not be all enfranchised? You will say, that Adam perhaps was our father: and
what? was not Christ (I beseech you) our brother? or is it equal (do you
think) that that son who bears the burden of his fathers sin, should yet
be debarred from what ever benefit might accrue unto him from his brothers
righteousness? Assure your selves, there is as great an efficacy in Christ his
blood, as in Adams seed; in Christ his blood to cleanse us, as in Adams seed to
stain us; in Christ his blood for our purgation, as in Adams seed for our
pollution. Indeed, were there betwixt Christ and us no manner relation at all,
somewhat improbable then might it seem unto humane reason, that by means here
of Christ his sacrifice, the wrath of God should be made to pass from us. But
now, besides the neernesse of Christ his conjunction unto us, natura, regno,
vadimonio (he being not only our brother, but even our king too; not only our
king, but also our pledge:) besides this (I say) what says the Scripture (I
beseech you?) Mary, we are all in Christ (says S. Paul) one body: so that
there is as straight an union betwixt us and Christ (you see) as betwixt the
members and the head. But now it being so common a thing in the body natural
to punish one member for another; for instance, to brand the forehead for the
tongues lavishnesse, and for the theft which the hand has committed to scourge
the back: why should it seem unreasonable unto us, that in the body mystical
Christ our head should die for us here? especially too, Christ being not only
willing (we are sure) thus for our sakes to undergo death, not only able by
his own strength powerfully to raise up himself again from death, but by
death also to overcome death, to purchase a life for us which shall never end
in death, and, to the endless praise of Gods boundless glory, to save us from
dying who must have died for ever else?

Well, you have seen at length (I suppose) what Christ has done: What! yea,
and for whom too. What he has done, do I say? what he suffered rather; for,
sacrificatus est (you see) he was sacrificed, and needs must he suffer (I
trow) even to destruction, whosoever he is that shall be sacrificed. Why, and
to make it plain unto us that Christ did so, some translations read it
therefore, He was slain: Christus Pascha nostrum immolatus est, Christ our
Passover (say they) is slain. He was slain (I say) and that not for himself
(I showed you) innocent Lamb that he was, not for himself: no, nor yet for
Angels, no, nor yet only for Jews neither; but for Jews and Gentiles
together: for Us, for Saint Paul, for Corinthians, for Circumcised, for
Uncircumcised, for Hebrews, for Greeks, Christ is sacrificed (says my Text)
for us. For us, yea even for all of us, sub condition (as we say) and in
causa: for albeit in Christ none but the Elect were redeemed, yet was the whole
world redeemed (says my Lord of Sarum) by Christ: but for Us of the faithful,
Gods children, simpliciter (I told you) and cum effectu: for us, by way of
edification, nostro commodo, for our good: for us, by way of expiation, nostro
loco, in our stead: for us, per viam confirmationis, for our profit and
behoof: for us, per viam surrogationis, in our person and behalf. Let us
pass now from what was done on Christ his part, unto what remains to be
done on ours; from the Beneficium unto the Officium, from the dogmaticall part
of my Text unto the practical, from the doctrine of faith, the Credendum,
Christ his bounty to us upon Good Friday, unto the rule of life, the Agendum,
our duty to him now at Easter; yea let me tell you again not at Easter only,
but during the whole course here of this our life.

One thing I am sure of (however Dr. Kellison would bear the world in hand
that we teach the contrary) never the doctrine was it for ought I know, never
the dream (as yet) of any Church Protestant, that because Christ on his part
has done so much for us, we from henceforth therefore need do naught on ours.
No, even (...), we have all been taught (I hope) how that Christ was as well a
Prophet as a Priest, 2 Timothy 3.15.
as well (...), as well a Prophet to teach us our future duties, Heb. 5.1.
as a Priest to satisfy for our passed debts: Even this my Text here does
evince thus much, where the Apostle having taught us (you see) how that Christ
was sacrificed, yea and that he was sacrificed too our Passover, to the end
that the wrath of God might be made to pass from us; does he now leave it (can
we say) unto our selves alone, to make what use we list of this so heavenly a
doctrine which he has delivered? does he refer it wholly now unto our own
discretions only to pass by this so infinite mercy of God in what sort we
please? No, that he does not: for as in the seventh Verse he has showed us
what concerning this point we are to believe, so now in the eight Verse does
he also inform (you see) how in consideration hereof we are to live: as
before in the preceding part of my Text by way of doctrine he has taught us
what in love to us Christ did suffer, so now in that which follows does he
by way of use teach us what in thankfulness unto Christ we must do: viz. that
in a grateful acknowledgement of this his so unspeakable favor toward us,
we must from henceforth solemnly keep a feast: Christ our Passover is
sacrificed, let us therefore (says Saint Paul) keep the feast.

The word in the original is (...), which as well bids an holy day (you must
know) as indicts a feast, and every whit as properly by Tremelius is rendered
festum celebremus, let us keep the holy day, as by the vulgar Latin and some
others epulemur, let us keep the feast. Our last English version reads it both
ways, and not but upon very good grounds too does it so read it, it not being
unknown unto us how that both these ways men did solemnize a Passover of old
amongst the Jews: viz. Et festum celebrando, and epulando, both by making a
holy day, and by keeping a feast too. Why, and in the name of God both these
ways let us Christians celebrate now this our Passover; because Christ our
Passover is sacrificed, let us therefore keep an holy day: because Christ our
Passover is sacrificed, let us therefore also keep a feast.

First, festum celebremus, let us keep an holy day, and that by observing
carefully an holy rest, as from sin every day, for never upon any day may we
rest in that (Christ for us being not therefore slain now, that we from
henceforth might live in sin) so upon all these and the like solemn
holy days from all works also of servile labor, from all worldly works of
what kind soever they be, which without notorious detriment cannot be well
forborne. Besides what we may learn in this point even from very Heathens,
whose several holy days (we find) they did count polluted, if after notice
once given thereof per praeconem, a man upon any such day was found at his
work: besides this (I say) I pray tell me, B. Ely, Sab. page 222.
does not a learned Prelate of ours, in a late elabourate Treatise of his,
amongst sundry other Kings laws to this purpose, produce a law enacted by our
own Alured, that a freeman, if he wrought in quavis festa die, he was either
to be divested of this liberty, or to be soundly fined for it; a servant
either corium perdere, either to lose his skin, or to redeem it with his coin?
And no marvel truly, for even Gods own law it is in Leviticus 23. it is Gods
own law there (I say) that bid adieu we should unto all worldly affairs upon
all holy days, that upon all holy days (as the very name may prompt us to
do) we should forbear to mingle our selves with what belongs to earth.

Not that it is Gods will that we should now be idle (we may think) or pass
the Holy Day away in doing nothing. No, qui nihil agit male agit, he that does
naught must needs do naught, we may be sure. Even very heathen people have
seen thus much, though they had the light only, God knows, of blind nature:
and therefore amongst the ancient Romans the goddess, it seems, had no Temple
allowed her within the City, but abroad elsewhere without the Walls, in some
extreme parts of the Suburbs; intimating unto us hereby, how that idleness is
a vice not tolerable in any State, as being indeed the undoubted mother of all
ungodliness and sin. But what now? will God suffer, do you think, upon an
holy day, what is not to be endured, we may be sure, upon any day? or is it an
idle rest, do you think, that he always requires at our hands, when upon
such days as these are he interdicteth labor? wherein then, I wonder, would
this our rest differ even from the very rest of our jumenta? from our ox his
rest at the stall, and from our horses rest in the stable? for sure I am, as
well as we, even they are to rest also from all travel. It is recorded by
Cato concerning one of the Scipio's, how that he was never less alone (he
should say) than when alone: and, Nunquam minus otiosus quam cum otiosus, never
less idle than when he was idle. (...), (says a Divine, whom St. Basil speaks
of) (...), I know not what others may do, but sure am I, says he, that I am
never more busied, than when I do rest: why, and never more busied let us at
any time be, than when God does call us, as here, to keep an holy day; never
more exercised, though neither in sinful nor secular affairs, yet in all such
works as do concern the day.

Now what are they? Sure I am, not to mad and gad it up and down the
streets, to sir and smoke it in Tobacco shops, to roar and revell it in
Tavernes, (and as it were in contempt of that destroying Angel (whose sword as
yet, you fee, is not quite sheathed) to lay purposely aside all honest labor,
that we may the more greedily prostitute our selves unto all lewd excess? No,
there are both laws Imperial, (I am sure) and Ecclesiastical, strictly
restraining men from these exorbitancies; and that especially too upon all such
days, as for order and policy sake we do call Holy. And no marvel truly,
for, Haeccine solennes dies decent, says Tertullran, quae alios dies non
decent? or have we no other way, may we think, to make an holy day, than by
making our selves thereon the more unholy? Indeed, were they Liberalia which we
do now celebrate, were they days dedicated to the god of Riot, unto drunken
Bacchus I mean, on whose several Festivals men might both speak and do, it
seems, what ever they listed; then wonder I could not if that we did keep
these days now with far more looseness than I hope we do. But now, besides
that he is a sober God whom we are to worship now (as the Athenians said
sometimes of their Minerva) a God who holds not liberty, I am sure, to be
piety, or occasion of rioting to be religion; neither ever did teach us, as
yet, when we are to keep an holy day, to express our public joy by our
public shame. Besides this, I say, I pray bethink your selves, is not the
feast we keep now the feast of Passover? Yes. But (...), says Saint Gregory,
(...), the word Pascha, says he, imports a passing, as of that destroying
Angel from over the Israelites, so of the Israelites themselves also from out
of Egypt: why in the name of God then, if indeed your purpose be to keep a
true Paschall holy day now, (...), yea and that too in such a fashion, as
whereby Gods destroying Angel may be made to pass at length from us, why let
us pass then with all diligence from what ever courses heretofore we learned
in Egypt, unto such works only and religious exercises, as shall best beseem
(we know) Gods own chosen Israelites, viz. (...), from works of sin unto
works of grace, a rebus inferioribus ad superiora, from works of vanity unto
works of piety: and (that we may do opiu diei in die suo, in it own day the
work of the day) from the base drudgerie works of the flesh and devil, unto
such as are true holy day works indeed.

Would you know what these works are? Why, do but uncase the word (I beseech
you) the Latin feriae (I mean) into its first swaddling clothes, and you shall
then find, how that a right holy day work is either ferire victimas, or far
dona, you shall then find how that a true holy day work, is either to slay
our beasts for sacrifice, or to bring hither our gifts. One thing I am sure of,
both these works did the Jewish people heretofore upon their holy days, as
unto men versed any whit in sacred story it is most evident and clear. Why,
and in the name of God (if we will keep the holy day aright) both these works
also let us do on ours now: because S. Paul his will is that we should keep
an holy day, let us slay our beasts therefore now for sacrifice; because Saint
Paul his will it is that we should keep an holy day, let us bring hither
therefore now our gifts too.

First let us ferire victimas, slay our beasts for sacrifice: not those beasts
we do read of in the law; no, I do doubt very much how willing many of us
would be to part in these days with such beasts as those were; neither if we
all were willing has every one of us (can I think) any such beasts now to
part with; neither if we all had them, does God now (I am sure) require any
such beasts at our hands. What say I? does he not require them, do I say?
nay, to speak sooth, he does now reject them; for sacrificia and victimas
noluisti (says David) as for all legal sacrifices (says St. Paul) God will
none of them now. Psalm. 40.6. Heb. 10.5.
Indeed a time once there was, I must confess, when God required such beasts
(not for that he himself then had the least need of them; for the beasts of
the forest are mine all of them (says God) and so are the cattle too upon a
thousand hills; and therefore, as S. Justine Martyr rightly, we can never think
that any thing can be wanting unto him who is Lord of all things:) why but yet
at that very time was the slaying and sacrificing of such beasts, only a
ceremony, no standing law; only a ceremony, I say, which had only (...), as
the name gives, no standing law which was to reach unto us.

No? Was it not so, will some say? Why, what are those beasts then, we would
know, that must be slain by us now (you tell us) upon this our holy day?

Surely not the beasts of our herds (you must understand) no, but the beasts
rather in our hearts, our unreasonable affections, our brutish lusts, these
especially are the beasts which we must now down with: these beasts if we
shall still stable in us, though slay whole Hecatombs we should of those other
beasts, yet when all comes to all, shall we but keep a beastly holy day (I
dare say) a day no way pleasing unto him that was now slain for us. These
beasts therefore let us now to pot with, though they be never so dear unto
us, let not our hand spare them: no, whether the hot petulant goat of carnal
lust it be, or the rash headstrong ram of unadvised anger, yea or that proud
unruly beast either (which I am afraid to meddle with almost, so generally
fostered is he (I see) both in town and country, there being hardly that
family amongst us in the whole kingdom where we shall not hear him muttering
and murmuring at some time or other either against Church or State:) would you
that I should name him unto you? Why, if I shall not offend then in so doing,
it is that stiff-neck'd Bull (I mean) of -- Discontent.

Now all these beasts being thus slain by us (as oh if it were Gods will that
in truth they were) let us not by and by set up our rest here, as if the whole
work now (we thought) of the day were done: no, he that here gave himself
(ye see) to be slain our Passover, does expect oblations (we must think)
as well as sacrifices, and looks that in celebrating unto him this our
holy day, we should as well bring our gifts hither, as here slay our beasts.
One thing I am sure of, as upon other festivals, so in particular on this of
sweet bread, Gods express order it was, Deuteronomy. 16.16.
that there should not any man appear before him with an empty hand. The
people shall offer thee (says the Prophet) in the 110. Psalm (speaking of
these very times now under the Gospel) oblationes voluntarias, Ver. 3.
free will offerings, in die virtutis tuae, in the day of thy power; or (as
Rivet and some others will have it) in die exercitus tui, in the day of thine
army. But now in the whole compass of the year, are there any days, the
days so properly (we may say) of Christ his power, yea and dies exercitus too,
and copiarum ejus, the days, in truth, of his hosts and armies, as are these
very days, when in the like places to this, the selected bands of Christ his
Church do troop together thus, solemnly to commemorate that most stupendous
act of Christ his power, in most powerfully raising up himself from the dead?
In any case then let us not fail to manifest our selves a most willing people
unto Christ now upon these days; upon these days (I say) these solemn
holy days, these days of Christ his army, these days of Christ his power.
And that as by bringing hither unto him that (...), that which of all other
gifts is indeed the best, the hallowed oblation of a good intention, offered
upon the unstained altar of an honest heart (for the sacrifice of God is the
heart (says David) and what ever gift we shall bring him without the heart,
it will but prove ominous at length and prodigious, as did that heartlesse
sacrifice sometimes of King Pyrrhus;) so because the intentions of the heart
are seldom real (we may be sure) where they do not express themselves
(when time serves) by the outward act; even by the word of the mouth when it
has means and opportunity so to do, yea and when it has means and
opportunity so to do, by the hand too: (for, for mine own part I have ever
held (I must tell you) their reasons to be as brainlesse, as their religion is
heartlesse (I fear) who in excuse of their unbended knees, and unbared heads
in Divine Service, do allege Gods acceptance only of the heart:) for this
cause therefore (I say) together with the incense of our hearts, let us bring
hither the calves also of our lips, lauding and praising Gods name in this
great celebrity of ours, as for that we do yet live, here to assemble our
selves, when so many (you see) on either hand of us have this year bin swept
away; so for that we can assemble our selves here to magnify him for his
infinite mercies toward us in Christ Jesus, slain of purpose that he might
be a Paschal sacrifice (you see) for Us, who never had one before, even for Us.
This unvalued mercy of his, let us never cease to set forth, never at any time
forget to speak of, especially not at this time, when to this very purpose
(you see) we are to keep the holy day, that as the word feriae imports, we
might fari, here speak of these things unto God his praise. Yea, but what
then? Will it serve the turn (will some say) if we do bring hither unto God
our lips only? or may we put God off (may we think) with a bare lip-gift
alone, as the King of Cowlam (they say) does his Pagod?

Beloved, Nequam verbum est (as he in Plautus says well) been vult, nisi qui
been facit; and therefore because he that accepts the will for the deed when
naught but the will can be had, does yet expect the hand with the lips, when
men may give the hand; for this cause therefore (I say) let as many of you as
God has given hands unto as well as lips, present God now, as with the calves
of your lips, so with the very best and choicest fruits also of your hands:
imparting liberally (...), and according every man unto what has been lent you
by God, somewhat Aris Dei, unto the repairing and beautifying (I mean) of
decayed Churches, Christ his mansions; somewhat Charis Dei, unto the relief
and succor (I mean) of distressed Christians, Christ his members; and that as
for his sake, by whose only merit it is that we are already passed from wrath
to grace, so for his service too, by whose only power it will be that we shall
hereafter pass from death to glory, there (...) (that I may speak in
Damascens phrase) (...), there to keep with Christ an everlasting holy day,
throughout all eternity in the heavens; whither he bring us all who has
dearly bought us all, even Jesus Christ the righteous: to whom, with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed (as most due is) all honor, and glory, and
praise, and power, and dominion, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen,
Amen.

A SERMON, PREACHED IN S. PAUL'S CHURCH IN LONDON, BY JOHN SQUIER PRIEST, Vicar
of Saint Leonard Shordich, in MIDDLESEX.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT YOUNG, for Humfrey Blunden, 1637.

To the most worthy pair of most religious persons, Sir Alexander Saint-John,
and his virtuous Lady.
THis Text and Sermon does exhort to good works. It is my riches, that even in
my poor Parish there are some, who preach this exhortation better by their
practice, than I enforce it by my preaching: of whom (be it spoken without
either disparaging them, or flattering you) ye are the chief. This has been
long printed in my thought, and now my thought is printed: I account it a maine
branch of my happy content, that I have two such chosen people, so zealous of
good works, living under my ministry. And that you may long live So, and
There, by the increase of Gods Grace, and to the increase of Gods Glory, is the
perpetual prayer of him, who is

Yours in our Jesus, JOHN SQUIER.

A SERMON PREACHED IN St. PAUL'S CHURCH IN LONDON.
MATTHEW. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
THat City of Antioch, Acts. 11.26. does in some sort resemble this Text: from
this place are the servants of our Savior first and principally called
Christians. For howsoever as there was in Logic, although there be in
Theologicke, a continual contention betwixt the Realls and Nominalls; yet do
I really side with, and ex animo subscribe to the former. Our talkative
Christians, who are like the Nightingale, Vox and praeterea nihil, nothing but
voice, I deem them and doom them fitter for the cage than the Church, sing
they never so melodiously. But I hope and pray that we may learn Christ
otherwise from this text. This text is Christ his Institution of a Christian,
which consists in doing the deeds of Christianity. The deeds of Christianity
are here described by the Matter and Form thereof. The Matter of Christianity
is here called 1. literally, Good works: 2. metaphorically, Light.
The Form of Christianity follows, in following the metaphor, and that in
three particulars: Good works must shine, they must be seen, and they must be
shown. 1. Good works being termed light, we know that light, lucerna is of
light esteem if it be not lighted: my Text says therefore that good works
must shine: 2. a light that is lighted, and does shine, yet it may be kept in
a closet, or put under a bushel: the Ubi or proper place of the candle is a
candlestick; it follows therefore, our good works must shine before men,
that they may see them. 3. Though a candle do shine before men, and men do
see it, yet if it be so placed, that a man cannot see to write, or read, or
work that which does principally concern him, he is deprived of the
principal benefit thereof: wherefore the remnant of my Text shows that a
Christian must apply this Candle of his soul to the eye of his soul, that he
may see to do the grand work of his soul, to Honor his God; that they may
glorify his Father which is in heaven.
Thus does Christ instruct every one to be a Christian, how to do Bonum, and
that been, thereby to become bonus. Our light must so shine before men, that
they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. Now
that God give us His grace, that we may give him That glory.

Undertaking this heavenly work of heavenly edification, consider we first
the Materials thereof, (...), your good works. If Christianity be not (...),
that Christian is (...), an Idlesby in that building: because mere knowledge
is to greater damnation, Luke 12.47. and mere knowledge is in the damned, in
the devil, Luke 4.10. Omnes Grae cinorunt quid sit honestum, soli Lacedaemonii
faciunt quod est honestum: All Christians Know, true Christians Do
Christianity.

The fruit does show the tree, Luke 6.44. a good man like the good tree Psalm.
1. does bring forth his fruit in due season; like the tree of life, Rev. 22. in
many seasons: yea like the tree in Alcinous his orchard, in every season.
Aarons rod did not only bloome. Philosophy says (...), felicity is (...),
operation, not speculation: and the Moralists, that their Art is not (...), but
(...), not an affection but an action. Nature frames men with ten fingers to
one tongue: but we invert it, Oraque centum, like Stentor, we open our mouths
wide, when we should open our hands wide, Deuteronomy. 15.11. But surely they are no
excellent servants who will only wear the Livery; therefore, (...) Christ
says, Christians must do the works of Christianity.

Such as are Christians must do the works of Christianity: and good Christians
good works. What? absolutely good works? No, I absolutely deny that. (...):
Sanctum non est quod geritur sanctum, nisi sancte quod sanctum est peragitur:
Dew attendit tum actum, tum affectum, says St. Cyprian. Where there are good
works in perfection, there must be both a perfect action external, and perfect
affection internal. But quis idoneus ad haec? lives the man that dares say
he can discharge it? Alas, alas, we have many commissions, more omissions: In
the most vigilant Christian, Gregory's two worms will eat out the core and cor
of his most hearitie action: superbia aut desidia, either sloth in them, or
pride of them, will constrain the best Christian to ponder the terminus
diminuens, remaining: opera bona Nostra, they are Our good works, and
therefore blemished in their goodness.

Christ does, and Christians may call their works, good works: for they are
wrought out of a good matter, the holy Scriptures, 1 Samuel 15.22. by a good
efficient, the holy Spirit, Joh. 15.5. and to a good end, to hallow Gods holy
name, in my text for this day, and in our prayer for every day. Primitively,
our works are pure, are clear in the fountain; but derivatively muddie and
dirtie in the channel and kennell of our performance. If once they be Our
works, Our God does know it, and has said it, All our righteousness is but
as filthy rags, Isai. 64.6. This is enough to vilify our best actions, and
to humble our best affections, that they are called bona opera Nostra, Our good
works.

Passing the dignity, proceed we to the necessity of our good works, (...),
Let your light shine. Christ is Imperative, and Christians are Optative, that
they may be Potentiall, and Indicative, manifestly and powerfully to stop the
mouths of ignorant malicious people (...), by our good works, and godly
conversation, 1 Pet. 2.15. I will not cramme your attention with that Crambe,
those common Scriptures for good works, obvious to our Children and
Catechists, to our (...) and (...) to our very Novices in Religion: only I
will appeal to all your memories, that all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Disciples, Martyrs, Fathers, Confessors, and sound Professors, did ever strive
to practice that opus sidei, that work of faith, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. and to walk in
that narrow way to heaven, which is paved with good works. For my part, I am
through, that those who go not in this via, shall never attain that patria.
Though Bennard saw not A'll, yet he saw enough in this point, and they are
blind Bayards, who be so bold as to gainsay it. I am transported with this
point, and as it were translated by this point, into a pilgrimage toward
heaven: like that of Jacob to Padan Aram, Genesis 28. me thinks I have a vision
of a ladder reaching to heaven, and a (...), a multitude of the effects of good
works, as Angels ascending and descending, as messengers to tell us, that we
shall climb the ladder, where God stands at the top thereof.

1 At the foot, below the foot of that ladder, lies Man: (...), yea, (...).
Before Hell was, we were prevented from Hell, and elected into Heaven in Christ
Jesus. The (...), and Charter of our enfranchisment is in Gods Predestination:
the (...) or counterpane thereof, is in our own Conversation. By doing good
works, we may and must make our election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

2 In the fall of Adam, we, all Adamites, fell into Hell. Titiones ab incendio,
out of which fire we are snatched by our blessed Redeemer: our good works are
the fruits and signs of that our blessed redemption. For if we be the children
of Abraham, we will do the deeds of Abraham, Joh. 8.39.

3 As we were Titiones ab incendio, so that we be not Titiones ad incendium:
that we do not relapse to our ruin; but that we are assured that we are
justified, and shall be glorified. The evidence of this assurance is given by the
Spirit Causative, by way of operation: but it arises also from our works,
effective, by way of declaration. If we keep Gods Commandments, we dwell in
him, and he in us: and herehy we know that he abides in us, 1 John 3.24.

4 That we are elected, redeemed, justified, yea and Glorified (...), according
to the first fruits, and gracious fore feeling thereof. We must render our
regale vectigal: our thankfulness must be our tribute to God, for that we
are made Citizens and Subjects of his Kingdom. And our thanks must be by our
deeds, we must gratias agere; gratias dicere is no phrase. Like Cinaetus to his
King, we must say, (...). When we have done what we can, we are but
unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10: Though we shall be unprofitable, yet must we
not be unthankful servants: and by our good works we must declare it.

5 True thankfulness for our benefits, does always produce true love to our
benefactour. Now this love must not be Gyges, to walk inconspicuous; nor an
Adombezech, to have no Fingers; nor like Logic, may it be clutcht-fisted, but
like Rhetorike, it must be open handed. Love does dwell at the sign of the
open hand, and the motto is bona opera vestra, Your good works. If we love
Christ, we will keep his commandments, Joh. 14 21.

No servant to Love: Love there fore is Obedient; and Obedience is the
foundation of my Text. I am Obedient to my Creator, says every Creature: Tu
loquere, ut te videam. Show it by thy works, says Christ to us Christians; and
we Christians should answer our Christ, as the Israelites did Moses, All that
the Lord has spoken will we do, Exodus 19.8.

7 But our consciences, mill testes, a great cloud of witnesses, complain to
Us, of Us, that we have not returned those thanks, nor embraced that love, nor
expressed that obedience to our blessed Creator. It stands us then in hand to
repent us of those notorious Omissions. But what is repentance? only
mortification, and vivification; a putting off the old man, and a putting on
the new man, Ephesians. 4.22. and 24. that is, the eschewing of evil works, and
the ensuing of good works. We say we repent, how do we show it? It is
possible, that all our gestures, postures, sighs, prayers, and profession, may
be but Domestici testes, partial false witnesses, or vainglorious
Pseudo-Martyrs. Deus testis; that we do truly repent (if we be not rotten
hypocrites) our good works before God and man will witness it.

8 Next, no repentance! no faith. These twins, like those of Hippocrates,
will thrive or pine together. These (...), Day stars, will rise and set in
the same minute. Like Ruth and Naomi, they will live and die together. A
carnal neglect of good works will kill them both. But for faith! a wording
professor (as the Harlot used her Infant, 1 King. 3.16) does smother it, and
take away the breath of it. For as the body without breath is dead, so faith
without works is dead also, James 2.26.

9 If our faith fail, it is fit that we should fall to our prayers: Lord
increase our faith, Luke 17.5. Our prayers are heavy, like Moses hand: we
cannot hold them up against braving Amalek, against our bold temptations: our
goods works are Hur and Aaron to support them. Our prayers are Sagittae
Salutis, 2 King. 13.17. the arrows of salvation: goods works, are our Elisha,
to teach us to shoot. Good works are the feathers to those arrows, which
make them fly as high as heaven; and, like Jonathans Bow, never to turn back
empty, but ever to bring a blessing with them. A voice was heard from Heaven,
saying, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God,
Act. 10.4.

10 Yea good works are not only helps of prayers, but they are prayers also. I
conceive prayers to be vocal sacrifices, and sacrifices to be real prayers.
Now good works are sacrifices: therefore prayers. I dispute not the
distinctions, whether good works be sacrificia propitiatoria, sacrifices to
assuage Gods vengeance for our transgressions; by our piety for our
sacrilege, or by our charity for our avarice: whether goods works be
sacrificia impetrantia, to beg a blessing upon our King and kingdom, upon our
families and persons: or whether they be only sacri ficia Eucharistica, the
tribute of our thankfulness. But this I know; our good works are sacrifices,
true sacrifices, sacrifices wherewith God is pleased, yea well pleased. For S.
Paul says, To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices
is God well pleased, Heb. 13.16.

11 Hereunto will I be bold to annex a transcendent goodness of good works. I
must speak it truly, you must hear it cautelously. Good works do purge us
from our sins. I transgress little from the phrase, nothing from the sense of
S. Pet. 1. Pet. 1.22. We purify our selves in obeying the truth. Indeed this
property of purging sins, properly, by way of redemption, is peculiar to the
prerogative of Christ: the blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all our
sins, says S. Joh. 1. Joh. 1.7. but instrumentally, and by way of
mortification, and repressing our concupiscence: as it is mentioned by S. Paul
to Col. 3.5. we may ascribe this good work to good works. By mercy and truth
iniquity is purged, Pro. 16.6. I will therefore presume to the best man under
this roof, under heaven, to come near and say, Father, go to Jordan, wash and
be clean. Cleanse your selves by good works, and a godly conversation.

12 We are Gods servants; do our frail appetites invite us be hirelings? will
mercinarie motives make us to be good? to do good? our good works shall produce
a good reward, a double reward, yea a treble, temporal, spiritual and
eternal, 1 Timothy 4.8. Do not censure, nor suspect this doctrine for Popish and
implying merits: no, out of my judgment, not affection, I abhor all Popery,
and of all Popery I abhor this Heresy, that proud presumptuous point of
Merits. But that good works shall have their remard* it is Saint Paul's
doctrine, Hebr. 11.6. and we have Saint Paul's distinction to clear it from
Popery, Romans 4.4. our reward shall be of Grace, not of Debt, (...), says S.
Basil: and S. Ambrose seems to speak the same sentence in Latin, Donum
liberalitatis, non stipendium virtutis; a reward proceeding from the benignity
of the rewarder, not from the dignity of the rewarded: he can be no way
meritorious. I have heard that power belongs unto God, and that thou, Lord,
art merciful: for thou rewardest every man according to his work, Psalm. 62.12.

13 Moreover, the good works of good Christians, shall have a reward according
to the proportion of their goodness. He which sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly: and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully* 2. Cor.
9.6. They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; but
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever, Dan.
12.3. The patient Innocents which start not, and shrink not at the groundless
and endless barking of black-mouthed slaunderers; They are blessed, and
commanded joyfully to expect the augmentation of their blessings. (...), a
reward, even a great reward in the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 5.11.12.

14 These many points are so many stems, springing from one stalk, (...): the
love of our selves, to our selves. There remain two maine motives; whereof the
one is comparable to any of these, the other superlative to all of these:
(...), and (...), our love to our brethren on earth, and our love to our Father
in heaven; to edify them, and to glorify him, both in the Text. To draw men
to Christ is Gods rovall Prerogative, John 6.44. therefore to communicate this
to Us, must be a rare privilege for such mortal miserable creatures. But
exempla trahunt mores, exemplary good works are an adamant, very attractive,
and they are (not iron) of a heavy disposition, who will not follow them. Good
works do (...), draw men, (...), they make nolentem volentem, such as are
backward to religion, to become forward in religion: Thus homo generat hominem,
one good work does produce another. Good works are necessary to be done by
good men, that by their example they may edify their brethren.

15 These many forenamed motives to, and effects of good works, are as so
many stars, which impart light to us, and exercise their influence on us, to
make our souls vegetative, to grow from grace to grace, to be fertile and
fruitful in good works. Or like those stars, the septem Triones, they are
brave directions to us toward our haven, our heaven: and happy are those holy
Christians, who can steer thither through an ocean of good actions.

And this last, our exemplary piety, and charity to edify our brethren, like
the star of the Epiphanie, it does as it were stand over the house, and
directly direct us to this command of Christ, as that star did those Magi to
the person of Christ. Or sicut inter stellas Luna minores, like the Moon, it
shines brightly, that we may see the way to heaven, in this night of our
ignorance, and imperfect understanding. And, as the Astrologers teach of the
Moon, it does rule the head, and imploieth the brains in holy meditations, to
compass an holy conversation.

But the motive behind is before them ^ll in (...) incitement: like the Sun,
it does obscure all these in a glorious luster. It does impart light and life
to all who are called Christians, to walk worthy of their Vocations, since by
our good works we shall glorify our good God, that we shall do good works
in the sight of the Devil, Job 1.8. and in despite of divellish men, (...),
as Theophylact speaks, that our very enemies shall approve us with their
hearts, though they reprove us with their tongues. Had I the tongues of men and
Angels, I could say no more to urge the necessity of good works, than what is
here said in this Text, in this part of my Text: Let our light so shine before
men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in
heaven.

I will shut up this Sermon, drawing this one Doctrine into a double useful
Application: first, by way of apology, for our Religion, secondly, by way of
Antilogie, against our Religion. In the one, I will profess the Doctrine of
our Church to be admirable; in the other, I will confess the practice of our
professors not to be answerable.

1 Have I here any Auditors, who are Papists, or Popishly affected? If
prejudice and partiality have not stopped both the ears of such persons, I
crave but one corner to receive the true report of their false reports and
forged calumnies, wherewith they charge our Church Reformed.

The Protestants do neglect good works, because they do not hold them
necessary to Salvation, says the Jesuit who did occasion that rare Treatise
termed, The way to the Church, sect. 40. Nil nisi Fidem requirunt. Lessius
says, the Protestants require nothing but faith, de Antichristo, page 250.
Suarez more fully and foulely too: Quocunque modo vivunt, per solam fidem
gloriam sibi promittunt; and neque Mandatorum observationem, neque Poenitentiam
esse necessariam praedicant: the Protestants preach (says the Jesuit, Apolog.
5.10. nu. 11.) that it is no matter how men live, promising glory by faith
alone, accounting both the keeping of the Commandments and Repentance
Unnecessary. Legem ad Salutem nequaquam esse necessariam, impie dicere non sunt
veriti, their Trent Catechism says, page 339. we are not afraid to say
impiously, That the Law of God is not necessary to Salvation. The same smoke
arises from a cloud of like witnesses, Campian, Dowly, Malvenda, Ferus,
Stella, etc. against which loud lewd Lie, we appeal to our God, to our
Consciences, to our Books, to our Sermons, to this Sermon, to our Hearers, to
our very Children in their Catechismes, who were never taught one syllable of
such a damnable doctrine.

But the best is, Bellarmine does blush at these bold calumnies; Disertis
verbis docent opera esse ad Salutem necessaria: non quidem necessitate
Efficientiae, sed Praesentiae, de Justificat. 4. The Protestants (says he) do
plainly teach, that good works are necessary to Salvation, not in the act of
Justification, but in the work of Sanctification, without which there can be
no Salvation.

Indeed we do not, indeed we dare not avouch with that Jesuit of Rome, that
at the last day we expect Justum Judicem, a Just Judge, not misericordem
Patrem, not a merciful Father. Nor with those Priests of Rhemes, that Heaven
is the value, worth, and price of our works. For my part I profess, I can
swallow no Pills, be they never so artificially gilded. No Merits will down
with me, though wrapped up in the quaint phrase of curious Campian, Opera tincta
sanguine Christi: or with the neat distinctions of Condignitie, Congruity, etc.

But if it can be proved, that the Protestant Church does hold dogmatically,
that good works are not necessary to Salvation, I will turn Papist. Again,
if we make it plain, that they charge us with these palpable, gross,
shameful and shameless lies, only to strengthen their desperate resolution
in this damnable point of Merits; me thinks an ingenuous Papist should
almost be persuaded to turn Protestant: only S. Paul has told us, and
foretold of them; there is a generation, who will not receive the love of the
Truth: and therefore God has sent on them strong delusion, that they might
believe a lie, 2. These. 2.10, 11.

Concerning the remnant, a long Preface would be requisite to mediate for that
short conclusion. For my Mistress Experience has taught me (her wise
Scholar) that it is more offensive for a Preacher to reprove sin, than for an
Hearer to commit it. I hope therefore and pray, that in this Congregation there
be none of Malchas his kinsmen, who have lost their right ears; nor none of
Theophrastus his Scholars, who used none but their left hands, that whatsoever
I reach them with a right hand, yea and heart too, they receive it with a
sinister interpretation. Beloved, I beg an intelligent and charitable
attention. I will speak in verity, in Gods holy name do you hear in charity.

Good works! Good God, where are those good men who do perform them? some
few only excepted.

1 The idleness of the poor, dejected, unrewarded, unregarded Mercenaries;
the lofty, lordly deportment of others more plentifully maintained. The base
flattering of great ones, and that more than most basest flattery of the base
ones, the multitude, to the fomenting of faction, schism, and disobedience.
Are these the good works of our Clergy?

2 The slow foot to the house of God, the stiff knee to the worship of God,
the shut hand to the members of God, the evil eye against the ministers of
God, and (as it is feared) the schismatic heart in the Church of God. Are
these the good works of your Laity?

3 The hyperexcessive prodigality upon hawks, horses, hounds, drinking,
dancing and dicing, and that incredible parsimonie toward the poor, the
country, Church, nay their God. Are these the good works of the Country?

4 The lying in shops, swearing in markets, equivocating in selling,
ingratitude, nay persidiousnesse in borrowing, usury, nay extortion in lending;
and that avarice is become an ubiquitary Inmate in this famous metropolis. Are
these the good works of this City?

5 The encouraging and instructing of malicious quarrelsome Clients, the
protecting and priviledging of debtors and malefactors; their antipathy to the
Church Government, because of the Churches anti jurisdiction, and the spinning
out of Lawsuits with long and costly proceedings, often times to the undoing of
Plaintiff and Defendant too. Certainly such Lawyers are no Papists, for they
mean not to merit heaven by such good works.

6 That a Gallant may not hear the lie, but that his sword must right it, and
write it in the blood of his reproacher, or lose his own in assaying it. That
a Gallantresse may not see that woman, but that her foot or heart must press
before her: only to Church and Heaven she will give precedence to any. That
He does torment the Taylour, She the Sempster, both the Devil with inventing
fashions: that both spend more time in cutting, curling, powdring, and plaiting
their hair, than they do in praying either in public or in private; and that
they make themselves monsters by their misshapen attire: I can hardly contrive
these good works within the compass of my text, and of the holy Scriptures.

7 That work of our Nation is no good work; that which makes our Kingdom a
scorn to our foes, a sorrow to our friends, a shame to our selves: That Noli
me tangere, and Noli me nominare too; I dare not name it. But Christ does name
it, and curse it too, Luke 11.17. That work will bring this land to a speedy
confusion, if God does not shield it by his merciful protection, and
miraculous prevention.

8 But the Antipodes to all good works, is that Seminary of all bad works;
that work -- which heretofore has been hated of the Heathen, now practiced,
patronised, yea purchased by Christians, by Protestants: Sacrilege and
Church-robbing. What? be a thief to my God? Master is it I? every one will
apologize for himself in the phrase of that innocent Apostle. I would to God
there were no coin in my cottage, no bread in my cupboard, no books in my
Study, no breath in my body, conditionally there were no sacrilegious
Church-robbers in this Kingdom.

The stones in their walls, the sheaves in their barnes, and the loaves on
their tables, will cry sacrilege against many a man of worth in our nation.

This goodly, but drouping Edifice, if it should drop down; and bury us,
either talking in the Church, or praying in the Quire, we should be no Martyrs,
who esteem (...), all cost lost, which might be bestowed on so religious a
reparation; nay, so necessary a prevention.

That so many persons in too many Parishes are in want of spiritual bread
under their temporal Tith-takers: we need not glory in our merits, that we
suspend our assistance from those silly souls. The people may perish where
prophecy fails. Beloved, there is a positive, and there is a privative
sacrilege. Cain was profane, though peradventure seventy times short of Lamech
in profaneness. To withdraw what the Church has, and to withhold what the
Church does need: the later is sacrilege as well, though not as much as the
former.

There is one, and but one salve for this sore, the redemption of
Impropriations.

Let not Impropriatours start, I plead not for impossibilities; not that they
should give them, but that we should buy them: That every man should lay by
him in store as God has prospered him, till that his private charity might
find opportunity, and (if God has such a blessing in store for us) be enabled
by public authority, to concur in the buying in of Impropriations.

If Authority would open that Treasury for Gods house, the rich men would cast
in their gifts, and the widows would cast in thither their mites also. And the
blessing of Jeroboam be upon that hand, which would be clutched in such a
contribution.

This would be the accomplishment of this text, in one superlative particular.
If we should light that torch which Popery has extinguished: Then, would our
light so shine before men, that they would see That good work, and glorify
our Father which is in heaven. Yea, for this present my meditations apprehend
such a good work to be our best Orator, to beg a blessing upon our kingdom;
upon the Epitome thereof, the Honorable high Court of Parliament; upon the
Head thereof, his Royal Majesty.

As therefore we love our King, as we love our Kingdom, as we love our Church,
as we love our Souls: so in this point, Let our light so shine before men,
that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven.

Frange Domine panem quidem tuum, manibus meis: I have delivered thy Message,
to thy people; I have spoken to their Ears, Lord Jesus speak unto their
Hearts.

FINIS.

