THE DAY OF SALVATION. OR, A HOMILY UPON the bloody Sacrifice of CHRIST, or his
Death and Passion.

Written, and intended only for private Meditation of a most Noble and
Virtuous Lady, on Good Friday last, but since thought worthy the public view.

By Anthony Stafford Gent.

Printed at London by N. and I Ok^s* for Daniel Friar at the Red Bull in Little
Britain, 1635.

TO THE MOST Happy Mistress of all imaginable Graces* which beautify and
ennoble both Body and Mind, the Lady THEOPHILA COKE.
Madame.
THis censorious Age wants not many who judge of Books by their Vollume, and
such will think the Dedication of this short Discourse rather a Disparagement
then an Honor to your Ladyship, not confidering the Dignity of the Contents,
nor the limits of a Homily. The curiosity of this their Voluminous ignorance, I
shall very shortly satisfy by placing your Ladyships name before a far
greater Work; which (Heaven asststing) may Eternize You and it self. In the
mean time, to the more knowing, this Treatise will appear as great in Value
as small in Bulk. The Subject of it is the Object of our faith, and the Worker
of our Redemption, Christ Jesus, without whose meritorious Oblation man were
more miserable then the Beasts themselves, or the very stones he treads on, to
whom there is no pain after this Life, no Hell awarded. Had not He endured
unexpressable torments on the Cross, we had never been pertakers of the
inconceiveable joys in Heaven. It is not with us Christians, as with the
Heathen; for the rifing of the Sun they adore brings them light, but the
setting of the Sun we worship gives us an Eternal Day. This bitter Passion
of his, that we might remember he instituted his last Supper; the principal
time of whose Celebration is now at hand. You have a Soul clear, and prepared
to entertayne this Royal Guest, in whom Majesty, and Humility gave each other
the first kiss. You have the peace of Conscience far above that of Nations,
which commonly is made upon necessity, and broken upon advantage, whereas this*
is fixed ( like the great Infuser of it) and transcends all humane happiness
whatsoever. You have a Charity ready to embrace all that mere it, and to
pardon all that provoke it, You are friends with all, and surely none Enemies
to you. If any such there are, they can be no other then the Windfalls of
Nature, such as neither Virtue, nor any of her generous Brood will stoop to
gather. You have no crying Vices that call upon GOD for Vengeance, but crying
Virtues you have many, which call upon Men for applanse and admiration. These
perfections of yours, Madame, will receive, if no increase, certainly no
diminution by the perusal of this sad Discourse, which will infect you with
sorrow; but such a noble one, as will well become you, and render you amiable
in the eyes of your Redeemer. He long preserve your Ladyship on earth, a glory
to your Sex, Nane, and Nation, and give You a seat in Heaven next your most
excellent Mother, the very imputation of whose pious and Heroicke actions is
able to restore luster to a Family as long lost to Honor, and Virtue as Yours
has enjoyed their glorious Shine. And this prayer shall be as extensive as the
life of

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble loyal servant, Anthony Stafford.

To the Peninent Reader.
SOme more accute then modest, affirm that the Redemption of the World is a
more powerful work then the Creation: a holy Reverence forbids me to compare
such Transcendents, but upon the warrant of Truth, I dare maintain that man
for whose use and service all things visible are made without this last, saving
oblation of our Savior had been the most wretched of all Creatures. GOD at
first framed him of Earth, and Created him after his own Image, but he
ungratful, disobedient; proud, arrogant, ambitious, aspiring to be like his
Maker in Knowledge, became most like the Divill his seducer in wickedness.

In this desperate Estate was Man, damned ere borne, and once conceived was no
other then a vile froth, or a coagulation of impure blood, which turned into
flesh, nursed, and brought up with never so great care becomes at length the
food of Worms. He being such, persuaded the Lord of Heaven and Earth (in whose
sight the very Stars themselves are dark and impure) to take upon him what
in man was so abject, the image of his humanity. Which when he had assumed he
came into the World, and sought in vain for a place of Repose, and finding
none amongst men, he took up his lodging with the beasts. Yet doubted he
not, but man upon a more familiar conversation with him, would be won by his
all saving Doctrine, his infinite benefits, and his stupendous miracles at
least gently, if not R^ally to receive him. Wherefore he appl^e^ himself
wholly to gain his affection, with whose Nature he was in love so many
thousand years before he took it on him, himself confessing: His delight to
be amongst the Sons of men. All his actions tended to the contentment of this
his beloved. If any Widow bewailed her only son, if any sister her brother,
he restored life to both. Where bread was wanting his miracle sufficed. He did
not abhor the company of Publicans and Sinners. This Heavenly Physician stood
always environed with these internal Lepers, whose perfect cure he made his
first care. At length when he did confidently (as well he might) expect at least
thanks for these his innumerable Graces and Favors, he found nothing less.
When with a longing thirst he looked for Grapes from his Vineyard, she produced
him nothing but Thorns, with which (as full of scorn, as void of pity) she
crowned and pierced his sacred head.

To express my self more clearly; he dyed by them whose conversion he had
labored living, and whose Salvation he prayed for dying. This inhumane Act of
theirs, though in it self most horrid and abominable; yet to us was
infinitely advantageous; for by this his plenary redemption, the defect of our
satisfaction is supplied.

Yet without application of this Divine Remedy to our infected Souls, they
will still retayn their malignity. For as he who has heard of Sugar, yet has
never tasted it, knows the name of Sugar, but of the sweetness and Virtue
he is utterly ignorant: So he who only hears and knows there is a Christ,
but does not by Faith relish his meritorious sufferings, he may be well
acquainted with the name of Christ, but he is a stranger to his merits and
Passion. Let us not deceive our selves, my condoling Reader, through any vain
hope of enjoying a blessed and eternal life by any other way: for neither by
the Academy new or old, nor by the curious disputes of The School of
Aristotle* near Athens.
Lyceum, nor by any other means in Heaven, or on Earth, within our selves by
the observation of the Law, nor without us by the deserts of other holy men, or
Angel are we saved, but* by the Voluntary shedding of his most precious
blood. Let us not therefore loose the interest we have, in his Crucifixion,
but make it appear by the purity and sobriety of our lives, how much we
resent the bitterness of his Death.

Though we are in the World, yet let us show we are not of it, and though in
the flesh, yet freed from his Empire and power; let us follow this our
Triumphant Redeemer, though not in Body, yet in Soul, in longing, and
affectionate Vows and Wishes, and on the wings of Contemplation fly to his
Cross. There let us lay down all our unclean, lustful, and revengefull
thoughts, our Pride and fond opinion of Science, the vanity and riot of our
youth, the Avarice and morosity of our Age, together with the whole swarm of
our infirmities.

Neither let us only lay them down, but with Knees cleaving to the Earth, with
Eyes fixed on Heaven, with sighs and groans fetched from the very center of our
penitent hearts invoke him to bury them so deep in his oblivion, that they
never rise up in judgment against us.

Amen Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.
THE DAY OF SALVATION* OR A HOMILY UPON the Bloody Sacrifice of Christ, or his
Death and PASSION.
THis Day, this saddest of days, our Sweetest Savior, (who not only took
upon him our Nature, but to rescue it also out off the jaws of Death and Hell)
by those to whom, and for whose cause he came, whom before he had saluted by
his Ambassadors, and warned of his approach ( Earth being stricken with
trembling, and Heaven with blindness) was brought to a most execrable end. The
sad remembrance whereof rather requires the tears of the faithful, then the
Eloquence of Orators: wherefore I must leave mine eyes to deliver that which my
Pen cannot. A holy Ecstasy is here more seemly, then a curious Inquisition;
the Passion of Christ being as inexplicable as his Generation, which all daring
spirits hitherto have failed to explain, though not their own insolent
ignorance in the bold attempt. We may as well conceive how Jesus upon the Cross
had the particular Id^as in his mind of all those for whom he was to suffer,
as how he endured the extremity of those torments. Whosoever will rivet his
soul into the languishing life of this blessed one, shall find it naught else
but an extended torture. Whether the Epistle of Lentulus to the Senate of Rome
be Authenticke or no, I know^ not; sure I am, many things in it are consonant
to truth; and this particular especially, that this dear Master of ours was
never seen to laugh, but to weep often.

Alas, at what should he laugh? to see his own people not own him, either
for their lawful King, or potent Redeemer? needs must he be afflicted for
the ingratitude of their hearts, but more for the danger of their Souls: for
hardly would they be induced to undergo the Spiritual yoke, that would not
put on the Temporal.

Should he laugh at his Poverty, or its more miserable concommitant derision?
Should he laugh at Hunger, his Thirst, his Nakedness, and that no Roof
vouchsafed him covering, save his own heavenly Arch? Should he laugh at the
persecution of his Friends, and his separation from them, a divorce of all
other (next to that of Soul and Body) the most cruel, especially if you well
consider the Queen and glory of her Sex, his blessed Mother to have been one
of them? or should he laugh to have his sacred Ears scorcht with horrid
blasphemy against Himself and his Almighty Father? Well might he be styled
the Man of Griefs, who exiled from his own heavenly inconceiv^able joys,
could never conceive what an earthly joy meant: Scarce had this Holy Professor
vented his All-saving Doctrine, but destruction dogged him at the heels, and
Malice disgorg'd upon him all her base Epithets, as seducing, impious,
lunaticke, blasphemous; nay, some of her venomous brood not only called, but
held him a devil, and a Tormentor, to whom he he had demonstrated the
infallible signs of a God, and the tender affection of a Savior.

O strange confusion, caused by a stranger stupidity! were ever souls but
these, so purblinde, as to take the Creator of Light for the Prince of
darkness? never yet was there such an obstinate ignorance heard of, as to
think that Vice and Virtue can blend. They could not but discover all the
never erring marks of goodness and truth in his looks, his words and
actions; and could these brutes imagine that Piety and Impiety, Truth and
Falsehood can lodge under the same Roof? that God can out of stones raise up
Children unto Abraham we read, and gladly believe; but here we most
unwillingly find, that (by his Divine permission) the devil is able to turn
men into stones. A happy Meditation, was it of the truly humiliated St.
Francis, who seeing a poor single Lamb amongst many Goats, said to his
Companion, see thou that solitary Lamb? just so did our dearest Messiah
walk amongst the Pharisees. When Truth had bin a long time banished this lower
world she came swimming in to it again in a Crimson, flood of this meek^ one,
and his Martyrs: who as he was more pure and immaculate: so was he likewise
more miserable then any of his Types. Never did half a span of life contain
so many miseries, during his conversation here below, he had nothing without
him that could make him amiable, being contemned in his own person, in his
Disciples, and followers. He was of the blood Royal, indeed; but then when
the glory of it was quite eclipsed. Amongst the Israelites, but at a time when
they were Captived to the Romans: Borne of a Virgin, but so poor, that she was
espoused to a C^rp^^ter: At his Birth worshiped by many Shepherds, but by a
few Wise men, three only: Persecuted by Herod, and living in such a retired
obscurity until the time of his Baptism, that John himself knew him not.

But let us examine* more particularly his miseries, and beginning with his
Birth, pace on dolefully with him to his Death, by which we shall find that
he came into this World, and continued in it with the same misery and ignominy
he left it.

Where was he borne? in Jerusalem? no. In a stately Palace? no. Where then? in
Bethlem, a poor Village, that the World not without Amazement might behold
Obscurity bring forth Glory. In what place in Bethlem? in a poor Inn. In what
part of the Inn? in the Stable, where the first Air he breathed stunke of
several Ordures. He was welcomed indeed into the World with loud Music, but
it was a wild one, made by an Ox and an Ass His lodging promised neither
Honor nor safety, for he lay with Beasts, and at their mercy; but here no
doubt, was to be seen a most pleasing spectacle, a brutish Innocence
worshipping a Heavenly.

No sooner was He borne, but He lost Blood in his Circumcisi^^* no sooner
Circum^is'd, then destined to slaughter. Usurping Herod trembled at the Birth
of this Almighty Babe, who was indeed the true KING of the Jews. He therefore
vowed his Death, which to procure, he insinuated himself into the good graces
of the Wisemen, and besought them to acquaint him with the abode of the child,
that he also might come and Worship him. But they knowing by Divine
Revelation, his bloody meaning, gave him the slip, and returned into their own
Country another way. Seeing this plot frustrated, he makes a Massacre of all
the male^ from two years old and under (hoping inclusively to cut off his new
born Prince,) whose immaculate souls ^lew back to their Maker, adornd with
their Primitive beauty, and their innocent blood cried for Uengeance at his
hands.

Here also the cruel intentions of this Tyrant were deluded, for the poverty of
this holy Lamb was his security, which did so Eclipse him, that he could not
by his own luster be discerned and betrayed. Moreover the quiet of his parents
by day, and their sleep by night were continually disturbed with divine Dreams
and Visions touching his preservation. Alas, what had this pretty one done,
that could incite this bloody monster to study his ruin? He had slain none of
the Herodian family, or the Jewish race, that he should be made a Parentation
Though parentation commonly signifies the performance of any office due to the
deceased Parents: yet here it signifies the slaying of those Enemies, or any of
their race, who flew our Parents, or any of our blood.
. It was Love not Malice invited him to descend from his heavenly habitation:
His coming was to shed no blood but his own, and that for the Salvation of
others. Yet was his incomparable Mother forced to fly as far as Egypt, to
save the dear life of this sweet one, guilty neither in thought, word, nor
act.

Long was he banded to and fro between the Ministers of the devil, who now
eases his servants, and becomes himself in person his Tormentor. He first
leads him into the Wilderness, hoping either to starve him, or that hunger
would provoke him to Blaspheme. After he had fasted forty Days, and forty
Nights, he propounds to him a trial of his Godhead: If, says he, thou be
the Son of God, command that these Stones be made Bread: Now, though Christ's
Omnipotency could not only have turned those stones into bread, but the whole
Globe of the Earth into one Loaf: yet at the devils instigation he would not
do it, neither did his own necessity require it: and therefore he gave him to
understand, that his food was supernatural, to wit, the Word of his Father, a
diet which his scorcht pallat could not relish. Next he sets him on a Pinnacle
of the Holy Temple, where he makes another experiment of his Deity: If, says
he, thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, etc. Here again, though
Christ could have walked, or flowne in the Air, or stood fixed in it, (a thing
no way difficult to him) yet having taken our flesh upon him, he would in all
things do like a man; and therefore there being a pair of stairs, he would
not neglect the ordinary means of descending. Moreover, he was not ignorant,
that Satan had impaired the Text, which says, that God should give his Angels
charge over him in all ^ Bishop An^^^^^ on the (...).
his ways: but a desperate precipitation becomes not a Christian, much less
Christ himself; and therefore could be none of his ways. Last of all, he
places him on the top of an exceeding high Mountain, where he makes a third
proof of his Divinity: Having thence showed him all the Kingdoms of the
Earth, and the glory of them, he maks him this large promise, All these things,
says he, will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: This last
Test he knew to be infallible; for if he were the Lord of Light, he would
never abase himself so far, as to worship the Prince of darkness. But here I
cannot wonder enough, how a spirit not dulled by actuating a fleshy body,
should be so foolish, as to propound that as a reward of Christ's worship,
which was his own before; for he could not but know, that Christ's Dominion
extended not only over both the Globes, but even his own Hell it self.

Finding at length our blessed Savior in all things unanswerable, he left
him, and gave him over once again into the hands of his Damned Agents, whom
he had furnished with full instructions how to torture, and afflict him. After
a long consultation the 1. thing their inveteterate malice excepted against,
was his Preaching (which, though it had made others Saints) turned them into
Furies, an evident proof that the doctrine of Salvation is loath some, to
souls full gorged with the surfeits of sin. Truth of her self is
persuasive, but passing through that mouth, and delivered with so sweet an
Eloquution, so gracious a Countenance* me thinks she should Civilize
Barbarism it self, penetrate the most obdurate hearts, and Force Attention
from the very Devils. But these Spiders suck venom from this Rose, and seek
to root it up. Here the saying is verisied, that there can be* no society,
much less a friendship between Truth, and Falsehood. They throw stones at him,
and drive him out of their City, with a resolution to cast him down from a
high Mountain. You barbarous Infidels, has he upon mature consideration, of
all the Nations of the Earth, chosen you for his people, and do you refuse him
that elected you? Are you of humane race, and can you butcher Innocence it
self? Shall the Sacrifice for your sins, fall a Sacrifice to your Malice?
Sure you were borne without bowels, or the Rocks engendered and brought you
forth, their flinty natured issue, to infect Mankind with a savage cruelty. Why
this is the Cornerstone, which taken away, the whole Frame of your well being
here, and your Salvation hereafter consequently totters, and falls into an
irreparable, and eternal ruin. But God has given you over to a reprobate
sense, and your Reason and Religion have left you to be guided by your evil
Destiny. You will, I see, cast your Savior with your rubbish out of his own
City, over which he weeps the divining tears of her near approaching
destruction. When your Temple, and your Houses burnt round about you, then did
Titus, ( whom the Romans styled, deliciae humani generis, the delight of humane
kind) out of a noble and a manly pity, beseech you to save your selves; yet
being the brood of obstinacy, you would not move a foot, but saw your own
bodies consume in fire made with your own hands. And Jesus ( who has a style
above Titus, as being deliciae coelestium incolarum, the delight of the
heavenly Inhabitants* with his eyes drowned in water, (like the Sun looking
through a rainy Cloud) beheld you with Compassion, and wooed you to make him
the happy means of your preservation, from the never dying flames now ready to
embrace you* Notwithstanding this his merciful offer, you ungrateful
Monsters, at once, excluded him ^^^ of the earthly Hie^^salem, and your ^^lves
out of the heaven^^. But the very dis^ursing with you is con^^gious, and
therefore I ^^ll leave to speak fur^^er to your persons, and ^^oceed to your
horrid ^^actices and strata^^ms against our mee^^st Master, in the as^^ming of
whose name upon us, we are asmuc^ honored as he abased* taking our Nature up
on him.

But to go on i^ my sad relation, The Text says, he desired to pass into
Samaria, but the Samaritans would no^ give admittance to his Harbingers. Satan
plays his part, and arms all places against him, ren^ring him as despi^able
in the Country, ^s the City. To this their insolency he ^eplies nothing, but
His Disciples, James and John took snuff at it, and said, Lord, will thou that
we command fire to come down from Heaven, and consume them, even as Elias
did? But he turned, and rebuked them, a^^ said, ye know not wh^^ Spirit ye are
of, for (...) Son of man is not co^^ to destroy men's liv^^ but to save them*
He let them know his purpose n^^ was to establish, an^ propagate his doctrine
with the swor^ and the Faggot, practice at this da^ very frequent wit^
Christians, betwixt whom we read of greater Carnages, then between them and
the Turks. He gave them to understand that his Church and he used but one
kind of Armor, Prayer. When St. Peter ask't this mild one, How often shall I
forgive my offending brother? 7. times? he answered, I say n^^ unto thee 7
times, bu^ 70 times seven, Math* 18. And in the sam^ place, to show us that we
should forgive our Neighbors from our hearts, he brings in the Parable of the
wicked Servant, to whom his Master had forgiven a Thousand Tallents: He bids
us learn of him* for he is meek, etc. Lord we must learn it of thee, or no
where; for amongst the* Philosophers it is not to be found. Their chief good,
and thy Beatitude are as distant as the Poles. The Stoic ( of all the
Philosophical sects nearest in virtue to thine own) wanted Humility, thy own
peculiar virtue. With the Aristotelian, mercy is contemptible, Revenge
Laudable, the first motions of our affections not culpable; whereas thou
placest thy prime happiness in poorness of Spirit, in Meekness, in Want, in
Mercy, in Cleanenesse of heart, in Peace, in Mourning, in Afflictions, etc.
Sweet Jesus thou art beyond the Level of our imitation, but not of our
admiration, which shall ever be fixed on thee as its best, and only object.

Pardone Pious Reader my zeal, which so often interrupts my Method, in that it
is so inflamed with a Holy love of this our sacred Emanuell, that I cannot but
make a cursory Paraphrase in the persecution of his Story. I must now come to
the most Execrable of all Acts, the betraying of our blessed Savior by one of
his own Family.

To perfect this their cursed enterprise, they begin with the breach of the
Laws of Hospitality (the only stayne of the They bribed K. Pr^sias to betray
Hanniball being his guest.
Roman Empire) and make a strange and horrible conversion of an Apostle into a
Traitor. For thirty pieces of Silver (a sum despicable in the eye of many a
Cutpurse) he sold his soul to Lucifer, and his best friend to his greatest
Enemies. And the manor of his persidiousnesse is worse then the crime it
self, for he Betrayed him with a kiss, a sign as appropriate to friendship,
as the joining of the right hands. Him whom he knew to be God; whom his
conference assured him to be without blemish, to whom he was obliged by so
many ties, as of dependancy, of instruction, of affection, he delivers over a
prey into the jaws of these ravenous Wolves. And this Treachery of his our
indulgent Redeemer both foreknew and foretold not long before; yet did he not
discover any displeasure conceived against him in word or look. Nay when he
came to apprehend him as a Malefactor, he called him friend. I dare all ages
to produce me such a president of patience. On the fatal instrument of all his
Tribulations and Persecutions, he bestows this most familiar, this most dear
title of friend. * Such Friends as Oamici, amicus nemo.
this, Aristotle intends when he says: O friends there is no friend.

Having bought this distressed King as a slave at a certain price, like such
they lead him up and down, and no man offers to rescue him, save only Peter,
whose bold Attempt he stops with this Denuntiation, all that use the sword,
shall perish with the Sword. And here we have another effect of his sweetness
in healing the wound of his foe, given by his friend. Those on whom he had
wrought such miraculous cures; all forsake him. It is likely enough, that the
same Eyes to which he had restored sight, now looked on him with scorn, and
envy; that those dumb Tongues to which he had given speech, cursed and revild
him; that those decrepit Feet which he had enabled to walk, ran not to
embrace, but apprehend him; Nay it is not incredible, (such was the ingratitude
of this obdurate Nation,) that they out of whom he had cast Devils, now
called him Devil for his labor. All his benefits though infinite, and fresh,
an ungrateful Oblivion seizes on: Nay, his own servants abandon him, and not
long after, his own Peter denies him. Only a few tender hearted Women, face
danger, and follow him. From Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas ^o Pilate, from
Pilate to Herod, and from Herod, again t^ Pilate, they hurr^ this future Judge
^^ the living, and the dead. Here Innocence is opposed, Simplicity made a
laughing stock, and Truth trampled on by Falsehood. Here is to be scene a
Combat, but an unequal one where Fury assaults and Patience ^ave^ her self
open. They illanously* Abuse ^im, both in words and deeds. In words with
several stings, ^s detracting, con^radicting, contumelious, deriding* ^n
detracting, both privily, and openly: Privily when they said softly to each
other: If this man were a Prophet, he would know what manner of woman this is.
And, this man `Blasphemes. Openly, when the Pharisees upbraided his Disciples
with this Question, Why does your Master eat, and drink with Publicans and
Sinners? Also when they depraved his Miracles. In Beelzebub, Prince of the
Devils, he casts out Devils. and, This man is not ^f God, because he ^eepes
not the Sabbath. ^n speeches contradictory they thwar^ed him, as when they
said, Thou art ^hy own witness: Also, Thy Testimony is not ^rue, and, Thou
art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? In Phrases
contumelious they reproachit him, as Luke the Fifth, Say we* not truly that
thouart a Samaritan and have a Divell*s and, who is this that speaks
Blasphemies? But especially they reviled him in the house of Annas, and
Caiphas, as also before Pilate, and Herod. Moreover, when he hung on the
Cross, he heard no other language. Lastly, they vildly, and grossly derided
him, when he said the Maid was not dead, but slept, and in the house of Pilate
they bowed their knees to him in dirision. In his Passion again they ieered
him, as when we come to it we shall show it at large.

But these talkative wrongs are tolerable, in respect of those committed
against him by fact, which are more insupportable as being centuple greater in
their Nature and number. As Physicians give their Patients Preparatives, that
make them less sick before they administer Stronger medicines, which search
the veins, and more offend the stomach: So these hangmen by the lesser
tortures inure, and prepare him to endure the greater.

Fex Romuli, the scumme of the world, insulted over the Lord of it; The^ go to
Boys pla^ with him, they blind and buffet him, an^ then bid him ghe^^ at the
striker* T^ render him a tru^ spectacle of laughter they change his ga^ment,
and dress him like a Buffoo^ And (that their Villainy might be complete) in that
fac^ (wherein Beauty, Mercy, and Modesty, strove for superiority) they spit
the noisome infection of their Rotten Longues. But let us examine how he
behaves himself in the midst of these outrages: He received them with the
same Countenance: that others do benefits* all blows he takes as if they had
hit him, being meant to another. But now his enduring, and their afflicting
draw both to a period; For they clime to the Summity of Wickedness, and
(thirsting for the last drop of his precious blood) they again hale him before
Pilate, from whom he was to expect his last sentence. Here is he fiercely and
strongly accused by the Pharisees, by whom, and by Pilate he is questioned about
many particulars; to which he replies nothing at all. Alas to whom should head
answer? to the Jews? they were plotters and Actors, in his Tragedy. To
Pilate? he was wholly ignorant of the cause, They ask't him if he were the son
of God? had he answered affirmitively, the Maw of their envy had been filled;
for that confession was it they looked for. Again, reply Negatively he could
not; for Truth cannot lie. Nor do I see why he should speak ought in his own
defense, the fairness of whose life was his Apology. They might as well
discern a stain in the body of the Sun, as in him the least imperfection.

When Pilate had heard the uttermost they could allege against him, he
acquitted him, but the more he spoke in his defense, the more they cried out,
Crucify him. Notwithstanding their vociferation, he cleared him again, and
again. At length, though Pilate knew the Jews to have no other cause, then
their own rancor, and hatred against Jesus. Yet abhorring their importunity
and clamor, and fearing Caesar's displeasure, (for they publicly told him,
Christ had dishonored Caesar, in calling himself a King) he delivered this
Righteous one to be scourged and crucisied by these inhumane Monsters. Yet ere
he gave him up to their fury, he called for water; and washed his hands
before the Multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person,
see you to it; to whom all the people answered and said, His blood be upon us
and our Children.

Here, not without reverence and astonishment, let us observe three points in
this unjust Arraignment very remarkable. First, that God sometimes forces
truth from the mouths of liars, contrary to their own intention. Secondly,
that he compels the wicked to clear the righteous, even when they think
they most condemn them, and frames al their actions to his own ends* when
they think they are most directed to their own scope; not unlike to him who
on the Hatches of a Ship walks East, when by the force of the Wind he is
carried West. Thirdly, and lastly, that though GODS Judgments* move slowly,
yet cortainely at length, and when least expected, they overtake oppressors,
and the blood-thirsty.

The first observation is made good in Caiphas, who with a loud voice
exclaymed, That one must die for the people: which (though quite contrary to
his meaning) was indeed verified in Christ, who died for their manifold
transgressions. Also those who called him King of the Jews, said most truly,
though they spoke it by way of scoffing. The second is manifested in Herod, who
sent him away in a white Robe, which color ever yet argued the innocence and
integrity of them that wore it, though no doubt Herod cherish't no such good
opinion of him, but held him a man guilty, and an Imposter.

The third is clearly demonstrated in Pilate, Herod, and the whole body of the
Jewish nation. As for Pilate, he being accused to Caius Caesar, for corruption,
and misgovernment in his Province, he chose rather to fall upon his own
Sword, then abide his Trial. Herod having made an oration to the People which
commanded not only their attention, but adoration (as it appears in that with
general acclamations, they vowed it to be the voice of a God) was by the
Angel of the ^rue, and jealous God smitten, and the Worms immediately
devoured him. Here is a plain demonstration what Power, what Majesty is when
it is deprived of Gods favor. As a Mirror while the Sun Plays upon it,
sends forth Beams that at once does dazzle and delight the Eye, but (bard his
luster) loses those rays, and grows dim again: So when God smiles on
Princes, and irradiats their minds with Knowledge, and Virtue, they appear
bright and glorious in the eyes of all men; but he once averring the shine of
his loving Countenance, they become obseure, and there is nothing worthy in
them discernable. The truth of this is apparent in Herod, who stands here a
poor worm, devoured by his fellows.

Nor did this Generation of Vipers, the Jews (though forewarned) shun the
vengeance which not long after fell upon their Heads. For Vespasian and Titus
having long besieged their City, it was by his Engines, and their own fire
utterly defaced, having before hardely escaped Drowning in a slood of theirs
and their Childrens blood mixed together.

There were of them in the space of seven years in Civil and Foreign Wars
these several slaughters faithfully collected out of Josephus.

FIrst, there were slain at Jerusalem by the command of Florns, 630. At
Caesarea, by the inhabitants there for hatred of their Nation, and their
Religion, 20000. At Scithopilis a Town of Syria, 130000. At Ascalon in
Palestina. 2500 Also at Ptolomais, 2000 At Alexandrea in Egypt under Tiberius
Alexander then President, 50000. At Damascus, 10000.
All these were put to the Sword by Sedition and Tumults.

After this there fell in open War by the hands of the Romans, these ensuing.

When Joppa was taken ^^ Cesius Florus, 8400. In Mount Cabulon, 200 In sight at
Ascalon, 10000. Again, by Stratagem, 8000. At the taking of Aphaca, 15000. In
Mount Garizin, 11000 At Jotopa, where Josephus himself was in person, 30000 At
the taking of Joppa were drowned, 420^ In Tarichaeis, 650^ At Gamala, killed by
t^^ Enemy, and their own precipitation from hig^ places, 900
Where not one humane race escape but two Sisters.

Giscala being forsaken, there were slain in the fight, 2000. and taken
Captives, which we number not, 2200. In the Streets of Idu^ea, 10000. At
Gerasium, 1000. At Macheruns, 1700. In Massada, 960. In Cirene slain by Ca^lus
the President, 3000. In Jerusalem in the ^^^e of the siege, 1000000 Taken
Captives which ^ will not number, 97000
The whole sum, (omitting those which perished by Famine, Exile, and
Mischances) amounts to One Million, two hundred thirty and two Thousands,
six Hundred and Ninety.

TO these miseries I may add, that at this day they cannot properly be called
a Na^^^^, being dispersed here and there, (like Rogues and Vagabonds) ove^ the
face of the Earth, having in all Countries, Mulcts imposed on their estates,
and in some themselves enjoined to wear a mark on their Clothes, whereby they
may be distinguished from other honest men. I may also truly a^^werre that no
people under Heaven, has so much degenerated from the primitive purity of
their Religion, See M. de Pless^^ in his Tract. of the Jews.
having defiled it with introduction of innumerable new Ceremonies, and
alteration of the old. But withal I must confess, I know not what Nation else
has strictly kept her Integrity, they having never yet matched out of their
own Tribes and Race.

I must withal insert this caution, that I speak not of Proselites, but of
legitimate Proselites were such Heathen people as disclayming Paganism, became
converts, and ioyened themselves unto the Church of the Jews. A Jew by father
or mother, was called an Hebrew, but he who was a Jew both by father and
mother, was styled an Hebrew of Hebrews, and such I here speak of.
Jews by Father or Mother, or both. I profess seriously, that nothing amazeth
me so much, as the contemplation of the unparalled obstinacy and impiety of
this seed of Abraham, chosen by God to be the dispensers of his Oracles. A
lamentable proof of this, is the murder of many thousands of Christians, for
the abominable Crimes of these Miscreants. For though these two Religions are
as far from each other in Nature and distance, as Heaven and Earth, yet the
Romans often confounded them: which we may perceive by this, that in their
persecutions they seldom or never distinguished them. Many (not verst in
Story) rail at Tacitus, and others for inveying against the Christians, and
the Jews of those times. But what Historian could abstain from a severe
censure of them, when he found the later daily dragged to Execution, for such
villainies as the very imagination of them (could it be detected) ought to be as
punishable as the Action? Should any but a Christian read their damned facts
in any of the four Evangelists, he would throw away the Bible as a Fable, not
thinking it credible, there could be such inhumanity in men.

And I am confident, had Pliny believed as much of them, as we know, that they
had not only rejected, but buffeted, spit upon, scourged, and crucified their
legitimate King, and Redeemer, he would not have vouchsafed them room amongst
his foure-footed Beasts, but have plac*t them amongst his crawling creatures,
and venomous Serpents. And with such they deserve to be ranked, as not worthy
to retain the name of Men, having long since put off the Nature.

Those guiltless hands (which so often he had lifted up to his Father for
their Conversion) they bind so fast, that the Cord eats into his tender
flesh. On that Head wherein Universal Wisdom was contained, they set a
Crown of Thorns so fast, that his purest Blood runs in streams down his
sweetest Face: That Body (which Whiteness and Symmetry consulted to make
lovely above all other) they unmercifvlly and uncessantly whippe from the top
to the bottom, so that from head to foot he was but one continued Sore. On
his shoulders they lay his weighty Cross, and lest with a fall, he should ease
himself of his Burden, they shoulder him up on all sides: If at any time he
lag, these Butchers beat, and kick him on, as if he were a Beast. But seeing
him faint, and fearing he would dye, before he had undergone all the pains
provided for him, they load an obvious Stranger called Simon, with his Cross.
And and thus they lead him to be made an Oblation for the sins of the whole
World. See the love, and Humility of this our dearest Messiah; he saw they
would not take up his Cross, and follow him, he takes it up himself, and
follows them. All this was done by the eternal decree of his Father, for
there was found no Sacrifice under the Law powerful enough, to appease the
wrath of God, justly conceived against Man. Wherefore Man must for ever suffer,
or the Son of God once for him, whose suffering only was of Virtue
sufficient to work this blessed reconciliation: For the Passion of Christ was
suitable to his person; his person of infinite excellency, could not be so
abased without insinite Merit, accrued by such Humiliation. His dying was more
the Equivalent to all the Worlds frying in Hell everlastingly. Here the foolish
Atheist scoffs us, demanding how it was possible that God should suffer. Hear
thou profane wretch the the voice of the Church. God is said to suffer by
Union, who could not suffer by Nature. Hear again blind Infidel; He who
dyed on the Cross and lives eternally; he who suffers on Earth, and not in
Heaven; whose Body suffers and yet not he with his body; he who is overcome by
Death, and yet vanquished it, although he be not one in Nature, yet he is one
Redeemer, and one and the same Person. As the Soul and the Body are Different
things, yet make but one man.

We now arrive at the abridgement of his Story, his Passion, and at the
Consummation of his Humility, his Death.

A Man would think it had been pains enough for him to bear his Cross,
without bearing more upon it: But their malice is insatiable, and they cannot
imagine how they can inflict, or he endure too much. His hands soft as those of
Mercy, his feet never swift to shed their blood, they pierce with massy
Nails, which they drive in with as little remorse as if he were made, of
Wood. They scoff athim; and Nodding their heads, and bending their knees, they
salute him by the name of King of the Jews. Nay, they utter such blasphemies
that I wonder they were not attended with a Thunderbolt They not only dar^ him
of himself to descend, but his father to fetch him down; Who could in a
moment have commanded one Angel ^o have destroyed them, and their Coun^rey,
and have left ^t to be demanded, where Judaea was. Being as thirsty in ^he
heat of this cru^^^l Conflict betwixt ^he Flesh and the Spi^^t, as the Earth
is under the reign of the Dog-starre, he desires drink, to whom they proffer
a base beverage made of Vinegar and Gall two ingredients no^ good enough for
the drench of a Horse* Three of the Evangelists affirm, that they who were
crucified with him* revile^ him also: But Saint Luke says, that only one was
faulty. Which Difference Saint Austine thus reconciles, that at first indeed
they both vi^^ifi'de him, but that one of them by a sudden inspiration,
instantly repented, and rebuked the other, saying, Do thou not ^^are God,
seeing thou ^rt in the same condemnation? and we indeed justly, for we receive
the due reward of our deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss and he said
unto Jesus Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

I will not he^^ with some conclud^ that this good Thie^ was he who w^^ on the
right han^ of our Savior, and that it was not without the special providence
of God; neither will I deny it: It shall suffice me, that Christ said to him,
This day shall thou be with me, in Paradise. None of the Roman Caesar's either
on his Tribunal, or in his Triumphant Chariot, could have spoken so bravely
and powerfully, as our Savior here did in the extremity of his Agony. This day
will I make thee a Governor of Provinces, or, This day will I make thee a
sharer with me in all my Glories: Or, This day will I give thee command over
Legions: Or, this day will I divide the habitable World into two parts, and
accept of that half thou refusest; This is all Caesar could have said. These
Offers are scant, and narrow, in respect of the promise here, made by our
Omnipotent Redeemer: This day of a Publican, I will make thee a Saint; This day
of a Malefactor, I will make thee a Martyr; This day I will translate thee from
Earth into the Impyriall Heaven; This can be no other then the voice of an
Almighty Savior. O happy, O blessed Day! wherein Sin is depressed, the
Sinner exalted, and the Gates of Heaven heretofore shut against him, now opened
to him, by God himself; where the Honor equals the Benefit. The entry into
Paradise heretofore was guarded by a Cherubin, having a flaming Sword in his
hand. The Fire is now extinguished, the Sword taken from him, and now there is
no guard upon it. Nay, that no man might despair of entrance, it is first of
all opened to a Thief, in whose soul before his conversion, vices were as
thick, and as surely rooted as the hairs in his head. The Jews who lay
claim to Sanctity, (as only proper to them) are rejected. He who at first was
ableto form Man, can now form himself a new people. He that before
condemned the proud Pharise in the Temple, now iustifies the pensive Thief on
the Cross. It was now about the ninth hour, when Christ full of anguish both
in Soul and Body, cried out with a loud voice, Eloi, Eloi, Lamasabachthani, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Here the the Atheist steps in again;
and asks how he could despair, and be a God? to whom I vouchsafe this
answer, that here is to be heard only the voice of the flesh, which denotes
not at all the separation of God from his Humanity, but the Calamity of his
Humanity it self; for he could not be forsaken by him, from whom he could no
way be separated. But that thou may be certain, this could be no less
then a God: behold here Nature her self suffering with her Lord. From the
first borne says the Text, There was a general darkness over the whole face
of the Earth. Nor was this a common, but a supernatural Eclipse, as
testifies Saint Austine: Lib. 3 de civil Dei. cap. 15
Quam solis obscurationem non ex Canonico Syder^^ cursu accidisse satis
ostenditur, quod tu^^ erat Pascha Judaeorum: ^an plena luna solemniter agitur:
It is evident, says he, that Eclipse of the Sun not to have happened by the
ordinary, and orderly course of the Stars, it being then the Passover of the
Jews, which is solemnised at the full Moon. And this was it that gave
occasion as is the common opinion, to that memorable Exclamation of Dionisius
the Arcopagite, residing then in Aegipt: Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut Machina
mundi disolvetur: Either the God of Nature suffers, or the Fabric of the World
will be dissolved. And hereupon too, as it is thought by some, was erected that
Altar at Athens Ignoto Deo, to the unknown God. Acts 17. 23. I am not ignorant
that some think that Eclipse was confin'de within the borders of Judaea, which
opinion I rather incline to, because if it had been general quite over the
World, Tacitus, and the Historians of that time must of necessity have
mentioned it, Judaea being them subject to the Roman Empire. Nay, the ensuing
Ages would not have buried in silence a thing so strange and miraculous.
Howsoever, it cannot be denied, but that it was certainly beside, and above the
course of Nature. Neither ought it produce wonder, That the Sun in the
Firmament of Heaven should suffer, when the Son of Righteousness suffered upon
Earth.

You seed of Perdition what have you done? your Blasphemies, and Iniquities
have chased the all gladding Light out of Heaven, and you now are left in a
C^^^ri^n darkness, a presage of that you shall eternally dwell in. And will
not this moove you to acknowledge your Potent King, and Redeemer? The Veil of
your Temple rents, and falls with him who taught the ever living truth in it,
in token that all Prophesies of his death are now fulfilled; and will not this
persuade you to pros^^ate your selves before him? No, no, all things in Heaven,
and Earth resent his Death, save obstinate you only. The Earth it self
trembles, but you quake not. The Rocks split, but your Adamantine hearts are of
proof against all his Calamities. The graves open, but your bosoms are shut.
The Dead with him arise, but you lie still wallowing in your own filthy
enormities. Yet this is no wonder; for they were dead in Nature, you in finne;
whose weighty burden lies so heavy on you, that you cannot possibly get up.
He is yet alive, yet sue to him, of whom never any begged in vain. You see
he is willing to remit your trespasses, in that he has in the very height of
his torments prayed to his Father for you. He is now giving up the Ghost; yet
call on him for mercy, that with his last gasp he may pronounce your pardon.
But it is now too late, he is dead to you, and you to Grace: He has now
finished this great work, and commended his hands, that will keep it as the
apple of his Eye.

Having seen how they used him in his lefe, let us now make an inquiry,
whether or no they behaved them selves to him more reverently (being dead.)
When the Body of their Sovereign, and Savior had hung many Hours between
his Foot stole, and his Throne, they take it down, not with a resolution to
honor it with burial, but to mangle, and deface it. They thrust a Spear into
his side, out of which ran Water and Blood, the representers, as some think,
of his two mystical Sacraments. His Coat being seamlesse, and therefore not
divideable, they cast lots for. And then they left him Naked as a prey to the
Beasts of the Earth, and the fowls of the Air. But he is otherwise provided
for by his Heavenly Father, who sends Joseph of A a just man and a Councellor
(who refused to be present at the condemnation of Jesus) to beg the body of
Pilate, which obtained, he foulded it in fine Lynnen, and laid it in a new
Sepulcher, where never man was laid before. And here not without sighs, and
tears, and groans I leave him, the utbounds of this discourse being his Death
and Passion.

But I forbid no thee, O my Soul to repeat, and revolve within thy self the
dignity of thy Savior, and the indignity of his sufferings. We discern some
sparks of the brightness and glory of his Beauty in his creatures, but the
joint stock of their whole life can no more express him, then can a Gloworme,
the Jubar of the Sun. O fix thine Eyes here for ever, and lose thy sight
together with this object. Consider, O my Soul, that to ransom thee, this
Master piece, this utmost endeavor of Nature and the Holy Ghost, offered
himself a most willing Sacrifice. Rise, says he, behold he is at hand that
does betray me. And in another place it is said, Jesus therefore knowing all
these things that* should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom
seekyee? They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said unto them, I am he,
etc. Here he meets sedition half way, gazeth her in the face, and
fearelesse confesses his name. Athanas. de incar. Thomas 3 Sum.
And some learned Devines think that he would not die by disease, or age, lest
he should seem to leave this life against his will, or out of Natural
infinite Common to all.

But with his unvaluable Worth, Balance the Affronts and Miseries He Endures.

1. THis Lord of Lords that frees the captived, and illuminates the blind; is
apprehended, and bound like a Thief.

2. Nay, they prefer a Thief and a Murderer before him, demanding Barrabas
to be released, and him to be Crucified.

3. Call to mind again, oh my soul, that for thy Crimes he carried his own
ponderous Cross, and groaned under the weight of it: which that the other two
did, that suffered with him, we read not.

4. Meditate also, that for thee he was scourged, in which he underwent,
diverse punishments due to several offenders. It was the custom amongst the
Ancients, to strike the indocible on the head, their servants which they cast
out of doors on the neck, those who were ordinary delinquents on the ^ace and
their more heinous Criminals all over the body: Christ endured all these. They
struck his Head with a wande or rod, his Face and neck with their fists, and
his whole body they whipped with rods and scourges.

5. But weigh withal, that the lashes given his soul by the tongues of
Blasphemers and deriders, were more intolerable then the former.

6. Contemplate too, that his Torment was much augmented by the very thought of
the infamous company he suffered with: for they placed him in the midst
between two Thieves, as if he had been their instructor and seducer.

7. Neither can thou believe, O my Soul, but as he had more grace, so he
had more shame then other men, which must needs be infinite, in that he was
become a naked Spectacle to his greatest Enemies, not having any veil to cover
those parts which humane Nature would have hidden from the eye.

8. He suffered also in his estate, goods, and friends, of the first of which
he was stripped even to the skin, and of the latter (consisting of his own
dear Disciples) forsaken.

9. And he was grieviously troubled in mind which did compassionate, his
fellow feelers standing under the Cross, (as his Mother and others) and repine
at the insolent fury of his foes.

10. His Fame and Reputation (dear to him, as his own eyes) is not only
questioned, but defiled with false and base aspersions, for they termed him a
Seducer. Observe also, o my soul, that he suffered in regard of the place,
the time and the manner of his Death.

11. First, in respect of the place, which was Jerusalem it self, where he
was once well known, and honored for the miracles he had there performed.

12. Secondly, in consideration of the time, of the year, and of the Day (the
feast of the Passover being then celebrated) which to solemnite* a great
multitude and concourse of people resorted thither, ^^ that he had the eyes of
all the World upon him. Again, it was upon the sixth hour of the day, with us
the twelfth, when all men were up and ready, and walking abroad.

13. Thirdly in regard of the kind of Death, he did undergo, to with the
Cursed Death of the Cross.

14. Remember also, O my better half, that his Passion was aggravated, by
reason of the natural complexion of his Body; for it is certain his Body was
of a most admirable and delicate Temper, as being organized by the Holy Ghost
himself. And hence it came to pass that being thus formed without any defect,
or error in Nature, there was no conflict between his Flesh and his Spirit.
Wherefore his Spirit by strong consequence must love his flesh, better then any
other Spirit or Soul can, or ought to love its body.

15. And it is very worthy thy serious Meditation: That his anguish was
increased in respect of the quality of those members in which he most
suffered, as his hands and feet, which are nervous, and most perceptive, and
most apprehensive of pain.

16. Moreover consider O my Soul, that his passion was exacerbated in regard
of the diuturnity or long continuance of it. The Holy Martyrs who have
perish't by fire, water, or the sword, have quickly finished their Martyrdom,
which the same hour, or the same Sun has seen begun and ended. But the
passion of thy Redeemer endured from the very instant (as it were) of his
conception to the hour of his Death. For he certainly foreknew what his
Humanity was to suffer, the very imagination whereof made him sweatblood. Find
if thou can what particle of his life was free from persecution. But more
eminently it endured from that dismal hour after Supper, to the Ninth hour
of the Sixth Holy day^ Wonder not therefore that his Soul was sad and heavy,
since he was most cruelly tor^ur'd in all his senses. His eyes on the other
side saw the grim and fierce looks of his Executioners; on the other, the
amiable countenance of his Mother, and his other female Votaries, together with
his beloved Disciple, all which (as he was man) he was loath to part with. His
Ears heard nothing but insulting, and deriding Blasphemies. His Taste was
distasted with ^ most bitter and loathsome potion, being a compound of Vinegar
and Gall. The pain he endured in his feeling, was diffused clean through his
body, his Nostrills drew in nothing but Noisome stinks, and dampes arising from
putrified Carcasses, for it was the common place designed both for the
Execution and burial of Malefactors, which is implied in the name they gave
it, God gotha, in our Tongue the place of Dead men sculls.

And if we follow some of the Hebrew Interpreters, this is the very place,
wherein Adam longsince was buried, for the truth o^ which, I wish I had some
better authority then that of a Jew. But if it be true, it is questionless
not without the special providence of God, that sin might first lose his
force there ^here he first gathered strength. And this is the Master-comfort
of a Christian (without which ^ee were less happy ^hen the Heathen) that ^t
the second coming ^f Christ he shall rise in Glory, in despite of Death,
whose sting shall be taken out, and he ^ive with GOD for ever. And this
infinite benefit is an effect of his Passion.

O Hasten Lord Jesus that joyful day, which all thy Elect have, an^ do still
long to see; when Death and Time sh^l^ l^^ their Scepters, as I d^^ now my
self, prostrat^ before thee. Then shall I, and never till then, b^^ truly
blessed, in singin^ (with all the Saints and Angels) Halleluias eternally to
thy most glorie^* name,

AMEN.
FINIS.

