If I were not DIOGENES I would wish my self ALEXANDER


STAFFORDS Heavenly Dog: OR The life, and death of that great Cynicke
DIOGENES, whom Laertius styles Canem Coelestem, the Heavenly Dog, By reason
of the Heavenly precepts he gave. Taken out of the best Authors, and written to
delight great hearts, and to raise as high as Heaven the minds that now grouell
on the earth, by teaching them how to overcome all affections, and afflictions.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold at the
great South-doore of Paul's: and at Britains Burse. 1615.

TO THE HONORAble, my all-worthy, and no less dear friend, Sir JOHN
WENTVVORTH Knight, Baronet.
APplause attended mine eye, noble Friend, when I first read in a pleasing
writer, Amicos primu^ esse deligendos, deinde diligendos, that friends are
first to be chosen, then to be loved. Notwithstanding my applause, with me
it fell out otherwise when I first saw you, who passed through mine eye into my
heart, where you shall ever sit. Yet was not my affection so sottish, but that
(disdaining to have Foolish for an Epithete,) it went to my judgment for
approbation, which in a short space satisfied it to the full of your complete
Worth. And (as I remember) the foundation on which my judgment encouraged my
affection to build, was, the love I discerned in you to those better studies,
and to Scholars, the best of men. I saw that as GOD had given you an ability
of mind; so you (not unthankful) sought to pollish that excellent part.
Neither did you think it enough to beautify your Soul, but withal took a
course to conform it to Reason, and to fortify it against the forces of false
Fortune. To that purpose you made choice of Seneca, and other authors that
might furnish you as well with the Helmet, as with the Feather. Of the same
nature, and, I dare say, of the same height is this Book, and therefore will
deserve your reading. It treats of a strange, inimitable man, who had
nothing, yet never knew adversity. His happiness was ever the same, and he ever
himself. The cruel effects of Fortunes malice could never make him change his
mind, nor his countenance. And so he lived, as if she had stood at his award,
and not he at hers. To you I dedicate this dear Dog, together with my heart.
That, which made me set your Name before it, was my ambition, the mawe of which
will be full, when I shall have the honor to be reputed your friend, which
(upon ocasion) I will prove my self to be, with the hazard of my life. In
death I will profess my love to Sir JOHN WENTVVORTH, and till then rest

His fixed friend, and servant Antony Stafford.

TO THE MODEST READER.
THe wisest of Kings, and men, says, that of writing Books there is no end.
True, says a late, but witty comment, there is no end of writing Books which
are written to no end. The exposition seems good, and agreeable to the meaning
of Solomon, (who in my opinion, which I write, not maintain) in all
probability means such Books when he says, that much reading is awearinesse
to the flesh: for certainly there are authors, of which a man can never read
so much but he will still desire more, according to that of Lipsius upon
Epictetus, Pluris facio cum relego, semper vt novum, and cum repetiui
repetendum. Amongst those Books which never can be read enough (next to the
sacred) the moral take place, which are written to an end as noble as are
their effects admirable. These are they which make us men indeed, without which
(as says singular Seneca) men would be but maiusculi pueri. O my Reader! let
us never aba^don morality, unless we mean to banish all ciuility, and give
our selves over to sensuality. Neither let us scorn these things, because the
Heathen writ them; for set the three supernatural works aside, taught us in
our Creed, Creation, Redemption, and Sanctification; and tell me, good Reader,
in what we excel them. In what go we beyond them? nay, in what come we not
short of them? Are we not content with their knowledge? do we not see the
whole life of a modern scholar spent only to expound one of them? God grant
that we (who have received from them all their natural helps, and in a higher
degree have been divinely taught from above by Truth, and Life it self all
truth, and goodness) be not found unthankful for those humane gifts. If we
proudly (under the pretense of learning divinity) despise the studies of
humanity, we shall do like him that greedily plucking a fruit, throws away
the leaves that both adorned, and defended it. Let us then admire, Reader, let
us then reverence the Ancients, from whose Ocean of knowledge have flowed these
Riuerets of ours. And amongst all let us not bestow more wonder upon any, then
upon the Heavenly Dog this Book treates of; whom, if I cannot style the most
learned, certainly I may call the happiest of the Heathen. His carriage was so
strange and austere, and his life so void of perturbation, that I wonder the
superstitious people of his time did not adore him as a God, or (at least) as a
Semo. A Tubbe confined his body, but his mind the bounds of the World could
not limit. I know not thy degree of admiration, Reader, but I vow, that if
Diogenes were now at Corinth with joy to Corinth I would hie me, and kiss his
feet. I had rather go thither to see him that has the mind, then a furlong
to see him that has only the fortune of a King. If this treatise give not a
perfect model of his worth, I crave no pardon, Reader; since I think any
bastard, languishing language unable to express his excellencies. As for his
Oration to Alexander, I think thou will think it not his own. They had many
enteruiews, and therefore, no doubt, much conference; at all which having
guessed, some part thereof I may have bit. I confess, Diogenes made it not,
yet many things in it are his own, and Possibility says they might have been
spoken to Alexander. Suppose the Oration were mine own, I should in this
imitate no worse a man then divine Plato, who in most of his writings makes
Socrates speak for him; or Epictetus, who speaks more then a little in the
person of this old Cynicke. Some things I have borrowed of other Philosophers,
which if thou happenest to discover, carpe not at it, but thank my judgment,
that for thee did select them. Think not the Spider (which produces a
cobwebbe out of her own body) better then the Be which gathers her honey
abroad. Yet I acknowledge my self to be of his mind, who held that a man
should have something a se, as well as in se, and therefore have not so much
tired my wit with translation, as I have refreshed it with contemplation.
Whatsoever is borrowed, or mine own, I here make thine; for which my hope
expectes thanks. Though thou deny to stroke, I trust thou will not strike my
Dog, which never yet bit honest man. Thou can not deal so ungently with
him; for I know that either his head, his body, or his tail will please thee,
if modest thou art, and not preiudicious. I know there are Coltes who will
venture to row in waters wherein (to use the seafaring phrase) they cannot
live, that is; they will censure things they cannot see into; not unlike to
that German clown, who undertook to be very ready in the ten commandments,
and being asked by the Minister which was the first commandment, answered;
Thou shall not eat. These I would wish to read Ballads, and books Balladicall,
works not befitting a wit that dwells with the Seraphins and Cherubins.
Notwithstanding their sinister opinions, I affirm that he, who cannot pick
something out of this book worthy the reading, is unworthy to read it. To thee,
modest Reader, I present my book, offer my service, and promise the fruits of
my future studies.

Farewell.
STAFFORDS Heavenly DOG: Or the life and death of that great Cynicke Diogenes,
who by Laertius is styled Canis coelestis, the Heavenly Dog, and Iouis
filius, the son of Jupiter.
He that was before the beginning, made nothing since the beginning, which he
thought worthy to participate of reason but man. The happy estate man was
created in.
God let al other creatures see their being; to man he gave to know his
being, that is, how he came to be, and to what end he was made. He suffered
the beasts to see the things themselves; to man he granted to know the causes
of them, both how, and why they were. The wandering ambitious spirit of man, not
content with this free gift of his maker, sought yet to know more, and by that
means came to know less. Man's Fall.
No sooner did he disobey God, but a sinful mist so dimmed the eyes of his
intellect, that of little he could judge aright. What he did then know, was
but as a dream of what he knew before. Whereas he might have bequeathed to his
Successors Freedom and Innocence, he left Obscurity to their understandings,
and Slavery to their wills. So that man (who was formed a sacred, stable,
innocent, perfect creature) is now justly styled, The dream of a shadow, the
son of Calamity, the example of Imbecility, the spoil of Time, the sport of
fortune, the image of Change. In a word, A little filth digested into form.

God repayres the ruins of man's mind two sundry ways.
All that miserable man now knows, is, that he knows nothing. And
undoubtedly, his knowledge would not far surmount that of beasts, did not he
that is mercy, and bounty it self, deal mercifully and bountifully with him
two sundry ways. The first way.
First, when by the omnipotent, and absolute power of his Godhead, he imparteth
knowledge of things unto his creatures freely, without much study and labor of
the party so endued. So was Solomon taught by God the knowledge of all things
in the world. The Apostles likewise were taught sundry languages from above
without any study at all; and unto Saint John in particular, the knowledge of
things to come was revealed from God by his Angel.

These kinds of gifts, and these sorts of knowledge, as they be most divine,
and certain, immediately proceeding by influence from God above: so be they not
common, every where, in all places, or in all persons to be found.

The second way.
The second way, God has showed us to repair the aforesaid ruins of the mind,
is more usual, every day practiced, and necessarily followed; to wit, the
study of Philosophy, to which the Arts give entrance; the only ordinary mean
which God has left unto us from time to time, in all ages, in all nations, to
restore memory, to enlighten understanding, and direct will for the finding out
of solitary Truth, who goes still alone, and the refuting of Error, the damme
of all diseased opinions. The excellency of the former science, which comes by
inspiration, though the treatise of it be more noble, and the contemplation of
it more pleasing then of the latter, I will not here handle, it being, perhaps,
a ground too hard for a deeper Divine then my self to plow up. Of the latter
then only I will treat, and yet not of all that (what wit can compass it
all?) but of that part only, the necessary use whereof shall most commend it.
That is, ac- (...) tus? No. Socrates? No. Seneca? No. Though these be men
somewhat above men, greater then the greatness of their fame, whose meanest
actions exclude all exceptions, yet I will not make them my guides in the
Moral path I am to tread.

The Names of these men sufficiently commend them, their deeds praise them
above the power of my words. I, who in all things am a vowed adversary of the
opinionated Vulgars, will pick me out a Tutour, whom the giddy headed Rout
never names but in derision, yet deserves to be had in great estimation. Who
may this be? Diogenes the Cynicke. A man, Diogenes praised.
who certainly never saw his equal for greatness and constancy of mind, and
yet with the common sort is in so vile repute, that every scuruy, sordid fellow
they nickname with Diogenes, and bring him up in their bald, witless Proverbs.
And (which is a thing remarkable) he that loathes their saucy, senseless
conversation, and stands amongst them, as (...) judgment, the Ariadne in the
labyrinth of life. The Proverb goes, that he, who would find Piety, must
seek her far enough from the Court; and I dare depose, that he who would
trace out Verity, must run far remote from the grosse-headed Multitude.
This course took Diogenes, who though he affected Populum, the people, yet
he hated Plebem; the plebeians, and wished for a gulf between him and them.
It is a thing memorable of him, that standing on a day in the market place, and
crying with a loud voice, Heus homines: He, men, many of the ignorant fry
came about him, whom he beat away with his staff, and said, Homines, non
purgamenta vocau^: I called men, and not cleansings.

Coming out of a bath, one asked him, whether many men were within: he said
no; but being questioned if a great throng were there, he said, yes. Being
demanded, why the charity of the people extended it self to the lame and the
blind, and not to Philosophers: Because (...) well as an issue-male at the
hands of Jupiter.

Thus he taught, thus he derided, The love of Diogenes to the wise.
thus he scorned the rude ones. On the contrary, the polisht, and learned
spirits he had in as much admiration, as the former in detestation. Laertius
writes, that when he came to Athens, he went to visit Antisthenes, from whom
having received a shameful repulse, he yet tarried, neither would depart; at
which Antisthenes angered, lifted up his staff to strike him: Diogenes nothing
moved thereat, bowing down his head, bade him strike, telling him, he could
not drive him away with the hardest staff he could find, so long as he
discoursed of any thing, whereby his understanding might be bettered. O thou
glory of Greece! did poverty according to thine own confession drive thee to
study Philosophy, and shall not stripes now drive thee from it?

Pause here a while, Reader, and if thou be young, learn here to love
learning; and if in age thou art, let this example comfort (...) quisition. One
saying, there was no such thing as Motion; he rose up and walked. In this he
pointed at the sottishness of those, that deny things universally granted.
Spado a rich knave, writ over the portall of his house these words: Nihil hic
ingrediatur mali: Let nothing evil enter here: Alas, said Diogenes, Where
shall the Master of the house go in? Who sees not in this place the pretended
purity of Spado pointed at, and laughed at? A neat brisk young man spurred him
a question, to whom Diogenes answered, that he would not resolve him, til he
had felt whether he were a man or a woman. Here an effeminate dress not be
fitting a man, is reproved. He resembled a rich Buzzard to a sheep, with a
golden Fleece. Seeing many women hanged on an Olive tree, I would, says he,
All trees bore such fruit. Being questioned what he would take to receive a
blow on the pate, he answered, An Helmet. Being demanded, what Wine he loved
best, he said Another man's. Coming to Myndum, seeing great gates, and a little
City; he thus exclaimed: O men of Myndu^, shut your gates, lest your City go
out. He gibed at beggary, that would observe state. To a bad, sluggish
wrastler, newly turned Physician, he said; Those that threw thee upon the
ground, thou will now throw into it.

Xeniades asking him, how he would be buried; he answered, Upon his face; and
made this his reason, that the world would shortly be turned topsie turuy, and
then should he be buried on his back, his tail would come to be uppermost.
Here he mockes also the Macedonians
Here he scoffs at those, that before death have a great care of burial. He
praised those that were about to take wives, but never took them; that were
about to sail, but never sailed.

Being demanded what was the fittest hour to dine at; he replied, that a rich
man's hour was, when he would, and a poor man's, when he could get it.

Many more of these ingenious speeches had he, for which, a very barren wit may
find fit applications: but I will not here set them down, lest the length
offend, and the number take away the sweetness. Besides, I should much wrong
Diogenes, who has yet better stuff in him, and more worthy the dwelling upon.
I will therefore now arrive at the Port, where all Diogenes virtues lie at
anchor. At anchor, said I? Yes surely, Virtue never took a deeper root in any
mind, then in that of Diogenes. By reiteration of actions, he had gained so
strong a habit for every virtue, that they were of proof to abide the battery
of Fortune. He was no Statist; and therefore of his prudency, and justice, I
shall not need to make relation. He had not so much as need of that part of
Justice, which we call Commutatiue: for he neither bought, nor borrowed any
thing.

Socrates going on a time into the Market, po^dring the infinity of things
vendible, cried out; Ye Gods, how many things I want not! Diogenes might
better have said so, his drink being water, his food roots, his house a tubbe.
Certainly, had he wanted a nurse, no beast on earth but might have bragged of
as choice keeping. Nature was his Cook, and provided him no sauce but hunger.
His Temperancie.
Can his Te^perancy better be expressed? His Continency.
As for his Continency (in which he is held defective) I can read but one thing
in all his life, which can eclypse it; and undoubtedly, had he thought it a
breach of Continency, he had never acted that. It is a thing to me strange,
that Diogenes so great a teacher of Modesty, should him self be incontinent.

He was so joyful a beholder of Modesty, that seeing once a youth blush, he
said, Trust to it, my Son, this is the color of Virtue. Hearing a comely
youth to use indecent speeches, he thus rebuked him: Fie, Son, His love of
Modesty.
do not you blush to draw a Leaden sword out of an yuory Scabbard? Speak
Envy, could Modesty herself have spoken more? To a young man too curious in
his dressing, he gave this check: If thou go to men, all this is in vain;
if to women, it is wicked.

His patience.
His Patience next presents it self, which in him was so great, that belief
will reject it, as a thing incredible. His poverty, his old age, his banishment,
the hisses of the people, the whooping of boys, he bore with such a calm of
mind, that a man would have thought his discontents had contented him. Having
received a blow on the head from one, all his revenge lay in these words:
Truly, I never thought till now, my head had been armed with an helmet.

Thus he overcame himself, and conquered his adversary, who was overcome by
anger. They hit him in the teeth with his stamping of false coin in his youth;
to whom, this was his answer: In my youth I pissed apace, but now softly. The
worst speeches they could give him, stirred not up his wrath, but his contempt.
He says himself, that this Worlds most miserable creature, is an old Man
poor. How we should believe thee, Diogenes, I know not: for thou thy self art
poor, thou thy self art aged, and yet thy felicity admits no equiparation,
nay, hardly a comparison. To show Fortune, that she has not crosses enough to
load thee, thou plaiest the Voluntary, and make thy burden more weighty,
enduring more then the hard-hearted Goddess would have thee, putting thy self
to a penance, which she never enjoined. I call you to witness all that now
breathe; was there ever (without a measure of grace) such a pattern of
patience? He renders Fortune back, part of her allowance, as if it were too
large. She gives him a dish, he throws it in her face; and seeing a boy
drink water out of the hollow of his hand, he does the like, never using his
dish more. What, says he, and shall a boy excel Diogenes in humility? His
Humility.
No, Diogenes, no boy shall surpass thee in Humility, in Magnanimity no man.
Thou could never have been thus humble, His Magnanimity.
had thou not been Magnanimous.

Aristotle here stays my hand, and teaches me, that Magnitudo animi magnis
in rebus (vt nomen ipsum declarat) elucet: The Magnitude of the mind (as the
name it self declares) appears in great things, and therefore Magnanimity
cannot be ascribed to Diogenes. Yes Aristotle, I will convince thee with a
sentence of thine own, and by it prove, that Magnanimity was in Diogenes.
These are thy words: Magno animo habendus is, qui magna se mereri existimat,
idque suo merito: He is to be accounted Magnanimious, that thinks he deserves
much, his merit answering his estimation. That Diogenes knew his own deserts,
and was nearer the over then the vndervalew of himself, the whole course of
his life will discover.

When he was taken and sold, it was demanded of him, what he could do: to
which he answered, that he knew how to command men; and therefore turning
himself to the Crier; Proclaim, says he, if any man will buy him a Master,
etc. He told Xeniades, who bought him, that though he was his Slave, yet he
must be obeyed; For, says he, a physician and a Pilot, though they be
servants both, yet they rule all. Being invited to supper, he denied his
presence, and made this his reason; that he had not yet received thanks for
his last company.

He was so far from a low opinion of himself, that he thought his fellowship
was richly worth a thanksgiving. Some counselling him to seek out his servant
run away, he told them, it would be ridiculous, if Manes could live without
Diogenes, and Diogenes could not live without the help of Manes.

Going from Lacedemon toward Athens, one encountering him on the way,
questioned with him from whence he came, and whither he went: to whom he
returned this answer, that he came from men, and was going to women. His big
heart could not smother his scorn of womanish persons, nor his approbation of
the manly. He denied himself to be a Slave; for, says he, Lions serve not
their Keepers, but the Keepers the Lions. He thought himself to be the same
amongst men, that the Lion was amongst the beasts; and that though Fortune kept
him from the exercise of his authority, yet he was indeed their Emperor; and
therefore a fear, and a reverence was due unto him. Neither was this only
Stoicall Magniloque^cy: he did the great things he spoke. Though Fortune
allotted him the portion of a Slave, yet did he undergo no office servile. The
worst of his office was, to teach; a function, then which none is more Noble
and Royal. What higher happiness can Invention find out, then to be able to
teach reason to Creatures rational? We seeing those not to want their praise,
that have the gift of teaching a Dog, a Horse, or a Hawke.

If then the prestancy of instructing be such; surely Diogenes (with whom it
was so frequent) may in name, but not in deed be a Slave. A Prince he was
rather, who gave laws and precepts worthy a Prince, his mind being a fountain,
in whose (...) went himself in person to visit him.

In the suburbs of Corinth, at a place called Cranium, he found him laid al
along in the Sun: but when the good old man saw so many coming toward him,
he somewhat raised up himself, and fixed his eyes full upon Alexander. He that
in war so furious, was here as courteous, and asked the Cynicke, if he
lacked any thing: Yes, said he, that I do, That thou stand out of my Sun a
little. Alexander had the Magnanimity of this man in so great admiration, that
he was ready to wish a transformation of Alexander into Diogenes: but when he
remembered his immortal race; his self-love made him think that thought base;
and yet to his deriding followers he said, that if he had not been Alexander,
he could have wished himself Diogenes. I cannot blame him: for if he, that
approaches nearest in knowledge to the Deity, deserve amongst men the
principality: Surely then Diogenes shall be the superior of Alexander.

(...) spirit, one World is too narrow to contain, whom the riches in, and
upon all earth cannot content: Behold here, (beyond thy hope!) a sight; a happy
man, the resolution of whose mind no external thing can shake. Without envy,
Passion an enemy to Virtue.
without fear, without hope I live, being subject to as little passion as any,
the gods excepted.

See here the universal happiness of this Universe contracted into a Tubbe,
which I no sooner go out of, but all the ground I walk on, is mine own. My
foot treads on not another earth; all belongs to Diogenes. Mine eye cannot
discover any thing, I am not Lord of. Nature made all things in this inferior
world for the use of Diogenes. Nothing on the earthes surface, nothing in her
entrails, that is not mine. I dare call the Sun mine, the Stars mine, nay,
Jupiter himself, mine. If (according to thy vain supposition) he were thy
Father, yet so precious in his sight thou could not be, as is Diogenes. There
is an affinity and a friendship between good men, and the gods, whose
goodness they imitate. If then thou be the Son of this Almighty (...)
uoyding of any thing. Virtue makes me rich, and poverty secure. What is it I
lack? Am I not void of fear? Am I not free? Who ever saw me frustrated of my
wishes? Could Fortune ever yet force me to accuse the gods of injustice, or
men of falsehood? How often has she put me to the rack, and yet could never
make me confess her Deity? All my actions are generous, bold, honest, and
endure the light. It may be Nature, being hasty, was not curious in the frame
of my body, but made me all at one sitting, not gracing my visage with her
purest colors. What of that? The fairness of the mind is to be preferred
before that of the body.
In this Tun of filth, a mind as fair as the Sun I carry about. My
conscience is my guarde, Virtue my Armor; by the former backed, by the latter
armed, I am invincible. I love honesty simply, for it self without hope of
reward, or fear of punishment. Others have houses to keep them from the rage
of the wind and weather, whereas I lie at the Sign of the Moon, and the seven
Stars; having nothing but mine innocence to defend me from the heavens
cruelty.

I need not blush at any one of my actions: I make the people my spectators,
and my Judges. I approve my self to God; the censures of men, The censure of
man not to be regarded.
I regard not, nor care I, if all my thoughts were registered. What is good, I
applaud: what is evil, I reprehend in whom soever I find it. Thus it often
falls out, that my Patients beat me, and will not attend the cure of their bad
affections. My mind alters not, notwithstanding their stubbornenesse: but I
still endeavor to teach those that correct me; and with the fondness of a
Father love them.

Liberty, (the very sound of which allures all men (whom many have sought)
through fire, through blood, through famine, yet could not find her) shines in
this breast of mine, where she is so surely seated, that from thence the power
of al earth cannot hale her. Thou (who have conquered Climates, and brought so
many kingdoms to obedience) with the strength of althine host, can not force
the mind of Diogenes.

It Is possible thou may conquer all this Hemisphere, and lead it against that
other, but impossible thou should compel Diogenes. Man is called a little
World.
Thou have already terrified all the great World; but this little world with
all thy forces thou can not affright. Style not thy self Conqueror, before
thou have overcome Diogenes. What can thou lay upon me that I cannot undergo
with an upright shoulder? I can as freely suffer as thou can punish. Make
Diogenes acknowledge himself miserable, and then thy victory is complete.
Which way can thou vex me? An exile I here already stand, and will thou
banish me hence too? Do so; confine me to what place thou will, and that is
part of my Country. I am not a Citizen of Athens, nor of Corinth, but of the
World. The whole world is a wise man's Country.
I am free of this capacious Circumfere^ce, and therefore cannot be sent from
home.

Any place habitable for man or beast I can live in. Thou can not send me
thither where I shall not tread upon some earth, drink some water. Having
heaven over, and earth under me, I cannot do amiss. The basest Soldier of
thine army was never driven by Necessity to that hardness, which I voluntary
put my (...) age, The lees of Life; for on my never violated word, my later
days are as pleasing to me, as were my first. Sure some woman first broached
that opinion, who had rather be stricken dead, then stricken in years. I have
not a Character of age but my hair. My sight is quick, my joints nimble, my
back strong, my heart good. No man that sees me would think that the earths
lap were my best Lodging.

Thou see by this time, great Alexander, that thou can not send me out of
mine own Country, or if thou could, yet that I am so armed against the
miseries of an exile, that banishment to me would rather be a journey of
pleasure, then of penance. But thou will say, that thy power extends it self
farther, and that thou art Master of my life. I grant it, thou art so. What of
that? He is not a Philosopher that this can move. It would trouble me no more
to lay down my life, then it would do thee to take it.

Yea good Gods! what a sight it is to behold an austere, He is no Philosopher
that fears death.
bushbearded Philosopher (who fears a razor, as much as a rope) quake at the
name of death, even as a treuant boy does at the name of his Tutor? Such a one
was old Antisthenes, whom I hearing exclaim, and say, Who shall free me of my
griefs? I forthwith gave him a dagger, and told him, that could ease him: to
which he made reply, that he desired to be rid of his griefs, not of his life.
I cannot abstain from extremity of laughter, when I ruminate Homers Mars, whom
he describes beaten, and howling so, that the clamours of ten thousand men
could not drown the noise he made.

Perhaps he wanted Venus there to wipe his face, to stroke his head, and to
dry his n'eyes. Though he was a god, and could not die, yet he could not
contemn pain, A good man fears not death, but to deserve it.
which a weak woman in travail can endure. A lofty spirit indeed fears not
death, but to deserve it: and verily, he deserves it, that cannot suffer it.

He that abhors death tells us, that he has yet done nothing to make
himself live hereafter, and therefore would yet be, because he never yet
was.

An earthly body is too (...) in hers. Alexander condemns Diogenes to die, and
Nature Alexander.

Take this old head off, and see if not undaunted I stand the stroke, and why?
because I know thou art but natures Executioner. I will stare my headsma^ in
the face with as much confidence, as if he came to barbe me. Necessity is to
be obeyed.
What I must, that I will do, without so much as a repine, or a struggle. I am
not ignorant that Necessity and Fate are twins; what Fate decrees, that
Necessity exacts. I profess to thee, I would neither eat, nor drink, but
that Necessity will have it so, neither would I die, did not Necessity will it:
but, Necessity bidding, I will as willingly die, as either eat, or drink. And
if I should not, Nothing horrible in Death.
stripes were my due, since I see nothing horrible in death.

No evil can happen to him in this life, that truly comprehends, that in the
privation of life there is no evil. Those, who compare death to sleep, show
us the little harm is in it. Death is nothing to him that contemplates it
aright; for while we are, Death is absent, and when death is come, we are then
departed.

So that it is a false opinion of deaths cruelty, and not death it self that
torments us. Certainly, had Nature written the day of each man's death in his
forehead, all the world would have died with thought, and not one have lived to
his assigned day.

No death miserable, but that of profane men.
There is no death miserable, but that which gives an end to a profane life,
the wicked leaving their infamy as an inheritance to their posterity. Blessed
is he, and next to the Gods happy, that dies, his head begirt with a Garland
of glorious actions, whose sweet savor shall perfume the world. Thus shall I
die, who have lived with more innocence then Men, and with approbation of the
Gods. Destroy then my body, victorious man, make it a subject of dishonor, and
shame, nay, exercise all imaginable villainy upon it, and thou shall see me
stand like one elected by Jove, to try how much humane Nature can suffer. All
thy torments cannot alter the temper of my mind, nor can any punishment
displease me.

Is it thy will the rage of fire consume me? with a thankful heart I accept
it, thinking it better to hau^ my body consume in an Element noble, and borne
with Heaven it self, then to have putrefaction, and corruption prey upon it.
Will thou drown me? Though this be the most terrible of deaths, because the
substance of the Soul (as some think) is fiery, and therefore abhorrs to be
quenched, yet it shall nothing at all ap^ale me. I had as liefe the Fishes
should devour me, as the Worms. All pains, all deaths are to me
indifferent.

As a strong constitution can away with heates, and coldes, and all such
annoyances: so a good disposition can withstand the malice, and the fury of
Tyrants, together with all such afflictions. Thou can provide no torture,
mighty Monarch, against which my mind is not forearmed.

Thus much on the passive part; now on the Active. Leauy Diogenes an Army of
men, and see if he do not, as well as thou, teach them the military Discipline,
and be to them an example of Valor. But what shall draw me into the field?
An Ambition to be styled Monarch of the World? (...) standing; for I had rather
give my body to the ground, then give ground. In this cause I would not care to
die with conquering, so by death I might conquer.

Here should my prowess proclaim to my Soldiers, that Fortune is sometime
wanting to the valiant, but ever to cowards. In this quarrel were Alexander my
foe, I would single him out, and fist to fist encounter him, though I knew
destruction to be the certain wages of his sword. I would then make it
apparent to Alexander, that a Philosophers courage cannot fall, though his Body
cannot stand, A Philosophers courage falls not with his body.
and that though it be the task of one man to take Diogenes prisoner, yet
millions of men cannot subdue his soul.

Nay (which more is) Fortune (to whose will thou and thine army are subject)
could never yet cause the mind of Diogenes to stoop. That blind Queen of this
Ball, who is above thee, and Kings, is under me. My mind is not dejected, but
erected against Fortunes worst. If thy pride will let thee learn, I will teach
thee too how to lay her prostrate at thy feet. Listen (...) and his last gasp
will groan out love. In death he will love me, and I him after it. His memory
shall be as dear to me, as ever was his presence. But grant it to be a cross
deserving grief, no more to taste the sweetness of my friends conversation.
How then? Must I therefore break out into immoderate whining? No. Fortune has
yet left me Philosophy to moderate betwixt me and sorrow. Philosophy tells
me that my friend was borne subject to that fatal law of Nature, which as it
allows an entrance into life; so it commands a departure out.

The earth never produced any thing that was not reduced to that first, The
first minute of ^ife, we march to meet death
predominant Element. The first minute of our life, we lake our journey
toward death, which some finish in that minute, some in an hour, in a year
some, and all once. He that ends soonest his pilgrimage, is in my opinion
most in grace with Providence. As we prize our meat, not according to the
quantity, but the quality of it: so should we life; not according to the
length, but the sweetness of the same.

Jupiter I have often called (...) port him, that his curses shall aim at,
though they cannot hit Jupiter. He will dare to say that the soul of his Love
grudged to leave her body, as being loath to leave a true heaven to go to a
supposed. Exclaim he will against death, and call for his fatal stroke,
bidding death to be pitiless toward him, since to her he was not pitiful.
He will say that Nature, to avoid the imputation of a liar, let death seize
her, Nature having in her promised more to the World, then she could perform.
In contempt he will mention the flinty wisdom of us Cynicks, and swear that
we are as void of virtues, as of affections* and by way of argument will
avouch, that no Virtue makes a man lose his understanding. But were he
conversant in our Schools, he should there learn that a man, A wise man
submits his mind to God, al other things to his mind.
who understands himself aright, will subject his mind to God, all other
things to his mind, and not lose his understanding for the loss of a woman.
We could teach him that they are fools, who will not lay down for their own
sake, the grief which they have taken for another.

(...) in thy breast, not in the field. It is not blood, not famine, not war
that can bring peace to thine own conscience. The feliciis false that depends
on things external.
If on External things depend thine inward content, with those external
things thy content will vanish. If thy quiet of soul be procured by things
without thee, Fortune (of these things the Mistress) will command all the
thoughts within thee. Thy mirth, and thy sadness shall be at her appointment.
Is there a beauty on which thy thoughts seed? That beauty she will blast. Is
there an eye, the very thought whereof enlightens thy mind? That eye shall be
extinguished. Lies all thy pleasures in thy possessions? Within one hour
Fortune will lay all thy wealth in another lap. Art thou now one of the
earths mightiest Kings? Anon thou shall be rancked amongst Slaves. Thus shall
thy mind be as changeable as is all mutable Fortune.

Live then another while under the government of Virtue, and believe me (whom
in all things thou see to be above Fortune) that thy joys shall far exceed
the number of thy days. But a subject of (...) thy stomach, not inflame thy
blood. The fullness of wickedness has often followed repletion of the grape.
If to live joyfully, and blessedly be thy wish, have a care thy attendants be
honest.

The company of the honest to be embraced.
Honest they shall be, if thou banish the vicious, and retain the virtuous.
In the flight of the one, villainy and slavery will depart thy Court, and with
the good that tarry with thee, goodness, and liberty will remain. It is
better to have one true, honest attendant, then a flock of fools, and knaves.
Listen no longer to flatterers, whose soothings are pernicious. As a Wolf is
like a dog, yet they are of far different natures: so is a flatterer like a
friend, though their intents be diverse.

Suffer not Sycophants to persuade thee to the erecting of thy Statues, nor let
Apelles draw thee any more, but, that City which thou meanest to grace with
thine Image, there strive to make the memory of thee a Monument of Gentleness,
of Mercy, of Justice, of Liberality.

As the Sun attends not on the prayers of mortals, but rises of his own
accord, shines freely, and is of all all-hailed: So neither do thou respect the
praises, the applauses, and inuocations of the people, but do good freely,
without solicitation; so shall thou be as welcome to thy subjects, as is the
Sun to Mortality. If thou be not thus gracious, and thus good, thou art not
worthy to be a Prince; and therefore resign thine office to me. I will make
it manifest to thee, that a Philosopher can prevail more with persuasion, then
thou by violence. But me thinks I hear thy insole^t tongue bid me betake my
self to the government of my Tubbe, the only Kingdom I was borne to. He is
most miserable, that cannot govern his passion and confine his d^sires.
Mock on, most miserable of mortals, who can neither govern thy passions,
nor confine thy desires; Diogenes despises thy derision. This Caske I dwell in,
is to my mind as ample, as all thy Dominions are to thine.

As he that is borne in Persia, will not covet to live in Greece, but in
Persia set up his rest: So I being born in Poverty, with poverty am contented,
nor does my highest thought aim at abundance. (...)

For Alexander to say he is better then Diogenes, because he is richer, is as
much, as if one horse should say to another, I am better then thou, because I
have more Prouender, more hay, and finer trappings: or as if one bird should
say to another, I am to be preferred before thee, because I have finer feathers
and a neater nest.

As it is the swiftness of the wing, and the foot, which commends the Hawke
and the Horse: so is it the quickness of capacity that commends the man. In
this ability of soul, if Alexander surpass Diogenes, The ability of soul, is
that which comme^ds the man.
Alexander shall have the upper hand. But in that, Diogenes cannot be excelled;
and therefore will never yield to Alexander the precedence. Get thee gone then
to those that worship thee as a God; for I think thee not a complete man.
Tell thy Idolaters, thou did meet with a man that proved himself happy, and
thee miserable.

And if they ask thee who? Say it was Diogenes, who neither feared thee, nor
Fortune. God and mine innocence protect me against thee, and her. My (...)
uours, The body is subject to many inconveniences.
to tyrants, to fire, to water, and to all things in strength above it; but
nothing is above the heavenly part, but heaven, and the almighty maker of all
things, Jupiter. If then thou have nothing that can ennoble, and enrich my
soul, keep all to thy self; for concerning my body I am not solicitous. So
base a thing is the body, that had not Nature give to every man a self love,
each man would have sought his own destruction, rather then have his soul
dwell in so loath some a lodging. This he shall soon apprehend, that does but
imagine what a trouble, and vexation it would be unto him for a week only to
dress, and mundifie any man's body but his own. With what indignation he would
rub another teeth, and cleanse other parts, which nature of necessity must
foul. The love we bear our selves, makes us bear with our i^firmities.
It is then the love we bear our selves, which makes us bear with our
infirmities. If then it be true, that in our bodies we are subject to so many
diseases, to so many disco^modities; and that it is the divine Mistress of
this clayie mansion that gives us freedom, I will seek to polish and adorn
the latter, but bestow little cost on the former. Why? this (...) Philosopher,
Diogenes had a greater spirit then Alexander.
whose mind was greater then the Monarks to whom his speech was directed. He
that looks into their deaths (the only touchstone to find a counterfeit
courage) shall see Diogenes die like a man, and great Alexander like a little
child.

He that had made so many Nations patiently put on the yoke of servitude,
became himself such a slave to fear, that he sent to death all those that
did but mention Augury, The superstition of Alexander.
and trembled at the whistling of the winds. Every ordinary accident was to him
ominous, and any noise he heard, he thought to be the voice of death. His end
was much like that of Lewis the 11. The ends of Alexander and of Lewis the
eleue^th of France much alike.
of France, who in his latter days suspected the faith of his old servants,
cooped himself up in an Iron cage, and secluded himself from all society. He
gave his Physician 10000. Crowns a month, to prolong his too well beloved
life. He commanded the observation of solemn days, fasts and prayers, not so
much for the salvation of his soul, as for the preservation of his putrified
part: (...) not the eternity, yet it seems that death was more afraid of him,
Death was more afraid of Diogenes, then he of it.
then he of it, in that he was feign to seek it. So some report, and that, by
keeping in his breath, he let out his Soul. Others (with more probability)
deny that his death was violent, and describe the manner of it. By this latter
Narration we shall learn, that though he laid not violent hands on himself,
yet he shook hands with death, and welcomed him as the only Phisitia^ that
could cure him of all his aches. He cried when he came into the world, because
he was a child: but, being a man, he scorns to howl at his going out.

There was no more motion, no more reluctation of Nature in his death, then in
the sleep of others. A little before life left him, a short slumber vsherd
death, out of which being awaked, his Physician asked him how he did, and
enquired whether or no his pain lessened; The admirable answer of Diogenes to
(...) Physician.
to whom he answered, that anon it would diminish; for he had entertained the
one brother already, and looked (...) tam stertere noctem,

Diogenes half asleep, half awake, answered thus, Qui popules moderatur, and
ampla negotia tractat.

This answer expressed to the full the worth, and office of Diogenes, who
taught the people to obey, and Kings to rule aright. Their virtues compared.
Alexander surpassed Diogenes in strength, wherein a horse surpasses Alexander;
Diogenes excelled Alexander in knowledge, wherein the gods excelled not
Diogenes. Diogenes greater the^ the gods he worshipped.
He was, indeed, greater then the gods he worshipped, who were of mortal
race as he was, and had not so much desert to claim a Deity as he had.
Alexander could not temper his passions, but in his anger put to death
Philotas, and slew Clitus as brave a Soldier as himself, and all for
remembering him, that he was the son of Philip. Diogenes made his affections
conformable to his will, and his will to reason. Alexander sought to shun
inevitable death; Diogenes met it boldly. The Sun in the space of twelve
hours (...)


