Honor and Virtue, Triumphing over the Grave. Exemplified in a fair devout
Life, and Death, adorned with the surviving perfections of EDWARD Lord
STAFFORD, lately deceased; the last Baron of that Illustrious Family: which
Honor in him ended with as great Luster as the Sun sets within a serene Sky.

A Treatise so written, that it is as well applicative to all of Noble
Extraction, as to him, and wherein are handled all the Requisites of Honor,
together with the greatest Moral, and Divine Virtues, and commended to the
practice of the Noble Prudent Reader.

By Anth. Stafford his most humble Kinsman.

This Work is much embelish'd by the Addition of many most Elegant Elegies
penned by the most accute Wits of these Times.

LONDON: Printed by J. Oaks, for Henry Seile at the Tigres Head in
Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstans Church. 1640.

To my much honored Lord, Thomas Lord Howard, chief of the Howards, Earl of
Arundell and Surrey, Earl Marshall of England, Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My very good Lord,
THe Fame of your Lordships Heroic Virtues invites me to present to your
gracious acceptance this Treatise, of which Honor is the Theme. Indeed to whom
more fitly can she make her address, then to your Lordship, through whose
Veins she runs, from whose Bosom she flows, in whose Actions she shines, and
by whose Protection she is secured from the insolent Affronts of the Vulgar?
Being distressed, she makes You her fair Sanctuary, being wounded, she makes
you her sovereign Balm. Nay, (which draws near to a wonder) many put their
Honor into Your hands, esteeming it more safe there, then in their own. This
is the first cause of my Dedication; The next is, that the true Child of Honor
(the deplored Subject of this Book) was a Debtor to Your Lordship for his
Education, whose Advancement in Virtue, Honor, and Estate; You made the
greatest part of Your Study. And, to say the Truth, where could such a
Guardian be found for him as Your Lordship, since between the renowned
Ancestors of You both, Virtue, and Blood has long since engendered a strict
Friendship, and between whom there was a near similitude of good and evil
Destiny, both having amply shared of Infortunity, and Glory? I may add, that
there cannot be a more lovely Sight, then to behold an ancient, lofty Cedar
sheltring with his Branches from the Rage of weather, a Young one of the same
Kind, aspiring to the same Height; had not the Frost of Death, immaturely nipt
this Noble Plant, it were an Heresy to doubt that he would have flourisht
under the care of a Lord, whose Virtue is too immense for one Region to
contain, and whose Perfections are so many, and so transcendent, that they are
able not only to adorn these more Polisht Parts of the World, but to civilize
also the more Barbarous, and to make an Athens of Madagascar. The Oblation of
my Tears, and Supplications to God, not availing to keep him here, J have sent
my Vows after him, and have given him a Funeral Equipage consisting of the
Testimonies of brave, good, and knowing Men, which will eternize him on Earth,
as his Goodness will in Heaven. I, confess freely, I was unwilling to leave
him to the Mercy of some grossly ignorant Chronologer of the Times, in whose
Rubbish, Posterity might unhappily have found him lying more ruined then his
glorious Predecessors were by the Tyranny of Time, or the Cruelty of Princes.
Now in the last place, I must most humbly beseech Your Lordship to take notice,
that his whole Name have made an affectionate, but an imprudent Choice of me to
be their weak Orator, to render Your Lordship submissive, and due thanks for
the Good You did, or intended him, and withal to make You a Religious Promise
of their Prayers to God, and their Praises; to Men, as in particular, I do of
the vowed faithful service of

Your Lordships most humble, loyal Servant, Anthony Stafford.

To the Virtuous, and excellent Lady, the Countess of Arundell.
MADAM,
THE causes why I make this Dedication apart to Your Ladyship, are diverse. The
first is, that sweet Lord (the lamented Subject of this Book) in whose
praise, my Muse ending, will expire like a Phoenix in a Perfume. He was
extremely obliged to Your Ladyship in particular; and therefore You deserve
particular and infinite thanks from all of his Blood and Name, of which I am
one, who have ever had your Virtues in admiration. The second is, that You,
Madam, are none of those Romance Ladies, who make Fiction and Folly their Study
and Discourse, and appear wise only to Fools, and Fools to the wise. By
reading nothing else but Vanity, they become nothing else themselves. They make
a more diligent enquiry after the deeds of Knights, and Ladies errant, than
after the Acts of Christ and his Apostles. The loss of their time is their
just punishment, in that they spend a whole Life in reading much, and yet is
that much, nothing. But you, Madam, are capable of the most profound grave
Mysteries of Religion, and daily peruse and meditate Books of Devotion. You
despise the bold Adventures of those Female Follies, and piously surveigh the
lives of the Female Saints. You have rendered yourselfe a most accomplished
Lady on Earth, by imitating our blessed Lady which is in Heaven; who as she was
here the first Saint of the Militant Church, so is she there, the first of the
Church Triumphant; having learned that she spent al her hours in works of
Charity, you trace her steps, knowing that She, and Virtue, trod but one path.
Hence it comes, that you are at no time so angry, as with the loss of an
opportunity to succor the distressed; and that you are as indefatigable in
doing good as heaven in motion. Hence it is, that the impetuous force of a
Torrent may be as well stopped, as the constant flood of your goodness; which
never stays till it have watered, and relieved all within its Ken, commendable
either for Knowledge, or Virtue. My third, and last scope in placing your
Character in the Front of this Treatise is, that like a Star it may strike a
luster throughout this Book, and by its light chase away the darkness
Oblivion would else cast upon it. Questionless it will breed a holy emulation
in any of your Sex, who shall here learn that there is a Lady, whose virtues
are come to the Age of Consistence, and can grow no further; and from whom, not
only her posterity, but her Ancestors, also receive honor; They, in this
resembling the Morn, who though she precedes the Sun, receives her splendor
from him. Thus sweet, thus excellent, Madam, I have received you from those who
have been truly happy in being daily witnesses of all your Words and Actions.
I conclude with this protestation made in me by Truth her self, that I am so
constant an honourer (I had almost said an Adorer) of Virtue wherever I find
it, especially when that in estimable Diamond is set in Honor (as it is in
you, Madam) that should I round the World in your Ladyships service, I should
esteem it a Voyage far short of Your Merit, and my Duty; and that I should not
think the highest Title Imagination can rear, a greater addition to me, than
is the submissive style of

Your Ladyships most humble loyal Servant, ANTHONY STAFFORD.

To the noble Reader.
IT has been the manner of Ancient Times to commend their Dead, rather to
testify a good affection, to bewail their loss, and to hold out the Lamp of
their virtuous Lives to others left behind, then to gratify the deceased. Thus
David commended Saul and Abner, Elizaeus Elias, and Nazianzen Bazill; Ber
bewailed Malachie, complaining that his very bowels were pulled from him. And J
may truly aver that Death tore out my Heart, when he bereft me of that
sweetest Lord, of whose rare Gifts and Graces this ensuing Discourse is
composed. That I deferred till now to do him this right, and to administer
comfort to his virtuous Mother, and the rest of his Noble and dear Friends,
(who still keep warm his Ashes with their Tears) was for a wise
consideration, no base neglect. A green wound abhorres the hand of the Surgeon,
which after it patiently endures, nay, longingly expects: Jn like case, the
Griefs of the mind, being newly entered, are not easily expelled, but at first
reject all consolation given them; whereas afterward they become obedient to
Reason, and readily admit of those Remedies, which at first they refused. There
are so many reasons comprehended in this following Treatise, why his Friends
should not grieve too immoderately for him, that I will only here add this,
that they should not too violently lament his departure out of a World where
Vice is natural, Virtue but counterfeited, or at the best well acted. Here we
discover her, but through a Cloud. Let them apply that usual saying of the
Rabbis to their sad souls, The godly even in their Death are alive, but the
wicked in their Life are dead; Jf a Heathen could boldly aver, Nunc
Epaminondas vester nascitur quiasic moritur: In so dying your Epaminondas is
now reborne, may not we with greater confidence affirm the same of him?

Thus much of the excellent subject, now to the Work it self. Jn this Age
(fertile in Coriats, barren of Sydneys and Raleighs.) that Book must come into
the World with a good Angel to defend it that escapes the severe censures of
malevolent spirits, with whom it is a wicked custom to damn by Tradition, and
traduce Authors before they peruse them. As Cankers commonly cleave to those
Roses which are best grown, and spread: So these envious Detractours commonly
fasten their venem^us Teeth on Works, to which Fame promises Eternity. This
ought not to deter Good and Knowing Men from publishing their Labors; who
herein should imitate the Sun, which (though the Atheist, and the Jmpious,
are unworthy of his Light) shines forth still, and with his Beams glads the
Earth, and all the Movers on it. The only Recompense J desire of my ingenious
Readers is, that they would vouchsafe not to read this Treatise out, but that
they would be pleased in imitation of the Sorts Virgilianae to take the
Staffordian Lot, that is, to practice in their lives the first Page Chance
shall direct them to, in the opening of it; since there is not one in this
Work which contains not some lovely Virtue or other of that dear Lord
deceased: by enlarging of whose Fame, J have taken the Advantage to render my
own less obscure. This small favor J hope my Noble Readers will not deny
their Servant,

A. S.

Imprimatur

Samuel Baker.
August 9. 1639.
HONOR AND VIRTUE, Triumphing over the Grave: Or the life of the late Lord
Stafford.
NOne of Wisdoms Children will either despair, or be confident of any thing
in this inferior World, all things are subject to such a strange Revolution.
We often see the money destined to set out a Triumph employed in furnishing a
Funeral, and the purple, together with these great preparations turned into
Balmes, Blackes, and Cypress. Pluto sometimes snatcheth Hymen's Torch out of
his hand, and leads the new linked couple from the Bridal Bed into his
solitary Vault. Nay, it has been recorded that an Execution has bin changed
into a Coronation, and a Scaffold built for a Delinquency, has become a Throne
of Glory. We have many certain signs of Danger and Sickness, none of
Security, there being in one part, or other daily examples of men that die,
singing, laughing, eating, and drinking. The strongest Humane Fabric Nature
ever built, a crumme going down awry destroys. Force and Chance take away the
Young, and Maturity the Old. Nothing visible that is not mortal, no Object has
sense less fading then itself. The general Tide washes all passengers to
the same shore, some sooner, some later, but all at the last. Every man must
take his course, when it comes, never fearing a thing so necessary, yet always
expecting a thing so uncertain. Our Intemperancy prepares a Feast for Death,
and is therefore called the Mother of Physicians. This goodly Tree of Life is
surcharged with Fruit, some fall by clusters, some single, all once. Every
thing rises with the Condition of a Fall, and all Increases have their
Diminutions. This is the firm Bond that compasses, and girdeth fast the
Bundle of Mortality, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. That all
this is true the Noble Subject of this Book is a fair, yet sad Example, much
to be lamented because much to be admired, of whom something I must speak,
though it come as short of his inestimable Worth, as I do of an accomplished
Orator. And here I must crave pardon of the judicious Reader, if I draw not
his perfections to the life. My Apology may be a just complaint that my style
is fettered by the idle Censures of Schismatic Fools, whose purblinde souls
cannot discern between a fawning Flattery and a due praise, who have hardly
language good enough to make themselves understood, much less to persuade
others, except it be never to read them again. I could without the aid of any
Rhetoric at all, pen one of their dim foggy Lines, wherein there is nothing
considerable, that I would not reduce into a poesy for a Ring, so that they
might wear their own story on what finger they please. But there are more then
humane helps required to give a Hero his true Character, whose magnanimous
soul harbors not a thought small enough to enter into their narrow, passive
brains. As in the Ancient Sacrifices, it was not lawful to kindle the Altars
of the Gods with any material common Fire, but with the pure Rays of the
glorious Sun: So a divine flame is required to illuminate that Spirit which
undertakes to characterise the souls of great and eminent Men. I confess,
freely, the the wings of my invention flag, and are not able to bear her to
the Summity of her towering subject. It is a received opinion, that Wit
increases Grief, and Grief Wit. I find the former part of this Tenent true;
for that small proportion of Wit Nature has given me, turns to my
disadvantage, in that it makes me to apprehensive of his worth, and
consequently of his loss; but the later I prove in my self to be false; for
now the charming Eloquence of Anthony, Crassus, and Cicero is required to limme
this rare Piece, a stupifying Dullness seizes on me, and the very Knowledge
of what I have to write distracts me, so I know not what to write. And yet this
is no wonder at all; for my best blood being lost in him, my worser remaining
must needs chill, and no man is ignorant, that where there is not Focus in
Venis, there cannot be Subtilitas in Intellectu: When Warmth forsakes the
Veins, Subtilty must of necessity abandon the Head. Yet were I master of as
great an eloquence as Demosthenes himself, my best words could not give his
Virtues a clothing correspondent to their luster. The most skillful Painter
cannot give a Picture all the lively Graces contained in the Natural, from
which it is drawn; Nor can the most expert Orator fully, and truly delineate
the Beauty of an Original so sublime that it transcends his Understanding. As
it is more easy to tell what is not in Heaven then what is: So it is by far
more facile to number the Vices which he had not, then the Excellencies of
which he was the happy possessour. But because in great Designs, even
attempts are laudable, and that by many, this Testimony of my Duty is looked
for at my hands, I am content to take the advantage though of a most unhappy,
and unwelcome occasion to seal up my former Affection, and publish to the
World the damage I have received by this fatal Deprivation, nor I alone but
all his Stock, and all the lovely Brood of Honor, and Piety. And I now
opportunely choose to make this Oblation to his Memory. Quando nec laudante^
adulatio movet, nec laudatu^ tentat elatio; When neither Flattery moves me,
nor vainglory assaileth him. My comfort is, I have chosen a Theme where (to
some judgments) the highest Hyperboles will pass for defective Truths. Sure I
am, I need not fear to out-speake his merit and my love, which ought to be so
much that it cannot possibly appear too much. I dare tell Envy and Detraction
to their Teeth, that praise justly belongs to the pious deceased, and that I
may call it, with Pliny, the charitable Dew that makes Virtue spring up in the
Living. Who knows my friends better then I my self? If they are not such as I
make them, sure I am, I believe them such. No Crown can give me such content
as does this comfortable error; for such captious Critics will term it,
though in my belief it be an upright and impartial Verity.

Before I enter into his commendations, I must entreat all my Readers to
consider that (besides the forementioned Obstacle) there is yet another, which
is that my Pen is too straightly confined, the bounds afforded her not being
large enough to make a Demonstration of her Agillity, and Sufficiency; for
Obstinacy her self can not deny that (man's Life being but a Span) she has
little more then an Inch allotted her to traverse in, he dying at the Age of
Fourteen. She must therefore be enforced only to draw in a small Card the
first Spring of his Youth newly delivered of such beautiful Issues commendable
both for their Ornament and Odor, as are able to commit a Rape on all knowing
Souls, and to send out a perfume as far as Posterity. Had he he arrived at
the Autumn of his Age, she had then been Mistress of a Field large enough to
exercise her Art in, and she would have presented the Surveighers of this
Work with as Beautiful Fruit as the large, spreading Tree of Honor ever
bore. We might well divine of him, as Antigonus did of Pyrrhus, Magnus futurus
si senesceret, He would prove great, if Aged.

The common Method in handling matters of this nature commands me to make the
first part of this Discourse the place of his Birth, the Nobility of his Race,
and Disposition, and to continue and close it up with the Virtues practiced in
his Life, and the Sanctity expressed in his Death.

IN setting down the place of his Birth I shall follow the usual course of
others who hold it Where a worthy man of a fair Line is born, and bred is
necessary to be known.
a Circumstance very necessary to make known where a worthy man, and of a
fair Line is born, and bred, in that it is not the Fertility and Beauty of the
Soil, but the manners, and goodness of the Dwellers that commend the place.
True it is that Isaac commands Jacob that he should not take a wife of the
Land of Canaan, but of Mesopotamia in Syria, being more renowned. I must not
thwart the Scriptures, nor deny that some countries are more famous then
others, but I desire to know whether, or no the Braverie of their Inhabitants
have not conferred on them the Renown they are so big with. What made Greece
the Wonder of the World, but the Learning, and Valor of her people? What makes
her now the contempt of all men but the Baseness, Dullness, and Cowardice of
the same? What once was Ireland but another Goshen? There was a time when the
people of this Country being asked how they had disposed of their sons, their
Ordinary Reply was, Mandati sunt ad Disciplinam in Hiberniam, They are sent
into Ireland to be instructed. Within the remembrance of many, the Americans
are not at this day more barbarous, then were the more Northern Natives of
that Island, though now (Heaven be praised) they have almost quite shaken of the
cumber some shackles of that Cymerian Ignorance. I infinitely applaud the
speech of Aristotle to a vainglorious Fellow, who boasted himself a Citizen
of a mighty City, Noli, inquit, hoc attendere, sed an dignus sis magna, and
illustri Patria: Have not an eye, said he, to the splendor of thy Country, but
to thy own Worth, and examine whether thou deservest to be derived thence. So
that we see there is no Climate so obscure that is not illustrated by the
Birth of meritorious men. Had Sir Philip Sidney written his Poem, or Sir Walter
Raleigh his History amongst the Savages of America in Greek or Latin, I am
confident all succeeding Authors would have named America as often as now they
do Rome, or Athens, and those rude creatures would have received an imputative
worth from them, whereas now they are in little, or nothing to be distinguished
from their Cattle. Or had they penned those their immortal Works in the
Indian Tongue (after once they had come to light) we should have studied that
unpolished Language as hard, as now we do the Oriental Dialects. Did not a
Gaditanian come from the farthest part of the World to see the far famed
Livie?

I will here cut off this no impertinent Digression, with relating that this
hopeful young Lord breathed his first Air at Stafford, which Town and
Country the memory of him will for ever commend, ennoble, and endeare to all
such as profess themselves friends to him, or Goodness.

BEfore I begin to speak of the Antiquity of his Family, I must necessarily
insert something of noble Extractions in general, because there are some
clownish Infidels who believing there is no such thing as a Gentleman.

That in all Ages, and Nations the more Worthy have been distinguished from
the rest by Superior it is here proved against all clownish Infidels, that
there is such a thing as a Gentleman.
Titles, and callings is undeniable. The Hebrews severed them from others by
stiling them Jeduim, Horim, Scalithim, Scheliscim, Avarim, Massegucrim,
Artsilim, Maginim, Guevirim, Guibborim, Nedivim, Kervim, Ahhaschedappenim, by
which is signified in the propriety of that Language, that they are
Illustrious, Generous, Principal Men, not much inferior to Kings. But they
were most honored who were descended from the greatest Houses, and these they
named Benhorim, Children of Noblemen. Moses Governor of Israel, to the end he
might rule the people well, and worthily, selected seventy Men of Eminent
Condition, Hachamim, and Jeduim, Wise, and Noble men well versed in Affairs of
State. And Iosuah his Successor added others of the same quality. Men of
Honorable Blood have ever been held to be of Royal Condition, and reverenced
as little Kings, because them in several Provinces their Princes have graced
with great Titles, Privileges, and Prerogatives, and on them have conferred
their Regal Authority, that by this means they might be more reverenced, and
obeyed by the people whom under them they were to govern. There is no man,
says Livy, so stupid, that he is not enflamed with a Desire of Domestical
Glory. The words of the same Author in another place are these. Parentage and
Nobility are great Ornaments, doubtless, for a man to enjoy here in this
life, but far greater to leave behind him to his Posterity. Harken to
Cicero, Omnes boni semper Nobilitati favemus, and quia Reipublicae utile est
Nobiles esse homines dignos Majoribus suis, and quia valere debet apud nos
senex clarorum hominum de Republica meritorum memoria, etiam mortuorum: All we
who are good ever favor Nobility, because it is a thing profitable to the
Commonwealth to have men worthy of their Ancestors, as also that the aged
Memory of famous Men deserving well of the Commonwealth (though dead) ought to
be in esteem with us. Plato divides Nobility into four parts. The first are
they who derive themselves from good, and just parents. The second have Princes
their Ancestors. The third are they whose Progenitors have been great
Warriors, and Lawreated Triumphers. The fourth and best, are they who excel
in Magnanimity, and Greatness of Merit. And truly I am of Plato's mind; for
though I am a never yielding Advocate for men of remarkable Stocks, yet I
believe not that Honor is confined to run in certain particular Channels, or
that the Rational Soul should be bound to the same Laws with the Vegetative,
or Sensible. Where Nobility is only Nuda Relatio, a meare bare Relation, and
nothing else I esteem it, not a Grace, but a Disparagement. I shall never
seek for that Fruit in the Root which I should gather from the Branch. Virtue
is the legitimate Mother of Honor, not Fortune, who, though she be a Queen,
many times imitates unhappily some of her own Rank in suffering her self to
be enjoyed by Grooms, and fixes there her Admition where the World places
its Derision. Him Him whom Vice, and Ignorance does still detain prisoner in
the Heard of the Vulgar, if by his own virtuous actions he cannot separate
himself from them, my Vote, nor Judgment shall ever give him Freedom. In
this I am seconded by no worse a man then the most Eloquent Demosthenes. De
Nobilitate parum laudis praedicare possum, bonus enim Vir mihi Nobilis videtur,
qui vero non justus est licet Patre meliore quam Jupiter sit genus Ducat
Ignobilis mihi videtur. Nobility I cannot much predicate; He who is a good man
appears to me noble; He who is not Just (though he derive himself from a
better parent then Jupiter himself) seems to me Ignoble. The French usually
say, Le Splendeur de Virtue la Noblesse de Race: The Splendor of Virtue is the
Nobility of Race.

I am not ignorant that the Censure and Custom of many Kingdoms are against
me, where all men have respect, and precedencie given them by their great
parentage, not their good parts. But above all other, the Dane is the Amongst
all Nations the Dane is the greatest Adorer of Nobility.
most strict Observer of Descent. In Denmark he is not ranked amongst the
Gentry, who cannot prove him Even Herremand auff Seisten Aufner, A Gentleman of
sixteen Descents by Father and Mother. At all Triumphs, and Tiltings it is
proclaimed, that he who is not such must not presume to handle a Sword or
Lance, or enter into the Lists. Nay, it is most certain, that at those great
Solemnities they have excepted against some base sons of their own Kings
defective in Blood by the Mothers side, and would hardly be pacified by their
Princes answer, which was, that what honor was wanting on the Mothers side was
superabounding on the Fathers. In the Reign of Frederick the Second King of
Denmark, there lived a most learned Man named Erasmus Laetus, who for his
Science, and pleasing Discourse, was admitted into the best Companies, and had
an eminent place at all Tables. He proud of his high vallue, and ambitious of
higher, traveled to Venice, and was there created a Venetian Knight, and in
coming back was, made Poet Laureat by Caesar's own hand. The first Table he
came to after his return home was the Chancellor of that Kingdom who placed
him lowest of all his Guests, not sticking openly to tell him that the
Reverence, and Superiority which before was given him as a profound Scholar,
was now denied him as a Superficial Gentleman. If in that Kingdom an ignoble
man defloure a noble Maid, his head is infallibly cut off, and she lives, and
dies shut up between two Walls. If any woman gently borne marry a Roturier.
(as the French call him) with us a Peasant, she is deprived of her portion, and
never taken notice of afterward by any of her Kindred. In some places of Polanda
a gentleman has this privilege that if he kill a Burger, a Hind, or any
other ordinary man by paying down four shillings he is quit.

I abhor this foolish strictness, and severity, yet could wish we were not
as careless this way, as they were punctual, our Tables then would not be so
thronged with Farm, and shop-Gentry. The Ancient Romans in this case excluded
omnem quaestum, All manner of gain. If my Vote might pass for good, all
originalls of great Families hereafter should issue out of Schools and Camps,
there being no other beginning of power to warrant them from censure and
laughter. A true testimony of this I will give you in Pallas Freeman, of
Claudins the Emperor, a servant as Worthy, as his Master Wise. You shall see
an Emperor, and a Senate of Rome (Lords of the World) conspire and combine to
eternize this Pallas, and to set him up a mark of greatness, and glory to all
succeeding Ages. The Senate presented this abject fellow with the Praetorian
Dignity, and 150 Sesterces, the former of which he took, the later he
refused. They assemble together on purpose, and humbly thank this sottish
Prince for this his servile Favorite, in that he had vouchsafed to commend him
to the Senate, and by that gave them occasion of shaping him a reward
answerable to his merit. Upon his rejecting this their pecuniary offer, they
flock again to the Emperor, embrace his knees, and submissively beseech him
to persuade Pallas to accept of their gift, which supplication of theirs, this
foolish Emperor presented to Pallas. Behold an Emrour, and a Senate, says
Pliny, contending for superiority in slavery. You would have thought by this
their so frequent conventing before Caesar, that either the Confines of the
Empire had been enlarged, or the Armies had returned in safety. Within the
first stone of the Tiburtine way they built him a Monument with this
Inscription. Huic Senatus at fidem, pietatemque erga Patronos Ornamenta
Praetoria decrevit, and Sestertium centies Quinquagies, cujus honor contentus
fuit. On this man for his Faith and Piety to his Patrons, the Senate conferred
the Praetorian Ornaments, and presented him with 150. Sesterces, but he
contented himself with the Honor only. The excellent Pliny repines so much
at the grace and honor done this Furcifer (for so he calls him) that he breaks
out into this bitterness of Speech. This mancipated Senate, says he, styled
that modesty in him, which, indeed was Insolency. How I applaud my fortune,
that I lived not in their Times, in whose behalf I blush so many years after
their committing of this base folly. But why should we repine at this? Rather
let us laugh, that they may not think they have made any great purchase who
are come to that degree of happiness, as to be laughed at. By this one Example
we may clearly perceive, that it is not in the potency of Princes to create a
never fading A never fading Honor is not the gift of Fortune, but of Virtue.
honor, that supreme blessing being in the gift of Virtue only.

That the original of true Nobility is not derived from any accidental good
flowing from Fortune, or Lineage, but receives its birth, and growth from the
ability, and Harmony of a virtuous Mind, I will both by reason and example
demonstrate.

By reason; for if solid and ligitimate Nobility It is here proved by reason
that Nobility depends not on the will of Fortune.
depended so on the will and beck of Fortune, that she could circumscribe the
marks, and Ensigns of Honor within the narrow compass of the womb, and
give, and take them away at her pleasure, there would be nothing left in the
spacious circumference of this earthly Globe for a Wise man to desire, who
knowing Fortune to be so changeable, that some of the Ancients used to make her
Statues of Glass, as an argument of her fragillity, and even then suspecting,
and fearing her when she most fawnes on him, places not his confidence at all
on her, but involves himself within his own virtue, which only can secure
him from her tyranny. What ever is in her possession he scorns, though he may
have it for the fetching, because she is so blind that she cannot penetrate
into his worth, and so base that she lodges oftener and longer with the the
ignorant and infamous, than with the more deserving and more knowing. He
smiles at their arrogance and pride, who upon an idle persuasion grounded on
their Nobility, presume to take place of others, whereas, indeed, nothing is
more vain, abject, and more remote Nothing is more remote from the nature of
true Nobility, than an ancient stock void of virtue
from the nature of true Nobility, than an ancient stock void of virtue. The
judgments of Plato, and Seneca will here be inserted opportunely, who affirm
that if we be inquisitive after Pedigrees we shall find that there is no slave
who is not sprung from mighty Kings; nor no King that is not descended from
despicable slaves. By which we may apparently see that it is not greatness of
Blood, but of Merit, that really dignifies any man. For my own part, I
seriously protest, I should glory more in being the happy Master of the lofty
mind, and low Extraction of undaunted Maerius, than in enjoying all the vast
Dominions of Tersytha, and Sardanapalus, together with the innumerable
splendent Images of their Ancestors. That Alexander the Great was truly Noble,
no man will deny, in that he was son to so puissant a Monarch as Phillip King
of Macedon: yet was he so far from being puffed up with any vaineglorious
conceit of his royal descent, that Plutarch upon his credit assures us, he
being yet a Child, repined at nothing so much as at his Fathers glorious
Actions. To this purpose is remarkable that passage between him and other
Children, who (alleging to him his happiness in being son to so brave a
Prince, that made such large Conquests, and only for him) received from him
this magnanimous answer. What boots it me to possess much, when I my self
have done nothing memorable? So prosperous a success attends all my Fathers
Enterprises, that he will leave me nothing to Conquer. O generous speech
proceeding from a high aspiring mind, deservedly destined to Conquer, and
govern this lower Hemispheare. Me thinks I hear him thus enlarge his reply.
Has my Father in one night deflowred both Fame and victory, and extorted from
them a vow never hereafter to wait on any but him? shall I then live like a
Plant, and only grow to stand still? Sloth is the common Nurse to all Vices,
and in learning nothing, we learn to do ill. I like the Custom of that
Nation who suffered not their Children to be taught any thing sitting, and
always sacrificed to the gods the last Commer to the Army. Bar me Motion,
and action, and conclude me a Trunk, not a Man. Shall I lie still imprisoned
within the Straights of my own Greece? No, I am resolved not only to trace my
Sire, but to out-goe him. I will have this massy Globe measured, that I may
see how much is left for me to overcome. The Sun shall not discover more then
I will Conquer, only I would not so soon vanquish as he surveighs, lest my
Valor should want employment. Of the same thread with this opinion of
Alexander, is that of Lijcus in Seneca's Hercule furente.

Nobiles non sunt mihi Avi, nec altis inclytum titulis Genus, Sed clara virtus.
Qui Genus jact at suum Aliena laudat. It rests now, that I confirm by
Example It is here by example confirmed that Descent is no sound Argument of
true Nobility.
what I have proved by Reason, that Descent is no sound Argument of true
Nobility. The truth of this, the very consideration of the inconstancy of
human affairs will assure us, in that the Presidents are most frequent of
men this day prostrate, and the scorn of all men, to morrow exalted, and their
very nods observed.

If we look back upon old Rome we shall quickly perceive, that not long
after she was built, many obscure men became her Rulers. Who knows not that
Tarquinius Priscus, one of her most famous Kings, had for his Parents a
banished Merchant, and a servile Woman? Was not Servus Tullius the son of a
mean fellow, and a Maid servant? Was not the birth of Tullus Hostillius, who
preceeded both these in the Empire, very mean, he having been in his Nonage
sometimes a Neatheard, sometimes a Shepherd? Now let us come to the Caesar's
themselves, and examine whether or no they were of more renowned extraction
than their Kings. Augustus himself (whose Greatness and Happiness grew to a
Proverb, (Sis Augusto Felicior, Trajano melior) and whose surname at this day
the German Emperors with pride usurp, shutting up all their Titles with
Semper Augustus, ever Augustus) was not his Grandfather a Silver-smith, and his
Father an Astipulator? Both which Cicero writing to his brother Quintus
avoucheth to have obtained the Quaestorship by supplication. What other Founder
of his Stock had Vitellius than a Libertine, or Freed man, whom Cassius
Severus, and many others maintain to have been no better than a Tailor.
Trajan, the best of all the Caesar's (in whose Reign the Map of the Roman
Empire was at the fairest) swamme at first in no Flood of Fortune, and that he
was of no great House. Nerva himself inferres, who when he designed him
Emperor, and commended him to the Senate, bade them look into the man's merit,
not his parentage. Pertinax none of their worst Emperors had a slave to his
Grandfather, and a freed man to his Father. Piscenninus Niger, no bad Prince,
had no better a beginning. Opilius Macrinus, was first a Servant, then a Freed
man. Galienus, Posthumus Lolienus, and Martius, whose Reign continued but
three days, could not glory much in their Pedigrees, the later of which was
but a Smith. Galerius had poor Country parents, and he himself was an
Armorour, and from thence got the surname of Armentarius. Of the same poor
condition were Maximinus, Pupienus, and Balbinus, his co-Regnant. The virtuous
Aurelius was born meanly. The Father of the most accomplished Probus was a
Gardner, yet was he Lord of so many perfections, that Valerius the Emperor
earnestly by Letters exhorted his Son Gallenus to imitate him in all things,
using often to say by the way of Allusion to his Name, that if his Cognomen had
not been Probus his Praenomen should have been such. Bonosus rose from a
Schoolmasters to be an Emperor. Dioclesian was the Son of a Notary.
Licinius, and Maximinianus, Eutropius, and Paulus Orosius, number amongst the
Plebeians. The Father of the Emperor Valentinianus was a Rope-maker, whence he
himself got the nickname of Funerarius. Iustinius was but an Armorour. I must
not omit Basilius the Macedonian, who being brought Captive amongst other
vendible slaves to Constantinople was there created Emperor. I cannot pass
over Abdolominus, or, as some will have him called Abactonius, who was brought
by Alexander from drawing water, and watering Gardens, and by him made King of
Sidonia, to to the eternal dishonor of all the discontented Nobility of that
Country. Nor must I conceal Antipater, the succeeder of Alexander in the
Kingdom of Macedonia, who was Nephew to a she Player, that acted the Clownes
part. Arsaces, King of the Parthians, is reported to have been the son of
the people. The Parents of Cambyses, King of the Persians were of poor
condition. Darius the son of Hystaspes, who bore no better an Office under
Cyrus then that of a Serjant, was exalted to be King of the Persians, and was
the first of that Name. Here I must introduce the Father of Eumenes carrying of
burdens, and Telephanes, who being but a base Coachmaker, obtained the Lydian
Crown. I cannot but insert Mydas, who by the Phrygians was called from the
Cart to be their King, and Ptolomaeus who made so large a Step, as from being a
common Soldier to be crowned King of Egypt. Tyridates clome from a servant to
be King of the Parthians. Livy informs us, that Vectius Messius King of the
Volscians, was more commendable for his Deeds then his Birth. Who is ignorant
that Parrhasius, and Lycastus (being exposed by their Mother to the mercy of
the weather, and wild beasts) were found, and brought up by Tilliphus a
Shepherd, and afterward governed Arcadia. That the Shepherd and Hog-heard
Tamberlaine was afterward King of the Scythians, is obvious to every man's
knowledge. I will here make a holy conclusion with David, and Saul, whom God
himself withdrew, the one from following the Ews, the other from following the
Asses, to rule over the Hebrews.

Notwithstanding all these forementioned Honor and Virtue conjoined, outshine
solitary Merit.
Presidents, I would not have any man conceive me to be so simple, that I
believe not two good things together are better then one single, that Desert,
and Noble Blood conjoined, far outshine solitary Merit. As the purest blood
always resorts to the Heart as the first liver, and the last dier, and the
noblest part of the Body: so for the most part Perfections and Graces, as the
Requisites of Honor, make their repair to the more Honorable of Mankind.
Abortion sounds not so strangely in our ears as degenerating, because the
former is common, the later not. We not very often, see any man of a Noble
strain in whom we detect not some Impression, some seeds of his Parents worth,
which in time spring up, bud, and flourish in him. Lightly, he who is well
borne ponders with himself whether or no, his Predecessors acquired their
Dignity by Arts, or Arms, which once known he seeks by the same means at
least to preserve, if not to increase the Honor they have left him.

If our Hodiernall Nobility would spend some Arts and Arms should be the study
of the more Noble.
time in this Meditation, and diligently exercise themselves both in Letters,
and Arms, their Honor would not be assailed on all sides by the Vulgar as at
this day it is, and it would no longer appear as in some it does, a mere
shadow of a consumed Body. The Emperor Adrian Successor both in the Empire,
and Virtue to Trajan, (equally an Enemy to Vice, and Sloth) used to say, that
it was not decent to see a young Gentleman without a Book in one hand to teach
him Wisdom, and a Sword in the other to defend the same against all Barbarians
whatsoever. So amiable was the Conjunction of both these in his sight, that he
did never eat without two standing by him of several Abilities, one to
discourse to him of the secrets of Nature, the other of Stratagems of War.
And that this was the Custom of the other Emperors, appears by the two
Masters of Nero, Burrhus, and Seneca, the one a Martialist, the other a
Philosopher. Charlemaine, Lewis the Debonaire, Saint Lewis and others had them
in such esteem, that they held the joining of them together as necessary, as
the linking of the Husband, and the Wife.

The Politickes dispute which of these two should have the Precedencie, but in
the end give it to the Gown, in that Good Letters can instructus in the
Military Discipline, but Arms cannot impart the Knowledge of the Arts.

I may seem to some to have dwelt too long on this weighty, and necessary
Argument of Honor in General, whose pardon I crave, and so proceed in my
Method to treat of his Nobility by Race, who is now my deplored Theme.

I am utterly void of all insight in Heraldry, and therefore can write nothing
in this kind, save what I have upon trust, but that little I shall deliver
shall be backed with great Authorities. That his Ancestors have been Dukes, I
am confident, every man has heard, but how great in Authority, and Revenue it
may be all men apprehend not. I am informed by a Knight skillful and Excellent
not only in our English, but Foreign Heraldry also, that the Dukes of
Buckingham have been so great, that Earls have been the Stewards of their
Houses, and that they have The Dukes of Buckingham, have been so great that
Earls have bin Stewards of their Houses.
disbursed eight hundred pounds yearly old Rent in Pensions to Earls, Barons,
Knights, and Gentlemen. To this worthy Testatour of their Greatness, I shall
yet add a far greater: namely, the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Northampton,
a Lord so omniscient that he seemed to all learned men living in his time, A
walking Athens. In a speech of his contained in a Book entitled, The
Arraignment of the Traitors, his formal words are these. It was a Monk of
Henton, that seduced the late Duke of Buckingham, to the Ruin of as great a
Name as any Subject in Europe (excepting only the Surname of a King) can
demonstrate, by which I receive a blemish, and all those that descend from him.
This is enough for me, in that I cannot blazon Coats, nor draw Pedigrees, and
because I am unwilling to disparage some whose Names the Staffords bore in
former times, and afterward forsook them as somewhat too obscure, and low, for
their lofty deeds.

We have all this while dwelt in the Suburbs, we will now enter the City,
and glad our eyes with the splendor of it. Imagine all the premises to be but
the Curtain, which now being drawn we will gaze on the Beautiful Piece, his
Life, so pure and innocent to the outward sight (in Gods eye who can be
justified?) that what was said of Scipio Nassica, may be applied to him, Nihil
in vita nisi laudandum aut dixit, aut fecit; Through his whole Life he never
did, or spoke any thing that was not commendable.

The first care of his Excellent Parents was to His pious Education.
let him know there was a God that made him, and they taught him by gesture to
acknowledge this Truth, ere he could by speech. The erection of his eyes, and
Hands spoke for him ere his Tongue could. To learn the Arts, and Sciences
requires a convenient Ripeness of Age, but it fares not so with Religion which
is to be sucked in with the Mothers, or Nurses Milk. A Vessel Religion is to
be sucked in with the milk.
reteines long the sent of that wherewith it is first seasoned, and therefore
he was taught to name, and know his Heavenly Father before his Earthly. When
he came to have the use of speech, he was instructed every morning with an
humble heart, and in a submissive phrase to crave the conduct, and safeguard of
God for that Day, and in the same lowly Language to implore his Almighty
protection for the ensuing Night. Then was he carried into Gods sacred Temple
there to offer up prayers, and Vows due to his Maker. True it is, that we not
only see, but handle God in his Creatures, but we no where speak univocally,
and unanimously to him, nor he at all to us but in his Church.

And that he might judge of Religion and His learned Education.
Goodness aright, these his solicitous Parents gave him a learned Education:
for though Learning be not the Adaequate Cause of Virtue, Though learning be
not the Adaequate cause of Virtue, it is the adjuvant.
(that being Assuefaction in Goodness) yet that it is the Adjuvant, all men
not Contentious will easily grant. Some there be (who affirm) that Virtue
cannot be taught, because though the Intellect may be informed of the true
form of Virtue, yet the Will by this Instruction cannot be made flexible.
Experience proving to us that many profoundly Learned, are withal damnably
Wicked. But this falls out by accident, when Science meets with a perverse, and
depraved Nature. If we consider Learning in it self, we shall find that
though it do not necessarily engender Virtue, yet it moves, and enclines the
Will to embrace it. To this alludes that of Ovid.

-- Didicisse fideliter Arts
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
There are many forcible, convincing Reasons, why a learned man is more apt to
follow Virtue then an unlearned. Amongst many other I will only produce four.
The first is, that by studying the Arts, and Sciences the thoughts of man are
averted from dwelling on corporeal things, the ordinary objects of his
Affections, and by that means the occasions are cut off, that usually allure
him to be enamored on Vice. Secondly, he who is a curious searcher into the
Nature, and causes of things, judges of them aright, and esteems them as they
are. Hence it comes to pass, that he magnifies things truly great, and
contemnes those equally base, and is nothing at all moved with such Events as
in the Vulgar beget Terror, and Astonishment. Thirdly, through the Knowledge of
things Natural, and Supernatural, he discernes many causes why we should
adhere to Virtue, and detest Vice: For he who understands the Nature and
Excellency of God, will desire to be like him, and he who knows that God has
created all things under the Sun for him, will be enflamed with a divine love
toward him, and approve himself grateful, and serviceable to this his
Heavenly Benefactour. Likewise he who espies in the brute creatures
themselves Images of Virtues, in some that of Fortitude, in others that of
Temperancie, and Chastity, in all an Instinct, and Industry in undergoing
those Offices they are made for, and which are proper to them, will easily be
induced to think it a shame, and dishonor to him, if he (having the use of
Reason, and having the stamp of the Deity upon him) should be found defective
in his Duty. Fourthly, and lastly, Learning lays before us the true Form of
Virtue, and furnishes us with Examples of brave accomplished men, with the
rewards, and Glory they purchased by their Perfections: and on the contrary,
the ignominious, and horrid ends of such as have lived, and died mancipated to
their own sordid, enormous Imperfections, the Meditation whereof will render a
knowing man an Admirer of Goodness, and a loather of Wickedness.

They who are so obstinate as to reject these Reasons in favor of Good
Letters, will surely be ore-borne, and have their Judgments rectified, and
reformed by the Authority of great Men, who have declared themselves Fautours
of Erudition. This Example of Alexander, subjecting Great men have declared
themselves fautors of Learning.
himself to be the Disciple of Aristotle, shall be the Leader. Before he
attempted the subduing of the World, he desired to know what the World was,
and it is likely that the knowledge of it invited him to the conquest thereof.
How he doted on Homers Works is notorious even to Dablers in Story. The same
Alexander it was, who would have no difference of Habit between the Grecian
and the Barbarian, saying, that their knowledge, and their ignorance, were
marks sufficient to distinguish them. That incomparable Prince Alphonsus King
of Spain, Sicily, and Naples, (Coetanian with Charles the Seventh of France)
after he had once read in Saint Augustine, that an illiterate King was no other
then an Ass crowned, had ignorance in such detestation, that where ever he
went, and at all times whether in War, or Peace, he endevour'd both by
Reading, and Conference, to better his Understanding, and at so high a rate he
valued Science that he gave for his Crest, A Book open. It was a frequent
saying with him, That his dead Counselors, his Books, were to him far
better then the living, since they without flattery, Fear, or bashfulnesse,
presented to him Truth naked without any disguising Coverture. I ingeniously
confess, I never read that speech of Solon, without infinite delight, who
lying on his Deathbed, and over-hearing some of his learned Visitants
desputing and deciding some subtle question or other, attentively listened to
their Disputation, which a stander by observing, demanded of him why he now
ready to leave the world, should give ear to their discourse: to whom he made
this answer, worthy to be treasured up in all memories; Ut cum illud audiero
moriar doctior. That when I have heard that point discussed, I may dye the more
learned. Aristippus being demanded by one, in what his son should be
bettered if he learnt the Arts, and Sciences; answered. Etsi nulla alia in re,
nequit, certe vel in hoc, quod in Theatro non sedebit lapis supra lapidem: If
in nothing else, says he, yet truly in this, that he shall not sit in the
Theater one stone upon another. The same Philosopher often protested that he
had rather be a Beggar than a Fool, in that the former only wants money, the
latter humanity. Antisthenes confounded the studious, and the noble, and
admonished his Scholars, that learning was the only Viaticum, that in storms
and shipwreck when all things else perished, would boy up in spite of evil
Fortune. Aristotle was so great a student, that when he went to rest, he used
to hold in his hand a Ball of Brass over a large Basin of the same Metal,
that when he slept, the noise of the Ball falling into the Basin might awaken
him. To one who asked him how the Learned differed from the ignorant, he
replied, ut Viventes a Mortuis: As the Living from the Dead. He would often
repeat this his own speech, That Learning was an Ornament in prosperity, in
adversity a Refuge; and that Tutors were far to be preferred by Children,
before Natural Parents, because they received from the later the benefit of
living only: but from the former the felicity of living well, and blessedly. I
dwell the longer on this point that it may serve as an Admonition to all
parents, especially the more Noble to bestow on their Children a breeding
answerable to their Birth. In elder times, a Son was discharged in all duty
of obeying, comforting, and relieving his parents in their Age, if he could
prove that they had neglected to instruct him in his Youth. The Ancients held,
that they who provided Lands, and ample possessions for their posterity on whom
to bestow a learned Education, they would would not be at the charge, resembled
a silly fellow, that has more care of his shoes than his feet. They thought
that the heaping up of Riches for a flat-witted Coxecombe, who knows not how
to use them, was as if a fair sweet Lute should be presented to one who
knows not how to make it speak harmoniously. They deemed ignorance to be at
best but a dead Sepulcher, in which many were buried alive.

Of the same mind were the tender parents of this sweet young Lord, and
therefore incessantly exhorted him to be careful rather of augmenting his
Knowledge than his Estate, whom he readily obeyed, his ambition and their will
being like two Lines that meet in one Center. The first show of his
inclination to virtue, was his love to Science, and her Favorites, which I may
properly call the entry to that future Glory which virtue intended him, and
Time deprived him of. Though he had Lands to till, he forgot not to manure his
mind: Some by necessity are constrained to study hard, he by delight was
invited to his Book. He was none of those who imagine all that time lost which
they lose not, accounting all those Hours misspent which they take from their
pleasures, and give to their studies. He would praise every man that aspired to
Knowledge, whether he were his superior, his inferior, or his equal in
Learning. His Superior had his best words as his due, because he deserved
them. His equal he would not despise, lest he should be thought to undervalue
himself; and his inferior he would not contemn or insult over: for he held
it no glory to excel the inglorious. The very desire of Learning he thought
laudable in any man, much more the Acquisition of it. It was an infallible
Maxim with him, that except those Eternal Works of the soul, we can
properly call nothing ours, in that all other things we leave behind us find
other owners. He therefore labored that by a barbarous Ignorance he made not
a forfeit of an Inheritance so inestimable as is a fair Fame, which was able
to make all the survivours of his name happy sharers in that honor posterity
shall pay him. But what was the scope of his study? was it accutely to scold
and wrangle, after the manner of the Times? No, his thoughts could not but be
at peace, whose spirit was composed of nothing but sweetness and mildness.
Was it to pry into the unrevealed Mysteries of the Deity? Nothing less; for
he had found that many secrets in Nature, remain yet unexplicable, much more
then are those of God inscrutable, and impenitrable by any humane eye. He had
purus'd the Fable of the Poets, which tells us that Minerva struck Tyresias
blind, for beholding her naked. The Moral is full, and significant, implying
that the Deity must not be over-curiously searched into. Was it for Vainglory,
and to learn things more curious than profitable? No, he could not be proud of
Knowledge, who understood that man was ignorant, and a stranger to himself,
till God revealed him to himself. He learnt nothing being a Child, that would
not prove advantageous to him being a Man. He hated superfluous Science, and
made choice of such Authors only as may instruct, not distract his mind. He
knew it fared with the soul as with the body, which is not nourished by the
greedy devouring of much, but the good digestion of a little. He made,
according to the Proverb, no more haste than good speed, finding, that to come
to the end of a long journey required not to run a pace, but to be ever
going. Was it language and words he only hunted after? Neither of those, for
he loved the Kirnell far better than the shell. If none of these, what then
was the aim of his study? surely nothing but virtue, which he knew to be
Res, non Verbum, as one says, A Thing, not a Wordonely. And understanding that
the Poets feign her to have short arms, inferring, that he who covets to be
embraced by her, must make a near approach to her before he can come within
her reach, and attain to that supreme Happiness; he came so close up to her,
and conversed so frequently with her, that all his actions ever after savored
of her sweetness. Her he made his supporter, knowing that ingenious Antiquity
represented her to us by a Hieroglyphick g, whose top parts two ways, and
resembles a Musket Rest, to denote the aid and support she affords those that
put their trust in her. And because she divides her self into many branches,
whereof some are divine, some morrall, he resolved seriously, and intentively
to practice, first the former then the later. The three Theological he first
chose to exercise himself in, were Humility, Obedience, and Charity; and that
task ended, he purposed to make a strong Essay to gain a habit in all the
Cardinal, and lesser Moral Virtues. In the service of these he made a vow to
spend the remainder of his days, setting apart the virtues of Italy, where
every Painter, Dancer, Toothdrawer, and Mountebanke is called a Vertuoso.

Here his religious parents stepped in again to his aid, who did not imitate
the Images of Mercury set up in times past in the common Roades, with the
forefinger poynting out the way to passengers, but standing still themselves,
not bearing them company. This loving couple (as happy in themselves, as in
him) were his guides not only by Advice, but Action.

The reason why he began with Humility was, that it rendered him more apt
and able to Humillity extolled in it self and him.
acquire the rest, and was the virtue his, and our blessed Master commenced and
ended with, and all the Saints in imitation of him have studied, and with
diligence put in practice. Our sweetest Savior forbade his Disciples to
divulge his miracles, least the World might think he gloryed in them, as
appears by his cure of the Leprous, of the Blind, of the Lame, and of the
Dumb, etc. In his Transfiguration he gave them the same charge; Reveal this
Vision to no body. His Disciples demanding who should be the greatest in the
Kingdom of Heaven, he answered, Whosoever shall humble himself like one of
these little ones, shall be greatest there. What taught he but Humility, when
he said, When thou art invited to a wedding, take not the first place at the
Table. What can persuade a man sooner to avoid Vainglory, and to enrole
himself amongst the servants of Humility, than his moving example of the
Pharisee, and the Publican? He made choice to be conceived of a poor humble
Mother, and to be borne not only in no remarkable Country, but in a Stable,
where beasts only were witnesses of his Birth. Thirty years he lurked in the
World, in so much that we read little or nothing of him in all that time, save
that when he was twelve years old, he was found hearing, interrogating, and
determining in the Temple. About his thirtieth year he sent not for Saint
John Baptist, but came to him, and demanded Baptism at his hands: wherein we
learn a profitable lesson for the proud, who disdain to visit their
Inferiors. He that came from Heaven scorned not to wait on earth, on his own
servant: and shall insolent men who live on earth, and are made of earth,
scorn or grudge to give each other a visit? He began his preaching in the
same humble manner as John did, Repent, etc. He intruded not into the Nuptials
of the rich and lofty, but of the meek, and penurious, where Wine was wanting.
When he understood they meant to make him a King, he flew into the Mountains
to conceal himself. He being Lord of all things, paid Tribute as a servant.
He travailed commonly on foot, and when he was weary, hungry, and dry, his
lodging and fare were little better then that of the irrational Creatures.
This is with ease proved, for he complains himself, that he has not a house
to put his head in: and we find that when he was faint and thirsty, he had
no other repose then on the ground, nor no other drink then that pure Water
drawn for him, by that purer Samaritan. He elected humble Disciples, and
preached to them Humility. He said not to them, Be Omnipotent as I am
Omnipotent, Be Wise as I am Wise; No, no, his Doctrine flew a lower pitch, and
was delivered in a more stooping phrase, Be humble, as I am humble. He named
himself the son of man, oftener then the son of God, and though he was
truly both, in that he participated of both Natures, yet he chose his
Denomination oftener from the inferior nature then from the superior. He made
his Entry into Jerusalem, not like a Triumpher in a Chariot, nor on a proud
Courser with rich Trappings, but on a sily Ass void of rich Furniture. Being
to depart out of this World, that he might leave behind him an unequalled and
unheard of Example of Humility, he washed his Disciples feet, and wiped them
with the linen cloth wherewith he was girt. Lastly, every circumstance of his
Passion rellisheth humility. Did the Saints digress a whit from this path
trod by their Redeemer? Surely no, one proof whereof we have in St. John
Baptist, whose thoughts, deeds, and words were all humble. The Jews enquiring
of him whether he were Christ, or a Prophet, he answered negatively to both:
whereas our Savior protests that the Humane Race could never boast of a
greater then he. He assumed no higher a style then, I am the voice in the
Wilderness, etc. His Diet, his Raiment, and his Lodging were all contemptible.
How often did that fair recovered Bankerupt of all Grace, Mary Magdalene, fall
at our Saviors feet, and wash them with her tears? After the miraculous cure
of the lame by Peter; his speech was lowly, not attributing the fact to
himself, but to the divine Virtue, and the Invocation of the Name of JESUS.
When upon his entry into Caesaria, Cornelius meeting him fell at his feet, he
raised him up, saying, I am a man also as thou art. Paul, and Barnabas hearing
that the Inhabitants of the City of Lystris, concluded they were Gods and
resolved to sacrifice to them, cut their garments in pieces, and running into
the midst of the Throng, cried out; What mean you to do? We are no other then
poor Mortals, as you are; Yet with this their clamor could they hardly keep
the superstitious people from sacrificing to them. Paul submitted himself to
learn of Aquila, and Priscilla, the Art of Tent-making, and got his living by
it. This last, but most learned of the Apostles, was a submissive petitioner
for the prayers of others. I beseech you Brethren, says he, even in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Charity of the Holy Ghost, to assist me with
your Prayers. In other places he terms himself the least of the Apostles,
and professes that he deserves not the name of an Apostle. In his Epistle to
Timothy, he descends yet lower; Jesus, says he, came into the world to
save Sinners, whereof I am the chief. Of the same Humility relish these his
meek forms of speech, Not aspiring to height of Knowledge, and thinking
themselves superiors to one another only in Humility. Armatura tutissima
animi Modestia, says Saint Basil, A modest humble mind is an Armor of
proof. Wittily Saint Bernard, As the morning Light is a sure sign that the
Sun is entering into our Hemispheare; so the very dawne of Humility in any man,
is an infallible Token of approaching Grace. This is the Virtue that sweetens
all the rest, and a good Frame, and security ever attend it. By this the holy
Martyrs have triumphed over Tyranny, and Death, and by it have obtained the
eternal Crown of Glory they now wear. He who void of Humility, seeks to
engrosse other Virtues, do like him who gathers dust to throw it against the
wind. This Virtue never entered into the Heads or Hearts of the Heathen. Nulla
tanta est Humilitas, (says Valerius Maximus) quae dulcedine Gloriae non
tangatur: There is no Humility so great, as to be altogether senseless of the
sweetness of Glory. Humilis satis est (they be the words of Livy) qui aequo
jure satis vivit, nec inferendo injuriam, necpatiendo etiam: He is humble
enough, who is a just observer of this equal Law, neither to act, nor suffer
an injury. To these I may add that of Isocrates; Legi, Principi, and
sapientiori cedere modestum est: It is the part of a modest humble man to
subject himself to the Law, his Prince, and those in wisdom above him. The
Philosophers in the beginning were so proud as to assume to themselves the
style of Wisemen, Pythagoras being the first, (as witnesses Laertius) that
modestly called himself a Philosopher, that is, a Lover of Wisdom. Socrates,
indeed, seemed to look toward Humility, when he said, Hoc tantum scio me
nihil scire: I only know this that I know nothing. But this was spoken
respectively, that what he knew, was nothing in respect of that whereof he was
ignorant. The Stoicall, Magniloquent Sect uttterly excluded Humility, and the
Cynick though he appeared sordid and abject, was thought by other Sects as
inwardly haughty as he was outwardly dejected, which was intimated by his
speech, who said to one of them, That he espied his pride through the hole in
his Cloak. The Poets went this way altogether, as far as they,

-- Valet ima summis
Mutare and insignem attenuat Deus,
Obscura promens, --
As says the Horace, and Seneca in his Thyeste; adds,

Laus vera humili sape contigit viro. In this submissive Virtue this our sweet
Bud of Honor grew to such a height, that he had many noble Emulatours who
aspired to climb to the same degree. He made Man's miserable condition the
Mirror wherein his Humility beheld her self. He rightly conceived, that as
the Tree that grows high must take deep root: so the Mind that ascends to God
must first prostrate it self before him. His sanctified soul (if her Creator
accepted of her poor endeavors) was altogether careless of the applause of
men, like a chaste Spouse, who being ravished with the delight she takes in the
kisses and embraces of her Husband, is nothing at all mindful or careful of
the frowns, or favors of others: yet did she humbly comply with all men as
far as the Service, and Honor of her Maker would give her leave.

This Virtue prepared him to receive the yoke of Obedience, which he readily
put on, and never Obedience commended in it self, and him.
after disobediently cast off. He was conformable in all things to the Word of
God, the Church, his Prince, Parents, Tutours, and Superiors That there was a
God he learned from the Order, and Beauty of the Universe, which to attribute
to the Virtue, or power of things created were to ascribe the motion of the
wheel to the wheel it self, or the Excellency of an Image to the Pensill.
He saw nothing that put him not in mind of God, but being admitted to be a
member of his mystical Body, his Church, he there saw him more clearly, spoke
to him, and received from him his divine behests, of which he forth with vowed
himself a most obedient, and religious observer.

The Duty he owed his Parents, Nature had His obedience to his parents.
ingrafted in him, and Grace had assured him that he deserves neither the
style of Noble, nor of Man, who neglects to be dutiful to those to whom he
owes his Life, and Being. A reverence to these in-seated in the Blood. Two
strange demonstrations of this Verity we find in Livie, and Valerius
Maximus. The first is, that Marcus Two rare examples of filial duty, and
piety.
Pomponius having accused Lucius Manlius of cruelty to Titus Manlius his son,
the said Titus went to the House of Pomponius then Tribune, and with his Sword
drawn, threatened to kill him, unless he would swear to let the Process
fall against his Father, and forced him to take that Oath. The later in
Valerius Maximus, is of a Woman condemned to die by Famine, whom her Daughter
then a Nurse (having leave daily to visit her Mother) nourished with her milk,
which pious deceit of hers being detected, bred that relenting, and
astonishment in the hearts of the Judges, that they not only pardoned the
Mother, but in memory of this pious, dutiful fact of the Daughter, razed the
Prison to the ground, and erected in the same place a Temple to Piety. Diceret
aliquis, says Valerius, hoc esse contra legem Naturae, nisi Naturae prima lex
esset diligere parents: A man would say, that for the Daughter to give suck to
the Mother were a thing preposterous, and against Nature, were it not that the
first Law of Nature is to love our Parents. Aristotle affirms, that the Storks
nourish their Dammes, in way of a grateful recompensation of their care, and
pains in breeding them. Quicquid praestiti, says Seneca, infra aestimationem
Paterni Muneris est: What ever I have performed, comes short of the Benefits
for which I stand a Debtor to my Father. None but Monsters of Ingratitude
forget such blessings as these.

His Tutours he honored and obeyed, not for fear of punishment, but love of
Discipline. He His obedience to his Tutors.
sufferd not himself to be hailed, and dragged to his Book, but was as
sedulous in learning as his Masters in teaching, who (no doubt) had told him
that the Muses love a smiling Scholar, not one who lowers on them, and beholds
the School with the same countenance Malefactors look on the Gibbet. I cannot
say whether his alacrity in receiving, or his care in executing his Tutors
commands were the greater.

The esteem of the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Fathers of the Church had this
Virtue in ought to advance it much in our esteem. God bound man to obedience
presently after his creation in the state of innocence, the breach whereof he
severely punished. Noah readily obeyed all Gods commands when the Flood was at
hand. The swift obedience of Abraham was admirable, when without any delay at
all, he made haste to sacrifice his son, and with his own hands to let out
his own blood. It is worthy our observation, that when ever the Children of
Israel, or any of Gods servants fought with, or against his will, they had
accordingly good, or bad success. God told that if he willingly executed all
his precepts, he would ever fix the Throne of his Kingdom in Jerusalem: but
on the contrary, if he did not perform them, he would cut Israel from off the
face of the earth. Therefore, says S. Gregory, is obedience better then
sacrifice, because by sacrifice another flesh, but by obedience our own wills
are subdued, slain, and offered up to the Almighty. An obedient man, says
Saint Bernard, deferres not the execution of a command, but straight prepares
his ears to hear, his Tongue to speak, his feet to walk, his hands to
work, and all his thoughts are fixed on the will of his Commander. And in
another place, the same Father says, That there is, no doubt, but he deserves
more grace, and favor, who prepares and makes himself ready to receive a
command, then he who willingly executes the same. To this alludes that of
Plantus,

-- Pater adsum,
Impera quid vis, neque tibi ero in mora,
Neque latebrose me abs tuo conspectu occultabo.
And that of Terence,

Facis ut te decet cum isthoc quod postulo impetro cum gratia. We will
conclude this point with that which Ovid speaks of Achilles.

Qui toties socios, toties exterruit hosts,
Creditur annosum pertinuisse senem.
The next that presents it self to our view is Charity, a Virtue that will
usher any man to Charity praised in it self, and him.
Gods presence, who is ambitious of that greatest of Glories. This Love is the
King of all the passions of the soul, and motions of the Heart, he attracts
all the rest to him, and renders them conformable to himself. His Essence
consists in doing good works readily, diligently, frequently. Let us hear that
excellent Father Saint Augustine magnify this Virtue. In Charity, says he,
the poor are rich, and without it the rich are poor. This sustaines us in
adversity, tempers us in prosperity, fortifies us against unruly passions, and
makes us joyfully do good works. This was it made Abel delightful in
Sacrifice, Noah secure in the Flood; Abraham faithful in his peregrination,
Moses merry amidst injuries, and David meek in tribulation. This made the fire
a playfellow to the Children in the Furnace. This caused Susanna to be chaste
above the temptations of man. Anna after the use of man, and the blessed Virgin
without the knowledge of man. This animated Paul to be free in arguing, Peter
humble in obeying, the Christians gentle in their confessions, and Christ
himself prone to pardon sinners. What shall I say? should I speak with the
tongues of men, and Angels, and want Charity I were nothing, it being the
soul of Divine Knowledge, the Virtue of Prophecy, the salvation contained in
the Sacraments, the fruit of Faith, the riches of the poor, and the life of
the dying. He adds, A man may have all the Sacraments and yet be evil, but he
cannot have Charity and be so. Again, Science if it be alone, is puffed up
with pride, but because Charity edifies, she suffers not Knowledge to swell.
He calls it in another place, the cement of souls, and the society of the
Faithful. Saint Hierome commends it to us in these words. I do not remember
any one has died an ill death, who willingly performed the Works of Charity:
the reason is because he has many Intercessours, and it is a thing impossible
that the prayers of many should not penetrate the sacred ears of God. Sweetly,
says St. Gregory. As many boughs spring from one root; so many Virtues are
derived from Charity alone, in which not rooted, no branch of goodness can
flourish. To these Suffrages, I will add that of Hugo, O divine Charity, I
know not how I should speak more in thy praise, then that thou did draw God
from Heaven to Earth, and did exalt Man from Earth to Heaven. Needs must thy
force be great, since by thee God was so humbled, and Man so exalted.

In so few years as fourteen, a man can expect only a propension to this,
and all other Virtues: yet he that looks for no small progress in this, and
most of the other (for the practice of some are not incident to that tender
age) shall not have his expectation deceived. For his Charity, I may truly
aver, that it was extensive not only to his friends, and acquaintance, but
to the poor, to strangers, and enemies also. Some friends he chose both for
support, and ornament, His love to his Friends.
as appears by his love, and imitation of his truly good, and great Guardian,
the Earl of Arundell, Lord Marshall of England, for no sooner had age ripened
his judgment, but he elected him for the object of his affections, and the
model of his actions. A copy drawn from so fair an original, you will say
could not prove deformed. Others he chose for delight, and all he loved with
a heart wherein Truth kept her Court. Some he would to his power so suddenly,
secretly, and cunningly relieve, that they often times found their wants
supplied, before they knew from whence the benefit came, resembling in this a
Physician, who cures his patient unawares, before he dreams of a recovery. He
approved that speech of Diogenes, Manus ad amicos non complicatis digitis
extendi oportere: That a closed hand is not to be reached out to a Friend.
Where he discovered a complete worth, he disdained not to be a suitor, and
first to make an offer of his service, in imitation of a Husbandman, who first
tilleth, and sows the ground, and then expects the fruit of his labor. His
word, and the effect of it, were as inseparable as heat and fire. This true
property of a Gentleman the Ancients deciphered to us, when they painted a
Tongue bound fast to a Heart. He was no importunate, or severe Exactor of the
return of a love answerable in greatness to his own; wisely, and nobly
considering that he is no true friend who is always no more a friend then his
friend is.

Marry (I must confess) he was exceedingly His curiosity in the choice of
his friends.
curious, and cautious in his choice, following in that the counsel of Bias
the Philosopher, Amicos sequere quos non pudeat elegisse: Follow such friends
whom to have chosen you need not be ashamed. He applauded that of Anacharsis,
Multo melius est amicum unum egregium quam gregarios multos possidere. It is
far better to enjoy one brave Friend then many mean and vulgar. He knew
that they who in haste, and without mature advise contract friendship, suffer
the same inconveniencie as they do, who greedily and hastily devour sundry
meats which they can neither quickly with ease and safety cast up, nor
retain. He discreetly weighed, that friendship made with the wicked, is as
unstable Vice, the Basis whereon it is built. As the Ocean with great labor
strives to work all dead bodies to the shore; so a generous friendship expells
all such as are lost, and dead in sin. It is not enough to be wise and good
our selves, but we must not keep the foolish and the wicked company, except we
will incur the censure of the World, and be our selves thought such. Vice,
and the Vicious he fought with, after the manner of the Parthians, flying. If
his dearest friend had solicited him to join with him in any act not warranted
by Virtue, he would have answered him with Pericles, who to an intimate friend
that woed him to forsware himself in his behalf, replied; I am my friends
friend as far as the Altars. As if he should had said, I will pass for thee
through all miseries, dangers, and shipwracks, save that of Conscience, which
like a Maid of Honor, I must preserve inuiolated, and immaculate.

As he was extremely nice, and careful, not to entertain debauched friends,
so was he also resolved A herd of Friends he loved not.
not to admit of many. He was not ignorant that a River which has many Arms,
and out-lets, is always in danger of being low, and dry. Plutarch maintains,
he cannot be faithful, and honest, who has a herd of friends, because many
may want his Faith, and assistance at one and the same time, to all which he
cannot be serviceable. But those he had once judicially chosen, and on whom he
had fixed his affection he still regarded with the same countenance; whether
they were in a flood, or an ebb of Fortune, clean contrary to the course of
flaterers, and dissemblers, who fawn on their friends in abundance, and
forsake them in penury, not unlike in this to Flies, which came in swarms to a
Kitchen full of flesh, and abandon it empty.

His affection to his friends took nothing His love to the poor.
from his care, and love of the poor. It was not hidden from him, that the
chief work of mercy, is to have pity on a man's own soul; he therefore
first endeavored to mundifie his own heart, knowing that God more than man
respects the pure mind of the giver. True it is, he was in his Nonage, and had
no great store out of which his Liberallity should flow, but all he could
spare Charity disposed of. God Crowns the intent where he finds not the
faculty. Legitimate Mercy proceeds not from a full purse, but a free bosom.
He that in his heart compassionates his neighbors infortunity, deserves more
of him, and in the sight of God, than he who gives him only a material
Alms, for he who gives, parts only with his outward substance; but he who
affords the indigent sighs, tears, and groans, imparts that which comes from
within, from the very Center of the soul. He kept to himself only what was
necessary, and the superfluous he imparted to the Needy. He piously meditated,
that Poverty is a consecrated Field, that quickly returns the sower a
plentiful harvest. It fares with spiritual, as with temporal Husbandry,
unless seed be scattered, no increase can be expected. He laid up his Treasure
in his true eternal Country, Heaven: He thought continually that he heard the
voice of his Savior thus saying. I was thy Benefactor, now make me thy
Debtour, become my Usurer, and thou shall centuply receive the Sum thou
disbursest. In obedience to his command he assisted, as far as in him lay,
all that wanted. He that gives indifferently to all, shall ever be merciful,
but he who sits upon the Life's of the poor, and judges them according to
their faults, not their necessities, shall seldom or never do good. We ought
to cast our eye on nature, not on the person, according to that of Aristotle,
who being reprehended for succouring a Lewd, but poor man, replied, De
Humanitati, non Homini. I give to Humane Nature, not to the man. He murders the
poor, who denies him that whereby he subsists. Most accursed is he who shuts up
in his Coffers the Health and Life of the distressed. In vain he lifts up his
hands to heaven, who extends them not to the succor of the afflicted. It is a
lovely ruin, and a pleasing spectacle to Christ, to see a devoute man undo
himself with his own hands, in freely and readily bestowing all that he has on
the naked. But oh! it is deservedly to be lamented that the whilome downy open
hands of mercy are now shut, and brawny, and that most men either out of a
flinty Nature, or out of a needless fear to be thought Vainglorious leave
to be pious. To the former hard-hearted brood, whom no misery of another can
move. I will say with Pliny, If they merit the Epithets of wise and valiant they
shall not be denied them, but we will never grant they shall be styled wise,
and valiant men Men, since they have unmanned themselves, lost their bowels, and
cast off all Humanity. The later, who make Vainglory their scruple, I can
assure that the Benefit is not despicable before God, which is confirmed in the
sight of men, but that which is done to the end men may see it.

From his pronesse in giving, we now come His ready forgiving of injuries.
to his readiness in forgiving, another office of Charity, executed with far
greater difficulty than any of the former. To love desert in friends, or supply
the wants of the needy, reason and Nature invite us, but to suffer disgraces,
and intolerable injuries from worthles men, is a thing they both abhor: for
that of Seneca is most true; Duplicat dolorem sustinentis indignitas
Inferentis. The grief of the sustainer is doubled by the indignity of the
Afflictor. Appositively to this Cicero; Qui se non defendit, nec obsistit
injuriae, sipotest, tam est in vitio quam si parents, aut amicos, aut patriam
deserat: He who defends not himself, and repelleth not an injury, if he
can, commits as great a crime as he that forsakes his Parents, Friends, or
Country. It is a thing not very hard for flesh and blood to rejoice in God,
and his Blessings, but very difficult it is to take pleasure in all Slanders,
Infamy, and Persecutions for his sake: for that gentle submissive soul, into
which Ambition, nor the least thought of honor ever entered, would yet most
gladly avoid all abuses, and dishonours. But our now truly blessed one, the
beloved Theme we now handle, had learnt this holy humble Art of him, whose
life was nothing but a continued passion. All injuries intended, or acted
against himself he could freely pardon: but those which were directed against
the Majesty and dignity of his Maker, he could not endure. In such a case a
holy Fury becomes the Child of God. It favored in his opinion of more piety
and wisdom, to overcome a slight injury, that reached not to his Parentage,
or Religion, with silence, than with a tart replye; having found in Story, that
small words have overthrown great Cities. No wrong being equal to that which
is done with reproach, and contumely, in that to an Heroicke Spirit the loss
of blood is not so grievous as that of Reputation.

We will now descend from the Divine to the Valor magnified in it self and
him.
Moral Virtues; amongst which Valor (according to the general vulgar
belief) is the first required in a Lord, or Cavallier. Therefore the Poets
feign the god of War himself to be borne in Thrace, because the people of
that Country are hardy, and courageous. This was to denote that Fortitude
usual resides amongst men of a generous, and lofty strain, whose Education
leads them to knowledge in good Letters, which at once informs them of the
Renown of their Ancestors; and that the image of Fame was ever placed before
the Temple of Mars, to intimate, that the great exploits of daring, and
undaunted men, are by her carried into every corner of the earth. It will not
be amiss here to insert the judgments of the Fathers of the Church, passed
on this virtue. St. Austin shall be the Chorus: Qui vera virtuta fortis est nec
temere audet, nec in inconsulte timet. He who is truly valorous neither dares
rashly, nor fears unadvisedly. That of St. Hierome deserves our observation.
Fortitudo via Regia est, aqua declinat ad dextram qui temerarius est, and
pertinax, ad sinistram qui formodolosus est, and pavidus: Fortitude is the
Kings high way, from which he swarves on the right hand, who is fool hardy,
and obstinate: He on the left hand who is cowardly, and fearful. Wisely and
pertinently Cassiodorus. Vir vocatus, a viribus, qui nescit in adversis
tolera^do deficere, aut in prosperis aliqua elatione se jactare, sed animo
stabili defixus, et Coelestium rerum contemplatione firmatur manet semper in
pavibus. Man is so called from his strong and manly mind, which knows not how
to faint in suffering adversity, nor to boast and insult in prosperity, but
fixed in a stable resolution, and confirmed by the contemplation of heavenly
things remayns evermore fearelesse. The Heathens themselves differd not in
opinion from these holy men, as Cicero testifies in his Rhetoricks: Sicut
scientia remota justitia caliditas potius quam sapientia appellanda est: sic
animus ad periculum paratus si sua cupiditate, non aliena utilitate impellitur
Temeritatis potius nomen habet quam Fortitudinis: As Knowledge not accompanied
with Justice, is rather to be called Craft then Wisdom: so a mind ready to
encounter danger, if it be driven thereunto by its own desire and pleasure,
not the public profit, meriteth rather the name of Temerity then Valor. In
the same place, he thus defines Fortitude. Fortitudo est immobilis inter
adversa gloriosa animi claritudo res arduas pulchre administrans, quae nec
adversis infestando frangitur, nec prosperis blandiendo elevatur: Fortitude is
an unmoved glorious serenity of the mind fairly administering things difficult,
which is neither broken nor dejected with the frowns of Fortune, nor puffed up
with her smiles.

This Virtue is justly admired of all, truly understood, All men admire, few
understand what valor is.
and practiced but by a few. Some think it valor to kill themselves, some to
injure and provoke others, and almost all believe that a valiant man ought to
fear nothing. For the first, that a man ought not to lay violent hands on
himself all good Christians conclude. Aristotle thus cries, this self-murder
done: Mollitudinis est laboriosa fugere: It argues a man of Effeminacie to seek
by Death to fly from the troubles, and labors of this life. This Philosopher,
and the Pythagoreans held that as a soldier ought not to leave his station
without the command of his General. So no man should dare to go out of this
life without the leave of God, and Nature that gave it him. We will therefore
spare the proof of a thing so universally granted by all Christians, and many
Philosophers. But withal the strength of Divinity and Philosophy, I shall
never be able to convince the greater part of Mankind of another error almost
as damnable as this, and that is a foolish, and pernicious Tenent, that they
may lawfully send Challenges, and accept of them, though the occasion of the
quarrel be Wine, Dice, or prostituted Women. Nay, many a man is the Martyr of
Temperancie, and is killed because he will not excessively drink. I knew two
Gentlemen of great quality, and little wit, fall out in a Tavern upon a
protestation of the greatness of their mutual love each to other. In this
ardencie, each strove for prioritie in affection. One said, Thou art dearer to
me then I to thee, whereupon the other replied with the Lie, and was run
thorough in the place where he stood. Monsieur de la Noue a g^^lant and learned
French Captain demonstrates the misery of these Duels upon slight occasions,
by an infortunitie that befell himself in the like case. He being importuned
by a Gentleman of his Nation, not Acquaintance, to be his Second; willingly,
and thankfully condiscended to his Request; for, indeed, the French think
themselves never so much honored as when their friends value them at so high a
rate, as to put their Honors, and Lives into their custody. Well, this brave
Second associated his Principal into the Field, where they were to fight two
to two. He no sooner arrived there, but with grief and horror he beheld his
nearest Kinsman, and dearest friend he had in the World ready to encounter
him, as being the opposite Second. You may easily conceive, what a combat there
was in his noble breast between Honor and Affection, but the former being a
Tyrant quickly overcame, and suppressed the later, and violently haled this
great Commander to combat his Friend, who there fell under his sword. I will
omit all other examples, for all come short of this. Non mediocris animi est
fortitudo, says Saint Ambrose, quae sola defendit ornamenta virtutum omnium:
Fortitude bears no mean dejected mind, which alone defends the Graces, and
Ornaments of all the other Virtues. Sure I am, the most part of our Gentry put
it to a clean contrary use, and exercise it only in the defense of Vice, and
her deformed Litter. These silly brothers of the Sword either by the force of
Drink, Fury, or Ignorance, are rendered as stupid as the Natives of Barbary are
with the excessive eating of Opium, which hurries them into Quarrels, that
Grace and Nature both tremble at. The Spartans ever before a battle, tempered
and allaid the choler of their Soldiers with the melody of the Flute, and
other instruments, that so their anger might not deface their Reason. We had
need of some charming Music to qualify the heat and rage of our Rorers.
Hardly will they endure the Test of the Scripture, who cannot undergo that of
Aristotle. First, says he, a valiant man fights not for fear of Infamy, or
Reprehension. Secondly, not for the awe he stands in of Military Discipline.
Thirdly, not out of confidence of his skill in the Military Art, or of his own
strength and armature. Fourthly, not being urged thereto by the violence of
natural passions, as Anger, Grief, Lust, and the like. Fifthly, not out of
ignorance of his enemies force, nor out of fear of servitude, or hope of
booty. Sixthly, a valiant man is the Champion of honesty; for which only he
is to combat all that oppose it. He could not imagine any thing in excellency
above Honesty, which he still makes his utmost scope, not being so blessedly
subtle as to discern God and his Church. Examine well all these Requisites of
Valor, and how many now a days shall we discover and allow valiant; most men
fighting against all the Rules of Honesty, and the Laws of God? If our Nobility
and Gentry shall diligently peruse ancient Histories, they shall find that
their renowned Ancestors never ascended to the Throne of Honor this way.
Debaushes, Quarrels, and Duels were not the degrees by which they mounted. They
singl'd not out an enemy in the field upon exchange of idle words, never
drawing their swords but to rescue their Country out of the jaws of Ruin, or
their Prince from the Height of a Breach, or from the Center of the Enemies
Battalion. The Valor not thus nobly employed, they reputed no other then a
womanish choler, a simple passion and a feeble revenge unworthy of a man
magnanimous. Certainly, our Gallants cannot but imagine the great Alexander,
and the mighty Julius to be nothing inferior to them in this Virtue, yet did
not they judge that a foolish hasty word should be put in balance with a
Life. These Masterspirits of the World were utterly ignorant what reparation of
Honor the Lie claimed, and of the circumstances in managing a Quarrel, which
these Hacksters make our younger sort believe to be a Mystery, and by this
ridiculous Science get their Livings. Those great Worthies concluded that the
offense always returned upon his head that offered it. From these single,
bloody Encounters, what can Gentlemen expect other then if they kill, to have
their Lands confiscated to the King, and (if married) to have their Wives and
Children live by the succor of the Knapsack, to leave infamy to their
Posterity, and to have no other Historiographer then the Hangman; whereas their
lives lost in a set Battle, would make them ever live in the best Chronicles
of theirs, and after times. Now suppose they fall themselves under their
enemies hands, what can ensue but a burial of their Names together with their
bones, and (without Gods infinite extraordinary mercy) the damnation of their
souls? These Duels, and the Horse-races of our Gentry so much in request with
them, have two goodly originals. The first began amongst the slaves of
Haniball, after he had passed the Alps, and the later amongst the Butchers of
Barnet, who (their London Markets once ended) soundly dows'd in drink, used to
run home for wagers. What will these Fighters say, if I prove to them out of
the great Secretary of Nature, Aristotle, that a man may fear, and yet be
valiant? First, says he, a valiant man may dread all things shameful and
wicked, and the Infamy of himself, and his. Secondly, he may fear all things
so dreadful, that they exceed the power of Humane Nature to withstand, as
Thunder, Lightning, Earthquakes, Inundations, and the like, which yet he fears
not, so that they shall make him forget to do the office of a man resolved.
Nay, he stops not there, but maintains that a valiant man may fly from an
enemy without being justly branded with cowardice, in case he finds his Life
may be more profitable to his Country then his Death. He cannot then be said
to shun death out of pusillanimity, but to reserve himself for a greater good.

But I desire to be read by my own Light; for I would not have any man think
that I infer by this Invective against the abuse of this Heroic Virtue, that
I counsel any Gentleman to endure gross Injuries of a high nature, such as
may disparage his whole Race, Country, Religion, or hazard the safety of his
person; for of these foul wrongs, all Nations allow a Repulsion, and the
Ancients called this harmless defense, Incorruptam Tutelam. Therefore Mars was
pictured with his Bosom open, to show unto us that worthy men ought to expose
themselves to all dangers, for the preservation of their Honor.

This dear Gentleman, whose loss we condole, had not yet received force and
vigor to make a demonstration of the external valor, but the internal he
had abundantly, as appeared by many seeds of true Magnanimity, which both by
his carriage and speech, were easily to be discerned in him. Such sparks as
these of a great mind the Romans discovered in Cato yet a child, and by those
judged of his future Two admirable signs of Cato's future valor discovered in
him yet a child.
Greatness. Two of these, as most remarkable, I shall here insert not only to
delight but to confirm, and strengthen the minds of my Readers. He, and his
brother Caepio, being educated in the House of their Uncle Livius Drusus, it
happened that the Latins were at that time suitours for the obtaining of a
City, and that one of the chief of them, Popedius Silo, was entertained, and
lodged in the House of Drusus. Popedius one day amongst the rest talking, and
jesting familiarly with the children, said to them, Will not you intercede with
your Uncle that we may have a City granted us? To this Caepio fairly and
readily assented, and promised his utmost aid, but Cato silent and sullen,
looked on him with a brow knit, which Popedius observing, in a feigned fury,
took the child up in his arms, and held him out of the window, threatening to
let him fall, unless he granted his request. Notwithstanding all his threats,
Cato still continued his silence, and his frowns; whereupon Popedius set him
down again, and whispered this softly to his friends standing by. What will
this child do when he comes to be a man? I believe we shall not obtain by
his consent one voice from the people of Rome. Another proof of his
Magnanimity he gave in the time of Sylla. Being about the age of fourteen,
Sarpedon his Tutour carried him to salute Sylla, who civilly and gently
received him, in remembrance of the friendship he had contracted with his
father. The palace of Sylla, was then no better then a slaughterhouse, into
which men were carried bound, and there suffered all kind of wracks and
tortures, and after those death it self. The heads of proscribed men were as
commonly and openly carried in and out, as if they had belonged to beasts:
which Cato at several Visits, not only took notice of, but withal marked how
good men sighed and groaned at this cruelty, and he himself abhorring so
bloody a Tyranny, with a resolute mind, and countenance said to his Tutour;
Why does no man kill this monster of men? To this Sarpedo replied, Because they
fear him more then they hate him: but you answered Cato, have given me a Sword
that I may dispatch him, and free my Country from servitude. He utterd this
with such fierceness, that Sarpedo after that time seldom or never presented
him to Sylla, or, if he did, it was not without preparation of him by his
authority, and advise.

From the vanquishing of outward Enemies, Temperancie extolled in it self, and
him.
our method leads us to the subduing of inward, which are our passions and
affections. The Conqueror of these is Temperancie, who is Natures Minion, and
studies her preservation. By this Reason governes the sensual part, tames it,
and makes it endure the Bitt. Without this, our passions will violently carry
us into the gulf of pleasure, out of which few or none return at all, or, if
they do, it is not without suffering of shipwreck, and extreme peril.
Delights betray us with kissing, and having charmed us into a profound sleep,
we no sooner awake, but we see our selves environed with Horror and Despair,
out of whose sharp claws none ever yet escaped unwounded. In the entry to
Voluptuousness we discern nothing but Roses, Violets, and the prime flowers
of the Spring strewed in our way, but in coming back, we view nothing but
unked, dismal Objects of solitude, and sorrow. The comfort is incredible of
those who joyfully fly into the embraces of this Virtue, loathing and
abhorring the very shadow of Intemperancie, which ugly Traytresse never leaves
Youth till she has brought them to those Precipices which she has prepared
for their destruction. The famous Orator Demosthenes upbraided the Athenians
with this folly, that they never treated of peace, but in mourning Garments,
which they wore for their friends lately lost in the Wars. And this is the
custom of luxurious men, they never so much as mention Sobriety, and
Continency of Life, till they are under the lash of the Physician, or the hand
of Death. We are by much more virtuous, says Pliny, in sickness then in
health, we then make God and Virtue our continual meditation, and are no
longer ruled by our passions and affections. We are not then Amorous,
Ambitious, Covetous, Revengefull. Riot is like a fierce untamed Tiger, the
keeping whereof is as perilous as the taking. We must here imitate Ulysses,
not his followers, whom Circes turned into Swine. If we lend an ear to the
enticing, ravishing voice of pleasure, we also shall be transformed into
beasts. This Virtue is exercised in brideling, and restraining the inordinate
appetite to meat, drink, and Venery. The Romans used ever to imbowell their
dead, and not to allow those ignoble parts, the panch, and guts burial, as
being the only causers of our Dissolution. He is unworthy the Name, and
Definition of man, who lives only to eat. Diogenes called the Belly the
Charybdis of the Life. Musonius the Philosopher warns us that it is decent, and
behoofefull that man alone, amongst all Creatures, being descended from the
Gods should chiefly nourish himself, as they do, with contemplation, not
minding food farther then to satisfy nature: Drunkenness, and Gluttony are
comprehended under excess, who is the common mother to both.

The Ancients represented to us the ugliness Drunkenness dispraised.
of the former, by picturing Bacchus naked and young, to signify unto us, that
Drunkards can keep nothing secret. As when Wine begins to work in a Vessel,
that part of it which is in the bottom mounts up to the top: so a Drunkard
discloseth the secrets that lie in the very bottom of his heart. His Chariot
was drawn by Lions, Leopards, and Panthers, to intimate unto us that Wine
metamorphoseth them into Savage bruits, that drink it beyond measure. They
drew him clad in Goats skins, to denotate the incontinencie of such. His
Sacrifices were ordinarily executed by women, to argue the effeminacie of men
given over to that vice.

Neither are Surfeits of meat less odious and Gluttony reprehended.
enormous then these of drink. What a strange and undecent sight is it to
behold men lothing, and longing for meats, like women with child? Where this
Vice reigns, nothing of value can reside. As when we behold the Sun through
vapors, and clouds, he appears not to us so beautiful as when he is in his
full shine, having nothing interposed between him, and us: so a soul charged
with Repletion and Fumes that arise from excrements, and meats undigested is
eclipsed, and through the mists and fogs raised by sensuality can discern
nothing subtle and generous, expressing no more harmony in her functions than
we can expect from an instrument filled with Dirt and Rubbish. Unclean spirits
love unclean lodgings, as we may perceive by the Devils in the possessed man,
who petitioned our Savior that they might enter into the herd of hogs, not
into Oxen, Sheep, or any other clean Beast, nourished with clean food. The
example of Dives should much terrify these ravenous devourers, who was so
cruelly tormented in his Tongue, the Organ of Taste. The devil knew man to be
so prone to this sin, that he made it the bait to catch our first Parents,
and the snare wherewith he thought to hold fast our Redemer. If thou be the
son of God, said he, command these stones to be made bread. Innocentius thus
inveighes against this superfluous feeding. Gula Paradisum clausit,
primogenituram Vendidit, suspendit pistorem, decollavit Baptistam, Nabuzardam
Princeps coquorum Templum incendit, and Jerusalem totam evertit: Gluttony
first shut up Paradise, sold the Birthright, hanged the Baker, beheaded St.
John Baptist, Nabuzardam the Master Cook burnt the Temple, and overthrew the
Walls of Jerusalem. The frequent use of delicious meats and drinks amongst
the Romans (as their Jecur Anserimum, their Porcus Trojanus, Sumen, Vvedulae,
Ficedulae, Phaenicopteri, and their generous Wines, Cecuba, Falerna, etc.)
caused them to be as much censured by succeeding Historians, as their virtues
made them admired. The Naturallists report, that the Seahorse has his heart
placed in his belly, to intimate his voracity. Philoxenes wished his neck were
as long as a Cranes, that he might the longer feel the sweetness of his
meat. I knew an old witty Epicure of this nation who has often in the
presence of a whole Ordinary, wished himself a Cow, that he might eat his
meat over twice. Alas, said he, a man has small pleasure in feeding twice a
day half an hour at a time, I would be ever eating. He wished if he must
needs go to heaven he might be wound up thither by a Jacke. All the while
this glutton pampered his body, his soul starved, receiving no nutriment, but
what was unclean and putrid. Sminderides rode a wooing attended by a thousand
Cooks, a thousand Fowlers, and as many Fishers. That this sin of gluttony is no
solitary vice, but is ever accompanied by Incontinency. St. Hirome tells us.
Semper Saturitati junct a est Lascivia: Vicina igitur sunt venture, and
genitalia; pro membrorum ordine ordo vitiorum. Lasciviousness ever associates
saturity. Therefore are the Belly, and the secrets placed close by one another,
to show that they are as near in consequence and dependancy as in situation,
the one feeding and maintaining the other. Wherefore they were in no error,
who styled hunger the friend of Virginity, in that it cooles the boiling blood,
and renders the Flesh subject to the Spirit. Water, Fruits, and Roots were
man's first sustinance. Lord how far is his diet altered from its first
simplicity? Remarkable is that saying of Alexander: I know no better a Cook to
procure me an Appetite to my dinner, than to rise betimes, nor to my Supper,
than to eat little at Dinner. Epictetus Counsaileth us, not to deck our Rooms
with Tablets and Pictures, but with Sobriety, and Temperancy; in that the
former only feed the eyes, but the later the soul, to which they are eternal
Ornaments.

This our sweetly disposed Lord closely followed the advice of this
Philosopher, who in all his Actions did nothing without the consultation, and
approbation of Sobriety, and Modesty. He never was invited to a feast, but he
diligently called to mind that he had two guests to entertain, the body, and
the soul; and that what ever he bestowed on the one, would be corrupted, and
converted into Excrements; but what he conferred on the other would enjoy the
same Eternity with it. He observed such a beautiful Order in all his desires,
that they never ran before, nor lagg'd behind, but ever kept that rank in
which Reason had placed them. He lived by a Rule composed, and confirmed by
either Testament, and taught his soul to affect nothing she might not
lawfully covet. Thus we see the admirable fruit Temperancy brought forth in
his mind, and will in all other wherein she is once planted. I will give a
period to the discourse of this Virtue, with the words of Prosper, who thus
extolls it. Temperantia facit abstinentem, parcum, sobrium, moderatum, pudicum,
tacitum, and Verecundum. Haec Virtus si in animo habitat libidines fraenat
affectus 'temperat' desideria sancta multiplicat, vitiosa castigat, omnia inter
nos confusaordinat, cogitationes pravas removet, scientiam inserit, ignem
libidinosae cupiditatis extinguit, mentem placida Tranquilitate componit, and
totam ab omni in semper tempestate Vitiorum defendit. Temperancy makes a man
abstinent, sparing, sober, moderate, chaste, silent, and modest. This Virtue
once entered into the mind, bridles lust, tempers affections, multiplyes holy
desires, and chastises the vicious, sets our confused thoughts in order, and
removes the wicked ones, inserts knowledge, quenches all libidinous flames
within us, composeth and setleth the mind in a pleasing Tranquillity, and
evermore defends every part of it from all Storms raised by Vice.

Justice challenges a place here, and deservedly, it being a Cardinal Virtue,
and of great Justice exalted in it self, and him.
eminency, not only amongst the Moral, but Divine virtues also. Homer says,
she was begotten by all the gods, so diverse, and so admirable are her effects.
Cicero thus commends her to us: Justitia Virtutis splendour est Maximus, ex qua
viri boni nominamur. Justice is the greatest splendor of virtue, from which we
purchase the names of good men. Most elegantly Cassiodorus: Iustitia non novit
Patrem, non novit Matrem, veritate^ novit, persona^ no accipit, Deum imitatur:
Justice knows neither Father, nor mother, she knows Truth; she is no respector
of persons, and is in that an imitator of God. According to the strict or
slack practice of this virtue, all Commonwealths have flourished, or decayed.
Without her what were Mankind, but a confused multitude of ravenous hungry
Lions, living by rapines, and murders. This Virtue consists of two parts, the
distributive, and commutative. The distributive is chiefly Regal, and
appropriate to Emperors, Kings, Princes, and to all those who derive their
Authority from them. The Commutative is an equal and just dealing between all
men, of what Condition soever they be.

The former part is of greatest dignity, and acted but by a few, and they of
great rank, and quality: yet of those few how many shall we find that execute
the great Offices committed to their charge by God himself with impartiality
and equity? The difference Aristotle puts between a just Prince and a Tyrant
is, that the aim of the former is the public good, the scope of the later is
his own profit. These two behold their Subjects with a different eye, no
otherwise than a Shepherd, and a Butcher look on a sheep to different ends,
the one to preserve, the other to destroy it. A Tyrant is like Boreas, that
ever threatens shipwreck and ruin; A just King resembles Zephyrus, whose
breath begets plenty and sweetness. That a just King, or Judge ought to be a
most studious, and careful Investigatour of the Truth, is taught us by the
example of God himself, who said, I will descend, and see whether the cry
which is come unto me be just, or no. The Ancients pictured Astraea (whom they
made a Representour of Justice) without a head, which they said was in Heaven,
to signify that Justice should not regard men, but have her eyes fixed on God.
In Athens the Delinquents ever pleaded before the Judges with their faces
covered, lest the sweetness of some pleasing countenance should so much move,
and so far work upon them as to make them do injustice.

Two stupendous presidents of Justice we have in two mighty Monarchs,
Seleuchus, and Two stupendous presidents of Justice.
Cambyses. Seleuchus having made a law, the transgression whereof he ordaind to
be punished with the loss of both eyes: it most unfortunately happened that
his own son was the first transgressour of it, whereupon being a most
indulgent Father, and withal a most severe Justicer, to satisfy the rigor of
the Law, he caused one of his own eyes to be pulled out, and another of his
sons. Cambyses having condemned a cruel and corrupt Judge to be flead alive,
caused the chair of Justice to be covered with his skin, and make the son of
this monstrous Oppressor sit, and give judgment in it, for an astonishment,
and terror to him, and all succeeding Judges. Iunius Brutus executed his own
children, for their conspiring against the liberty of their Country. By the
severe Laws of Draco, which were written in blood, when the Author of a Crime
could not be found out, even things inanimate were cited, condemned, thrown
out of the City, banished for ever, or broken in pieces, according to the
Nature of the Fact. As a Physician, or Surgion oftentimes administers stinking
and loathsome potions, nay, sometimes cuts off a limb, and all this for the
preservation of his patient: so in the body politic, a just Judge always
inflicts bitter punishments on the putrid, wicked members of the Commonwealth,
nay, sometimes cuts them off, having this for a Statemaxime, that he who is
merciful to the bad, is cruel to the good.

In this distributive part of Justice, no wise man can look that this our
mirror of the youthful Nobility should attain to the least degree of
perfection, since neither his few years admitted, nor his Prince called him to
sit in the seat of Justice. In the commutative part he was no way defective,
doing to all men as he would be done unto. In this he strictly in all points
obeyed the advice of Seneca: Quisquis Justitiam sectari desideras prius Deum
time, and ama, ut ameris a Deo. Amabis Deum si in hoc illum imitaberis, ut
velis omnibus prodesse, nihil nocere. Ab alio expectes quod alteri feceris.
Praestabis parentibus pietatem, cognatis dilectionem, pacem cum hominibus
habebis, bellum cum vitiis praestabis, amicis fidem, omnibus aequitatem:
Whosoever thou art that desire to follow Justice, first fear, and love God,
that thou may be beloved of God. Thou shall show thou love God, if in
imitation of him thou seek to profit all, to hurt none. Expect from another
what thou have done to him. Thou shall make an expression of piety toward thy
Parents, love to thy Kindred, thou shall have peace with all men, war with
vices, thou shall keep thy faith unviolated to thy friends, and observe the
Laws of Equity toward all men.

What should have been placed in the Front, comes here in the Rear, and that
is prudencie, Prudencie commended in it self, and him.
a virtue which serves, measures, graces, and crowns all other virtues
whatsoever. As amongst precious stones some are of greater prize then the rest,
and by their presence impart to them a luster: so prudencie amongst all other
Virtues, is of greatest esteem in the eyes of all men, as being to the rest a
Guide, a Gage, and an Ornament. As the eye in the body is by all preferred
before the other senses: so prudencie in the soul is commended above all other
perfection. In the troop of Virtues she has the most honorable charge.
Prudencie gives a measure, and a Gage to every other Virtue; for (if not
measured, and directed by discretion) a needful Care turns into an utter
Despair, a decent grief into Rage and Bitterness, Love into Flattery, Hope
into Presumption, Joy unto Wantonness, and a just Anger into an immoderate
Fury. So that we may perceive an undiscreet virtue to be no better then a
Vice. This is she that has ever an eye to what is past, present, and to come,
and out of all three picks this advantage, that her Adversary can never
surprise her unawares, or take her unprovided. She laughs at that usual
saying of Fools, I had not thought. As in the wars, though the Enemy be far
off, the Watch is still constantly set: so she is always vigilant, and has a
several ward for every blow of Fortune. She is like double-faced Ianus looking
two several ways at one and the same time. This all men will readily grant
me, that if Fortune cause a Tempest to rage and rore, she shall not so soon
sink him, that foreseeing the storm has taken in his sails, as him, who
mistrusting nothing, bears them all out. Prudencie teaches us that in this
rolling, tottering World there is nothing stable, and that the best remedy
against an evil is the prevention of it. To be brief, her assistance is more
necessary, clean through all the affairs of this life, then on the Sea is the
government of a Pilot, who knows not how to assuage the violence of a storm,
nor to appease the fury of the Winds, nor to gain his desired Port at his
pleasure; whereas prudencie will for the most part either prevent, or frustrate
all practices that tend to her ruin. As if there were no Sun, we should live
in a perpetual darkness, for all the comfort, and light the other Stars could
afford us: so except the beams of this bright, and radiant prudencie reflect on
all our actions, and Negotiations, they will appear dim and sordid,
notwithstanding all the light the other Virtues can lend us. This virtue was in
such repute with Agesilaus, that he exhorted his soldiers, now ready for the
combat, that they should not mind the multitude of their Enemies, but bend all
their forces against Epaminondas their General; for he once subdued, all the
rest would in a trice be vanquished: For, said he, none but wise and prudent
men know how to prevent a defeat, or obtain a victory. This Virtue eminently
and superlatively appeared in all the proceedings of Christ himself with the
Jewish Nation. When he had attained to the age of twelve years, he sat in
the Temple amongst the grave Doctors, questioning, answering, and instructing;
and the Text witnesses, that all who heard him stood amazed at his prudent
demands and replies. He also deluded the Priests and Elders of the Jewish
Synagogue, by prudently answering one question with another. When they asked
him by what power he did those Miracles? he demanded of them, Whence the
Baptism of John was? When again they demanded of him if he were the Son of
God? he replied, You say that I am. This prudencie (next to the Invocation of
his Father) was the only Engine wherewith he defended himself against the
pernicious plots of this Generation of Vipers. As no Architecture can come to
perfection, without the help of the Compasses and the Rule: so stands it with
Human Actions, without the aid of prudencie, none of them can receive their
grace, and accomplishment. Let a man be master of all abilities imaginable, if
he be not withal judicious and prudent, to make a right use of them, and to
produce them in their proper times and places, they will acquire him rather
shame then glory. If one could have Aristotle and Seneca, without book, and
were withal injudicious, inconsiderate, and undiscreet, he would oftener
purchase laughter then applause. Diodorus (omitting the idle Fables of Proteus)
informs us that he was adopted King by the Egyptians, in that he excelled all
men in Wisdom, which made him so cunning in giving, and taking counsel, and
in changing it with dexterity when opportunity served, that hence arose the
Fable, that he could turn himself into so many forms and shapes. If in his
determinations he altered any thing, you could not so properly say he changed
as he fitted his mind to the present occasion; as we see the hand is the same
still whether it be shut or extended. Indeed the mind of a Wiseman is, as
Seneca says, like the state of the World above the Moon, where there is no
change He always returns home (as it is said of Socrates) with the same
countenance he carried out; and, according to Epictetus, is like himself even
in his dreams.

This our incomparable Child of Honor gave strong essays to climb the
summity of this virtue, both by diligent reading, and observation of all the
writings and actions of the wise. In his conversation he ever applied himself
to those who had deservedly gained a fame in good Letters, or had acquired
wisdom by Experience; whose sage precepts, and admonitions, he as greedily
drank in, as a thirsty Traveller does Water from a clear fountain. These he
made the mirror, wherein he daily dressed, and composed his mind, which was a
Paradise into which the Serpent never entered, but he received a sudden
repulse. Two times especially he made choice of, to prepare and examine
himself, the Morning, and the Evening. In the first he forecast what was that
day to be done, in the later he called to mind what that day he had done. To
do good was his fixed resolution, and when he had the power to do harm (like
the true son of Prudency) he never had the will: whereas the Nature of a fool
is, when he has not the ability, then to have the will to do mischief, This
Virtue was defused clean through all his endeavors, nay through his very
habit, gesture, and discourse; which were neither too mimical, too anticke, nor
too grave, but suitable to the modesty required in so green an Age. Impudency
(which Politicians profanely call the gift of God) he hated so in others, that
he never gave it countenance, nor harbor himself. In his Discourse he warily
proportioned his words to the bigness of the subject he spoke of: in imitation
of a Mariner, that fits his Sails to the smalnesse or vastness of his
Vessel. As slender men lightly wear their clothes loose, and large, a little
to augment their bulk: so small wits, who want matter, enlarge themselves in
words; whereas indeed, that speech is best which comprehends most sense in
fewest words; as we esteem that Coin most, which in a small compass
includes a great value. He was not hasty to speak, or in speaking, but in both
prudently observed a decency. He was very careful not only what he vented,
but what he heard, that it relished not of Immodesty, Levity, or Vice; for he
held that, what ever it was, a villainy to act, it was also a villainy to harken
to. He talked always opportunely, and appositively, never above his
knowledge. He derided those who with a great dinne uttered nothing but high
profound Nonsense, resembling in that the Cypress trees, which are great, and
tall, but bear no fruit. A visit given to a wise, but sick man, by one of
these babbling, curious impertinents, afflicts him more than his disease. His
own secrets, those of his friends, or of the state, he neither revealed, nor
pryed into; for he was sure he could at any time speak what he had concealed,
but he could not conceal what he had once spoken. En la boca serada moxca no
entra (says the Spanish Proverb) Into a mouth closed a Fly never enters. He
had happily read, or heard, that Anacharsis the Philosopher was accustomed to
sleep with his right hand on his mouth, and his left on his secrets, being of
opinion, that the Tongue more than Concupiscence needed a bridle. Not to be
tedious, I may boldly, because truly, aver that Prudency was the general of
his Demeanor, Speech, and Actions, and gave to all of them a Wise and safe
Conduct.

You see, pious Reader, what embellishment, what Ornaments his Life, like a
sparkling Jewel, His Death.
was set with; and I imagine you cannot believe so fair a beginning could have
a foul end. You cannot surely be at once so stupid, and uncharitable: If you
can, you shall quickly be convinced of your Error, and shall see this Sunset,
with the same glory in which he rose. First, in his sickness that led to his
death he made use of His Patience.
his patience, a Virtue which miraculously overcomes by yielding. As he would
not shun his death, so he would not hasten it, but used all lawful, and
possible means to prevent it; no otherwise than the Master of a Ship, who when
the sails are rent asunder, the Mast cut down by the boarde, and a Leake
sprung in the ship, yet still labors for life, and leaves no way unsought to
preserve it. But when he saw his inconstant Mistress, Nature, ready to
abandon him, and that as well Necessity forced, as God called him hence: then
self-love, the Life's Jaylour could no longer withold him from readily
running into the Arms of Death, who he knew would soon usher him into the
embraces of his Savior. He beheld Death no otherwise then a Pilot does the
Winds and the Sails, that will bring him to his desired Haven. He endured the
terrible approach, and the furious assaults of Death with so undaunted a
resolution of a man, and so firm unmoved a belief of a Christian, that he
became at once a pleasing, and sad spectacle to his friends, who believed he
could not so patiently undergo such pain and torments, without the
extraordinary assistance of some Beatificall vision. We see many in the dark
are afraid of every thing, but the comfortable light expells all fear: so it
is for those who are blinded with the Mist Atheism, and Impiety, have cast
before their eyes to doubt, and tremble: security becomes such as live and dye
in the true Light, and are illustrated with the beams of Gods favor, as was
this Patient of Heaven, who not being curable here, was thither to be
translated. Before the coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, they feared
Death, and forsook their Lord, but when they were once illuminated from above,
they undauntedly appeared before Tyrants, and constantly suffered Martyrdom.
Having sent his desires long before to cast Anchor in Heaven, he longingly
expected his own passage with a calm, patient, and contented mind, wherein
no distemper ever stayed, but as an unwelcome stranger. At length when he
perceived all his senses were ready to forsake him, being innocently ambitious
to retain to the last his knowledge of all things, he suddenly by a holy Art
drew the vastness of his memory into a Compendium, and remembered God only in
whom are all things, in whose Fatherly eternal protection we confident, and
submissively leave him.

In this bud of Honor two things are deservedly Two things to be lamented in
his Death.
to be lamented. First that it dyed under the hand of a Royal Gardner, who
meant to underprop and cherish it: Secondly, that it so soon faded.

All men will confess his infortunity was great in departing this life in the
Reign of a His infortunity in dying so immaturely in the Reign of so gracious
a Prince.
Prince great in the Union of the Roses, greater in that of the Lawrells, but
greatest of all in the love of his people. He knows full well, that full ill
it went with mankind if the Almighty Maker of all things should confine his
favor to one only, and neglect the rest of Humanity, and therefore as a god
on earth (in imitation of of the Heavenly) distributes his favors amongst all
his subjects, but not eodem gradu, because they are not ejusdem meriti. Like
the Sun, he strives to impart the light of his countenance to all, and
whither his beams cannot reach, thither his warmth extends. Though all cannot
enjoy the honor of his presence, all are sharers in the comfort of his
benefits. We are not more happy in living, than this brave deceased Lord was
unfortunate in immaturely dying under so gracious a King, diligent in the
search after desert, and magnificent in rewarding it, who in all probability
(upon a proof made of his faith, and merit) might in him have raised his
whilome great House to that Height from which Tyranny unmercifully threw it
down. I say to the same Height, not the same Titles.

As concerning the immaturity of his Death, The immaturity of his Death.
I willingly acknowledge the sudden, unexpectted deprivation of one so dear,
and so hopeful, must needs be bitter, and grievous to all those whom blood,
friendship, or acquaintance had linked to him. Yet ought they not to grieve
immoderately, the sorrow of a Christian being by Christ himself bounded, and
confined. We may deplore the absence of our departed friends, but we must not
too much bewail their deaths, because they are with God. As not to feel
sorrow in sad chances is to want sense; so not to bear it with moderation, is
to lack understanding, since it is fit that grief should rather bewray a
tender then a dejected mind. The effects of our sorrow must not too long
outlive the cause. We moysten not the earth with precious Waters; they were
distilled for nobler ends, either by their Odor to delight us, or by their
operation to preserve our health. Our Tears are Waters of too high a price to
be prodigally powered into the dust of any Graves. But we unwisely court sorrow,
and as a Lover always espyes something in his Mistress that in his opinion
exalts her above her Sex, so we labor to find out causes for our excessive
grief, and to prove our present loss unequalled, though indeed, it have many
paralells. As the light handling of a Nettle makes it sting us, but the hard
griping of it prevents that harm; so we should not stroke and cherish our
griefs, but out of Divinity and Humanity compose a probe that may search them
to the quick. He who heateth an Iron, takes it not out by that part which the
fire has enflamed, but by that end which remained without: Nor should we take
our afflictions by the wrong end, but if we can find any comfort to arise
from them, we should discreetly lay hold on that. He who comes into a Rosary,
finds every Rose guarded with innumerable Thorns, yet he warily gathers the
one without being pricked by the other. The most bitter accident has a grain
of sweetness and Consolation in it, which a wise man extracts, and leaves the
Gall behind.

To apply this; out of the subitary death of this Noble Gentleman we may cull
many comforts. True it is, that Death is said to kill the old by Maturity, and
the young by Treachery, and that unripe, untimely ends, are by all extremely
pitied; but if we will harken to Reason, issuing out of the mouths of the most
profound Philosophers, she will tell us that brevity Brevity of life to be
preferred before Longevity.
of Life is to be preferred before longevity. If we will give belief to
Seneca, he will assure us that Nature never bestowed a greater Benefit on man
than shortness of Life, it being so full of Cares, Fears, Dangers, and
Miseries, that Death is become the Common wish of all men afflicted. He who
dies soon, should no more complain than he whose Navigation in a rough
troubled sea is quickly ended. We account not those the best trees that have
withstood the rage of many Winters, but those who in the least time have borne
the most fruit. Not he who plays longest, but sweetliest on an Instrument is
to be Commended. Compared with Eternity, the longest and the shortest Life
differ not. Life is not a constant Fountain, but a fickle Flood that quickly
rises, and as suddenly falls. Some have compared life to a Bird in a Childs
hand, which sometimes flies away before he can well fasten his hold on it. By
the virtue of that Organ wherewith we first behold the shine of the sun, by
the defect of the same we are brought into the darkness and shadow of death.
It is so, it is so, He that built this fair Fabric would have nothing
stable, and permanent in it but himself. This goodly, rational, subtle
creature, Man, above the Stars themselves, and next to God himself in Dignity,
able to penetrate into the deepest secrets of Nature, to observe the motions of
the heavens, and to compass both heaven and Earth in a thought, is only
immortal here below by succession; Generation being as restless as
corruption. The mistocles rightly affirms that no creature is so miserable as
Man, in that none but he knows the use of life, yet when with great study and
industry, he has attained to that knowledge, he is by death deprived both of
life and it together. Age brings to us experience in one hand, and Death in the
other. Just were the tears, and sweet was the Humanity, says Pliny, of that
Royal and youthful Xerxes.
Grecian, who wept to think that not one of that glorious immense Army he
then commanded should survive one Age. Such a gentle commiseration of humane
frailty made Anselme thus cry out. O durus Casus! Heu! quid perdit homo? quid
invenit? perdi dit beat itudinem ad quam factus est, and invenit mortem, ad
quam factus non est. O hard hap! Alas! What did man lose? What did he find?
He lost the blessedness to which he was made, and found death to which he was
not made. Shall then the valiant, and the learned have a harder fate then fools,
in so soon parting with those Crowns which Mars and Apollo have placed on
their heads? shall they so suddenly be deprived of the comfort of that fair
Fame which with blood, and sweat, with fasting and watching they have
purchased? Yes, yes, Caesar shall never terrify the World again with his
valor, nor Cicero charm it with his eloquence. The sword of the one, and the
pen of the other have now with their Lords the same eternal and unprofitable
rest. Alas, alas, Man's is as brittle as glass, but not so conserveable. As he
increases in growth, his life decreases. As whether one sleeps, or wakes in a
ship under sail he is insensibly, as it were, carried away toward his
intended Port; so what ever we are doing, we unawares sail toward the region
of death. Time deals with man Arithmetically; He first adds to his Beauty, and
multiplies his Graces, and then he substracts all these, and makes a long
lasting Division between him and Nature. It were strange, if we should think
we shall never arrive there, whither we are ever going. Plutarch writes of
creatures in a certain part of the World which are borne in the morning, are in
their prime at noon, grow aged toward the evening, and are dead ere night. Had
these reasonable souls as we have, they would have also the same passions.
They would after our womanish custom lament their untimely death who die
before noon, esteem them happy that live till the evening, and yet bewail
them too who depart at night. Our fond whining were seasonable, and to purpose,
if it could prevent the death of our friends, or call them from the dead; but
it savours of a vain, foolish arrogant ambition to desire they should be
privileged, and exempted from the fatal, common condition of Mankind, since
we cannot be ignorant that God has set down a period beyond which Nature her
self shall not pass. Nothing represents better to us this world then a
theater; God has set down a period, beyond which Nature her self shall not
pass.
whereon one acts a King, another a Lord, a third a Magistrate; others again
play the base servil parts of fools, messengers, and mutes. Some of them stay,
stare, strut, and look big a long time on the Stage; others only show
themselves, and without speaking This World compared to a Theater.
one word, as soon as they come on go off again; to conclude, all have their
Exits: So we poor Mortals who are sent by our provident omnipotent Creator
into this world, to undergo several charges (some whereof are honorable, some
ignominious) have al an egresse out of this life, as well as an ingresse allotted
us. Some a long time be at this earthly Stage with the Majesty of a Tragedian;
others are fools and sneak up and down to the laughter of all men; others again
lie manacled, bedridden, or (which is the worst of Fates) distracted. Some no
sooner enter but they go out again, as did that child in the besieged,
depopulated, desolate town of Saguntum, who by an instinct of Nature, no sooner
put his head out of his Mothers womb, but he pulled it in again, as divining
the approaching destruction of his City and himself. To continue the
similitude; As he who acted an Emperor (the Play once done) is no better then
he who represented a slave: so the Grave, as Horace says, equals all, the King
and the Beggar. Pertinently to this S. Ambrose, We are born naked, says he,
and die naked, and there is no difference between the carcasses of the rich,
and the poor, save that the former stink worse through a repletion with
excrements, which surfets of delicious fare have left behind. This world is
Deaths region, about it as a triumpher over all flesh he rides his circuit.
Since then his coming is so necessary, so inevitable, whether he comes in the
dawne, the noon, or twilight of life, let us bid him welcome. What should
hinder us to do so I cannot tell; since as there is no ship but in one Voyage
or other dasheth not against some hidden rock, or shelf: so the most happy life
is not free from infinite crosses and disasters. Yet though every man knows the
inconveniences and perils of this life, says S. Austin, and that he must once
die, yet all men seek to shun, and defer the hour of death; not only the
heathen, but they to who believe the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. To our reproach the holy Father spoke this; for though it be no
shame for a Gentile to fear death, whose only scope of life is to see and be
seen, to know and be known; yet to a Christian it is, whose aim and desire
should be not only to serve God faithfully here, but also to reign gloriously
with him hereafter. What is necessarily to be done, a wiseman does voluntarily;
let us not therefore with the foolish Tyrant in Lucian, either with tears,
prayers, or bribes vainly think to persuade inexorable Death, but wisely
consider that we are neither the first, nor the last; All have gone before,
and must follow us. Nay, not a man dies, that has not at the same time many to
accompany him, who arrive at the house of Death by several ways. Life is a
due debt to God and Nature, as long as we have it, we enjoy a benefit, when we
are deprived of it we have no wrong. Let us then daily render it back to him
that gave it, since he is a bad debtour who unwillingly pays. As a Soldier,
the sign once given, readily obeyes the command of his General, and armed at
all points, follows him through all Dangers, and faceth Death himself: so
must we chearefully observe the very Beck of our Heavenly Commander, and
through all miseries and destruction it self make our way to him. Death should
be no longer formidable to us, since our Redeemer has taken out his sting, and
he is now no other then an old toothlesse Dragon. It is a foolish thing to
delight in sleep, and abhor Death, sleep being only a continual imitation
of it. He that seriously contemplates the privileges, and advantages that
accompany a Christian Death, will be in love with it. It is the Refuge of the
afflicted, and the end of all earthly evils. It takes not life from us, but
presents it to the custody of Eternity. It is not an end but an intermittance
Death to a Christian not a punishment, but a tribute.
of life, nor no longer a punishment, but a Tribute, and we are gainers by it.
As he who has a long time layne in a dark dungeon, is beyond imagination
joyful when he comes to the light: so the soul when she is freed from the
vapors and clouds in which the flesh involved her is ravished with delight.
While she is yet in the body, though her ambition reach at Heaven, yet is she
still clogged with that heavy mass of earth, and cannot so nimbly and nobly
operate as she would. She may fitly be called the Guest, and the Body the Host,
that makes her pay dearly for her clayie lodging. For if a Magistrate be vexed
and busied to subdue and pacify the Rebels of a seditious City, needs must
the soul be troubled and afflicted, who has a harder office assigned her,
which is to bridle, and restrain the vicious, inordinate, dissolute affections
which are inseparable adjuncts to her while she has a conjunction with the
body.

The prerogatives of Death being so many, and so certain, let us no longer
condole the decease of this our completely noble Friend, but congratulate his
happy departure hence, and his safe arrival in the Imperial Heaven. When
Proculus Julius had reported to the Romans that he had seen Romulus, and that
assuredly he was a God, a Wonder it was, says Livie, how much they gave
credit to this Tale, and how greatly the miss of Romulus, both amongst the
Commons, and Soldiers, was by this belief of his Immortality digested. Much
more should our sorrow be mittigated by the confidence we have that this our
blessed Friends soul is ascended to him from whom it descended. When Brass or
Gold is melted to make the Statue of some great deserving Man, we say not that
the Metal is lost, but dignified: In like case when a Body is turned into its
first Principles, Dust, and Ashes, we who have an eye to the glorious
Resurrection of it, think not it is utterly ruined, but dissolved to be
refined. As in the Eclipse of the Sun or Moon, we nothing at all wonder, or
grieve, because we know either Star will reassume its former splendor: So
we who are conscious of the divine promise of Immortality should undismayed,
believe the death of this our honored friend, no other then a passage to a
better eternal life. I will conclude with this double consolation to all his
Honourers. First, that he died with that matchless comfort, The love of all
men, and heard yet living, the judgment men would pass on him dead, and was,
as it were, present with Posterity. Secondly, that whereas here he ran a
perpetual hazard, in that he carried a heavenly Treasure in an Earthy
Vessel, he now lives in an unmoved Security, and that Treasure is enclosed
in a Magazine to which the Heavens are Walls, and the Angels Warders. It is now
high time to cover this sweet, beautiful issue, who with the Rose and Violet
is laid down to sleep in the Bosom of his first Mother the Earth, and shall
enjoy, though it may be not so sudden, yet as certain a Spring as they, and
which is more, an everlasting.

FINIS.
ELEGIES UPON THE DEATH OF THE LAST LORD STAFFORD.
AS over-rich-men find it harder far
T'employ what they possess, then poor men are;
Such is the state of those who write of thee,
Whilst in that larger field displaid they see
All objects which may help invention in,
They know not where to end, where to begin.
And as into this Labyrinth they fall,
Loath to omit the least praise, lose them all.
Then whilst some style thee with the glorious name
Of lineall heir to Mighty Buckingham,
And tells the greatness of thy line that springs
From such as could raise up, and throw down Kings
I Will not look back; but with the Indians run
To meet and court thee, as my rising Sun.
My offerings to thy memory shall be seen,
In telling what thou were, or would have been.
Why say I would? when the most jealous eye
Could find no want, though in thine infancy,
Which some say promised much, this I disdain,
For where the gifts are, promises are vain;
Since in this noble youth who did not see
The old man's wisdom, young man's industry?
An humble Majesty, that could tell how
To scorn a league with pride; yet make it bow.
Whose courage was not in extremes like ours;
With ebs and flows, causd by the passions powers:
But was a constant ever grafted love
To blessed goodness, and the powers above.
Who though he joyed in this frail mortal life,
As one whose soul had felt no ingor'd strife:
Nor labored with impatient have like some
To break their prison ere the freedom come.
Yet when the ever seeing power had found
So fair a flower planted in barren ground;
Whose glorious beauties which that frame inspired,
Were envyed more then followed or admired:
Resolved to take what he had only lent,
As giving him reward, us punishment;
Then death was welcome, and he so resigned
(Not feeling grief to leave, nor fear to find)
That such his parting was as might be said,
Whilst he staid here, he lived not, but obeyed
That happy call, which all clear souls expect,
Whose doubtful states are changed to be elect,
Let then such friends as mourn the sad decay
Of his great house, in him the only stay,
Lift up their wondering eyes and for him look
In Angels Quires, not in a Heralds Book.
Yet though the root be taken hence to plant,
Where heavenly moisture it can never want;
There yet remains a branch shall ever shine
Engrafted in the noble Howards line.
John Beaumount.

Upon the Death of the most hopeful the Lord STAFFORD.
MVst then our Loves be short still? Must we choose
Not to enjoy? only admire, and loose?
Must Axioms hence grow sadly understood,
And we thus see, It Is dangerous to be good?
So Books begun are broken off, and we
Receive a fragment for an History;
And, as'twere present wealth, what was but debt,
Lose that, of which we were not Owners yet;
But as in books, that want the closing line,
We only can conjecture, and repine:
So must we here too only grieve, and guess,
And by our fancy make, what is wanting, less.
Thus when rich webs are left unfinished,
The Spider does supply them with her thread.
For tell me what addition can be wrought
To him, whose Youth was even the bound of thought;
Whose buddings did deserve the Robe, whiles we
In smoothness did the deeds of wrinckles see:
When his state-nonage might have been thought fit,
To break the custom, and allowed to sit?
His actions veiled his age, and could not stay
For that which we call ripeness, and just day.
Others may wait the staff, and the gray-haire,
And call that Wisdom, which is only Fear,
Christen a coldness, temperance, and then boast
Full and Ripe Virtue, when all action's lost:
This is not to be noble, but be slack:
A Stafford never was good by the Almanacke.
He, who thus stays the season, and expects,
Does not gain habits, but disguise defects.
Here Nature outstrips Culture: He came tried;
Strait of himself at first, not rectified:
Manners so pleasing, and so handsome cast,
That still that overcame, that was shown last:
All minds were captived thence, as if 't had been
The same to him, to have been loved, and seen.
Had he not bin snatchd thus, what drive hearts now
Into his nets, would have driven Cities too:
For these his Essaies, which began to win,
Were but bright sparks, which showed the Mine within,
Rude draughts unto the picture; things we may
Style the first beams of the increasing day;
Which did but only great discoveries bring,
As outward coolness shows the inward spring.
Nor were his actions, to content the sight,
Like Artists Pieces, placed in a good light,
That they might take at distance, and obtrude
Something unto the eye that might delude:
His deeds did all, most perfect then appear,
When you observed, viewed close, and did stand near.
For could there ought else spring from him, whose line
From which he sprung, was rule, and discipline,
Whose Virtues were as Books before him set,
So that they did instruct, who did beget,
Taught thence not to be powerful, but know,
Showing he was their blood by living so.
For, whereas some are by their big lip known,
Others b' imprinted, burning swords were shown:
So they by great deeds are, from which bright fame,
Engraves free reputation on their name:
These are their Native marks, and it has bin
The Staffords lot, to have their signs within.
And though this firm Hereditary good,
Might boasted be, as flowing with the blood,
Yet he nere graspt this stay: But as those, who
Carry perfumes about them still, scarce do
Themselves perceive them, though another sense
Suck in the exhaling odours: so he thence
Never did perceive he carried this good smell,
But made new still by doing himself well.
TO embalme him then is vain, where spreading fame
Supplies the want of spices; where the Name,
It self preserving, may for Ointments pass:
And he, still seen, lie coffind as in glass.
Whiles thus his bud dims full flowers, and his sole.
Beginning does reproach another whole,
Coming so perfect up, that there must needs
Have been found out new Titles for new deeds;
Though youth, and laws forbid, which will not let
Statues be raised, or him stand Brazen: yet
Our minds retain this Royalty of Kings,
Not to be bound to time, but judge of things,
And worship, as they merit: there we do
Place him at height, and he stands golden too.
A comfort, but not equal to the cross,
A saire remainder, but not like the loss:
For he, that last pledge, being gone, we do
Not only lose the Heir, but the honor too.
Set we up then this boast against our wrong,
He left no other sign, that he was young:
And, spite of fate, his living virtues will,
Though he be dead, keep up the Barony still.
Will. Cartwright.

On the much lamented Death of the Lord Stafford.
It Is not to enbalme his name or crown his hearse,
That our sad thoughts flow in our eyes and verse.
Or to add a luster to his dimmed name,
Which only now must shine in Heaven and Fame.
This were to hold a Taper out by night,
And cry, thus shone the glorious Suns fair light:
To view his rising splendour at our noone,
Were in a shadow to set out the Sun.
Nor do we Cypress bring in hope of Bays
(As death makes many Poets now a days)
Our tears flow by instinct, and a cold frost
Seazing our Palsie-joynts told what was lost
Before the fat all knell, not a dirge sung,
Nere a sad peale of Elegies was rung.
No bearded wonder, or propheticke flame,
Vsher'd the ruin of his house and name:
Yet then we melted in a chilling sweat,
And every fainting breast did something threat.
Not each days wonder, some strange news come
Creeping upon us, like the general doom;
And this was Staffords death, in his own fall
A world of people felt their funeral,
And lost a being they nere had: for he
Writ not a man, but House, or Family.
Thus have I seen a little silken clew
Of completed twists, at the first view
Comprised in a palm, but ravel'd out,
And drawn to lines, the thread will wind about
Countries or towns. Great shade the fate was thine,
Who by the issue of thy Noble line,
Might soon have peopled Kingdoms; but thy all
Is now wound up in a small urne, or ball:
And all thy virtues in sad weeds do lie,
Only spun out into thy memory.
Thus have we lost what goodness knew to dwell
In flesh and clay, more worth then we dare tell.
As for an Epitaph upon his stone,
Write this -- Here lie a thousand Lords in one.
Geo. Zouch. A. M. N. C. OX.

On the Death of the Noble Lord STAFFORD.
OThers to Staffords Hearse Encomiums give,
Not that his worth, but that their wit may live
My Muse has no such aim; it is less praise
To bear Apollo's, then his fun'rall Bays.
Nor is it the Lord I mourn; what is it to me
Who am no Herald, if a Baron die?
I do not hope for fees; I Am none of those
That pay down tears for legacies, or clothes.
My solemn grief flows in a Nobler tide;
Soon as I heard one so well qualified,
Had put off clay, the fright (not news) struck deep,
And made my eye of Understanding weep.
He was no Pagiant Courtier, such as can
Only make legs like a fine Gentleman.
Though's outside showed all that the nicer eye
Of critique Madams could desire to see:
Yet was his soul more gay, his ample breast
Was in a silken disposition dressed.
And with Heroicke habits richly lined;
The Virtues had no Wardrob, but his mind.
As the Honors, and the Lands, so he alone
The worth of all his Ancestors did own.
And yet that He is dead; so dead, that here
Is naught preserves his name, but's tomb, and sheire.
That Noble Stock is spent! injurious Fate;
To make a House so ancient desolate!
Felton killed Englands George, and with his knife
Only not cut the thread of others life.
We had some comfort left in that his blood
Was not quite spilt; after his fall he stood
Transcribed in pretty Emblems, which we all
Read as true Copies of the Original.
But none survives this Phaenix: it is our woe
To have this Sun not set but put out too.
The Gardener weeps not when his Lillies die,
If they their seed leave as a Legacy.
But should an only Flower, the Gardens gem,
Wither in her full pride, and of her stem
Bequeath no slip, the poor man's eyes each plot
Of ground would wet, without his water-pot.
No wonder it is that reverend Arundell,
And other Lords do groan out Staffords knell:
Since, at his fall, a Race of Heroes dyed,
Which cannot but by Creation be supplied.
Ri. West.

On the Death of the Lord STAFFORD.
WHat trust to titles? shame to our hopes there is gone,
One who was, none can say how many a one.
Muses, you are too few, to wait on's Ghost,
Wandering in sorry sheets to tell what is lost.
His Peerless Body eathed, some eyes may weep,
As if they had never seen him but asleep.
But those who viewed, with somewhat more then eye,
The finer beauties of thy mind, put by
The grief of tears, and call their Consistory
Of inward Powers to lament thy story.
Perfection, which might tempt the Scribes of Fate
To voluntary penance; force their hate
Recoyle upon themselves; to Nature swear
Rebatement of such rigor: Was It not severe
To cast the blackenesse of dead night so soon
On Noble luster entering, into noone?
How is deluding Heaven thus pleased to whet
Our hopes for Harvest, and then blight the Wheat?
This was not all, great Ghost we connot free
Thee from contempt of sad Mortality.
Thou thought enough, thy star should guide the wise
To honor, which thy self meant to despise.
Thy high-borne Spirit ripening into Man,
Deemed that so scant a measure must needs span
Short of thy merit: so sliding out of the roll
Of earthy Titles, thou would shift thy soul.
But yet me thinks, though Heaven envy our soil
Such virtuous Simples; Mercy should not spoil
A Garden, of it is only verdant pride,
Until some hopeful plants were set beside.
The plucks-up Olive; that the same sweet vein
Might spring and flourish in high blood again.
Our stock of Honor's is rooted up yet green,
Whose draught's uncoppyed must no more be seen:
An ancient house in this new rubbish lies,
Here urn'd the ashes of whole Families.
As if the Church in need of Ornaments,
Should hence her number have of monuments.
Proud exercise of Sextons, who dare live
By fatal dust, and look that piety give
To see this shrine, and know that in this One,
There lived and died a Generation.
No member of a Tribe, who fills this Tomb,
He Is Sepulcher of Staffords name, in whom
A Race and Field is lost, a Pedigree
And Catalogue of Heroes --
Could not presaging fears (which often divine
In The fall of one, the sinking of a Line)
Move one years haste, to sow in Hymen's bed
Some seed, which when thou ere mer't gathered;
In living buds might fresh and growing save
The Grand-sire trunk from rotting in a grave?
But since the closing of thine eyes alone,
Wink's many glorious Tapers into none;
We wail thy death, more thy Virginity,
We lose in that, in this posterity.
Thy soul might still have lived, in others breath,
Whose single life, is now a numerous death.
Io. Castillion.

On the most immature Death of the late young Lord Stafford, the last Baron of
that Family.
WHat Nemesis? what envious fate
Still waits on those who antedate
Their years by virtue, and behind
Cast slow pac't age with swiftest mind?
So it is, wise nature shortest day
Allows to things which post away.
The long lived Olive tree of peace,
And Laurel slowly do increase,
But the early pledge of Spring
The Primrose soon is withering.
So Ceres often with too much haste,
Her yellow dangling locks does waste,
And having rose too soon from bed
Before night hangs her drowsy head.
O see what hopes (which raisd were high
To aggravate our misery)
Now blasted, as a star which shone
New shot from Heaven, are flit and gone.
Have you seen a Pine tree prond,
Her head invested in a cloud,
Which the fatal axe has thrown,
Or the giddy whirlewind blown.
Whilst the Hamadryades with floods,
Of tears do drown their mournful woods;
And Sylvan his espoused Queen
Laments, fair, hopeful, fresh, and green.
Have you seen a vessel trim
Upon the smiling Sea to swim,
Whose sails do gently swell with air
Of many a Merchants zealous prayer,
O never ship with greater pride
Did on a watery mountain ride,
But strait a blustering storm does rise
And dasheth her against the skies,
Then on a rock her glory tears
No shrikes nor cries nor clamours hears.
Or have you seen but newly borne,
The rosy-finger'd fairest morn
Whilst the sprightfull Satyrs play,
And leap to see the golden ray,
But then a sullen cloud this light
Turn's to a dark and dismal night,
These were Emblems of thy fall,
Noblest Stafford, so I Would call
Virtue, by this name she is known,
And it is more proper then her own.
But which deeper wounds, with thee
Died thy stem and Baronie,
As that Nymph which by the Pine
Lived, and with the same does life resign.
When the Deluge did deface
The book of nature, humane race
Reprinted was, and found supply
From the floating Library.
But of Stafford we have lost all
Both transcript, and original,
Only some margent notes are left
To tel's of what we are bereft.
Here multa desunt, which to fill
Passes the learned Critics skill.
But as in ruined abbyes we
Admire their fair deformity:
And do build up thoughts from thence,
To reach the first magnificence,
So yet of Staffords house do stand
Some sacred relics, which command
Our reverence, and by these we see
What was his noble Pedigree,
Whose earthly arms interred do ly,
But soul placed in the aetheriall sky,
Shines with star-blaz'd nobility.
Charles Mason.

On the Death of the Right Honorable Lord, the Lord STAFFORD, being the last of
that Noble Family.
Unseasonable Fate, vex not our sense
With Balefull sorrows, due forty years hence;
Must Stafford needs expire at twenty four,
Because in goodness only he is three score?
So have we seen the morning Sun, to lay
His glory down, and make a rainie day.
Trust me, ye Destinies it was unjust
So soon to lay his honor in the dust.
But we do fix our sorrows as upon
A private fate, when it is a public one;
And weep (alas) as yet, but with one eye,
If but for one we weep; why here does lie,
Not my Lord only, but a Family.
No, no! he is but the Center-point, from whence
Our groans, and sighs fetch their Circumference;
Here we must teach our eye to drop a tear,
Even for the loss of those who never were:
Griefs mystery! we must for those be sad
Who lose a being which they never had.
Must ye, your selves, O Parcae, women prove
In that, the greenest of our fruits, ye love?
Fruits! which not cropped, had thrived into a Tree
Of a large branching Geneologie!
Ye might have seaz'd some puling witless Heir,
And made a younger Brother; 't had been fair,
And we had Praise, and kissed those bloody palms,
Which in the killing this, gave to'ther Alms.
But you will no such spotted sacrifice,
Such please not yet, for such are in your eyes
Are neither good for earth, nor yet for Heaven:
Stafford must only make your weeke-Bill even;
He Is good, and therefore ripe: thus still we find
That good wares first go off, bad stay behind.
Will. Wallen. Coll. Joan. Soc.

Upon the Death of the young Lord STAFFORD.
Unequal nature that do load, not pair
Bodies with souls, too great for them to bear!
As some put extracts, (that for souls may pass,
Still quickening where they are) in frailer glass;
Whose active generous spirits scorn to live
By such weak means, and slight preservative;
So high-borne minds; whose dawning's like the day
In torrid climes, cast forth a full noone-ray,
Whose vigorous breasts inherit, thronged in one
A race of souls, by long succession;
And rise in their descents; in whom we see
Entirely summed a newborn Ancestry:
These souls of fire, whose eager thoughts alone
Create a fever, or consumption,
Orecharge their bodies: laboring in the strife
To serve so quick and more then mortal life:
Where every contemplation does oppress
Like fits o'th Calenture, and kills no less:
Goodness has its extremes, as well as sin,
And brings, as vice, death, and diseases in;
This was thy fate, great Staffords; thy feirce speed
T'outlive thy years* to throng in every deed
A mass of virtues; hence thy minutes swell
Not to a long life, but long Chronicle:
Great name (for that alone is left to be
Called great; and't is no small Nobility
To leave a name) when we deplore the fall
Of thy brave stem, and in thee of them all;
Who do this glory to thy race dispense,
(Now known to Honor) t'end with Innocence.
Me thinks I see a spark from thy dead eye
Cast beams on thy deceast Nobility:
Witness those marble heads, whom Westminster
Adores; (perhaps without a nose or ear)
Are now twice raised from the dust and seem
New sculp't again, when thou art placed by them;
When thou, the last of that brave house deceast,
Had none to cry (our Brother) but the Priest:
And this true riddle, is to ages sent
Stafford is his Fore-father's Monument.
Richard Godfrey.

On the untimely Death of the Lord STAFFORD.
NOt to adorn his hearse, or give
Him another age to live,
Need we to pretend at wit,
His worth has intercepted it:
Whose every virtue does require
A Muse that only can admire.
Death, though he strove, his utmost feared,
He could not take him unprepared.
He Had ripeness in his Infancy,
And lived well in Epitomie.
Of what we hoped in others, he
At the same age had maturity.
But he is dead: we may outdare
Death now, as having naught to fear;
The world has lost her chiefest bliss,
Heaven the only gainer is.
One blow has killed more then the plague, and we
In losing one, have lost plurality.
A sense might have been better spared, your price
We would have thought too but a sacrifice,
Such as was I saacks Ram, that saved in one
Just Patriarch, a generation.
One star we may see shoot, without a groan,
But should we lose a constellation,
'Twould puzzle Astrology, nay almost
By losing one, your science would be lost.
Fate's wisdom see, that he might leave our taste
In relish, he cut off your choycest last.
H. B.

Upon the Death of my Lord STAFFORD, the last Baron of that Ancient Stock.
GRieve not ye Sacred Ancestors of Fame,
As if this were the carcass of your Name:
The Bark now flourishes: we may presume
He Is planted, and not buried in the Tomb:
Your famous branches by his fall are blown:
His fate becomes your Resurrection.
Good deeds were all his Progeny; whilst he
Leaves them no other state, but memory:
The Titles, and Revenues let them hoord
That do delight to hear these words, My Lord.
In Stafford I confess they bore some weight,
Cause they spoke him, as well as this estate:
It was his Name, not Title: and that tone
Made him not famous, only better known.
Deserts well placed shine more: It is a tie,
And reverence to Virtue to be high:
Should the Sun falling to the earth fix here,
He Would suffer an eclipse from his own sphere.
Sure to prevent that old and glorious itch,
He died before the age of being Rich:
No Lands was ever he possessed of, save
That small unhappy portion of a grave.
Death did deliver him, we may be bold
To style it his redemption from Gold:
Wealth is a sin, though used, and to be free,
Yet never want, is but kind usury.
He was so witty, yet sincere, that we
Dare say he meant even an Hyperbole:
He could not flatter: what he spoke was known
No complement, but an expression.
Postures in him were Virtues, for when he
Did bend, it was not pride but charity:
His hat went off so honestly, we may
Affirm he only did himself betray:
Not like to those that study the Court stride,
And learn the decent stitch on the left side:
He nothing to the stream of the Time did owe,
The Staffords manners from themselves still flow.
We must despair thy equal, unless he
Could with thy Titles too inherit thee.
H. R.

On the Death of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Stafford.
WHen brave Heroic spirits fly from hence,
That governed others by their influence,
Each Muse with Cypress crowned instead of Bays,
Makes them the subject of their tears, and prays,
Who were examples living; being dead
With living Monuments are honored:
When other's course earth does neglected lie
That lived, as if they only lived to die.
But with what Marble, or what Brass shall we
Honor the Noble Staffords memory;
Whose very Name inscribed would luster give
Enough to make those dead materials live?
The glorious mind dwelt in his Noble breast
Did entertain each Virtue for its guest,
And what soever was opposite and foul,
For ever banished from his Christan soul.
He was as good, as great; and taught the Time
By what safe steps men might to Honor climb.
Yet ventrous death with his impartial Darts
Has disunited those his different parts.
Whilst the earth does his more richer earth contain,
What came from Heaven is thither flowne again.
E. B. Medii Templi.

On the deplored Death of Edward Lord Stafford, the last Baron of his Name.
STay Death, and hear a short plea; we would crave
Only the mercy of a single grave;
And that at one stroke, thou would kill but one,
In him thou slayst a generation:
Then ere thou strikst, Death, know thy sin; for this
Not a plain Murder, but Massacre is:
Compendious slaughter of a Family,
What yet unknown Plague shall we title thee?
What Power art thou, what strange Influence,
That thus usurpst the spleen of Pestilence?
Can the Grave propagate, that there should be
As yet a new kind of mortality?
Sure I mistake our misery; this was not
That which we call disease, but a Chaine-shot;
Death has foregone his Archery, and Dart
And practices the Canon; that dire Art
Of murdering by the hundreds: Thus alone
We lose not Stafford, but a Legion:
Take a friends counsel yet, grim fate; and stay,
Do not bereave thy self of future prey;
Let him survive to a large Progeny,
Which will be but a number, that must dye.
Visit some Friery, there thy wrath express;
There, where Religion is barrenness;
That were a thrifty cruelty, and to save
This Youth were mercy, would enrich thy grave.
Cheat not our hopes thus, riddling Destiny,
When we did pray, Stafford might multiply
As numberless as are the sands, there is none
Meant such a fatal propagation,
His own dust for an Off spring, our best prayers
Forbid such sad increase, Atoms for Heirs!
Howere be not so speedy, gods, but give
Him breath, till he has taught us how to live:
Must we thus wholly lose him, and such worth,
Ere in Example he can bring it forth?
And must this be his period? cannot we
Express a man beyond his Elegy,
And Epitaph? can we pen History?
What if long-lived, this little one would be:
Where is your Art Genethliakes? who dare
From the Brachygraphy of some Prophet star,
Transcribe the life of every birth, if Fate
And your great skill be such, Death comes too late
To prejudice your knowledge, and you can,
When he has seized the Corpse, reprieve the Man,
And pen him a long-lived Example, though
He had been borne a livelesse Embryo:
I pray, go calculate, and tell us then
What Stafford in his ripe years would have been;
Describe him at some Canon guarded Hill
Leading his daunted General, and we will
Lessen our present despair into fear
And tremble, lest our Stafford should fall there:
Then prosecute your story, till his years
List him among the graver headed Peers;
And in the bustle of some fcard-state-rent,
Let Us hear him tutoring a Parliament:
Alas! such thoughts but aggravate our cross,
Instead of comfort, summing up our loss:
Cease then all prattle; with the Grave and Hearse
Silence suites better, then the saddest Verse.
Ri. Paynter, Joan. Ox.

To the Memory of the Right Honorable the Lord STAFFORD, the last Baron of his
Family.
Great soul of Stafford,
It Was not for want of Merit, that thy Hearse
So long has lacked it is tributary Verse.
Things, whose frail memory scarce outlives the time
Their Elegies a reading, may have a Rhyme
In half an hour flung on them. Earthen plate
'S framed at a turn, when the rich Porcelane's date
Is a full Age. Raptures that do befit
Objects of wonder, are the fruits of Wit
And choice, not Fury. This kept Phoebus Quire
Silent so long, that naught but hallowed fire,
And purest gums might crown thine Vrne: yet still
They find thy Worth beyond their power and skill.
For who in meanest lines thy life should write,
Would by Posterity be guessd to endite.
Some Romance or vain legend. To the dim sight
The weakest Tapers yield the welcom'st light.
He was (vain voice!) the noble Staffords heir
His Mothers comely graces hung on's fair,
Yet manly check; the Younger-brothers heart
And wit to boot, nay each Heroicke part
Of Buckingham dwelt in him: so that he
Alone might justly be a Family.
So have I seen grow upon one small Tree
More various fruits, than in some Orchards be.
No dying Hermit meeker, though a Lord,
And under age too: Virtuous though a Ward.
No Dyall placed in the cross Meridian,
Whose shade runs still irregular toth' Sun
That should it guide: He Nobly bore that state
Of Ward, as if Nature had gav't, not Fate.
Like to our foreign Tulips, which each year,
As more mature in growth, new liveries wear,
Yet are the same flower: so as he elder grew,
Stafford was still unchanged, though's carriage new
The fashion he scarce followed nere outrun,
Striving to lose himself, and Nation.
If he toth' Friars came, his judgment swift
As Lightning, could each line, each Humor sift;
And his discerning Palate straight could taste
Beaumont, and Iohnsons wheat, from scraps and mast.
But this was Play. The royal Academe
His best hours challenged, where his noble theme
Was his great Fathers Valor, though his Face
Had not yet lost his Mothers beauteous grace.
So that from him being armd, the limmer might
Exactly draw Venus, as she in bright
Steel came to Lacedemon; or the brave Maid
Jove's daughter, as she came to her Fathers aid.
Death will he proud of's dart, when he shall find
'T has slain two Families, in Blood, and Mind,
Nay will more triumph that h' has slain but one
Than if by the Plague or Sword a Million;
Those could but last an Age; in Stafford he
Has killed Successive Immortality.
Now for his Epitaph, let only be
Fixed on his Tomb his Royal Pedigree.
This, like some well writ Book, whose every Page
Contains rich wit, and matter for an age,
When the reader with this treasury grows brisk
For Finis, meets with a sad Asteriske:
Or like some stately Palace, which half lies
Vnfinish'd, whose proud top should scale the skies,
Will more with pity the beholder move,
Then, if complete, with wonder, or with love.
Perhaps some gentler Lady, reading this
Three ages hence, may mourn Her loss of bliss,
In Staffords sudden fall: Had not his life
Bin short, she might have bin a Staffords Wife.
Will. Creed, of S. John's. Oxf.

Memoriae Sacrum Nobilissimi Dom. Domini Edwardi Stafford. EDWARDVS
NOBILISSIMUS STAFFORDIAE DOMINUS.
DE^a^us nunquam satis plorabitur,
Qui nunquam satis hilariter excipi poterat natu^.
In Quo magna Staffordiae gens stetit, cecidit;
Columon suae Domus, simul erat and Terminus.
Solus; and numerosa Prosapia!
Unicus; and magna Familia!
Exactissima Herois Buckinghamii Epitome:
Gemmula mole per exigua, infiniti pene valoris;
Mundus Major in Spithamam contractus,
(...) Magnus.
Quem dilexerunt omnes, qui norunt,
Plorarunt omnes, etiam qui non norunt.
Comitatis anima;
Nobilitatis Jdea;
Virtutis universae Virtus ipsa.
Aetate qui vix Ascanius, prudentia plusqua^ Aeneas:
Apollo intonsus, and Musarum Deus.
Cui corpus elegantius, quam Foeminarum,
Incoluit animus major, quam virorum.
Quem in armis diceres absque lanugine Gradivum,
Nec adhuc in Numen adultum:
Hunc, galea deposita, Adonidem Diones osculis rubente^
Ceu verius Cupidinem ex ephebis elapsum.
Que^ equitante^, Alexandru^ Bucephalo inside^te^ crederes
Aut Centaurum in Lapitharum praelia ruentem,
Sonipes ipse tam grato pondere superbiebat,
Gestiens a tanto dirigi.
Exteras hausit linguas, non quasi nostra sordesceret
Sed ne ullu^ exactissimo Curiali deesset compleme^tum.
Latinam paene habuit vernaculam:
Heroicam Graeci Sermonis majestatem,
Non ex ignorantia sed acumine judicii admirabatur,
Musicam didicit, ne tempus, cum ludo vacaret, porderet
Qui tamen ex Oppiduli ruinis
Altam posset Urbem extruere.
Ubi in numerum gressus efformabat,
Ei Perseum talaria commodasse crederes;
Jn choro volanti semper similior, quam pulsanti terram
Vestalibus ipsis castior; at hoc ex virtute natum,
Non corprris intemperie.
Quem tamen adeo castum vixisse lugemus,
Nec Patre^ fuisse (quod in aliis detest amur) quindecem jam annos natum;
Tunc alii Staffordiae gentis haeredes superfuissent,
Quam Vestes pullatae, and luctuosum funus.
At o praeposterae rerum humanarum vices!
Qui in perpetuu^ vivere meruit, immaturus occubuit,
Maternae prius haeres Telluris, quam Paternae.
Disce lector.
Familiae and tituli, aeque ac homines, suos habent occasus.
Guil. Creed, Joan.

On the Lord STAFFORD, the last Baron of his Race, who dyed in his None-age.
YOur Country Hindes if you have seen
When they have a Lopping been,
They take not here a Branch or there,
But leave the naked Back so bare,
It cannot be termed Plant, but we
Must called the Carcass of a Tree:
Which they (believing naught their own,
But what within their Pale is thrown)
Have so dismembered, for no good
But to increase their Stack of Wood.
Yet even these leave one sprout there
Expecting Company next Year,
Where if so chance it be not found
They lose their right to the whole ground.
What have thou forfeited, Death, now
That have not left a Topping Bough
On such a glorious stock? not spared
The tender sprigge, but further dared
Going beyond dire Sickness spite
Not for to bend, but break it quite:
What Plot is now in hand? Does Fate
Mean to bring in Confusion straight?
How shall a Stately shady Tree,
From Trunk or Mast distingnishd be,
If this be suffered? shall the source
Of Noble blood be stopped its course
Or chilled? and shall the Pedant Vein
Through all the Body flash amain?
Therefore Death (since you cannot be
Exempted from all Penalty,
When thou shall dare Trespass so high
Not in mistake, but cruelty)
Your Dart is forfeite, and must cease,
The Darter being bound to the Peace,
And so disarmed by Natures Will,
If you must needs yet Wound or Kill,
You must your presence use, or sight;
All weapons are debarred you quite;
For let Time accursed be
If he shall lend his Sith to Thee.
And all this Nature does enact,
Not for one petty Crime, or fact.
Her Law does not thee guilty call
Of treason, murder, but of All.
That which last year you did commit,
And we not know to name it yet;
Prometheus once presumed so
To steal from Heaven a flame or two;
Where now he feels loves angers edge
In Hell, and rues his Sacrilege:
How many Vultures had love sent,
If he had stolen the Element?
Put out a Star or Two, or more
And make them give their winking over,
You do no hurt, there is more to shine:
Which else perhaps had not been seen:
Or if we take them All away,
We shall be blamed no more than day.
But if we put out the Suns light,
We may bid the whole World Goodnight:
Not merely 'cause it is the Sun,
But chiefly 'cause it was but One:
For had we Two, who could repine
Though One did Set, so One did shine?
Thus stands it with thee death, and us
That have affronted the state thus:
Could not one House suffice, nay Town
But must you pull our Nonesuch down?
Could your transcendent Envy aim
Not at the Person, but the Name?
Must Stafford dye? True! Statesmen say
That even Kingdoms have their day
Nor dare Iavouch they err,
A Kingdome's a Particular:
A Name's Eternal, and a Race
Is bound to neither Time nor Place.
Now therefore think what thou have done
And burst thou foolish Sceleton:
Sithence we shall believe your spite,
Not your Power, infinite:
For though here lies the Corpse of Stafford dead
His Name and Epitaph cannot be Buried.
Io. Goad. Joan. Ox.

On the much lamented death of the Lord STAFFORD.
A Name too great for numbers, fit for those
Let loose their eyes, and weep as 'twere in prose
And yet a theme too vast for eyes and here
The greatest thing lamented is the Tear.
And when we have sat up to hang the Hearse,
We cannot be thought to weep our Lord but verse,
So great that we but tole his flame, and chime
His gloryes growing, Sextons but in Ryme,
Who when he is delivered best will bear
A fame like modern faces blotted fair,
Whom we conceal in phrase, so vast a Task
We write him to a beauty in a mask.
Though he might blow a quil to verse, whilst men
Envy to see the Poet in the Pen:
For who can think in Prose a man so clear
His thoughts did suffer sight, and soul appear?
That he that searched his hearty words might find
That breath was the exhalation of his mind,
Such faith his tongue did wear you might have vowed
He spoke his breast, and only thought alowd,
You might his meaning through his blood have spyde,
Too pure deformed dissembling to hide,
As to his Virgin soul, Nature had drawn
In so refined flesh a Veil of Lawne.
So was he borne, cut up, that now we could
Learn virtues from the Doctrine of his blood,
Which we might see preach Valtur, and espy
His vein, to make an Auditor of the Eye,
And run conclusions, for from hence we tried
Which was a flood of valor, which just Tide,
Learning from his wise heat, that in an Ill
A spirit might courageously sit still
That one might dare be quiet, and afford
To think all metal lies not in the sword,
And Cutlers make no minds, Armor no doubt
Does well, but none can be inspired without,
So did her chide the Flame oth' wilder youth
That fights for Ladies hair or less, their truth;
His blood discreetly boiled did make it clear
It is the mind makes old, and not the year:
That we may prompt his stone to say -- lies here
Stafford the Aged at his foure-teenth year?
Io. How.

Sacred to the Memory of the Right Honorable, the Lord STAFFORD being the last
Baron of his Name.
It Is high Presumption in us, that are
The feet, so almost excrement, to dare
Turn eyes and weeape a puddle rivulet
Over thy hearse, which Nobles have beset
We teemed too fast, and too much issue had
That let us blood, as rules of Physic bad:
But this gnawes our land's heart, Nobility,
And is more cruel in Epitomie.
By making us in this one Staffords fall,
To celebrate the exequies of all.
Why would thou yield so soon to death? alas!
Thou have too speedily finished thy race:
Thou ought not, pretty flower, have hung thy head,
Till thou wast ripe, and blown, had scattered
Some seeds about thy bed: where in a shade
Thou might have slept by thy sonne-flowers made:
When with strong bulwork of posterity
T'hadst fortified, thy decayed Ancestry,
Built up thy ruined house, allayed our fears,
And were foure-score as well in sons, as years,
O then, and not til then, thou should have tried
Whether our tender love would let thee'ave di'd.
Tho. Snelling. of S. John's Oxf.

On the memory of the late Lord STAFFORD.
Had thou stood firm, our eyes had yet bin dry
Not in their Vrnes, but in thy breast did lie
All thy stocks honor. Memphis never knew
Amongst her wonders Pyramid like you,
Stately how ere great families they shroud
And sceptered lines, yet far beneath a cloud.
With pearly drops, that all may clearly see,
Thou wast the jewel of Nobility:
We cannot hope that our distracted cries
Will please, amongst their well-tuned harmonies
Our Elegies not weep, but are to be
Wept at, and want themselves an Elegy.
Yet frown not on our verse, and tears of jet:
(Ah never any sorrow truer let)
Who can but sluice his heart throughout his eyes,
When Youth, Nobility, Hope, Stafford dies?
I sum not up thy beauty, comeliness,
Nor thousand graces, which thy soul did bless,
For, like to gamesters whom their lucks have crossed
We fear to know the utmost we have lost.
Thou did not by Example, States false glass
Dress thy behavior, and thy life's face:
Nor wast sufficient ground, that thou should do
This vice, because Lord such a one did so:
Thy eyes, when once had but a point let in
Of lust, the other spying the little sin,
Would send a visive ray, as messenger,
To tell, that if it would not drop a tear,
And quench that spark, he would not his mate dwell;
Then wept the sinful eye, and all was well.
Thus each part, just as in Philosophy,
Would Rule, and Maxim to the other be.
O what disease, then shall we wish may meet
With that disease, which took away this sweet?
That envious disease, and which out-vies
Even the Pestilence in cruelties:
For that, among hundreds; true, its poison thril'd
But they were troop, and so ill humor spil'd.
Thou in few years could such a height attain
Orelook'd the hills, and peer'd above the rain:
Our tears are too too low, and watery eyes
Do leese themselves in search of such a rise.
The loss was ours, thy Pyramid did grow
Still broad nigh heaven, decreased to us below.
The Virtues built thee, and the graces came,
And with all sweetness polished thy frame,
Honor, thy Mistress, there with glorious hand
Full often made her splendid impresse stand,
For she loved Stafford, each adoring eye
In thee insculpt read all nobility.
So were thou to the world hy heaven lent,
The life of new; old virtues monument.
Thy soul was large and able to contain,
More than the worthes of many ages gain,
The Virtues of thy Ancestors all knit
Could not it fill, were proud to enter it.
And thou encreasd'st that happy stock so well
As who will reckon, all the stars may tell
Of heaven, which has it, and us robbed in spite,
Or fear that they should be less infinite:
And man no more look up, since stars shine dim,
To virtues light, and heaven was nigh in him,
Thy virtues growth has our endeavors chid,
We Will raise no Pile to thee, great Pyramid.
B. Ollivier.

On the death of the Lord STAFFORD.
IF from thy Sacred Ashes did arise
Another Phoenix, breathing spiceries,
Such as thy blossoms did (since funeral fire
Refined in full age thine Honored Sire)
In whom you both might seem again t'returne,
Our griefs had all been buried in thy Vrne.
Nor vex the quiet Muses for a Verse
To be thy Offspring, or adorn thy Hearse;
Who leave Succession unto none of thine,
And but in such, liv'st in no other Line.
But now her self Nature begins to fear,
And startles to behold now here, now there
A family extinct, which though she strive
With all her Art and strength to keep alive
It vanishes (Great Stafford, thou shall be
To Nature a sad instance and to me)
Lest by Inductions she her self might be
Concluded in short time Vacuitie.
When the whole Fabrics into nothing hurld,
And the great fades as the lesser world.
Pillars of flesh, not stones and Imagrie
Preserve the dead in Living Memory.
The blossom cropped, before 'ts grown to a Pear,
Is no more worth, than if it had never been there
Which grown might from its kernels have begun
In other grounds a new Plantation.
The poor man's Only lamb, should have bin spared
It was his Only One; 's there no regard
Of One, and Only One? This One may grow
In time into a number, Whence may flow
Succeeding Millions; This One being lost
The hopes of all futurity are crossed.
Happy who first by his Victorious hand
Won honor to his house: whose Name did stand
In the first front, and after lived to see
His sons continue his Nobility,
But he who ends his Honor and his Name,
In his sweet youth and early hopes (when fame
Is scarce upon the wing to tell the Earth
His Ancestors, his Honors, and his birth)
Dies, leaving tears his only Legacy,
Which must be wept and paid from every eye:
This gives our tears new birth, nor does contract
Our sad Laments only into one Act
Such as was thy appearance; formed of clay
Arrayed with, and bereft of Honor in a day.
But will when ere we turn the book of Fame
Create new grief, when we shall read thy Name
With this unhappie mention, He died Young
And without issue, Here does end the Line
Of the Ancient Staffords Family. Thus Time
Becomes their Period also, and the End
Which should each action crown, to thee does lend
A double less, in whose one death do dye
More than thy self, Thy Ancient Family.
Tell me old Time, Chief Register of Things,
Who writ'st the fates of Commons, and of Kings
Was not a Tribe once precious in the Eye
Of the Almighty, though once doomed to dye
And perish all? yet some were left to be
Preserved, and raise up a new Progeny.
So lest no branch of David should be left
To bud till Shiloh came, Ioash by theft
Escapes the bloody stroke, only this One
Continues Kingdom and succession.
For one out of a numerous race to die
We know is common, when the race does lie
In One, and that One leaves no one behind
Besides a fruitless name, Nature's unkind.
"My own Creation's but a bliss begun,
"Which is made perfect in succession.
E. Marow.

On the Death of the most Noble Lord STAFFORD.
Impartial Nature, sham'st thou not that we
Should ever brand thee thus with cruelty?
Must all feel the like death? Must virtuous then
Be subject to corruption, like bad men?
Thus thou would have it be, but he whose breath
Thou enviously have stopped, shall not know death.
He who by Children thou deni'dst should give
A life to's Name, makes it himself to live.
He was borne Noble, and his life did so
Answer his birth, that it was hard to know
Which way he was most Noble, which most good
By his own virtues, or his Parents blood.
In him lived all his Ancestors, his fall
Proves not his only, but their funeral,
He was not his Stocks bare Epitomy,
Nor was he like but one of the Family,
He did resemble All. What dyed in him
Was seen again revived and live in him.
Life to the dead he gave. And though a Son,
His Fathers Fathers Father was become.
And now he that was like his friends in all things, tried
To be more like 'hem, and as they did, dyed.
With him falls the house of the Staffords, and it is well
It might have longer stood, not better fell.
R. Pull.

Sacred to the Memory of the most Virtuous Edward Lord Stafford, the last Baron
of his Illustrious Family.
SO is the ancient Rock that still sent forth
Jewels of clearer light, and constant worth,
By ruder hands still pillaged of it is store,
Safe only when they thought 'twould yield no more;
The Sun discov'ring a fresh drop of light
That might contest with him, and prove as bright
Does bid his beams that exudation steal,
Before the moisture into stone congeale:
So in the aged Rose tree, whose buds were
Such that we might affirm they were stars grew there,
After it long had yielded growing Fires,
Still snatched to seed the ravishers desires.
The cold does kill that bud that last shoots forth,
And robs us of all hopes of afterworth.
Thus here the heat, and there the frost does more
Spoil, then the Robbers Fingers did before.
But we can pardon fate, when that the cross
Extends it self unto no greater loss
Then of a Gem, or Flower: But when that hand
Shall snatch such living Jewels, let me stand
Senseless, and stupid as that Rock, and be
Wretched, and fruitless as that withered tree.
Fancy a morn that promised all delight
Day ere afforded, yet unto the sight
Clouded by sudden darkness, whiles the hours
Were busy yet to dress it with fresh flowers;
And you have fancied expectation Crossed,
But not like that of him we now have lost.
Fancy a spark that Time would soon have blown
Into a throng of flames, that would have grown
Unto the pitch of luster, as it bore
The Pyramid higher, and filled more, and more,
Dashed by a sudden, violent shower, and then
Know you are short of this as sparks of men.
Witness thou Deity of my pensive Muse,
His Sacred soul, that I no Art do use
To raise a noted grief from fancied loss,
Making the tears when I have made the cross!
Alas! the causes are too just. For where
Has Knowledge any glories, that his clear
Mind did not reach at? Where has Action ought
Of Fame, and worth that he would not have sought?
No Flower in all that Garden, or in this
That would not have been proud to be styled his?
Bays most retired from Light, and Sun had been
By his search found, and by his showing seen.
For whereas others think high birth, and blood
Virtues entaild, and all that is well borne good,
Though he might boast in this an ample share
(As the world knows, Virtue and this Lord were
As undivided still as Light and Heat,
That the Inherent Dowry, he the seat)
Yet he nere would his Birth to Virtue swell,
But thought it only might set Virtue well;
Made it the Ouch, not Jewel, and from thence
Did raise new Titles of pre-eminence.
Thus each day added to him, and we may
Say, if we view his mind, he did die gray.
Nor let me suffer misbeliefe, because
You knew him yet not man by Time, and Laws:
Souls such as his sore, and produce high things,
When others have as yet scarce hope of wings.
His Genius did rich glories then beget
And show, when lower could not Bud as yet.
Thus Regions near the Sun do Fields afford,
Thronged with the choysest Flowers, and richly stored
When the remoter places sleep, and show
Only a garment of benumming Snow.
When I consider all this snatched, I must
Wish that my tears could animate his dust.
But being we cannot call back lost good, nor bless
Our selves with him revived, I here profess
My breast his Marble, and do thence become
Both the bewailer of him, and the Tomb.
Anthony Stafford.

FINIS.

