A COMPENDIous or brief examination of certain ordinary com plaints, of
diverse of our country men in these our days: which although they are in some
part unjust and frivolous, yet are they all by way of dialogu^e thoroughly
debated and discussed

By William Stafford, Gentleman*

IMPRINTED at London in Fleetstreate, near unto Saint Dunstones Church, by
Thomas Marshe.

1581. Cum Priuilegio.



Qui Leo de Judah est, and flos de Iesse, Leones protegat, and flores Elizabeta
tuos.


TO THE MOST Virtuous and learned Lady, my most dear and Sovereign Princess
ELIZABETH, by the Grace of GOD, Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Defendresse of the Faith. etc.
WHereas there was never any thing heard of in any age past hetherunto, so
perfectly wrought and framed, either by Art or Nature, but that it has at
some time, for some forged and surmised matter, sustained the reprehension of
some envious persons or other: I do not much marvel most mighty Pryncesse,
that in this your so noble and famous a government, (the glory whereof is now
long sithence ^attered and spread over the whole face of the Earth,) there are
notwithstanding certain evil disposed people, so blinded with malice, and
subdued to their own parciall conceiptes: that as yet they can neither spare
indifferent judgments to conceive, or reverent tongues to report a known
truth, touching the perfection of the same. But for these men, as they are (no
doubt) sufficiently refuted by the testimonies of their own cosciences: so are
they most certainly condemned by the common consent of all such, as are wise or
indifferent. And although this be of it self so clear and manifest that it
cannot be denied, yet could not I forbear (most renowned sovereign) being as
it were enforced, by your Ma^esties late and singular clemency, in pardoning
certain my undutiful misdemeanour, but seek to acknowledge your gracious
goodness and bounty toward me, by exhibiting unto you this small and simple
present: wherein as I have indeu^ed in few words to answer certain
quarrels and objections, daily and ordinarily occurrent in the (...) of sundry
men, so do I most humbly crave your Graces favorable acceptance thereof:
protestinge also with all humility, that my meaning is not in the discourse of
these matters here disputed, to define ought, which may in any wise sound
prejudicial to any public (...), but only to allege such probability as
(...) could, to stop the mouths of certain evil affected (...), which of
their curiosity require farther satisfaction in these matters, then can well
stand with good modesty. (...) as upon this zeal and good meaning toward your
(...), I was earnestly moved to undertake (...), and in the handling thereof
rather content to show my self unskillful to others, the^ unthankful to you:
so (...) of your ancient accustomed clemency, I was so bold to (...) the same
to your gracious protection, fully (...) and assuring my self, that it would
generally obtain the better credit and entertainment among others, if your
(...) name were prefixed, as it were a most rich Jewel and rare Orname^t to
beautify and commend the same. God preserve your Majesty with insinit increase
of all his blessings bestowed upon you, and (...) that your days of life here
upon the earth may be extended (if it be his good will) (...) far beyond the
ordinary course of Nature: that as you have already sufficiently raygned for
your own honor and glory to last withal posterities: so you may co^tinew and
remain with us many more years, even to the full contentation (if it may so
be) of us your loving subjects, and to the perfect establishing of this
flourishing peace and (...) anquillity in your common weal sor ever.

YOUR MAJESTY'S most faithful and loving subject, WILLIAM STAFFORD.

A Table of things most notable contained in this Book.
THat no man is a stranger to the common (...) that he (...) in. 1. a That of
many heads is gathered a perfect counsel. 1. b That cuery man is to be
credited in his (...) art. 1. b Why (...) book is made by way of dialogue 2.
a The (...) of they* hole book* 2. a That men (...) borne to themselves only.
3. a The (...) of (...) by husbandmen. 3. b The (...) of (...) of victual by
artificers. 3. b The complaint of the decay of towns by Merchant men, and of
all other common (...). 4. a That many (...) are (...) down, and yet never
the (...). 4. a Of dearth of (...). (...). 4. a (...) of all (...) of (...) 4.
a (...) should not be the (...) of this dearth. 4. b (...) Gentlemen (...) most
(...) by this dearth. 4. b The (...) of (...) against Gentlemen for taking of
fear^, 4. b The (...) man complaint that he cannot set men a work for the
(...) of victual. 5. a The Gentleman, complaint (...) he cannot keep like
(...) as he was wont to do. 5. a Why Gentlemen do gieue over their
housholdes. 5. b Why Gentlemen do take fearmes to their hands. 5. b A
complaint against sheep. 5. b The Doctors (...) men of (...) sort. 6. a A
complaint against learned men. 6. a Why learning should be (...) to decay
hereafter. 6. b Whether a common weal may (...) well governed without
lear^* 6. b That the learned have alvvaies had the (...) over the unlearned. 7.
a Whether a man may be wise (...) learning. 7. a That (...) the (...) of
(...), and that (...) is the (...). 7. a The (...) by (...). 8. a (...)
learning. (...) (...), (...) os his great lear^ (...), (...) 8. b That
knowledge in moral Philosophye is most necessary for a Counsailour. 9. a
What makes learned men to be so fevv. 9. b That young studients be alvvaies
over hasty in uttering their judgments. 9 b That Pythagoras commanded silence
to his disciples for a time. 9. b That Plato commanded that no man ignorant
in geometry should enter his scoole. 10. a What harm may come if they be
suffered to judge in things to whom, that does not (...) 10. a That it is
not learning sufficient to know tongues and write. 10. a Why learning should
decay. 10. b That every state (...) himself grieved. 11. a That marchaunts can
best save themselves in every alteration. 11. a Os our old coin exhausted. 11.
a Whether it made any matter of what metal the coin be made 11. b What men
are most pinched by this same dearth 11. b That the prince has most (...) by
this universal dearth. 11. b What danger should it be to the Realm if the
prince should want treasure in time of needo. 12. a How the Queens (...) can
not have treasure when her subjects have none. 12. b A recapitulation of the
common grieves. 13. a That it is a maruailous dearth that comes in time of
plenty. 13* b The table of the second dialogue.
The occasion of this dearth is laid to the Gentlemen. 14. a How from the
Gentlemen it is laid to the husbandmen. 14. a The Gentlemen's excuse and
reasonable offer, 14. a The Husbandman refuses and puts over the fault to
ironmongers and clothiers. 14. b If all land were abated in their rent
vvhethet this dearth vvoulde be remedied. 15. a That it were not expedient
that strangers should sell their vvares (...), and we ours good cheap. 15. a
Another offer of the Gentleman made to the husbandman 15. a Whether (...) the
husbandman were forced to abate the price of his (...): (...) dearth should be
then amended. 14. b The strangers take but money current every where for
their vvares that they have over their exchange. 16. b That strangers and all
(...) brings things that be best cheap to them, and dearest with us. 16. b
What thing is of that sort. 17. a He that sells good cheap, and buieth
dear shall not lightly thrive. 17. b It is not possible to keep our treasure
from (...) forth of the realm if (...) be in (...) estimation elsvvhere. 17. b
That the dearth rose neither at the gentleman nor the husband (...) hands. 18.
a Permutation of things before coin, 18. a (...) complaint against (...)
masters. 18. b That Inclosuresis occasion of desolation and vveaking of the
power of the realm. 18. b Reasons to defend Enclosures. 18. b What kind of
Enclosures is hurtful. 19. a Whether that that is profitable to one, may be
profitable to all other if they use the same feate. 19. a Every commodity must
be so advanced, as it be not prejudicial to other greater commodities. 19. b
No man may abuse his own things to the prejudice of the common weal. 20, a
How enclosures might be remedied without cohercion of laws. 20. b. That a
like restraint of vvoll should be made as is of corn or none to be sent over
(...). 21. a Reasons why the husband should not be at liberty, as well as
other to sell his (...). 21. b That by breeding the husband has most clear
gains. 22. a That profit aduaunceth all faculties. 22. b That some are to be
allured by rewards, and some other with straight pains (...) in a common
weal. 22. b The less honor or profit is given to any Art, the less it shall
be frequented. 23. a Profit will make husbandmen more occupied and thereby
more plenty and consequently better cheap of corn. 23. b Whether the Queens
custom should be minished by restraint of Wool vnvvrought. 24. b How
strangers fetches from us our great commodities for very trisles. 25. a Our
delicacy in requiring strangers vvares. 25 a The (...) of Haberdashers, and
Mylleners over they were wont to be. 25. b How the Strangers find an
easier way to get Treasure by things of no value then by any Mines of gold and
silver. 25 b How strangers (...) their people with our co^modityes. 25. b
Why strangers may aforde Wares by them made, (...) then we may the same made
here, and yet that it were better for us to buy our own though they be
dearer. 26. a The most durable and universal profit is more to be esteemed
then short and particular. 26. b Whether such restraints do touch the leagues
made with outvvard princes. 26. b No league is to be chearished that is not
for the common weal. 27. a A worthy example to be solovved in using of
strangers 27. a What harms come and may come by the alteration (...) the
coin. 27. b That the substance and quantity is esteemed in coin and not the
name. 28. b That the necessity of mutual traffic and commodity of exchange
made coin to be devised. 29. a Why Gold and Silver were the stuff most
meetest for Coin to be stricken in. (...). (...) Why Gold and Silver are
esteemed (...) all other me^als. 30. a Why Silver and Gold were coined. 31. a
(...) br^e silver and gold were weighed before coin made. 31 a What loss
(...) of loss of ^edence. 31. b What do (...) bring us for our treasure and
chief commodity* 3^. a How our old coin may be t^nsported, and the (...) and
her (...). 32. a We (...) the (...) way (...), 32. b Why (...), 32. b Some
(...) by the (...) of the coin, 33. a Who (...) loss by the ^lteration of the
coin. 33. a Of (...) i^ app^ll. 33. b In (...), 34. b Of (...) in buildings.
35. a How the alteration of the (...) ^houlde b^e most loss to the Prince,
35. b Whether all our Woolle were expedient to be soulde over vnvv^ght. 36. b
Mysteri^ are to be increased rather then minished. 37. (...) Of (...) of
Mysteries. 3^. (...) One (...) out (...) treasure. 37. (...) Another spends
that they get in the same country again. 38. a The (...) sort brings in
^reasure, and therefore most to be chearished. 38. a Mysteries do in^iche
countries that be else barren. 38. b (...) with strangers are to be purchased
and kep^, 39. a Whether great Armies were as necessary here as in France. 39.
a A less grie^ would not be helped with a greater sore. 39. b The common
grieves. 40. b The table of the third dialogue.
The original cause in every thing is to be searched. 41. a Diverse sorts of
causes there be. 41. b How one thing is cause of the other and that of the
third. 42. a The strangers answer touching thi^ dearth. 42. b That the
alteration of the coin was the very cause of the dearth and consequently of
other griefs which follovved, 43. b How Enclosures might be remedied. 46. a
Of towns decayed. 47. b The occasion of the decay of towns. 48. a That art
is to be most cheri^ed in a town that brings most to the town. 49. a
Towns are enryched with some one trade. 49. a The occasion of sysmes in
matters of Religion, 51. a The (...) on the part of ^he ^aytye. 53. b How
these sysmes ^ight be remedied. 54. b The bishop of Rome is no indifferent man,
55. a
FINIS.
A Brief conceipte touching THE COMMON WEAL OF THIS REALM OF ENGLAND.
CONSIDERING THE diverse and sundry complaints of our countriemen in these our
da^es, touching the great alteration of this common wealth, with the compass
of these fewyeres lately past: I thought good at this time. to. set down such
probable discourse for the occasion hereof, as I have ^earde oftentimes uttered
by men of* (...) learning and deep judgment. And a^eit I am not one to whom
the consideration and reformation of the same does especially belong: yet
knowing my self to be a Member of the same Commonweal, and to further it by
all the ways that possibly I man: I cannot reckon and No man is a stranger to
the commo^weale he is in.
(...) my self a mere stranger to this inatter, no more than a man that were
(...) a Shi^pe, which being in danger of wrack might say, that, because he is
not (percase) the master or Pylate of the same, the danger thereof does
pertayne nothing at all to him. Therefore ha^inge ^owe suffycient leisure from
other (...), me thought, I could no^ apply my study to a better and the^ to
publish and make relation of such matters as I have heard thoroughly disputed
herein.

First, what thingee men are most grieved with, than, what should (...) the
occasion of the same: And that known how such (...) may be taken away, and
the state of the Common weal reformed again. And albeit ye might well ^ay,
that there be men of greater wits then I that have that matter in charge,
yet* Fools (as the Proverb is) sometimes speak to the purpose: and as many
heads, so many wits, and therefore Princes, though they be never so wise
themselves, (as our most excellent Prince is) yet the wiser that they be, the
more counselors they will have, (as our noble and gracious Queen does daily
make choice of more) for that, that one cannot perceive, another does discover:
the gifts of wits be so diverse, that some excelles in Memory, some in
Invention, some in Judgeme^t, some at (...) first sight ready. and some after
long consideration: and though each of these by them selves do not ^euerally
make per^t the matter, yet when every man bryngs in his gift, a mean witted
man may of all these (the best of every man's devise being gathered together)
make as it were a pleasant and perfect Garlonde to adorn and ^cke his head
with all. Therefore I would not only have learned Of many heads is gathered a
perfect counsel.
men, whose Judgments I would wyshe to be (...) ^steemed herein, but also
Merchant men, Husbandmen, and Artificers, which in their callinges are taken
wise, freely suffered, y^a, and (...) to tell their Aduyses in this matter. For
some (...) in their feats, they may disclose, that the wysest in a Realm
cannot unfold again. And it is a maxim, or a thing received as an
infaylible verity among all men, that every man is to be credited in That every
man is to be credited in his own Art.
that Art that he is most exercysed in. For did not Apelles that excellent
Paynter consider, y^ when he laid forth his fine Image of Venus to be seen of
every man y^ past by, to the intent he hearing every man's judgment in his own
Art might always amend that was a mysse in his work, whose Censures he
allowed so long as they kept them within their own Faculties, and took not
upon them to meddle with an other man's Art: so percase I may be answered as he
was, yet I refuse not that, if I pass my compass: but for as much as most of
this matter co^tayneth Policy, or good gouermnent of a co^onweale, being a
Member of Philosophy morale, wherein I have somewhat studied, I shall be so
bold with my countrymen: who I doubt not will construe-euery thing to the
best, as to utter my poor and s^mple co^teipt herein, which I have gathered
out of the talk of diverse and sundry notable men that I have hea^ de reason
on this matter: and though I should herein percase move some things that were
openly not to be touched, as in such cases of disceptacion is requisite, yet
having respect to what (...) they be spoken, I trust they can offend no man,
for hard were it to heal a soar that a man would not have opened to his
Physician, nor yet a surf^ that a man would Why the Book is made by way of
Dialogue.
not declare the occasion thereof. Therefore now to go to the matter, upon
(...) of your good acceptance, that kind of reasoning seems to (...) best
for boultinge ^ut of the truth, which is used by way of Dialogues, or
colloquyes, where reasons where made ^oo and froe, as well for the matter
intended as against it: I thought best to take that way in the discourse of
this matter, which is, first in recounting the common and v^niuersall grieves
y^ men complain on now a days, secondly in boulting out Thesu^me of the
whole Book.
the very causes and occasions of them, thirdlye, and finally in devising of
remedies for all the same. Therefore I will declare unto you what communication
a Knight had between him and certain other persons of late about this matter,
which because it happened between such persons, as were Members of every state
yt find themselves grieved now a days, I thought it not meet to be
forgotten to let you understand that y^ persons were these. A knight as I said
first, a Merchant man, a Doctor, a Husband man, and Crafts man. And first,
the Knight rehearsed y^ communication in this manner ensuing.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
Knight. AFter I and my Fellows the Justices of peace of this (...) had the
other day declared the Quen^s highness co^ission touching diverse matters, and
given the charge to (...): I ^eing does weary of the heat of the people and
(...) of the same, thought to (...) to ^ friends house of mine in the town
which selles Wine, to the intent (...) eat a ^orsell of meat, for I was then
fasting, taking with me an honest husbandma^, who^ for his honesty and good
discretion I loved very well: whether as we were come and had but ^kant sit
down (...) ^ close Parloure, there comes me in a Marchaunte man of that c^ty,
a man of estimation and substance* and requires the said Husbandman to go and
dyne with him, ^ay (quoth I) ^e will not I trust nowforsake my company, though
he should fare better with you.


Merchant. Than (quoth the merchant man) I will send home for a pa^y of
^enison that I have there and for a friend of mine and a neighbor that I had
bid to dinner, and we shall be so bold as to make merry, withal here, in your
company, and as for my guest he is no stranger unto you neither* And
therefore both he of youres, and you of his company, I trust will be the gladder.


Knight. Who is it.


Merchant. Doctor Pandotheus.


Knight. Is he so, on my faith he shall be heartely welcome, for of hi^ we sha^
have some good communication and wise, for he is noted a learned and a wise
man. And immediately y^ Merchant sendes for him, and he comes unto us, and
brings with him an honest man a Capper of the same town who came to speak
with the said Merchant, than after salutations had (as ye know the manner is)
between me and master (...), (...) of (...) which had been long before (...)
us, we sat all down, (...) when we (...) of out stomachs.


Doctor. On my ^ayth (quoth the Doctor) to me, ye make much ado, you that
(...) of (...) of (...) Country, (...), and in causing poor men to appear
before you and leaving their husbandry vnlookte to at (...).


Knight. Surely it is so. Yet the prince must ^e served and y^ co^monweale, for
God and y^ prince have not sent us the poor (...) that we have, but (...)
service therefore abroad among our Neighbors.


Doctor. It is well if ye take it so, for nature has graffed that persuasion
in you and all other that follows the clear light of Nature. As learned men
have remembered, saying, Plato. Cicero.
we be not borne only to our selves, but partly to the use of ou^ (...), of
(...), of our Kinsfolks, and partly of our Friends and Neighbors, and
therefore That men are not borne to themselves only.
all good virtues are graffed in us naturally, whose effects be to do good to
other, wherein we show forth the Image of God in Man, whose property is ever
to do good to other, and to distribute his goodness abroad like no Nygarde,
nor enuyous of any other creatures. As they rese^ble nothing of that godly
Image, so they study no common vtility of other, but only the conservation of
them selves and propagation of their own kind. Wherefore* if we look to be
reckned most unlike them being most vile, and lykest to God being ^ost
excellent, let us (...) to do good to other, not preferring the ease of this
Carcass which is like the Brute beasts, but rather the virtues of y^ mind
where^ we be like God him self.


Husband. Then (said y^ Husbandman) for all your pains (meaning by me) and all
ours also, I would ye ^ad never worse Commissions in hand than this is. So
we had lost more (...) works at our (...) than this.


Knight. Why so*


Husband. Mary for these (...) us ^ll, for they make us to pay dearer for our
land that we occupy, and causes that we can have no land in manner for our
money to Complaynt of Enclosures by Husbandmen
put to Tylla^, all is taken up for (...)* for Pasture* either for (...), or
(...) of Cattle, in so much that I have known of late ^ (...) ploughe^ within
less compass than (...) about me, laid down within this sene^ years: and
where threescore persons or upward had ^eir livings, now one man with his
Cattle has all, which thing is not the (...) cause of former (...): for by
these Enclosures many do* lack ^uings and be (...), and therefore for ^ery
necessity they are desiro^s of a change being in hope to come thereby to
somewhat, and well assured that how so ever it befall with them, it can be no
harder with them than it was before: more over all (...) are so dear that by
their day wages, they are not able to live.


Capper. I have well y^ experience thereof, for I am ^aine to give my
Iourneimen two pence in a day more than I was (...) to do, and yet they say
they cannot sufficiently live thereon. Complaynt of death of vittayle by
Artifice^s.
And I know for truth, that the best husband of them can save but little at the
years end, and by reason of such derth as ye speak of we that are
Artificers, are able to keep but few or no Prentizes like as we were wont to
do, and therefore Cities which were her^tofore well inhabyted and wealthy, (as
ye know every one of you) are now for lack of occupiers fallen to great
poverty and desolation.


Merchant. So be the most part of all y^ towns of England, London (...), and
no^ only the (...) are (...) decayed in their Howses, Walls, Streates, and
other buildings, but also the country in their high ways and Brydges,
Complaynt of towns by Marchauntm^ and of all other common ea^ementes.
for such poverty raygneth every where, that few men have so much to spare as
they may give any thing to y^ reparation of such ways, brydges, and other
co^mmon easements, and (...) there be many things laid down now which before
time were occasions of much expenses, as Maygames, Wakes, Revels, wages at
shootinge, wrestling, Many superflu ous charges laid down and yet never the
more plenty.
running, and throwing the stone, or bar, and besides that, Pardons,
Pylgrimages, Offerings, and many such other things, yet I perceive we be never
the wealthyer, but rather poorer: whereof it is long I cannot well tell, for
there is such a general dearth of al things as before. xx. or* xxx. years has
not ^ene the like, not only of things growing within this Realm, but also of
all other Marchaundize Dearth of out ward Marchaundize.
that we buy from beyond the Sea, as Sylkes, Wynes, Oils, Wood, Madder, Iron,
Steel, Wax, ^lare, ^ymencloth, (...), (...), Couerlets, Carpets, and all
^earfes, and Tapestry. Spyces of all sort and al ^aberdasher ware, as ^ayer
both white and brown, Glasses as well drinckinge, and looking as for glasinge
of Windows, (...), Needles, Knives, Daggers, ^ats, Cappes, Broches, Buttons,
and Laces. I wot well all these do cost now more by the third part than
they Dearth of all kind of vittayle.
did but few years ago: than all kind of Uittayle are as dear or deerer
again, and no cause of Gods part thereof as far as I can perceive, for I
never saw more plenty of Corn, grass, and Cattle of all sort than we have
at this present, and have had (as ye know) all these twenty years passed
continually, thanked be our Lord God: if these Enclosures were cause thereof,
or any other thing else, it were pity but they might be removed.


Knight. Since ye have plenty of all things, of Corn, and Cattle, (as ye
say) the^ it should not seem this ^arth shou^ be long of these Enclosures,
for it is not for scarceness of Corn y^ ye have this dearth (for thanked be
God) Corn That Inclosues be not the cause of this dearth.
is good cheap, and so has been these many years past continually. Than it
cannot be the occasion of the dearth of Cattle, for Enclosure is the thing
that nourishes most of any other: yet I confess there is a wonderful dearth
of all things, and that do I, and all men of my sort feel most grief in,
which have no way to sell, or occupation to live by, but only our lands. For
you all three (I ^eane) yo^ That Gentle^ (...) by this ^h.
my neighbor the husbandman, you master (...), and you goodman Capper, (...)
other Ar^rs may save your selves meetely well. Forasmuch as all things are
deerer then they were, so much do you arise in the price of your wares and
occupations that ye sell again. (...) ut we (...) nothing to sell whereby we
might ad^ce y^ (...) th^of, to counterualue those things that we (...)*


Husband. Yes, ye raise the price of your (...), and ye take Fermes also and
pastures to your hands, (which was (...) to be poor men's lyuings such as I
am) and have given over to live only upon your Lands.

On my soul ye say truth (quoth the (...)) and the Capper also said no less,
adding thereto that (...) was The complaint of (...) men against Gentle men for
^ing of (...).
never merry with poor Crafts men, since Gentlemen became Grasiers, for they
cannot now a days (said he) find their Prentizes and servants meat and
drink, but it cost them almost double as much as did before (...), where fore,
where many of mine occupation and other like, heretofore have dyed rych men,
and been able to leave honestly dehynde them for their Wife and Children, and
besides y^ leave some notable bequestes for some good deed, as to (...) making
of Brydges, and repayring of highwayes, all which things go to wrack now
every where. Also some were wont to buy Land either for to help the poor
beginners (...) occupations: yea, some time they had such (...) as they could
over such bequestes leave another Portion to find a prysle, or to found a
Chauntry in some parish The craftesmans co^playnt that he cannot set me^ a
work for the Dearth of victayle.
Church, and now we are skant able to live without debt, or to keep few
seruasits or no^^, except it be one Prentize or two. And therefore the
Journeymen what of our occupations, and what of Clothyers, and all other
occupations being forced to be without work, are y^ most part of these rude
people that makes these vprores abroad, to the great (...) not only of the
Queens highness but also of her people. And need as ye know has no booty.


Merchant. It is true, ye know likewise what other notable acts men of mine
occupation have done in this City. Before this ye know the hospital at the
town^s end, wherein the freemen deca^ed are releaued, how it was founded not
long (...) by one of our (...), (...) thereby y^ the ^y should be much
releaued, which then was in some decay, and yet it decays still every day
more and more, whereof it should be long, I ca^ot well tell.


Knight. ^yr, as I know it is true that ye complain not ^out cause, so it is
as true that I and my sort, I mean a^ The Gentleman's co^playnt how he cannot
keep like countenance as he was wont to do.
Gentlemen have as great yea and (...) greater cause to complain then any of
you have, (for as I said) now that the pry^es of things ar^ so risen of all
hands you may better line after your degree then we, for you may and do raise
the (...) of (...) wa^s, as the pri^es of ^tayles, and other your (...); and
(...) cannot we so much, for though (...) be true that of (...) as come to our
hands, ^ther (...), (...) by ^mination and ending of such ter^es of years, or
oth^ (...), that For mine (...) in (...)* I ^oe either (...) a better (...)
than of (...), or (...) the ren^ thereof, (...) thereto for (...) ^arge of ^y
^holde that is so increased over that it was, yet in all my life time I look
not that the third part of my land shall come to my disposition, that I may
enhaunce the rent of y^ same, but it shall be in men's holding either by leases or
by copy granted before my time, and still continuing, and yet like to continue
in the same state for the most part during my life, and percase my Sons: so
as we cannot raise all our wares as you may yours, and as me thinks it were
reason we did, and by reason that we cannot, so many of us Why Gentlemen do
give o^ their housholdes.
(as ye know) that have departed out of y^ country of late, have been driven
to give over our households, and to keep either a chamber in London, or to wait
on the Court uncalled, with a man and a Lackey after him, where he was wont to
keep half a score of clean men in his house, and xx. or xxiiii. other
persons besides every day in the week* and such of us as do ^yde in the
country still, ^not (...) two hundredth a year, keep that house that we might
have done with CC. marks but (...). years past. And (...) we are forced
either to minishe the third part of our household, or to raise the third part
of our revenues, and for that we cannot so do of our own lands that is
already Why Gentlemen do^ take Farms into their hands.
in the hands of other men, many of us are enforced either to keep pieces of
our own Lands when they fall in our own possession, or to purchase some
Farm of other men's lands, and to store it with sheep or some other cattle
to help to make up y^ decay of our (...), and to mainetayne our old e^ate
withal, and yet all is little enough.


Husband. Yea, those sheep is the cause of all these (...), for they have
driven hus^ out of the country, by y^ which was increased before all kind of
(...), and now all together Complaint against sheep.
sheep, sheep, sheep* It was far better when there were not only she^epe
enough, but also (...), (...), swyne, Pig, Goose* and Cayon, (...), (...)
Cheese: yea, and ^de (...), and (...) corn (...), reared all together upon the
same land.


Doctor. Then the Doctor y^ had leaned on his Elbowe all the while musing, sat
up and said, I perceive by you all three, that there is none of you but have
iu^ cause to complain.


Capper. No by my troth except it be you, men of y^ church, which travail
nothing for your lyuinge and yet have enough.


Doctor. Ye say troth in deed, we have least cause to co^p^ne: yet ye know
well, we be not so ple^tious as we have b^ne, The Doctors complaynt for men of
his calling.
the first fruits and tenthes are deducted of our livings, yet of the rest we
might live well enough, if we might have quietness of mind and conscience
withal. And albeit we labor not much with our bodies (as ye say) yet ye
know we labor with out minds, more to y^ weaking of y^ same, then by any other
bodily exercise we should do, as ye may well per ceiue by our c^plexions, how
wan our color is, how faint and sikely be our bodies, and all for lack of
bodily exercise.


Capper. Mary I would if I were of y^ Queens counsel, provide for you well a
fine, so as you should need taken no disease (...) against le^ed men.
for lack of exercise, I would set you to the Plough and Carte, for the
devil a whit of good (...) do with your studies, but set me^ together by the
Ears, some with this opinion and some with that, some holding this way, and
some an other, and y^ so stiffly as though the troth must be as they say that
have y^ upper hand in co^tencion, and this contencion is not also y^ least
cause of former vprores of y^ people, some holding of y^ one learning and some
of y^ other. In my mind it made no matter though we had no learned men at all.


Knight. God forbid neighbor that it should be so: how should the Prince have
(...) then: how should we have christian religion taught us: how should we know
y^ estates of other realms and have conference with them of al cou^tryes, except
it were through learning, and by y^ bene^t of Letters.


Doctor. Care not therefore goodma^ capper, ye shall have few ynoungh of
learned men ^in a while if this world hold on.


Capper. I mean not but I would have men to learn to write and read, yea and
to learn y^ la^guages used in countries about us y^ we might write our minds
to the^ and they to us, yea and y^ we might read y^ holy scriptures in our
mother tongue, and as for your preaching (except ye a gree better) it made no
matter how little we had of it, for of dyuersity thereof comes these
diversities of opinions,


Doctor. Then yes care for no other sciences at all, but the knowledge of
tongues, and to write and read, and so it appears well that ye be not alone
of that mind, for now a days when men sendes their sons to y^ Uniuersities
they suffer Why learning should be l^e to decay hereafter.
the^ no longer to tarry there, the^ they may have a little of the latin tongue,
and then they take them away and bestow the^ to be Clerks with some man of
Law or some Auditor, and Receyuer, or to be a Secretary with some great man or
other, and so to come to a living whereby the Uniuersities be in manner empti^d,
and as I think will be occasion that this Realm within a short space will be
made as empty of wise and pollitique men, and consequently barbarous, and at
the last thrall and subject to other Nations whereof we were Lords before.


Knight. God forbid that we that be Gen^emen should not with our policy in
war provide that we come not in sub iection of any other nation, and the
stoutnesse of English hearts will never suffer that, though there were no
learned men in the Realm at all.


Doctor. Well, an Empire or a Kingdom is not so much won, or kept by the
manhood and force of men, as it is by wisdom and policy, which is gotten
chiefly by learning: for Whether a co^monvveale (...) be well go (...)
without lear^.
we see in all kinds of governance for the most part, the wyser sort have
the soueraygnty over the rude and unlearned, as in every house the most expert,
in every City y^ wisest and most sage, and in every common weal the most
learned are most commonly placed to govern the rest, yea, among all nations of
the world they that be polytique and cyuile do master the rest though their
forces be inferior to the other. The Empyres of the Greeks and Romans do
declare that, among whom like as learning and wisdom That the learned have
alvvay the soue^ignty over the unlearned.
was most esteemed so the Empyres were spread widest, and longest did continue
of all other. And why should you think it straung that you might more be
vanquyshed than the other were before time that reckened themselves as stout
men as you be, yea dwellers of this realm, as y^ Saxons last were by the
Normands, and the Romans by the Saxons before that, and the Brytons by y^
Romans first of all.


Knight. There may be wise men enough though they be not learned. I have
known diverse me^ very wise and politic that know never a letter on the
book, and contrary wise as many other learned men that have been very Idots in
manner for any worldly policy that they had.


Doctor. I deny not that, but I say that if such wise men as ye speak of had
learning to their wits, they had been more excellent. And the other that ye
call so simple had be^e Whether a man may be wise without learning.
foolyshe if they had had no learning at all. Exercise in wars makes not
every man meet to be a Captain, though he travail in it never so long,
nor there is no other so apt for the war but with experience and use he is
made more perfect, for what makes old men commonly more wise than the younger
sort, but their greater experience.


Knight. Yea, experience helps much the wit of men I confess. But what does
learning thereto?


Doctor. If ye grant me that experience does help, then I doubt not but ye
will grant me a none that learning does also help much to the increase of
wisd^me: let yt then That lear^ng supplieth the (...) of (...), and that (...)
is (...) of Wisdom.
be set for a sure ground that experience does further wisdom, and take it as
it were y^ father of wisdom, and memory to be y^ mother. For like as
experience does beget wisdom as a father, so memory nourishes it as a mother,
for in vain should experience be had if y^ same were not kept in remembrance.
Then if I can show you that both experience and also memory are helped and
furthered by learning, then ye must needs grant me that learning furthers
wit and increases it, ye confess the experience of an old man makes him
wiser than the young, because he saw mo things then the other. But an old
man sees but only things of his own time, and the learned man sees not only
his own times experience, but also that be fell in a great many of his
ancestors, yea since the world began. Wherefore he must ne^des have more
experience then the unlearned man, of what great age so ever he be, the^ so
many cases as he sees in all that time to have happened could not so well be
remembered of any man, as it is kept in memory by wrytings, and then if the
unlearned man once forget the thing he saw, he never lightly remembers it
again, where as y^ learned man has his book always to call him to
remembrance of that he should else forget. Therefore as he that lives a
hundredth year must needs have more experience then he that lives fifty, so
he that sees the chances of the world as it were in a table painted before
him of a thousand years, must needs have greater experience then he that
lives but a hundredth. Also he that trauaileth many far Countries has more
experience than other of like age that never goes out of his native country.
So he that is learned sees by Cosmogragraphy hystories, and other learnings,
the right manner and ^age of every country in the world, yea of many more then
is possible for one man to travail through, and of these y^ he trauayleth much
better does he learn there by small tarying, then the other (by longer
experience) that are all together and wholly unlearned, and consequently more
wit, being in capacity and memory both else equipolent, and now I am forced to
consider the maruaylous gifts that we have by learning, that is, how learning
supplyeth unto man the greatest lack y^ some Writers have co^playned The
vvonderfull gifts that we have by learning.
of to be in man kind, that is y^ breuity of Age, the grossness and weight
of body: wherein the ^irts, diverse beasts as Hearts and many other, and in
the last all Birds do excel man, for where it is deemed man to live above a
hundredth years or there aboutes: by the benesite of learning he has the
commodity of y^ life of a thousand years, yea two or three thowsandes, by
reason he sees y^ events and occurrents of all y^ time by Books. And if he
should have lived him self by all that space then could he have had nothing
else to his commodity but that experience of things, the rest had been but
travail: which experience he has now by letters and without any travail in
manner at all, and without the dangers that he might him self have be^e in,
if he had lived by all that space. As to the other point, that we be not so
agill and light as fowls and Birds of the Air be of, as that we might stir
from on place to an other, we have the commodity through learning that we
should purchase by such Peregrinations, as well as we should if we might flee
from one Conatrey to another like Birds, and yet with less tra^ayle and
danger. May we not through Cosmography see the situation, temperature, and
qualities of every Country in the World, yea, better and with less travail
then if we might flee over them our selves: for that, that many other have
learned through their great trauayles, and dangers, they have left to us to be
learned with ease and pleasure. Ca^ we not also through the science of
Astronomy know the course of the Planettes above and their conjunctions and
Aspectes as certaynely as if we were among them? is surely that we may, for
tell me? how came all y^ learned men here to fore to the exact and perfect
knowledge thereof? came they not to it by co^fere^ce, and marking of
circu^sta^res (yes in dead) so yt out of their writings we learned it: and to
the knowledge whereof by sight only we could^ never attain though we were
as agile as any Bird. What is there else profitable or necessary for the (...)
of man's life here in earth, but in learning it is taught That there is no
fac^lty b^t is made more perfect by learning.
more perfectly and more co^pleat than any man can learn only by experience
all days of his life, no not so much as your Feate in war sir Knight, no nor
your Feate good. Husbandma^, but that either of them are so exactly taught and
set forth in learning, that neither of you both though, ye be never so
perfect in the said feats, but might learn many poyncts more than ever ye saw
before, by experience in either of them, as you sir Knight in Vigetius, and you
good Husbandman in Columella.


Knight. I say again, might we not have that in our Englysh tongue, and read
the^ over though we never went to schole.


Doctor. Yea well enough, and yet should ye be far from the perfect
understanding of the^, except ye had the help of other sciences, that is to
say, of Arithmatique in disposinge: and ordering your men, and Geomatry in
devising of Ingens How Caesar excelled all other captains by reason of his
great learning joined with his provvesse.
to win Towns, and Fortrasses, and of Brydges to pass over, in the which
Caesar excelled other by reason of the learning that he had in those sciences,
and did wonderful feats which an unlearned man could never have done, and if
ye had war over the Sea, how could ye^ know toward what Coasts ye be
sea driven without knowledge of the latitude of the plate by the Poole and y^
length by other stars, and you good husband for the perfection of the
knowledge of husbandry, had need of some knowledge in Astronomy, as under what
aspect of y^ Planets and in the entry of what sign, by the Sun and Moons it
is time to Care, to Dou^ge, to Sow, to reap, to Se^, to Graffe, to Cut your
Wood, your Timber: yea, to have some judgment of the Weather that is like to
come for Inning of your Corn, and Grass, and houseinge of your Cattle: yea,
of some part of Physic called Veterimaria, whereby ye might know the
dizeases of your Beasts and heal the^. Then for true measuring of land, had
ye not need of some knowledge in Gcomatry to be a perfect husband, Then for
building, what Carpenter or Mazon is so cunning or expert, but he might learn
more by readinge of Vitriuius and other writers of Architecture, that is to
say, the science of building, and to pass over y^ sciences of Log^cke and
Rethorique, whereof y^ first trauayleth about y^ discus^ of the true reason
from y^ false, the other about y^ persuasion of y^ is to be set forth to the
people, as a thing to them profitable and expedient, where of a good and
perfect counsaylor might want neither: well, tell me what ^sayle can be perfect,
what common weal can be well ordered vprighte, where none of the Rulers or
Counsaylors have studied any Philosophy, specially the part that teaches That
knowledge in moral philosophy is most necessary for a Counsallor.
of manners (the other part of philosophy I pass over now, which teaches of
natures and is called physic) what part of the common weal is neglected by
philosophy moral: does it not teach first how every man should govern
himself honestly. Secondly how he should guide his family wisely and
profitably. And thirdly, it shows how a City or a Realm, or any other
co^monweale should be well ordered and governed, both in time of peace, and
also war. What commonweal can be without either a Gouerner or Counsaylors
that should be expert in this kind of learning, this confirms the point
that we now talk of: if men expert in this Science were consulted and
followed, the common weal should be ordered as fewae should have cause to
complain: therefore said Plato that Plato.
divine Philosopher, that happy is that Commonweal where either y^ Prince is a
Philosopher, or where a Philosopher is the Prince.


Knight. I had weened before that there had been no other learning in the
world, but that these me^ had that be Doctors of Divinity, or of the Law, or
of Physic: whereof the first had all his cunning in Preaching, the second in
matters of y^ spiritual law, and the third in physic and in loking of
dizeased men's water, mary ye tell me now of many other sciences very necessary
for every common weal, which I never heard of before: but either there be few
of these Doctors that can skill of them, or else they disclose but little of
their cunning.


Doctor. Of truth there be to few of them that can skill of these sciences now
a days, and of those there be too few of them that are esteemed any thing the
more for their knowledge therein, or called for to any counsel. And therefore
other seeing these Sciences nothing esteemed or set by, they fall to those
sciences that they see in some price, as to Divinity, to the Law, and to
Physic: though they cannot be perfect What makes learned men to be so sevve.
in none of these without the knowledge of the sciences above touched, and
therefore it is ordained by Uniuersities, that first men should be Bachelors
and Masters of Arts, ere they should come to Divinity: and these Arts be the
seven liberal sciences, as Grammar, Logic, Rethoricke, Arithmatique,
Geomatry, Music, and Astronomy, and now they skip over them and fall to
Divinity by and by, before they have gotten or purchased them any Young
stu^ents be allvvales over hasty in uttering their judge ments.
judgment through thefore said sciences, which makes the^ to fall to these
dyuersities of Opinions that ye speak of: for all beginners in every science
be very quick, and over hasty in giving their judgment of things, (as
experience teaches every man) and the^, when they have once uttered their
judgments and opinions, they will see nothing y^ will ^ounde contrary to y^
same, but either they will construe it to their own pha^taste, or utterly deny
it to be of any authority. Pythagoras, Pythagoras co^ mau^ded ^le^ce to his
disciples for a time.
to his Scholars y^ came to learn his Profane sciences commanded silence for
seven years, that by all y^ space they should be hearers only, and no
reasoners: and in this Divine science every Boy that has not red scripture
past half a year, shall be suffered not only to reason and enquire of things
(for that were tolerable) but to affirm new and strange interpretacio^s
upon the same never heard of before. What end of Opinions can there be while
this is suffered. Also Plato forbad any man to Plato comanded that no man
ignorant in Geomatry should enter his school.
come to his school that was ignorant in Geomatry, and to this high school
of Dyuinity he that knows not his Grammar, much less any other science
shall be admitted at the first, I say not to learn, for that might be
suffered, but to judge: and there comes in the thing that the same Plato
says to be an only cause sufficient to over throw a whole Common weal
where it is used, that is, when they take on them the judgment of things to
whom it does not apertayne, as youth of things belonginge to What harm may
come if they be suffe^ed to judge in things to ^ho^ it does not appertain.
old men, children over their fathers, servant over their masters, and
private men over their Maiestrates: what Ship can be long sause from wrack
where every man will take upon him to be a Pylate: what house well governed,
where every servant will be a master and a teacher. I speak thus much of the
commendation of learning, not only because I heard my friend here (the
Capper) set little by learning, but also that I see many now a That it is not
learning (...) to know the tongues, and to write.
days of his Opinion, which care nothing for any other knowledge, but ^nely
that they may write and read, and learn y^ tongues: whom I can resemble well
to those men that esteems more the Ba^ke than the Tree, the Shale more then
the ^yrnell: wherefore they seem to take the bright Su^e from y^ Earth, that
would take away learning from us: for the same is no more necessary for the
increase of all things on earth, then is ^earninge for the increase of
Ciuility, Wisdom, and Policy among men. And as much as reasonable men does
excel all other creatures by y^ gift of Reason, so much excels a learned
man any other through the polishing and adorning of Reason by these Scyences.


Knight. Of my faith I am glad it was my chance to have you in ^y company at
this time, for of a wise man, a man may always learn. But me thought ye
said lately to my neighbor the Capper, that we should have learned men few
enough within a while if y^ world did continue. What meant ye thereby, and what
should be y^ cause thereof.


Doctor. I showed you all ready one great cause of the same: that was, where I
showed you that most men were of that opinion, that they thought learning
enough to write and read, Why learning should decay.
another cause is y^ they see no preferment ordered for learned men, nor yet
any honor or estimation given them like as has vene in time past. But rather
the contrary, y^ more learned, the more troubles, losses, and vexations they
come unto.


Knight. God forbid. How so?


Doctor. Mary have you not seen how many learned men have been put to trouble
of late within this xx. or xxx. years, and all for declaring their opinions in
things that have risen in controversy, have you not known when one Opinion
has been s^ ^orth, and who so ever said against that, were put to trouble: and
shortly after, when the contrary opinion was furthered and set forth, were not
the other that prospered before put to trouble for saying their minds against
this latter opinion: and so neither of both parties escaped but either first or
last he came to be hit, of whether side soever he were, except it were some
wetherwise fellows, that could change their opinions as y^ more and stronger
part did change theirs: and what were they that came to these troubles, the
singularest fellows of both parties for there came no other to the
concertacion of these things but such who seeing in steed of honor, and
preferment, dishonor, and hinderaunce, recompensed for a reward of learning:
will any either put his child to that science that may bring him no better
fruit than this? or what scholar shall have any courrage to study to come to
that end: the rarity of scholars, and solitude of the Uniuersities do declare
this to be truer then any man with speech can declare.


Merchant. Then I perceive every man ^deth himself grieved at this time, and
no man goes clear as far as I can perceive. The Gentleman that he cannot
live on his Lands That every (...) finds himself gree^ed.
only as his father did before: the Artifficers cannot set so many a work by
reason all manner of victayle is so dear: the Husbandman by reason his Land is
deerer rented then before: then we that be Marchaunts pay much deerer for every
thing that comes over sea: which great derth (I speak in comparison of
former times) has been always in a manner at a stay ever after that baseness
of our English Coin, which happened in the later years of King Henry the
eight.


Doctor. I doubt not but if any sort of men have licked themselves whole, ye
be the same: for what odds so ever there happen to be in exchange of things,
ye that be Marchaunts That Marchaunts best (...) themsel^ in every (...).
can espy it straight: for example, because ye touched somewhat of y^ Coin,
as loone as ever ye perceive the price of that enhaunsed, ye by and by what
was to be won therein beyond sea, raked all the old Coin for y^ most
part in the Realm, and found the means to have Of our old Coin (...) ^d.
it carried over, so as little was left behind within this Realm of such old
Coin in a very short space, which in my Opynion is a great cause of this
dearth y^ has been since of all things.


Knight. How can y^ be what makes it to the matter what sort of Coin we have
among our selves so it be current from one hand to another, yea if it were made
of Leather.


Doctor. Yea, so men commonly say, but the truth is contrary, as not only I
could prove by common reason, but also y^ proof and experience has already
declared the same: but now we do not reason of the causes of these griefs,
but what states of men be grieved in deed by this dearth of Whether it (...)
any (...) of (...) Coin be (...) of.
things, and albeit I hear every man sinde (...) self grieved by it in one
thing or other, yet considering y^ as many of them as have wares to sell, voe
enhaunse as much in y^ price of things that they sell, as was enhaunsed before
in the prices of things that they must buy: as the Merchant if he buy dear
he will sell dear aga^: so these Arti^cers, as Cappers, (...), ^homakers, and
Fa^mers have respect large enough in s^ge their wares to the price of v^tayle,
^ooll, and Iron, which they buy, I have seen a Cap for xiiii. pe^ce as good as
I can get now for it. shillings six pence: of cloth ye have heard how the
price is risen. Now a pair of shoes cost twelve pence, yet in my time I have
bought a better for six pe^ce. Now I can get never a horse shooed under ten
pence or twelve pence, where I have als^ne the common price was six pence. I
cannot therefore understand that these men have greatest grief by this common
and universal dearth, but rather such as have their Lyuinges and Stypendes
rated What men are most (...) by (...) ^o^mon ^th.
at a certaynty, as common Laborers at eight pence a day, I ourneymen of all
occupations, serving men to forty shy^ngs a year: and (...) whose lands are
set out by them and their Ancestors, either for lives or for term of years,
so as they cannot enhaunce y^ rents thereof though they would, and yet have the
price enhaunsed to them of e^ry thing that they buy. Yea, the Prince of whom
we speak nothing of all this while, as she has most of yearly That (...)
Pr^nce h^th (...) by (...) c^mmon ^th.
R^newes and that certain, so should she have most loss by this dearth, and
by the alteration specially of the Coin, for like as a man that has a great
number of ser^ts under him if he wou^d grasit that they should pay him pinnes
weekly, where before they paid him pence, I think he should be most looser
himself: so we be all but gatherers for the Prince, and of that which
comes to us, we have but every man a poor living, the clear gaynes
comes for the most part to the Prince, now if her highness do take of us the
overplus of our gettinges in th^s base Coin, I report me to you wether y^
will go as far as good Money in y^ Provision of necessaries for her self and
the Realm. I think plainly no, for though her grace might within this realm
have things at her own price, as her grace cannot in deed without great
grudge of her Majesty's subjects, yea since her Majesty must have from beyond
the Seas many things necessary, not only for her graces household, and
Ornaments as well of her person What danger should it be to the Realm if the
Prince should want (...) in time ^f need.
and family, as of her horses which percase might be by her Grace somewhat
moderated: but also for the furniture of her wars, which by no means can be
spared, as Armor of all kinds, Art^llary, Ankers, Cables, Pitch, Carre, Iron,
Steel, (yea, I judge farther) some Handgunnes, Gunne powlder, and many other
things more than I can reckon, which her Grace sometimes does buy from beyond
the Seas, at the prices that the strangers will set them at: I pass over y^
enhaunsment of y^ charges of her Graces household which is common to her Grace
withal other noble men, therefore (I say) her Majesty should have most loss
by this common dearth of all other: and not only loss, but danger to the
Realm and all her subjects, if her Grace should want ^reasure to purchase the
said Provision and necessaries for war, or to find Soldiers in time of
need, which passes all y^ other private losses that we speak of.


Capper. We here say that the Queens Maiestyes mint makes up her losses
that way, by the gaynes which she has by the Mint another way, and if that be
to short she supplieth that lack by Subsidies, and impositions of her
Subjects, so as her Grace can have no lack, so long as her Subjects has it.


Doctor. Ye say well there, so long as the Subjects have it, so it is meet
the Queen should have as long as they have it: but what and they have it not,
for they cannot have it, How the Queen: Maie^y cannot (...) when her
sub^ects h^e none.
when there is no Treasure left within the Realm, and as touching the Mint,
I coumpt that profit much like, as if a man would take his wood up by the
rote to make the more profit thereof at one time, and ever after to lose y^
profit that might grow thereof yearly: or to pull y^ wool of his sheep by
the root, and as for the Subsidies, how To what profit the new Mint is like.
can they be large when the Subjects have little to depart with: and yet y^ way
of gathering treasure is not always most saufe for the Princes suerty: and we
see many times the profits of such Subsidies spent in the appeasing of the
people that are moved to sedition, partly by occasion of the same.


Knight. Now that it was our chance to me^te with so wise a man as ye be,
Master Doctor. I would we did go thorough with y^ whole discourse of this
matter, and as hitherto we have ensearched the very sores, and grieves that
every man feels: so to try out the (...) of them, and y^ causes once known,
the remedy of them might be soon appa rent and though we be not the men that
can reform them, yet percase some of us may come in place where we may
advertise other of the same that might further and help forward the redress
of these things.


Doctor, A Gods name I am content to bestow this day to satisfy your
pleasures, and though this communication (percase) should do no great good,
yet it can do no harm I trust, nor offend no man, s^h it is had be^weene us
here a part and in good manner.


Knight. No, what man should be angry with him that were in an house, and
espied some fault in the Beams, or Rafters of the same, and would ensearch y^
defa^lt and then certify the good man of the house thereof or some other dwell
A recapitulation of the common grief^.
ling therein, as well for his own sauegarde as for others: but for as much as
we have thus far prooceeded as to y^ findinge out of the griefs, which as
far as I perceive stands in these poyncts (that is to say) dearth of all
things in comparison of the former age, though there be scarsenes of nothing,
desolation of Cou^tryes by Enclosures, desolacion of ^wnes for lack of
occupations, and Crafts: and (...) of Opinions in matters of Religion, which
h^leth men, to and fro, and makes them to contend one against another. Now
let us go to the Garden under the Uyne, where having a good fresh and cool
sitting for us, in the shadow, there we may proceed further on this m^tter
atleasure. And I will be speak our Supper here with mine host that we may
all suppe together. A Gods name (quoth every one of the rest of the company)
for we are weary here of sitting so long. And so we all departed to the
Garden.


THE SECOND DIAalogue, wherein the causes or occasions of the said griefs are
increased.
Knight. WHen we had walked up and down in y^ said Garden a pretty while, I
thought long till I had heard more of the said Doctors communication, for he
seemed to me a very wise man, not after y^ common sort of these Clarks which
can talk nothing but of the faculty that they profess: as if they (...)
Deu^es, of divinity: Lawyers of y^ law: and Physicians of (...) one^y: this
man spoke very naturally of every thing, as a man v^iuersally seen that had
joined good learning with good wit, and therefore I desired him and the rest of
our said companions to resort again to the matter that we left at, and
first to discourse and search out what should be y^ causes of the said common
and universal dearth of all things (in comparison of y^ former age) saying to
y^ Doctor thus. That it is a m^ruaylous Dearth that comes in time of plenty.
I maruayle much master Doctor what should be y^ cause of this dearth, seeing
all things are (thanks be to God) so plentyfull. There was never more plenty
of Cattle the^ there is now of all sorts. And yet it is scarsity of things
which commonly makes dearth: this is a maruaylous dearth, that in such plenty
comes contrary to his kind.


Doctor. Sir it is (no doubt) a thing to be mused upon, and worthy of
Inquisition: let me hear every one of your opinions, and than ye shall hear
mine.


Husband. I think it is long of you Gentlemen, that this dearth (...), by
rea^ ye enha^e your lands to such a heyght The occasion of this dearth is
laid to the Gentlemen.
as men that lives thereon must needs sell dear again, or else they were
never able to make their Rent.


Knight. And I say it is long of you Husbandmen, that we are forced to raise
our Rents by reason we must buy so dear all things that we have of you, as
Corn, Cattle, Gorse, From the Ge^tlemen it is laid to the Husbandmen.
Pig, Cap^, Chiken, Butter, and Eggs. What thing is there of all these but
that ye sell it now deerer by the one half then ye did within these xxx.
years? cannot you neighbor remember that within these xxx. years I could in
this town buy the best Pig or Goose that I could lay my hand on for four
(...), which now costeth tweluepe^ce, a good Capon for threepence, or
fourepence, a Chiken for i. d. a Hen for ii. d. which now costeth me double
and triple y^ money? it is likewise in greater ware, as Biefe and Mutte^.


Husband. I g^aunt that, but I say you and your sort, men of lands ^re y^
^rst cause her^of by reason you raise your lands.


Knight. Well, if ye and your sort will agree thereto, that shall be helped,
under take that you and your sort will sell al things at the price ye did
xxx. years ago, and I doubt not to bring all (...) vn^ you their ^andes at
the ren^ they (...). years past* and that (...) fault is more in you that be
Husbandmen then in us that ^ee Gentlemen, it appears by this, all the lands
of the Realm is not enhaunsed, for some have takings therein, as Leases, or
Copies The Gentlemen's ex^se and reasonable offer.
not yet expyred, which cannot (...) enhaunsed though y^ owners would, and some
Noblemen and Gentlemen there be, that when their lands be at their
disposition, yet they will enhaunse nothing above the old rent, so as a
great part of the lands of the ^ealme stand yet at the old rent: and yet
never the less there is none of your sort at all, but sells all things they
have deerer then they were wont to do by the one half. And yet these
G^ntlemen that do en^ their rentes, do not enhaunse it generally to the
double though I confess that some of us that had (...) either given us by the
Kings highness, y^ belonged heretofore to Abbeyes, and Priories, and were
never surueyed to y^ utter ^ost before: or otherwise descended to us, have
enhaunsed any of them above the old rent* yet all y^ (...) teth not to half
the lands of the Realm.


Doctor. How say ye? he says well to you now: will ye sell your wares as
ye were* wont to do, and he * will let you have his land at the rent ye
were accustomed to have it. When the Husbandman had pawsed a while, he said.


Husband. If I had the price of every thing that I must pay for besides,
likewise brought down, I could be content: else not.


Doctor. What things be those?


Husband. Mary, Iron for my Plough, Harrowes, and Carts: tar for our sheep:
shoes, cappes, linen and woollen clat^ The husbandman refuses and puts
over the fault to Iron Mong^, and clothiers.
for my meany, which if I should buy nevertheless as ^re as I do now, and yet
sell my wares good cheap, though my rent were thereafter abated, except the
other things aforesaid might he abated in price to gether, I could never live.


Doctor. Then I perceive ye* (...) y^ (...) of other* things qualified as well
as the rent of ^r land, ere ye (...) aford your ware good cheap.


Husband. Yea, (but sir) I think if the land were brought down that the price
of all things would fall withal.


Doctor. Grauut that all the Landlords in this realm would^ withone assent
agree that their lands should be in their ^naunts hands, at like rent as
they were at xxx. years ago: ye said before ye could not yet sell your
wares as good cheap as ye might xx. years past, because of the price that
is raised in other things that ye must buy: and if ye would say that those
men should be driven again to sell those wares that ye buy, first better
cheap, and then ye will sell youres thereafter. I pray you how might they be
(...) to (...): (...) be (...), (...) within If all Land^ ^vere abated in their
re^t, whether this does would be remedied.
obedience of our so^ Lady, that (...) sell such wares, as Iron, Car^e, Flax,
and other: then consider me, if ye ^not so compel them, whether it were
exuedient for us (...) suffer (...) to (...) their (...), and we ours good,
(...): if it were so* than it were a great That it were not, expedient that
strangers should sell dear and we ours good cheap.
^ything of other cou^treyes, and unpouerishinge of our own, for they should
have much Treasure for theirs, and have our commodities from us for a very
little: except ye could devise to make one price of pur commodities among ^ur
ielues, and another outwardes, which I cannot see how it may be.


Knight. Nay, I will make my Neighbor beer, another reasonable offer, if he
refuse this: let my Cenauntes rent bee^ A another offer of the Gentleman made to
the Husbandman.
^eased as your payment* is increased, after the rate and yet I am ^ed.


Husband. What mean ye by that?


Knight. I mean this, ye sell that ye were wont to sell a foretime for xx.
grotes, now for xxx. let my rent be increased after that proportion and rate
that is foreuery xx. groots of old rent x* shillings, and so as the price of
your wares (...), and yet I do but keep my land at y^ old stent.


Husband. My bargayne was to pay for my hold, but vi. pounds xiii.
shillinges, iiii. d. yearly of rent, and I pay that truly, ye can require no
more of me.


Knight. I cannot much say against that, but yet I perceive I shall be still a
loser by that bargayne though I cannot tell y^ reason why: but I perceive ye
sell deerer that ye live on, and I good cheap that which is my living: help
me Master Doctor I pray you, for the Hushandman drives me to the Wall.


Doctor. Mary but me thinks touching y^ matter ye did reason of, ye drove
him to his shifts, that is, to confess that this dearth ryseth not at your
hand. And though he do defend him self for his payment to you by color of a
law, yet he seems to co^nfesse thus much, that the law compels you to
take little for your land, and that there is no law to restrain him, but he
may sell his wares as det^s* he le^eth: it is enough for our purpose that ye
took in hand to prove that this dearth rose (...) first at your hand, Whether
if the Husbandman were forced to abate the prices of his stuff this dearth
should be the^ mended.
but whether the pryces of things increasing as they do* it were reason ye
did raise your wares (which is* your land) or to be paid after the old
rate: when ye did set your land, if ye be compelled to pay for yo^ provision
after the new rate, we will talk of that here after, or let y^ to be
considered of other wise men: but now let us see if the Husbandman were forced
to sell his things good cheap whether all things should be well then. Our
English Coin being supposed to be base, and of no such estimation in other
countries as within our own Realm (as for the most part it has been) before
that it was restored by our noble Prince which now raygneth: put y^ case this,
y^ this husbandman should be commanded to sell his wheat at viii. d. the
bushel, ^ye at vi. d. Bareley at iiii. d. his pig and goose at iiii. d. his
capon at iiii. d. his (...) at (...) h^s Wool at a mark the Todde, (...) and
(...) after the old pryces as in time past have been: he has then enough to
pay his Landlord, as he had in time past: his Landlorde again has as much
^ent as he was wont to have: and the same when the price is so set, will go
as far for the said wares, whereof y^ pryces be thus set as so much of old
Coin, pa^de after the old wont would have done: all this is yet well, here
is yet neither Lord, nor ^naunt grieved: well let us go farther, the
Husbandman must buy Iron, Salt, Tar, Pitch, and suppose he should be also
forced to rear up Flax on his own, and that (...) of cloth both Linen, and
Woollen, and Leather were set after the rate. The Gentleman must buy Wynes,
Spices, Silks, (...), Glass to glase his house withal* Iron also for Tools,
Weapons, and other Instruments necessary, as Salt, Oils, and many other
diverse things; more then I (...) without (...): whereof they may in (...)
wise want, as Iron, and Salt, for of y^ which is within (...) of both, is not
half su^ for the same: (...), (...), Pitch, and Rozyn, whereof* we have none
at all, and without some other of the said commodities we could live but,
grossly* and Barbarously, as without (...), Spyces, and Silks, these must be
brought (...) the S^as, shall we buy them as good cheap after the (...)? A
man would th^ke yes, for when strangers should see that with less money then
they were wont to take for these wares, they may buy as much of the commodities
of this realm as they were w^e before with more money* they will be (...) to
take the less money when it* goes as far as y^ more went before, and so
sell their wares as good cheap: (as for an example) if they sell now a yard
of ^luet for xx. s. or xxii. s. and pays that for a ^odde of Wool, were it
not as good for the^ then to sell their Ueluet at a mark (...) yard, so the
(...) ^dde of ^ooll for a mark?


Knight. I would think so, for thereby he should be at no more loss then he
is now. And so the like reason may serve for Iron, Wynes, Salt, Spice, Oils,
Pitch, Carre, flexe, Wax, and all other out^arde commodities.


Doctor. If I should ask* you this (...), whether they should be compelled by
a law to sill their wares so or no: what could ye say?


Knight. It makes no matter whether it were so or no, and I think they cannot,
because theybe out of the Princes Dominion, and at liberty, whetherthey will
^ing any thing to us or no, but seeinge they may have all (...), as good
cheap at tha^ pr^e* they sell for less money, as they had before for the
greater ^ice they will willingly bring their (...) and sell them so.


Doctor. Thereof I doubt, upon the former supp^ion of ou^ (...) Coin, for ^
think they would sell still at the highest as they do now, or bring nothing
at all to us. For ye must The strangers will take but money curra^t every
where ^or their vvare hat they have on their charge
understand they come not always for our co^mo^ities, but so^etimes to fell
theirs here, (...) it here took (...) vendible and to buy in other co^es
other com^dities where the same is best ^heape, and some times to s^ll in one
part of the Realm their wares that be there most de^red, and to go to some
other part of the realm for the commodities that (...) there most abundaunt
and best cheape^or partly of our Country and partly of another, and for y^
purpose Come vn^uersally current is most co^modtous, specially if they ente^d
to bestow it in any other place, the^ where they were vnlade^ of their
marchau^dize. Now if our coin were not so allowed in other places as it is
here, the strafiger should be at greater losses, if he should take our coin
for his wares, he had ^auer bring his wares to other places, where he might
have Coin current in all places for it, that he might bestow where and when
he list. If they would look but for our wares for theirs, think ye that
they would not (...) to bring to us such wares or (...) should be best cheap
with them, and most dear with us.


Knight. Yea no doubt, that is the polisie of all Marchaunts.


Doctor. What stuff is that trow you?


Knight. Mary Glasses of all sort, painted Clothes, and Papers, Orenges,
Pippens, (...), perfumed Gloves, and such like try^es.


Doctor. Ye say well, they will percase attempt us with such, and such things
as are good cheap with them, it co^th but That strangers and all (...) bring
things that be ^est cheap to the^ and dearest with us.
their labors only and their peoples, which else should be idle, yet these
things be some what after the price in other places v^ndible as well as here.
But when we feel the lack of Iron, Steel, Salt, Hemp, Flax, and such
other, such light wares as ye speak of will not be desired here, but
rei^cted, and these other looked for: what other things else will they bring
trow you?


Knight. Percase ye mean, Silks, Wynes, and Spy^s?


Doctor. No not that, for those be in good price else where.


Knight. that then should they have to utter to us, that is best cheap with
them and dearest with us?


Doctor. Brass, for it should go with them but for Brass in deed, and
therefore good cheap, and here with us a great part for Silver, and therefore
dear with us, and y^ they would bring unto us.


Knight. How, in brass Pots, Pans, and other Uessel of brass?


Doctor. Not so: no man would take such Stuff but for Brass in deed.


Knight. How then? Then the Doctor told me, that it was in Coin made beyond
sea like in all things to our Coin, which they brought over in heaps, and
when they see that Doctor.
esteemed here as silver, they bring that for our commodities, as, for our
Woo^es, felles, Cheese, butter, ^loth, Tin, and Led, which thing every man
will be glad to ^ell for the most they can get: and being offered of
strangers mo^e of our Coin then they may get within the cou^ trey, they will
sell them to strangers rather then us with whom the price is set: then
straunge^s may aforde y^ Coin good cheap, for they make it them selves, and
the Stuff is good cheap that they make it of, and so they will geeue thereof
for our said commodities as much as yes will ask. Then though they made not
such Coin themselves, yet seeing they must pay more for our wares, or else no
man would bring them to them, when he may have as much at ^ome of his
neighbors, the strangers must needs have a consideration of that in the
price of y^ said outwa^de marchau^dize that they sell, and also hold them
dcerer. And thus by the one way they may exhaust our chief commodities, and
gieue us brass for them, where with we cannot buy such other like necessary
commodities again, as we should want if they were not plenty within our
Realm. Much li^e the exchange that Homer says Glaucus made with Glauci and
(...) perm^tatio^.
Diomedes, when he gave to this man his golden Harness for Brazen. But y^
other way they must needs be brought to sell their w^res deerer to us, and
then if this husbandman and Ge^tleman, and so all other within this realm
should be compeiled to sell their things good cheap, and He that s^lles good
cheap and (...) dear s^ll not lightly (...).
yet buy all things dear that comes from beyond the Sea: I cannot see how
they should long prosper, for I never knew him that bought (...) soulde good
cheap, and use it any long space, to thrive*


Knight. There may be searchers made for such Coyners as ye speak of coming
in, and punishments devised therefore, and for going forth of ^ictayles also,
that none shall pass this Realm.


Doctor. There may be no ^euise imagined so strong, but that ye may be
deceived in both those points, as well in such coin brought in, as in victailes
carried forth: for many heads will devise many ways to get any thing by, and
though we be enuyroened with a good Poole (that is the Sea) yet there It is
not possible to keep our Treasure from going forth of the Realm, if it be in
m^re esti mation el^ where.
is to many Posterns of it to get out and in, unawares of y^ master. Whosoever
has but a pretty house with any Family of his own, and but one Gate to go
forth and come in at, and the master of y^ house never so attentive, yet
somewhat shall be purloined forth, much more out of such a larg Realm as this
is, having so many ways and Posterns to go forth at and come in. And yet if
strangers should be content to take but our wares for theirs, what should
let them to advance y^ prices of their wares, though ours were good cheap
unto them, and then shall we be still losers and they at the winning hand with
us, while they sell dear and buy good cheap, and consequently enrych
themselves and impouerishe us. Yet had I leauer aduau^ce our wares in price as
they advance theirs (as we now do) though some be loosers thereby, but
yet not so many as should be the other way. And yet, what business should
there be in making of prices of every trifle, for so it would be, if the price
of any one things be a bate^ by co^ma^ment: That the death ^ose neither at the
Gentleman (...) Husband^ h^d.
and therefore I cannot perceive that it may be remedied by either of you both
(I mean you Gentleman, and you good hus^andma^) for if it rose at either of
your hands, so it might be remedied like wise at the same, by (...) the thing
again at either of your hands that was y^ cause of this dearth. But if either
you should relea^ your rent, or you the price of your ^ictayle to the old
rate, yet that couldenot compel ^raungers to bring down the price of
Permutation of things b^ fore Coin.
theirs as I have said: and so long as their commodities be dear, it were
neither expedient nor yet ^ould y^e though ye would: make your commodities
g^d cheap (except ye can devise away how t^ live without them and they with
out you) which I think unpossible: or else to use exchau^ge of ware for ware
without Coin (as it was before Coin was found) as I read in the time of
Homer it was, and also the Civil law both affirm y^ same, which were very
combersome, and would require much carriage of ware up and down, where now by
the benefit of Coin a man may by those tokens fetch the wares that he lacks
a far of, without great trouble of carriage: and hard were it readily to find
all wares that the oue has to pay the other, of equal value.


Husband. ^f neither the Gentleman nor I may remedy this matter at whose hands
lies it to be helped then?


Doctor. I will tell my mind therein he ereafter, but first let us boulte out
y^ cause of this Dearth. And therefore let me learn, what other thing should
be the cause thereof.


Capper. Mary these Enclosures, and great Pastures are a great cause of the
same. Whereby men do tur^e the erable land being a living for diverse poor men
before time, now t^ Complaynt against ^pemaisters
one man's hand, and where both Corn of all sort, and also cattle of all
kinds were reared aforetime, now there is nothing but only sheep. And in
steed of C. or CC. persons that had their living thereon, now be there but
three or four Sheepherds and the Master only that has a living thereof.


Doctor. Ye touch a matter that is much to be considered, albe^ I take not
that to be only y^ cause of this dearth at this time; but this I think in my
mind, that if that kind of enclosing (...) as much incr^ase in xxx. eyares to
come, as it has done in xxx. years past, it may come to y^ great desolation
That Enclosures is the occasion of desolation and vveaking the power of the
Realm.
and weaking of the strength of this realm, which is more to be feared the^
dearth, and I think it to be y^ most oc^ of any thing ye spoke yet, of these
wild and unhappy vprores y^ has been among us: for by reason of these
Enclosures many Subjects have no Ground to live upon, as they had before
time, and occupations be not always set a work all a like, and therefore the
people still increasinge, and their ^ings di^inishing, it must needs com^ to
pass that a great part of y^ people shall be idle (...) lack living, for
hsiger is a bitter thing to bear. Wherefore they must needs when they lack,
murmur again them y^ have plenty, and so stir these tumultes.


Knight. Experience should seem to prove plainly that Enclosures should be
profitable and not hurtful to the common weal: for we see y^ countries where
most Inclosiers be are Quod in co^^ni possidetur ab om nibus negligitur.
most wealthy, as Essex, Kent, North Damptonshyre. etc. And I have heard a
C^ilion once say, that it was taken for a Maxim in his law (this saying) that
which is possessed of many in common is neglected of all, and experience
shows that ^enaunts in common be not so good husbands as Reasons to de* (...)
when every man has his part in seueralty, also I have heard say that in the
most countries beyond y^ Sea, they know not what a common ground means.


Doctor. I mean not of all Enclosures, nor yet ail co^ins, but only of such
Enclosures as turns common and erable ^elds into pasture, and violent
Enclosures of commins without What kind of Enclosures is hur^ull.
just recompense of them that have right to common therein: for if land were
severally enclosed to the ^tent to continewe husbandry thereon, and every m^n
that h^th right to commen had for his portion a piece of y^ same to himself
enclosed, I think no harm but rather good should come thereof, if every man
did agree ther^to: but yet it would not be sodaynely done, for there be many
poor cottages in England, which having no lands of their ow^ to live one, but
their handy labor and some refreshinge upon y^ said co^mens, which if they
were sodaynely thrust out from that commodity, might make a great (...) and a
disorder in the commonweal, and percase also if men were suffered to enclose
their grounds under the pretense to keep it still in tillage, within a while
after they would turn all to Pasture, as we see they do now, too fast.


Knight. If they find more profit thereby then otherwise, why should they not*


Doctor* I can tell why they should not welynough, for they may Wh^her that wh^h
is p^ble to one may be pro^ble to all o there if they use the same (...).
not purchase themselves profit by y^ which may be hurtful to other: but how
to bring them y^ they would not so do, is all the matter, for so long as they
find more profit by pasture then by tillage, they will still enclose and turn
erable land to pastures. (quod the Knight.


Knight. That well may be restrained by laws, if it were thought most
profitable for y^ common weal, but all men do not agree to that point.


Doctor. I wot well they do not, and therefore it were hard to make a law
there^: so many as have profit by that matter resisting it. And if such a law
were made, yet men studying still of there most profit, would defraud the law
by one mean or other.


Knight. I have heard oftentimes much reasoning in this matter and some in
maintenau^ce of these Enclosures would make this reason, every man is a Member
of the co^monweale, and that, which is profitable to one man may be profitable
to another, if he would exercise the same feate. Therefore that which is
profitable to me and so to another, may be profitable to all, and so to y^
whole co^monweale: as a great Mass of Treasure consists of many pence, and
one penny added to another and so to the third and fourth etc. makes up a
great sum, so does each man added one to another make up the whole body of a
commonweal.


Doctor. That reason is good adding some what more to it, true it is, that, y^
thing which is profitable to each man by himself, so it be not preiudiall to
any other, is profitable to y^ whole commonweal, and not otherwise, or else
stealing or robbing which percase is profitable to some men, were pro fitable
to the commonweal, which no man will admit, but this feate of inclosinge is so,
y^ where it is profitable to one man it is preiudi^all to many, therefore I
think that reason sufficiently answered.


Knight. Also they will lay forth another Reason, saying, that, y^ which is
our own commodity should be always advanced as much as might be, and these
sheep profit is one of the greatest commodity we have, therefore it ought to
be advanced as high as it may be.


Doctor. I could answer that argument with the like reason as I did the
other: true it is, we ought to advance our own commodity as much as we can,
so it be not to as much Every commodity must be advanced so as it be not
prejudicial to other greater commodities.
more the hinderaunce of our other commodities. Or else where as the breed of
Coneyes, Dear, and luch like is a commodity of this Realm. Yet if we should
^urne all our erable ground to nourishe that commodity, and give up the Plough
and all other commodities for it, it were a great folly.


Knight. They will say again, that all Grounds be not meet for sheep.


Doctor. It is a very ill Ground but either it serves to breed sheep, or to
feed them upon: and if all that is meet either for the one, were turned to the
mayntenaunce of Sheep and none other thing, where shall we have our other
commodities grow*


Knight. All cannot do so, though some do.


Doctor. What should let the^ all to do y^ which they see some do, yea what
should better encourage them thereto, the^ to see the^ that do it be come
notable rich men in short the by y^ doing thereof. And the^ if every man
should do so one following the example of another, what should ensue thereof
but a mere solitude and utter desolation of the whole realm: furnished only
with Sheep, and Sheepherdes in st^ede of good men: where by it might be a pray
to the enemies y^ first would set upon it, for then the sheep Masters and
their Sheepherds could make no resistaunce to the contrary.


Knight. Who can let them to make their most advantage of y^ which is their
own*


Doctor. Yes mary men may not use their own things to the damage of the
commonweal: yet for all this that I see, it is a thing most necessary to be
provided for, yet I cannot No m^n may abuse his own things to the prejudice of
the common* weal.
perceive it should be the only cause of this dearth, for this Inclosinge and
great grasinge if it were occasion of that dearth of any thing* it must be of
Corn thiefly, and now these many years past we had Corn good cheap enough.
And the dearth y^ was then most, was of cattell^ Biefes and Muttons, and the
brood of these are rather increased then diminished by Pastures and
inclosinges.


Knight. Why should men be then so much offended with these Enclosures.


Doctor. Yes and not without great cause, for though these many years past
through the great bounty of God, we have had much plenty of Corn whereby it
ha^h been good cheap* one Acer bearing as much ^orne as two mos^ commonly were
wont to do: yet if these year^s had chaunsed to be but meanly fruitful of
Corn (no doubt) we should have had as great dearth of Corn as we had of other
things. And then it had been in a manner an undoing of the ^oore Commens. And
if hereafter there should chance any ba^n years of Corn to fall, we should
be assuered to find as great extremity in the price of Corn from y^ it was
wont to be, as we find now in the prices of other victayle. And specially if
we have not enough to serve within y^ Realm which may happen hereafter more
likely then in time past, by reason that there is much land since turned to
pasture, for every man will seek where most advantage is, and they see there
is most aduau^tage in grasing and breeding, then in husbandry and tillage by a
great deal. And so long as it is so, the Pasture shall never incroch upon
tillage for all the laws that ever can be made to the contrary.


Knight. And how think ye that this might be remedied then?


Doctor. To make the profit of the plough to be as good, rate for rate, as the
profit of the Grasier and sheep master is.


Knight, How could that be done?


Doctor. Mary I conjecture two manner of way^s, but I fear me the devises
shall seem at the first blush so displeasaunt How Inclosiers may be remedied
without constraint of laws.
unto you ere ye consider it thoroughly, that ye will reject them ere ye
examyne the^: for we talk now, to have things good cheap: and then if I
should mention a mean y^ should make some things deerer for the time I should
be a none rejected, as a man y^ spoke against every man's purpose.


Knight. Yet say your mind and spare not, and though your reason at the first
seem unreasonable, yet we will hear whether ye can bring it to any
reasonable end.


Doctor. Remember what we have in hand to treat of, not how the prices of
things only may be brought down: but how these Enclosures may be broken up
and husbandry more used: of the prices of things we shall speak hereafter.


Knight. We will remember well that.


Doctor. What makes men to multiply pastures and ^osures gladly.


Knight. Mary the profit that grows thereby.


Doctor. It is very true and none other thing. Then find the means to do
one of these two things that I shall tell you. And ye shall make them as glad
to exercise tillage, as they d^e ^e Pa^ures.


Knight. What be those two things*


Doctor. Mary, either make as little gaynes to grow by y^ Pastures as there
grows by y^ tillage. Or else make y^ there may grow as much profit by tillage
as did before by the Pastures, and then I d^ubt not but tillage shall be as well
cherished of every man as Pasture.


Knight. And how may that be done*


Doctor. Mary the first way is to make yt wool to be of as base price to the
breeders thereof, as the Corn is: and y^ shall be, if ye make a like restraint
of it for passing over Sea, unwrought as ye make of Corn: another is to
increase y^ rustome of Wool that passes over unwrought. And by that the price
of it shall be abated to the breeders, and yet y^ price over Sea shall be
neuer*thelesse: but that which is in^eased That a like restraint of wool should
be made as is of Come, or none to be sent (...).
in the price thereof on strangers shall come to y^ Queens highness, which
is as prefitable to the Realm as though it came to the breeders, and might
relieve them of other subsidies. Thus far as touching the bringing down of
the price of Woolles, now to the inhaunsinge of the price of corn, to be as
good to y^ husbandman as wool should be, and that might be brought to pass if
ye will let it have as free passage over Sea at all times, as ye have now for
Wool.


Merchant. By the first two ways, men would send less wo^ll over sea then
they do now, and by that way the Queens cu^ome should be dyminished: by your
latter way y^ price of Corn should be much enhau^sed, wherewith men would be
much grieved.


Doctor. I wot well it would be dear at the first, but if I can persuade
you that it were reasonable, it were so, and that the same could be no
hinderaunce to the Realm universally. but greater profit to y^ same, then I
think see would be content it should be so: and as touching the Queens
custom I will speak afterward.


Merchant. I grant if ye could show me that.


Doctor. I will assay it, albeit the matter be somewhat intricate, and as I
showed you before, at the first view would displease many, for they would say,
would ye make Corn deerer then it is, have we not dearth enough else without
that: Nay I pray you find the means to have it better cheap if it may be,
it is dear enough already, and such other like reasons would be said. But now
let the husba^dman answer such again. Have not you Grasters raised the price
of your Woolles, and Felles: and you Marchasit men, Clothiers, and Cappers,
raised y^ price of your marchaundize and wares, over it was wont to be in
manner Reasons why the Husbandman should be at like liber ty as other to sell
his vvares.
double, is it not as good reason then that we should raise the price of our
Corn: what reason is it you should be at large and we to be restrained.
Either let us all be restrained to gether, or else let us be all at like
liberty, ye may sell your Wool over Sea, your felles, your tallow, your
Cheese, your Butter, and your Leather, (which ryseth all by grasing) at your
pleasure, and for y^ dearest penny ye can get for them. And we shall not sell
out our corn, except it be at x. d. the bushel or under, that is as much to
say, as we that be husbandmen shall not sell our ware except it be for
nothing, or for so little as we shall not be able to live thereon. Think you if
the husbandman here had spoke these words, that he did not speak them some
what reasonable.


Husband. I thank you withal my heart, for ye have spoken in y^ matter more
then I could do my self, and yet nothing but that is most true. We felt the
harm, but we wist not what was the cause thereof, many of us saw well long a
go, that our profit was but small by the Plough, and therefore diverse of my
Neighbors that had in time past, some two, some three, some four Ploughes of
their own, have laid down some of them part, and some of them all their
Ceemes, and turned either part or al their erable ground to Pasture, and
thereby have waxed very rich men. And every day some of us incloseth some part
of his ground to Pasture, and were it not that our ground lies in y^ common
That by breeding the husband has mo^ clear gaynes.
fields entermingled one with another, I think also our fields had been
enclosed of common agreement of all the towneship long or this time. And to
say y^ very truth I that have enclosed little or nothing of my ground, could
never be able to make up my Lords rent, were it not for a little herd that I
have of Ncate, sheep, swyne, geese, and He^es, that I do rear upon my
ground. Whereof because y^ price is somewhat round: I make more clear profit
then I do of all my corn, and yet I have but a very bare living, by reason
that many things do belong to husbandry, which be now exceeding charg^able
over they were in time past.


Capper. Though this reason of master D^ctors here does please you well that
be husbandmen, yet it pleases us that be ar^rs nothing at all, which buy most
both bread Corn, and malte corn for our penny: and whercas ye master doctor
say that it were as good reason that the Husbandman should reyse the price of
his corn, and have as free vente of the same over sea, as we do and have of
our wares: I cannot greatly deny, but that yet I say that every man has (...)
of corn, but they have not so much of other wares.


Doctor. Therefore the more necessary that cor^e is, the more be the mea to be
chearished that reareth it: for if they see there be not so much profit in
using the plough, as they see in other feats: think ye not that they will
leave that trade and fall to another yt they see more profitable? As ye may
perceive That pro^ ad (...) all (...).
by the doings of this honest man's neighbors, which have turned their (...)
land to pasture, because they see more profit by pasture: then by tillage. Is
it not an old saying in Latin. Honos al^t arts: that is to say profit or
advancement Honos al^ Arts.
no^isheth every faculty, which saying is so true that it is allowed by the
common judgment of al me^. We must understand also that all things that
should be done in a common Weal, be not to be forced or to be constrained by
the straight penalties of the law, but some so, and some either by alurement
and rewards rather. For what law can compel men to be industrious in
travail or labor of body, or studious to learn any science or know le^ge of
the mind: to these things they may be well provoked, encouraged, and allured:
if they that be industrious That some thing, are to be (...) by (...) and some
other with straighte (...) forced in a ^Weale
and painful, be rewarded well for their pains: and be suffered to take
gaynes and wealth as rewards of their labors, and so likewise they that be
learned be advanced and honored according to their forwardnes in Learning:
every man will then study either to be indust^ious (...) b^dely labor, or
studious in things that pertaynes to knowledge. Take these rewards from them,
and go about to co^pel the^ by laws thereto, what man will ploug^ or digg* y^
ground or exercise any manual art wherein is any pain: or who will adventure
over seaes for any Marchau^dise, or use any faculty wherein any peril or
danger should be, se^ing his reward shall be no more then his y^ sits still: but
ye will percase au^sw^re me yt all their reward shall not be taken away, but
part of it. Yet then ye must grant me yt as if al these rewards were taken
from the^, all these faculties must decaie, so if part of that reward be
minished, the use of these faculties shall minish withal after the rate, and
so they shall be the less occupied, the less they be rewarded and esteemed.
The less honor or profit is given to any ^rte the le^e it shall be freque^ted.
But now to our purpose: I think it more necessary to devise a mean how
husbandry may be more occupied rather then less: which I cannot perceive how
it may be brought to pass, but as men do see the more gains therein the
gladder they will occupy that feate, and this is to be true (that some things
in a common weal must be forced with pains and some by rewards a^ured) may
appear, by y^ which the wise and pollitique senator T^lly writes: saying,
that it Tulli in Ep. ad atti.
was the words of Solon which was one of the seven wise men of Greece, and of
those seven the only man that made laws, that a common weal* was holden up
by two things, chiefly that is by reward and pain: of which words, I gather,
that men should be provoked to do good de^des by rewards and preferments: and
to abstain from ill doings by pains, trow you if husband men be not better
chearyshed or provoked then they be, to exercise the plough, but y^ in process
of time so many ploughes will be laid down as I fear me there be all ready
that of one unfruitful year shall happen among us, as commonly does once in
seven years: we should the^ not only have dearth but also skarcenes of corn,
that we should be driven to seek it from outward par^ies and pay dear for it.


Knight. How would ye have them better chearished to use the plough.


Doctor. To let them have more profit by it the^ they have, and liberty to sell
it at all ^nes and to all places as freely as men may do other things: but the^
(no doubt) the price of corn would rise specially at y^ first more then at
length: yet y^ price would provoke every man to set y^ plough in the ground, to
^ill waste grounds: yea and to turn the lands y^ is now e^losed for pasture to
erable, for every man will the gladder follow that wherein they see the more
gains, and thereby (...) needs ensue both greater plenty of corn within the
realm and also much treasure should be brought into the realm by reason
thereof. And besides that plenty of all other vi^tuall increased among bs.


Knight. That would I feign hear you declare how?


Doctor. Ye have heard that by this free vent and sale of corn, the
husbandmans profit is (...), then it is showed that every man naturally will
follow that, wherein he sees profit Profit will make husba^dmen more occupied
and there by more prof^ and conseque^t ly better cheap of coin.
ensue: therefore men will the gladder occupy h^shandry, and the more do
o^cupie husbandry, the mors plenty of Corn must needs be: And the more plenty
of corn there is, thereof the better cheap: And also the more will be spared
over y^ which shall suffice for the realm. And then that may be spared in a
good year, shall bring us again ^ther corn: or else the commodities of other
coun^ries necessary for us. Then the more husbandry there is occupied, the more
universal breed should be of all victuals of Near, Sheep, Swine, Geese,
H^nnes, Capo^s, and Chickens: for all these are reared much on corn.


Knight. If men should sell when a good seasonable year is, all that is
overplus: when the Realm is se^tted what should we do if a barren year
should happen, when no store of corn is left of the good year before.


Doctor. First ye must consider that men will be sure they will keep inoughe
to find themselves within the realm, ^re they sell any forth of the same and
having liberty to sell at their pleasure, doubt ye not, but they had lever
sell their corn two pence or three pence in a bushel better cheap within the
realm, then to be at the charge of ca^iage, and peril of adventure: in
sending it over and sell it dearer, except it be for much more gains. And
thus men being provoked with luker, wilkeepe the more corn, loking for a dear
pear in the country, whereby must needs be great store: and though they did
not so, but should sell over sea all that they might spare ou^rthat serves the
realm, when the year is plentiful, yet by reason that through the means
asoresaid (...) Ploughes are set a work, then would suffice the Realm in a
plentiful year: if a scarce year should fall after, the corn of so many
ploughes as in a good year, would be more then enough in an unfruitful year,
at the least would be sufficient to find the Realm, and so should y^ realm
be served withinough of corn in a scarce year, and in a plentiful year, no more
the^ enough: which might be soldouer for great treasure, or greater
commodities: where now in a plentyfull year we seek to have but as much as may
suffice y^ realm. Then if a scarce year should happen, we must needs lack of
our own to serve and should be driven to buy from beyond the sea, and then if
they were as envious as we be: might not they say? when we required any corn
of them, (that seeing they could get none from us when we had plenty,) why
should they let us have any corn when we have sc^rsitie? Surely common reason
would that one region should help another when it lackes, and therefore God
has ordained that no country should have all commodities, but which that one
(...) another brings forth: and that yt one country lacks this year, another
has plenty thereof commonly the same year, to the intent men may know that
they have need one of another help, and thereby love and society to grow
among all men y^ more, but here we would do as though we had need of no other
country on earth, but to live all of our selves: and as though we might make
the market of all things as we lust our selves, for though God is bountiful
unto us and sendes us many great commodityes, yet we could not live without
the commodityes of others. And for example, of Iron and Salt^ though we have
competentlye thereof, yet we have not the third part to suffice the Realm,
and that can in no wise be spared if ye will occupy husbandry, th^n tar, rozyn,
pitch, Oil, and steel, we have none at all: and for Wynes, spyces, ly^en
cloth, silk^s, and colors, though we might live indifferently without the^,
yet far from any ciuility should it be: as I deny not but many things we might
have here sufficiently that we buy now from beyond sea, and many things we
might spare wholly: whereof if time will serve I shall talk more here after:
(...) ut now to return to the first point I spoke of before, to be one of
the means to bring husbandry up, that is by basing y^ estimation of wool, and
felles. Though I take not that way to be as good as the other, for I do not
allow that mean that may base any of our commodities, except it be for the
^haunstng of a better commodity: but if both commodities may be inhaunsed
together, as by the last devise I think they might be* I allow that way
better, neuer-thelesse where as you (brother Mer^er) showed before, that eit^er
by r^raining of wool and other commodities, till they were equale within the
Realm after the ra^e of the corn: or by inhau^^g the cus^ome of wool and
other the said commodities, till the price beside the custom of the said
commodities were brought like to the corn in proportion: y^ Qu^enes custom
Whether the Q^ee* custom should be dim^nished by s^int of ^ll (...).
should be diminished, I think not so, for the one way, as much as she
should have for y^ more wool at little custom ven^ed over, so much should we
have for the less wool at a greater custom ventred. And the other way as
much as her Grace should lose by her cus^ome of wool, so much or more should
her grace win by y^ custom of ^thes man within the realm. ^ut one th^g I
d^e note by this later devise, that if they should take place (...) must do,
that is if ^e keep within us much of our commodities, we must spare many
other things that we have now from beyond sea, for we most always take h^de
that w^e buy no more of strangers then we do sell them, for so we should
impouerish our selves and enriche them. For ^ee were no good husband that had
no other yearly revenues but of his husbandry to live on, that would buy more
in the market then he selles again. And that is a point that we might save
much by our treasure in this realm, if we would. And I marvel no man takes
heed to it, what number first of tri^les How ^ger* (...) from us our great
for very (...).
comes hither from beyond the sea, that we might either clean spare or else
make them within our realm, for the which we either pay inestimable treasure
every year, or else exchange substanciall wares and necessary for the^ for y^
which we might receive great treasure. Of the which sort I mean as well
looking glasses, as drinking, and al^ to glase Windows, Dialles, ^ables,
Cards, Balls Puppettes, Pe^ers, Inkehornes, Cothepickes, Gloves, Knives,
Dagges, O^hes, Browches, Aglettes, Buttons of silk and Silver, Earthen pots,
Pi^es, and Points, Hawks belles, Paper both white and brown, and a thousand
like things that might either becleane spared, or else made within the realm
sufficient for us, and as for some things they make it of our own commodities
and send it Our delicacy in requiring strangers Wares.
us again, whereby they set their people a work, and do exhauste much
treasure out of this Realm: as of our woll they make clothes, Cappes and (...)
of our felles they make spanish ^es, Gloves and Gerdels, of our (...)
Saltsellers, Spones and Dishes, of our broken ^en clothes and rags, Paper
both white and brown, what ^reasure think ye goes out of this Realm for
every of these things: and then for all together it exceedes mine estimation.
There is no man can be contented now with any other Gloves then is made in
France or in Spain: nor ^ersie but it must be of Flaunders die: nor ^oth
but French or Ou^he: nor Duche, Brooch, or Agglet but of Venice making, or
(...): nor Dagger, Swearde Knife or ^yrdle but of spanish making; or some
outward country, no not as much as a Spur but that is fetched at the
Millener. I have heard within these xl. years when there were not of these
Haberdashers that selles french or Millen ^appes Glasses, Knives, Daggers,
Swords, The en^ase of haberdashers and (...) over theyvvere (...) to be.
G^dels and such things, not a dosen in all London: and now from the town to
^minster alonge, every streate is f^l of them, and their shoppes glitters and
shynes of glasses as well drynking as loking, yea all manner of vessel of the
same stuff: painted cruses, gaie Daggers, Knyues, Swerdes, and Girdels that it
is able to make any ^e^perate man to gase on them and to buy somewhat, though it
serve to no purpose necessary. What need them beyond sea to travail to
Perowe or such far countreies, or to try out the sands of the rivers of
Tagus in Spain, Pactogus in Asia, and Ganges in India, to get among them
after much How the st^au gers ^nde an easy way to get (...) by things of no
value then by any mine* of gold or (...).
labor small sparks of gold, or to dig the deep bowels of the earth for
the mine of Silver or Gold, when they ca^ of vile claie not far sought for:
and of pryple Stones and Fern roots, make good Gold and Silver, more then a
great many of Silver and Gold mines would make, I think not so little as a
hu^ndreth thousand pounds a year is fetched of our Treasure, for things of
no valor of them selves, but only for the labors of the workers of the same,
which are set a work all on our charges* what grosenes of wits be we of, that
s^e it, and suffer such a continual spoil to be made of our good and treasure
by such means and specially that will suffer our own commodities to go and
set strangers a work, and then to buy them again at their h^es, as of our
Woll they make and die Kersies, Fre^chadowes, How (...) with our ^ties an
(...) our costs.
broad clothes, and Cappes beyond sea and bring them hitherto be sold
again^: wherein I pray you note what they do: they make us pay at the end for
our own (...) again. (...), for y^ ^gers custom for their workemanshippe,
and colors, and lastely for the second custom in the return of the wares
into the realm again: where as by working the same within the realm, our own
men should be set a work at the charges of strangers, the custom should be
borne all by strangers to the Queen, and the clear gains remain within the
Realm.


Knight. If ye ponder such things and other, which goes over Sea yearly from
us for the same, ye speak to little by as much again, but one thing I have
marked that albeit it is true, that though strangers buy their woll dear and
pay twice custom, that is both at going out of the woll, and when it
retournes in clothes or cappes, yet the same shall be better cheap then that
which is made within y^ Realm, whereof that should come, I would feign know.


Doctor. Whether it come of our sloth, or of our chargeable fare or of our
idleness, which we Englishmen use, percase more then other nations, I know not:
yet it were better for us Why ^gers may aforde vvares bett^r cheap made by
them then we may the same made here, and yet that it were b^r for us to buy
our own though they were dearer.
to pay more to our own Countrymen for these wares, then to strangers
less, for how little gains so ever goes over, it is lost to us clear, but
how much so ever y^ games is that goes from one of us to another, it is all
saved with in the Realm: and a like reason as you make now hete. Once a Book
Seller made me when I asked him why, we had not white and brown paper made
within y^ realm as well as they had made beyond the sea* Then he answered me
y^ there was paper made a while within y^ realm. At the last the man perceived
that made it that he could not forth his paper as good cheap as it came from
beyond y^ sea, and so he was forced to lay down making of paper and no blame
in the man, for men will give never the more for his paper because it was made
here* but I would either have the paper stayed from coming in, or so burdened
with custom: that by that time it came hither, out men might aforde their
paper better cheap, then strangers might do theires, the customs considered.


Knight. There ye speak a thing that the Queens Attorney would not agree
unto, for if such ^are were made within the real^e, the^ the Queens custom
should be less^ by reason that l^tle or no such wares should come from beyond
the Sea.


Doctor* If the Queens Attorney did regard, as well the pro^te that should
come after: as that which is present before y^ eyes, he would agree to this
well enough, for by this means inestimable treasure should be saved within y^
realm, The most dura ble and vn^sal profit is mo^e to be ^steemed then (...)
and particular.
and then it could not grow to the profit of the subjects, but it must needs
grow also to the profit of the Queen, for the wealth of the subjects, is
the profit of the Queen: and in mine opinion they do not best provide for
her Graces profit, that procures only a present commodity: but rather that
commodity that may longest endure without grief of her subjects.


Knight* You would have a law made, that no such ware should be brought from
beyond the sea, to be soulde here, of such things as could be made here, as
well as there.


Doctor. Yea fors^oth, so would I wish.


Knight. I was once in a Parlyament, when such a thing was moved, but only
for Cappes, that none made beyond sea should be sold here within the Realm,
and then it was a^swered by a great wise man, that it was to ^ee feared Whether
our restr^ts doc touch the le^ues made with other l^ces.
least it touched the league made between y^ Princes highness, and some
foreign Prince: what think you the^ would have been said, if ye would have
moved a law to be made of our wool, our Tynne, our Led, and Hydes, beyond
sea, should have been sold here.


Doctor. I cannot tell whether that should touch the league or no, nor whether
any such league be: but I say to you y^ I think it a maruaylous league that
should let us to make laws to bind our own subjects that might be
profitable to the^: and if their were any such league I had leauer it were
broken No league is to be ^shed that is not for the co^(...).
then kept, which being broken should do us good, and being kept should do
us harm, and I suppose that when we enter any league the same is meant to be
for our weal, and not for our hinderaunce, wherefore that league would not be
esteemed y^ might hinder our commonweal.


Knight. What if they would make a like law beyond the sea, that wares made
within this realm should not be soulde ther^, as they made of late, when we
devised a law that no Wynes should be carried heather in strangers bot^es.


Doctor. Yet should they be enforced rather to dissolve their law then we ours,
for our stuff is necessary for them y^ is made here: as cloth, Leather, Biere,
tallow, butter, cheese, pewter vessel etc. Theirs be to us more to serve
pleasure then necessity: as Cables, Cards, perfumed Gloves, Glasses, gally
Pots, Dyails, Orenges, Pippens, and Cheries: yea their chief commodities might
be better spared of us, the^ retained of them, as wynes, silks, spices, iron,
and Salt. A worthy example to be follovved in ^sing of ^gers.
I would to God we would follow but the example of a poor Haven town y^ I
heard of it to do of late: here in y^ Marches of Wales, called Carmarthen,
when there came (...) certain ^essell thither out of England all Laden with
Appells, which aforetime was wont to bring them good corn, the town
co^aunded that nonne should buy the said Appells upon a great pain, and so
the Boat stood so long in the haven without sale or ^ent till y^ Appells were
putri^ed and lost. And when the owner demanded of the Bayliffe of the town,
why he hao stayed his sale and vent, the Bayliffe answered again, that the
said vessel came thither to fetch the best wares they had in the country, as
Fryzes, broad Clothes, and wool: and in steed thereof, he should leave the^
in their country but appells, that should be spent and was^ed in less then a
week^. And said bring unto us corn or ^te as ye were wont to do, whereof y^
country has need, and ye shall be welcome at all times, and ye shall have
free vent and sale thereof in our Port: think ye that the cities of London,
Southhampton, Bristowe, Chester and other more, might they not learn a good
lesson of this poor Welsh town in this doing* Might not they say when ships
full of Orrenges, Pippens, or Cheries come in, that if they would again take
Plu^mes, Damozins, and strawberries for them, they should have free exchange:
and when they bring in Glasses, Pupple^s, Rattles, and such like things, they
should have like trisles for them, if any such were to be had within this
Realm, as there be many, but if they come for our Woolles, for our Clothes,
^erseyes, Corn, (...), Led, yea our Gold, and silver, and such substantial
and necessary things: let them bring in again, Fla^e, Carre, Oils, ^e, and
such like. And not to use them as men do little Children, geeue them an appell
for the best Jewel y^ they have about them. And thus we are empouerished of
our treasure, and chief commodity, and cannot per^eaue it, such is the ^enesse
of strangers wits and the grosenes of ours, yet it were more tolerable if we
did no more but chearishe their devises y^ Of the coin what have might have
gr^ of the alteration of it
be strangers: but we have in times past devised our selves many other ways,
to our own impouerishment, and to exhaust our treasure. And now I must come to
that thing that you (brother Mercer) touched before, which I take to be the
chief cause of all this dearth of things (in comparison of former times) and
of the manifest impouerishinge of the Realm, and might in short time have been
y^ destruction of the same, if it had not been y^ rather remedied, that is, the
ba^ng or rather the corrupting of our coin, and trea sure, whereby we devised
a way for the strangers not only to buy our Gold and silver for brass, and to
exhaust this realm of treasure: but also to buy our chief commodities in
manner for ^ought, yet it was thought this should have been a mean not only to
bring our treasure home, but to bring much of theirs: but the experince
plainly declared the contrary, so that it were but a very Dullerdes part now
to be in any doubt thereof.


Knight. Forsooth and such a Dullerd (...) I in deed, y^ I cannot perceive
what hinderaunce it should be to the rea^me to have this metal more then that
(for our Coin) see^g the Coin is but a token to go from man to man, and when
it is stricken with y^ Princes seal to be current: what makes it the matter
what metal it be made of: yea, though it were but Leather, or Paper.


Doctor. You say but as most sort of men do say, and yet they be far wide
from the truth, as men that do not consider the thing groundly: for by that
reason God would never send dearth among us, but the Prince might quickly
remedy it. As if Corn were at a Crown a Bushel, the Prince might provide
Crowns enough for himself and also his subjects made of brass to pay for the
same, and so to make it as easy for him and his subjects to pay a Crown of
such metal for a bushel, as it should be for them now to pay a penny for the
same: and as the price of corn does rise, the the Prince might raise the
estimation of his coin after y^ rate, and so keep the coin always at one
estate in deed though in name it should seem to rise. As for example,
suppo^e Wheat this year to be at a grot a bushel, and y^ next year at two
grotes, the Prince might cause the grote to be called viii. d. and if the
bushel rose to xii. d. the bushel, he might raise the estate of the grote to
xii. d. and so whether it were by making of coin of other mettalles then be
of price received among all men, or by enha^ng the price of the old coin
made in mettalles of estimation, the Prince might if your reason were true,
keep always not only corn, but also all other victaylles and necessaries
for man's life, always at one price in decde, though in term they should vary:
but ye may see daily by experience y^ contrary hereunto, for when God sends
dearth either of corn or of other things, there is neither Emperor nor King
can help it, which they would gladly dee if they might, as well for their own
ease, ^s for their subjects, and might soon do it if your reason before
touched mig^t take place: that is, if either they might make coin of what
estimation they would, of vile mettalles: or else enhaunse the value of coins
made in mettalls of price, to what some they would. Yet a man at the first
blush would think that a Prince in his realm might do this easily, and make
what coin he would to be current and of what estimation it pleased him, but he
The subs^au^ce and quantity is ^eemed in coin and not the name.
that so thinks marketh but the terms, and not the things tha^ are
understood by them, as if a man made no differaunce between vi. grotes that
made an ownce of ^uer, and xii. grotes that made in all but an ownce of Silver,
by the grote of the first sort, the sixth part of an ownce, and by a grote
of the other sort is the twelfth part of an ownce of silver understood, and
so there must be as much difference between the one grote and the other, as is
between two and one, the whole thing and the half: though either of both be
called but under one name, that is a grote: we must consider though gold and
silver be the metals commonly wherein the coin is strycken to be the tokens
for exchannge of things* between man and man: yet it is the wares that are
necessary for man's use, that are exchaunged in deed, under the outward name of
the coin, and it is the raritie and plenty of such wares, that makes the price
thereof hier or baser. And because it were very combrous and chargeable to carry
so much of the wares that we have abundance of, to exchange for the wares that
we want, always both for the weight of our wares, and also for that they could
not be carried so fa^re without perishing of the same, nor proporcioned so even,
as they should be always, neither more or less brought of our wares, then
were equiuale^t with other wares that we receive, therefore were the metals of
gold and silver Aristo. lib. 5 Eth.
devised, as wares of little weight, most in value, and least combrous to carry:
and least subject to detriment or hurt in That the neces sity of Mutual
trassique and commodity of exchang made Coin to be devised.
the car^age thereof, and may be cut and divided in most pie ces and portions,
without any loss, to be as the mean in wares to exchange all other wares by.
And if the thing were to be new devised, necessity would cause us to devise y^
same way again. For put the case there were no use of money among us, but
only exchange of war^s, for wares: as ^times I do read has been: we might at
a time have Ho^m. F. de emptione et vendicatioue. Li. (...).
such plenty of things in our realm, as for example of corn (...), and
Felles, Cheese, and Butter, and such other commodities as were sufficient for
us, and there should remain with us such great store, that w^e could not
spend it in our needs, nor keep it long without perishing. Would not we be
glad to exchange that abundance of things, y^ could not abide the long
keeping: for such wares that would a^yde the keeping, which we might
exchange* again for such wares, as I rehearsed, or any other as nec^ssary:
when scarsitie of the same should happen among us? Yea verily we would study
to have in that exchange such wares as would go in least romth and continue
longest without perishing, and be carried to and fro with least charge, and be
most current at all times: and at all places. Is not Gold and Silver, the
things that be most of that sort: I mean most of Why Gold and silver were
the (...) most (...) for coin to be (...) in.
(...), mo^ light to be carried, longest able to abide the keeping: apt^st to
r^iue any form, mark, and most current in all places: and most easelie
divided into man pi^es without loss of the stuff. In some of these (...) I
confess precious Sto^es do excel Silver or yet Gold, as in val^e or
lightness of carriage, but then, they may not be divided without perishing of
the substance, nor put again together, after they be o^es divided, nor many
of them abide so many my dangers without perishing of the matter, nor yet re
ceiue any mark or stamp easily, nor be so universally esteemed: therefore
they be not so meet for Ius^rumentes of exchange, as Silver and Gold be, or
else they for their pieces and lightness of carriage, might be. And because
Gold and Silver have all these commodities in them, they are chosen by common
assent of all the world, that is known to Publica me^sura Aristo. Eth.
be of an^ ^ility, to be instruments of exchange, to measure all things by,
mostap^e to be either carried far or kept in store, to receive for things,
whereof we have abundance, and to purchase by them again other things which
we lack, when and where we have most need. As for example, if there were no
coin current, but exchau^ge of things as I said sometime there was: set this
case, that a man had as much come in one year as he could not well spend in hi^
house in four years after, and perceived that he might not keep it so
long, or till a dear or skarce year should come, and if he did, much of it
should perish or all: were it not wisdom for him then to exchau^ge the over
plus of that corn, for some other ware that might be longer kept, without d^er
of ^ast, or deminishing, for y^ which he might at all times have either corn
again at his need, or some other necessary thing* Yeas no doubt, if there
were no use of Silver or Gold he would have Tin brass, or leadde or such
other like thing that would abide the keeping with least detriment, and would
desire to have that thing most, that were in least weight, most in value, and
in least danger of wearing or perishing, and most universally received, w^ere
in Gold and Silver excelles all other mettalles.


Knight. What makes these mettalles to be of more value then other.


Doctor. No doubt their excellency abone other mettalles both in pleasure, and
use partly the raritie of them.


Knight. (...) What be these qualities * If ye praise the Gold for his weight
or pliablenes, Led does excel it in these points ifyee commend his color,
Silver by many men's Judgments (whose color resembles y^ day light for his
clerenesse) passes him. And Herroldes preferres it in arms: because it is
furthest of seen in y^ Field, nor never seems other color but his own, be
it never so far of: where al other shall seem black far of, and so loose
the strength of their own.


Doctor. As much as the Led approaches the Gold in that point I speak of
weight and pliablenes, it is cast behind it in other qualities far more
commendable, as in colonr it either passes Silver by some other men's
judgments, because it resembles the color of the celestial bodies, as the
Sun and Stars being the most excellent things that comes under the view
of the bodelie senses of man, or it Why Gold, and Silver are estem^d afo^e all
there mettalls.
is equibalent to it: in arms I know not how much it is este^med, well I wot
Princes blase their arms most with that color, whether it be for excellency
of the same, or for that they love the metal it is made of so well, I cannot
tell. but now to esteem their other qualities, Gold is never wasted nor
consumed by ^er: yea the more it is burned, the more puerer it is: which ye can
say of none other mettalles. Then it wears not less by occupying, it de^h not
the thing it touches, as Silver does, with which ye may draw lines, which is a
declaration that the s^ffe falls away, al beit writers do marvel that it
should draw so black a line being of that brightness and color it self. ^hen
there is no rust nor s^e y^ deminisheth the goodness or wasleth y^ substance of
Gold: it abides y^ freating, and licours of Salt and ^inegar ^out damage, which
wears any other thing: it needs no fire, ere it be made Gold as others
require, it is Gold as soon as it is found, it is drawn without woll, as it
were Woll, it is easily spread in leaves of marvelous th^es: ye may adorn or
guild any other metals with it, yea Stones and (...): it is also nothing
inferior in commodity of making ve^sels or other instruments to silver, but
rather pu^, cle^er, and more sweet to keep any liquor in. Next him approaches
Silver in commendatio^s, as in clea^es, beauty, swee^es, and brightness. And it
serves not only to make vessels and other (...), but it is also sponne, but
not without Woll, as Gold may be, though they could not do it a^re time, but
with Gold only, as I have heard, church ^estures were made only of Gold
then, and now of late of this Silver being spon with s^lke and guilte, they
counterfeite the old excess of clothe of Gold and tyss^e. Now to speak of
other mettalls, ye see what uses they serve for, which if these were away
should be more esteemed. Then I toulde you the raritye commends the said
metals of Gold and Silver, yet more the^ this. For as they do excel in
qualities, so Dame nature seems to have laid them up in a further ward, then
her other gifts, to show us that all fair things be rare, and y^ the fairest
things as they be hardest to be attained, so they be most to be esteemed. I^ a
Glass (as Erasmus says well) were as rare as silver, it should be as dear as
silver, and not without cause: who could glase a Window with silver so as he
might keep out the injury of the weather and yet nevertheless receive the
commodity of the light through ye same to his house, as with glass he might*
And so I might commend other things for their use before Gold or Silver, as Iron
and Steel, with whom ye may make bette^ tools for many necessary uses, then
with Gold or Silver, but for the uses that we talk of, Silver and Gold do
clearly excel all other metals. I pass over that matter: thus I have showed
some reason, why these metals of Gold and Silver are grown in estimation
above other.


Knight. Why do Kings and Princes stricke these mettalles and other with a
coin, but because they would have that coin of what value so ever it be, to
bear the estate that the Why Gold and Silver were ^ned.
coin prete^oeth, which they did in vame if they could make the metal that
bears that, to be neither better nor worse in estimation. The^ I had as liefe
have sinal gadds or plats of Silver and Gold without any coin at al, to go
abroad from man to man for exchange.


Doctor. Surely the time was so (even among the Romans, when neither brass,
silver nor gold was coined:) but were esteemed only by the weight. And
thereof to this day remains Plini lib. 33 Cap. 3.
these vocables of coins, as Libra, Pondo, Dipondius, as Solidus, Denarius,
words of weightes, that afterward were given to coins prete^ding ye same
weights. Also the commen officers that waighed these rude metals Sometime ^le,
^luer and Gold were ^hed be^ Coin made.
were called Libri pendes, whereof we have me^cione made in y^ Civil law: but
because in great tra^que and assembly of buyers, and such, it was tedious to
tarry for y^ weighing of these Mettalles and trying, it was thought good that
the Princes should strike those ^ttals with several marks, for the variety of
the weights they were of, to assure y^ Receiuor, Inst. de test. ord.. 1.
the same to be no less then the weight it pretended. As for playner example,
they struck y^ pound weight with the mark of the pound, and the ounce with the
mark of y^ ounce, and so after the variety of y^ weights of other pieces
variable marks: whereby began the names of Coins, so that the people needed
not to be troubled with the weighing and tryinge of every piece, being assured
by the mark of the Prince, that every piece contained the weight that was
signysied by the mark set on every one: the Princes credit was then such
among their subjects as they doubted nothing therein. As soon as they
attempted to do otherwise, that is, to mark the half pound with y^ mark of
the pound, and the half ounce with the mark of y^ ounce, (...) their credit
made those coins current: As I (...) among y^ Romans practiced more then
once, but as soon as it was espied, the two pieces of half pou^ds went no
farther then y^ one piece of a whole pound went before. And at length, as much
as they won at the first, they l^st at the last in payment of their rentes,
cu^omes, and duties. (And What losle co^moth of c^edence.
so the nearer East, the further from West.) And they consequently lost their
credit, much like as I have known certain towns in England to have done which
were wont to make their clothes of a certain breadth and length, and to set
their seals to the same, ^hile they kept the rate truly, strangers did but
look on the seal, and receive their ware, whereby these towns had great vent
of their clothes, and consequently prospered very well. Afterward some in those
towns not contented with reasonable gaynes continual, and desiering more.
Devised clothes of less length, breadth, and goodness then they were wont to
be, and yet by the commendacion of the seal to have as much money for the
same as they had before for good clothes, and for a time they gat much, and so
abased the credit of their Predicessors to their singular luker, wh^h was
recompensed with the loss of their Posterity. For after these Clothes were
found faulty, for all their seals, they were not only never the better
trusted, but much less for their seal: yea, though their clothes were well
made, for when their untruth and falshoode was espied, then no man would buy
their clothes, till they were ensearched and unfolded, regarding nothing the
seal: and yet because they found the^ untrue in some part, they mistrusted
them in other: and so would give less for those clothes then for any other
like having no seals to the same, whereby the credit of the said towns was
lost, and the tow^s utterly d^caied. Did ye not see, that our Coin was
discredited immediately upon the alteration of it, in the late years of King
Henry the eight, specially among strangers, which ever before destred to serve
us before all other Nations, at all our needs, for ye goodness of our Coin. And
then they would let us have nothing from them, but only for our commodities,
as Wool, Felles, Callow, But^er, Cheese, Tin, and Led, and where before
time, they were wont to bring us for the same, either good Gold or silver, or
else as necessary commodities again, then they sent us either such trisles as I
spoke of before: as Glasses, gally Pots, tennice Balls, Papers, Gyroles,
Brouches, Buttons, Dyalls, and such light ware, that stands them in no charge
or use, or else (if it be true that I have heard) and as I told you in your
ear before, they sent us Brass for our Treasure of Gold and silver, and for
our said commodities, I What do ^gers send us ^or our (...) and ch^
commodities.
warrant you ye saw no Gold nor Silver brought over unto us, as it was
before used, and no marua^le: to what purpose should they bring silver or Gold
thither, whereas y^ same was not e^eemed? Therefore I have heard say for a
truth, and I believe it the rather to be true because it is likely, that after
that our Coin was based and altered: Strangers cou^terfayted our Coin, and
found y^ means to have great Masses of that transported hither, and here
uttered it well for our old Gold and silver, as also for our chief
commodities, which thing I report me unto you what inconvenience it might
bring unto this Realm, if it were suffered, in a small compass of time.


Knight. There be Searchers that might let that matter well enough if they be
true, both for staying of such false Coin to come in, and of our old Coin to
go forth.


Doctor. I said so to the man that told me the same tale that I told you
even now. And he answered me, there were many How our old coin may be
transported, and the Prince or her officers not ^ing of it.
ways to deceive the Searchers, if they were never so true, as by putting of
the said Coin in their ships balast or in some ^elles of wine or other
Lyquor transported either unto us or from us: then every Creake in ^ys Realm
has not scarchers: And if they had, they be not such saints as would not
be corrupted for money. Besides We d^uise the (...) way to drive away our
Treasure.
this, was there not made proclamations that the old ^oyne, specially of
Gold, should not be current here abeue such a price: was not that the di^st
way to drive a way our gold from us? every thing will go where it is most
esteemed, and therefore our treasure went over in heaps.


Knight, I believe well that these were means to exhaust y^ old treasure from
us, which ice have rejected: but how it should make every thing so dear among
^ur selves since y^ time (as ye said it does) I cannot yet perc^aue the reason.


Doctor. Why? do ye not perceive that by ^ason hereof, we paid dearer
presently for every thing that we have from beyond the Sea, then we were wont
to do before?


Knight. That cannot be denied.


Doctor. By how much think you?


Knight. By the third part well in all manner of things.


Doctor. Must not they that buy dear, sell dear again their wares?


Knight. that is true, if they intend to thrive: for he that sells good
cheap and buyeth dear, shall never thrive.


Doctor. Ye have your self declared the reason, why things ^in the Realm
proved after that time so d^aie: for we must buy dear all things bought from
beyond the sea, and therefore Why things (...) should be so dear.
we must sell again as dear our things, or else we make ill bargaynes for
our selves. And though that reason makes it plain, yet the experience of y^
thing makes it playner: for where ye say that every thing bought beyond the
sea, is commonly dearer by the third part then it was: do ye not see y^ same
proportion reised in our wares, if it be not more?


Knight. What loss have we by this, when w^e sell ou^ commodities as ^eare as
we buy others?


Doctor. I grant to one sort of men, I account it no loss, yea to some
other a Gain more then any loss, and yet to some other sort a greater loss
the^ it is pro^ to y^ other, yea generally to the utter empouerishing of the
realm and weaking of the Queens maies^es power exceedingly.


Knight. I pray you what be those sorts that ye mean. And first of those that
ye think should have no loss hereby.


Doctor. I mean all these that lives by buying and selling for as they buy
dear they sell thereafter.


Knight. What is the next sort that ye say would win by it?


Doctor. Mary all such as have tak^es or ^earmes in their Some ^ad gaynes by
the alteration of the coin.
own manurance at the old rent, for where they pay after the old rate, they
sell after the new: that is, they pay for their land good cheap, and sell
all things growing thereof dear.


Knight. What sort is that which ye said should have greater loss hereby,
then these men had profit.


Doctor. It is all Noble men, Gentlemen and all other that live either by a
^ented rent or (...), or do not Mannure the ground, or do occupy no buying or
selling.


Knight. I pray you peruse these sorts as ye did the other, one by one, and by
course.


Doctor. I will gladly, first the Noble men and Gentlemen live for the most
part on the yearly revenues of their lands and fees given them of the Prince.
Then ye know he that may spend now by such revenues and fees CCC. li. a year
may Who had lo^ by the alteration of ^ne.
not keep no better port then his father, or any other before him, that could
spend but nigh CC. li. and so ye may per^eiue, it is a great abatement of a
man's countenance to ta^e away the third part of his living, and therefore
ge^tlemen do ^udy so much the inerease of their Lands and enhaunsing of their
rentes, and to take Fearmes and Pastures to their own hands as ye see they
do, and all to seek to maintain their (...) as their predecessors did, and
yet they came short there in. Some other seeing the charges of householde
increase so much, as by no provision they can make, it can be helped: give over
their householdes and get them chambers in London or about the court, and
there spend their time some of them with a servant or two, where he was wont
to keep thirty or forty persons daily in his house, and to do good in the
Country, in keeping good order and rule among his neighbors. The other sort
be even Seruingmen, and men of War that having but their old stented wages,
cannot find themselves therewith: as they might before time, without rauin or
spoil. As ye know xii. d. a day now will not go so far as viii. pence would
before time. And there fore ye have men so evil willing to serve the Pr^e now
a days, from y^ they were wont to be. Also where xl. shillinges a year was
honest wages for a yeoman before this time, and xx. pence a week board wages
was sufficient: now double as much will skante bear their charge.


Knight. That is long of their excess, as well in apparel as in fare, for now
a days Seruingmen go more costely in apparel, and look to fare more
deintely, then their masters were wont to do in times past:


Doctor. No doubt that is one great cause of the greater charge Of excelle in
apparel and fare.
of householde. For I know when a Serving man was content to go in a Kendall
coat in Summer, and a frise cote in winter: and with a plain white hose made
meet for his body: And with a piece of biefe or some other dishe of sodde
meat all the week long: Now he will look to have at the least for summer a
coat of the finest cloth that may be gotten for money, and his ^osen of the
finest Kersey, and that of some strange die, as Flaunders die or french puke,
that a Prince or great Lord can wear no finer* if he wear cloth. Then their
coats shall be guarded cut and stitched and the breches of their hose so drawn
with silk, that y^ workmanship shall far pass the price of the (...), And
this thing is not restrained as it should be, but rather cherished of the
masters, one striving with the other, who may be most proud and whose
retinue may go most lavish and gay for a time of show, whereas through such
excess they are feign all the rest of the year to keep the fewer servants.
And so in excess of meats they fare at some times in the year, that in the
whole year after they keep either no houses at all, or if they do it shall be
very small: like excesses as well in apparel as in fare were used in Rome a
little before the declination of the Empire, (...) as wise men have thought it
was occasion (...) the decay thereof. And therefore Cato and diverse wise
senators at that time, would have had laws made for restrainte of such
excesses, and for that through the insole^ie of some, that maintained the
contrary, y^ (...) not duly executed, muchpride ensued there: and of pride
diu^tand through division utter desolation of the common weal. I pray God this
realm may beware by that example, specially London the head of this empire,
where such (...) (by reason the wealth al most of all this Realm is ^aped there
(...), as the corn of a Field into a ^rne) be most used: for in other parties
commonly of this realm, the law of necessity keeps men in good case for
exceeding either in apparel or fare. I think we were as much dread or more of
our enemies, when our gentlemen went simply, and our Seruingmen plainly,
without cuts or gards bearing their heavy Swords and Buckelers on their
thig^es in sted of cuts and gardes and light daunsing Swords: and when they
rode carrying good Spears in their (...) in ^ede of white rods, which they carry
now more like ladies or gentlewomen, then men, all which delicacies makes our
men clean effemina^e and without strength.


Knight* We may thank our long peace and quiet within y^ realm that men be
not (...) to ride^ strong. It was a tr^blous world as well within the Realm as
without, when men went and rode as you do speak.


Doctor. What can you tell, what time or how sone such a world may come
again, wise men do say, that in peace men most look and provide for war,
and in war again for peace. In Peace look for Wa^re.
If men might be always sure of peace, then needed no man to keep men at all.
But since it is otherwise, and that the iniquity of men is such, as they cannot
be long without War: And that we reckon here in England our chief
strength to be (...) our Seruingmen and yeomen, it were wisdom to exercise
them in time of peace somewhat with such apparel, fare and hardenes, as they
must needs sustain in time of war, then the same shall be no nouelty to them
when they come to it: and their bodies shall be strong and harder to bear
that, that they were somewhat accustomed which all before. Let this that I say,
be of no cre^ite: if del^acie and te^dernes was not the most occasion of the
subduing of the greatest Empires that were.


Knight. Surely ye say very well and that which sounds to good reason. I must
needs allow that I have found true my self, for my men are so tenderly used in
time of peace, that they can not away with any heavy armor in time of war,
but either shirts of Maile or Coats of linen rags, which at a shot may
perhaps deceive us. Then what say you by our buildinges that we have here in
England of late days, far more exce^iue the^ at any time heretofore. Does
not that impouerish the Realm and cause men to keep less Houses.


Doctor. I say that all these things be tokens of ornaments of peace, and
that no doubt is cause of less housholdes: since the buildings and trimming of
those houses spendes away that, that should be otherwise spent in household. But
it does not empouerish the Realm at all, for all the expenses of buildings,
for the most part is spent among our selves and among our neighbors and
Countrymen. As among Carpenters, Masons, and Laborers, except men will fall
Of excess (...) Buylding^.
to guilding or peinting of these Houses. For in that much treasure may be
spent, and to no use. Also the Areses, Uerderers, and Tapistry works wherewith
they be hanged commonly, conueieth over into Flaunders and other strange.
Countries (where they be had from) much of our Treasure.


Knight. Sir, yet I must remember you of one thing more, which men do suppose
to be a great occasion of the spending of y^ treasure abroad: and it is, where
there is comen to y^ crown of late years much lands by reason of Monasteries,
colleges, and Chauntres dissolved, which men suppose has be^ the cause two
manner of ways, that there is less treasure a broad in the Realm. One is
because the revenues of the said places dissolved heretofore, were spent in the
country and went from hand to hand there, for vittaile cloth and other
things: and now are gone to one place out of the cou^ trey. Another is that
diverse men which had any riches or wealth uttered the same, to buy perselles of
the said dissolved lands lying commodious for them, whereby one way and other
the whole riches of the country is sweeped away.


Doctor. Truth it is also, that it wringed the country abroad for the time,
and had kept it so still if the Kings Majesty had not dispersed the same lands
abroad among the^ in the country again, but after y^ his highness departed
with a great deal of those possessions, part by gift and part by sale:
treasure has and will increase again abroad, as much as ever it was, if it be
not let by other means: so that I take y^ to be no great cause of the
dearth that we have, for the soil is not taken away, but the possession
thereof is only transferred from one kind of persons to another.


Knight. Then to return to the matter of the coin where we left. I have
heard your conceit how the alteration thereof, within our Realm did some men
no harm, as Buyers and sellers: some other it did good unto, as Farmors that
had Land at the old Rent: and some other as Gentlemen, men of war,
servant, and all other living by any rated or stented rent or stipend, were
great losers by it: But I heard you say it was so much withal to the loss of
the Prince, that it might be to the great peril of y^ whole Realm in process
of time. I marvel how it should be so, for I heard wise men say, that the
Queens highness Father did win inestimable great sums, by the alteration
of the Coin.


Doctor. So it was for the time, but I liken that gaynes to such as men have
when they sell away their lands, to have the greater some at one time, and
ever after to lose the continual increase that should grow thereof: for you
know all How the alt^ration of the ^oyne should be most ^oste to the Prince.
the treasure of this Realm, must once in few years come to the Princes
hands by one means or other, and from thence it should go abroad again to
the Subjects. As all Springes runs to the Ocean Sea, and out of it are they
spread abroad again: the^ as they came into y^ kings coffers at the first in
good metal, they came forth in such as you have heretofore seen. And albeit
it seems at y^ first view to empouerishe but the subjects only: at length
impouerisheth also the Prince: and then if the Prince should want in time of
war, specially sufficient treasure to pay for armor, weapons, tacklings of
ships, gunnes, and other artillary necessary for y^ war, and could by no
means have of the subjects wherewith to buy y^ same, what ease should the
Realm be in? Surely in very evil, and therefore these Coins and treasure be
not without cause called of wise men, Nerui bellorum (yt is to say) the Synowes
of war. And that is the greatest dasiger that I do consider, should grow
for want of treasure to the Prince and the Realm, for though a Prince may have
what coin he will current within his Realm, yet the strangers cannot be
compelled to take them. And I grant, if men might live within themselves, all
together without borowinge of any other thing outward, we might devise what
coin we would: ^ut since we must have need of other and they of us, we must
frame our things not after our own fantasies, but to follow the common
market of all the world, and w^e may not set the price of things at our
pleasure, but follow the price of the universal Market of the World, I grant
also that brass has been coined ere this, yea and Leather in some places. But
ever I read y^ that was at an extreme need, which thing is not to be
follow^d as an example, but to be eschewed as long as possible may be: And if
our treasure be far spent and exhaust (as it hapened in the later years of
King Henry the eight) I could wish that any other order were taken for the
recovery of it, then y^ deprauing of our coins, which serves the Prince but a
lit^e while, for some present shifte, and hindered him a long time afterward.
I am persuaded that within our Realm treasure might be soon recovered by
these two means: first if we forbad the bringing in and selling of so many tri
fles as I before rehearsed to be brought us from beyond the sea, and that
nothing made beyond the sea of our own commodities should be sold here. And
secondly, if we forbad that none of our commodities should pass unwrought over
sea, which being wrought here and soulde over should bring in infinite treasure
in short time.


Knight. Mary and there ye be contrary to the opinions of many a great wise
man, which think it better y^ all our wool were sold over sea unwrought,
then an^ Clothiers should be set a work withal, within this rea^.


Doctor. That were a strange thing in mine opinion, that any man should
think so, and what should move them to be of that opinion I pray you.


Knight, I will tell you. They take it that all insurrections and vproares for
the most part, do rise by occasion of these clothiers: For when clothiers lack
vent over sea: then is a great multitude of these clothiers idle. And when they
be idle, the^ they assemble in companies and murmur for lack of living, and so
pick one quarrel or other to stir the poor commons Whether all our Wool
were expedient to be ^ould over vnvvoug^t
that be as idle as they, to a commotion: And sometimes by occasion of wars
there musle needs be some stay of clothes, so as they cannot have always
like sale or vent: at every which time if the said Clothiers should take
occasion of commotio^, they think it were better that there were none of them
in the Realm at all, and consequently that y^ woll were uttered unwrought over
sea, then to have it wrought here.


Doctor. So it may seem to them that considers one inconvenience, and not
another. Surely who soever has many persons under his governance, shall have
much a do to govern them in quietness, and he that has a great familye shall
have sometimes trouble in the ruling of them. It were but a mean pollicye
either for a Prince to deminish his number, or for a Master of a house to put
away his Servants, because he would not have any trouble with y^ governance
of them: he that would so do, might be well resembled to a man that should sell
his land because he would not be troubled with the account of it. I think it
meet that we did not only increase y^ feate of clothing, but also intend
diverse other mo feats and occupations, ^hereby our People might be set a
work, rather then take away any occupation from them, specially such as
clothing is, that settes so many thousands a work, and enryche both Town
and Country. Where it is occupied in Venice, as I have heard, and in many
other places (...) Sea, they reward and (...) every man that brings in any
new Art, or mystery, whereby the people might be set a work, with such
things as should both find their Mysteries are to be increased rather than
diminished.
work men, and also bring some treasure or other commodity into the Country.
And shall we contrariwise labor to destroy our best and most profitable trade,
which is by clothing? I would know what thing else might bring us treasure from
(...) parties, or wherewith should so many of our people be set a work, as
have now their lyuings by clothing, if that occupacion were laid down?


Knight. Mary we might have treasure enough from outward Parties for our
Woolles, though nonne were wroughte within the Realm: And as for an
Occupation, to set our Clothiers a work, they might be set to the Plough and
husbandry, and that should make husbandry to be the more occupied, and grasing
less, when all these people that now do occupy clothing, should fall to
husbandry.


Doctor. As to the first that (...) said that Wool is sufficient to bring in
treasure: if it were (as it is not in deed) yet that Feate were not for the
Weal, nor for continuance of the Realm. For when every man would fall to
breed sheep and to increase Wool, and so at length all other occupations
should be set a side, and breedinge of sheep only occupied, then ye know
that a few sheep masters would serve for a whole Shyre: and so in process
of time y^ multitude of the subjects should be worn away, and none left but a
few Sheepherds, which were no number suffici^nt to serve the Prince at need,
or to defend this realm from Enemies. As to the other part of your tale,
whereby ye would that these Clothiers should fall from that occupation to
husbandry: how could so many added to them that occupy husbandry already, get
their lyuinge by the same, when they that be husbandmen now, have but a small
Lyuinge thereby. And if ye would say to me that they should have at all
times, free vent and full Sale of their corn over sea, then comes the same
inconvenience in that ye thought to avoid before, by putting them from
clothing. For some years it should happen either for wars or by reason of
plenty in all parties beyond the Sea, that they should have no vent of their
corn, and then be driven to be idle, and consequently for lack of living to
assemble together, and make like vproares as ye spoke of before. They have in
France more handy crafts occupied and a greater multitude of Artificers, then
we have here by a great deal, and for all that they have made many great
sturres and commocions there before this: yet they will not destroy artificers,
for they know that the highest Princes of them all, without such artificers
could not maintain their estate. Does not all their toules customs, taxes,
tallages, and subsidies chiefly grow by such artificers? What king can
maintain his estate with his yearly revenues only growing of his lands: For
as many servant in a house well set a work, gains every man somewhat to
their masster: So does every artificer in a Realm each gain somewhat, and
altogether a great mass to the king and his realm every year it brigeth.


Knight. And now because we are entered into communication of artificers, I will
make this division of them. Some of the^ do but convey money out of the
country: Some other that Three sorts of Artificers.
which they get, they do spend again in the country. And y^ third sort of
Artificers is of them that do bring in Creasure into the country. Of the
first sort I reckon all mercers, Grocers, Uintners, Haberdashers, Milleners,
and such as do sell wares growing beyond the sea, and do fetch out our One
brings out our Treasure.
treasure for the same, which kind of artificers as I recke^ them tolerable,
yet not so necessary in a common Weal, but they might be best spared of all
other. Yet if we had not other Artificers to bring in as much treasure as they
do carry forth, we should be great loosers by them. Of the second sort be
these Shoomakers, Tailours, Carpenters, Another spend that they g^t in the sa^e
country a^ gain.
Masons, Tylers, Bouchers, Brewers, Bakers, ann Uittailers of all sorts, which
like as they get their living in y^ country, so they spend it* but they bring
in no treasure unto us. Therefore we must chearish well the third sort. And
those be Clothiers, Tanners, Tappers, and Worstedmakers, The third sort bring
in Treasure, and there fore must be cherished.
only that I know, (which by their mysteries and faculties) do bring in any
treasure. As for our woll^s, felles, Tin, Led, Butter and Cheese, these be
commodityes that the ground bears requyring the industrye of a few persons,
and if we should only trust to such and deuyse nothing else to occupy our
selves with, a few persons would serve for the rearing of such things, and few
also it would find: and so should our realm be but like a grange better
furnished with beasts then with men, whereby it might be subject to the
spoil of other nations, about which is the more to be feared and eschued:
because the country of his own kind is apt to bring forth such things as
be for increase of cattle, then for such things as be for y^ nourishment
Pomp. Me*
of men. If Pomponeus mela be to be believed, which descrybing this I land
says thus. Plana, ingens, and ferax: sed eorum quae pecora, quam homines
benignius alant. That is to say, it is plain, large, and plentiful: But of
these things that nourishes Beasts more kindly then men. So many Forestes,
Chases, Parkes, Marshes, and waste grounds being more here, then most commonly
elsewhere, declare the same not to be all in vain, that he affyrmes. It has
not so much erable Ground, Tynes, Dlyues, Fruits, and such as be both most
necessary for the food of men. And as they require many hands in their
culture, so they find most persons food, as France and diverse other
Countries have. Therefore as much grosid as is here apt for these things would
be turned as much as may be to such uses as may sinde most persons. And over
that towns and Cities would be replenished with all kind of Artificers, not
only clothyers, which is as it were our natural occupation, but with Cappers,
Glouers, Paper makers, Glasiers, Paynters, Gold smithes, black smithes of al
sorts, Couerlet makers, needle makers, pinners and such other, so as we should
not only have enough of such things to serve our Realm and save an infinyte
treasure, that goes now over for many of the same: but also might spare of
such things ready wrought to be sold over, whereby we should fetch again
other necessary commodities or treasure. And this should both replenish the
Realm of People able to defend it, And also save and win much treasure to the
same. Such occupations alone do enrich diverse countries that be else baren of
them selves.

And what riches they bring to the Countries where they Mysteries do enrich
countrie^ that be else barren.
be well used. The Country of Flaunders, and Germany do well declare, where
through such occupations it has so many, and eke so wealthy Cities, y^ it were
almost incredible so little ground to sustain so much people. Wherefore in my
mind they are far wide of right consideration, y^ would have either none or
else lessc clothing wtin this Realm, because it is some time occasion of
business and tumults, which comes for lack of vent. There is nothing every
way so commodious or necessary for man's use, but it is sometimes by ill
handling occasion of some displeasure, no not fire and water that be so
necessary as nothing can be more.


Knight. Yea master Doctor we stand not in like case as France or Flaunders
that ye speak of: if they have not vente one way, they may have it another
way (...), for the firm land is round about them in manner. If they be at
war with one Neighbor, they will be friends with another to whose
Countries they may send their commodities to sell.


Doctor, So may we be, if we were so wise, to keep one Friend or other
always in hand. Who will be so mad being a Private man, but he will be sure
to do so. Let wise men consider what Friends tl, is Real^ has had Aliance
with (...) are to be ^cased and kept.
in time past. And if they be now lost or intercepted an ^ther way (...), let
us purchase other for them: or else give as little occasion of breach with our
Neighbors as may be. The Wise man as I remember, says in Ecclesiastes: Non
est bonum homini esle solum.


Knight. Also in France they have diverse Bands of men in Arms, in diverse
places of the Realm, to repress such (...) Armi^s (...): (...) as in (...).
Cumults quickly if any should arise. If we had the like here, we might be
boulde to have as many Ar^ers as they have.


Husband. GOD sworbote, that ever we should have any such Tyranntes come among
us: for as they say, such will in y^ Country of France take poor men's
Hens, Chikens, Pigges, and other provision, and pay nothing for it, except
it be an ill turn, as to Rauishe his Wife, or his Daughters for it: and even
in like manner said the ^ar chaunt man adding thereto, that he thought that
would rather be an occa^on of Commocions to be stirted then Merchant.
to be quenched. For (as he said) the Stomachs of English men would never
bear, to suffer such Injuries, and Reproaches, as he heard that such used to
do to the Subjects of Frau^e, which in reproach they call Pe^aunes.


Knight. Mary the Pryace might restrain them well yaough, for doing Outrages
upon great payaes.


Doctor. What if it were (...) in his power to do^ the Romans had sometimes
such men of arms in diverse places for defense of the Empire, it was thought,
that a^ length it over threw the same. Julius Caesar does that declare: and
many times after that when the Emperors died, the men of war Erected what
Emperor they lysted, sometime of a Slave or a Bondsman contrary to the Election
of the Senate of Rome, being chief Cou^saylors of the Empire, till the whole
Empire was clean destroyed: it is not for commotions of Subjects, that France
also ^eepeth such: but the slate and necessi^ty of the Country which is
environed about with enemies, and neither sea nor wall between the^, against
whose Inrodes and invasion they maintain those me^ of war of necessity. They
would feign lay the^ down, if they durst for fear of their neighbors. And
some wise men among them have said and written, that the same me^ of Arms may
be the destruction of their Kingdom at length. And beside that the large^sse
of our Dominion or Situation of the same toward other Countries, does not
require such men, nor yet the revenues of this realm is able to make up y^
like number with France. And then if we should make a less number, we should
declare our selves inferior in power to France, to whom we have been
hitherto counted Superior in successes, through the stoutness of our
English hearts. And therefore I would not have a small sore cured by a greater
grief, nor for auoydinge A less g^fe would not be (...) ^ith a (...).
of populer Sedicion, which happens very seldom and soon quenched, to bring
in a continual yoke and charge both to the Prince and the people.


Knight. You say well, and so as I can say no more against your semence, but
yet I would wish your saying could satisfy other men as well as it does me.


Doctor, Well, it is now time to make an end. I have troubled you here with
a tedious and long talk.


Knight. I could be content to be troubled longer of that sort.


(...). and Capper. And so could we, though it were all this day, but for
troubling of your selse gentle master Doctor.


Knight. Yet the most necessary point which we spoke of is yet behind, that
is, how these things may be remedied: And therefore we will not go from you
till we have heard your advice herein.


Doctor. A Gods name, I will show my fantasy in that part: But let us first
go to supper. And so we went to gether to our Supper, where our Host had
prepared honestly for us.


THE THIRD DIAlogue, wherein are devised some remedies for the same griefs.
Knight. AFter we ^ad well refreshed our selves at supper, I thought long till
I had known y^ judgment of mays^r Doctor, about the remedies of the things
above rem^bred, how he thought they might be best redressed, and with least
danger or alteration of things. (And therefore I said unto him thus:) Since
ye have (...) unto us (good master Toctor) our dis^ases and also the
occasions thereof, we pray you leave us not destitute of convenient remedies
for the same. You have perswad^d us full, and we perceive it well our selves,
that we are not now in so good slate as we have been in times past. And you
have showed us probable occasions that has brought us to that case, therefore
now we pray you show unto us, what might remedy these our grie^es.


Doctor, When a man death perceive his grief, and the occasion also of the
some, he is in a good way of amendment. For knowing the occasion of the
gr^efe, a man may soon avoid the same occasion: and that being avoided, the
grief is also taken away. For as the Philosopher says: Sublata causa tollitur
effectus But let us briefly recount y^ grie^es and then the occasions thereof,
and thirdly go to the inquisicion of the remedies for the same. First this
universal dearth in comparison of y^ former age, is y^ chiefest grief y^ all
men complains most on. Secondly Enclosures, and turning of erable ground to
paslure. Thirdly decayinge of Towns, Towneshippes, and Uillages, and last
division and diversity of opinions in religion. The occasions or causes of
these, although I have before diversely declared after the diversity of men's
minds and opinions. Yet here I will take out of the same, But only such as I
think verily to be the very just occasions in deed. For as I showed you
before, diverse men diversely judge, this or that to be the cause The original
cause in every thing is to be searched.
or occasion of this or that grief, and because there may be diverse causes of
one thing, and yet but one principal cause that brings forth the thing to
pass: Let us seek out y^ cause, omitting all the mean causes, which are
driven forward by the least oryginall cause, as in a press going in at a
slraight, the foremost is driven by him that is next him, and the next by him
that follows him, and the third by some vi olent and strong thing that dryues
him forward, which is the first and pryncipall cause of the putting forward
of the rest before him. If he were kept back and stayed, al they that go before
would stay withal. To make this more plain unto you: as in a clock there be
many wheels, yet the first wheel being sturred it dryueth the next, and that
y^ third etc. till the last that moves the instrument that strickes the
clock: so in making of an house, there is the master that would have the
house made, there is the Carpenter, and there is the stuff to make the house
with all: y^ sluffe never stirs till the work man do set it forward, the
workman never travails but as y^ master provoke him with good wages, and so
he is the principal cause of this house making. And this cause is of y^
learned called efficient, as that, y^ brings the pryncipal thing to effect.
Persuade this man to let this building alone, and the house shall never come to
pass, yet the house can not be made without the stuff, and workmen, and
therefore they be called of some causae sine quibus non, and of some other
Materiales, and Formales, but all comes to one purpose. It is the efficient
cause, y^ is, the pryncipall cause, without removing of which cause y^ thing
that cannot be remedied. And because that it was graffed in Diverse sort^ o^
(...) be.
(...) man's judgment, yt the cause of any thing being taken away, the (...) is
taken awa^ with all. Therefore men took the causes of these things that we
talk of without judgment, not discerning the principal cause from the mean
causes, that by taking away of these causes that be but secondary as it were,
they were never the near to remedy the thing they went about, much like the
wife of Ajax Cic top. (...). 5.
that lost her husband in y^ ship called Argos, wished y^ those Fur beams
had never been felled in Peleius wood, whereof the said ship was made, when
that was not the eff^ent cause of the loosing of her husband, but y^ wyld ^yre
cast in the saidshippe, which did set it a fire. Such causes as they be, be
called remote, as it were to far of: so they be also idle and of no
operation of them selves, without* sum other to set them a work, and percase
I (while I degresse so far from my matter) shall be thought to go as far from
the purpose, yet to come to our matter, and to apply this y^ I have said to
the same, Some thinks this dearthe begins Sublata causa tollitnr essectus.
by the tenant in selling his wares so dear, and some other by the Lord in
reysing his land so high. And some by these enclosures. And some other by the
reysing of our coin or alteration of the same. Therefore some by taking some
one of these things away (as their opinion served them to be the pryncipall
cause of this dearth) thought to remedy this dearth. But as the trial of the
thing showed they to^ched not the cause efficient pryncipall, and therefore
their devise took no place, and if they had, the thing had been ^emedied
forthwith, for that is proper to the principal cause that as soon as it is
taken awaythe effect is removed also. Yet I confess all these things rayseth
together with this dearth, that every of them should sceme to be the cause of
it, nevertheless that is no good proof that they should be the causes of it,
no more then was the steeple made at Dover, the cause of the decay of the Haven
of Dover, because the Haven began to decay the same time, that the Steeple
began to be builded: nor yet, though some of these because of the other in
deed, yet they be not all the efficient causes of this dearth. But as I have
said before of men thrusting one another in a thronge one dryuing another, and
but one first of all, that was the chief cause of that force: So in this How
one thing is cause of another, and that of the third.
matter that we talk of, there is some one thing that is the oryginall cause
of these causes, that be as it were secondary and makes them to be the causes
of other. as I take y^ reising of al prises o^ victauls at y^ husbandmans hand,
is cause of the reysing of y^ rent of his land. And y^ Gentlemen fall so much
to take ^earmes to their hands least they be driven to buy their provision to
dear, that is a great cause again that Enclosure is the more used: For
Gentlemen having much land in their hand and not being able to weild all and
see it manured in husbandry, which requires the industry labourr and
governance of a great many of persons, do convert most of that Land to
Pas^ures, wherein is required both less charge of Persons, and of the which
^euerthelesse comes more clear gains. Thus one thing hanges upon another,
and sets forward one another, but one first of all is y^ chi^fe cause of all
this circuler motion and impulsion. I (...) hile, that y^ chief cause was not
in the h^andman, nor yet in y^ (...). Let us (...) whether it were in the
merchant man. It appears by reason that all wares bought of him are dearer
now fare the^ they were wont to be, the husbandman is driven to (...) his co^mo
dities deare^: now yt the matter is brought to mais er ^ar chaunt, how can ye
anoyd the cause from being in you.


Merchant. Sir easly enough for as we sell now dearer all things then we
were wont to do. So we buy dearer all things of strangers: and therefore let
them put the matter from us, for we disburden our selves of this fault.


Doctor. And they be not here to make answer, if they were, I would ask them
why they sell their wares dearer now then they were wont to do.


Merchant. Mary and to that I heard many of them answer er this (when they
were asked that question) two manner of ways. One was they selled in deed no
dearer then they The strangers aunsvvere touching this dearth.
were wont to do: saying for proof there of that they would take for their
commodities, as much and no more of our commodities then they were wont to do.
As for our tod of woll they would gieue as much Wine, Spice or Silk as they
were wont to give for so much. Yea for an ounce of our silver or gold, as much
stuff as ever was given for y^ same: and their other answer was yt if we
reckened they did sell their wares dearer because they demanded more pieces of
our coin for the same then they were wont to do, that was not their fault they
said but ours, that made our pieces less or less worth then they were in
times past. Therefore they demanded the more pieces of them for their Wares,
saying, they carried not what names we would gieue our coins, they would
consider y^ quantity and right value of it, that they were esteemed at, every
where through y^ world.


Knight. Then I would have answered the^ there of this sort. If they came
hither but for our commodities, what made it y^ matter to them, what quantity
or value our coin were. If so they might have as much of our commodities for
y^ same as they were wont to do. If they came again for our silver and gold.
It was never lawful, nor yet is expedient they should have any from us.
Wherefore I would think that was no cause why they should sell their wares
dearer then they were wont to do.


Doctor. Then he might have answered again, that it chaunsed not all ways
together, that when they had wares which we wanted, we had again al those
wares y^ they looked for. And therefore they having percase more wares
necessary for us, then we had of such wares as they looked for, would be glad
to receive of us such stuff current in most places, as might buy that they
looked for elsewhere at their pleasure: And that they will say was not our
coin. And as for our laws of not transporting over sea any gold or silver,
they passed not thereof, so they might have the same ones conveyed the^. As
they had many ways to have it so, which I have before remembered. Finally he
might say that we had not in deed our coin in that estate our selves, that
by the name they pretended, but esteemed both the value and quantity of the
stuff it was made of. For if they had brought unto us half an own of silver,
we would not take it for an ownce: nor if they brought us brass mingled with
Silver, we would not take it for pure S^luer, and if we would not take it so
at their hands, why should they take it otherwise at ours. Then they saw no
man here but would rather have a cup of silver the^ of brass, no not the
master of our mi^ts though they would otherwise persuade the one to be as
good as the other. Wherefore seeing us esteem the one in deed better then the
other, as all the world does beside, why should they not esteem our coin
after y^ quantity and value of the substance thereof, both after the rate it
was esteemed among us, and also every other where. And so as in more pieces now
there is but the value that was in fewer pieces before, therefore they demanded
greater number of pieces, but ^et the like value in substance that they were
wont to demand for their wares. Now let us see whether now goes the cause of
this matter? from the strangers: For me thinks he has resonably excused
himself and put it from him.


Knight. By your tale it must be in the coin, and (...) in the ^ynges highness
by whose (...) yt same was altered.


Doctor. Yea percase it goes further yet, yea to such as were the first
counsa^lours of that deed, pretending it should be to his high^es great and
notable commoditye, which if his grace might have perceived to have been but a
mome^tain profit, and cont^all loss both to his highness and also his whole
R^alme. He with his people might have been easily revoked again, from the
practice of that simple de^se: but as a man that entendeth to heal an other by
a medecin y^ he thinks good, thought it prove otherwise, is not much to be
blamed: no more was the kings majesty in any wise, (in whose time this was
don, which is not to be supposed to have intended thereby any l^sse, but rather
commoditye to him self and his s^iects) to be herein reprehended, albeit the
thing succeeded beside the purpose.


Knight. Then ye think plainly y^ this alteration of y^ coin was the chief
and pri^cipall cause of this universal dearth.


Doctor. Yea no doubt, and of many of y^ said grienes that we have ta^ked ^f,
by means, it being the oryginall of all, and that beside the reason of the
thing, being plain i^gh of it self: ^.
also experience and proof does make it more plain. For even with y^
alteration of y^ coin (...) this dearth, and as the (...) appayred so rose the
mi^s of thing^s with all: and this to (...) true, y^ few (...) of old co^ne
which afterward (...), did (...). For ye should have for any of y^ same coy^e
as much of any ware ^ither outward or inward as ever was wont to be had for the
same. For as the (...) is mad^ ^sse* there goes more number to make up the
tale, and (...) this (...) not together at all men's hands, ther^ore some ha^h
great losses and some other great (...) thereby, and that made such a
general (...) for the thing at the (...). And thus to conclude* I think this
alteration of y^ Coin to have been y^ first origi^all cause, that strangers
first sold their wares dearer to us, and that made all Farmors, and Tenaunts,
that reared any commodity again, to sell y^ same dearer. The dearth thereof
made the Gentlemen to raise their r^ts, and to take Farms to their ha^es for
their better (...), and consequently, to enclose more Grounds.


Knight. If this were the ch^fest ^ause of the dearth, as of very good
probability (by you master Doctor) here tofore alleged, t should s^eme to
be: how comes it to pass^ (where as you say, if the cause be removed, the
effect is also taken away) that the pryces of all things fall not back to
their old rate, where as now long (...) our english coin (to the great honor
of our noble Princess which now rayghueth (has been again thoroughly restored
to his former purity and perfection.


Doctor. In de^de sir I must needs confess unto you (although it may seem at
the first sight to discredit my former sa^ings in some part) that
notwithstanding that our Coin at this present day, yea and many years past,
has recovered his aunciente goodness, yet the dearth of all things, which I
before afirmed to have proceeded of y^ decay thereof, to ^emayne and continewe
still amongst us. Wherefore as your doubt herein moved very aptly, and to y^
purpose, is well worthy the consideration: so do I accoumpt it of such
difficulty, y^ perhaps it would not be thought to stand with modesty, to
undertake without far^her study presently to dissolve the same.


Knight. Sir, I pray you for this time om^t the pleadinge of m^desty. I
understand well (...) by your former talk, that you are not unprovided of
sufficient store (without farther deliberation) to satisfy us w^thal, in
greater matters (if need were) then these.


Doctor. Well, I am cont^t (because you will have it so) to yield to your
importunity. I will utter fra^ckely unto you mine Opinion herein, but under
protestation that if you like it not, ye reject it, imparting likewise with
me your own Fantasies and judgments in the same: I find therefore two
special causes in mine Opinion, by means of the which, notwtstanding ye
restitution made in our ceine, the aforesaid dearth of things in respect of y^
former age remains yet among us. The first is, that whereas imme diately
after the baseness of our Coin in y^ time of King Henry the eight, y^ prices
of all things generally among al sorts of people, rose: it must needs happen
here withal (as ye know) that our gentlemen which lived only upon y^ ^euenues
of their lands, were as near or nearer touched (as is before proved) with the
smarte hereof, then any other of what order or estate so ever. This therefore
being taken as most true, the Gentlemen desirouse to mayntaine their former
credo^e in bearing out y^ Port of their Predecessors, were driven o^ necessity
as often as whenever any Leases devised for term of years, by themselves or
their ancestors were thoroughly expired, and fell into their hands, not to let
them out again for the most part, but as y^ rentes of them were far racked
beyo^de y^ old: Yea this racking and hoyssinge up of rentes has continued
ever since yt time until this present day: hereupon the husbandman was
necessarily enforced, whereas his rent was now greater then before, and so
continues unto this day, to sell his victailes dearer, and to continue the
dearth of them: and likewise other artificers withal to maintain the like
proportion in their wares, wherefore as this dea^th at the first time (as I
said before) sprang of the alteracion of the coin, as of his first and
chiefest efficient cause: so d^e I attribute the continuance of it hitherunto
and so for^ward, partly to the racked and stretched rentes which have lasted,
yea, and increased ever since that time hetherunto, and so are like to continue
I know not how long. Now if we would in these our days, have the old
pennyworthes generally restored among us a gain. The restoring of our good
Coin, which already is past, and before ye improued rentes would only of it
self have be^ sufficient to have brought this matter to pass, will not serve
in these our days, except wtall the racked rentes be pulled down which
possibly cannot be without the common consent of our landedme^ throughout yt
whole rea^. Another reason I conceive in this matter to be y^ great store and
plenty of treasure, which is walking in these parts of y^ world far more in
these our days, the^ ever our forefathers have seen in times past. Who does
not understand of y^ infinite su^mes of gold and silver, which are gathered
from y^ Indies and other countries, and so yearly transported unto these
coasts? As this is otherwise most certain, so does it evidently appear by the
common report of al ancient men living in these days. It is their constant
report, y^ in times past and within y^ memory of man, he has been accou^pted a
rich and wealty man and well able to keep house among his neighbors which all
things discharged, was clearly worth xxx. or xl. l'. but in these our days y^
man of y^ estimation, is so far in the common opinion from a good houskeeper,
or man of wealth, y^ he is reputed the next neighbor to a beggar. Wherefore
these ii. reasons seemed unto me to co^tain in them sufficient probability for
causes of the continuance of this general dearth.


Knigh^. Yea, but (sir) if the increase of treasure be partly the occasion of
this continued dearth: then by likelihood in other our neighbors nations, unto
whom yearly is conuayghed great store of gold and silver, the pryces of
victayles, and other wares in like sort, raised according to the increase of
their treasure?


D^ctor. It is even so, and therefore to utter freely mine Opinion (as I
accoumpt it a matter very hard for the difficulties above rehearsed to revoke or
call back again all our Enlish^ wares unto their old prices? so do I not
take it to be either profitable or convenient for the Realm, except we would
wish that our commodities should be uttered good cheap to strangers, and
theirs on y^ other side dear unto us, which could not be without great
impouerishing of the Commonweal, in a very short time.


Knight. Now that you have so well touched the occasion of this derth, and what
is to be hoped or wished of y^ same so fully, that I am well satisfied withal.
I pray you sh^we me the remedies of this great Inclosiers, whereof all the
realm complains of so much, and has complained long upon. For you have well
persuaded how it is a mean of great desolation of this real^ne, and that is
long of y^ great profit that men have by pasture, over y^ they have by tillage
y^ they turn so much to pasture. Now I would feign hear how it might be
remedied again: for I have heard this matter of long time, and often reasoned
upon as well in Parliament, as in Cou^sayles, and yet small remedy found
therefore that took effect.


Doctor. If I, then after so many wise heads as were in those Parliaments and
Counsels, would take upon me to correct (as they say) Magnificat, and to
find a remedy for this thing, which they could never do. I might be reckened
very arrogant.


Knight. Yet tell your fantasy therein, for though you miss of the right
mean to reform that, it shall be no more shame for you to do so, then it was
for so many wise men as ye speak of to miss.


Doctor. You say truth, and since I speak nothing in this part, y^ I would
have taken as it were for a law or determined thing, but as a certain motion
for other wise men to consider, and to admit or reject, as to their better
reason shall seem good: therefore as ye have boldned me already with your
patience to say thus far, I will not spare to declare my mind in this. But
still I must keep my ground, that I spoke of, that is to try out the
effectual cause of this enclosures, and then by taking away of the cause to
redress the thing.


Knight, I pray you do so, for to me it seems very reasonable that ye say
and agreeable to that I heard a good Ph^tion tell me ones, when I was sick of
an ague: when I asked him why he gave me purgati^s that made me yet weaker
Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
then ^ was, being weak enough already: saying, he had more need to give me
things that should make me stronger. Then he answered me that choler was the
cause of my sickness, and that he gave me those purgations to avoid this
humor, which being the cause of my disease ones taken away, the sickness
should be rid from me with all. And therefore I pray you use your accustomed
order in this matter and tell the cause of these Enclosures.


Doctor. I showed you before in our communication in the Garden, the things
that I thought to be the cause thereof, and partly the remedy of the same.


Knight. So did other men among us tell their fantasy as then, but now, we
pray you tell which of al those causes ye take for the necessary and efficient
cause of this matter.


Doctor. To tell you plain it is avarice yt I take for y^ principal cause
thereof but can we devise yt all covetousness can be taken from men. No, no more
the^ we can make men to be without How Inclosiers may be r^medied.
wealth, without gladness, without fear, and without all affections: what
then? we must take away from men the occasion of their covetousness, in this
part, what is that? the ^xceeding luker that they see grow by these enclosures
more then by their husbandry. And that may be done by any of these two means
yt I will tell you. Either by the minishing the luker that men have by gasing.
Or else by aduaunsing Omnes sun^ lucri cupidi*
of the profit of husbandry til it be as good, and as profitable to the
occupiers as grasing is, for every man (as Plato says) is naturally covetous
of luker. And yt wherein they see most luker, they will most gladly exercise: I
showed you before, that there is more luker by grasing of x. Acres to ye
occupier alone, then is in y^ tillage of xx. And y^ causes thereof, be many, one
is y^ grasing requires, small charge and small labor, which in tillage co^sumes
much of ye men's gains, though it be true y^ the tillage of x. acres brings more
gains generally amongs the master and all his mainy then the grasing of xx.
acres. Another great cause is, that whatsoever thing is rered upon grasing has
free vente hoth over this side and also beyond the sea to be sold at the
highest penny. It is contrary of all things reared by tillage, for it requires
both great charge of servant and of labor. And also if any good cheap be of
corn, it paieth scant for the charge of y^ tillage. And then if the market do
arise either within y^ Realm or without, the poor husband shall be so
restrained from sellyng his corn, y^ he never after shall have any joy to set
his plough in the ground which makes every man forsake tillage and fall to
grasing which brings all these Enclosures.


Knight. Now what remedy for that.


Doctor. Mary as for the first point, that is, touching the unequal charges of
tillage and grasing, that can not be helped in all points, by reason the nature
of both reapes the contrary. Therefore the latin tongue calls the one, that
is pasture Prat^ quasi paratum.
pratum, that is as much to say as: paratum, ready. But thee other thing might
be remedied, that yt husbandma^ might have as much liberty at all times to sell
his corn either with in the Realm, or without: as the grasiers has to fell
his, which would make the husbandmen more willing to occupy their plough. And
other seeing them thrive would turn their pasture to tyllage. And though it
enhaunse the market for the time, yet would it cause much more tillage to be
used and consequentely more Corn, within time of ple^tye within this Realm,
might bring in much treasure. And in time of^ arsity would suffice for y^
realm as showed you before. And this with luker they should ^te entysed to
occupy the Plough, yea and with other privileges. I have red y^ in this realm
sometime there was such a law as a man that had trespassed the law of
misaduenture moughte have taken the Plough tail for his sainctuary. Also yt
occupation was had so honorable among the Romans yt one was taken from
holding the plough to be Consul in Rome, who after his year ended thought no
scorn to resort to y^ same feate again. What occupatio^ is so necessary or so
profitable for ma^s life as this is. Or what mystery is so void of al craft as
the same is, and how little is it regarded: yea how much it is despised: that
many in these days rep^tes the^ but as villains, pesaunts, or slaves, by whom
the proudest of the^ have their livings. So yt I marvel much there is any
(seeing such ability and contempt of y^ thing) will occupy the feat of husbandry
at al: For as honor nourishes al sciences, so dishonor must needs decay
the^. And therefore if ye will have husbandry increased ye must honor and cherish
it, yt is to let the^ have honest gains thereby and since yt gains shall come
into your country why should you be offended therewt. Another way is to
abate the commodity of grasing as when any tax is requisite to be granted to
y^ Prince, if lands be chargeable thereto, to charge one aker of pasture as much
as two of erable. Or else to burden wolles and fels, and such things as are
reared by grasing y^ pass to y^ parts be yond y^ sea vnwrouth, with double
talage over any corn tra^sported, and so by enhaunsing the profit of tyllage,
and abasing of the profit of grasing, I doubt not but Husbandrye would be more
occupied and grasing much less. And thereby these enclosures to be broken up.
Also there is one thing of old time ordained in this realm which being kept
unaltered would help hereunto also, that is where men are enter co^miners in
y^ common fields, and also have their porcions so entermedled one with another,
that though they would they could not enclose any part of y^ said fields so long
as it is so. But of late diverse men finding greater profit by grasing then by
Husbandry, have found the means either to buy their neighbors parts round
about them. Or else to exchange with them so many acres in this place, for so
many in another: whereby they might bring all their lands together, and so
enclose it, for the avoiding whereof I think verily, that it was so of old
time ordained, that every Tenant had his land not all in one parcel of every
field, but enterlaced with his neighbors lands so as here should be three
acres, and then his neighbor should have as many, and over that he other three
or iiii. and so after the like rate be ye most parts of the copy holds that I
do know in this country, which I think good were still so continued for
avoiding of the said enclosures, and thus far as to that matter.


Merchant. Now that ye have well declared your opinion in these matters of the
common dearth and enclosures. I pray you tell us your mind what should be the
occasion of the decay Of Towns decayed.
of the good towns of this Realm, and of all bridg^ highwayes, and
Hospitalles, and how the same may be remedied and releued again. For that
these husbandmen and dwellers of the country, find not so great lack in the
fields abroad, but Citizens an^ Burgeses find as much within their walls,


Doctor, Since I have begone to take upon me to tell my fantasy in all these
things. I will go through. In mine opinion. y^ good occupations heretofore
used in the said Towns, was occasion of their wealth in times past, and the
laying down of those occupations again is the cause of the decay of the same
towns. Wherefore if such occupations may be ^euyued again in the same, they
would recover their former wealth again.


Merchant. I believe that well, that the decay of the occupations was the
decay of these towns, but what I pray you, was the occasion of such decay of
the occupations.


Doctor. I will tell you while men were contented with such as were made in the
market towns next unto them, then were The occasion of the decay of our
Towns.
they o^ our Towns and cities wellset a work, as I knew the time when men
were contented with Cappes, Hattes, Gyrdels, and Points, and all manner of
garments made in the towns next adjoining, whereby the Towns were then well
occupied and set a work, and yet the money paid for the same stuff remained
in the country. Now, the poorest youngeman in a country cannot be content
with a lether gyrdle, or lether points, Kuyues, or Daggers made nigh home. And
specially no Gentleman can be content to have either Cappe, Cote, Doublet,
Hose, or Shyrte in his country, but they must have this gear come from London
and yet many things hereof are not there made, but beyond the sea: whereby the
artificers of our good towns are idle and the occupations in London, and
specially of the towns beyond the seaes, are well set a work even upon our
costs. Therefore I would wish some stay were devised for coming of so many
trifles from beyond the Sea, and specially of such things as might be made
here amongs our self. Or else might be either all spared or else less used
among us, as these drynking and looking glasses, painted clothes, perfumed
gloves, daggers, knives, pinnes, points, aglets buttons, and a thousand other
things of like sort. As for silks, wines, and spice, if there came less
over, it made no matter. But specially I would that nothing made of our
commodities, as wolles felles, and tin, such be brought from beyond the sea
to be sold here: but yt all those should be wrought within this realm: were
it not better for us y^ our own people were set a work with such things then
strangers. I am sure xx. thousand persons might be set a work within this
realm, that are set a work beyond sea with those things that now be made
beyond the Sea, and might be made here: (might not yt Prince be glad of any
aid, whe^eby he might find X. M. persons through the whole year, and burden
his treasures with never a p^nny thereof?) I think these things might be
wrought here not only sufficient to set so many a work and serve y^ realm,
but also to serve other parts, as all kind of Cloth, and ^ersey: Worsteds,
Couerlets, and Carpets of tapestry: Caps, knit Sleues, Hosen, Peticotes, and
Hattes: then Paper both white and brown, parchment, velam, and all kind of
Leather ware, as gloves, points, gyrdl^s, skins for Ierkins: and of tin all
manner of vessel, and also all kind of glasses, and ^arthen pots, tennice
balls, cards, tables, and chesses, since we will needs have such things. And
Daggers, knives, hammers, sawes, chesells, axes and such things made of iron
might not we be ashamed to take all these things at strangers hands, and
set such a multitude of their people a work as I spoke of now, whose finding
and wages we do bear now. Where all this profit might be saved within the
Realm, where it should not go from us, but return to us again from whence
it came, and in settinge up of these occupations, I would have them most
preferred and cherished, that brings most commodity and treasure into the
country, as ye must consider three sorts of occupations: one that carries
out the treasure, the second sort, that as it carries none forth of ye
country, so it brings none in, but that it gets it spends in the
country, the third brings in treasure to the country. Of the first sort
are (...), Milleners, (...), these galley men, Mercers, Fuslian Sellers,
Grocers, and Pothecaries that sell^th us any Wares made beyond the Sea, for
they do but exhaust the treasure of the Realm. Of the second sort are
Uyctaylers, Inholders, Bouchers, Bakers, Brewers, Tailors, Cordwinders,
Sadlers, Carpenters, Io^ners, Masons, Black Smythes, Turners, and Hoopers,
which like as they convey no money out of y^ country, so they bring none in.
But where as they get it they spend it. Of the third sort be these, clothiers,
cappers, worstedmakers, That art^ is to be most chearished in a town that
bringes most to the town.
Pewterers, Tanners which be all that we have of any art which I can now
reckon, that brings into the realm any treasure. Therefore these arts are to
be chearished, whereas they be used, and where they be not they would be set
up, and also other sciences mo, as making of glasses, making of Swerdes,
Daggers, R^iues, and al tools of Iron and Steel, also making of pinnes,
points, laces, thread, and all manner of paper, and parchme^t. I have heard say
that the chief trade of Couentry was heretofore in making of blew threde, and
then the town was rich even upon that trade in manner only, and now our
thredde comes all from beyond Sea. Wherefore that trade of Couentry is
decayed, and thereby the town likewise. So Bristow Towns are enriched with
some one ^ade
had a great trade by making of points, and was the chief mystery that was
exercised in the town, and albeyt these be but two of the lightest faculties
that are, yet were there two great towns chiefly maintained by thesetwo
faculties above rehearsed. I heard say in Venice (that most flourishing city
at these days of al Europe) if they may here of any cunning crafts man in any
faculty, they will find the means to allure him to dwell in their city, for
it is a wonder to see what a deal of Money one good o^upyer does bring into a
town, though he himself does not gains to his own commoditye but a poor
living. As for example, what Money one Worstedmaker brynges into y^ town where
he dwelles, and how many has lyuings under him, and what wealth he bryngs to
y^ town where he dwells, truly I can not sufficiently declare, for by a few
worstedmakers y^ some towns have they are grown to great wealth and riches.
So of Clothyng and Cappyng. But where other cities do allure unto them good
workmen, ours will expel them out, as I have known good workmen as well
Smythes and Weauers have common from strange par ties to some Cities within
this Realm ^ntending to set up their crafts, and because they were not free
there (but specially because they were better Workmen then was any in the
Town) they could not be suffered to work there. Such incorporations had
those Mysteries in those Towns that none might work there in their faculty,
except they did compounde with the first.


Capper. And do you think it reasonable that a stranger should be as free in
a City or Town, as they that were prenti^es there: then no m^n would be
Prentice to any occupation if it we^e so.


Doctor. I said not that they shall have commonly like liberty or Fraunchise,
but as one craft makes but one particular company of a Town or City, so I
would have the weal of the whole City rather regarded, then the commodity or
Fraunchise of one craft or mystery: for though commonly no^e should be
admitted there to work, but such as are free yet when a singular good workman
in any mystery comes, which by his good knowledge might both enstructe them of
the Tow^ie being of the same faculty, and also bring into the Town much
Commodity beside. I would in that case have private Liberties and Privileges
give place to a public weal, and such a man gladly admitted for his
excellency to the Freedom of the same Town, wy^houte burdenyng of him with
any charge for his first entry or set ting up. Yea where a Town is decayed and
lackes artificers to furnish the Town with such crafts, as were other
sometimes exercised well there or might be, by reason of the situation and
Commodity of the same Town, I would have such crafts men allured out of
other places where they be plenty, to come to those Towns decayed to dwell,
offering them their Freedom, yea their house rent free, or some stock lent
them, of the common stock of such towns, and when the town is well furnished
of such Artistcers, then to stay the coming in of For^rs, but while y^ town
lackes enhabitauntes of artific^rs. It were no policy for the restoration of
the town to keeye of any stra^g artificers, for the most part of all towns
are mainteyned by crafts men of all sorts, but specially by those y^ ma^e any
wares to sell out of the country and brynges therefore treasure into the same.
As clothiers, cappers, worstedmakers, hatmakers, poyntmakers, pinners,
painters, founders, smythes of all sorts, cutlers, glouers, tanners, parch
meant makers, gyrdlers, poursers, makers of paper, thredmakers, turners, basket
makers, and many other such. As for the mercers, and haberdashers, vinteners,
and grocers, I cannot see what they do to a town, but find a living to v.
or vi. housholdes, and in stead thereof empoue^ish ten times as many, but
since men will needs have silks wine and spice it is as good that men do
spend their money upon such in their own town, as to be driven to seek the
same further, as for y^ rest of y^ artificers, like as I said before eue^ as
they take no money out of the Country so they bring none in, as Taylours
Shoomakers, Carpenters, Ioyners Tylers, Ma^ons, Bouchers, vittailers, and such
like. Also an other thing I reckon would help much to relieve our Towns
decayed, if they would take order that al y^ wares made there, should have a
special mark, and that mark to be set to none but to such as be truly
wrought, and also that every Artificer dwelling out of al towns (such as
cannot for the commodity of their occupations, be brought to any town to
enhabite, as Fullers, Tanners and Clothers) should be limited to be under
the correction of one good Town or other, and they to sell no ware but such as
are first approved and sealed by the Town that they are lymitted unto. And by
these two means, that is to say, first by staying of wares wrought beyond
sea, which might b^e wrought within us, from coming in to be sold. Secondly by
restraining of our wolles, tin, felles, and other commodityes from passing
over vnwroughte. And thirdly by brynging in (under the correction of good
towns) artificers dwelling in the countreies: making wares to be sole outward,
and those wares to be viewed and sealed by the town seal before they should
be sold. I would think our Towns might be soon restored to their
ancient Wealth or far bettered if they would follow this.


Knight. Now we pray you go to the last matter ye spoke of how these diversity
of opynions may be taken away, which troubles the people very sore, and makes
great sedition and de uision among them, and in manner makes debate between
neighbor and neighbor, the Father and his Son, y^ man and his Wife, which is
yet more to be feared, then all other the foresaid losses of worldly goods.
For if we were never so poor, and did nevertheless agree among our selves,
we should lycke our selves hoale again in short space.


Doctor. Ye say truth with concord weak things do increase and (...) big.
And contrariwise with discord strong things wax weak. And it must needs be
true that truth it self Goncordia quae res crescunt discordia maxim
di^abuntur.
says. Every kingdom divided in it self shall be desolate. Wherefore I cannot
forbear to show you my poor opinion, how so great a mischief as this is,
may be avoided out of this our common Weal: and still I will use one trade, as
in seeking out the oryginall cause, and by taking away of that, to show the
remedy. I take the chief cause hereof as well the sins of the^ that be the
ministers of Christ's holy word and mysteries, as of you that be the flock.
And first of ours that have swarued altogether, from their due course order
and profession to all kind of liberality, not only to the baseness of lay men,
but far inferior to them in pride, covetousness, and such. Wherefore ye lay
men seeing in us no excellency in our manners in deed, think us unworthy to
be your Leaders and Pastors, or to whose doctrine ye should gieue credence,
whom ye see in living far discrepant from the same. And therefore ye take
upon you y^ judgment of spiritual things, to whom i^ does not appertain. As
one inconvenience draws ever another after him, for 'so long as the ministers
of the church were of those manners and conversation agreeable with their
doctrine. So long all men, yea the greatest princes of the world and the
wysest me^ were content to believe our doctrine, and to obey us in things
concerning ye (...): and since we fell from the perfection of life, we grew out
of credit, and ye holy doctrine of Christ suffered slander by our sinful
living. So we have gieuen the first occasion of this evil, and ye have taken
it as an instrument to The occasion of the scylme in matters of reli gion.
work this scysme withal. And though both do evil therein, yet the remedy ought
to begin at the root of this mischyef, which I take to be in the ministers
and pastors spiritual. And to be plain with you, and no more to dissemble
our ownefaultes, then I have done yours, except we reform our selves first,
I can have no great trust to see this general scysme and division in religion
utterly taken away: it may percase, with authority be for a time appeased, but
ne uer so as it spring not up again, except we reform our selves first.


Knight. Mary and I think ye have been well disciplined and corrected already,
so as ye had good cause to be reformed as by taking much of your possessions
from you, and in burdening of your benefices with subsidies, as well annual as
proportional, and other ways. What other reformation would ye have more.


Doctor. Yea no doubt we have had beating inoughe if that would have served,
but some masters with little beating will teach their scholars better, the^
other with more strypes ca^ do, and again some scholars will be reformed wi^h
less beating then other. So you and we do now, you in beating enough but little
teaching, and we again little regardyng the (...) dolearne as little. For
notwithstanding these pu nishments that we have had, the reproaches and
reuylinge and opening of our faults, see how many of us have reformed our
selves, yea so much as in our outward duties, whereunto we are bound both by
gods law, and our cannons laws, and decrees: how many more of us have resorted
to our (...) to be resident thereon, which not only by the said laws, but
also upon great penalties we are bound unto by the laws of this Realm. How
many less now then before have studied to heap ^ (...) upon Benefice, when
we be scante able to discharge one of them, what better trial or examination
is there now in admyttyng of ministers of the church* What more exact search
is made by our Bishops, for worthy men to be admitted to the cure of souls:
What letter execution of our cannons. and decrees does our Bishops, Deanes,
and Archdearons in their visitations now, then they did before? Yea what better
hospitality residence, or ministration either of the word or of their other
duties do our prelates and Bishops now then they did before? do they not lurk
in their mansions and manor places far from their cathedral churches as they
were wont, and scant ones a year will see their principal church, where they
ought to be continually resident? be they not in a manner as unmeet for
preaching the word of God as ever they were, for all these plagues that God
sendes to them, but they are so blinded that they cannot see wherefore they be
thus punished, and construe it to be for other caus^s, as by the covetousness of
lay men in desiringe their Poss^ssions, by a hatred conceived against them for
not obteyning their purpose at men of the Churches hand. Or for that they
cannot abide the correction of the church, or such other causes as they imagine
with themselves. And think that the indignation against the^ shortly will
slack of it self: But I pray God it do not rather increase, as I fear me it
will, except we amend us the rather. How can men be content to pay yt tenth of
their goods which they get with their sore labor and sweat of their brows,
when they cannot have for it again neither ghostly comfort nor bodily: what
layman will be any thing scrupelus to keep those tithes in his own hands,
when he sees us do nothing more then he for it: What credit will any man
gieue to our doctrine, whom they see so light in living, what reverence will
they gieue our persons in whose manners, they see no gravity. But to pass
from these matters to others. There be most go^ly ordinances made by our laws
by authority of Counsels generally, that all Atchdeacons should visit in
person yearly their pre^. The Bishop every three years to see y^ whole
Diocese what is to be reformed either pryuately or generally, that private
faults might be reformed forthwith and the general at the next Synod, and
therefore they have their procurations. Uisite they do not in person as they
ought to do, but by deputies, more for their procurations then for any
reformation. The money is surely gathered but the cause wherefore it was given
nothing kept: the stipend is exacted, and the work wherefore it was due,
vndo^. Then is there another good ordenau^ce, and godly absolved after the like
sort: where every bishop should year y keep a synod in his dioces of all
euangeliall persons, and every archbishop a sinod for his whole province, every
third year that if any thing occurred in the diocese worthy reformation it
might be referred to the provincial congregation. If it were either doubtful
to the bishop or could not be reformed without great authority then the
Bishops alone. Where be these sinod^s now kept? yet they receive every year
their sinodals of the poor priests: of such good ordena^ce and godly there is
nothing kept, but y^ which is there own private commodity, which be yt
procuratio^s and sinodals: y^ other part wherefore yt charge was laid is
omitted, y^ burden remai neth and the duty is taken away, yet better it were yt
both y^ one and ye other were taken away, the^ to have ye good part taken and
the worse to remain. If they will say, that there needs now a days no such
visitation, nor ^ynods, then there needed never none of them, for more things
to be reformed among us, were never then be now, nor reformation neue^ more
necessary. But our prelates would say they dare make no laws in such sinodes
for fear of penury, what need any mo laws made then they have already? what
should let them to put these in execution that be already made? specially sins
they have the aid of the temporal laws thereto, is there not statutes made in
parliament for residence, and for restrayning of plurality of benefices? which
had never need to have been made, if we would have put our laws in execution.
Are not we worthy to have other men to correct and reform us, when we can not
reform our selves? Is it marvel that we be not out of credence when our
life and conuersationis contrary to our own laws and profession, and that the
religion of them suffers slander offense and reproache, through our
defaultes shall be ones required of our hands. Therefore if we will have this
scisme taken away from christ's church, let us first reform our selves and put
our laws in execution, as in resorting to our benefices ^o keep r^sydence,
and in contentyng our selves with one Benefice a pieee: And ^yth the lyuinge
that is appointed to us for our ministration without devising of other
extraordinary and unlawful gains. For what is more agreeable with reason,
then a man to spend his time where he has his living and to do his office,
for that he has y^ benefit of: And seeing every benefice is a man's living, and
if it be not Propter officium datur beneficium,
it might be amended till it be a competent living, and every one requires one
man's whole charge. What reason is it that one man should have two men's livings
and two men's charge, where he is able to discharge but one. The^ to have more
and discharge the ^re of never a one is to far^e against reason. But some
percase will say, there be some of us worthy a greater preferme^t then other,
and one bene^ were to little for such a one. Is there not as many degrees, in
the variety of Benefices, as there is in men's qualities? Yes forsooth there is:
yet in this realm (thanked be God) benefices from M. marks to xx. marks a
year of sundry values to endow every man with, after his qualities and degree.
And if a mean ben^e happen to fall let every man be contented therewith til a
better fall. And if he be thought worthy of a better, let him leave the first
and take y^ better, for the meanest Benefice is a sufficient living for some
man, which should be destitute of a living, if that benefice and other like
should be heaped up together in great mensha^ds. Yea I do know, yt men which
have such mean benefices be more commonly resident, and keep better
hospitality on the same, then they that have greater benefices. It is a common
proverb. Its meary in Hall: When Beardes wags all. Now look through a whole
Diocese, you shall not find xx. persons resident that may dispend xl. l* a
piece, nor of all the benefices in a Diocese, the fourth person resident over
the same. What temperal office is so far abused as these be that be spiritual
and of greater charge: I pray God send our Prelates Eyes to see these
Enormities: for it should seem that they are so blinded that they cannot see
them. And then I doubt not but all delays set a part they will reform them:
and if they do not, I pray God send our Maiestrats temperall the mind to
reform these things with their seculer power. And to study for the
reformation of them, rather then for their possessions, Christian Princes bear
not their swords in vain: nor yet is it so strange a thing to see Christian
princes reform the Prelates that swerve from their duties. Thus far beit
spoken touching the reformation of them yt be mynisters of y^ Church. Now to
speak of y^ is to be reformed of our part that be of the laytye, ye must
understand, that al y^ give the^ selves to ye knowledge of any faculty, are
commonly subi^ct to either of two vices (as that great clarke Tully does
report) y^ one Cicero de o^i. Lib. 1.
is to take these things yt we know not for things known, or as though we
knew them: for a voyding of which fault men ought to take both good space and
great diligence in consideration of things, ere they come to give judgment The
faults in the part of the laytye.
of the same: the other vice to bestow too great a study and labor about
obscure and hard things nothing necessary. Let us now consider and those
faults be not among you at these days, ye be all now studious to know the
understanding of holy scripture. And well for there can beno better desire,
more honest, nor more necessary for any christian man: but yet do ye not see
many young men before they have either taken any long time, or any good
diligence in the consideration or study of scripture, take upon them to judge
of high matters being in controversy, geeuing to quick assent either to their
own invention, or to other men's: before they have considered what might be
said to the contrary. And this fault is not only seen in men studious of the
knowledge of scripture, but also in young students of all other sciences:
shall ye not find a student in the law of the realm, after he has been at
the study of y^ law not past (...). years, more ready to assoyle you a
doubtful cause of the law, then either he himself or another, after y^ he
has stu^ied the law xii. or xiiii. years. Yea no doubt, so it is in a young
Gra^marian, Logitian, Rethoritian, and so of al other sciences. Therefore
Pythagoras forbade his Scholars to speak the first v. years y^ the^ came to
him, which lesson I would to God ye would be content to observe, before ye
gave any judgment in matters of holy scri^. And the^ I doubt not, but after
vii. years reading, ye would by col lation of one place with another of
scripture, find a greater difficulty therein, then ye do now, and be more
scripulouse to give an answer in high things then ye be now: and this harm
comes of rash iuegement in y^ part, that when a man has once (...) his
opinion in any thing, he will think it a great shame for him to be brought
from y^ he has once affirmed for truth. Therefore what so ever he reads
after he construeth for the maynetenaunce of his opinion, yea and will force
that side not only with his words and persuasions, but also with that power and
authority y^ he has, and will labor to bring other to the same opinion as
many as he can, as though his Opinion should b^e the more true, the m^e
fauor^s that he may get of y^ same. By such means if we s^eke but for the
truth, that is not to be judged to be always on the best side yt gets y^
over hand by power, authority, or Suffrages extorted: it is not like in the
disceptacion, and inquisition of the truth, as it is in a fight or a wrestling:
for he that has the over hand in these things has the victory, and in the
other he that is sometimes put to scilence, or other wise vanquished in the
sight of the world, has the victory and conquest of truth, on his side.
Since we contend but for the knowledge of the truth what should we divide our
selves into factions and parties: but let the matter be quietly discussed,
tried, and examined, As Consta^tyne the great, did in the time of Ari^.
by men to whom the judgment of such things appertains. And provide in the
mean time that neither party do use any vyolence again the other, to bring
them by force to this or that side, vntle the whole or most part of the^ to
whom y^ discuscio^ of such things appertayn^th unto, ^oe freely consent and
determine the matter. That is the only way to descide such controversies, and
since this contencion must once have an end: it were better take an end be
times then too late, when percase more harm shall have ensued of this
dangerous Scisine, as has already done in other parties even before our Eyes.
And in like things has before this time been seen, of such sort as it is too
lamentable to be remembered: what loss of Christian men? what diminishing of
the Christian faith? what continual wars, has the Faction of the Arrians
been the occasion of? did it not separate and sever at length all Asia, and
Affricke from the Christian faith? Is not the Religion, or rather the wicked
supersticion of the Turk graffed over this Arrian Sect? did it not take his
foundation thereof? As there is no dyuision more dangerous, then that which
grows of matters in Religion: so it were most expedient and necessary to be
quickly remedied, which cannot be done by any other way then by a free and
general counsel, that has been always from the time of y^ Appostles who
first took that remedy (even to their days) the only way to quiet and
appease all controversies in religion. And no doubt the holy Ghost as his
promise is, will be private in every such assembly, that is gathered together by
no force or labor of any affection. But now we will say, though we would for
our parts set a side partiality, and be indifferent and use no cohercion to
get numbers and voices that should favor our parts, who can promise that the
Bishop of Rome and other Prelates would do y^ same. Surely if ye did say
so, ye said a great matter, for they be men and much more subject to
affections there ye be. But I shall be bold after my manner totel my mind
herein as well as in other things, I take all these matters that be now a days
in controversy How this scisine might be ^emedied.
to be of one of these sorts, that is either touching the profits and
emolumentes of the Prelates and Mynisters of the church or touching points of
religion. As touching those articles that concern religion, I would wish y^
they had only the discuscion thereof, which ought and have used always to
have the judgment of the same, and as touching the articles that concern the
profits of Ecclesiastical persons, I would have these left to the discuscion
of the seculer powers, because it concerns seculer things only, where no
man need mistrust. But that y^ Maiestrates will provide an honorable living
for that kind of men that serves so honorable a room as y^ ministration of
Gods holy word and his Sacraments. Farthermore I would wi^he in things
touching y^ bishop of Rome and his iurisoi^tion, y^ he should be set a part and
some other iudiffere^t persons chosen, by christian Princes to direct or be
Presidentes in the The Bishop (...) Rome is no indifferent man.
Counsel while his matter is in handlinge, (if it please Christian Princes to
hold a counsel with that ^hare of Babylon) for no man is m^ete to be a Judge
in his own cause: here I have but briefly touched y^ sums of things after my
simple pha^tasie, referringe the alowing or rejecting of all our some of them
to your better judgment.


Knight. I am sorry that it is so late that we must needs depart now.


Merchant. Husband. and Capper. And so be we in good faith: but we trust
ere you depart the town to have some communication with you again.


Doctor. I will be glad if I tarry in the town. But as yet truly I know not
whether I shall remain here beyond too morrow morning, which if I do (in any
thing y^ my simple judgment will reach unto you) you shall hear my farther
opinion, in the mean time I pray you so to think of me as of one, that if I
have spoken any thing which may be prejudicial to the common weal any way, I
am ready to revoke it, and to yield to the judgment of any other man, that
can show how all these griefs or the more part of the^ may be remedied by any
other better means, for I know of many a thowsande in this land, I may worst
speak in such a wayghty matter. And so here for this present I take my leave
of you all.


Knight. And thus we departed for that time: but on the morrow when I knew
master Doctor was gone out of the town, I thought not meet this
communication should be lost, but remembered at y^ least in mine own private
book, to the intent as opportunity should serve, I might bring forth some of
his Reasons in places where they might either take place, or be answered
otherwise then I could. And therefore I have noted the said communication
briefly of this sort as you see.


FINIS.
IMPRINTED at London in Fleetstreate, near unto Saint Dunstones Church, by
Thomas Marshe.

1581.


