Tes Irenes Trophaea. OR, The Tryumphs of Peace.

That Celebrated the Solemnity of the right Honorable Sr Francis Jones Knight,
at his Inauguration into the Maioraltie of London, on Monday being the 30. of
October, 1620.

At the particular cost and charge of the right worshipful and ancient Society
of the Haberdashers.

With explication of the several shows and devices by I. S.

Vir. Parua sub ingentimatris se subijcit vmbra.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND worthy Gentleman, Sir Francis Jones, Knight, Lord
Mayor of the City of London.
Honorable Sr,
I Doubt it is my Fortune, to hazard calumny, in the employment of my invention
in your service, and not the thing, but the person incurs it, whose minority
admits censure before trial; therefore I beseech your Honor seriously to
superuise this slight labor, scarce meriting your attention; and the content
you want in this, let it be but added to the pleasure (I hope) your Honor will
conceive at view of those real Tryumphs (scarce admitting a second) which your
liberal Society have so nobly bestowed on you and then I doubt not but to
attempt that credit, which many will Envy. Thus wishing that the Tryumphs of
Peace may for ever attend you, I remain,

Your honors servant Io. Squire.

Tes Irenes Trophaea. OR, The Triumphs of Peace.
THe first show, or presentment, on the water, was a Chariot, aptly contrived
of two sea Monsters Argent, and drawn by two Sea-horses, set also off with pure
silver: on this chariot was one borne representing Oceanus his head wreathed
with segges, one hand grasping a scepter of green reeds, to show his potent
sway within his watery dominions; and the other curbing the forward fearcenesse
of his horses: his azure locks, and beard, over grown, hung like the careless
emblem of a reverend age, disheuered over his naked limbs, which were shadowed
off with a mantle of sea green taffaty, lymd with waves and fishes. This first
presentment vshered on a stately well built ship, bearing full sail, figuring
the traffic or trade of the (worthy to be esteemed noble) company of the
Haberdashers. Behind the ship sat Aeolus the god of Winds, filling their
sails with prosperous gusts, and at each corner of the ship sat (upon small
Islands) the 4 parts of the World, Asia, Africa, America, and Europa, each of
them inuiting their trade unto their coasts. Asia was attired in an antique
habit of peach colored Satin, and buskins of the same, a Coronet on her head,
and a censor in her hand reaking with Panchayian spices: Africa a blackmoore in
a naked shape, adorned with beads, and in her hand the branch of a
Nut-megg-tree: America a tawny Moore, upon her head a crown of feathers, and
bases of the same; at her back, a quiver of shafts, and in her hand a Parthian
bow: Europa in a robe of Crymson taffaty, on her head an imperial crown
conferred on her by the other three as Empress of the earth, and holding in
her hand a cluster of grapes, 'to signify her full swollen plenty. These
meeting the Lord Mayor on the Thames at three Cranes wharfe, where he took
water, Oceanus made this speech.

The speech of Oceanus.
I that am styled the potent king of waves,
Oceanus, he that in a moment can
Curb the vast depth of sea when as it raues,
And level marble mountains that have ran,
To ruin earth and skies; I now am sent
From all the watery deities to attend
Thy stately triumphs, as an honor meant
To add unto thy greatness, which to the end,
And confines of our rule has clapped his wings;
For still the water Nymphs, and gods of streams,
Running unto my bosom, each one brings,
Report of thee; but my beloved Thames,
Full often when the cheerful Lamp of day,
Has warmed my chilly bowels with his fires,
Has tic'd me from his comfort with a lay
Of what thou art; and then with prayers, desires,
And what else could attract me to consent,
Has yielded to my convey thy large ships,
To traffic through my wide vast continent.
And now with a desire that outstrips
Imagination, I am come to see,
And wonder at the state which I now find,
For to attend thy Brotherhood, and thee:
And now with you this le^gue I will combind,
That while the influence of the forked moon,
Appoints my curled billows ebbes, and tides,
While that the shipman throws to heaven his boon
For safe return, and while that stella rides,
With sparkling glory over my wrinkled face,
My care shall be for ever to attend;
Your wealthy bottoms to your coasts apace;
And this my promise will I never end,
Nor break, until your wealth and states surmount*
Tagus unvalued sands in the account.
The speech of Aeolus.
ANd here the god of winds his promise plights,
That whilst the boisterous North, and gentle West,
The South, and nipping East wind, days and nights,
Begirt the desert Ocean, ready pressed,
To execute my will, with prosperous gales,
I will send home your ships, and take delight
To play with gentle murmures on your sails.
Thus since both seas, and winds, themselves unite,
Unto your good, I wish all powers divine,
Might unto your their love and aids incline.
THe second and last presentment on the water, was Pernassus mount, whereon the
nine Muses sat; Clyo the first suited in a gown of purple taffaty, and
studiously imployd in turning over books, she being the Historical Muse;
Melpomene was attired in a black taffaty robe, her head decked with Cypress,
and playing on a Theorbo; Thalia the comic Muse in a light changeable taffaty
robe, and playing on a Voyall; Euterpe the Muse that first invented
wind-instruments, was richly apparelled, and played on a Flute recorder;
Terpsichore on the Lute; and the geometrical Muse, Erato with a scale and
compass in her hand. The Heroical Muse Calliope was shaped in a tauny silk
robe, and her temples girt with Bays: the heavenly Muse Urania that invented
Astrology, was decked in a robe of azure taffaty semined with stars; on her
head she wore a coronet of stars, and her right hand supported a sphere;
Polymneia the inue^tres of Rhethorique assumed her place nearest to Apollo, who
sat on the top of the mount in a robe of cloth of gold, under a laurel tree,
playing on a harp, alluding to that of Virgill: In medio residens complectitur
omnia Phoebus.

And on the backside of the mount stood Mercury listening to their harmonious
strains. This accompanied the Lord Mayor up to Westminster with variety of
music, where while his Honor was taking the Oath, it returned back and met
him in Paul's Churchyard, where Euterpe and Terpsichore, entertained him with
this song.

^ We Muses of the pleasant hill, that bath within the Thespian spring, That
did direct the Grecians quill, Who of old Pelius son did sing.

^ We that Amphion did in -- spire, With ad -- mired strains and lays, And
did infuse a sacred fire, In both these to gain the Bays.

^ We Appolloes hand-mayds nine, Come to meet thee on the way, that unto thy
honors shrine, We might dedi -- cate this day.

^ And his die -- ty us a -- mong, So curious -- ly shall wrest thy glory. That
the envious among this throng shall confess it merits story.

THE third presentment was a Quadrangle, that mounted by ascents to the form
of an Egyptian pyramed, whereon in a well wrought Landscape, where figured the
several shieres of England; on the top sat a princely Majesty acootered in a
robe of purple velvet furred with Ermines, on his head he wore an Imperial
Crown, and in his right hand a scepter; over his head were fixed the arms of
England, and at his feet a Lion couchant, which did demonstrate his power in
reconciling fearcenesse unto a willing servitude; under him sat two Dukes; two
Marquises; two Earls, and two Barons, in Parliament robes of purple velvet;
about their necks they wore collers of Esses, and on their heads the apt
cognizance of each ones honor; at the 4 corners of this Pyramed, stood two
Lions, Or, and two Unicorns Argent, supporting 4 streamers, wherein were
Escutchoned the arms of our four Kingdoms, England, Scotland, France and
Ireland: before it was caractered in a scroule, Respublica Beata; and round
about it ran the Ocean. This Pyramed was supported by four silver Corinthian
columns, the Bases, and Capitalls, fine gold. Within these columns sat 4
Persons, that seemed as it were to underprop the ponderous burden of the
Pyramed; the first was the City, presented in a scarlet gown guarded with
black Velvet, like a Lady Maiores; and in her hand two golden keys; the other
the Country in a Rustique habit; the third the Law, habited like a Judge, and a
scrowle in his hand; the fourth Religion in a rotchet like a Bishop, and in his
hand a book. At the 4 corners of this under square stood two Lions Or, and two
Gotes, Argent, which are the supporters of the Companies Arms, bearing 4 large
streamers, in which were the arms of the City, and of the company; and in the
front stood the crest of the Lord Mayor, a Lion supporting an azure anchor, and
on it was fixed his cote of Arms, which was a chief Or, with a Lion Or, upon a
field azure, between 3 crossed forms Or.

THE fourth presentment, being the maine Pageant, was a Mount, where on the top
under a canopie lim'd with stars, was seated Catherin, the Saint of the
Company, whom antique stories report to be the daughter of Costus King of
Alexandria; she was attired in a snow white satin gown, in one hand she held
a book, and in the other a sword with the point downward; it being the
instrument that in death sealed her the fruition of immortal rest; her head
circuled with a crown of gold, which did intimate her princely descent; and at
her feet lay a broken wheel: round about sat her Attendants twelve maids of
honor gorgeously attired, each one bearing in her hand a silver shield, upon
which were portrayed Catherin Wheels, and within them the Motto to the
Companies arms, Serve and obey. Under these sat her servants at work, some
carding Wool; some Spinning; others Knitting capps; with her Feltmakers; one
Bowed; one Basoned; and another Blockt; and behind the Mount sat a Shepherd
keeping his sheep: Each of which industrious faculties have reference to the
support of this Worshipful Society.

THE fifth and last invention, was a Chariot painted full with houre-glasses,
and sun-dialls, the fore-wheeles were two Globes, and the hinder wheels were
like two Church dialls; within it aged Time was drawn, seated upon an
houre-glasse that was supported on the shoulders of a giant, representing the
Iron age; in one hand he held a sickle, in the other a croutch; and in the
Chariot with him were drawn the four Elements, Ignis, Aer, Aqua, and Terra.
Ignis fire, was attired in a flame colored taffaty robe, leaning on a
Salamander, and in his hand three teend Lightning; Aer Air, in a robe lymmed
with clouds and several shaps of Birds, and in his hand a Dove; Aqua water, in
a robe limmed with Waves and Fishes, her azure tresses decked with flegges, and
in her hand a vessel full of live Fishes; Terra earth, in a robe on which
grass and flowers, sprang as it were naturally; on her head stood green corn,
and in her hand she bare a silver spade. This Chariot was drawn by the four
seasons of the year, Ver the spring, Aestas the summer, Antumne, and Hyems
winter. Ver was suited in green taffaty, a chaplet of flowers on her head, a
bow in her hand and a quiver at her back like a huntresse; Aestas in a yellow
taffaty robe, and her brows like Ceres, decked with ripe corn, and a
cornucopiae in her hand; Autumn in a naked shape like Bacchus, his temples
wreathed with vines, and in his hand a cluster of grapes; Hyems Winter in a
furred gown, and in his hand a pan of burning coals. This Chariot, in the
evening when the Lord Mayor came to Paul's, at the upper Conduit in Cheapeside,
Time made this speech.

ME thinks I see amazement pierce each eye,
That viewes me representing my weak state,
Who sated with my dull variety,
Turn back their heads I do not imitate;
But show the spacious world, the age I bear:
For when command of the immortal powers,
Had given me being, when I first did rear
My Nimble essence on the winged hours:
I went forth like the spring, and did behold,
And wear out man's first days the age of gold;
Then rose the silver age, and that decaid^,
Successively another ganne to reign,
Called the Brazen age: when that did fade,
This last prop of the world that does sustain,
My ponderous glass and me, the Iron age,
Sprung up to be my Atlas; were he gone,
These Elements attending would with rage,
Turn feeble Time to desolation:
But now do you not wonder much to see,
Me as I am ay'd, a solemnity,
Like to a victor borne triumphantly?
O Honored Lord, it is to show the love,
I bare to thee and thy Society,
Whose bounteous intertainments are above
All that I ever found. Now in return,
I promise this, if that with honored care,
Thou execute thy charge, then shall thy vrne,
Be reverenced, and thither shall repair,
A blessed memory that never dies,
To bl^son it unto posterities.
Under this Pyramed, sat sacred Peace, that changed her celestial Mansion, to
make us happy with the sweet pleasures of a quiet state; on her head she wore
a wreath of olives, in her right hand a palm, her robe was of white taffaty,
limm'd with the map of England: in her lap she bare the model of London,
and on her left arm a shield, whereon was Vndae Argent and azure upon a bend
Gules a Lion passant gardant Or, the Arms of the Society; at her feet lay
war in complete arms upon Spears, Lances, foulded ensigns; and leaning on
an Vnbrac't drum; this show passed along till the Lord Mayor came to Saint
Laurence lane end, where Peace began to speak thus.

The speech of Peace.
A Welcome honored Praetor I doc give,
Free and unbounded, as my wish to live,
And to retain the blessed styles are given
Me, with applause of Nations and of heaven:
From whence I boast my lineage; I am Peace
That my long Pilgrimage did never cease,
From the first minute of the aged World,
Until I found this Island; for being hurld
Out of each region by rebellious War,
(Which now lies bound my Vassal) like a star,
Whose vnfixt glory glides from sphere, to sphere,
I wandered up and down: and not a tear
I shed, but with it went a sigh that I
Might be so fauor'd of the Deity,
To be recald from earth, which when they saw
Me, from the world be sides they did withdraw,
To this (then troubled) state, which did embrace
Me with such Joy, that Nobles flockt apace,
To intertaine me, and the poor did stand,
To crave my blessing, to ore flow their land;
And Jointly all of them delivered War,
Fetterd in chains to be my prisoner,
Now honored Lord since that you find and see,
Peace placed here by a divine decree;
Within this commonwealth, and chiefly here,
Within this City, where for one whole year,
Thy mandats are obayd, then have a care,
To see me safely kept; and since you bear
That powerful sway about ye that attends,
The execution of your will, and ends:
Imploy't so nobly that my general state,
May say thou leadst the way to imitate.
After the Sermon at St Paul's Church was ended, the Lord Mayor returned back
by torch light to his house, attended by the whole body of the Solemnity, where
being come to his gate, War from out the Pageant called the Commonwealth, made
this speech.

IT is decreed, nor can my power resist,
This most incuitable doombe of fate,
I have forgot my nature, and consist
Of something more then lenity: my state,
At first was sovereignty; and that same sway,
That curbed dominions: for I mounted on
The back of horror, bathed in blood, could fray
Peace from their coasts, then desolation,
I could command to raise my statues there,
That Nations far remote with mourning eyes,
Should not rehearse the story without fear,
Lest I might so close up their obsequies:
I taught the Romans to immortallize,
Their names by their great acts, and to refine,
Their mean creation by the sacrifize,
Of their own blood to War and to my shrine,
They offered mighty spoils, but now I bear
Captivity about me: yet like one
That renders servitude for love, nor fear,
Employing his devotion to be shown,
As free as if his mind could captiuate
His will, I yield to sacred Peace and you;
That this day have with a tryumphant state,
Entered your charge, and office, which the due
Of Time admitts you too, and should it chance,
That any foraigne arms from out this throane,
Strive to enforce her, I will then advance,
My ensigns to her aid; and make it known,
That this is her inheritance, and place,
Which heaven has pointed out to be her rest;
And therefore worthy Lord follow the trace
Of noble presidents, and in thy breast,
Resolve of future hazards; and prepare
Me such provisions that if times should cease,
To be unto this land is now they are,
War might restore again the Palm to Peace.
This speech being ended, Peace and War dismounted from under the Pyramed,
Peace conducted the Lord Mayor into his house; and War stood with fire and
sword to defend his gates.

And thus the solemnity dissolved.

The credit of this workmanship (curiously exceeding many former shows, and
far more rich then any, in regard no metal was used to adorn it but gold
and silver) I impose on Francis Tipsley Citizen and Haberdasher of London.

FJNJS.

