A PLAIN EXPOSITION UPON THE FIRST part of the second Chapter of Saint Paul
his second Epistle to the THESSALONIANS.

Wherein it is plainly proved, that The Pope is The Antichrist.

Being Lectures, in Saint Paul's, by JOHN SQVIRE Priest, and Vicar of Saint
LEONARDS Shordich: Sometime Fellow of JESUS College in CAMBRIDGE.

August. Epist. 89. Hilario. Melius exponant is it a meliores: Nam ego paratior
smu discere, quam docere. Psalm. 115. 10. Attamen ipse credidi, propter quod
locutus sum. LONDON, Printed for Philip Waterhouse, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of St. Paul's Head in Canon street near London Stone. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable EDWARD Viscount CONVVAY, Lord President of his
Majesty's Honorable privy Counsel: My most honored Lord.
MY LORD,
THese Lectures I labored principally to satisfy mine own conscience, in this
great point. But understanding, that some conscionable persons, have received
some small satisfaction, by hearing them: I print them. And presume to present
the^ to your Honor to read them, or some of them, at your Lordships leisure.
That I may publish to the world how I am assured of your Honors sincere
affection to the Church of England, as it stands now in opposition to the
Church of Rome. Which that it may be daily confirmed, and increased in your
Honor, and in the rest of our Honorable English Nobility, shall be the daily
and sincere prayer of

Your most unworthy, yet most humble Chaplain JOHN SQVIRE.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, Let me commend these briefes to thy Christian Charity. For
this Book; If my small judgment, and the eyes of many of my judicious
friends, have not failed me: it may have some (...) but no (...): some slips,
no gross Errors. For the Quotations, though some may seem perhaps to have
bin alleged judicio errante, yet animo reluctante, not one: I may
misunderstand some; but I mis report not one Author, by a voluntary
falsification. For the Author, he is a thorough conformable member, and
Minister of the Church of England. And for the Scope, it is for the information
and salvation of thy soul, and his own soul. Take the Treatise, and give
prayers, for

Thy fellow-member in Christ Jesus JOHN SQVIRE.

To the Papists, or popishly affected.
I Beseech you by our Christ, perform this Christian duty; whereto my Practice
does invite you, by a Precedent. Read my Treatise; As I do, and will the
learned Authors on your side. If your impartial judgment censure it, as
Erron^ous: reject it, refute it. But if my arguments be strong: love not the
name of the Church, more than you do the Truth of the Church. Magna est
veritas! Christ grant that his Truth may prevail on either party.

Yours in the Truth, JOHN SQVIRE.

The Contents of this Treatise.
SERMON 1.
OBstinacy an error dangerous to salvation. 6 Ministers should win their people
by lenity. 8 Of the Resurrection. 10 Blessings bind us to be constant in
Religion. 14 Of Union. 7, 15
SERMON 2.
The coming of Christ may not be defined. 18 The authority of the Fathers. 21
The errors of the understanding, terrors to the Conscience. 22 Six means to
avoid error. 26 Three Fountains of Error 28 Of Enthysiasme. 29 Of the use
and abuse of eloquence. 31 Of false quotations and corrupting Authors. 32 The
means of seducing to Popery. 34
SERMON 3.
The point of Antichrist may be handled. 38 The name of Antichrist. 43 The
Fathers not the best Expositers in this point. 46 The Apostasy. 47 Whether the
Church was ever extinguished. 55 When was the Apostasy. 57 Communion in both
kinds. 60 The Primacie. 60 Image worship. 61 Deposing Kings. 62 The Pope above
a Council. 62 Priests marriage. 63 Apostates to Popery. 63 Latin Service. 65
SERMON 4.
Antichrist not one man. 68 The man of Sin. 76 The Pope the cause of
Ignorance. 83 The Pope the cause of Whoredom. 85 The Pope the cause of
Treason. 90 The Powder Treason. 94
SERMON 5.
Antichrist the son of Perdition. 97 Antichrist and Judas paralleled. 99
Antichrist, Judas and the Pope paralleled. 101 The Pope may err. 105 Popish
Persecutions pass those of the Emperors. 106 Of the Inquisition. 121 Rome
Destroyed. 135 Whether all Papists be damned. 136 Popish threatenings to draw
men to Popery. 137
SERMON 6.
Antichrist not an open Adversary. 140 The Pope does oppose Christ. 145
Fundamentally. 147 Universally. 149 Six plain propositions where Christ is
plainly opposed by the Pope. 153 The Pope the worst Adversary that ever the
Church had. 154
SERMON 7.
(...) Temple. 159 Antichrists seat. 159 Not the ^^teriall Temple. 159 Rome the
seat of Antichrist. 167 Whether Rome be a true Church. 168 A Parallel betwixt
Rome and Babylon. 185
SERMON 8.
Antichrist shall not exalt himself above the true God. 197 The Pope does. 200
And above all that is worshipped. 202 The Popes Ambition. 204 The Pope does
exalt himself above Kings. 207 Above the Emperor. 216 Papists are Traitors.
226
SERMON 9.
Antichrist shall not sit corporally in the Temple. 288 The Pope usurpeth the
same power with Christ. 232 The same titles. 233 That he is above Councills.
238 That he can make a Creed. 240 The Pope is not the head of the Church. 234
The King is the Head of the Church of England. 235 The Pope countermands all
the Commandments. 244
SERMON 10.
Antichrist shall not call himself the true God. 257 The Pope does show
himself to be God. 259 The Pope does show himself to be God plainly. 268
SERMON 11.
What hindered the Revelation of Antichrist. 289 The To: Empire not to be
abolished. 294 It is removed. ibid. Of Travelers and traveling to Rome. 301
SERMON 12.
The time of the Revelation of Antichrist. 305 Where our Church was before
Luther. 326 Affected ignorance of Antichrist. 328
SERMON 13.
The Mystery of Iniquity. 335 Popish mysteries to advance the papacy. 343
Popish mysteries to advance popery. 360 Baits to catch pap^sts. 369 Hooks to
hold pap^sts. 373
SERMON 14.
The Pope (...) or the lawless person. 381 In regard of Scriptures. 391 Of the
Creed. 395 Of humane Laws. 396 Of Oaths. 397 Of national Laws. 402 The
Exemption of the Clergy. 404 Of Childrens obedience. 408 Of Marriages. 409 Of
his own Constitutions. 411
SERMON 15.
The destruction of Antichrist. 414 The beginning of the Reformation. 416
Popery may return into England. 417 Popery may not be put down by force of
Arms. 418 The final destruction of the Pope uncertain. 428 Popery shall not
be extinguished till the last day. 432 The destruction of Rome. 434
SERMON 16.
Of lying miracles. 440 Of Popish miracles. 343 The miracle Rev. 13. 13.
explained. 465 Whether Papists do any miracles. 467 Whether miracles should
persuade unto Popery. 470
SERMON 17.
Of the Antiquity of the Church of Rome. 478 Universality. 478 Unity. 478
Infallibility. 478 Of disputations with Papists. 487 The care of the Popish
Church for Controversy Writers. 488 Of Popish persuasions. 491 Devotions. 494
Prayers. 494 Discipline. 495
SERMON 18.
Of Satan. 497 Papists refuse all Communion with Protestants, 498 Why so many
learned be Papists. 501 No Reconciliation with Rome. 506
SERMON 19.
The Doctrine of Devils. 521 The Church of Rome teaches the doctrine of
Devils. 522 Popish forbidding marriage, 531 Popish forbidding meats. 537
SERMON 20.
All who are deceived by Antichrist are damned. 542 Whether all Papists be
damned. 545 Of Apostates to Popery. 558
SERMON 21.
Antichrist not a Jew. 560 The Church of Rome does use the Scripture for own
turn. 567 The ambition of the Church of Rome. 570 Consolation against
Antichrist. 574 Five notes of such as love the truth. 575
SERMON 22.
The Papists surpass the Pagan Idolatry. 579 Angels made Idols. 584 Saints.
585 The V. Marie. 587 Images. 589 The Cross. 592 The Sacrament. 594 Every
Creature made an Idol. 597
SERMON 23.
Precedents of obstinatenesse. 601 The Papists obstinate and deluded. 607 No
Reconciliat^on. 441 The Pap^sts are deluders. 607 Want of p^ov^sion for
Converts, an hindrance to Reformation. 617 Pronenesse of People to be deluded
by Popery. 447 God does send delusion. 623 A Caveat to the Church of England
against obstinatenesse. 625
SERMON 24.
Popery supported by lying. 631 The Primacie. 636 The Cross. 638 Popish lies
against the persons of Protestants. 640 Against Calvin. 642 Beza. ibid. Luther.
ibid. Bishop King. 643 Queen Elizabeth. 644 Popish lies against the Profession
of Protestants. 646 Concerning the Sacraments. 647 Our Government. ibid. Our
Preachers. ibid. The Scripture 650 Our obedience to our King. 651 Our obedience
to our God. 653 Popish lies concerning their persecution. 654
SERMON 25.
The Pope may Err. 677 Has ^rred. 687 In his Translations. ibid. Canon Laws.
688 Papacredens and docens, that distinction examined. 680 Of implicit faith.
698
SERMON 26.
Popish points that are damnable. 702 Inhibition of the Scriptures. 706 Latin
Prayers. 707 Merits. 711 The Communion in one kind. 712 Worshipping of Images.
715
SERMON 27.
Six opinions of Antichrist. 721 The Devil shall be Antichrist. 722 Nero. 724
The Turk. 726 The Turk and Pope. 732 Antichrist shall be a Jew. 737 The
Papists Trienniall Antichrist. 740
SERMON 28.
The Sum of the whole Treatise. 746 The Paraphrase of the whole Text. 754 The
Parallel to the Pope. 757 The Conclusion. 764 A Dehortation from Popery. 766
A Plain Exposition upon the first part of the second Chapter of St. PAVL his
second EPISTLE to the THESSALONIANS.
SERMON I.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 1. Now we beseech you, Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our assembling unto him.
That obstinacy in error is dangerous to salvation. And that it is dangerous to
break the peace of the Church. Ministers should win their people by Leuity. Of
the Resurrection. Blessings bind us to be constant in Religion. Of Union.

WHen first I cast mine eye on this Chapter, it reflected my mind on the first
Chapter of the first Epistle: and I undertook that Epistle, because of this
Chapter: that so I might discuss the Point of Antichrist, here so plentifully
proposed. A point, none more difficult, none more necessary to be known. This
also did call into my memory my Text at my first Sermon, entering upon that
Epistle to the Thessalonians; which was the nineteenth and twentieth verses of
the sixth Chapter to the Ephesians: That ye should pray for me, that utterance
might be given unto me, that I might open my mouth boldly, to make known this
Mystery: that therein I might speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

I hope that your Christian prayers have been like the Leviticall fire, that
they have been ever fervent in my behalf. But now I beseech you to blow them
up with an extraordinary affection, to beg an extraordinary blessing upon my
poor Labors. I expect Argus, and Midas, and Momus, and Magus, to be my
Hearers. I look that broad eyes, long ears, wide mouths, and false hearts,
shall observe every syllable in these Sermons. I am resolved to have my
reputation torn for my pains. But let Malice speak truth, and spare neither
my life nor my learning.

For the End of my Labors, in this point: I know the Sun cannot give light
nor sight to the Blind or Blind-folded: I know Truth it self cannot satisfy
Prejudice and Obstinacy. But to the seeker of the Truth, I promise thus much in
the presence of God, before whom I stand, I will endeavor to discuss this
point, with all Humility, Industry, and Impartiality.

Which that I may do, again and again I beseech you, for that for which St.
Paul besought Ephesians. 6. 19, 20.
the Ephesians, in those verses of that Chapter before cited: Brethren, I
beseech you to pray for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may
open my mouth holdly, to make known This Mystery, and that therein I may
speak boldly, as I ought to speak. I beseech you to pray for me. For it, I
will be your Debtor; and yet will I pay you in your own Coin. Pray you for
me, and I will pray for you: Pray you for me in Speaking, and I will pray for
you in Hearing. Let us promise and perform this, as a Preface to this great
work. Let us heartily pray for one another: and thou Lord! let the words of
our mouths, and the prayers of our hearts be always acceptable in thy sight,
both now and ever, O Lord our strength, and our Redeemer.

This second Epistle consists of three Chapters: wherein the argument of the
first is gratulatory, for what they had been: of the second Expository, of
what they must be: and the contents of the third are Hortatorie, what they
should be. The Expository argument of this Chapter is twofold, (...) and
(...): Praedicit, and praedicat: Information of Antichrist is delivered to the
thirteenth verse: and Consolation against Antichrist, from thence to the end of
the Chapter. The information or first general part of this Chapter does branch
it self into two particulars: concerning this Discourse, on this cause,
consider the Occasion thereof related in the two first verses, and part of the
third: and the question it self debated, from the third verse unto the
thirteenth.

The occasion why St. Paul did dispute of Antichrist was an Error among the
Thessalonians concerning the Coming of Christ. This being premised in the
three first verses: the Apostle shows them the thing by which he does
dissuade them in the first: and the thing from which he does dissuade them in
the second and third. The debating of the question it self may be drawn into
these five particulars. First, we have Antichrist described, in the third and
fourth verses: secondly, revealed in the fifth, sixth, seventh, and part of the
eighth verse: Thirdly, destroyed, in the remnant of the eight: Fourthly,
confirmed in the ninth, and part of the tenth verse: and finally, we have
Antichrist embraced in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth verses.

The sum of this Text is the thing by which St. Paul did dissuade the
Thessalonians from their Error; to wit, by the Advent of Christ, and also by
the Event thereof. In the first words: Now we beseech you, Brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, here is the Advent; the Event whereof
follows in the last words; and by our gathering together unto him. In the
first consider the matter of his disswasion, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and the manner thereof, We beseech you brethren. In the last point two
other particulars are considerable: the Thing, a Gathering together: and the
persons, Our gathering unto him.

The Advent is the first general point, whereof particular is the matter of
St. Paul's disswasion, in these words, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the maine point, so effectually
disputed by the Apostle, in the two last Chapters of his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians. From which Treatise in general, as from that phrase in
particular, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. [ Then we which are alive, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds:] Satan raised this error, That Christ should
come in that age, with a slye subtilty, thereby to avert, and evert the
expectation of Christ's coming: that after one age, secure people might
pronounce that profane phrase mentioned by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 4. Where is
the promise of his coming? St. Paul therefore (on Timothies information
thereof) did dissuade them from this error, By the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Which adiuring phrase does imply both the confidence and the reverence
which Christians ought to have concerning the Coming of Christ. Adjuration is
a prevailing argument, urged by the high Priest to unlock the silence of our
Savior himself, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether
thou be the Christ, Matthew. 26. 63. Conceive this to be the sense of this
phrase. I have taught you the true doctrine of Christ's coming: but I am
informed that some erroneous Doctors do teach you a new doctrine, that his
coming shall be in this age. O but I adjure you, per adventum Domini, by the
confidence you have of his coming, and by the reverence you will have at his
coming, Even by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech you brethren
revoke this wicked error.

Let this adjuring of them advise and instruct Christians, that to be obstinate
in an error is dangerous for their salvation. Had these Thessalonians
persisted in their opinion, this Text implies that they would have lost the
comfort of Christ's coming. If any shall preach another Gospel, that is,
publish his error, he is pronounced (...) a Cursed creature, by St. Paul. And
Christ Gal ^. 8.
himself confirms it: If a man shall break the Mat. 5. 19.
least Commandment, and teach men so, he shall be called least in the
Kingdom of heaven. Errare possim, haereticus esse nolo: I fear Nature may
make me fall, but I hope Grace will teach me to repent and recant when I
understand my error. Errare hominis, perseverare Daemonis: I am the Son of
Adam, I may err, but to persevere, to be obstinate, I trust God will bless
me from the snare of the Devil. The ugliness of the sin of obstinatenesse
appears unto me from two reasons: from the Nature and Author of Error. The
Devil is the Author thereof, Matthew. 13. 25. therefore Obstinatenesse therein
can be no less than Diabolical. And obstinate error does naturally produce
either Heresy, (and Heretics are (...), condemned, if not damned of
themselves) or it teemeth Schism at the least: and Schismatickes are wished to
be cut off, Gal. 5. ^2. Haereticos scimus pejores esse quam Ethnicos: an
obstinate Heretic is as bad as a Pagan infidel: this was the censure Conc.
Carth. Cypr. p. 447.
of Vincentius a Thibari. Again, Gravis culpa discordiae, nec passione
purgatur: the grievous sin of breaking the peace of the Church cannot be
washed away, though afterward thou would Cypr. de unitate.
pour out thy heart blood for that offense, says St. Cyprian. A mutinous
soldier is trussed up by Martial Law, when the open enemy has fair Just.
Hist. Lib.
quarter. Alexander the Great exercised greater fury against the Thebans, his
own Countrymen, but Rebels, than he did against the Persians, though
barbarous people, and professed adversaries. Saul did rend Samuels garment, but
it signified, that God would rend his kingdom from him. So Schismatics may
make a rent in the Church; but I fear it does forebode, that God will rend his
kingdom from them. Certainly, to be obstinate in our errors cannot but be
dangerous to our Salvation.

Apprehend here the danger of our times: Errors infinite and impudent. The
Anabaptists increase: but Papists swarm. The peaceable Protestant is placed
betwixt them both, like a Ship betwixt the Sand and Shore: touch upon either,
and suffer shipwreck. Or like Susanna betwixt the two Elders: they both entice
thee, and either will defile thee. The Papist will make thee to profane one
Sacrament, the Anabaptist will make thee to renounce the other. Both inveagle
thee from the Church, thy Mother; where is then thy God, thy Father? Learn
this one lesson, Luke 18. 18. Take heed how you hear. Look to thy Ears, they
are both Sirens, to inchant thee, to incant thee. But Per adventum Domini, by
the coming of our Lord Jesus* Christ: I beseech you brethren, to beware of
both of them.

Thus far for the first point, the matter of St. Paul's dehortation: next
follows the manner thereof, the second part, in the first words, Now we beseech
you, brethren. We beseech you, (...), from (...) signifying love. He adds
moreover, We beseech you brethren. (...) a Brother, being derived of (...),
uterus, a womb: brethren being properly uterini, the fruit of one womb. This
phrase also implying his affection, that he rendered the Thessalonians as he
did his mothers womb, or his own bowels, even as Brethren. The sense is
evident: We beseech you brethren: that is, even in all Brotherly love, we
beseech you to beware of seducers.

Which may teach us Teachers an excellent lesson. Ministers must endeavor to
win their people by lenity: They must preach as Brethren, to Brethren; in
love, and from love, according to the phrase and example of the Preacher in my
text. The Man of God must sometime play the Child, and pipe to his people,
says the great Preacher, Luke 7. 32. Therefore inferior Ministers may not
think it base to stoop so low, even as to beseech their hearers, by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 1. Thus St. Augustine Aug.
Epis^. ^ ^7.
persuaded Vitalis, Cupio, hortor, rogo; I desire thee, I exhort thee, I
entreat thee. Thus he prevailed Aug. Retract. lib. 2. page 59.
with Vincentius, Invenem non-detestandum, sed docendum, quanta potui cum
lenitate tractavi: I did not, says he, reject him as a boy with sour
severity, but I did admit and instruct him as a Christian, with all courtesy
and lenity. And according to his own practice, he proposed a Rule unto other
Preachers, Quanto melior, tanto Aug. epist. 28.
mitior: The more religious, the more courteous. Those Twins will always go
together, and grow together. With this proviso: if the nature of the people
will bear it. If they be not tractable, then indeed Christiana charitas and
severitas must be yoake-fellowes, says the same St. Augustine: then Lenity
and Severity must Aug. epist. 19.
be used interchangeably, as occasion shall be offered. For some Asses will not
move with a spur, when a good metal will speed on with the least motion of the
body. The Virgin Claudia Lactant. de Orig. ^^r lib. 2 sect. 7
(says Lactantius) did lead on a laden Ship with her Girdle, which all the men
in Rome could not hale on with Gables. Sometimes, I suppose, some Ministers may
meet with both these natures: it behooves them therefore to be armed with both
these qualities, Severity and Lenity, that they may be able to cope with either
disposition. But with the latter, Lenity especially. For God does not always
appear in the strong wind of rough reprehensions, 1 King. 19. 11. and 12.
nor in the Earthquake of bitter invections, nor in the Fire of over-fervent
declamations: but our great God may come in a still small voice. If the People
be Thessalonians, the Preacher must be St. Paul. Then must we beseech them as
brethren, to beware of seducers, and all other Transgressions.

Miserable therefore are our times, and braving heresy begins to trample on
Lenity, Severity and Authority also. The Ministers words, yea and the
Magistrates swords also have lost their edge: they do not touch the erroneous.
The Owls dare look on the Sun: and those who were wont to creep together
by night, now flock together by noone day. That we must Non apud Aug. Epist.
109.
vos verbis, sed apud Deum lachrymis agere: as St. Augustine once complained,
we must turn our preaching into prayers, and tears. But for you, let me use
the phrase of my Text. Notwithstanding all our preaching, you shall have strong
seducers. But Oramus vos fratres: We beseech you brethren, by the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to beware of them.

I have dispatched the advent or coming of Christ: now I proceed to the Event
thereof; wherein we are to ponder the thing, and the persons. The first is
termed in my Text, (...), a gathering together. The simple, (...), signifies
the place or act of gathering together. (...), is when other persons are added
to that place or action. (...), I may well translate a Congregation, and (...),
an Aggregation, that is, an addition to the Congregation. St. Paul's meaning may
then be thus expressed, As you know that Christ will come with a company of
Saints: and as you hope and desire that your selves shall be added to that
company: Even so, We beseech you brethren, (...), by our gathering together,
that you be not moved from the truth by any seducers.

Which offers this doctrine to our consideration, All true Christians which
dye, shall meet together in heaven. Now there is the congregation, the
aggregation shall be when our happy souls shall be joined to those blessed
Saints already departed. The Angels shall gather the Elect together from the
four winds, says our Savior, Matthew. 24. 31. And loving Martha comforted her
self concerning the death of her beloved brother, because she knew that he
should rise again in the resurrection at the last day, Ioh. 11. 24. This truth
we cannot but conceive, if we consider the end of the resurrection, which is,
that God may be glorified in his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. That our poor
carkeises shall be raised out of the dust: how glorious will this be to our
Raiser? who then can doubt of our gathering together, of our blessed
Resurrection? The Husbandman determining to fill his Granary, does scatter the
seed in diverse furrows and fields: the seed dies, but afterward returns
into one room. So our bodies may be buried in diverse Cities and countries, and
scattered on the land, or in the bottom of the Sea: but heaven is the
Granarie, there shall we at the last day have a blessed gathering together. Not
unlike Jacob, Joseph, and the Patriarchs: as they by many unpleasing means,
yet met al together joyfully in one place. So we: Death, Diseases, and the
Grave, are indeed distasteful to flesh and blood: yet are they Gods
instruments, for this same (...), to gather us all together, at that blessed
day of our joyful Resurrection.

A great comfort in a great affliction. Our friends dye: there is (...), a
congregation; but we shall dye after them, and go to them; here is (...) our
aggregation. Indeed our singular consolation. Praemittuntur, non amittuntur,
says St. Cyprian: our Friends by death go before us, not from us. I shall go
to him, he shall not return to me, said holy David of his child, and it may
be said by every Christian of his dear acquaintance. Xerxes viewing his
numerous army, wept; because he conceived that all those were to die within a
few years. So the tender Father, when his loving eyes are cast upon his bosom
and his bowels, upon his beloved wife and children; Quis temperet a lachrymis?
will it not wring tears from his eyes, if not sighs from his heart, to think
that they, even they must dye. Indeed we may do as much in humanity: but
Divinity will tell us, that like Job. 42. 12. and 14. The Lord will bless our
latter ^^d more than our beginning; that even death shall give back our
children and friends, in greater affection, in greater perfection. And shall
not we gather comfort from such a comfortable gathering together?

The last point contains two persons concurring gathering together: Our
gathering together unto him. Unto him, this shows the action: Our, the
affection, concerning this gathering together. The first, (the action of our
gathering together) Christ our Head will perform it, when he does (...),
Ephesians. 1. 10. that is, (...), gather together all under one head. This he has
done already by his first coming, gathering together both Jews and Gentiles
under one Head, and making them one Church militant. But this he will do in a
fuller manner, by his second coming, gathering together all, both living and
dead, under one Head, and making them one Church triumphant. That ( the
gathering together of the Jews and Gentiles into one Church militant) was
(...), a Congregation. This ( the gathering together of the living and dead
into one Church triumphant) is (...), an aggregation or a Congregation of
Congregations. The second ( the affection to this gathering together) in the
word our, appears to be an allusion in that Proverb, Matt. 24. 28.
Wheresoever the carkeise is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. For
Nature does not make the Eagle so to sent out, and to hunt out the carkeise, as
Grace does make the Faithful to hunger and thirst after that coming. The
sense then thus I set down, in more, and more plain terms: As Christ will
join you to him effectually, and as you long after that conjunction
affectionately: even so, by the gathering together, (...): by our gathering
together unto him, we beseech you brethren, not to be moved from the truth by
any false seducers.

From these premises let us conclude this Gods blessings do bind Gods
children to be constant in the truth. Thus we see in this Text, that Christ's
coming is urged, as an argument to confirm the Thessalonians in Christ's
doctrine. Romans 9. 31. and 32. the grievous fault and punishment of Israel was
this; God gave them righteousness by faith, but they fell to their works; and
therefore lost all. Luke 12. 32. God gives his servants a kingdom; therefore
they should not fear to serve him. And indeed this is the maine end wherefore
God gives us his blessings, to encourage us in his truth. The man who has his
head held up by a skillful swimmer, meriteth drowning, if in a fond fear he
forsake him, to lay hold on some floating staff. So, let him sink in error,
that will be affrighted even with an Ocean of temptations, if Gods blessings
support him. Alexander the great, Just. hist. l. 11.
says Iustine, made choice of the stipendiary, his Pensioners, for his prime
soldiers, in his Persian expedition. So, such as are Gods Pensioners, that is,
enriched with his continual favors, ought to be his Triarij, that is, his
most courageous soldiers, and most constant professors in the Church militant.
And finally, as in 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. Nathan said unto David, Thus says the Lord
God of Israel: I have anointed thee King over Israel, and I delivered thee out
of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy masters house, and thy masters wives
into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel, and of Judah: and if that
had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such
things. As, I say, David was here argued from Gods benefits, because he fell
into carnal adultery: so shall we be condemned also from Gods benefits, if
we fall into Spiritual adultery. We shall find the Lord a jealous God, if his
mercies move us not to keep his Commandments.

Hence therefore it may appear that the assurance of Gods blessings, that is,
the certainty of salvation, is not the natural mother of Presumption. No, that
Bastard is filius populi: presumption proceeds from man's corruption
accidentally, and not necessarily from that sweet Consolation.

But if Blessings do bind, then are we bound to God in infinite bonds.
Remember that blessed uniting of the two Roses, the white and the red, York
and Lancaster. Remember the uniting of the two Lions in gold and gules, England
and Scotland. By the first dissension, the two Houses might have ruinated this
Kingdom: by the second, the two Kingdoms might have ruinated this Island: had
they not been united. Yet can we not be haled to Union in the Church, but
still we nourish a fatal dissension.

Remember moreover Gods blessings of protection! in 88 God delivered us from
water: and in 1605 from fire. And yet some of us love that Religion which
hatched those hateful machinations. Consider his present blessings: such a
plenty for three years, and such a peace for three score years, as this Land
enjoyed not in three hundred before. And yet remain we unmindfull,
unthankful. Now that we may be sensible of this sin, God withdraws some of
them. This City does see, and the Country does feel the abundance of
unseasonable rain: so that some cannot end their harvest, and others cannot
begin their seed-time. May not this be a prologue to a Famine? Again, is it
a small thing, that we are almost universally smitten with the small pox? May
not this be a Rabshekah? the Forerunner of Senacherib? May not God tell us by
the small pox that he has a greater plague to smite us with? To what end is
all this? Even to urge the same argument upon us, which St. Paul here does upon
the Thessalonians? that we be constant in our Religion? Therefore by all those
blessings ye have, or hope for; by those judgments ye do deserve, and may
stand in fear of; by the liberty of our Conscience, and plentiful preaching
of the Gospel; by the famine of bread, and famine of the word: but above all,
By the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech you brethren: Brethren I
beseech you be constant in the Truth of God. And the God of truth make us
careful, cheerful, and joyful to perform it.

SERMON II.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 2, and 3. That you be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled,
neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by Letter as from us, as that the day of
Christ were at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means.
The coming of Christ may not be defined. The errors of the understanding,
cause terrors to the conscience. Means to avoid error. Three fountains of
error. Of Enthusiasine. Of the use and abuse of Eloquence. Of false
quotations, and corrupting Authors. Ten means of seducing to Popery.

THis Text and the former verse contain the short preface premised to the
great point of Antichrist. In that you heard by what St. Paul did dissuade the
Thessalonians, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. In this you shall hear
from what he dissuaded them, from an error concerning the coming of Christ. In
the text there are two generals: the Heresy, and the Fallacy. The heresy to
which, and the fallacy through which they were in danger to be seduced. In each
general there are two particulars. In the heresy, their error, and their
terror. The error in the last words of the first verse, as that the day of
the Lord were at hand: and their terror, in the first words of this verse,
that ye be not soon shaken in mind or troubled. In the Fallacy observe it
related in particular: in the remnant of the second verse, neither by spirit,
nor by word, nor by Letter as from us: and finally observe the fallacy repeated
in general, in the third verse, Let no man deceive you by any means.

The first of the five particulars is their Error, They thought the day of
Christ to be at hand. But say some; those err who call this an error. For St.
James says, Iam. 5. 8. The day of the Lord draws nigh^: and St. Peter, 1
Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand. If therefore the Thessalonians did
think that the day of the Lord was at hand: yet was this no error. These
places may be reconciled two ways. First, distinguish of the phrase: St.
James and St. Peter say, (...), it is coming, like a cloud in the wost, before
our eyes. But the phrase of St. Paul is (...), it is comne, like a cloud in the
Zenith, over our heads, imminent, at the point to drop down. Again,
distinguish of the Time: according to St. Peter, Christ's coming was at hand,
(as our late Divines term it) quoad ultimum Buchan. loc. 38.
tempus, in regard of the last time of the world: according to St. Paul,
Christ's coming was not at hand, Quoad ultimum temporis, in regard of the last
age of the world. Finally, St. Augustines phrase will also help to clear this
August. epist. 8^.
point. There are, says he, dies novissimi, as also novissimorum novissimi,
that is, the last days, and the latest of those last days. St. Peter speaks
according to the first phrase: and St. Paul according to the last, That they
were afraid that the coming of Christ would have been in that very age
wherein they lived. This was the error: from which St. Paul in this text did
dissuade the Thessalonians.

From hence then it does appear to be unlawful for men to define the time of
Christ's coming. St. Paul does here condemn it as an error in the
Thessalonians: an evident conclusion, that it is an error in us also. It were
superfluous to discourse of this point in this place, because it is so
copiously disputed by St. Paul himself, in the last Chapter of this first
Epistle. Only this one thing let me commend to your observation. This Error,
we see, was hatched in St. Paul's time, killed by St. Paul's hand: yet afterward
it was revived again, and received by many rare men. Many rare godly men did
attempt curiously to define the time of Christ's coming. Est appropinquantis
judicij terribilis expectatio, said Vincentius Vinc. Lyrin. page 15. Pr^f.
Lyrinensis: that is, in his age they had a fearful expectation of the
apppoaching day of judgment. St. Augustine avoucheth that he did live in sexta
Aug. R^tr. lib. 1. cap. 26.
aetate mundi, that is, in the last age which the world could endure. Sex
millia annorum jam pene complentur, says St. Cyprian, that is, the Cypr. de
Exb. Mart.
sixth and last age of the world, was almost finished in his age. The holy
Scriptures of the old Testament contain in them the Histories of five thousand
years, says Josephus. S. Ambrose Josephus lib. 1. cap. 1.
was of the same opinion, says our Doctor Whitakers. Lactantius is yet more
peremptory, Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 25.
Omnis expectatio non est amplius quam ducentorum annorum; The world, says he,
cannot endure above two hundred years: and yet those two hundred, and a
thousand years besides are passed, since he passed that peremptory sentence.
I conceive that S. Hierome also might be of the same opinion, because of his
Surgite mortui, he thought that he always heard the sound of the last Trump. A
double mistaking misled all these Fathers into this one error. First, they
erred in Theology, because the world was created in six days, therefore they
concluded that the world should endure but six thousand years: having no other
ground for their conclusion, but only that phrase of S. Peter, One day is with
the Lord as a thousand years. ^ Pet. 3. 8.
Secondly, they erred in Chronology, following therein the error of the
Septuagints; who in the fifth and twelfth chapter of Genesis added an hundred
years to the life of every Patriarch. For example: Genesis 5. 3. where the
Original reads that Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, the Septuagints
translate it, Adam lived two hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in
his own likeness. These were the causes of their gross error, that Christ
must come in their age.

Let us make a double Use of this Doctrine: learning, and the other to better
our lives. First, learn that the verdict of the Fathers is (...), but not
(...): very venerable, but not absolutely infallible. I acknowledge, Scientia
nullum habet inimicum praeter ignorantem: that none contemn the Fathers, but
either the ignorant that cannot, or the idle that will not read them. Howbeit,
since even the Fathers were but men: I say their consent is an excellent
confirmation, not an evident demonstration. This one example, that so many did
concur in this one error, is too true an evidence for my assertion.

Secondly, in our lives let us quit our selve^ over-busie curiosity concerning
times and seasons, and the coming of Christ. Let us be good servants* let us
do our service, and not pry into our Masters secrets. Let us be Gods
children: let us assure our selves that we shall have our inheritance; but let
us leave the time unto our Fathers disposition. In a word, Let us not be
troubled nor moved concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Having considered their error, that they thought the Day of the Lord to be at
hand: this leads us unto the consideration of their terror, that they were
shaken in mind, and troubled. Which terror is expressed by a double metaphor.
First from a Sea-storme; for (...) signifies both the Sea, and a Storm also.
From whence is derived the word in my text (...), to be shaken, to wit, as a
ship is shattered in a sea tempest. Another word is also added in the text,
They were shaken in mind, yea from their mind, (...) so runs the
original. Their mind or understanding seemed to be torn from them, through
the fear of the day of judgment: as a storm forces a ship riding in the
road, to slip or cut Gable. The second metaphor is taken from soldiers
frighted by a sudden Alarm: for so that word in my Text (...) seems to
signify. The sense is clear: Heretics do terrify you with their false
doctrine, That Christ will come with flaming fire, even in your age. But they
give you a false Alarm, to affright you from your anchor-hold, and settled
Religion. Therefore we beseech you brethren, (...), that you would not be
shaken in mind, nor troubled concerning this error.

These phrases may teach us this doctrine. The error of the understanding, is
a great terror to the conscience. The text terms it (...), and (...): as a
storm to a ship, and an Alarm to men asleep: than which, nothing can be
more terrible. The like metaphor is urged by S. Paul, Gal. 4. 14. Be not
children carried about with every wind of doctrine. Imagine how fearful
children would be in a Boat, hulling on the Sea, without Rudder or Anchor: and
conceive the terrors of that soul, which floateth on groundless errors, to
surpass imagination. The Apostles phrase, Ephesians. 4. 16. imports that the
erroneous are like a bone out of joint, it will cost many an hearty groan,
before they be reduced to their right place. They will be (...), Tit. 3. 11.
their own consciences will be both the accusers and the accused: and in
conclusion they will become aliens from Gods Commonwealth, Ephesians. 2. 12. Now
suppose a traveller in the night and out of the way; how will he be troubled? a
Rebel out of the Kings favor; how perplexed? The Athenians mutined Just. hist.
for a time against Alexander; but they were glad (notwithstanding their brags)
to be reconciled upon any condition. Alas, beloved, the Erroneous are those
Travelers, so troubled: those Rebels so perplexed: and those mutinous
Athenians, their fear must be great, till they be reconciled to their God upon
any condition. 1 King. 2. 30. Ioab having run a wrong course of erroneous
election, against his Lords liking: although he could pretend, that he did
adhere to the right heir, was encouraged by the High Priest, and might be
excused by his other former services, and was protected by the Altar:
notwithstanding, because he erred against the Kings will, the terrors of death
did compass him on every side. So let the erroneous gild over their positions,
with never so many glorious pretenses: that they adhere to the right heir, to
the old Religion: that they are encouraged by the High Priest, by the Pope
himself: that their life otherwise is very innocent, and that they have the
Altar, the only Catholic Church to protect them. Notwithstanding all this, if
they wander without the warrant of the Lord; without the apparent Scriptures,
the sword of Benaiah hangs over their heads: The conscience of the erroneous
cannot but suffer the terrors of the Lord with a troubled mind.

Lo here the lot of all those who are seducers, seduced. Fear and trembling
are their companions. From the Papist to the Anabaptist, all seducers are like
the Aspen, they cannot but quake continually: and like the old Romans
mentioned by S. Augustine: Deum colunt timorem Aug. epist. 44. Maximo.
and horrorem: Terror and horror are housed in their consciences. As the text
speaks, their consciences are shaken and troubled perpetually.

But say the Erroneous, the Papists especially: we have none of these terrors:
we have resisted your Religion, (...): we are careless and fearlesse to shed
your blood, or our own blood, in the confidence of our Catholic cause. We are
not shaken, nor troubled in conscience, for teaching our Doctrine.

I say (notwithstanding their bragges) some of them do fear: though they will
not show where their shoe wringeth them: Some of them shall fear. Morte
personam non ferent: Death shall unmaske them, and discover their consciences,
pale and wan, with fear and trembling. If some of them live and dye confident
in their errors, then I apply that other phrase of my text unto them, (...),
they are besides their minds: (...) is (...), says Clemens, and Clem. Alex.
Protrept. p. 2. Ign. ep. 5.
(...), says Ignatius, their blindness is madness, and franticknesse. Mad
men will wound themselves, and feel not: and the frantic will run into the
fire, and fear not. So, those men are (...), they ran out of their wits,
when they ran out of the Church: and this makes them like Bedlems, to be so
courageous, indeed so outrageous in their herefies.

But how may we avoid these errors and terrors, and be settled in the Truth?
I can teach men no better than Erasmus taught children: Quod lego Scripturis,
and Symbolo, summa siducia credo: si quid receptum est ab usu Ecclesiae, quod
non plane cum Scripturis pugnat, servo. That is, that man who does constantly
believe, whatsoever is taught him by the Scriptures; and conscionably obey
whatsoever is commanded by the Church, provided the Church command nothing
plainly contrary to the Scriptures: Such a man, I say, will be settled in the
Truth, and seldom or never shaken in mind, or troubled concerning any Errors.

Yea, but some speak of all the Scriptures what S. Peter spoke of some of the
Scripture, 2 Pet. 3. 16.
they are (...), hard to be understood. I answer, Use these means faithfully,
and thou shall find the necessary principles of the Scripture to be a food for
the Lamb to wade through, and to be food for very Babes to feed on. Eschew
three things; and ensue three things. Let these six points be the practice of
thy piety, Eschew Pride, Prejudice, and Profit, in searching out the Truth.
Matter omnium Haereticorum superbia: St. Augustine says, it is Pride which
progues Aug. contra Manich. 2. 8.
men to factions and partakings. Simon Magus would be (...), Acts 8. 9. a great
man: this was the Magic that bewitched him to his heresy and sorcerie.
Prejudice is a second and maine prevention of knowing and embracing the Truth.
In hac side eram natus, in hac educatus, and in ea moriar, said an Eutichian;
because he was borne therein, therefore he would live and dye in that
opinion. There are many mad Ephesians, who will cry out against Paul, when they
know not the cause wherefore they cry out against him, Acts 19. 32. And
finally, profit and commodity is Truths common adversary: there are wretched
men who subvert whole houses for silthy lucres sake, Tit. 1. 11. and their
gain teaches them, to teach falsehood (...), to please their Patrons, and
maintain errors, because errors maintain them. On the other side, ensue
three other things; Fidelity, Charity, and Humility. Fidelity toward the
Scriptures: Charity toward the Church: and Humility toward thy self. Fasten
thy Faith on the Scriptures; say with the Pythagorians, (...) (...), he has
said it, and therefore we will believe it. And say with St. Paul, Though an
Angel from heaven should preach another Gospel (and teach thee any thing
contrary to the word of God) let him be an Anathema, accursed, by God and man,
Gal. 1. 8. Next, to thy fidelity to thy Father, thy God speaking in his
Scriptures, exercise thy charity to thy Mother, to the Church speaking in her
Institutions. Alexander (says Iustine) did lament, that he had wronged his
Nurse in his drink. The Church of England is our Nurse, and surely they are
not sober who wrong it, and I hope that at length they will have grace to
lament it. If any accuse our Church which has nursed thee, let thy love teach
thee to take heed of such accusers, and abstain from the very appearance of
evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Let both Fidelity to the Scriptures, and charity to the
Church, be a garland to thy Christian head; but let Humility be the Flower of
that garland. O be not high-minded: Think not thy own chickens the whitest;
or thy own opinions the truest. The right way to be baptized, that is, to be
washed from error, is to imitate the humble Ethiopian, Act. 8. 31. to crave a
guide to understand the Scriptures. Thus putting away pride, prejudice, and
profit: if a man read the Scriptures carefully, hear the Church charitably,
and esteem of himself modestly; I dare say it confidently, that such a man
shall understand the truth sufficiently. And for a motive to put these means
in practice; let the phrase of my Text, (...), remember us, that to be in an
error, is to be out of our wits. Let us therefore labor to settle our minds,
and to be resolved in our Religion. We must not forget it: Such as are out of
the truth, are out of their wits. The Lord therefore settle our minds, and
preserve us from all spiritual madness.

Having dispatched the Heresy; it follows Fallacy. Which in the first place
we find here related to be threefold: by spirit, by word, and by letter. The
first fallacy or trick whereby seducers did deceiv^ the Thessalonians was,
(...), the spirit, that is the pretense of some Vision, Revelation,
Inspiration, or Spiritual information. Thus 1 John 4. 1. Believe not every
spirit, that is, yield no^ credence to every Doctor, who does gild ove^ his
doctrine with the pretense of the spirit, o^ spiritual infusions. So the
Scholia interpr^^ this phrase, (...): false prophets (say they) use to plead
for their false doctrine: This say they is the dictate of the Spirit, an
extraordinary gift we are endued with. The second means to deceiv^ these
Thessalonians, was (...), by word: whether spoken or written: S. Paul calls
it, (...), enticing words, Coloss. 2. 4. and (...), the show of wisdom,
Coloss. 2. 23. so speak the Scholia also, (...) Certain persons, say they, by
their eloquenc^ and enticing words persuaded the poor Thessalonians, That the
day of the Lord would come in their age. And finally, the last fallacy is set
down in the next words, nor by Letter as from us. Two ways did the seducers
endeavor to deceive the Thessalonians in this kind, by quotation and
falsification. Some did quote that place of St. Paul, in the 17. verse of the
fourth chapter of the former Epistle, Then we which are alive shall be caught
up: this they alleged that the Thessalonians in their own persons should see
the coming of Christ in that age. Others, (...); others forged Epistles and
spread them abroad, under the name of S. Paul, say the same Scholia.

Here then we discover three fountains of errors, and false doctrine:
Inspiration, Disputation, and Quotation. By Inspiration, and the Spirit, they
deceive the Ignorant: By Disputation and Word they deceive the Learned: By
Quotation, or Letter, or mis-alledging the Scriptures, they deceive both the
Learned and the Ignorant: S. Paul does arm them against all these, with this
Caveat: Be not shaken in mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by Letter as from us.

The first sort support their errors by Inspirations. These are the
Enthusiasts, both old, and new. In old time Montanus and the Montanists, in our
time Monetarius and the Anabaptists seduce ignorant people by pretended
Inspirations. This foul error does evidently appear from the act and effect
thereof. First, God does govern natural things, according to the nature of
them: therefore he does usually and ordinarily instruct men (since they have
bodies) by corporal means, and not by immediate spiritual infusions. Again,
these visions may be suggested by the Evil spirit: Let them therefore confirm
them by Miracles, and then peradventure we may believe them: or rather by the
Scripture, and then we must believe them without peradventure. Next, they
nickname the (...), the holy Penmen of the holy Scriptures. Impure Quintinus,
Bell. de verbo Deilib. 1. c. 1.
with a profane tongue does call S. Paul, vas fractum; S. Peter, abnegatorem;
S. Matthew, foeneratorem; and S. John, juvenem stolidulum. Bullinger says,
that Thomas Schykerus killed his brother kneeling at his prayers, a pretended
effect of his godly Inspiration. And Sleidan has historied it, that 1525. the
Anabaptists did murder 50000. Germans in one day, guided also by Inspiratio^.
One place may satisfy al men, concerning this fantastical frenzy. Luke 16.
31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rose from the dead: it is the Scripture, not Inspiration, on which
our Faith must rely. So S. Cyprian although he had a vision, yet he proved the
point he persuaded, out of the sacred Scriptures, Ne videretur verbum Dei
adulterare, lest he should seem to derogate from the Scriptures, whilst he
did arrogate to Inspirations. But I will pursue this monster no further: For I
assure my self, if this Viper did but creep upon the body of our Church, the
hand of Authority would shake it into the fire. Our Land would be impatient of
such an impious assertion.

A second sort deceive the simple by their discourses and disputations: by
uttering (...) as St. Peter speaks: they make 2 Pet. 2. 18.
their swelling words to be the windy bladders on which children swim in a
stream of errors, as if they were the most current assertions of Orthodoxall
Divinity. And indeed Eloquence is very potent for either party. Tertullus was
no mean opponent of S. Paul himself. And Faustus the Monk was surnamed
Laqueus Diaboli, Aug. confess. lib. 5. cap. 3.
says S. Augustine, the ginne of the Devil, Quo multi implicabantur per
illecebram suaviloquentiae, because he ensnared many ignorant persons by his
eloquent discourses. On the like ground Alexander did exile all the Orators
out of Athens, causas insurrectionis, as the only Trumpets of Rebellion. Yet
must we consider what we ought to think and to do concerning Eloquence:
discreetly distinguishing betwixt the use and the abuse thereof. We cannot but
know that Eloquence is an excellent instrument and assistant to the Truth also.
Eloquent Apollos was as effectual a propugner of the Gospel as ever Eloquent
Tertullus was an oppugner of the same. And the eloquent tongue of S. Ambrose
through the Ear did touch the heart of Aug. Consess. 5. 14.
Augustine, with the knowledge and love of the Truth: Veniebant in animum cum
verbis quae diligebam, etiam res quas negligebam, says that holy Father in his
heavenly Confessions. Who Aug. de Magisho cap. 3.
also does instruct us in our duty, in that point: Acute falleris, sed autem ut
falli desinas, acutius attendas: If they take such great pains to seduce us by
their Rhetoric and Logic, let us take as great pains to des^ry their
seductions, though proposed unto us in the probable and plausible arguments of
Logic and Rhetoric.

The third and last instrument of Impostors, is false quotations, urged by
false teachers. Thus among the Latins, Manichaei legunt Scripturas
Apochryphas, nescio a quibus su^oribus fabularum, sub nomine Apostolorum
scriptas: The Manichees, said S. Augustine, frame writings of their own
composing, which they urged as Scriptures penned by the holy Apostles. And the
Grecians also had their (...), says Ignatius, the patchers of Pamphlets, which
they put out as Authentical. But above all, the Papists are most expert in
this Art of Iuggling, quoting (...), Apochryphall Legends, as if they were the
writings of the very Apostles: to wit, the Gospel of S. Thomas, the Lyturgy of
S. James, and the Constitutions of the Apostles. For the Fathers, they urge
some false ones, such as are Abdias, Ephrem, Martial, Idiota, Turpinus, etc.
other falsely, as the story of the translation of the head of John Baptist, in
Cyprian: some Sermons de tempore, in S. Augustine: and other Books, Filios
populi, spurious, very Bastards, yet do they lay them at the doors of the
most holy Fathers. Nay, if their own Authors do speak against their own
cause, they have authorized a Iudex, an Index, to purge them from such
aberrations: Ferus, Stella, etc. can witness this policy. Iustine reports
that at Just. hist. lib. 12.
the return of Alexander from his Persian expedition, Magnificentiora castra
fieri jussit, he commanded his Soldiers to erect more magnificent Tents than
ever they were owners of, ut hostis terreretur, to astonish the enemies. So, to
astonish the poor Protestants, the politic Papists tell us of strange
treatises, under the titles of the Fathers, which indeed were Tents of their
own building. Finally, Robert le Bruce admitted of Women and Boys, to supply
the room of trained Soldiers: though they thereby got the day, yet I hope that
we who fight the battles of the Lord of Hosts, shall never be defeated by such
a subtle policy: Though they stuff their Controversies with forged Authors,
in stead of authentical and orthodoxall Fathers. Ye see the threefold Cord of
deceivers; Inspiration, Disputation, and Quotation. Take only one Scripture,
Gladium ancipitem, only one two-edged sword, to cut all these pretenses in
pieces. Search the Scriptures, there shall you find life, and know Christ:
says Christ himself, John 5. 39.

These are the Fallacies related in particular: there remains the Fallacy
repeated in general, in the last words of my Text, being the first words of
the third verse, Let no man deceive you by any means. Suppose that S. Paul
spoke in this manner: I have told you of three ways by which you may be
seduced: But there are infinite seductions besides. Therefore Take heed: Let no
man deceive you, (...), By any means.

Ye desire to hear some of them by name: Indeed they are infinite. Howsoever,
Facilius est seductores definire, quam finire, to make Aug contra Ac^^^micos
lib. 1. cap. 4.
use of S. Augustines phrase. Would God the commonwealth could tame them, as
easily as I can name them. I will tell you their tricks in old time, do you
apply them to our time. I will declare only a Decade of their devices: your
meditations may subdivide them into many Centuries of like subtleties.

Heretics have deceived ten ways.

By public disputation, and by private dissimulation: By employing their
Learned men, to deal with our Noble men, and by procuring their Noble men to
deal with our learned men: By employing men to seduce women, and women to
seduce men: By complaining that they are persecuted, and by threatening
persecution: By slandring the learning, and by slandring the lives of the
Orthodoxall.

1 Public Disputation is a public engine deceive. Saepe ad me venisti, magis
studio contradicendi, Cypr. ad Demetr
quam voto discendi, said S. Cyprian of Demetrianus. To challenge a public
disputation with a private determination to hold the conclusion,
notwithstanding any arguments to the contrary, is no mean disadvantage.

2 Private dissimulation is no less advantage to their public cause. It was
an ill deed of a good man; Consentius inter Priscillianistas, obloquebatur Aug.
contra mendacium lib 2.
Catholicis, and se simulavit Priscillianista^ ut eos e latebris erueret:
Consentius feigned himself to be a Priscillianist, that he might dive into the
mystery of their Religion. A Protestant in fiction, but a Papist in faction: no
petty pillar of Popery.

3 In old time cunning Seducers would so contrive their proiects, that their
learned men might insinuate themselves into the acquaintance of Noblemen.
Constantia commended a Pappus hist. page 283.
learned Arian Priest to the service of her brother Constantine; who instilled
into that good Emperor affection to, if not infection of that wicked Error.

4 They inverted their policy, causing their Theodoret. lib. 4. c. 19.
Noble men to assay the learned. Modestus General for Valens, iournied to
Caesarea; his errand thither was only to deal with S. Basil, Vt tenui ex
disquisitione dogmatis, nollet Imperatoris amicitiam perdere: that he should
not lose the favor of that great Emperor, for the small trifles of disputable
Controversies.

5 The employing of men to seduce women, is an old trick as ancient as the
Heretics of S. Paul's age: to creep into houses, and to lead captive silly
women laden with sin, 2 Timothy 3. 6. propagated by them to the Arians also:
whose plot it was, whereby Iustina was so wrought Aug. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 7.
by them, that for them she became a persecutor of S. Ambrose.

6 Others on the contrary, employed Women for the seducing of men: Priscilla
and Maximilla, auro and spiritus mendacio, Montani dogmatibus Coster. in Vine.
Lyrin. page 114.
plurimos corruperint: what with their lying and their buying they purchased
many to partake with wretched Montanus.

7 By complaining that they were persecuted, they attract many to pity their
persons, and some to favor their opinions. Such was the complaint of the
Donatists in Saint Augustines Aug. Bonif^^io epist. 50
time.

8 Yet those very same men, as it is avouched by the same Father, could make
use of that they complained of; menacing persecution Aug. Bonifa^io Epist. 50.
when they met with men of a timorous disposition. A quaint device: to sail
with two contrary winds to the same point.

9 Slander is a great help to the seducer: first of the learning of the
Orthodoxall. Thus S. Paul himself shall be pronounced (...), but a Babbler, by
the Philosophers, Act. 17. 18. and S. Cyprianus Coprianus, hissed out
Lactantius lib. 5 cap. 1.
as a dunghill-declaimer, by the Rhetoricians.

10 And finally, to slander the lives of their Adversaries, was common, and
commodious. The Heretics hate both thee and me, (said Saint Hierome to Saint
Augustine) Vt Hier. apud Aug. Ep. 25.
quos gladijs nequeunt, votis interficiant: That since they cannot take away
our natural lives with their swords, yet that they may take away our civil
lives with their words.

Thus the Roaring Lion sends out an Herd of his Whelps, seeking whom he may
devour. Thus thousands of Pharisees compass Sea and Land to make one
Prosylite. S. Paul's Text is too true in our times; There are many men who would
seduce us many ways. But the God of Heaven preserve all of us from all of them.

The Application I omit: it is easy, you cannot but apprehend it.

SERMON III.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. Except there be a falling away first.
The point of Antichrist may be disputed. Of the name of Antichrist. The
Fathers are not the best Expositors in this point. The Apostasy. Whether
general? When it was.

OF Antichrist. This is the question propounded by St. Paul, and (with Gods
gracious assistance) to be expounded by my labors. I have heard some such
history of that Vision. A studious Father meditating on the mystery of the
Trinity, there appeared unto him a Child with a shell, lading the Sea into a
little hole: he demanding what the Child did: I intend, said the Child, to
empty this Ocean into this pit. It is impossible, said the Father: As possible,
said the Child, as for thee to comprehend this profound mystery in thy shallow
capacity. De me narratur fabula: it is mine own case. Many in our age of our
learned Fathers have passed by this question, as fadomlesse: why then should I
(will some say, ( a child in knowledge) prepare my shell to empty this Ocean?
and lose my labor in deciding this controversy? I answer: when you are to
return home in the dark, I think you had as leefe have a little child to
guide you with a Candle, as a man to go before you with a Torch unlighted. And
this I know, that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings God has Matt. 21.
16.
perfected praise. I add moreover: I have not done this work of the Lord
negligently. I have perused, if not read, most of the Authors of either side:
but I have furnished my discourse principally from the labors of four of our
own learned Bishops. This also I add, first Jewel of Sa^i^bury, Andrews of
Elie, Abbot of Sa^isbury, Downam^ of Derie.
for the honor of our Nation: this little land surpassing all the Christian
world besides, for incomparable learning in that calling: secondly, for some
scrupulous persons satisfaction. I wonder how any can call this Calling,
Antichristian: since four Bishops have written against Antichrist: none more
sufficiently, none so sufficiently.

Notwithstanding there are many and learned men, who would have this point of
Antichrist left undecided, undisputed, yea untouched also. Some few ingenuous
and truly learned men, I only except. From whom I beg their charity toward
me, as I desire to exercise mine toward them: that they would not censure me
to be too censorious; because I impute to them only, and in this point only,
ignorantiam purae negationis, not pravae dispositionis. But the partial,
though learned, are led thereunto by three motives: by Policy, Idleness, and
Prejudice. First, the Politic Papists Rhemists in Act. 1. 7.
inhibite this Question to be inquired after. Those Politicians know full
well, that such disputants do lay hold on the very Pillars of Babel: Judge. 16.
26.
and therefore the Philistims would gladly thrust out the eyes of any that
should but look after such a question: and (as the wife of Anthony did to
Tully after his death) stab through the tongue of him, that should dare to
talk of Antichrist. Next some idlesbies and slow Tit. 1. 12.
bellies, who never made any painful assay on this point, cry out, that there
is a Lion in the Prove. 22. 13.
way, that this is a dangerous question, extraordinarily perilous for the
ordinary people to dive into. This is the true ignavia fallax: they cover their
own negligence, by disparaging and discouraging the diligence of other men: by
crying out of difficulties, which they themselves never attempted. Who is more
blind than he who will not see? A third sort, and those learned, have read
this question, but with an evil eye, and partial heart, following the
affection, yea the faction they are resolved to adhere unto. Like the false
Spies: because of the children of Anak, because of some Number. 13. 26.
difficulties, they bring an evil report upon the whole controversy. But for
those learned persons, who in other points are ours, let me crave leave to give
them this Item: Hereby they are become the Popes Triarij, and do the Papists
special service. For they think that they cry down our cause more by their
bare names, than by all the arguments of the best Authors of their own side.
For the people, on our part: without peradventure there are Papists who would
entertain these our learned men, as Timotheus the Musician was wont to be
entertained, they would give them double hire for unteaching our Protestants
what they have been taught concerning Antichrist. And for other people, on
their part: these our learned men infuse into them the Honey of Rododendron
(...): they make them Plin. lib. 21. c. 83
more furious Papists than ever they were before: because, say they, Our own
great men do reject us in this great cause, with a scornful contradiction.

To arm our selves against this combination of our Foes, and of our Friends
also: let me entreat every impartial person to take these five things into
their indifferent consideration. It may concern us to set a strong hand to
this cause, because hereby the Axe is Matt. 3. 10.
laid to the root of the tree, the rooting up of Popery. To use the words of
that worthy Divine, Dr, Beard of Antichrist Ep. Ded.
one of the same College whereof my self was once an unworthy member. In all
other controversies, the contention betwixt us is, as that was betwixt the
Romans and Pyrrhus, Vter imperaret: but in this, as betwixt them and the
Carthaginians, Vter esset? for if this foundation be razed, the whole Building
of Popery must fall to the ground. But if it stand firm, we fall from a maine
argument, to avouch our Separation. Again, if S. John does proclaim, that all
Gods children should come out of Babel, shall it be thought inconvenient for
the same persons, to inquire whether they be in Babel or no? And if S. Paul be
so earnest to employ half this Chapter in this point, can we censure the
inquiry into this point, an unnecessary employment? Nay our adversaries
themselves: learned Bellarmine Bell. de Pont. Romans Praf.
calls the Point of the Pope, whereof this is a branch, Summam rei
Christianae, a matter of extraordinary moment. And laborious Malvenda
professes that he did spend his Ma^^. de Ant. calce.
whole studies for twelve whole years, in this point only. Where the enemy
does fortify, he does suspect his weakness. Therefore a just suspicion may
warrant us to search into this controversy. In a word: the knowledge of this
point of Antichrist, in some men, in some sort, is necessary to salvation. For
those who adhere to Antichrist revealed, are in the estate of damnation, out of
the Book of life. Rev. 17. 8. in the way of death. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. (...)
Antichrist does prevail in those that perish, says S. Chrysostom. And S.
Jerome says Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Hieron ad Al^as. qu. 11.
the same: In iis qui ad perditionem sunt praeparati, that Antichrist does
deceive those who are ordained to destruction. As therefore we tender our
souls and salvation, even so let us, with all humble diligence, attend to this
difficult, but profitable question. In the handling and hearing whereof, God,
even our own God grant us a blessing.

Antichrist! This word, of all the Scripture is found only in the Epistles of
S. John, and there principally in the 18. verse. of the second Chapter of his
first Epistle: where he does distinguish betwixt (...), and (...), betwixt the
mean Antichrist, and the maine Antichrist. Every enemy of Christ is an
Antichrist: but that Antichrist is the grand Enemy, at the end of the world.
(...). Damasc. lib. 4. cap. 28.
Antichrist properly so called, is that Arch-adversary, who shall come at the
end of the world, says Damascene.

Antichrist is a Greek word: whereof there are three derivations. The first of
which is manifestly false, the second manifestly true, and the third probable.
Some say it is pronounced Magdeburg. Cent. 1. cap. 4. page 416.
Antichristus, as it were Antechristus, that is, before Christ: because
Antichrist should come immediately before the second coming of Christ. A
manifest error: to derive a Greek word from a Latin root, is more then
childishly ridiculous. Others say, Antichristum, Hilar. de Synodis adversus
Arianos p. 311.
as it were Contra Christum: Nominis Antichristi proprietas est Christo
contrarium esse, says Hilarie, the propriety of the name of Antichrist does
imply a contrariety to the person of Christ. Hence Danaeus does suppose that S.
Paul in his word (...), the Adversary, does allude to this term of S. John,
(...) the Antichrist: and here there is an absolute agreement betwixt the
Protestants and the Papists. Others in the third place say probably, that
Antichristus does signify Aemulum Christi: Antichrist, a Counterchrist: one
who under the show of Christ does oppose Christ. Thus in apposition (...)
signifies in stead, as Matt. 2. 22. Archelaus did reign, (...), in the room
of Herod: and in composition, (...), one case for another. So we may say more
than probably: Antichrist is an Adversary, pretending to be in the stead of
Christ, but indeed fighting against Christ, (...), he shall Damascen. 2. 28
faigne himself religious, says Damascene: and Bernard, Tentabit and
supplantabit sub specie boni, that he should insinuate himself under the show
of Religion. Thus I say we may say probably, and more than probably: and this
probability will plainly point at the Pope. But I rather follow the second,
because I would close with the consent of the Papists. They, we, all, consent
in this: Antichrist does signify one that is contrary to Christ, even the
greatest adversary that ever was, is, or shall be, to Christ, and
Christianity. Now who is that great Adversary, that great Antichrist: this is
our great question which now we have in hand to be decided.

In the first place, let me lay this ground Aug. de Civit. 20. 19.
on the words of S. Augustine, Nullum dubium est, eum de Antichristo ista
dixisse: S. Paul does speak of that Antichrist, in this Chapter, yea and
plainly too: Johannes scripsit Antichristi Sharpus Specul^ Papae cap. 1.
mysterium, Paulus commentarium, says our acute Doctor: S. John in his
Revelation does write of Antichrist obscurely, as it were in a mystery: but S.
Paul in this Epistle speaks of him plainly, as it were by way of a
commentary. To which I annex the caveat of that accomplished Divine, in his
Accomplishment of Moulin Accompl of Prophes page 77.
Prophecies. Though a man may move some difficulties here and there; yet it is
enough to stagger the most opinionative, when he shall see all the pieces of
this so long a Prophecy to concur upon one only man.

This point of Antichrist is delivered from the third verse, to the thirteenth
of this chapter. Wherein I will pass through these five particulars:
Antichrist described, in the third and fourth verses: Revealed, in the fifth,
sixth, seventh, and part of the eighth: Destroyed, in the remnant of the eighth
verse: Confirmed, in the ninth, and part of the tenth: and received in the
tenth, eleventh, and twelfth verses.

In the Text, we have the first point of these five, Antichrist described:
wherein we are to consider four parts of his description: his Time, Titles,
Place, and Properties. First, the Time of Antichrist, his coming is either
after, or with an Apostasy; for that day shall not come, except there come a
falling away first. Secondly, his Titles are three; Antichrist is termed the
Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, and the Adversary, or he who opposes
himself. Thirdly, his place is the Temple of God. Fourthly, his properties are
three, each exceeding one another, and all exceeding all other: He does exalt
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: He does sit in
the Temple of God, as God: and he does show himself that he is God.

I must premise one thing more: All reverence premised to the judgment of the
Fathers: The judgment of the Fathers must not determine this controversy.
Prophetiae non intelliguntur, Rex Iacobus prae^ page 84.
donec compleantur, said that Patron of Learning: those cannot understand the
Prophesies, who do not live to the end of the Prophesies: this prophecy of
Antichrist was not fulfilled, therefore it was not expounded in the time of the
Fathers. To those old Fathers, these prophesies were aenigmata, mere Riddles,
said that old Father Irenaeus. And Daniel in Irenaeus lib 4. cap. 43.
his Prophecy does desine the obscurity of all Prophesies: Such words are
closed up, and sealed, Dan. 12. 9.
till the time of the end. Ego, quid dixit, fateor me Aug. de Civil. lib. 20.
cap. 19.
ignorare: St. Augustine concerning this very Chapter, does confess that he
could not conceive the contents thereof: and he calls the opinions of his
times, suspiciones, but conjectures.

As before the coming of Christ, the Fathers of Israel did but guess at those
things which the Church did afterward see so plainly. So concerning Antichrist,
the Church may see those things now plainly, whereat the holy Fathers did but
guess in the Primitive time. Bellarmine also did reject twelve of the Fathers
in this very point of Antichrist, De Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 12. Therefore
without any wrong (to be imputed to us by our adversaries) to those reverend
Fathers, we may refuse them in this cause: we have the Fathers, the Scriptures,
and Bellarmine himself to avouch it.

The Time is the first point: and (...) is metator Antichristi, (as Lucianus
termed Decius) that is, the falling away, is the forerunner of Antichrist. When
a Fort does see some Troops sit down before their walls, they conclude that
the General of their enemies is at hand to besiege them. So S. Paul gives the
Church this sign; When the falling away is come, Then, that man of sin is at
the doors.

(...), an Apostasy, is the falling of a man from his Lord, to whom he owes
his fealty. A Renegado: or to turn Turk. It is taken three ways by the
Expositors. First, Politically, to fall from the Roman Empire by Rebellion.
Secondly, Ecclesiastically, to fall from the Church in Religion. And thirdly,
Figuratively, the subject for the adjunct, the Apostate for the Apostasy: By
the falling away, understanding the head, instrument, or person causing that
falling away.

The second signification of these three, is most suitable to the Text; because
it is used in the Scriptures: as Luke 8. 13. (...), they fall from the word. 1 Timothy 4. x. (...)* some shall fall away, or depart from the faith: and Luke 18.
8. (...), when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?
meaning that all will fall from faith at that season. Next, the Fathers use it
in the same signification. This Apostasy, says S. Cyril, it shall be (...),
from the orthodoxall Faith. And S. Augustine calls the Aposlate, Refugam a
Domino, Aug. de Civ. 2^. 19.
a runnagate from the Lord. And that many of the Fathers did take this word in
this sense in this place, Bellarmine himself confesses, ^^ll. de Romans ^o^^i^*
3. 2.
that S. Augustine does witness it. Again, Apostasy in the Scriptures, and in
the Ecclesiastical Writers, is never used politically, for the falling away
from a temporal Prince. Moreover, Discedit imperium, non disceditur ab
imperio, Ap^l^g^* in Bell. cap. 9.
said our English Gamaliel: there must be a nullity of the Empire, not an
apostasy from the Empire, to make way for Antichrist. (...) in the sixth verse,
and (...) in the seventh both the thing and the person which lets, both the
Empire and the Emperor must be absolutely removed. And finally, Antichrist is
termed (...) Rev. 16. 13. a False prophet. which must imply an Ecclesiastical
apostasy, or falling away in Religion.

Neither can the third sense conveniently be applied to the Text, to take the
word Apostafie siguratively, for the Apostate himself. This misprision arose
from a false translation, Refuga being read for Apostasia, Aug. de Civitate Dei
20. 19. which is acknowledged also by Suarez, who also says, Graeca vox
Apostasia Suarez Apolog. lib. ^. c. 10. Sect. 5.
significat discessionem a side in sua syncer a proprietate: that is, Apostasy
does properly signify a falling away from the Church in Religion.

Thus properly S. Paul does speak of the E^clesiasticall falling away. Yet I
will follow all three: both because the other two are true also, though not
proper. For the first: the Roman Empire it self must fall, which must imply a
falling from it by rebellion, before Antichrist does come. And for the third:
if the great falling from the faith shall be absolutely before the coming of
Antichrist; then Antichrist when he comes (as Bellarmine speaks Bell.
Apolog. cap. 9.
well) Non inveniret quos seduceret, shall have few or none to seduce by his
strong delusions. Therefore it is true also, Antichrist shall be the maine
causer of this falling from the faith. Again, I retain all the members of
this distribution, because, as near as I can, I will tread in the very
footsteps of the Papists themselves, and infer my conclusions from their
premises. It is their distinction: The Rhemists Rhemists ^^ 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect.
5. and 6.
on this Text acknowledge the two first branches: though in the fifth Section
they deny that there can be any revolt from the Church: yet in the sixth
Section they seem to revolt from that resolution: saying, It is very likely
that this great revolt shall be, not only from the Roman Empire, but also
from the Roman Church, and withal from most points of the Christian faith.
Suarez also does acknowledge spiritualem Suarez Apolog. lib. 5. c. 10 nu 18
stragem, a spiritual defection and destruction. Dr. Steuartius professor of
Ingolstade, Steuartius in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
on this place, does thus describe this falling away. Insignis defectio a
Romano Imperio, and memorabilis Apostasia a side Christiana: Vnde non immerito
Patres vocaverunt Antichristum, ipsam Apostasiam, quod multis author sit, ut a
Deo discedant. That is, There shall be such an admirable falling away both
from the Roman Empire and from the Christian Faith, that thence the Fathers
have justly called Antichrist the Apostasy it self.

Finally, this entire distinction is borrowed from Bellarmine himself. Suarez
also has the Bell. de Romans Pontif. 3. 12. Suarez lib. 5. cap. 10. ^u. 13, 14,
and 16.
very same in his Apology. I take it therefore for granted, that the word in my
text is taken three ways, Politically, Ecclesiastically, and Figuratively. And
I will make it appear that every way it does most properly occur with the
Church of Rome.

For the first. The Church of Rome from the Empire of Rome has fallen away, and
so fallen away, as no part of the Empire beside. It is true: The Roman Empire
lost Asia, and other places: but this was by the open invasion of the Turk,
and of other foreign Princes. But that he should be thrust out of Rome, his
Imperial seat, whence his Empire is named Roman, by the rebellion of his
Subjects; I suppose there never was falling from the Empire like this: and this
was achieved by the Pope. Somewhat after six hundred years of our Saviors
Incarnation, Bonifacius the third, obtained of Phocas the title of Universal
Bishop: here that Pope was hatching his Apostasy, this was but the infancy of
his Insurrection. After that, the Longobards invaded and conquered part of
Italy: yet so, that the remnant thereof remained entire under the Emperors
Dominion. But the Emperor himself residing wholly in the East; Italy (as it
is in most Kingdoms, governed by Viceroyes) was oppressed by his Exarchs.
Thereupon the Italians became wonderfully averse from the Emperors, inclinable
to the Bishops of Rome. And the Bishops of Rome encouraged by this popular
favor, did attempt to excommunicate the Emperors. Now their Rebellion was
grown to some head and maturity. About eight hundred years after Christ, Pope
Leo the third did create Charles, the most potent Prince of Europe, Emperor of
the West: yet with this politic and profitable proviso, That the whole Roman
Territory should be rendered to the possession of the Roman Bishop. Finally, in
the eleventh Century, Hildebrand, commonly called Gregory 7. annexed the
Temporal unto the Popes Spiritual Monarchy. We need not therefore be dainty
to propose our conclusion, in their own words, Pontifices deficisse ab
Imperatoribus. Bell. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 15.
It is notorious that the Roman Bishops have fallen away from the Roman
Emperors. Thus have the Popes performed the first Apostasy.

The second, their Ecclesiastical falling away from the Faith, is yet more
plain. This disputation were ended, if S. Paul himself might be permitted to
be the Moderator. Here, St. Paul does say, there shall be a falling away: it is
demanded, what manner of falling away? St. Paul himself does answer, in the
latter times Espens. in 1 Timothy 4. 1. Anselm. in 1 Timothy 41.
some shall fall from the faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. But from what points of faith? is
the second enquiry. S. Paul himself again does name those very points, 1 Timothy
4. 3. They shall forbid to marry, and command to abstain from meats. Their
Perertus does assent to one of these; Antichristus, Perer. in Dan. cap 14. etc.
ut sertur, ut plurimos decipiat, simulabit castitat^m: it is the common
opinion, that Antichrist may deceive the common people, he shall therefore
pretend Chastity. And our Ignatius applies both, and drives the nail Ign^t.
ad Philadelph.
home to the head: He shall call marriage pollutions, or meats abominable: (...)
such an one is possessed by the Apostaticall Serpent. Now for one Thief to
appeach another, it does not clear the Accuser to be guiltless: The Papists
cannot excuse themselves, by accusing Marcion and Montanus, guilty of the same
Apostasy. But it is as clear as the Sun; The Pope does forbid meats and
marriage: Therefore, The Pope is fallen from the faith. The Pope is fallen from
the faith: Therefore, The falling away is in him. The falling away is:
Therefore, Antichrist is come.

Finally, for the figurative falling away: the Pope is ipse Apostata, and
Refuga: the Head and Author of this falling from faith. I omit infinite
particulars, and insist in three only. Adoration of Images, against the second
Commandment: Invocation in an unknown tongue, contrary to the fourteenth
Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians: and Mediation
through, and Salvation by the Virgin Mary. I wonder there can be men so blind,
that do not see, or rather that will not see, how grossly they have fallen
from the Primitive faith. But yet more grossly have they fallen away in one
point, by the conclusion of two of their Councils. Licet Christus instituerit,
Council. Constant. Sess. 13. Council. Trident. Sess. 21. c. 1.
etc. Although Christ did institute the Sacrament to be administered in both
kinds: yet it seemed good to their Church, to injoyne the administration
thereof in one kind; and to pronounce an Anathema against any Christian, who
shall affirm it necessary to be received in both kinds; as Christ himself
did institute, Council. Trident. Sess. 21. Can. 1.
and administer it. Now that Church that does profess they have fallen from
Christ in one point, and does practice palpable Apostasy in many, we may call
that Church Apostata, the Head of this falling away.

To close up this point with that Jewel on Iuel. in 2 Thessalonians 2. 13.
this place: Their Church is increased in outward glory; decreased in the
inward truth: they have the Chest, lost the Treasure: They were Bethel, the
House of God; they are Bethaven, the house of vanity.

O Roma a Roma quantum mutata vetustaes?
Nunc caput es sceleris, quae caput Orbis eras.
How much is Rome altered from it self? It was the prime Church for verity; it
is the prime Church for heresy. It is Apostata, the very head of this falling
away.

Now concerning the Time, when this falling away was, I will absolve that
point, when I come to speak of the second part, Antichrist revealed. Here
(...): I will only glaunce at that question. About six hundred years after
Christ, it was performed by Mahomet, openly: and at the same time wrought by
Rome cunningly, and secretly. It was begun by all Heretics, preparatively,
from the very Apostles times, The mystery of iniquity does work already, says
the Apostle, verse 7. But it was brought to the height and perfection thereof,
about fifteen hundred years after Christ, when the world was in quiet, under
Pope Leo the tenth. Then, only a remnant of the Waldenses and Albingenses,
lived in the Alps: as also the Picards, Hist. Trent. lib. 1. page 3.
and followers of John Hus, called the Calistini, or Subutraqui in Bohemia.
Being all, but a few, and ignorant, simple men, unfit for opposition.

To conclude. Since first, the Pope is fallen from the Emperor, politically;
possessing Rome the Metropolis of the Roman Empire. Secondly, since Popery is
fallen from the first Faith, forbidding meats and marriage was S. Paul himself
did foretell. Thirdly, since we see that the Papacy does injoyne worship,
contrary to the Primitive Faith. And that they themselves confess, That they
have fallen from Christ's institution in one point. I say therefore of this
Apostasy, as Gregory said of John the Constantinopolitane; Greg. lib. 4.
Epist. 38.
Fidenter dico: I am confident in this first conclusion. Rex superbiae prope
est: Antichrist is come: for, the falling away has been long since.

Hereunto will I annex the assoiling of one Quaere: Whether this Apostasy has
been total and universal? I answer, No* In S. Ambrose Ambr. Hexam. lib. 4.
c. 2.
his phrase, Ecclesia obu^^brari potest, offluere non potest: Religion was
Eclipsed, not extinguished: the Church was hidden, not taken away. Which truth
will appear from the consideration of the contents of the Scripture, and from
the consideration of the Books of the Scripture. First then, how could the
truth be conveied unto us without new Apostles? Next, how could the Scriptures
be derived unto us, since the Church is the Pillar of the Truth, and the
preserver of those Oracles? And M. Cartwright Cartwright in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
says well on this place: If we should say that the Church could full away, or
cease to be, one Isay 59. 21.
word of the Prophet, which calls ^^ an everlasting people, were enough to
confute us. Other arguments may be added: From a Prophecy: My words shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed for ever. From a Precept: Go and teach, even to the end of
the world. Matthew. 28 20.
From a Promise: The Gates of Hell shall never Matthew. 16. 18.
prevail against the Church. And from an instance in Particulars: The
Administration of the Sacrament, which must be done, to show the 1 Cor. 11. 26.
Lords death, till he come. And the work of the Ministry, which must be
continued, Till we all Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
come in the unity of the Faith. Finally, Homo sum, and humani a me nil alienum
puto: Humane Testimony is pressed to do service to this Divine Verity. That the
Truth has at all times in some place and in some sort subsisted, it is the
Record and Concord of all H^story. If any desire a more full satisfaction in
this cause, I refer him to the solid Treatise of our learned Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield. Wherefore seeing The Grand imposture, cap. 5.
we are compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses; we say, the Visible
Church made a revolt, but the Church of the Elect God miraculously preserved,
even under the cruel persecution of Antichrist.

Here then we clear our Church from Bell. de notis Eccl cap. 9. Suarez Apol.
lib. 5. c. 10. nu. 17 Rich. Smith Protestan^ia Eccl. c. 4. nu. 13. Aug. in
Psalm. 101. Conc. 2.
that popish calumny, who charge us to avouch an Universal Apostasy of the
whole Church, from all the Christian faith.

Here also we condemn the pride of the Donatists: who held that the Church was
extinguished throughout the whole world, that Angle of Africa, wherein they
lived, only excepted. Yet far more insolent is the assertion of our own
English Anabaptists, who hold that The Church has been utterly extinguished
out of the Helwis Mist. of Juiq. p. 7.
whole world. This is the doctrine of their Apostle Helwis, in his Treatise
termed the Mystery of Iniquity. But condemning both, those old Anabaptists, and
these new Donatists.

Hence I say, to the moderate Papists, ye see the fearful falling away of all
Africa and Asia. To the indifferent Protestants, ye see the fall of the famous
Church of Rome. I say to us all: we see that this very Church of the noble
Thessalonians is fallen and gone. Therefore the Apostasy is past. Open then
your eyes to behold Antichrist, who cannot be far off. And who it is, with
Gods assistance I shall show you in my succeeding Sermons.

In the mean time, I suppose, it will be no great transgression, if I make one
small digression; and sweep down one Copweb, on which the Church of Rome does
rest her hand with strong confidence. If our Church (say they) be Less. de Ant.
Them. 4 p. 16.
thus fallen, show the time of this falling away, what Popes reigning, and what
Divines opposing, this miraculous Apostasy was performed. This brave weapon is
brandished by eloquent Campian, their elegant Champion: but this sword Campian.
Rot. 7.
shines better than it cutteth. Quando igitur hanc sidem tantopere celebratam
Roma perdidit? Quando esse desi^t, quod ante fuit? Quo tempore? Quo Pontifice?
Qua via? Qua vi? Quibus incrementis urbem and orbem religio pervasit aliena. If
we be Apostates, show then (says he) When did the famous Church of Rome fall
from that Religion, for which they were so famous? In what time? Under what
Pope? By what men? By what means? By what Decrees or Degrees did this
Apostasy surprise their Region, and Religion? I answer: The present Italian
tongue is the old Latin tongue corrupted. Because none can show, what Emperor
reigning, and what Grammarians opposing, this corruption was induced: will any
infer hereupon, Therefore the Italian is not corrupted? Concerning the
Italian Tongue, and the Italian Church, any indifferent, ingenuous, and
impartial person will frame the same illation. Yet to proceed* I say this very
Quaere is a politic point of the Popish Mystery, of their Antichristian
Iniquity. As Herod the Edomite first burned all the Registers of the
Israelitish Genealogies, and then demanded who could show any Record, whereby
it might appear that he was not an Israelite. So the Romanists require of us
Chronologicall testimonies of the Time of their Apostasy, when as they
themselves have suppressed those Chronicles, and conceal those Antiquities.
Again, we answer in the words of Christ, Matthew. 13. 25. Vnde Zizania? Whence
are the Tares? The enemy sowed them, when the men were asleep: In the words of
S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 2. They speak these lies in Hypocrisy: and in the words of
S. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 1. They brought in these damnable heresies privily: as
Tertullian Tertul. adv. Valent cap. 1.
speaks, Nil magis curant, quam u^ occultent quod praedicant: their maine
care was, to conceal their errors, when they did preach them and broach them.
And as Lyrinensis speaks, Vinc. Lyrin. cap. 15.
Latenter superinducunt errores, they infused their errors secretly. Yea to
shape them an answer in the language of their own Authors: Saepissime constat
de re, and non constat de modo, Bell. de P. R. lib. 2. c. 5.
says Bellarmine, The Matter may be apparent, when the manner may be
questionable. Of one point Minime constat, says Gregorius de Valentia, Gr. Val
de legit. usu Euch. c. 10.
we cannot tell the original thereof. Of another pedetentim, it entered by
Little and little, Ross. Assert Lutheran. Confut.
said Bishop Fisher. And of a third, their magnificent and so much magnified
Council of Council. Trid. Sess. 22. ca. 9
Trent, concludes with our very phrase, which we use concerning all their
errors: Multa irrepsisse videantur, many things seem to have crept into the
Church without observation or opposition. Since therefore the Roman errors
did enter into the Church of Rome secretly, and unseene, it is an unequal
demand, to require us to name the very time of their entrance.

Notwithstanding, if any desire more fully to be satisfied, even in the
Historical part of those points of Apostasy they stand charged with: I
refer them to the luster of Ireland, The Archbishop of Armach.
in his answer to the Irish Champian. From whom, in the most controversies of
maine consequence, they may receive most full satisfaction.

Six particulars I will insist in, which I suppose to be the sinews of their
Apostasy, and the supporters of Antichristianisme. The first concerning the
Communion: the Communion was instituted of Christ in both kinds, Matthew. 26.
27. It was administered by the Apostles in both kinds, 1 Cor. 11. 28. It was
received in the Primitive Church in both kinds: as it is Council. Constable. S^ss.
12. Council. Trid, Sess. 21. c. 1.
confessed by their own Council of Constance, and that of Trent also. The
withholding of the wine from the Laity, became a custom in the Latin Church
not long before the Council of Constance, their Gregory of Valence is our
witness. Greg. de Val. de legitimo usu Eucharist. c. 10. Trent Hist. lib. 1
page 3.
And it was imposed as a Law, by the said Council, under Pope Eugenius, and
the Emperor Sigismund, anno 1484. Against which the opposition was so famous,
that the opposers were called the Subutraque. Thus have they fallen from the
first institution of this holy Sacrament. And this is the first point of their
Apostasy. That the Pope is Universal Bishop, the universal Scripture does
afford not one tittle, to avouch this title. Nay 600 years after Christ this
great attribute was condemned by a great Pope, to be Nomen Antichristianum; an
Attribute Greg lib. 4. Epist. 31. and 39.
of Antichrist: and those who consent to that title do Fidem perdere, Fall
from the faith, said the same Gregory. Yet instantly after him did Pope
Cyriacus assay it: and anno 606 did Pope Bonifacius atchieve it. We therefore
can assign the Time and Persons, when the Pope, even in the judgment of the
Pope, did fall into this second point of Antichristian Apostasy.

Against adoration of Images, we produce Preesius de Trad part. 3. de Imag.
C^ss^nd. consult. tit^le Imag.
two, and those domestical witnesses. These are the words of Peresius, and
Cassander confesses the very same: Neque Scripturam, neque Traditionem
Ecclesiae, neque Communem Sensum Sanctorum, neque Concilij Generalis
determinationem aliquam, neque Rationem, qua efficaciter hoc suaderi potest,
adducunt: That is, No man (say these men, our adversaries) can produce either
Scripture, or Tradition, or consent of Fathers, or definition of any general
Council, or any found Reason, whereby they can plainly prove the lawfulness
of the worshipping of Images. Greg. lib 9. ep. 9.
A Pope also does condemn this Popish error more than six hundred years
after Christ: Imagines Sanctorum, in Ecclesias non ad adorandum, sed ad
instituendum collocantur, says Gregory: he permitted them for instruction, but
their adoration he utterly condemned. Yet was Image-adoration established anno
789 by the second Council of Nice, under Eirene the Emperesse, by the
assistance of Adrian the Pope: But with the heaviest opposition that ever the
earth saw, or the heavens permitted. Besides the gainsaying of those great
Bishops, Serenus of Marcellis, Claudius of Turin, Hincinarus of Rhemes, and
Agobardus of Lions: Besides those Libri Carolini, and the two Councills, the
Constantian in the East, and that of Frankford in the West: Besides those
infinite injuries and insolences which were offered, and suffered under the
reigns of Leo Isa^rus, Constantinus Copronymus, Leo Armenius, Michael Bardus,
and Yheophilus, whom Bellarmine calls Bell de Imag. lib 2. ^. 6. Homil of
I^el. part. 2. page 36.
Iconomachi, the enemies of Images: The Sun was darkened seventeene days, and
the Emperor murdered, when the Images were established by Eirene. Therefore
here also have we the Time when, and the Person by whom was performed the
thirdpoint of their Popish Idolatrous Apostasy.

That all men in general (and therefore the Pope in particular) should be
subject unto Princes, it was the doctrine of S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13. and of S.
Paul, Acts 25. 10. the doctrine of their Master, Matthew. 22. 21. and it was the
doctrine of their Disciples, Reges esse a Deosecundos, That Princes were under
no man, but God alone, this was an ordinary Aphorism of Tertullian,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Gregory, and of all the old Fathers. But in the year
1076 Pope Gregory the seventh, surnamed Hildebrand, Baron. an. 1076. nu. 26.
de facto did depose Henry the Emperor, and that it might seem afterward to
be done de jure too, he confirmed the same by a Council held at Rome in the
same year 1076. Bin tom. 3. ^o^^. page 1^8^.
Thus we insist in the Time and Name, in the punctual particulars of this
fourth falling from the faith, of this Arrogant Antichristian Apostasy.

It was the common Catholic conclusion of all Christians, for full fourteen
hundred years, that the Pope was not the supreme Judge of the earth, but that
he was subject to a Council. Their own Council of Constance does Council.
Constable. Sess. 4. Council. Basil. Sess. 2. and 33.
conclude it: and their other Council of Basil does call it, Fidei Catholica
veritas: a point of Faith. But in the year 1516 Pope Leo the tenth did reverse
that Decree: and did decree in his Laterane Synod, that the Pope was supreme
Council Lateran. Sess. 11. Bell. lib. 2. de Council cap. 17. Sect. De^que.
Judge, and superior to a Council. This is the grand Apostasy: whereby the
Pope did declare himself to be the Grand Antichrist.

The sixth point of the Popish Apostasy is the first part of that falling from
the Faith, foretold by S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3. and branded for the Doctrine of
Devils, is the forbidding of marriage. A motion of forbidding Priests to marry,
was in the Council of Nice, anno 325, but stayed Socrates lib. 1. cap. 8.
by the persuasion of Paphnutius. Siricius did set it on foot again, and
restrained some Priests from marying, in the year 380: in the year 1076,
Gregory the seventh (no singular chaste Pope) enforced single life, by Canons
and persecutions. And anno 1119 Calixtus 2, did Matthew of Westminster. Trent.
hist. lib. 7. p. ^80.
prosecute it as a Decree: but Pope Pius 4, an. 1563, would not permit it so
much as to be propounded by way of Disputation. To these six I will add a
seventh, prayers in a known language, that all the people may say Amen: was at
the first practiced by the Primitive Cranmer in a Pamphlet to Q. Mary, printed
1556 page 13. and 1^.
Church, and preached by S. Paul 1 Cor. 14. So is S. Paul understood in the
Civil Law, more than a thousand years past: where Justinian in a Synod
writes, Iubemus clara voce, -- ut a fideli populo exaadiantur -- celebrent,
etc. he commands that public prayers should be celebrated, that the people
might understand them. It a enim and divus Paulus docet in Ep^st: ad
Corinthios. This, says he, is the doctrine of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. and thus was
St. Paul understood of all Interpreters, Greek and Latin, old and New,
School Authors and others, till thirty years before Queen Mary's reign: at
which time one Eckius did devise a new exposition, understanding S. Paul of
preaching only. But when a good number of the best learned on both sides were
gathered together at Windsor, for the reformation of the Church Service: It was
agreed by both, without controversy (not one saying the contrary) That the
Service of the Church ought to be in the mother tongue: and that S. Paul in the
1 Cor. 14. was so to be understood. This memorable discourse was written by the
Martyr Cranmer, from a prison in Oxenford, to Queen Mary in a Pamphlet printed
1556. Here then again the Romish Church has fallen from the prim^tive Church:
and this is the seventh point of the Popish Apostasy.

This is plain enough of their falling from faith: whereby I have showed the
Times and Names producing most palpable apostasy. These seven particulars are
sufficient to show that point they so impetuously press us to, in what time,
and under whose reign this Apostasy was acted. Although I suppose that I may
undeniably conclude, That an old man has an hoary head, when I see it gray:
although I be not able to show the very day when every hair did turn color.

One word for our practice, and so I end. To fall from the truth, the text
tells us, it is the time of Antichrist, the sign of Antichrist, and the work
of Antichrist: indeed, the very Essence and Quintessence of Antichrist.
Apostasy has been a thing ever and most abhorred in the Church of God. Peter
did fall from Christ, but Christ knows it cost him dear; He wept Cypria.
epist. 52.
for it bitterly, Matthew. 26. 75. Trophimus a Minister, fell from the truth,
afterward he repented and returned, and was received into the Church: but
Cyprian would never suffer him to execute the function of the Ministry any
more. Fortunatianus a Bishop, fell from the Cyprian epist. 64, 68.
Church, but Cyprian and Cornelius, and many others denied him his Bishopric;
although he repented and recanted his wicked Apostasy. Marcellinus, a Bishop
of Rome, for fear of the Pappus page 108.
tyrant Maximian, revolted: but he returned with remorse, sought out the
persecuted Christians in a Crypta, a Conventicle at Suessa, in Campania, and
did voluntary penance, in sackcloth and in ashes, and in abundant tears, in
the open Congregation. Our noble Archbishop Fox Acts and Monuments Anno 1556.
page 2067.
Cranmer, thrust that hand first into the fire, which had subscribed unto
Popery. And the most disgraceful name that ever was fastened on a graceless
wretch, was the surname of Julian, Julian the Apostate, or Revolter from the
Christian Religion. Nay the very Apostates themselves cannot endure Apostasy:
but if the tortures of the Inquisition do extort recantation from any frail
consessour, sometimes they dyed notwithstanding: most times bore Tapers in
their hands, and wore Halters on their necks, and Sambenitos (that is, coats
painted with Devils) on their backs: and all times suffered shame, for such a
crime, and so shameful a transgression.

For our selves: know we that Antichrist has his instruments of Apostasy at
this day amongst us also. Laborious Papists, who will Math. 23. 13.
compass sea and land to make one Prosylite. Subtle Jesuits, who creep into
houses, and lead captive silly women. And many an Elimas, many an audacious
Seducer that will pervert Paulus Sergius, and seek to turn away (even
Noblemen) from the truth. But know, Facilis est descensus averm: It is easy to
fall from the truth: but (Hic labor, hoc op^s) infinite labor and dolor to
return to the truth. A garden is most weedy if once undigged: and a Christian
most savage, if once revolted. Remember Luke 9. 26. Whosoever denies Christ on
earth before men, Christ will d^ny him before God and his holy Angels in
heaven. Remember Hebr. 10. 25, 26, 27. If we forsake the assemblies, and sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and
fiery indignation which shall devour the Adversary. Remember that Apostasy
and revolting from Religion is the pledge of Hell, and Badge of Antichrist.
Christ therefore confirm us, and make us constant in his Truth, without
Hypocrisy, Apostasy, or Backsliding.

SERMON IV.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. And that Man of sin be revealed.
Antichrist not one person. The Man of sin. The Pope, the cause of Ignorance,
of Whoredom, and of Treason. The Powder Treason.

ANd tha^ (...) of sin be revealed. I have (...) the first of these five
points, which I propounded in the description of Antichrist. I have showed you
the Antichristian Apostasy. The second succeeds: His Titles: which are
three: The first of them follows in these words of my Text, And Suarez
Apolo^. lib. 5. c. 17. ^^. 1.
that Man of sin be revealed. Suarez in the fifth book of his Apology, and
seventeenth Chapter, in the beginning thereof; disliketh our Kings discourse,
because he omitted this clause. Therefore to satisfy those that follow
Suarez, I will discuss this point largely. And indeed there is ample matter in
this short sentence. In it I commend four points to your consideration: the
Subject, Article, Adjunct, and Accident. First, Antichrist is here termed a
man; secondly, the man; thirdly, the man of sin; and finally, the man of
sin to be revealed.

First, Antichrist is here called a man, (as I conjecture) to imply the manner
of his invading the Church, which is by subtlety and Policy. That whereas other
persecutors have bin compared to Beasts, because they assaulted the Church with
a brutish violence: Antichrist is termed a man, to show that he fights not
only with the horn of a Beast, Hostility: but also with the tongue of a Man,
Subtlety. Both Os gladij, and gladius or is: both the sword, and the word also,
shall be his instruments to cut down true Professors.

Howsoever, this quenches that error which was a little kindled by
Hyppolitus, that Hyppolitus ^e Consum. mundi^
Antichrist should be Demon in corpore phantastico, a Devil in a
fantastical body. This opinion is a fantastical assertion: for Antichrist
shall be (...), a man, says S. Paul in my text: Oecumen, in ^ Thessalonians. 2.
(...), an absolute man, says Oecumenius on my text.

The second point: (...), ille homo, The man of sin. This article of the
word, the Papists urge as an Article of their faith: that the Pope cannot be
Antichrist. Hence is Suarez his Suarez Apol. lib. 5. c. 2. nu. 3.
admiration, and Lessius his demonstration. The former does wonder (Quis sedem
Regni, hominem peccati appellare solet?) that any should call a Kingdom by the
name of a man. And the latter deriveth his third demonstration, ab unitate
Less. de Ant. Them. 3.
Antichristi, Antichrist is one man, therefore the Pope is not Antichr^st. Our
Rhemists say this Rhemist^ in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Bell. de P. R. lib. 3. c. 2.
article; or the, signifies one singular man. Et. sane mirum est, (says
Bellarmine) nullum adversariorum, qu^tamen jactant linguarum peritiam, hoc non
ammadvertisse: I wonder, says he, that none of the Protestants, who profess
themselves great Linguists, could observe this property of the Greek language,
where this article^ or the, does signify one singular person. Surely the
Rhemists might be right English, and Bellarmine a true Italian, but neither of
them good Graecians: their argument I may shape into this Syllogism.

The article does signify one singular person,

The Pope is not one singular person: ergo,

The article does not signify the Pope.

Ergo, The Pope is not the Antichrist.

The answer is easy. First, I ask any Divine, wherefore may not (...) the
Man, in this place signify a multitude, the Church malignant: as well as (...)
the woman, in another, Rev. 12. 6. does signify a multitude, the Church
militant? Next, every Schoole-boy can tell that the article* does not always
signify one particular person. Again, it seems there is no such
signification thereof in this place: for the old translation (so authentical
with them) absolutely omitteth it. And in Scripture the article (...) is used
four ways, (...), and (...); by way of Elegance, Demonstration, Difference,
and Eminence. First, (...), by way of Elegance, as Luke 4. 4. (...), Man shall
not live by bread alone. Matt. 4. 4. the same sentence is rendered without the
article, (...). Secondly, (...), by way of Demonstration, pointing at some
particular person, as John 1. 29. (...), etc. Behold the Lamb of God. Thirdly,
(...), by way of Difference, to distinguish the whole kind, as Mark 2. 27.
The Sabbath was made, (...), for man. Fourthly, it is used (...), by way of
Eminence and emphasie, to signify a thing that is noble and notable in that
kind, as 2 Timothy 3. 17. (...), The man of God, meaning not any man but the
Minister: yet, not one particular person, but the whole calling. So here,
(...), signifies, not all impious men, but emphatically, the Principal,
Antichrist: yet Him, not one particular person, but a whole vocation.

Notwithstanding, yield them this conclusion: nevertheless, from hence they
can conclude nothing against ours, or for their own cause: Though Antichrist
be one man, yet may the Pope be Antichrist. For supposing a personal, yea a
Trienniall Antichrist; and the persecutors and Heretics to have been
Harbingers to prepare his way. Notwithstanding the Sea of Rome may be the Seat
of Antichrist: and the succession of Popes may be the Series of those persons,
out of whom one Monster may arise, who shall succeed and exceed all his
predecessors, in breathing out threatenings, and slaughter against the
Disciples of the Lord, in making havocke of the Church, and in being drunk
with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. This
seems to be the conjecture of learned Zanchius: and to the same Zan^h.
misc^l. lib. 3. p. 25 de fine sac. 85. discept. cum Marbachio 474. Mr.
Mountagues Appeal, part 2 cap. 5. page ^19.
conjecture, seems our no less learned Countriman to incline, in these
words: It may be probable -- that one, notorious, singular, mischievous
Antichrist may arise, toward the final consummation of the world: who in
fraudulent colluding, malicious craftiness, in impious, execrable, and
transcendent wickedness, through heretical impostures, and lying miracles
shall go beyond all other, that ever lived in the world -- Surely if the
General of the Jesuits, should once come to be Pope, I would vehemently
suspect him to be the party designed. For out of what nest, that accursed bird
should rather come abroad, than out of that Seraphicall Society, I cannot
guess.

But indeed, that Antichrist should be one particular person, it is improbable,
and plainly impossible, which I will make appear by six arguments. In the sixth
and seventh verses, (...), and (...), that which withholds, and he which
lets, that is, the Empire, and the Emperor (by their own doctrine) does
signify not one man, but a succession, if the article does not restrain
(...), the person hindering, no more can it restrain (...), the person
hindered, unto the singular number. In this verse, (...), Antichrist is termed,
a man to be Revealed: but in the seventh (...) he was working, even then,
though in a Mystery: and the same man is said to be destroyed, at the coming
of Christ, in the eight verse. Antichrist therefore was in Saint Paul's time, to
be revealed in the after times, and to be destroyed in the last times. All
which cannot concur in one particular man. This also may be confirmed from
the drift of the Apostles discourse in this place. Which was to foretell, the
most notable Apostasy, and most importing the waste of the Church: which could
not be in the age only, of one man. Far fitter therefore it had been, to
have foretold the Heresy of Arius, which endured many years, and extended to
many places: Miratur orbis se factum Arianum, Hieron: Dial. ad Lucif.
Saint Hierom says the whole world was infected with Arianisme. To this
Sunshine of Saint Paul, St. John may add one Candle, Reu. 18. 7. Sedeo
Regina, 1 sit a Queen, and shall see no sorrow: which are the words of one,
not newly sprung up, by an usurped authority, but of one established in a long,
and rooted tyranny. But to lay the axe to the root of the tree: Matthew. 16. 18.
we read (...) that Christ will build his Church upon a rock. Now according to
their Popish exposition, if the Papists must expound the article to signisie
the singular number, and by (...) The rock, to understand Peter alone, and not
the whole succession of Popes: then sarewell to the Romish Supremacy, and
infallibility. And I think the Romanists had as liefe yield the Pope to be
Antichrist: as not to be the supreme head of the Church, and not to be the
infallible judge of Controversies. Finally, Bellarmine himself delivers
these Bell. de P. R. lib. 3 c. 1^
five things: Antichrist must 1 usurp the kingdom of the Jews: 2 vanquish
Egypt, Libia, and Ethiopia: 3 conquer seven other kingdoms: 4 subdue the whole
world: and 5 raise an universal persecution. Now how Antichrist shall ever be
able to post over, these expeditions on the wings of a whirlwind, in the
reign of one man, especially in the space of three years, and a halse, as the
Papists fancy, I appeal to the conscience of any indifferent person,
Protestant, or Papist: and they will conclude with me, Antichrist cannot be one
singular man.

Neither can any justly oppose, that argument from the opposition: Christ is
one man, therefore Antichrist shall be one man. For Christ, the Head of the
Church, lives for ever himself: and therefore is one person. But Antichrist,
the Head of Babel, is mortal and (continuing to the end of the world) must
therefore be perpetuated by succession: we have instances in this kind. The High
Priest, was the Type of Christ. The High Priest, that Type of Christ, was not
one Person, but the succession. The Pope is (called) the Vicar of Christ, not
one Person, but the succession. Quoad officium Papatus, omnes Papae, qui
fuerunt, aut erunt, non sunt nisi Vnus Papa: All the Popes, which over were or
shall be, in regard of the Function of the Papacy, are but one Pope, says that
Papist Augustine de Ancona. Even so, Antichrist is the Adversary of Christ: not
one Person, but the succession. And all those Adversaries, that ever were, are,
or shall be, quoad officium, in regard of their function (to oppose Christ)
they are all, but one Antichrist. Examine now the argument by these parallels.
Christ is one person: therefore his Vicar, the Pope is one person. Christ is
one person, therefore his Adversary, Antichrist is one person. Ye easily
discern the Fallacy.

Howbeit, we say, that Antichrist may be called one man, for two causes.
First from the phrase, it being prophetical: and in Prophecies, by one beast,
a whole Kingdom is designed, Dan. 7. 23. Secondly, from the properties of the
persons composing that Antichrist: they may be all called, in the singular
number, unus homo, one man: quia Omnes habent unum regnum, unum propositum, and
unum spiritum, says Rollocke on this place. They all have one Kingdom,
Rollock. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
in the same form of government: one purpose in persecuting the faithful, and
one spirit, they being all (...) as Oecumenius speaks: all madded, by the
same Devil, to underproppe Antichrist. Thus Antichrist may be called, one man:
but indeed he M^gd^burge Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4.
is, many: a maine succession. I conclude; Antichrist us est regnum falsorum
doctorum, Christi doctrinam obscurantium, and mundanum regnum arripientium:
Antichrist is a State, fighting against the Church in a long succession. Now
who they are, which plead most for succession: I leave this to your conjecture,
as a preface to plainer demonstrations.

Thirdly, the Adjunct is, (...), These are the two former points: concerning
the two remaining: Men, Fathers and Brethren, hear my Apology, which I make
unto you. Of those two points, I shall speak Nil, and Nimium: of the one, I
shall seem to speak too much, and of the other too little. The last shall I
now pass, I reserve Antichrist revealed to his proper place. The first will
enforce me, to spinne out the thread of my Sermon somewhat too long. But of the
first, with what breuity I may. The Adjunct is, The man of Sin, the very word
will cause some to expect invections, bitterness, clamours, and evil
speakings: but let me prevent them, by my protestation. I protest therefore in
the presence of God before whom I stand, I will speak nothing falsely, nothing
partially, but only what this Text puts into my mouth, and their own
writings into my eyes. And in them also will I silence infinite personal
instances.

Again, I protest by the same blessed Majesty, that my hearts desire is, to
confirm the Protestant, to reform the Papist: but to exasperate neither.
Therefore my tongue shall not be a vultures beak, to prey upon the putride
parts of the Papacy, and to rip up their personal vices. But it shall discuss
the Real parts of Popery: their positions published in print. If therefore
those, which themselves avouch as the sound parts of their religion, if they
shall appear to be rotten and putrifide. Then I hope the sheep of Christ,
will not (like Wolves) swallow down whole, whatsoever is put into their
mouths, by such Carvers. But to keep my discourse within the compass of
truth: I remember that saying of Christ, Math. 12. 36. Every idle word, that
men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment. I
remember also, what a Father said, of that saying: Si pro omni verbo otioso,
quanto magis pro omni verbo injurioso, and malitioso: if I must give an account
unto God, for every idle word, what must I do for every lying word? If I must
give an account for every lie in my house, what an account must I make for
every lie in my Pulpit? Here then are two reins, for that one member. Yet I
must insert one Proviso: Our Adversaries also are abundant in their
accusations. We say that the Pope is The man of sin: And they say we are The
men of sin. They have their Babels, and their Libels, infinite popish
pamphlets, which publish us to be the sink of sin, the shame of
Christendom, and the scumme of the whole world. But those imputations, they
put upon us falsely, and impertinently. Falsely, St. Hierome taxed Sabinian for
destouring a Nun, Sabinian retorted upon St Hierome, the like suspicion of
lewdness. Herein they differed: Hierom did accuse Sabinian per veram
convictionem, and Sabinian Hierom, per falsam confictionem: This is our case:
we charge the Papists that they defile the Church, by foul sins: they
charge us with the same. Herein we differ: our accusation is per veram
convictionem, by true conviction, and just relation: theirs is per falsam
confictionem, by false consiction and forged calumniation. Again, as these
calumnies are false, so are they impertinent also: for they accuse us of
personal sins, which always have, are, and ever will be, in the purest
Churches, upon the face of the earth. But we charge the^ with doctrinall, and
dogmaticall crimes: with crying sins supported by the Doctors, and doctrine
of their church. Having premised these items, I will speak to you, as St* Paul
spoke to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 7. I will speak the words of truth, and
soberness: Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

(...), The man of sin. Genitivi S^ar* Apol. lib. 5. cap. 17. nu. 2.
pro adjectivis, in scriptura positi, exaggerationem significant says Suarez,
Genitives put for Adjectives do augment, and increase the signification: as
here, The man of sin, that is, a most sinful man.

Now Antichrist is termed, a most sinful man, two ways, both affective and
effective: (...) and (...) of all men, he principally, is both the Practiser,
and the Causer of Sin. Magd^burgens. C^nt. 6 cap. 4.


He is the Prime practiser of sin, and herehence, Antichrist was called by
the ancients, Secundus Adolescens, the Adventurous youth, quia iuvenili
temeritate fervidus est in malo: because with a youthful frenzy he does
plunge himself into all mad courses. Again, he is the grand cause of sin:
therefore Aquin. Sum* 3. quaest. 8. Art. 8. Greg. Moral. lib. 24. c. 3.
is Antichrist called caput impiorum, the Head of wicked men: and every wicked
man, membrum Antichristi, the member of Antichrist: as if all wicked men, and
wickedness, received their beginning and continuance from that fountain. Both
these are included in one sentence by Oecumenius on this place, (...), Oecumen.
in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that is, Antichrist is called, The man of sin, because he does sin
incomparably himself: and because he does constrain others also to commit
iniquity. By the first he is like Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness
in the sight of the Lord. By the second, he is like I^roboa^, who made Israel
to sin. By both, he fulfilleth that in the first to the Romans, and the last:
He does not only do things worthy of Death, but has pleasure in them, which
do them.

But who is this Man? this Pattern and Patron of all impiety? the Rhemists call
it Blaspemy: we verity. We say, The Pope is The Man of Sin: both by Acting it
in Himself, and by effecting it in others. Anno 1562. the Archbishop Trent.
Hist. lib* 7. page 588.
of Granada, and all the Spanish Bishops desired reformation, in the Trent
Council: saying that the Fountain of all abuses, was the Court of Rome, which
is not only corrupt it self, but the cause of Deformation in all the
Churches. This truth is also confirmed by that false proselyte, Radix omnium
malorum, Spal^^^^^^s de Rep. lib. 4 c. 11. nu. 11.
est Romana Curia: the Court of Rome is the cause of all evil.

For the first: the personal sins of the Popes, I pass that. Only because
Suarez says Suarez. Apol. lib 5* cap. 17. nu. 5. Christoph de Antichristo
against Doctor Dounam. Tris^gion lib. 3. cap. 39.
that there were aliqui improbi, not many: and Christopherson in his catalogue
does not mention any evil persons, amongst all the Popes. I must therefore
give a taste of other men's observations. The learned author of the Trisagion,
says that there sat in the Sea of Rome, fourteen Popes which were
Adulterous; nine Simoniaks; twelve Tyrants; three and twenty Sorcerers, and ten
Traitors. To which I must To^^. Tor^i. page* 219.
add, what our Bishop has delivered out of their Platina: Monstra, Portenta:
more then twenty Monsters of Mankind, which sat: and more than thirty
Schisms, were hatched in the Chair of Rome. And for the space of one hundred
and fourscore years, and for the succession of Fifty Popes, he could reckon
Vix unum, Pontificis nomine dignum, hardly one worthy to be called a Pope; and
that you may not Him. 2. lib. Whits. 2. part. sol. 219, etc.
judge this to be a private judgment, or mine to be a rash judgment, read the
judgment of the Church of England, fully to this point, in the Homily for
Whitsontide. But I will remove my finger from this sore: which I had not
touched, had not their bragging Tongue, constrained my Hand, a little to
discover it. Next to come to the life of the cause: That the Pope is the cause
of sin, it will be confessed, if we consider, only this one thing. There is
a book, called Taxa Cancellariae Apostolicae, where in print, the Absolutions,
from sin, and dispensations for sin, are set at a certain Rate. Can any
imagine a fitter introduction? and a more imboldning encouragement, for any
sinful man to commit any sinful action? This is much which I say: but much
more is said, by one of their own, and best authors, Claudius Espencaeus.
Liber palam, ac public, hic Cl. Esp^^^. in Tit. cap. 1. Digres. 1.
impressus hodie ut olim venalis, Taxa Camerae, seu Cancellariae Apostolicae
inscriptus, in quo plus scelerum discas licet, quam in omnibus omnium vitiorum
summistis, ac summarijs: et plurimis quidem licentia, omnibus autem Absolutio
empturientibus proposita. That is, There is a book publicly to be sold, the
Taxa Camerae, whereby a man may learn more wickedness, than ever was
comprised in all the summists and summaries of Vices, which ever were set
forth; and wherein some may buy leave, and all pardon for any sin. The same
author proceeds in the same place and point, that that book does dispense
with Adulterers, Murderers, and Sorcerers. Adulteros, In cantatrices, and
Homicides: yea they absolve Parricidas, Incestos, and contra naturam cum
Brutis, those that kill their Fathers, defile their Mothers, or that are so
far past grace, that they commit, that foul crime against nature. By name:
for Perjurie, Cap. 4.
a villain which has falsely and willingly forsworn himself, shall be
absolved: and the price of his Absolution is printed six grosses, Cap. 3.
or nine shillings; and the same price is pitched, for that child of the
devil, who out of a diabolical lust, shall defile a woman, in the holy house
of God, in the very Church it self. Thus also under Alexander the sixth, the
Cardinal Waldenses lib. 2. cap. 3. page 48.
of St. Xist: sent into Dauphine, two bulls, one by which he gave absolution
for Simonie, Theft, Murder, Usury, Adultery, Detension of Benefices,
Destruction of goods Ecclesiastical, Perjurie, yea Apostasy and Heresy.

All which may be established, by the Bella^. de Pont. Romans lib. 4 ca. 5.
sect. Quod.
judgment of learned Bellarmine, for says he: Si Papa praecipiat vitia, and
prohiberet virtutes, tenetur Ecclesia credere, vitia esse bona, and virtutes
malas, nisi velit contra conscientiam peccare. That is, If the Pope should
command vices, and interdict virtues, every person who would not offend against
his conscience, must believe, that the vices are good, and the virtues are bad.
And that none may surmise me to wrong Bellarmine, or to wring his words beyond
his meaning: behold a like egg of the same bird. Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib. 4.
ca. 2. sect. Dein de.
Catholici omnes convenient, pontificem -- aliquid -- statuentem, sive errare
possit, sive non, esse ab omnibus fidelibus obedienter audiendum: that is, all
Catholics do accord in this, that the Pope, whether he may err or no, is yet
to be heard with all obedience. And Bellarmine does but Blanch Bell. Recogn. de
Sum. Pontif. page 507.
the Aethiop, when as he would seem to retract this paradoxe: saying that he
did speak de dubijs actibus: and in the last citation, he has in re dubia.
For the Powder Traitors, propounding Abbati Antilog. cap. 9.
it, as rem dubiam, to murder a King, and ruin a Kingdom, at one blow; from
these principles, if the Pope had returned the affirmative, they must have
obeyed him: yea have believed, that that vicious act, had been a virtue:
Tolet. Instr. lib. 4 cap. 3. sect. 7.
nay (as another Cardinal speaks in another case) they might have thought
that bloody barbarous villainy meritorious.

Let any patron of the Pope, under heaven, name any man, or succession of men,
on the earth, who have given the like incitements, encouragements, and
commandments unto sin. And I will recant, and confess, that I have done his
Holiness, and the holy series of his predecessors much wrong, saying, that
The pope, is the man of sin.

But principally, the Pope is the cause of three sins, he is the cause of
Ignorance, of Whoredom, and Treason. Now if I can prove that the Pope is the
cause of these 3 sins, I have cause enough, to conclude: The pope is the man of
sin.

For the first: If the Council of Tolet, has defined Council. Tol. 4. cap. 24.
right, that Ignorantia est matter omnium errorum, Ignorance is the mother of
all Errors. It will exercise the wit, and learning of his best friends, to
quite him from being the cause of much sin, who is the cause of that which is
the cause of all error. That the pope is the cause of Ignorance it is plain,
because he commands his to hear in Latin, and to pray in Latin, plebis est
admira^^ divina secreta* non Bonaventura in Luc. 1. 21.
pers^rutar^; the common people must admire not inquire after divine secrets
says Bonaventure. Math. Peresius speaks far more Matthew Peers. de Trad.
page 44.
boldly and broadly: his doom is, that it was the Devils invention, to permit
the Lay people to read the Bible. But acute Richard of Ments, hooketh all in
handsomely, by a pretty Trent. Hist lib. 2. page 158.
distinction: that the doctrines of faith, were now so cleared, that we ought
no more to learn them out of the Scripture: and therefore the scripture was
read heretofore in the Church for the instruction of the people, whereas now it
is read in the Church, only to pray, and ought to serve every one, to that end
only, and not to study.

Finally, he does forbid the Lay people to read the scriptures, unless they
obtain special License from the Bishop or Inquisitor to do it, as appears
by the fourth rule of Prohibited books, which is at the end of the Tridentine
Council. And the granting of those Licenses is now again taken away by
Clement the 8. as may be seen by his Index of prohibited books, printed at
Paris, by Laurentius Sonius. And Decretal. de Haeriticis ca. Quincunq. in 6.
for a lay Papist to dispute of the scripture, is to incur Excommunication.

The Popes injunction, to pray in Latin has made many of the lay people, such
ignorant people, that they become like Melitides, the natural fool, who could
not define, whether his Father or Mother did bring him forth! So they cannot
tell, whether God their Lord, or the Virgin their Lady, should be the object of
their Prayers. Yea a great Divine in the University Rex Iacobus med. in Orat.
Dom. page 132.
of Saint Andrews in Scotland, taught it publicly, that the Lords Prayer
might be said to the V. Mary, which monster could never have been teemed into
this world, if the Latin language had not been the Midwife. A trick of an
Apostate: the Pope wants no precedent, Julian interdicted the means of
knowledge to the poor Christians. I involve therefore two conclusions, in one
short sentence. The Pope is an Apostate, and The man of sin.

The second point is Whoredom. I say, The man of sin, is the cause of that
sin: and the Pope is the maintainer of Fornication, and maintained by
Fornication. Cornelius Agrippa shall Corn. Agripp. de vanitate cap. 64.
be one witness, that the Whores of Rome every week paid a Julius, that is,
six pence each, to the Pope; who shall be seconded by one of our own
Countrymen: The stews are in Wats: Quodlib. 2. Artic. 4.
Rome, cum approbatione, as lawfully, as any Citizen of Rome, says Watson. But
indeed I have a cloud of witnesses, for this truth. To keep a Concubine is
permitted ^^g^b^s, by the laws Duarenus de Beneficijs lib. 8. cap. 6. Lopez de
ratione reg. lib. 2. p^. 58
of Rome, ^aith Duarenus that learned Lawyer. Stews are to be tolerated, says
Lopez, ad detinendum libidinis ardorem, to limit the fury of lust. Strump^ts
inhabit Rome, sci^^^^ and patiente Nav^^* manuali cap. 17.
Papa, the Pope knowing, and suffering such inhabitants. Meretri^^s non sunt
dignae la^ueis legum, Whores are not worth, to be corrected by the Laws, said
^^valdus. Iacobus de Graffijs propounds the question; Quare Ecclesia
permittit Lupanaria, why does the Church permit stews? and assoileth it:
tolerat minus malum praesens, ut evitet majus futurum, that is, their Church
does permit the less evil to avert a greater. Nay the same author goes yet
farther, beyond our credence, if a papist did not report it. Lex cogit, the Law
does compel, publicas meretric^s ad fornicandum, cum quocunque, juxta tamen
mercedem. If he bring money, the law does compel their Whores, to commit
Whoredom, with any man.

Finally it is the report of a learned Convert Sheldens Mot. Law. 3. pa. 151.
that there are Permissive and Tolerative laws, for these stews, and
strumpets in some papisticall Countries: in the City of Rome, there is public
toleration, and Papal permission, and protection of Queanes. The Pope has
Toll from them, the Cardinals and Courtiers cannot be without them. Pius the
5. once banished them, but he drove away so many Citizens and Courtiers with
them, that he was contented to permit their return. Very consonant to the
name Courtizane, (the fairest title of a Whore) which arose from the Court of
Rome, because such were entertained day and night. These women sufficiently
prove, that the Pope is the Man of sin.

But to furnish this point, with proofs to the full: I add, the Church of
Rome, has made a Law to constrain some to uncleanness. And therefore it may
meritoriously be termed (...), the cause of sin. If a Prince command, that a
whole City, must wade through a deep foord, though some be of sufficient
stature to wade through, if the rest perish, shall we not impute it to the
Prince his command, that they be drowned? If a state inact a statute, that all
in a County shall bear two hundred weight, 20. miles, in one day. Although a
few strong men discharge it, if many women and children sink and dye under the
burden; may we not conclude, that that Law did kill them? Even so; censure a
Decree of the Church of Rome, That all the Clergy must vow a single life:
Though some may have that Blessed gift of Continence: yet many, too many cannot
but be unclean, unchaste, at least incontinent. I infer then: Their law does
constrain them. All have not that gift, Math. 19. 11. Marriage is the remedy to
them that have it not, 1 Cor. 7. 2. Therefore, those that have neither the
gift, nor the remedy, must fall into that foul sin of uncleanness: and
their Law does constrain them. This law of such a sinful shameful
consequence, Siricius attempted about the year 380: but it was effected by
Gregor^e 7. 1074. which is now so strongly supported, Trent. Hist. lib. 6 page
527.
that though Augustine Pavugarner, petitioning to the Council of Trent, did
avouch the Clergy of Bavaria infamous for lust, few of them not being
Concubinaries: yet could he not beg permission for them to marry, indeed to be
honest. A strange inversion: It is better to marry, then to burn, says St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 9.
it is better to burn then to marry, says the Coster. Enchir. cap 17. prop.
9. T^stat in 1 Samuel 17. qu^st. 45. Thom. 2. 2 aequ. 88. Art. 11.
Popes holiness. But it is a stranger position: Tostatus and Thomas put the
Quaere, if the Queen of the Sarazens, with her whole kingdom would be
baptized, and become Christians: conditionally that some Monk may be given
her for an Husband. What should be done in this case? They answer negatively:
That a Monk might not marry, no not such a Queen, licet multae animae sunt
manifesto periturae although many souls, should undoubtedly perish, by that
refusal. Now, what may we conceive to be the cause of this so severe an
inhibition? I conjecture it to be twofold: the commodity, and the glory of the
Church of Rome. Nondum erat ecclesia dotata, says Gerson, the Treasury of
their Church would be at a low ebb, if this channel were diverted. Hist.
Trent. lib. 7. page 680.
And Pius 4. anno 1563 blamed the legates, for permitting the question to be
disputed, because the affections of married priests would fall from the Church,
to their Country. I remember a fearful saying of Arnobius: Frequentius Arnob.
lib. 8. page 771.
in Aedituorum (sacerdotum, aut Monachorum) cellulis, quam in ipsis
Lupanaribus, flagrans libido defungitur? I will not translate his sentence, nor
relate my own sentence: but I will conclude, The Pope is homo peccati, the man
of sin: for he has law to command it.

To close up all with one or two memorable additions: Gravius peccat, si uxorem
ducit, quam si domi Concubinam ^^v^at. Costerus Coster. Ench. cap. 15. Prop. 9
says, it is a more grievous crime for a Priest to marry, than for him to
keep an Whore in his house. And it is a ruled case of conscience Tolet:
Instit. sacerd. lib. 4. c. 21.
amongst those Catholics: That a woman though she has oftentimes lain with
other men, yet she may say and swear to her husband, that she is no
adulteress: with this reservation, I never did commit adultery, Tibi ut
revelem, with an intent to tell him. But to put all whores and Taxa Camera cap.
13.
whoremongers out of all fear, they have pitched a public price upon this
Sin. Their Taxa tells us, that a Priest might keep a Concubine paying ten
shillings and six pence: and a Lay man may do the same, at the same rate. If a
man defloure a virgin, it shall cost him Cap. 14. Cap. 15.
nine shillings: and seven shillings six pence must be paid by him, that
defiles his kinswoman. Sarishariensis in Ep^st. ad Coloss. 4. 5. page 356.
Cause. z. Quest. 7. in Gloss.
I will shut up all with that quotation of our learned Bishop, out of their
Canonists: Pro simplici fornicatione, hodie nemo deponitur: Now none is deposed
for simple fornication. Now would I see him who will not see the Sun: can any
deny this conclusion? The Pope is the cause of whoredom. The consequence
whereof will hardly be waved.

(...),
The Pope is
The Man of sin.
The third and last sin, wherewith I charge the Church of Rome, that it is the
cause thereof: is Treason* Treason! Did ever Englishman think that any impudent
hand should throw back this dirt into our own faces? yet is there a popish
pamphlet to prove the popish Church to be Jerusalem, or the mother of peace:
and our Church to be Babel, or the Teacher and practiser of sedition. Just
like Athalia, who was the Arch-traitresse her self, 2 King. 11. 1. yet she
was the first and fiercest to cry treason, treason, against others, 2 King. 11.
14. But whether it be our Church, or the Church of Rome which is the shop where
all treason is hammered: let this discourse testify.

The whole Series of the Popes, for many centuries might well be called by the
surname of Vrbanus the third, Turbani: that is, the troublers of all
Christendom. But I will not enlarge my discourse too far: pondere, non
numero: I will produce a few testimonies, but to the purpose: and I will end
only with one authority, and with one example: which shall satisfy any
indifferent person, who does impartially desire satisfaction.

Aquine is an old Artist in this, and goes Aqum. 2. ^^ q^^st. 12. Art* 2.
plainly to work, Principe propter Apostasiam excommunicato, ipso facto
subditi ejus solvuntur a juramento fidelitatis: that is, if any Prince be
excommunicated for Apostasy, or falling from Religion, ipso facto, by that
very act, his subjects are absolved from their oath of allegiance. Bellarmine
drives the same nail a little further: Bella^r. de Pont. R. lib. 5. cap. 7.
sect. E^go ^^ia.
Si Princeps aliquis ex ove, aut ariete fit lupus, id est, ex Christiano
haereticus, potest Pastor Ecclesiae cum arcere per excommunicationem, and simul
jubere populo, ne eum sequatur, ac proinde privare eum dominio in subditos.
That is, If any Prince of a Sheep shall become a Wolf, that is, of a
Christian, an Heretic, the Pastor of the Church (the Pope) may expel him by
excommunication, and withal he may command the people to follow their Prince
no more, and finally he may deprive him from ruling over his Bellar. de Pont.
Rom lib. 5. ca. 7. sect. Quod si
subjects. And he adds a reason, why this has not been frequently done,
Quia deerant vires, the Pope wanted power to put it in execution. And this
certainly was the cause of composing that laborious, but lying libell
Monarchomachia, whereby the wily author would persuade credulous persons:
Jerusalem, Jerusalem: that the Papists are the most peaceable people in our
whole land: but desunt vires, they want power. There is the cause of their
quietness: and for ever may it continue unto them.

Thus have I the most, and most learned of the Church of Rome avouching my
accusation: For Thomas is the leader to all the Thomists: and few of the
Jesuits will stick to follow their Cardinal Bellarmine. Nay not only the
Thomists, and Jesuits, but if they will subscribe to the Pope, all the Papists
must grant the cause, though the title peradventure ( Treason) is declined by
them.

About the year 1253, Pope Innocent the Math. Paris. page 844.
fourth, said of King Henry the third: Nonne est Rex Angliae noster vasallus?
is not the King of England our subject? and ut plus dicam mancipium? nay more,
is he not our slave? Pope Monarchomach. part. 2. tit. 3. page 372.
Pius 5. endeavored the deed, (but God be blessed deerant vires (and ever may
they) armed our Northern Papists to Rebellion against our famous Queen
Elizabeth, as it is confessed by impudence it self, the Babylonish author
Apologia Regis Iacobi page 77.
of their Babel. Pope Sixtus the 5. uttered in the Conclave a panegyricall
Oration, in the praise of that traitorous Monk, who murdered Henry 3. King of
France. And finally Pope Vrbane 8. Maij 30. 1626. dated a Bull to Bulla Urban.
8. 1626.
England, to exhort all English Romish Catholics to refuse the oath of
Allegiance; that is, in effect to be Traitors. Wherefore then should we be
dainty, to give the title which is so meritoriously achieved? Homo peccati,
The Pope is the man of sin.

But all these instances fall short of that instar omnium, of that one
authority, with which I promised to conclude, and have reserved it to be the
complement of the whole cause. Suarez, ex cujus ore locutos, omnes conspirasse
affirmare audeam, all the hearts, of all the Papists, speak out of his mouth,
says Alphonsus a Castello Branco in his censure of his Apology. Now let us
hear his and their united language. Suarez Apolog. lib. 6. cap 4.
First therefore in his 6 book, and 4. chapter of his Apology, he proves this
proposition, Papa potest Reges deponere, ac occidere: that is, The Pope has
power to depose, and to kill Kings. But with five cautions; 1. Se inconsulto,
Suarez Apolog. lib 6. cap. 4. number. 17.
nemo contra regem suum insurgat. None may dare to rebel against his King, Se
inco^sulto, unless the Pope be acquainted with it. 2. Ab Suarez Apolog. lib.
6. cap. 4. number. 18.
illis tantum potuit expelli, and interfici, quibus ipse id commiserit. None
may expel, nor kill their King, but only those, to whom the Pope himself,
does commit this design. 3. What p^rticular Suarez Ibib.
person may principally perform this feat? Successor: his next Heir to the
Crown, si sit Catholicus, if he be of the Romish Religion, 4. Illo
negligenti^, what if the successor, does Suarez Apolog. Ibid.
make some scruple to executo the Popes pious injunction, and to touch the
Lords anointed? Then, communitas regni, all the Commons may take up ^rmes:
Dummodo sit Catholica, provided Suarez Apolog. lib. 6. cap. 4. number. 19.
they be Papists. Finally, if all ^aile, Alter Rex, a Foreign Prince may
invade his kingdom: always provided, si Pontifex potestatem ei tribua^
invadendi ^eg^^m* that the Pope permits ^^is ^^^^sio^* So (...) there must
be no deposing, nor killing of Kings, but with the knowledge, approbation,
instruction, of the Pope himself. Therefore the Pope himself is the root of
all Treason. And in this point also, he is Ille homopeccati, The man of sin.

Disciples have not been wanting to this Doctrine. Even tlle author of the
Monarchomachia himself, I doubt not, but is an excellent proficient in this
School, though he pretends that he never learned this lesson. In his
Monarch. part. 1. tit. 6, page 272.
first part and sixth title, these words fall from him, Who in his Realm is to
judge him? who in his Realm? Indeed the Pope is not in the Kings Realm. If he
would speak out, in plain English, we should find, that he that has
Jerusalem, Jerusalem so much in his mouth: that he has Babel Babel as much
in his heart: and that with Suarez he holds the Pope to be Judge unto the
King. But to wind up all in one example, never to be paralleld, the Powder
Treason, occasioned by the Tort. Torti page 86.
popish Religion: Attempted by popish Catholics: encouraged by popish Doctors,
as Faux himself freely confessed. Nay to speak in the phrase of Suarez: They
did not, they durst not attempt it, se inconsulto, without the knowledge of the
Pope: nisi catholici, unless they had been Romish Catholics: et quibus ipse
commiserit, they had never undertaken it, ha^ not the Pope himself given them
commission: (...), The Pope is, The man of sin.

But let us hear Babel, plead for Rome. Monarchomachia makes this excuse.
That Monarch^m. part. 1. tit. 1. page 14.
Horrible project of the Gunpowder Treason was attempted by a few private
Hot-spurres which in justice, is rather to be buried with the offenders, then
to be objected, and imputed to innocent men, who generally with great sorrow,
abhor the Memory thereof. I will answer in Monarchom^^. part. 1. tit. 1. page
52.
his own words: touching that objection, that the papists (and this Author
himself) do; they do say, that the Gunpowder Treason was an horrible
project: and they do say, that they abhor the memory thereof with great
sorrow: and this man does preach obedience, and has printed a pamphlet, which
he terms Jerusalem, to that purpose. But this is only a fallacy to avoid
the scandal: for now they see that those Traitors did not stand, nor maintain
their quarrel, now they leave them in the Briars, and cry out against their
project, and pretend that they abhor, that very Memory of them. Nay would
God they did so much in truth. For this and all their cunning pamphlets cannot
coape the lips of all their Catholics, but some of them, at some time, will
show their teeth. As M. More censured in the Star Chamber anno 1623. Article
15. said, That it was pity that he who undertook the blowing up of the
Parliament, that he was not hanged presently: not because he did attempt it:
but because he did not effect it.

Now that our King and Kingdom, our Peers and People, our Church and
Commonwealth, that our Nation and very Name of England should have been buried
in one grave: torn in pieces with one blast of Gunpowder. And yet by no
means, se inconsulto, without the approbation of the Pope. This may justly
cause us to say, Ecce homo peccati, The Pope is the man of sin.

In the year 1554 Queen Mary ordained that Trent. Hist. lib. 5. 385.
that prayer instituted by King Henry the eight, To deliver the kingdom, from
the Sedition, Conspiracy and Tyranny of the Pope, should be razed out of the
Communion Book. I think we may take up some such form of prayer again, and
pray: From Ignorance, Whoredom, and Treason, From the killing of our King, and
confusion of our Commonwealth, From the Man of sin, and that Pope of Rome,
Good Lord deliver us.

SERMON V.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. The Son of perdition.
Antichrist the son of perdition. Antichrist, Judas, and the Pope paralleld.
Popish persecutions surpass those of the Emperors. Of the Inquisition.

I Have discussed the first point in this Description: the time, a falling
away. Which being taken three ways, every way it is punctally fitted to the
Pope: either politically, for a falling from the Empire, by rebellion: or
Ecclesiastically, for a falling from the Church, in Religion: or Figuratively,
the falling away being put for the faller away, the cause thereof: all which
are proper to the Popish Apostasy. I am entered into the second point, the
three titles of Antichrist. In the first I have observed four particulars: the
Subject, Antichrist is termed a man, to show that he prevails in the Church
by humane means, Persuasion: not improper to the Pope. Secondly, the Article,
(...) The Man: not one man, but many, a succession: peculiar to them which lay
such claim to succession, the Popedom. Thirdly, the Adjunct, the man of
sin, that is, a most sinful wretch; both by affection and infection: the
pattern and patron of sin: so is the Papacy. The Court of Rome is both
corrupt it self, and the cause of corruption in all Churches, so complained
Granada. The personal sins of the Popes I insisted but little on: but I
showed how these three crying sins, Ignorance, Whoredom and Treason, were
caused and commanded by the Roman Laws.

I am to proceed to the fourth particular, the Accident: that man of sin
which must be revealed. But this point I must reserve to the eighth verse.
Here we have (...) there (...) there it shall be finished. Only this I will
premise: the Holy Ghost here tells us twice, that he shall be revealed. As it
is in Genesis 41. 32. the phrase is doubled unto us twice, because the thing is
established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass. Since therefore God
does tell the Church twice, that the Man of sin shall be revealed: let not us
shut our eyes against this Revelation. Let not us, like the Sepia, cast out an
inkie obscurity on that which God has made evident unto us. Jeremy 40. 14.
Iohanan said to Gedaliah, Do thou not certainly know, that Ishmael will s^ay
thee? but Gedaliah believed not: and therefore he was slain indeed. So here,
S. Paul tells us, that certainly Antichrist shall be revealed. If we will not
believe it, nor search into it, it is Gods just judgment to deliver us up into
the hands of the Man of sin, and that Antichrist should mightily deceive us.
Go we on therefore in all humble diligence, and diligent attention, to look
on him whom God has made known to us. If any stumble against the old stone,
and still distrust my ability to discharge this difficult duty; Let them but
impartially consider, how aptly, even I, shall invest the Papacy, with all the
properties of Antichrist: and then let them impartially conceive, how that Man
of sin, would have been displayed, if a profound Divine had undertaken this
exposition, to paint him out in hi^ right colors. Howsoever, according to that
portion of faith, which God has vouchsafed unto us, let us proceed in the
speaking and hearing of this great point. In the speaking and hearing whereof,
God, even our own God grant us a blessing.

The second Title of Antichrist, is that he is here termed, (...) the son of
perdition. A title wherewith Christ had long ago invested Judas, John 17. 12.
And well might these twain be adorned with one title: Nobile par: a pair of
rare creatures. And the parallel betwixt Judas and Antichrist does hold in six
particulars: In regard of their Vocation, Dissimulation, Covetousness,
Bloodinesse, Obstinate mind, and wretched end. First, Judas was an Apostle,
Luke 6. 16. Secondly, Judas betrayed Christ, when he did seem to honor
Christ: Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Luke 22. 48.
Thirdly, Judas did bear the bag, John 12. 6. Fourthly, Judas did sell and shed
innocent blood, Matthew. 27. 4. Fis^ly, Judas did persist in his wickedness,
though Christ did threaten enough to have terrified any wretch, Woe be to that
man by whom the son of man shall be betrayed, it had been good for that man
that he had never been borne: thus solemnly did Christ curse him to his very
face, Matthew. 26. 24. Notwithstanding this cursed caitife did not relent, but
obstinately proceeded in his cursed resolution. And sinally, the end of Judas
was shameful and fearful: he was hanged, and his own hangman. Matthew. 27. 5.

So Antichrist: First, he is an Apostle, at the least. For, Sedet in Templo
Dei, He does sit (.i. rule) in the Church of God, as if he were the Son of God,
as it shall be fully unfolded, when I come to open the first point in the
fourth verse. Secondly, his profession is holy and Apostolical, he has cornua
Agni, the horns of the Lamb: but his projects and practice is Diabolical,
Vocem Draconis, he has the voice of the Dragon, says S. John, Revel. 13. 11.
Thirdly, His soul does lust after gold and silver, etc. Rev. 18. 12. and 14.
Fourthly, Antichrist is drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood
of the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17. 6. Fifthly, the two witnesses shall prophecy
against Antichrist: but Antichrist shall persist even unto death: the Beast
shall kill them, Rev. 11. 3. and 7. Finally, Antichrist shall be cast into the
sea, Revel. 18. 21. into Hell, Revel. 20. 10. He shall be destroyed, says our
Apostle, verse. 8. Thus punctually do Judas and Antichrist agree in all the six
particulars, without forged or forced Application. One Name is the knot where
the properties of both these wicked wretches do meet. Either is meritoriously
named, (...) the son of perdition.

Neither are these properties altogether improper to the Popedom also. First,
the Pope is an Apostle also, S. Peter's Successor. His See, Power, Benediction,
etc. are all termed Apostolical. Secondly, he calls himself Servum
Servorum, but makes himself Dominum Dominantium: he pretends an heavenly
humility, but intends an Earthly Monarchy. Thirdly, Avarice is the very
pillar of the Papacy: for anno 1522 honest Adrian 6, having resolved to
reform his Court, found that covetous Trent. hist. lib. 1. page 22.
corruptions, as Indulgences, Dispensations, and collations of Benefices, were
the revenues and sinews of the Pontisicality. And therefore he bemoaned his
misery to William Encourt, and Theodoricus Hezius, his trusty friends, that
reformation was impossible. Fourthly, for their blood-seeking, and
bloodshedding, we need no other instance, than the Inquisition, a lamentable
testimony of their incomparable cruelty. Fifthly, I dare say that the Pope and
the Cardinals do Volentes, videntesque, (...), that they do know that they
have usurped upon Christianity: and that they are far from Christ's and
Christian humility. Finally, it is reported of Innocent the 4. that at his
death, Pless. mist. Iniq. Oppos. 52.
Vox audita est, Veni miser ad judicium; Wretch come to judgment. The end of
one Pope, may be the Emblem of many. At nolo ominari: I desire not the
destruction of the Destroyer: but rather wish that the Pope himself may repent
and be saved. Only this I must say, Judas and Antichrist, are Nobile par
fratrum, two brethren of wonderful likeness: and the Pope is alter idem, as
dear and near a friend unto them, as the Devil can wish, or Manimagine. They
are All, Filij perditionis, the sons of perdition.

Filius perditionis, the son of perdition: a childs name does import a
childs part: and the name of a son, an inheritance. Antichrist therefore is
Filius perditionis, the Heir of Hell: primogenitus Diaboli, the Devils
darling, of inevitable destruction. As therefore I pronounce Antichrist to be
haeredem, the heir of Hell: so do I infer such as adhere unto him, to be
cohaeredes, partners in the same inheritance. He is sponsus Babylonis, the
Bridegroom to Babel: they are amici sponsi, special friends to them both.
Those therefore who do tax me of temerity, because I do seek to know this
Antichrist: I may justly suspect them of supine security, because they will not
seek to know him, the knowledge of whom concerns them so nearly. But since
our Father does reveal him, every child of salvation may safely desire to
know the son of perdition.

Filius perditionis, The son of perdition: it is an Hebraisme, as much as
perditissimus, that is, one prepared to destruction: Both passively and
actively: hence he is called (...), Revel that is, both destroyed and
destroying, as Danaeus Danaeus de Antich. c. 8.
observes: which observation we have before him in Occumenius, (...): because
he destroys many others, and at length he himself shall be destroyed.
First passively, Filius perditionis, signifies one destinated to destruction:
as Mat. 23. 15 Filius Gehennae, is one who shall have his portion in Hellfire.
Next, Filius perditionis, used actively, does signify one ordained to be a
Destroyer of others: as Matthew. 11. 19. Filius sapientiae, the child of
wisdom, does signify one who communicates wisdom unto others.

Both these ways Antichrist is a Destroyer, both spiritually and corporally.
Spiritually, Antichrist does destroy the Kings and people on the earth, and
thence they are said to be inebriati vino, Revel. 17. 2. that is, drunk with
the wine of the fornication of the Whore of Babylon. Corporally also,
Antichrist will destroy mankind: and therefore Revel. 17. 6. the whore of
Babylon is said to be ebria sanguine, drunk with the blood of the Saints. In
like manner he shall be destroyed himself: first, spiritually: As in this
Chapter, verse. 8. S. Paul says, The Lord shall consume that wicked one with
the spirit of his mouth. Corporally also he shall be destroyed, as S. John does
testify, Revel. 18. 8. Thus shall Antichrist be a Destroyer, actively: killing
the bodies of Gods servants, and the souls of his own. And he shall be
destroyed, passively: himself and his servants; with fire on earth, and fire
in hell. And in this regard, Antichrist is called, Filius perditionis, the
son of perdition.

But, Quis est ille filius perditionis? Is this child yet borne? All the
parcells of this Application must move to their proper center. I say the Father
of Rome is the Son of perdition. Passively, it is conjectured that the Pope
and Papacy shall be destroyed. But actively it is known that he is a
destroyer, both spiritually and corporally: both to the souls and bodies of
miserable seduced men. The Crocodile attempting a Traveller two ways, does
ruin him both ways. If the poor man do follow him, he leads him into
Nilus: if he flies, he devoureth him. So Popish Agents, if they prevail,
they drown their Prosylites in Heresy: if they be opposed, they devour them
by their Tyranny. Hercules his picture had a string in his tongue, and a club
in his hand, either to draw, or to smite the multitude. So the Pope has
tongues for our souls, clubs for our bodies, destruction for both. Aut
inficiet, aut interficiet: infection to those that yield, and interfection to
those that resist. Meritoriously therefore, may the Father of Merits be
termed, the son of perdition.

That the Pope is a spiritual destroyer of the souls of men, it thus
appears. They will grant the Antecedent, Math. 23. 15. That their Seminaries
compass Sea, and Land to make one Prosylite. But suppose they poison their
Prosylites with Error, do they not then destroy their souls, and make them
the children of the Devil? This they say is (...) an impossible supposition:
for the Pope cannot Err, nor papists spread Errors: Si desint bona Hildebrand
ep. ad epis. Herm.
acquisita, sufficiant, quae a loci praedecessore praestantur: if they have no
good thing in themselves, yet their Predecessors Virtue is sufficient for
them. And yet their Antipopes, and contrary actions and assertions of the Popes
themselves, may cause a suspicion, that the Pope may err, in the very Chair.

But let us suppose it! Suppose the Pope should carry ten thousand souls to
hell: yet none may be so saucy as to say, Domine cur ita facis? Sir why do you
so? says that malleus Antichristi. Dr. Downam B. of Dery li. 1. ca. 4 sect. 8
e Glossa iuris Canonici.


Those who are his own, either by Education, or Conversion, for the most part
pereunt, they are lost, in an irrecoverable obstinacy. Like a Bird in a Snare,
they cannot: like a bird delighting in a Cage, they will not fly away. But
they sing in their Prison, and rejoice in their Captivity. Take the profession
of one: Cupers calls himself Mancipium Ecclesiae Romanae. I have heard of
Filius ecclesiae, the son of the Church: but mancipium, slavery is the badge
of Popery.

Add the practice of a Society: Caeca obedientia Lessius de Anti^. D^m. 9.
Iesuitarum, the blind obedience of the Jesuits, whereby they bind themselves
to Do, whatsoever they shall be commanded by popish authority: not baulking
Lying, Swearing and Forswearing, as is apparent by that juggling, and damnable
art of Equivocation. And to make all fast, they knit themselves, by the
Tr^dentine oath, to adhere immoveably ^o the Roman papacy. Since therefore the
souls of the papists are so knit, glued, and incorporated to the Papacy, I
think I may safely say, The Pope has destroyed them spiritually. Therefore is
the Pope, Filius perditionis, the son of Perdition.

Moreover, Corporally also, the Pope is a Destroyer: Ire^^us lib. 5. c. 25.
he destroys the bodies of his opposites. What Irenaeus spoke of Antichrist
of old time, we may avouch to be true of the Pope in our time. It is his true
title: Abominatio desolationis, the Abomination of desolation: Abominatio quia
est homo sum abominabilis: he is termed Abomination, because he is a person
of abominable enormities: and cognominatur desolationis, he is surnamed
Desolation, quia Sanctis and Christianis incredibilem desolationem efficiet,
because his persecution shall bring an incredible desolation on the Church of
Christ. This I say I will make good concerning the Pope. Consider what he would
do, Pius 5. cogitabat Elizabetham e medio tollere, the Pope Pius did Tortura
To^^i page 100.
consult, how he might contrive the death of the Queen of England, says our
Bishop, out of their Gabutius. Consider what he did do, Sixtus Quintus,
commended the Monk who Apolog. Reg. Iacobi page 77. Coll^n^ in Eudaem. part 3.
page 216.
murdered King Henry the third. Add that Augustine the Monk (not Augustine
the Saint) did slay twelve hundred holy Monks of Bangor, only because they
had not the Cross, Litanie, etc. and did dissent from him about Ceremonies of
Easter, Baptism, and such like.

But Bellarmine blotteth out all these, by Bell. de P. Romans 3, 7.
one pregnant objection. Pro uno Heraetico, that the Primitive persecutors, did
kill a thousand Christians where the Pope does put to death one Lutheran.
Bellarmine proves his proposition by an instance: that seventeene thousand
were martyred, in one month, under the Emperor Dioclesian: and Lessius does
Bell de Pont. Romans 3, 7. Less. de Antich. Demonst 9. Down. de Antich. lib. 6.
cap. 5.
conclude: therefore the Pope cannot be Antichrist. We answer Bellarmine,
that under Charles 9. more than thirty thousand poor Protestants in less then
a month, were murdered in the massacre of Paris 1572, surpassing all pagan
barbarousnesse, and punicke persidiousnesse: or rather let Bellarmine answer
himself: Bell. de not is Eccl. cap. vlt.
that an Hundred thousand of the Albingenses were slain in one day, under Pope
Innocent the third.

Here I gave a period to this point. But because I behold Lessius, and indeed
all the Lessius part 1. Demonst. 9.
papists to urge this as a Demonstration: That the Pope is not the Antichrist,
because he is not The Persecutor, I will wade a little farther into this
controversy. Thus they argue,

The greatest persecution shall be under Antichrist,

But under the Pope is not, the greatest persecution.

Therefore: The Pope is not Antichrist.

I answer to the point: that the greatest persecution is under Antichrist: but
the greatest tribulation was under Vespasian Luke 21. the first concerns our
Religion toward our God: the last was because of their Rebellion against their
King. I answer also, to the person: that Lessius does plead properly for his
Patron Lessius de Antich. Them. 9.
the Pope, that he is no persecutor, when almost in the same page he does
profess, that the papists do put the protestants to death, like so many
thieves and Traitors. I think the Heathen did no more against the Christians,
in the ten persecutions of the Primitive Church.

That popish persecutions have equalled, and surpassed those of the Pagan
Emperors, in the primitive time, or any persecutours that the world ever knew
besides: I will make it plain, in these three particulars. In regard of the
Time, Number, and Manner of them, the popish persecutions have been
incomparable.

First for the time, it was an heavy time, and a long with the Christians, when
they groaned under the persecuting Emperors, three hundred years together,
yet in that time, they had many lucida intervalla, many breathing spaces, under
Princes not altogether so bloody. But the Popes have persecuted the protestants
for eight hundred years together, 400 by the Inquisition, and that without any
intermission, but that in some part of the world, or other, they have made
havocke of some part of the Church or other. Eight hundred years! a long time
of persecution, and I think not to be paralleled.

The number is infinite: not to mention Hist. Albing. lib. 1. c. 5.
Merindoll, and Cabriers ruinated: nor Beziers, Dela Var, Carcasonne, and
Toulouse: against whom the Pope sent no fewer than three hundred Croisados (as
they were wont to go against the Sarasins) who put all the Albingenses
inhabiting those woeful Cities to the sword. Neither to speak of Calabria, out
of which the Waldenses were utterly extirpated by the popish persecution.
Besides all these, I shall number so many martyred and murdered by the
persecuting Popes: that it will exercise the pains of any papist to equal
them, and the heart of any protestant to read them.

Pope Martine 5, sent Cardinal Julian with Aenea^ Silvius Hist. ^o^^m. cap. 48.
an army of 80000 to extirpate all the Hussites (or protestants) in Bohemia,
where they burned many villages. At the same time his assistant Alb^r^us; did
burn above five hundred villages in Moravia, putting the inhabitants to the
sword. Here must be a nemoscit, none can tell how many were murdered in this
expedition: but a number did die, that is out of controversy.

The Duke D'Alva did profess publicly, Cr^ke^thorpe in Spalatens. ca. 32
that he killed by torment eighteen thousand of the Reformed, in six years
space, for the very cause of Religion. And yet religious Vargas complained of
him, Nimia misericordia Belgos deter^ores sieri* that he had made the
Netherlands worse, by showing them too much mercy. Certainly the mercies of the
wicked are cruel: And the Lord bless England from such outlandish mercies. An
hundred thousand of the Bellarm. de ^otis ecclesiae c^p. vlt.
Albingenses perished at the word, and by the sword of Pope Innocent 3.
Vergerius confessed, in the space of thirty years above an hundred and fifty
thousand perished by infinite tortures under the hands of the holy Inquisition.
And Ba^dwin. de Antich. ca. 6.
from the beginning of the Jesuits to 1580. (being the space of 30 years)
almost nine hundred thousand protestants were put to death in France, England,
Spain, Italy, Germany, and Downam de Antich. part 1. cap. 5. ^^. 5.
other parts of Christendom Nay in France alone, an hundred thousand of the
protestants were shamefully murdered in a short season. Sorry I am, for
Christendomes sake, that truth it self does extort from me this shameful
confession. The Christians have been more barbarous persecutors of the Pagans:
than ever the pagans were of the Christians, and under the pretext of Religion.

Consider this woeful precedent, the indelible blot of Christianity. Schioppius
says Schioppius Ecclesiast. ca. 38.
thus: Christus Ecclesiae suae manu, that is, Christ by the hand of the Church,
Indianos and Americanos Gladio and virga ferrea pavit: a strange phrase, that
the Church of Christ (which to the^ must be only the Roman Church) did feed the
Indians with the sword: and how did the Church of Rome feed the Indians with
the sword? Bartholmew Barth. decas. de Ind Occid prope initium.
de Casa does witness it with his tongue, who saw it with his eye. Within the
space (says he) of forty years they killed fifteen millions of those poor
Indians. The Pope an excellent Pastor: and the sword, an excellent pasture.

We guess at the nature of the beast, by these particulars. What appetite
they have toward our Reformed Christendom. If his teeth could fasten on it
(on all the Flock of Christ) that Wolf would swallow it whole. As Caligula
being offended at the Romans, wished them all to have but one neck; that at
one blow he might dispatch them all. So Pope Martin 2, being angry with the
Germans, wished that all Germany had been but one poole, that they all might
have been drowned at once, I may therefore pronounce this credible Hyperboly:
It is probable, that the popes have caused the death of more protestants within
these 800 years, than there are now at this day alive members of the Church of
Rome upon the face of the earth, I conclude then. The Pope is the persecutour:
and the son of perdition.

The number of Martyrs argue the popes to be cruel persecutors. But the
consideration of the manner of their martyrdom, will add an (...) or
augmentation to their cruelty, and persecution. What Suarez speaks of
Antichrist, Suarez Apol. lib. 5, c. 5. nu. 5.
I will considently avouch of the pope. Tribulatio ista maxim consist^t, in
coactione per tormenta, in inductione per promissiones temporales, and in
seductione per portenta, and falsa prodigia: that is, Antichrist (or the Pope)
will mightily fight against the Church by coaction and tormenting professors,
by induction or fair promises, or by seduction and amazing them with false
miracles. The pope I make no question, shall prevail on Christendom, by these
three projects, but principally by the first, Inductions and Seductions:
promises and miracles 1 Samuel
are like Saul, they slay their thousand; but coaction and torture like David
has killed his ten thousand. If Draco do write his laws in blood, the weaker
people cannot but obey him. By the two last, the pope has gained some few
papists in England and Germany: by the first he has gleaned up all the
protestants, in Spain and Italy, to their utter extirpation.

The author of the Monarchomachia, although Monarchomach. part. 2. tit. 3. page
385.
he does mince the enormities of the Romish Church, more than any: yet he
cannot but discover how the papists stand affected toward the protestants, if
they ever come within the compass of their power. His words are these; Charles
5. at Worms anno 1521, and at Ma^hling 1526, set down this penalty against
Heretics: of those that disputed of Controversies of Religion, or that kept
books prohibited: For the first offense forty shillings: for the second, four
pounds: and for the third, eight pounds, and perpetual banishment. And in the
year 1529, if at a time limited, they did not repent their errors, nor
disclaim them, he adjudged Viris ignem, and mulieribus fossam, that the men
should be burned, and the women drowned. If this very Statute by a
retaliation, were executed by the Protestants in England against the Papists, I
doubt not but the Papists would clamor against our English persecution. Yet
you must know, that this author spoke out of Jerusalem; all of Peace. Then
was there a marriage on foot, which filled the tongues of our
English-Romish-Catholikes, that they wooed us with their smoothest countenance.
But let Babel speak: foreign or former Papists, who have no interest in
those domestical and modern benefits, and you shall hear what out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

The Waldenses (or Protestants) in France, because Hist. Wald. lib. 1. cap. 3.
they were always exposed to sufferings, therefore from the Latin word pati,
which signifies to suffer, they were called Paturines, or Paterenians. And in
Flanders, they were called Turlupins, that is, dwellers with Wolves, because by
reason of their persecutions, they were oftentimes constrained to dwell in
woods and deserts.

In the year 1228 under Innocent 3, Dominique, Histor. Waldens. lib. 2. cap. 2.
and the other domineering monks of the Inquisition, made such havocke of the
Church, that even the popish Bishops themselves (to wit the Bishops of Aix,
Arles, and Narbonne) out of humane compassion, were constrained to write to the
Inquisitours, that the apprehended Waldenses were of so great a number, that it
was not only, not possible to defray the charge of their nourishment, but to
provide lime, and stone to build prisons for them. Whereby the way, you may
take notice of the latter part of Bellarmines objection: that Bell. de P. R.
lib. 3 cap 7. Hist. Wald. lib 2. cap. 3.
all the prisons were filled with the persecuted Christians under Dioclesian.
Forced by these fearful persecutions, the poor Waldenses (or Protestants)
fled into Dauphine, near the Mountains and Woods, and in them Caves, whither
they retired themselves from the fury of the persecution: as if Saint Paul had
writ, not only an History of his times, but a Prophecy of their times, that
the afflicted faithful should wander up and down in wildernesses, mountains,
dens and caves of the earth, Heb. 11. 38. But to show that these persecutions
under Antichrist do outstrip those under the Pagan Princes and Heathen
Emperors, they envied them even this felicity. Anno 1400 in the valley of
Pragela, on Christmasse day (a time they thought those mountains unaccessable)
they in their mountain called Albergam, that is, a place of retraite, and in
their Caves, were surprised by the enemy. The Waldenses, with their wives, and
their children in their hands, and infants in their cradles, were most
overtaken and slain: the rest so benumbed with cold, that 80 of the poor
babes were found dead in their Cradles.

Anno 1484 Albert the Archdeacon of Cremona Hist. Wald. lib. 2. cap. 8.
persecuting the foresaid Waldenses: Smoakes were made at the mouths of their
Caves, whereby three thousand were smothered and four hundred small infants
were found either strangled in their cradles, or dead in the arms of their
dead mothers, and those poor Christians wholly extirpated out of that part of
Dauphine. And that they might tear them Hist. Wald. lib. 2. cap. 3.
up by the roots, if any did mediate for them (were it the father for the
child, or the child for the father) they were instantly imprisoned and indicted
for Heretics. These are woeful Lessius de Antich. Them. 9. page 46.
examples of wretched persecutors: yet say the papists, the Pope did never make
open persecution against the protestants: and therefore by no means may we
term him the son of perdition.

It would be too tedious to add those infinite Hist. Albing. lib. 1. cap. 7.
examples of the Albingenses (other protestants) in Provence. I will give you
only a taste of them by two instances, which like Jobs servants, may tell you
what is become of their fellows. Simon Earl of Momsord taking the Castle of
Beron, caused the eyes of an hundred Albingenses to be pulled out, and cut off
their noses, leaving only one, with one eye, to be a guide to the rest, and to
conduct them to Cabaret. Men^rbe another Castle being yielded Hist. Albing.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
on composition, yet the Popes Legate caused 140 persons to be cast into one
huge fire. These are but a few clusters of Eshcol, these stories are full of
such fruit. Consider withal that to accompli^h their bloody projects, against
the Waldenses, Albingenses, and all protestants, they have used all lying,
perjury, breach of ^essius part 1. Them. 9.
promises, and oaths also, which the Turks and Heathen would be ashamed of:
yet their people practice it, and their popish Divines dare avouch it.

As the Duke of Alva, having the Fuick, a sconce by Harlem, yielded by
composition, to save their lives: yet he kept them in the Fort till they
famished, saying, that he promised them their lives, but not to give them meat.
Our poor forefathers might well be weary of suffering these barbarous
persecutions: for I am almost weary of relating them. Yet the hand of truth
will lead me a little farther in the red sea in this bloody relation. And the
first is to Dow de Antich. part. 1. lib. 6. cap. 5. nu. 5. Crakenth. in Spalat.
ca 2. nu. 5.
the ankles of blood: for at the massacre of Paris, it is recorded that the
streets did flow with blood of the credulous Hugo^ites or ( protestants) who
were enticed thither by the promises (if not by the oath) of a great King.
Notwithstanding all which, they were shamfully murdered. O Christ stupio
patientiam tuam! O Christ, that Christians should be perfidious! When we durst
trust the very Turks on such conditions. The Duke D'Alva caused women Met.
Hist. Be'g. lib 3.
with child to have their bellies ripped open, their infants to be slain, their
men to be flead, and their skins to head their drums, some to be burned with
gentle fire which did hardly burn, and others to be torn in pieces with
glowing tongues, and the very Carcasses of dead protestants to be dug up
again, and hanged Ioac. Vrsin. in. pt. de Inquisitione.
upon Gallowses. And in Westphalia the infants were torn out from great
bellyed women, cut in pieces, and so bound to the mouths of their mothers. The
men were forced by famine to feed on the flesh of their own children. Infants
of two years (twice more barbarous then bloody Herod) were closed in their
mothers bodies, and so strangled in their mothers blood. And the men (which is
as shameless as barbarous) were hanged by their privy members. Now considering
these cruelties against the protestants, and that in the mean time, the Jews,
Turks and Infidels are permitted to live in Rome it self. We must conclude
that the Romanists exceed those very Jews, Turks and Infidells, in
persecuting poor Christians. They have felt that the Pope is corporally a
destroyer, and therefore the son of perdition.

From these personal instances, I will proceed Hist. Wald. lib. 2. cap. 7.
to public examples, and I will shut up this point with the universal fate of
two famous Provinces. The Waldenses (or protestants) of Calabria, planted
themselves there 1370, Anno 1560 Pope Pius 4 sent Cardinal Alexandrine, with
some Monks, Inquisitors, who caused the inhabitants of Saint Xest to fly to
the woods: and sending soldiers after them, the most of them were slain, and
the remnant famished. The inhabitants of La Guard cited by proclamation,
appeared (being overcome by their fair promises) before the Inquisitors at
Folcade, where 70 of them were put to the rack: amongst whom Stephen Charlne
was so tortured, that his bowels fell out, to extort from him this calumnious
Confession, that their people assembled by night to commit whoredom, when the
candles were put out. Marcon was stripped naked, beaten with iron rods, dragged
through the streets and burned with firebrands. One of his sons was killed
with knives: and another was cast from a Tower, because he would not kiss a
Crucifix. Bernard Conti was covered with pitch, and so burned. Four of the
principal were strangled: fourscore had their throats cut (as if the Psalmist
had prophesied of them) like calves. And their quarters were gibbeted up, in
the high way, for the space of 30 miles together. One Sampson was hurled from a
Tower: the next day the Viceroy coming to the foot of the tower, found the
poor wretch half dead, and praying to God: to whom he gave a kick on the
head, saying, Is this dog yet alive? cast him to the Hogs.

At Saint Xist, 60 women were so racked, Hist. Wald. lib. 2. cap. 7.
that worms engendered in their wounds, which fed upon them being alive, and if
any did intercede for any, he was also put to the Rack by the Inquisitours.
The Inquisitours sent their men to the Galleys, their fugitives they condemned
to perpetual banishment, and sold and killed woman and child. Steven Negrine
one of their Ministers was starved in prison at Cossence. The other, Lewis
Paschal was burned in Rome in the presence of Pope Pius 4 himself, and his
Cardinals. And thus were the Waldenses wholly extirpated out of Calabria: and
yet the Pope never persecuted the Protestants.

To give a second example, which is second Hist. Wald. lib. 2. cap. 9.
to none. The Waldenses in Provence, were planted there about 1228. the records
of whose persecutions are lost. Lewis 12 King of France being misinformed that
they committed all manner of Wickedness and villainies, sent out commission
against them: but being better informed of their Innocence, that persecution
was prevented.

Francis the first renewed it: which was principally executed upon two of their
principal Towns, Merindoll and Cabreers. Until the year 1540, whomsoever
they did apprehend, they did either burn or gibbet, or dismissed them with
marks in their foreheads. But about this time, there passed such a sentence
against Merindoll, as never Parliament did parallel (like that of Assuerus,
Esther 3. 13) by which their men and women were condemned to the fire, their
Children outlawed, the Town it self to be demolished, the wood within 200
foot round to be cut down, and the place to be made utterly unhabitable. This
barbarous sentence was passed, against these Innocents without the hearing of
any of them who were condemned.

At Cabri^rs: in the Country round about, Hist. Wald lib. 2. cap. 8.
the men were slain, the women ravished, the breasts of the mothers cut off,
and the infants famished: and a proclamation published, that none should
relieve them. The town it self was yielded by composition, that the
inhabitants might go to Geneva. But being entered, O pede commanded, the men to
be brought into the field, and his soldiers to try which of them were
strongest to cut off Heads, Arms and legs. The women he shut up in a barn
with straw and burned them: and those women and ch^ldre^ which were found in
the Church, he gave to the bawdes of Avignon. Well then may the poor
protestants take up a complaint against the persecuting papists in the phrase
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 83. 3, and 4. They have taken crafty counsel against
thy people, and have consulted against thy secret ones. They have said Come,
and let us cut them off from being a nation: and let the name of Israel be no
more in remembrance. Aptly may I here remember that Epigram, made on one of the
Popes, Lucius 3. 1184, fitting the whole popedom, registered by that noble, and
nobly learned Plessey.

Lucius est and piscis, rex atque tyrannus aquaru^: Pless. My^. Iniq. an 1184.
Pr^gress. 49.

A quo discordat Lucius is^e parum.
Devorat ille Homines, hic Piscibus insidiatur:
Esurit hic semper, hic aliquando satur.
Lucius the Pope, and Lucius the Pike,
Search through the world, find not the like:
The Pike of Fish devoureth the small;
The Pope of Men does swallow all.
I may conclude in prose, The Pope is Filius perditionis, The son of
perdition.

According to the Vision of holy Daniel, cap. 7. I may call these premised
cruelties: one a Lion, another a Bear, and a third a Leopard: but there is yet
one kind of Popish persecution remaining, which I may compare to the fourth
Beast in that vision, verse. 7. It is fearful and terrible, and very strong:
and it has great iron teeth: and it devoureth, and breaks in pieces, and
stampeth all under his feet: and is unlike all that were before. This Monster,
is that monstrous cruelty of the Inquisition: which indeed is an uncomparable,
unsufferable, and an unutterable persecution.

The Inquisitours and supporters whereof, to the utmost of the power and policy
of man, have endeavored to make it sacrum Eleusinum, a secret mystery, that
none might know it. For their tortures are executed in a vault, which men may
discover, when they have the Eyes of Lynceus, to look through stone walls: And
those perplexed prisoners may pray to Christ, in that primitive phrase, (...),
By thy unknown torments, deliver us from our unknown torments. Moreover, if
they be released, they bind them with an oath, not to reveal any one point,
how the Inquisition did proceed against them: to which they annex menaces: and
they inhibit them from writing any letters: interdicting them also from
conversing or conferring with such or such, to whom they may be suspected that
they will reveal any thing. But if ever they be found to discover any thing,
they are condemned as relapsed, and they dye without redemption.
Notwithstanding this cunning carriage, and contriving of their concealed
cruelties: yet he that makes inquisition for blood, has given the world light
of their bloody inquisition. A taste whereof I will tender unto you, as I have
contracted and abstracted it out of Gonsalvius.

I will tell you out of him, with my best brevity, six particulars, concerning
these miserable protestants, which come within the compass of their Holy
House. First, How they catch them: secondly, Where they keep them: thirdly,
How they use them: fourthly, their Examination: fifthly, their Torture: and
sixthly their Execution.

Three incomparable instruments do they ^
use to catch and keep any person whom they ^onsalvius de Inquisition. c. 1.
suspect to favor the Protestants: their Familiar, Fly, and Priest. To some
sometimes they will give leave to play on the line, that they may strike them
the more surely. They will wink at a suspected Lutheran for diverse months,
and years also. But in that time they will employ one of those Familiars or
promoters to insinuate himself into this suspected and suspectlesse persons
acquaintance, who shall every day visit him, observing to what house and
company he does resort: till he does discover and disclose him: and so the
poor man is betrayed to the Inquisitours. Though he be thus caught, yet
peradventure G^^sal* de Inqu. cap* 9.
he will confess but a little: and therefore a new engine must be employed.
To him, and to his fellow prisoners they send a Fly: a villain that for money
indureth that prison* fetters, chains, filth, and stench, for many months,
faining himself to be imprisoned also for Religion: and at their conferences*
(which the politic Inquisitours then only permit unto them) He is the
forwardest to instruct, or to be instructed in the reformed religion. And when
this son of Satan has sufficiently sifted these innocents, he renders them
to the Inquisitours, as fuel for their fire. If miraculously Cap. 9.
any do escape these Flies, the third is set on work. They are called or
commanded to confession: the Priest hears them that day; but breaks off
abruptly, willing the prisoner to repair to him the next day: when he would
satisfy him more fully, with this mischievous intent, to inform the
Inquisitors of all that he shall confess, pretending that it is ( not sub
sigillo) out of the time of shrift: And thus are these sheep prepared for the
slaughter.

The poor Birds being caught, these Fowlers, Ginnes, so now they have
Gonsalvius de Inquisit. cap. 2. and 10.
Cages for them. They are put into Prison, each several person into a several
place: which is so big that they may lie down, and a foot besides, where
their stool of easement stands. If it be below, it may be resembled to a
grave: if aloft, to a furnace: where they have no more light than comes out
of a little long rift, no bigger than a man's finger. There are they kept alone,
eight, or fifteen days, or whole months, or years, as it pleases the Lords
Inquisitours. Yet so, that if any be brought in, he seldom comes out
again, till he be half rotten, till he have the foul disease, or fall
frantic, or be in a consumption.

Being imprisoned, the Inquisitours use to visit them: and in fair fatherly
terms, Demand Gonsalvius de Inquisit. cap. 9.
what they want? what language the Keeper does give them? and how he does use
them, concerning their Diet and Apparel? If any complain, though they see
them half naked, and half starven, yet the merciful Fathers answer them in
mild terms: Well, say they, the weather is warm, and you may full well lie
without a couch, or clothes. And for Winter: It Is true indeed (say they) there
has been lately a sharp frost, but it begins to thaw. Howsoever, take
care (say they) for the Garments of your Soul, to confess the truth we
question you for. As for apparel, it mattereth not.

Their Diet (the Officers fees deducted) is Go^sal^ius de Jnquisit. cap. 10.
like their lodging, very lamentable. And if any charitable person shall send
the smallest alms to those poor prisoners: if ever it be known, v^rily he
shall have a reward; but it shall be in the Holy House. Moreover, they are
locked up in their little lodgings, so that the Father and the Son may be
many years in the same Prison, and yet the one shall not know of the others
imprisonment. Hence Petro a Herrera, keeper of the Inquision prison, in the
Castle of Triara, at Sivil, because he did permit the mother and her two
daughters to meet but for one quarter of an hour: he himself was put in
prison, till the prison put him out of his wits, and that he fell stark mad;
because of the usage of the Inquisition. Nay, this Holy House denies that unto
Christians, what the very Pagan prison permitted to their prisoners, Act. 16.
25. they interdict them from singing Psalms. Which they put in practice for
many politic ends: three we may conjecture at. First, because they will
bereave these miserable souls of all solace for themselves. Secondly, because
their cheerfulness shall not encourage other weak prisoners. Thirdly, lest by
their voice, the friend or father might know his son or acquaintance to be
in prison, which they labor utterly* ^o conceal.

The day before the Execution, they are Cap. 12.
all severally examined, with threatenings and menaces, concerning their lands
and goods, that they conceal not one jote. And if any do escape death, yet
carry they the Inquisitours Cap. 4.
marks unto the grave, which usually are four: confiscation of their goods,
long imprisonment, the wearing of the Sambenit, or Devils coat, and a
perpetual ignominy to their whole kindred.

But before their fearful execution, they 4*
are assayed by frequent examination. First, they read unto them a long
indictment, charging them with infinite crimes, which they never did nor
thought; which puts the prisoner into such a maze, that he knows not what
to answer. Next, they take his confession by mouth, and suddenly they command
him to give another in writing, without deliberation: to the end they may
entrap him with some contradiction in two confessions. If he confesses any
thing that is heretical, from thence they draw other consequences, and charge
him with them: although the person himself did never speak them, will never
grant them, nay does not greatly understand them. And finally, if they confess
any point of the Protestants profession, which they call heresy, they ^^f^
them then: where they read it, of whom they heard it, who were their
instructers, and whom they instructed: and whether they did speak of those
things in any man's house, and who stood by when they talked: Be it friend, or
father, or child, or servant, they are sure to smart for it, because they did
not inform the Inquisitors thereof immediately. After a long and loathsome
imprisonment, when they suppose that those poor souls are brought so low,
that they will confess all, and more also, though it cost them their lives:
then are they brought to a more solemn examination, where they name to the
party two or three of their most famous men toward the Law: and wish the
prisoner to choose any of them to be his Advocate; and yet this learned Lawyer
notwithstanding shall not dare to inform this perplexed Client, in any one
point of the Law, for fear of displeasing the Lords Inquisitours.

Nay the Inquisitours themselves take order Gonsalvius de Inquisit. cap. 3.
for that, that the Advocate and his Client may never speak one word together
without witness. And when they come to the confutation Cap. 5.
of their witnesses, he may neither confer with his Client, nor draw his
answer, nor inform him concerning the depositions: but the miserable man is
left to himself, and none to help him but God only. At the publication of the
Cap. 4.
witnesses, the names of the witnesses are suppressed: both because the
prisoners laboring to find out all, may give occasion to the Inquisitors to
call others into question. As also because the prisoners enemies, Liars,
Drunkards, and Villains, might pass for witnesses to destroy this innocent
Christian. Nay the very Alcayde or Keeper of the prison, shall go current for
two witnesses, whenever he please to accuse any prisoner. And when the
Depositions are read, all those things which make for the poor prisoner, are
rejected as (...), things supersluous: but if any tittle do make against him,
that is sure to be observed, and to be insisted upon. And this is the Holy
examination of the holy Inquisition.

The next point (the Torture) follows fitly: examination is a torture, and
their Cap. 7.
torture is an examination. When the Inquisitors intend to extort a full and
further confession by torments, the prisoner is brought into audience on the
sudden, where all, or the most of the Inquisitors, sit in their majesty. Who
tell him, that they have deeply considered his case, and they find that he
has not made a full confession: and therefore they have resolved that he must
to the Rack, advising him to confess before he come to the torture: But
confess, or confess not, he must to the Rack: Gonsalvius de Inquisit. cap. 7.
which is in a deep dark dungeon, with many a door, to keep their shrickes
from hearing. The Tormentor is clad from top to toe in black like a stage
devil. The Inquisitors being mounted on their scaffold, and the prisoner
stripped, the token is given to the Tormentor, and then begins the business.
Sometime with a pully, and great weight of iron, hanged at the heels of the
party to be tormented, which rendeth every joint of his body one from another.
Sometime with the Burri or Aselli: which is an hollow trough, with a cross
bar, that his back may not touch the bottom: his heels being placed higher
than his head, into his legs, thighs, and arms, they twist little cords, with
great truncheons, till they cut to the bone, and be clean out of sight.
Sometimes they lay a piece of Lawnd upon the parties mouth and nostrills also:
whereby they stop his breath. Then they pour down water: so that both their
Nose and Mouth being stopped at once, the tortured wretch lies like a dying
man struggling for breath. Or at other times, they place a pan of hot coals
at the soles of his feet, and that the fire may have the more force, they baste
them with Larde and Bacon. In these tortures (which indeed are (...),
intolerable) if any desire to be let down from the pully, with promise to
confess instantly; after his confession, they hoyse him up again, and treble
his tortures, to extort more than all, from this more than miserable man. And
if in any of those agonies, pangs enforce the tortured to call to Christ for
patience and assistance, they fall to mock him, saying, Jesus Christ, Jesus
Christ! what ado is here with Jesus Christ? Confess the truth, and let Jesus
Christ alone.

At length these sorrowful creatures come joyful end of their wof^ll tragedy:
and Gonsalvius cap. 12. ^ 13.
the condemned prisoners are brought in great solemnity, on the Inquisitors
solemn festival. Then are they led forth, being clad in Sambenites (a linen
garment all painted with Devils) and a long hat like a turret, where is
pictured a Man burning in fire, and many Devils plying him with saggots. On
their tongues they fasten a cleft piece of wood, which they call Mordazo, that
they may not speak to the people. When their sentences are pronounced, they
charge them with a world of silthy, shameful, abominable, and blasphemous
crimes and opinions, never confessed nor acted by those innocents: but to
advance the Justice of the Inquisitors, and to make those standred Martyrs, to
stink in the nostrills of the people, by their forged calumniation. Afterward
they are led to the fire, and burned. Only some of them which continue
constant in their confession to the end, they break their necks with a trice:
and then they tell the people, that such did repentantly recant their heresies,
at the very last hour, and were reconciled to the Church of Rome. And
therefore the mercy of the Lords Inquisitours would not let them feel the
force of the fire. Oh more than Turkish cruelty, to kill both the body and the
name, at one time!

Thus have I plucked off the hood of holiness from the face of the Holy House.
And thus much concerning the Inquisition. Only I will conclude with the words
of the Psalmist: The Ps. 79. 3, 10, 12.
blood of the Saints have they shed like water on every side. Wherefore do
they say, Where is now their God? O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners
come before thee: according to the greatness of thy power, preserve thou them
that are appointed to dye.

That we may know this monster of mankind, this (...), Caniball, and Man-eater:
let us briefly review him once again. The Papists have murdered the
Protestants thirty thousand in a month* yea, an hundred thousand in a day.
Eight hundred years long killing infinite millions. Burning hundreds of
villages, and putting all to the sword. They have forced our Forefathers to
live in Caves, Woods, and Deserts: smothering the sucklings even in those poor
habitations: and imprisoned so many, that they had not bread to feed them, nor
Lime to build prisons to hold them. They put out the eyes of an hundred,
leaving only one with one eye to guide them: and cast an hundred and forty
into one fire. They ripped up the bellies of women, and made Drums of the
skins of men. They tore the living in pieces with burning pincers, and dug
up, and hanged up the carkeises of them that were dead and buried. They bound
the Infants to the mouths of the mothers, and sowed sucklings into their
mothers bellies: and hanged the men by their privities. They tortured them,
till their bowels fell out, to force them falsely to accuse themselves, for
adulteries, etc. at their meetings. They cut their throats like calves, and
hanged up their quarters for thirty miles together. Men, women, and children,
they banished, sold, killed, burned, hanged, starved, marked in the forehead,
sent them to the Galleys, and gave them to Bawdes: and so racked the women,
that worms engendered in their wounds, feeding on them yet alive. They razed
and made unhabitable whole Towns; as Toulouse, Cabriers, etc. and extirpated
populous Countr^es, as Calabria, and Dauphie. All these cruelties were
committed contrary to their compositions, promises, proclamations, oaths, and
Edicts. And the rack or death was his reward, who did but intercede for these
tortured Innocents.

But this surpasses all: that they have a licensed shambles out of Lent, the
Inquisition, without intermission, for the space of four Anno 1206. Hist.
Wa^d. lib. 2. cap. 2.
hundred years and more, where the poor Protestants have been led like
sheep unto the slaughter. None can tell who, or how, nor how many be the
torments, and the tormented.

That they proceed not in open Justice, as against obstinate Heretics, but
employ underhand their Promoters, Summoners, and Informers: their Familiars,
Flies, and Priests, under the pretense of Friendship, Afflictions, and
Holiness, to ensnare the weak, the ignorant, nay the guiltless, who are not
so much as inclined to the Reformed Religion. And yet be they innocent, or let
them repent; they cannot return without confiscation of goods, imprisonment,
shame, and insamie.

That they imprison them, in dungeons like graves: where through the filth
thereof, they cons^me, rot, run mad, or contract the foul d^sease. That they
let them lie alone, half naked, and half starven, and will not give them
leave to sing a Psalm, in this infinite solitary misery. That in their private
examination they indite them of things they know to be false: and to wrest
their confessions against their meanings, and ensnare their Parents, Children,
Servants, Friends, etc. and that in their public examinations, they put their
prisoners to make choice of a Lawyer, to be their Advocate: and yet that
Advocate shall not dare to speak one word for them, to them, with them. That
the witnesses are unknown to them, known to the world to be Villains, and
Knights of the Post: and that their Depositions being read, shall be omitted,
where they make for, and debated where they make against the poor prisoner.

That though they do confess, yet to extort confession beyond the truth, they
torture them. The Lords Inquisitors themselves beholding the naked creatures,
gibbited on a Pully, till all their joints be torn asunder: or put in the
Burri, till the tormentors with truncheons, have wrestred small cords to the
very bones: or roast with fire, or baste them with Lard and Bacon: or with
water poured through Law^d, to make them, healthful men, to feel the very
agonies of Death, struggling for breath. If the torments be remitted, whilst
the tortured do confess, they torment them again and more: instantly after
their confession. And if in these extremities, these miserable men call on
Jesus Christ, they mock and deride them for their Invocation.

That finally, they lead out these poor creatures in triumph, having them clad
like devils, in the pronouncing of their sentences slandred with devilish
lies, their tongues stocked, their bod^es burned, and the most constant of
those Martyrs to have their necks suddenly broken, and the people immediately
to be assured, that they recanted, and died in the Roman Religion, which they
feared more than the tortures of Hell, or than the eldest daughter thereof, the
torments of the Inquisition.

That these things are thus carried, we may challenge the East and West, the
former and latter ages to equal them. We cannot call them Heathen, Pagan,
Turkish, Jewish, or Barbarous; but only Popish cruelties. The Inquisition in
particular, and all other persecutions in general, subsist by his Authority.

The Pope is the nethermost millstone, to grind Gods Saints to powder: although
his Agents be the visible instruments thereof. The Pope has desined the death
of the Protestants: thus ^rban: Non arb^tramur eos homicidas, quos Cause. ^3.
qu. 5. Cap. Excommunicatorum.
zelo Catholicae matris ecclesiae ardentes, excommunicatorum aliquos trucidasse
contigerit: that is, in sooth, and plain English, It is lawful for any Papist
to kill any Protestant, and yet he is no murderer. They have a warrant for it,
e Cathedra. O then, good Christian: Will thou Ps. 94. 19, 20, and 21.
have any thing to do with that stool of wickedness, which imagines mischief
as a Law? They gather them together against the soul of the righteous: and
condemn the innocent blood. But the Lord is our refuge: and our God is the
strength of our confidence.

Thus have I fully and plainly made it to appear, that the Pope is the
Destroyer, actively: and passively he shall be destroyed, without all
peradventure. For the corporal destruction of Babylon; that is to come, I have
not the spirit of prophecy. Therefore I do not, I dare not define any thing
thereof in particular. Neither the manner, R R R F F F: i. Regnum Romae Ruet:
Ferro, Fame, and Flamma: that is, Rome shall be destroyed by Fire, Famine, and
the Sword: according to that old prediction out of Valerius Probus. Nor the
time, with Napeire, who does precisely determine the utter Napeire in Revel. 14.
destruction of Rome to fall out, anno 1639. Leaving the circumstance to God:
the substance is most true: Babylon shall be ruinated: and Rome shall be
corporally destroyed.

Finally, the Pope shall be destroyed spiritually also. Consider the connection
of the phrases in my Text: The Man of sin, and son of perd^tion. Never did
Chime follow the stroke of a Clock so certainly, nor suddenly, as perdition
^oth sin: He who is the Man of sin, shall be the son of perdition. Those
that do destroy the souls of other men, shall undoubtedly be rewarded with
their own Souls destruction.

But they infer, that I infer, that the Pope and all grand Papists are
perditi, are desperat^ly in the state of damnation. I answer with Saint Paul,
Romans 9. 18. Deus ^^s^r^tur, cujus vult misereri: God has m^rcy on whom he will
have mercy. With Cyprian: Eodem temporis Cyprian. de C^^a Domini.
articulo: God can infuse repentance, and give grace, at the very last gasp.
With Moulins, It Moulins Acc^^. of P^o^h page 82.
is not our parts to give judgment upon any body, nor positively to define
What men are damned: but we pray to God to show mercy, to those Popes and
Papists, who do breathe out their threatenings against us, and would bathe
their hands in our blood. And we say with Whitak^rs, Ex quo Papismus caepit
esse Antichristianismus, Whitaker in Sand^r. p 74^.
ne Papas quidem universos damnatos esse dixer^m, nec Papam hunc, si ad sanam
mentem r^di^rit, excluser^m: We are so far from saying that all Popes are
damned, that we will nor exclude even this Pope from his salvation: if he
repent and revoke his wicked error. I do not subscribe to the sentence of Pope
Sergius Oecum* lib. 1. part. 2. cap. 25.
the fourth, as to an infallible truth: Papam non posse dam^ari: sed quod
quicquid sa^^r^t salvar^tur: that is, Howsoever he l^v^. yet it is impossible
for the Pope to ^ee (...). Rather I incline to the opinion of another Pope. It
was O^^phri^^ in Marcello 2.
the say^^g of Pope Marcell^s the ^econd, Non vid^o q^modo qu^ (...) I conceive
not (said he) how that men which attain the high Majesty of the Papacy, can
ever be saved. And this I say, setting Gods secret Determination apart: The
Pope, and Papacy, and popish agents and instruments, if they proceed in these
Heresies, Cruelties, Treacheries and Tyrannies, which they now profess and
practice, d^spereunt, bis pereunt: they fall under a double destruction, of
body and of soul: They are this Filius Perditionis: They will be damned.

Some Papists will think it strange, that I term the Pope, the son of
perdition. And I think it more strange, that the Pope and papists use this
very property of Antichrist, Perdition, as a means to propagate their
Religion. Antichr^st is here called a destroyer, and they urge destruction as
an argument to draw fearful people to Popery. Does not Bellarmine and others
preach peremptorily that the Pope can depose Kings, and d^spose of Kingdoms?
what is this, but to terr^fie pop^sh Princes, from forsaking Popery, for fear
of d^stroying their Inheritance? Does not Suarez and others conclude
wretchedly, that the Pope may authorize a foreign Prince to invade his
neighbor, or the subjects to kill their Sovereign? what is this, but to
terrify the reformed Princes from opposing Popery, for fear of murder, and
destroying their persons? Did not our Powder plotters confess that they
intend^d to make our Parliament House, their slaughter house, because said
they, there the Laws were inacted against them? What is this? but to terrisie
this State, other States, and all States, from making Statutes against the
Romish Religion: for fear of being destroyed, by some such sudden
sulphurious Popish Romish villainy. Know we not their common threatenings, what
they whisper amongst the common people, What they will do when their day does
come? (but Christ grant that their day may never come.) When their day shall
come, do they not whisper amongst the common people, that they will no more
hew down the branches, but tear up the very roots of Reformation, rooting
out every professor thereof. What is this? but to terrify us from preaching,
and you from hearing for fear of destroying our poor persons, and innocent
children? Is not then destroying the Pillar of popery? Are not papists
destroyers? May not therefore their father be called ^ilius perditionis, the
son of perdition?

To answer their argument: Do they fear you, that you may savor them? Do
they tell you of death and destruction? tell them that Antichrist is a
destroyer, and that cruelty was never the Character of Christianity. Do we
think they will do what they threaten, and destroy us, if we come into their
power? Oh let us not fear them, that may destroy the body, but cannot hurt the
soul: rather let us fear him, who can destroy both body and soul in Hell,
Matthew. 10. 28. A thousand times better is it for us, to be like Saint Steven,
to pray for them* that kill us, than for them to be like the Jews, to vow to
kill us, who pray for them: and do them no Hurt, but only hinder their
Errors, and endeavor their salvation.

Well then, let them go on! the man of sin will be the son of perdition:
and those who are sworn servants to Rome, may swear our imprisonment, our
exile, our tortures, our death, our destruction. But the Lord destroy, the
destroyer! and grant that popery, may never get the dominion over us, Amen.
Amen.

SERMON VI.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. The Adversary.
Antichrist not an open Adversary. The Pope does oppose Christ. The Pope the
worst Adversary, the Church ever had.

THe Adversary! This is the third Title of Antichrist: Some call it his
Property; both properly enough: for the Title, does imply the property. Yet
more properly it may be termed his title, because it does allude to his proper
Name. The Adversary with St. Paul, and Antichrist with St. John are synonima's,
of the same signification. To consider this title, is a matter of some
consequence: for Sanders, Bellarmine, and all the papists, urge this as an
insoluble Demonstration. The Pope is Vicarius Christi, not Adversarius Christo:
The Pope is the Vicar, not the Adversary of Christ. Therefore, The Pope i^ not
Antichrist. Let us examine this point and judge the truth, according to the
plainness of the Evidence.

The Adversary: (...) This Title Beza in 2 These. 2.
of Antichrist, does allude to that name of the Devil, Satan: that the Son
may resemble his Father, and to show that Antichrist will be a devilish
Adversary. Now an Adversary is so, two ways: either openly or secretly. As
Porus Just. Hist. lib. 12.
a^^ailed Alexander with his sword: but Antipater his servant, yea as some
suspect his wife did slay him with poison. Possible therefore it is, for the
servant of Christ (yea servus servorum, for him that pretends himself to be
Christ's principal servant) to be a traitor: and for them who have the name of
the spouse, to be the Adversary of Christ. Again, Herod sought Christ with the
sword, but Judas did betray him with a kiss: the title therefore of an
Apostle, cannot wave the term of Adversary: of a secret adversary. And indeed
he is an adversary who does oppose, in what manner soever he does manage his
opposition. For to be a secret or an open enemy, is not of the Essence of
Enmity. Yea sub amici fallere nomen, tut a frequensque via est. Some who
pretend most friendship, intend most mischief. Such an one is Antichrist: a
secret mischievous Adversary.

Concerning this point, I propose these three particulars. I will show you the
manner, measure, and the man opposing Christ. First that Antichrist shall not
oppose Christ, (...) Openly: but that he shall be a secret Adversary unto
Christ, it appears four ways. From this Chapter, from the Scripture, from
the scope of his actions; and finally, from the confession of their own
Writers.

From this Chapter also, it is evident that Antichrist is a secret adversary,
four ways. First from the last verse, Antichrist is termed the Apostasy or
the Apostate. Now Apostates are Heretics, and Heretics pretend open
observance, and obedience unto Christ: Howsoever by their doctrine they oppose
him secretly. Therefore since Antichrist is an Apostate, and an Heretic, he is
a secret adversary. Secondly, in this fourth verse (which I will avouch in my
next Sermon) Antichrist shall sit in the Temple, that is, he shall place his
Throne in the Church. Antichrist therefore shall be a secret adversary in the
Church: not an open adversary of the Church. Thirdly, in the 7 verse, the
feats of Antichrist are termed (...), sleights which do (...), says the
Etymologists, blind the Eyes, that they cannot see, and stop the mouth that
they dare not say any thing concerning those secret mysteries. Now a Mystery
does import a Secrecy. As it is in the sacrum Eleusinum, and the Orgi^.
Alcibiades Just. Hist. lib. 5.
was convented, quia Mysterium Cereris enuntiasset, because he had revealed the
secret Ceremony, of Ceres. Therefore Antichrist is a mystical, a secret
adversary. Finally in the 8 verse, Antichrist is said to be revealed. It is
ridiculous to bring a Torch to behold him who does show himself in the
streets, and in the sunshine. And as ridiculous it is to imagine a revelation
of a manifest, professed and open adversary. But Antichrist must be revealed:
therefore Antichrist can be no open, but a secret adversary.

Secondly, I will second the former series of arguments, with six others
drawn from the Scriptures. First in the second Epistle of Saint John verse 7,
the Heretics are termed (...), Deceivers. Whence I infer: such as were the
Forerunners, such is the Grand Mr: but the Heretics, and Forerunners of
Antichrist, were (...), no open adversartes: Therefore Antichrist himself, is
(...), no open adversary. Again, Rev. 13. 11. Antichrist is said to have two
horns like the lamb: that is he shall have the outward appearance of the
servant of Christ: he cannot then be an open adversary against Christ:
Again, Antichrist does conquer the world poculo aureo, with a golden cup, Rev.
17. 4. Ioh. Aventrot. epi. ad ^^g. Hist.
Principibus imperat poculo, non Sceptro says Aventrotus to the King of
Spain: It is his Cup and cunning persuasions, and not his sword, and
open-Invasions, which inableth him to usurp upon Princes. Therefore he can be
no open adversary. Finally, Antichrist is called Pseudopropheta a false
prophet, Rev. 16. 13. and the Antichristian persons, composing that man of
sin, are called (...), by Saint Peter, that is, false teachers, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Saint Paul also calls the same (...), 1 Timothy 4. 2. false speakers, or such as
speak lies in Hypocrisy. From all these I must infer my former conclusion.
Therefore Antichrist is a secret lying Hypocrite: not an open professed
opposite.

Thirdly, the maine scope of Antichrist is to seduce, and that by (...) strong
delusion: as Saint Paul here speaks in the 11. verse. Now that project cannot
be performed, by a plain profession of enmity: against Christ. No deceivers,
deluders, nor seducers, will profess themselves to be so; for then all
Christians would fly from them. Therefore that great deceiver, the great
Antichrist, is a secret Adversary.

Finally, many of the most learned papists do acknowledge that Antichrist
shall be a famous Hypocrite. Hence Sanders, out of Ephrem Sanders de
Antichristo demonst. 10.
the Syrian, says: Erit falsus, and falsiloquus: Antichrist, shall be a
false-tongued, and a false-hearted seducer. Se praebens studiosum, and
speciosum, making a goodly show of all godly Acost^ de temp. Novis. l. 2. c. 20.
piety and sanctity. Acosta also says, erit vel primus little, qui in hypocrisi
loquuntur mendac^, habentes speciem quandam pietatis: that is, Antichrist shall
pretend piety and be the principal of all Hypocrites. I conclude then, an
Arch-Rebell does proclaim the Name of his King, the better to draw followers
to oppose the King. So Antichrist shall call himself a Christian, with the
better show, to oppose Christ and Christianity. Therefore he is no open
adversary. To make the conclusion yet more plain, thus I reason. Antichrist
is an adversary unto Christ, Praecipuo modo, after the principal manner:
Lessius de Antich. Them. 5.
But to be an open adversary, is not to be an adversary after the principal
manner (for the insinuating, lying, deceiving, unsuspected enemy, is most
perilous, and pernicious, as Judas was to Christ, and Ioab to Amasa.) Therefore
Antichrist is no open adversary.

The opposition of Antichrist, against Christ universal, and fundamental.
First (...), the adversary, expresses a greater contrariety, than if he had
called him, only (...) which signifies an Adversary also. For the first
signifies a thwart adversary, and opposite unto Christ (...), simply, and in
every respect, and not (...), in some one point, or other only. All Heretics
(especially such as deny the person or offices of Christ) are called
Antichr^sts, 1 Ioh 2. 18. But this adversary has fra^ed a (...)* has gathered
together, the rags and dregs of all Heresies. Secondly, the word (...), or an
Adversary does signify one, who does oppose the very foundation of the
Gospel. Those therefore, which do shut the door, against the grace offered
in the Gospel, are called (...)* the adversaries, 1 Cor. 16. 9. That
Antichrist shall oppose Christ universally, and fundamentally, this is the
measure: that he shall work it secretly, this is the manner of his Opposition.
And thus Antichrist is termed the adversary, or opposer of Christ.

Many could wish, that this adversary were Beast Dan. 7. 7. without a Name. Or
that his Name should be like that writing, Dan. 5. 8. that none could read it.
But Oedipo non opus est, we need no Daniel to expound it, every child can
spell it. It is plain. The Pope is the adversary.

But the Papists say, we do him open wrong, because he is no open adversary,
but a professed servant of Christ. I answer, even Mahomet, does speak
excellently of Christ; not only as ^^nicer, To^* 1.
of a Prophet, but also as of the Savior of his people. The Devil also
professed Christ to be the Son of God, Mark 1. 24. Therefore a professor
may be a secret, though no professed adversary unto Christ. We may say of the
Pope, what Mountague said of one Pope, Boniface 8, he can carry himself both
like a Fox, and like a Lion; a Fox, by public sophistry; and a Lion, by
private Tyranny. I say the man of Rome, is that woman of Babylon, which makes
the world d^m^e, with a world of impiety, Rev. 17. 4. as one acutely descanteth
on his name Papa.

That is, The Pope does poison all Princes, with abominable Heresies. P Poculum
A Aureum P Plenum A Abominationum


Or to confirm the Pope, according to his Election, Sacr^^. Caerem. lib. 1.
sect. 1.
by his own Cardinals. Electus indu^tur Papali habitu, toga scilicet lanca,
albi coloris, caligis rube^s, sandalijs rubeis, cingulo rubeo, birreto etiam
rubeo: that is, when the Pope is elected he is arrayed in his Papal apparel:
to wit, a White Gown, but red shoes, red stockins, etc. emblematically:
notwithstanding their white outside, they have a red bloody inside. And their
openprofession, is no argument, but that the Pope may be a secret adversary.

To say this, and show it too. First the Pope does oppose Christ,
fundamentally: he is an adversary, to the foundation of Chr^stianity, and very
groundworke of the Gospel, which is this: (...): Eternal life is the gift of
God through Christ, Romans 6. 23. But the Pope says, Good works can be no
other, than the value, desert, price, worth and merit of Heaven. Rhemists in 1
Cor. 3. 8.
Good works are meritorious, and the very cause of salvation: so far forth,
that God should be injust, if he did not render heaven for the same, say the
same Rhemists. Bellarmine Rhemists in Heb. 6. 10.
does amplify all the particulars, paraphrasing on the 2 Timothy 4. 8. namely
that the papists Bell. de justif. lib. 5. cap. 16.
expect Coronam justitiae, a Crown of Justice: meritis operum, for the merits
of their works: pro qualitate, ac disquisitione factorum, according Bellarm.
Apolog. page 163.
to the exact quality of their actions: a judice justo, non a patre
misericorde, from a just judge, Council. Trident. sub Paulo 3. Sess. ^. cap. 24.
not from a merciful Father. And if any shall say that opera, are only signa
and fructus, and not causa justificationis, anathema sit: the council of Trent
damneth that man to Hell, who shall say good works are not the cause of
justification. But whilst the thundereth out against us that Anathema
injuriously: he magnifying merits incurreth the Anathema of Saint Paul, Gal. 1.
8. meritoriously. Whosoever does oppose the works of Man, unto the grace of
God, No^ sit Anathema, sed est Anathema. He is that cursed adversary, which
does raze the very ^oundat^on of the blessed Gospel, which is not my
particular opinion only, but the judgment of the Church of England. These are
the Hom. Par. 1 ^^e Sermon of salvation.
words thereof: Wholly to ascribe our justification, unto Christ only: this is
the rock and foundation of Christian Religion. This whosoever denies, is not
to be accepted for a Christ^an man. It is the greatest presumption, and
arrogance, which Antichrist can set ^p against God, to affirm that a man might
by his own works, take away and purge his own sin, and so ^ustifie
himself.

Thus does the Pope oppos^ Christ fundamentally: that he does also oppose him
universally, Dounam Dere^^. part. 1. lib. 3 cap. 6.
it is made manifest, by that excellently learned, and religious Bishop of
D^ry, from whom I profess that I draw the most part of this excellent
Antiparallell; the Catholic opposition, which that Rom^sh Catholic makes
unto Christ, may be reduced unto three particulars. It is quoad mores, officia,
and beneficia, in regard of his conversation, offices and benefits.

First, for his conversat^on: three things were eminent in the manners of
Christ: Innocence, Humility and Charity. And the Pope does practice the
direct contrary. Christ was innocent as a Lamb: behold the Lamb of God says
Saint John, Ioh. 1. 39. and again, Ioh. 8. 46. which of you convinces me of
sin? the Popes personal infirmities, yea enormities I pass by, only I will
use the phrase of the fellow in Carrion: if you ask of me the lives of the
Carrion Chron. lib. 3.
Popes, I say since Gregory the first, there have been so many virtuous Popes,
that all their images may be graven in one Ring.

Humility (a virtue second to none) was the second virtue in our Savior.
Christ came riding on an Ass, Ioh. 12. 15. the Pope is carried on the shoulders
of Noblemen. Christ did wash his Disciples feet, Ioh. 13. 14. but even Princes
kiss the feet of the Popes Holiness. Christ would not arrogate Bulla Alex. 6.
so far to himself, as to divide a small Inheritance, betwixt two brethren,
Luke 12. 14. But the Pope is so arrogant that he has taken upon him to divide
the new world betwixt two great Kings. Finally, Christ is Charity it self, and
sharply rebuked his disciples for desiring fire from heaven to avenge them on
the inhospitable Samaritans, Luke 9. 56. But the Pope like the son of Hecuba,
is a Firebrand, setting all Christendom in a combustion. And thus far for
the first opposition.

Secondly, the offices of Christ are three: Prophetical, whereby he does
instruct his Church: Sacerdotall, whereby he does sacrifice for his Church: and
regal, whereby he does Rule the Church. Now the Pope by fortifying his
usurped primacy, does trench upon all these prerogatives.

First, Christ does, as he is a Prophet, instruct his Church by his holy Word:
and his holiness does oppose his own word, and makes it Equal to Christ's
word. To omit those monstrous sayings of Eckius, Hosius, etc. who nickname
Lessius de Antich. part. 1. Them. 15.
the Scripture to be a Leaden Rule, a nose of wax, of no better authority, (if
not authorized by the Church of Rome) than Esops Fables. To omit also the like
phrase of Costerus, Vagina quae Coster. En^h. cap. 1.
qu^mlibet gladium admittit, a scabbard fit for every sword. Omitting these
scurrilous similies, or rather plain blaspemies. In sober sadness, these are
their solemn conclusions. Verba pontificis Suarez. Apol. lib. 7. c. 22. nu. 8.
e Cathedrae, in veritatis certitudine, aequalia sunt Scriptura: that is, the
words of the Pope pronounced out of his Chair, are equally true, with the word
of God, written in the Scripture: so says Suarez. And it is the Catholic
conclusion of their Oecumenicall Council of Trent, Council. Trid. sub Paul^ 3.
Sess 4.
Traditiones pari pietatis affectu veneramur? that they receive the traditions
of the Church with equal reverence, and religious affection, as they do the
Scripture of God. Now for a Man, to equal his word, with Christ's word; This is
no mean opposition to Christ, but a maine derogation to his prophetical
office. The prime excellency whereof, consists in the incomparable
infallibility of his Word or instruction.

Again according as he was a Priest, Christ did offer himself once for all,
Heb. 7. 27. but the Pope does oppose this, and impose his Mass, as a
Propitiatory and daily sacrifice. Neither is it a light matter, that Christ in
all the Scripture is termed only Pontifex, that is, the High Priest. But the
Pope will be called summus Pontifex, the highest priest: as if the Lord of
Babylon endeavored to build up his supremacy, like the Tower of Babel unto the
very Heavens, that there he might (...), oppose even Christ himself,
concerning his Royal Priesthood.

Next, the Regal office of Christ, the Pope does oppose, or rather wholly take
away. He does make him, Regem sine villa, a mere titular King, over his
Church. Pope Innocent 3. in his Pl^ss. ^yst. Iniq. Progres. 50.
second sermon on the feast of Saint Peter, vouchsafes to call the Church
sponsam suam, his spouse. And some of our own Countrymen, are not unexpert,
in translating the popes language. Thus writes George Dowly in his George
Dowly catech. cap. 3.
English Catechism: hereby we may see how justly we call the Church our
Mother, and the Pope our Father. The Pope our Father! Indeed Cyprian de vnitate
Ecclesiae sect. 5.
I have heard, habere non potest Deum patrem, qui non habet Ecclesiam matrem:
the Church our mother, and God our Father, I easily believe it: but the Church
our mother, and the Pope our Father! I think this will never come Bellarm. de
Pon. Romans lib. 1. cap. 9, and 10.
into my Creed: no not though Trens it self should injoyne it. Moreover,
nothing is more familiar amongst the Papists, than to crack of the Monarchy of
the Church. But we know that every Monarch, aut praeponitur, aut opponitur,
every Monarch is either preposed and set before: or opposed and set against all
other Governors whatsoever. So must the Pope be to Christ: since he is a
Monarch; neither can they bla^ch this oppositio^, or Rebellion rather, with
that threed-bare limitation, Qua Vicarius Christi, that is, the Pope is Monarch
of the Church, but only as he is surrogate unto Christ. For here is
contradictio in adjecto, (...), the terms* supplant one another, in the same
proposition. As if we should say, such a man is King of Ireland, but Qua
praefectus, only as he is Lord Deputy for our King Charles; Or that such a
servant is Master of the family, but only Qua (...), as he is steward under
his master. As these are without sense in policy, so that is without reason in
piety. The Pope does either oppose himself in words, or our Savior in deeds:
each way he is the opposer. To conclude, the Popes word is equal to Christ's
word: the Popes title, is superior to Christ's title: and the Popes Government
(a Monarchy) no way inferior to the Empire of Christ. Therefore in regard of
his three offices, a Prophet, Priest, and a King, the Pope is exactly opposed
unto Christ, (...): there is the adversary.

The mame work of Christ, qua Jesus, as he is our Savior, supplying us with
all blessings, is that he does take away our sins, Matthew. 1. 21. part of which
power, the Pope and papists do ascribe unto Saints, to the Virgin Mary, and to
themselves. Nay the Pope does shoulder for that whole power, and does usurp as
much to himself, as Christ can do, in that kind. Concedons ^^^il. Pauli 5.
1620.
and ^largissons, tres pleine remission, and indulgence de tous leur pechez,
giving them full forgiveness of all their sins. This is all Christ can do:
yet Pope Paul the fifth did say that he would do as much. Nay the Pope has
done more than ever Christ did. Gregory by his prayer Revel. Brigittae lib. 4
cap. 13.
did recall a soul (the Emperor Trajane) from Hell. Christ never did the
like. And anno 1592 Pope Clement 8, gave indulgentiam plenariam, and
remissionem omnium peccatorum, tam culpae, quam paenae: A full forgiveness of
All their sins, both in regard of the guilt, and of the punishment thereof.
The last whereof they deny that Christ has done, in the doctrine of
satisfaction. Therefore in regard of this principal blessing (the forgiveness
of sins) which we receive from Christ, Christ is opposed by the Pope: and the
Pope is (...), the Adversary.

Moreover, I will avouch this opposition, to the meanest capacity, in six
plain particulars.

1. Christ says, Scrutemini, Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39.

The Pope says, Ne scrutmini, Search not the Scriptures.

2. Christ says, Pray in a tongue you understand, 1 Cor. 14.

The Pope says, Pray in the Latin tongue.

3. Christ says, Pray unto God alone, Psalm. 50. 15.

The Pope says, Saints also must be prayed unto.

4. Christ says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc. Exodus
20.

The Pope says, Thou shall make to thy self graven images, etc.

5. Christ says, Let every soul be subject to the higher power, Romans 13. 1.

The Pope says, The Clergy must be exempted, and the Subjects may be absolved.

6. Christ says, Drink ye all of this, Mat. 26. 27.

But the Pope says, Only the Clergy, and that by two Councils of Constance
and Trent.

To take all in one Apophthegme, Romano Pontifici tenemur obedire, non secus ac
Chr^sto, Bozius de Iure di^^^.
says Bozius: we are obliged to obey the Pope even as Christ: a pretty
superlative comparison. Yet is there another sentence, one degree beyond this.
The Pope permits one Canon hac Rat. Causa 31. qu. 1.
Canon to be in his Decretalls, which says that Saint Paul did speak against
all truth and reason. Never did, never durst any oppose Christ so directly, so
audaciously. I may therefore determine it boldly, the Pope is (...), the
Adversary.

But all this is broken against one stone, they say, the Pope cannot be (...),
the adversary: because he is not the worst Adversary, which ever the Church
had. I answer: The Pope is the worst Adversary, and worse than either Arius, or
the Turk, or all the Heathen persecutors. Review my last Sermon, and I shall
not seem to speak partially. To that long discourse I will add these six
brief considerations.

First, take notice of the number of his heresies. Derensis de Antichr. part.
2. c. 6.
Arius and other Heretics had some few (though) gross errors. But in Popery
we have a catalogue of six hundred, by the Bishop of Dery: as his word is
(...) a Vale where all the land floods meet, to make as it were one inundation
of Errors. Secondly, consider the time of their tyrannies. The Heathen Tyrants
raged from the time of S. John's receiving the Revelation (about 96, to 311,
when Constantine began his reign) but a small time, comparatively, about two
hundred and fifteen years. But the Pope, or Antichrist (according to the
judgment of our English Bernard, and Bern. in Apoc. page 1^0.
other English and outlandish Divines) shall reign two hundred and fifteen
months of years, being prophetically expressed by days, every day being put
for a year, is a thousand, two hundred, and threescore years. Howsoever, the
Popes persecuting power has prevailed these eight hundred years past: a long
time of Persecution. To this let us join the blood shed by the Popes
voluntarily, in France, Germany, Spain, Italy, and the Inquisition.
Peradventure (as I have made it good in my last Sermon) it will appear not to
be much inferior to the effusion in the ten persecutions. And for one
particular cruelty, we have the testimony of a Papist, B. Mortons Grand ^^post.
cap. 15. sect. 24. These. 2.
Natalis Comes by name: Nullum simile saevitiae exemplum, in tota antiquitate
reperiri: that all the old Histories are not able to give one example like the
barbarous Massacre of Paris.

Neither may we omit the blood which the Popes shed occasionally. His Apostasy
and strange opposing of Christian Princes, opened that gappe, whereby the Turk
entered into Christendom.

And all these Cruelties are mingled with many and strange subleties, which did
bewitch their credulity, as if they had been confirmed by miracles from
heaven, Revel. 13. 13.

Finally, their cruelty it self is incomparable: so that it is more tolerable
for a Protestant to live under a Turkish, than under, I will not say, a Popish,
but I do say, a Iesuited Popish government. Let the witness of a Pope warrant
this verdict. Pope Innocent the third sent an army of Croisado's against the
Protestants of Hist. Albing. lib. 1. cap. ^.
Toulouse, commanding the Commanders thereof to study to abolish the heretical
pravity, and these sectaries, and that more severely than the Sarasins,
impugning them with a strong hand, and stretched out arm, as being worse than
they. I conclude for the Popedom: Their errors are so innumerable, their
tyrannies so unsupportable: their cruelties so long, and their delusions so
strong: that the like never concurred in any one Estate. I say therefore of
this State: Papa est ille Adversarius: The Pope is a secret, but the greatest
enemy of Jesus Christ.

1 Reg. 18. 21. If Baal be God, follow him: if the Lord be God, follow him. If
there be any Papist, or popish in this assembly, I beseech you in the bowels
of Jesus Christ, to ponder these particulars, advisedly, and impartially. If I
have showed plainly, truly, and sufficiently, That the Pope is the Adversary of
Christ: then as you are Chr^stians, halt not betwixt two opinions. Be enemy to
him, or them, that is an enemy to thy Jesus: and yet no mortal enemy: we must
not hate them, as they hate us, unto death. We desire not their blood, nor
their lives: No: if they will be worthy men (loyal Subjects) we desire not,
that an hair should fall from them to 1 King. 1. ^2.
the earth. But if Rome has insected them with Antichristian enmity, then may
we lawfully desire that their hands may be hindered from throwing firebrands
in our houses: and their tongues bridled from casting poison into our
understand^ngs. To that end let us pray, that God would yet more illuminate our
religious Sovereign, Never to be a friend to him, who is an Adversary to his
Savior. Let us pray for the Parl^ament, that they may not trample on the
remembrance of that, which is under their feet, the Powder plot: and that they
may make Laws for such an Offspring, not Draco's laws, in blood: nor yet S^yth
an laws, Copwebs for every insolent Recusant to break through. But right
English Laws (Recti praeceptio, and pravi depuls^o: the commanding of that
which is good, and the represing of that which is bad,) to win their love, or
to prevent their hate and hurt. Let us pray for our seduced Countrymen, that
they may come out of Babylon, l^st they perish with them. And let us pray for
our selves, that for no company, commodity, affinity, or consanguinity, we
should be seduced by them. In a word: there are many Protestants, and (too)
many Papists in these Rea^mes; The Lord open their eyes, that they may turn to
us: the Lord open our eyes and hearts also, that we may never turn to them:
lest we perish under that son of perdition, and great enemy of Christ,
Christendom, and Christianity; the Pope; ille Adversarius, the Adversary.

SERMON VII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. Who sits in the Temple of God.
Of the Temple. Of Antichrists seat. It is not the Temple of the Jews. It is
Rome. Whether Rome be a true Church. A parallel betwixt Rome and Babylon.

THe third part in the Description of Antichrist, is the description of his
Place: he shall sit in the temple of God, says my Text. Although to have his
seat in the same city, be no sufficient argument to conclude, Therefore it is
the same person: Yet the very place is conditio necessaria, Suarez Apolog. lib.
5. c. 15. nu. 3.
it is a condition worthy to be taken into our consideration, says Suarez. In
the Text he is said to have his seat, (...), in the Temple: from which we
distinguish (...) (which signifies also the Temple) by this property. (...) a
Temple, is derived of (...) inhabito, because God does as it were make his
Residence there: and (...) sacrum, Holy, is another Z^^ch. in 4. P^aec^pt.
name of the Temple, because sacra, the holy rites of Gods worship were there
performed. The first name is in regard of the person worshipped, God: and the
second in regard of the persons worshipping, Gods servants. The meaning is,
Antichrist will usurp the Temple in the hig^est respect. Again, (...) is not
the ^^niu^ Paral. 3.
whole building and fabric of the Temple, but the principal part thereof,
whereto the people do principally resort to discharge their devotion. As the
Jews had the Sanctum, and the Sanctum Sanctorum in their Temple: and in every
Church amongst us also, there is the body, and chancell thereof, a common
distinction. This is the second way we distinguish (...), from (...). The
sense is evident: Antichrist Suarez Apolog. lib. 5. ca. 16. nu 4
will place his throne in the principal part of the Temple of God: as Adrian
did once erect his statue in the Sanctum Sanctorum, in the most holy place of
the holy Temple of H^erusalem. He shall sit (...), in the Temple of God, says
my Text.

Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God. Concerning the seat of Antichr^st,
I will propose two points to be handled, the Explication, and the Application
thereof. First I will declare what, and secondly where this Temple is.

The Temple is taken three ways: Materially, Suarez Apolog. lib. 5 cap 15.
number. 6. and 7.
Metaphorically, and Formally. Materially, it is taken for the place, for the
Temple of the Jews: Metaphorically, for the persons, or congregation of
Antichristians: and Formally, for the persons or congregation of true
Christians. The first, to take the Temple materially in my text, is the setting
of the Romish Mint on work, to coin a new fiction, like the old fable of the
Earthly Paradise: both in Eutopia, neither extant in rerum natura. Such is the
assertion of those who say the Temple of the Jews is the seat of Antichrist.
The second is the opinion of S. Augustine, who held that Antichrist Aug. de
Civit. Dei.
and the Antichristians should sit (...) not (...), not in, but for, and
instead of the Temple of God. Now who they be, which of all the world do most
cry Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Bell. de Pont.
Romans lib. 3. c. 13. Suarez Apolog. lib. 3. ca. 16. Malvenda de Antich. lib. 7.
c. 7 Lessius de Antichristo part. 1. Them. 12. Monarchomach. his Touchstone.
Christo* ho^so^ in Down lib. 1. Spalatensis Council. Red. page ^. 9.
Lord: and would have none to be true Catholic Christians, but only the
Romish Christians, I leave this to the conjecture of any ordinary capacity. In
the third place, the Temple is taken formally, for the Church of Christ: and
upon this do I insist.

But the maine difference consists in this distinction: whether by this
Temple of God, we are here to understand the Temple of the Jews, or the Church
of the Christians. We affirm the latter, and prove it three ways. First from
the Text* secondly from the Scripture, and thirdly from their confession.

First, the phrases of my Text do not sit this interpretation: by the Temple
of God to understand the material Temple of the Jews. The first phrase,
sedere to sit, is not here taken materially, for the gesture of the body.
Hilarious does express it well: Antichrist shall sit in the Temple, Potestate
regiminis, by his power and governing; not actu praesentiae corporalis, not by
the actual presence of his body. And me thinks our adversaries should not
boggle at their own phrase. They themselves know that for the Pope to sit, and
the King to reign, are both synonima's: both signify to rule, and govern.
Again, that other phrase, tanquam Deus, as it were God, cannot be expounded
materially: because God is immateriall, and incorporeall: and it is the error
of the Anthropomorphites to ascribe a bodily position unto God. God cannot be
said to sit materially: nor any creature neither, if he does sit tanquam Deus,
as it were God. Let therefore the phrases proceed in a just proportion, and we
conclude: the temple is not here to be taken materially for the temple of the
Jews: but formally for the church; for the company and congregation of
christians. The Church of Christ shall be the seat of Antichrist. Secondly, the
current of the Scripture phrase runs strongly for this interpretation: that
the temple of God does (now) signify the Church of Christ, and not the Temple
of the Jews. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God? 1 Cor. 3. 16. what
agreement is there betwixt the temple of God? 2 Cor. 6. 16. In whom all the
building being sitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord.
Ephesians. 2. 21. And finally, 1 Timothy 3. 15. (...), the House of God; which is a
synonima unto (...), the Temple of God, is there termed (...), the Church of
God, and no where the Temple of the Jews: I mean after the razing of the
Jewish temple. For it is the B. Andrews Apol. in Bell. c 9.
observation of the learned, that after the temple of Solomon was ruinated, the
Holy Ghost in the Scripture did never ascribethe title of the temple of God to
any thing, but to the church only. Yet the best is the last interpretation from
their own confession. Indeed Bellarmine de R. Pontif. 3. 13. Christophorsonne
his Succenturiatus lib. 1. Lessius Demonst. 12. and diverse others, dispute it
eagerly, that Antichrists seat shall be in the Temple of the Jews, and not in
the Church of Christ. But as many, and as good Scholars: yea more, and better
of their side, are of our side, in this point: that the Seat of Antichrist
shall be in the Church of God, and not in the Temple of Jerusalem.

The Rhemists on this verse are irresolute. Rhemists in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
In the eleventh verse they would gladly maintain that the Seat of Antichrist
shall be at Jerusalem. But in the twelfth verse, they dare not deny, but that
he shall rather sit in our Christian Church, than in their Jewish
Temple-Suarez also is no more resolute, in the fist Suarez Apol. lib. 5 cap. 16.
book and sixteenth chapter of his Apology. In the first number, he would
decline this point of the place of Antichrist: Facilius quid non sit, quam quid
sit, cognoscitur: it is no easy matter to demonstrate, that the seat of
Antichrist shall be at Jerusalem. But in the third number, he does define it:
yet so coldly, as if his conscience had checked him for a voluntary gainsaying
of the manifest truth: Verisimilius est, it is most probable, that S. Paul
means the Temple of the Jews. A probability, no demonstration. where is
Lessius then with his 12 demonstration? But Sanders plainly: Verius arbitratur,
qui dicit, Sander. de Antich. Them. 18
Templum Dei apud Paulum, non de Templo Hierosolymitano, sed potius de Ecclesia
accipiendum esse: that his opinion is the truer, who does think, that the
Temple of God in this place does not signify the Temple of Jerusalem, but
rather the Church. And as Sanders does approve this of S. Jerome by his
citation: so does Germanus Hervetus, the like of S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
by his translation, (...): Sedebit Germani Herveti versio. Suarez Apolog. lib.
5. cap. 15. number. 5. Pe^er. in Dan. lib. 14.
in Templo Dei, non quod Hierosolymis: Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of
God, not at Jerusalem: so Hervetus. Pererius as plainly: Sedebit in Templo
Dei, id est, in Templis Christianorum, haec enim sola vere dici possunt Templa
Dei: Antichrist, says he, shall sit in the Temple of God, that is, in the
Temples (or Churches) of Christians: for these alone may truly be termed the
Temples of God. Baronius more plainly: yea Baron anno 72. sect. 28.
as peremptorily as any Protestant that ever set pen to paper in this point.
This year, says he, the Jews were subdued to the Romans: Nunquam posthaec
servire desierunt, aut desinent, usque ad sinem mundi: after which they shall
live in perpetual servitude, even to the end of the world. Neque spes est
aliqua, restituendae iterum Hierosolymae, vel Templi denuo excitandi: Neither
is there any hope that that City shall be ever restored, or that Temple ever
built again: According (quoth he) to that Prophecy of Daniel 9. 27. He shall
make it desolate, even unto the consummation. Also he confirms it by a
second argument drawn from Experience: When as (says he) the Apostate in
hatred of the Christians (and the Jews in contempt of Christ, hoping (...),
S^z^menus lib. 5 cap. ult.
to make Christ a liar, and a false Prophet) indeavored to re-edifie the
Temple, the workmen were terrisied with hideous apparitions, and dreadful
fires, issuing out of the earth, which forced them to desist from that
building. To his judgment may be added this reason: the Temple was a type of
the Dounam de Ant. part. 1. lib. 1 cap. 2 sect. 1.
Church of Christ, and therefore when the Church of Christ was once planted,
(like other Types and Figures) the Temple of the Jews was utterly to be
abolished. And this seemed to be no singular opinion of any private person, but
the universal Tenent of the most, and best Divines of that age. Hence S.
Chrysostom composed an Oration ((...)) Chrysostom. Orat. 2. contra Iudaeos, tom.
6.
only to prove this point, That the Temple of the Jews should never be
repaired. Yea Suarez himself more plentifully; and as substantially: Suarez
Apolog. lib. 5. cap. 5. nu. 5.
as if Truth did extort confession from the mouth of that Adversary who does
labor to contradict it, and suppress it. He speaks so to the purpose, that
I now purpose to shut up my interpretation of this place, only in his own
words: Quod Paulus, per Templum Dei, Ecclesiam intellexerit, probabile est: sic
interpretatur Hieronimus, Hugo, Chrysostomus, Occumenius, Theophylactus: and
Theodoreti verba haec sum: Templum Dei appellavit Ecclesias, in quibus
Antichristus primam sedem arripiet. I will English it: for no Englishman can
speak more plainly to our conclusion. That S. Paul (says Suarez) by the
Temple of God does mean the Church, it is probable: for this is the exposition
of Hierome, Hugo, Chrysostom, Occumenius, Theophylact: and Theodoret has
these words: Saint Paul does call the Temple the Church, in which Antichrist
will usurp the chief See.

I conclude: from the Phrases of my Text, from the Testimonies of the
Scripture, and from their own Confession: The Papists themselves alleging the
authority of the most and best of the Fathers, and establishing this assertion
with reason: That the Temple shall not be built again. Therefore, The Man of
sin shall sit in the temple of God: and the very Church of Christ, shall be
the seat and place of Antichrist.

Thus have ye the Explication, What this Temple is: I proceed to the
Application, Where it is.

The last sentence I quoted, I will make my first entrance into the second
point. This is the saying of Theodoret (cited by Suarez) templum Dei, appellat
Ecclesias, in quibus Antichristus arripiet primam sedem: that is, Paul does
call the temple of God, the Church, in which Antichrist shall usurp the prime
See. Hence I argue,

The prime See of the Church, is the seat of Antichrist:

But Rome is the prime See of the Church:

Therefore, Rome is the seat of Antichrist.

Therefore the Pope (the other properties of this Text and Chapter being his by
a just application) is Antichrist sitting in Rome, the principal Church of
Christ.

But here the Papists oppose a plausible objection: Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 3.
ca. 13
that by this we confess the Church of Rome to be the Church of Christ. I
answer, we do so: with these limitations:

First, the Church of Rome may be termed Vhitak. Contr. 4. Quaest. 5.
the Church of Christ, because heretofore it has been a true Church. As they
themselves call the Host Bread, because it was bread before the consecration.
And Isay 1. 21. wicked Jerusalem is called the faithful City, because it had
been so.

Secondly, the Church of Rome does usurp the name of the Church of Christ.

Thirdly, it is the Church of Christ, in the opinion of the Papists.

And finally, it does still retain the relics of the Church, in that respect
therefore we may call it the Church of Christ.

Or to answer in the very words of Suarez himself: Congregatio in quae
Antichristus adorabitur, Suarez. Apol. lib. 5. cap. 15. nu. 8.
vocabitur Ecclesia and templum: quia antequam perverteretur, erat ecclesia and
templi^ Dei: That is, the Congregation of Antichrist is called the Church and
Temple of God, because it was the Church and Temple of God before their
Apostasy.

Or yet more acurately, with acute Tilenus: Tilen. syntag. part. 2. disp. 36.
these. 25. etc.
We say that the Church of Christ may be considered two ways, Vel ratione
externae (...), vel internae (...): that is, in regard of the outward
profession of the truth, or of the inward possession of the truth. The Pope, or
Antichrist, may sit in the Church of Christ, in the first sense: but according
to the second, only the servant of Christ can sit in the Church of Christ.

I will divert a little, to discuss one great point: Whether the Roman Church
be a true Church. In which discourse I will insist on these four particulars.

First, I will declare What the Church is.

Secondly, the reasons to affirm the proposition.

Thirdly, the restrictions and limitatio^s thereof.

And finally, I will remove away some stones whereat the Protestants do
stumble, and pluck away some plumes wherewith the Papists do magnify
themselves: Both from this one ground; because we yield them to be Templum
Dei, a true Christian Church.

Such indeed, is the charity of the Popish Spalatens. Cons. Red. page 12.
Bell. de Notis Eccl. lib. 4. ca. 8. Dico secundo.
Church, that they peremptorily pronounce ( Ecclesias Haereticas, ne Ecclesias
quidem omnino esse) all heretical Churches to be indeed no Churches: yea
precisely to name the very particular. As namely, that the great Church of the
Graecians, is also no Church. Whereby they also define all those infinite
souls, to be also damned. For extra Ecclesiam nulla est salus: There is no
salvation out of the Church. But nobisnon licet esse tam impios, we dare not be
so uncharitable. We say of those and this, that the very Church of Rome is a
true Church; Which will appear only from the definition of the Church, If I
should proceed no farther.

The Church is a company, which profess Christ, and are baptized. This is the
definition of the Hooker Polity lib. 3. number. 1. Bish. Abbot de Ant. cap. 3.
nu. 4. Deane Whites reply to Fisher, page 49. Dr. Beard de Antich. cap. 4. number.
6. Dr Crakenthorp in Spal. c. 16. and 21. Answer to Fishers relat. of the 3.
cons.
Church, according to the common current consent, of our most, and most learned
Divines. So, the essential difference of the Church of Christ from all other
companies, congregations, or societies consists in these two points,
Profession and Baptism.

For the first: Revel. 2. 13. the spirit testified, that the congregation of
Pergamus, was not fallen from being a Christian Church: because thou keep my
Name. Therefore keeping or professing the Name of Christ, is one essential
part of a Christian Church. Next, upon the acknowledging of the name of Christ,
the Eunuch was baptized by Philip, Act. 8. 38. Therefore Baptism is another:
and profession with baptism, are the two things which absolutely constitute a
Church. Consider moreover 2 Timothy 2. 20. and Math. 13. 47.

To amplify and honor this point, with Hookers Politic lib 3. sect. ^.
the very words of that incomparable learned man, in that unanswerable learned
book. For want of this (profession and baptism) it is, that Jews, Infidels,
and pagans, are excluded out of the bounds of the Church. Others we may not
deny to be of the visible Church, so long as these things, be not wanting to
them. For apparent it is, that all men of necessity, must either be Christians,
or no Christians. If by external profession they be Christians, then are they
of the visible Church of Christ. And Christians by external profession they
are all, whose mark of recognisance has in it these things which we have
mentioned. Yea although they be impious Idolaters, wicked Heretics, persons
excommunicable, yea cast out for notorious improbitie. Such withal we deny
not, to be theimpes and limbs of Satan, even as long as they continue such.
From these premises, I frame these arguments: the first from the definition of
the Church.

A Company which profess Christ and are baptized, are a Church.

But the Romans are a Company, which profess Christ, and are baptized;

Therefore, The Romans are a Church.

Add also, out of the amplification: Although the papists be impious
Idolaters, wicked Heretics, or excommunicable persons. Although for their
persons, they be the limbs of Satan, their profession be the deceiveablenesse
of Satan, their City be the Throne of Satan, and their Head be the son of
Satan; yet whilst they profess Christ, and embrace the Christian Baptism:
they are notwithstanding the Church of Christ.

But if any interpose, that Rome indeed is a Church, but not a true Church:
such must know that Ens and verum, Being and true, are convertible. So if they
grant the Roman to be a church, they must confess withal, that it is a true
Church. Videlicet, in regard of the Essence, not of the goodness thereof. And
a thief, is a true man, in regard of the truth of his Essence, as he is a
creature endued with Reason: yet is he not a true man, in regard of the truth
of his goodness, his equity and honesty. So the popish Church, is a true
Church, in regard of the truth of the Essence of a Church, (as a Church is a
company which profess Christ, and are baptized) yet is it not a true Church,
in respect of the truth of the goodness of a Church. That is, it is not a true
holy Church, neither in doctrine, nor in manners.

In a word, the Church of Rome, is a true Church, in respect of the Essence:
but a false Church, in respect of the doctrine thereof.

To prove that the Church of Rome, is a true Church, in our sense, and its
Essence, I will make it good by two sorts of arguments: Artificial and
inartificiall. But these inartificiall arguments shall be interlaced with many
artificial ones also. The Testimonies are lined with their several Reasons.

Reverend Calvin: Hoc rationibus satis validis Calvin. Epist. 104.
me probasse puto: Ecclesiam licet semiruptam, imo si libet diruptam ac
deformem, aliquam tamen manner in Papatu. I suppose (says he) that in the
Papacy, some Church remains: a Church crazed, or if you will broken quite in
pieces, forelorne, misshapen, yet some Church. And his Reason, is my Text:
because, Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God. Learned Zanchie: I Zanchius
praesat. de natura Dei.
acknowledge the Church of Rome (Nec potuit Satan, etc. Maugre the Devils
malice) for a true Church of Christ. His reason: because the Church of Rome
holds the doctrine of truth concerning Christ, that he is the Redeemer, and
shall be the Judge of the world, baptizing in the Name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the holy Buchanus loc. 44. quaest. 5.
Ghost. Buchane: Caetus Pontificiorum sunt Ecclesiae, sicut homo lepra, corrupt
us, and mente captus, non desinit esse homo. The Frenzy makes not a man cease
to be a man: no more does Heresy make Rome to cease to be a Church. Moreover,
Hooker in Ab^k. 2. 4. (...). 27.
as the Frenzy, though it self take away the use of Reason, it does
notwithstanding prove them reasonable creatures which have it, because none can
be frantike but men. So Antichristianitie being the bane and plain overthrow
of Christianity, may nevertheless argue the Church wherein Antichrist does
sit, to be Christian. That Rex Iacobus oratione ad ordines Nou. 9. 1605.
pattern and Patron of learning, King James, confesses Rome to be a Church,
and concludes from hence: because some in Rome may be saved. Charitable
Hooker: although (says Hooker in Hab. 1. ^. nu. 16, 17, and 25.
he) the Church of Rome has played the Harlot worse than ever did Israel: yet
are they not, as now the Synagogue of the Jews, which plainly deny Christ
Jesus, quite and clean excluded out of the Covenant. But as Samaria compared
with Jerusalem, is termed Aholah, a Church or Tabernacle of her own:
contrariwise, Jerusalem Ahol^bah, the resting place of the Lord. So whatsoever
we term the Church of Rome, when we compare her with reformed Churches: still
we put a difference, as then between Babylon and Samaria: so now between
Rome and Heathenish assemblies. He does render his Reason also: Bishop Andrews
Tort. prope sinem. B. Morton Apol. lib 4. ca. 2. sect. 5 B. Abbot de Anti^b.
lib. 3 nu. 4. Deane Whites Reply, page 49 Dr. Whites Defense, cap. 37. Dr.
Whitak: Contr. 4. quaest. 5. cap. 3. Dr. Sharp, sp^culo, c. 5. Dr Beard. cap.
4. number. 6. Answer to Fishers Relation of the 3. conser.
because Rome does overthrow the foundation of Christianity, not directly, but
by consequent only. In respect whereof we condemn it as Erroneous: although
for holding the foundation, we do, and must hold them Christians.

To the judgment of these sound Divines, subscribe many other, at this day
famous in our generation? And I find this their opinion opposed by very few
Reverend Authors: and for preserving of their reverence, I will suppress their
Names, proceeding to the remnant of my arguments.

The first, and foundation of all my arguments, is the argument drawn from the
foundation. The Church of Rome does hold the true foundation of Christianity:
it is therefore a true Christian Church. As a man, is in the ship although
tempests have torn away the Tacklings, Pirates have shot the maine Mast
overboord, and they themselves have blown up the Deck: and nothing be
remaining, but the Carine, the bulk, and very Carcass of the ship: and that
also upon the point of sinking. Now the foundation of Christianity is twofold:
fundamentum quo, and fundamentum quod, the foundation whereby a Christian does
know his salvation, and the foundation whereby he does obtain it. Fundamentum
quo, the fundamental Writings, which do declare the salvation of of
Christians, are the Scriptures: in them we have eternal life, and they
testify of Christ, Ioh. 5. 39. Fundamentum quod, the fundamental means, and
cause, which has purchased, and does give it, is Christ. Christ is the Savior
of the world, Ioh. 4. 42. and other foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
Both which foundations are held by the Church of Rome. The holy Scriptures they
have, and acknowledge yea even in the Original. And Christ they confess to be
the only Savior of the world: joining nothing with Christ in the work of
Redemption, but only in the Application thereof. Which although it be too
much, yet it is not enough, to raze the Foundation. Till then, that the Papists
do reject the Scriptures: or rather till they reject Christ: we must not
exclude them from the Christian Church, because they yet do hold the Foundation
of Christianity.

I will recompense the length of this first argument, with the brevity of four
following. Four ways in two words, will I plainly prove that The Church of
Rome is a true Church. From the Professors, Pastors, Pattern and Property of
a true Church.

Their children we do baptize: and their men baptized, we do not rebaptise.
I suppose we should make a question of the one, and no question of the other,
if they were absolutely out of the Church. Let the Protestants grant that the
Papists have true baptism: and the Papists will ea^ily and truly infer, that
then They are a true Church.

The Papists have True Pastors. This is acknowledged Whitak. Contr. 4. qu* 5.
c. 3. Mason de Ordin. minist. ca. 12
by our Doctors, approved by our Practice, we do admit Proselyte Priests, and
did (in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign) desire Consecration of our
Bishops, from theirs: and Luther himself was a Popish Priest. All these
remain so without Iteration. But there are no true Pastors out of the true
Church. Therefore, we granting them the one: we must yield them also the other.

Suppose thirdly, that a Pagan should pursue a Papist unto death, eo nomine,
only because he is a Christian. Can we deny such a man the glory of
Martyrdom? yet this honor to be a Martyr, we all know to be proper to the
Church. If therefore the Papists have true Martyrs, they are also a true Church.

And for Examples, we may be sufficiently furnished out of the Scriptures.
Israel, when the people did worship the calfe, Exodus 32. 1. when they did burn
incense to the brazen serpent, 2 King. 18. 4. when they bowed to Baal, 1 King.
19. 18. when they burned incense to other Gods, 2 Kings 22. 17. yea when the
Prophets did condemn them as the seed of a whore, Esa. 57. 3. as wicked
wretched miscreants, who had forsaken God, Ier. 13, 11. and were of him
forsaken, Isaiah 60. 15. Even then retaining the Law of God, and the holy seal
of his covenant, they continued to be his visible Church. As Hookers Politic,
lib. 3. sect. 1.
profound Hooker speaks acutely, God had his Church amongst them, not only
because he had there thousands which did never bow their knees to Baal: but
whose knees were bowed to Baal, even they also were the visible Church of God,
1 King. 18. 21. The Corinthians denied the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 19. The
Galathians admitted Circumcision, Gal. 5. 2. Thyatira suffered Iezabel, Rev. 2.
20. Laodicea was lukewarm, Rev. 3. 16. Philadelphia had but a little strength,
Rev. 3. 8. and Sardi was quite dead, Rev. 3. 1. yet were all these Churches.
Nay it is the Temple of God, though the Throne of Antichrist be pearched
therein, 2 These. 2. 4. We cannot say more of Rome, than what is here said of
these: that it is an Adulterous, Idolatrous fe^ble, Lukewarm, dead, generation
of temporizing Antichristian miscreants. Nor can we say less of Rome, than the
holy Scripture does here speak of these. Notwithstanding all this, because
they retain the Law of God, and the seal of the covenant: because they
retain the Scripture, and the Sacraments. Therefore

The Church of Rome is a true Church of God.

The Restrictions and Objections are of near affinity: una ergo fidelia, I
will handle them jointly. But (...), this assertion does place me as a
soldier betwixt two armies ready to give the onset. Our friends force me out
of their ranks, fearing me to be a Neuter, or rather a favourer of the Enemy.
The Enemy advances himself to turn my weapons, upon our side. Some
Protestants say I yield the enemy too much, and that which is too false also.
Is it possible say they, that the self same man, should belong both to the
Synagogue of Satan, and to the Church of Jesus Christ? That Rome should be
both Babel, and the church? Sub Ajacis clypeo: I will shield Hooker Polit. lib.
3. sect. 1.
my self under the arm of that old soldier of Jesus Christ, (who like an old
soldier, was never sufficiently rewarded for his service to our true English,
and truly Militant Church.) It is not possible that they should belong unto
that church, which is the mystical body of Christ: because that body
consists of none but true Israelits, true sons of Abraham, true Saints and
servants of God. Howbeit, of the visible body, and Church of Jesus Christ,
these may be, and oftentimes are, in regard of the maine parts of their outward
Profession, who in regard of their inward disposition of mind, yea of external
conversation, yea of some parts of their very profession, are most worthily
hateful in the sight of God himself, and in the eyes of the sounder part of
the visible Church most execrable. To his words let me add one. They think
that my assertion does put weapons into the hands of our Adversaries: but I
know that their contradiction does pluck the strongest weapon out of the hands
of our own side. For it must follow inevitably: If Rome be no church, then is
the Pope no Antichrist. Because the text does teach us, that Antichrist must
sit in the Temple of God.

The Papists advance on the other side, as if they apprehended some great
advantage by this assertion, as if by yielding them to be a true Church, we
must submit our selves to be schismatickes. Bellarmine speaks plainly, if
Bell. de Po^^. Romans lib. 3. ca. 13.
the Protestants confess that our church is a true church, then must they
yield their church to be schismatic: because they have separated from us.
But I). Smith more rhetorically: At Rich. Smit^^us de autho^e Protestantic^
Religionis lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 8.
^ incredibile^^ hominum impietatem: ut qui se Christianos profitentur, audeant
repudiare eam ecclesiam, quam fatentur esse adhuc in soedere Dei. And again,
Atque ^ prodigiosam caecitate^! ut non videant, quod dum fatentur Romanam
Ecclesiam, esse ecclesiam Dei, and sponsam Christi, fatentur suam esse
synagogam Antichristi, and scortu^ satanae. That is, O incredible wickedness,
that those who profess themselves to be Christians, will forsake them whom
they confess to be the Church of Christ! O incomparable blindness, that they
see not, that by granting the Roman church to be the church of God, and the
spouse of Christ, they yield themselves, the reformed church, to be the
synagogue of Antichrist, and strumpet of satan.

And the whole Army of the Papists swarm after their Leaders in this pursuit,
presuming that we must either fly or yield, if we give them this ground: that
the church of Rome is a true Church: and thence are they ready to cry Victoria.

At ne sit Encomium ante victoriam: let not Bell. de d^ Eccles. milit. cap. 4.
sect. Resp. vari^^.
him boast who puts on his armor, as he may who does put it off. To
Bellarmine, I shape an answer in his own syllables: we affirm the Roman to
be a true church, not simpliciter, but secundum quid: not absolutely, but in
some respect: in which respect, we do separate from it, and not simply.
Simple therefore is their reason, thence to infer: therefore, our separation
is schismatic. To D. Smith, and all the rest, we say, we do grant them, all
those glorious titles: but as so many testimonies, to witness their graceless
wickedness so to abuse them. We grant the Roman to be a true Church, to be
the Church of Christ, to be the spouse of Christ, and to be of the body of
Christ. We grant it to hold the foundation of faith, and to have the
scriptures, sacraments, etc. And what of all this? Reatus impij, est nomen
pium, says one out of Salvianus: godly Names do not justify godless Hooker
in Hab. 1. 4. nu. 7.
men. We are but upbraided when we are honored with names and Titles, when our
lives and manners are not suitable. Judas was an Apostle, and a Traitor too:
but the more wretched Traitor, because an Apostle. And so the Pope is (says
he) The Vicar of Christ, and an Enemy: but the more dangerous and devilish
Enemy, because the Vicar of Christ.

In particular: We grant, that Rome is a true Church, but in regard of the
verity of the Essence, not of the Doctrine thereof: this is corrupt and full of
pollutions. We grant it to be the Church of God: so much also, we grant to
the Iacobites, Muscovites, Arians, and Nestorians. Yet I suppose that none dare
hazard themselves to live in these congregations, who have any care of their
safety, souls health, or eternal salvation. We grant Rome to be the spouse of
Christ: but quoad externam Professionem, not quoad internam fidem: in respect
of their outward profession, not of their inward affections, no nor of their
actions neither. We grant that they are of the Body of Christ: his body
visible, no^ mystical. And so may a Legion of Devils also incarnated be, if
they will profess the name of Christ, and be admitted by the baptism of
Christ. We grant they hold the Foundation, but is there nothing dangerous, nor
damnable, but only to overthrow the Foundation of Christianity? Have they no^
besides, dangerous and damnable Errors, Heresies, and Idolatries? Moreover
they Answer to Fishe^^ Relation of t^^ 3. (...). ^8.
have Errors, which do weaken the Foundation, says the learned Author of
that labored appendix. They have Errors fundamental, reductive, by a
reducement: if they which embrace them, do pertinaciously adhere unto them,
and have sufficient means to be better Deane White Ibid. page 71.
informed. Says the Champion of our Church.

And sinally, their errors (as that of Justification) Hooker in Hab. 1. 4.
do overthrow the very foundation, by consequent, says impartial Hooker.
Lastly, they have the Scriptures, and Sacraments, lawful Ministers, and a
lawful Ministry, etc. actually in themselves, and effectually unto others: but
not so to themselves. Notum est Cives malae civitatis, administrare quosdam
actus bonae civitatis: it is manifest that the Burgers of Babylon, do
administer some functions of Jerusalem: and with effect too. They can hew out
an Arc for others, though themselves be drowned in the Deluge.

And for all this, is it not lawful to separate from Rome? We accounted our
common Citizens frantic, because they reviled, and railed at such as fled from
the infection. Certainly the Papists are possessed with a more spiritual
frenzy and infection.

At ^ incredibilem impietatem! Atque o prodigiosum caecitatem! O incredible
wickedness and incomparable blindness, that those who see the Scriptures,
should be so seduced by strong delusion to believe a Lie! That those who say
they are the Church of God, and spouse of Christ, should be indeed the
Synagogue of Antichrist, and the strumpet of Satan.

I conclude, and let any Papist brag, or any others upbraid, what they can
collect out of this conclusion, The Church of Rome is a true Church. And the
Pope of Rome is that false Antichrist, who does erect his seat therein: by most
foul usurpation. He shall sit in the Temple, says my Text.

I have done this Digression, this (...) which it may be some will condemn,
as (...) as an overlong, and impertinent Parenthesis. But I conceive it very
needful, if it were only for this: to imply an Item to our own Zelotes, that
(transported with a strong affection, and weak judgment) they do not thrust
the Papists further from Christ: when as ( Christ knows) they are too far
off, from him already.

I return to the remnant of my Text; ye have heard the explication, what this
Temple is, even the very Church of Christ. Now shall ye hear the Application:
Where this Temple is; We use plain words, in a plain cause: the Church of
Rome is the seat of Antichrist. Now the Church of Rome has two parts: commonly
called Curia Romana, and Ecclesia Romana, the part ruled, and the part ruling.
The part ruled, are those particular Churches which profess the Romish
Religion, as Spain, France, Polon^^, etc. The part ruling, is the City, or
Court of Rome. I say therefore that Antichrist does sit in all the Romish
Church: but (to speak in the phrase of Suarez) collocavit Thronum suum, and
regalem Curiam imperij Suarez Apolog. lib. 5. cap. 15. nu. 1. and 2.
sui in urbe, he has seated his Throne, and settled his royal Court in that
City.

This will I prove by three arguments, drawn from the situation, and
domination of Rome: and thirdly from the Assimulation, betwixt Rome and
Babylon. The Velites shall give the onset: I will propound their own argument,
as a preamble to our (more solid) proofs, Dan. 11. 45. He shall plant the
Tabernacle of his royal Palace between the Seas. Now although we know that
this Prophecy speaks literally of Antiochus, and of Antichrist only
Anagogically, of whom Antiochus was a Type: Yet because the Papists do expound
it literally of Antichrist, against them we retort it, as a true property,
and strong probability, that Rome is the seat of Antichrist, because it is
seated between two seas, the Tyrrhene, and the Adriatike, according to this
Prophecy of Dan. 11. 45.

I proceed to our own proofs. First from the situation, Babylon is seated on
seven hills, Rev. 17. 9. and so is Rome situated also, no City under the cope,
to be compared to it in that kind. So is it termed by Tertullian, and Tertul.
Apol. cap. 35. Dionys. Halicar. lib. 4. Plin. lib. 3. ca. 5. Sibylla lib. 2.
so was it founded by Servius Tullius, the last King of the Romans. Hence also
the Latins gave it the surname of Septicollis, that is, the seven hilled City:
and the Graecians called it in the same signification, (...) The common
epithet of the Poets, and almost the burden of their Poems.

Dumque suis victrix, septem de montibus orbem, Ovid. de Trist. lib. 1. Eclog.
4. Propert. Eclog. 10. Virgil. G^o^^* 2.

Prospiciet domitum, Martia Roma, legar.
Septem urbs alta jugis, toti quae praesidet orbi.
Scilicet and rerum facta est pulcherrima Roma.
Septem quae una sibi muro circumdedit arces.
Varro mentions a Feast, called septimontium, Varro de Ling. Latin. lib. 5.
as it were, dedicated, to celebrate a City seated on seven hills, and their
Names are famously known throughout the world, Calius, Exquilinus, Palatinus,
Viminalis, Quirinalis, Aventinus, Capitolinus. All Dounam: Der. Epis. de
Antich. part 1. lib. 1. c. 2.
these at this day, are within the Walls of the City, though decayed in the
number of houses, yet still beautified with many Churches, Monasteries, and
other goodly buildings. Moreover on the first, the hill Coelius, at this day
stands the Laterane Palace and Church. Which diverse Popes have consumed to be
Constitut. Romans Pont. page 11. 454. 618.
the Head church of all the churches in the world: as Gregory 11. Pius 4. and
Pius 5. If any except that these Hills are to be taken metaphorically; I
answer, here can be no metaphor: because it is an interpretation of an Angel,
expou^ding the seven heads to signify seven mountains. Now interpretat^^^s
must be plain, not metaphorical. Plain therefore it is, that Rome is seated
on seven hills: the very situation of the very seat of Antichrist.

Secondly, that City, which in S. John's time did reign over the kingdoms of
the earth, is Babylon, the seat of Antichrist, Revel. 17. 18. But Rome is that
City which in S. John's time did reign over the Kingdoms of the earth: Toti
quae praesidet orbi: Therefore Rome is Babylon, the seat of Antichrist. And
aptly may it be termed Babylon; because it is the manner of Kingdoms to title
themselves from the first notable persons which did erect their State: as the
Roman Emperors were called Caesar's, from the first, Julius Caesar. And Rome
was so named from Romulus. So let the Romans reflect a little further
backward: because they have achieved the Babylonian Monarchy: from the first,
this last Monarch, Rome, may be termed Babylon.

Lastly, Rome and Babylon concur in many resemblances, without any
constrained comparison. Babylon in the Scriptures is taken 3 ways. First
Literally, for Babylon in Chaldea, the Metropolis of the Assyrian Empire, 2
Reg. 24. 10. Secondly Literally, for Babylon in Egypt, since called Babylis,
or Caire: of which some understand 1 Pet. 5. 13. Thirdly Mystically, for the
City of Antichrist, Revel. 17. 5. of which the first was a type: and this is
our assertion: that Rome is mystical Babylon.

Rome resembles the old Babylon in four particulars.

First, the old Babylon was a work begun by seventy Families, which schismed
from Shem: but God was in Shems Tents. So, Babylon mystical, the Roman
Church, has made a schism from the pure Church of the primitive times. And we
hope that God does dwell in our Tents, who retain the Apostolical truth.

Secondly, Nimrod (by interpretation an Apostate, or a Rebel) was the Head of
old Babylon: so, the Pope, the Apostate, it the Head of Rome.

Thirdly, as Rome was given by the Emperors Otho Frigensis Chro. 7. 3. P^^kins
Probl. page 581.
of Christendom to the Pope, our chief Christian Bishop: so the Persian Kings
granted Babylon unto their High Priest. And the Persian translating the seat of
his Kingdom from Babylon to Ecbatan, held nothing at Babylon, but the bare
name of an Empire: So our Emperor removing from Rome to Aquisgrave, has
nothing remaining but the title, only that he is called the Roman Emperor.

Fourthly, Babylon was a City where the Church of the Jews were captive. And a
great part of the Christian Church is, and a greater was captive in Rome also.
To these four I may add a fifth parallel out of Bellarmine. One thousand, one
hundred, threescore, and four Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 3. c. 5.
years, after the building of Babylon it was sacked: so in the same number,
1164 years after the building thereof, was Rome taken by the Goths.

This Parallel, like Pharaohs dream (to show the certainty thereof) shall be
doubled. To those five, I will add five other, issuing out of the bowels of my
text: Which will accord Rome and Babylon in an evident and natural congruity.
Arrogance, Violence, Improbity, Idolatry, Hi^gons. Mist. Bebyl Sermon. 1. Inquis.
2.
and Cruelty: non ovum ovo similius: are so suitable to both Rome and Babylon,
that they seem to be a brace of Menechmies. It must be a sharp eye which can
be able to distinguish them.

First, in this verse, Antichrist is termed (...), he that does exalt
himself, behold his pride and arrogance.

Secondly, the object is named (...), above all that is called God, or
worshipped: that is, Kings or Emperors: a violent intrusion upon Authority and
Majesty.

Thirdly, for his Improbity, and wicked conditions: he is called the Man of
sin.

Fourthly, (...), the deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, in the 10 verse, is
expounded to be Idolatry.

Fifthly, to signify his destroying Cruelty, the Lord of Rome is termed (...),
the son of perdition. And so does Saint Paul imply the entire parallel betwixt
Rome and Babylon.

1. Babylon indeed was proud: but Rome has imitated their pride, and far
exceeded their copy. Is not this great Babell, which I have built for the
house of my Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty? Dan. 4. 30. This was the arrogant ostentation of Nebuchad^ezzar. But
can all the Babylonish Chronicles yield precedents for our Romish insolences?
King Henry 2 of England, did kiss the knee of the Popes Legate. King Charles 8
of France did kiss the feet of the Pope. Henry 6 the Emperor did suffer his
Diadem to be put on by the feet of the Pope. Henry 4 Emperor, did wait
barefooted, in winter, at the gates of the Pope. And Frederick Barbarossa,
that brave Emperor, had his noble neck trampled on by the proud foot of an
insulting Pope. We may give the Pope the title of Tarquin, Superbus: or call
him Lucifer rather. None but Hell can match Rome for pride. Proud Babell must
yield the precedence to her younger sister.

2. Violence, or an unjust intrusion upon other Princes dominions, is the
second part of the parallel. Babylon indeed was an intolerable intruder upon
Tirus, Ez. 29. 18. upon Israel, Ier. 25. 9. and finally upon the Universe, till
he became Monarch of the Universal World. The Oecumenicall Bishop has been
no dullard to practice the like violent usurpations. A^or. Ius^it. Moral. ^art.
2. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Rome did Gregory 2 wrest from the Emperor Leo, whereof he was a subject, by
excommunicating his Sovereign, and assoiling the subjects, he became the
Sovereign. Acquainted with intrusion, he exercised extrusion also. The Pope
exposed Naples to the Duke of Anjou, and Navarre to the King of Spain.
Boniface 8 gave France from Philip the Fair, to Albertus king of the Romans.
And Gregory 7 beat Henry 4 out of the Empire, by the hands of Henry 5, his own
son. Yea Christendom is too narrow a Nest for this towering Bird of prey:
America also must be usurped, and violently detained Francis Lopez Hist. Ind.
c. 19
from his donation. But I need not travel so far: we have domestical
witnesses enough. Besides his pretenses to Scotland and Ireland; from King John
he detained the Crown of England in the hands of his Legate five days. Henry 3
thence he termed his Vassal. Henry 8, by a Papal process from Paris was
Matthew. Paris. page 844.
deprived of his Kingdom. And because one attempt against the Father succeeded
not: he twice deposed his Daughter. First Pius 5, anno Regni 13. next Sixtus 5,
somewhat before 1588: but God be blessed, both wanted their success against
our blessed Queen Elizabeth of immortal memory. Yet the effect of those
violent assayes have made our Western Princes so miserable, that they must
either wear the yoke of Rome to their dishonor, or cast it off to their
danger.

3. For Improbity of life, or lewd corruptions of their conversations. The old
Babylonians were like the old covetous persons mentioned by Aristotle, (...),
she would not be cured, Ier. 51. 9. Yet has Rome justified Babylon (as
Jerusalem did Samaria, Ezech. 16.) in all her abominations. The abominable
lives of Popes I pass, (although I know the Church of Rome may make use of
that phrase of the Child, 2 King. 4. 19. My head, my head) only I would
persuade impartial persons to peruse Platina and other popish Authors,
concerning those very Popes, whom Bellarmine himself does name as parum probi,
but somewhat faulty: to Bell. Praes. de Sum. Pontif.
wit, Stephanus 6, Leo 5, Christophorus 1, Johannes 12, and Alexander 6. But
for the whole body of their Church and City, it is wholly polluted: that it
meriteth the name, not of Babylon only, but of Egypt, and Sodom also, Revel.
11. 8. Let their own Writers testify this truth. In Rome (says Espencaeus)
there is such Espenc. in Titum cap. 1.
license for sinning, and such impudence in sinning: Talis, and tanta, ut nemo
credat, nisi qui viderit, neget nemo, nisi qui non viderit: None would believe
it, but such as have seen it, none deny it, but such as have not seen it.
Platina does second him: There is (says he) such covetousness, lust,
ambition, pride, ignorance, hypocrisy, and universal corruption of manners,
in both the Laity and Clergy: Vt vix apud Deum locum misericordiae nobis
reliquerunt: that we can hardly hope for any mercy from the hands of the
Almighty. And to show that there is such a thing in the world as may be called
the Whore of Babylon, at one time in Rome there Stauislaus de lege Coel. b.
were five and forty thousand strumpets, which did pay tribute to his
Holiness. Yea, they declare their sin as Sodom did, they hide it not. Isay
3. 9.
Bellarmine does avouch it, that the Magistrate does not offend, Si
meritricibus certum locum urbis incolendum attribuit: if he give leave to
whores to dwell in the City: quamvis certo sciat eo loco eas non been usuras:
although he know they will abuse those dwellings. He may permit (says he)
minus malum, ut majora impediantur: a small evil, that a greater may be
prevented. A practice and patronage besitting the majesty of great Babell.

4. We can, and do challenge Rome to imitate and equal Babylon in manifold
Idolatry. For the worshipping of pure, yea impure creatures: both true Saints,
and other sinful persons, far from sanctification: for the worshipping of
Images: for worshipping of a piece of wood, the Cross: for the worshipping of
a piece of bread, the Host: yea, for worshipping of Non ens, fabulous fictions,
which were never extant since the Creation. But I will only instance in a
precedent of most gross Idolatry, which the Ignorant may discern, and most
learned be never able (without Sophistry) to desend.

Those who worship Images of silver and gold, the work of men's hands, which
have eyes and see not, etc. worship the idols of the Heathen, Psalm. 135. 15.
But Rome does worship Images of silver and gold, the work of men's hands, which
have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not, etc. Therefore, Rome does
worship the Idols of the Heathen. And therein is like Babylon. 5. Incomparable
cruelty is the fist part of this comparison. Of literal Babylon, History does
tell us that it was most cruel: and of mystical Babylon, Prophecy does tell
us, that it was, is, and ever shall be, as cruel: What a bloody race there was
of Babylonish Princes, that of Thomyris will teach us concerning one of them:
when she had duck'd the head of Cyrus Just. Hist. lib. 2.
in a vessel of man's blood, Satia, inquit, te sanguine quem sitisti, cujusque
semper insatiabilis fu^st^: Cyrus was insatiable in his appetite to blood. We
may suppose the same of that whole bloody generation of the old Babylon.
Neither is the New Babylon free from that dropsy: She is drunk with the blood
of Saints: Revel. 17. 6. and if we look on Calabria, Languedoc, Provence,
Bohemia, Hungary, and Spain; where the Protestants have been persecuted, and
whence they have been extirpated, our eyes (without the interposition of any
Red Glass, or other artificial medium) would apprehend those Countries to be
(like the Egyptian Rivers, Exodus 7. 21.) all blood. If we review the
Resolutions of the Spanish and English, and the Executions of the French: the
Armada, Powder plot, and miserable Massacres. But of all, if the Inquisition
(which is now like the son of Croesus, tongue-tyed,) would utter, A^^ G^llius
lib. 5. cap 9.
how many Lambs have had their throats cut in that secret shambles: We should
see so much, that it would compel us to speak as much to Rome, as Zipporah
did to Moses, Exodus 4. 25. Surely a bloody city art thou unto us: and therein
also like old Babylon.

But what need we contend for arguments, when our adversaries grant the
conclusion. That Rome is Babylon, and so consequently the seat of Antichrist;
it is plainly confessed by many of the most learned Papists. This is the Suarez
Apol. lib. 5. 6. 7. nu. 8.
assertion of Victorinus, Andreas, Ribera, Viegas, also Bellarmine de Sum.
Pontif. lib. 3. ca. 13. Sanders de Vis. Monarchia lib. 8. cap. 8. and many
others. Roma a Iohanne saepius v^catur Babylon, says Lessius. Si aeutem (says
Suarez) If Lessius de Ant-Dem. 12. Suarez Apol. lib. 5. c. 7. nu. 8. Malvenda
de Antich. lib. 4. c. 4
by Babylon we understand any particular City, it can be no other than Rome.
Nay, says Malvenda, since S. John Revel. 17. 18. does call Babylon the Great
City which reigns over the Kings of the earth: this (says he) is as plain
as if one should veluti digit^ Romanam Vrbem demonstrare, with his very finger
point at the city of Rome. Thus far then we concur: that Rome in the
Revelation is meant by Babylon: and that Rome or Babylon is the seat of
Antichrist.

But they qualify this grant with a distinction. Suarez Apolog. lib. 5. 6. 7.
nu. 8.
It may be (say they) Rome is Babylon, and shall be the seat of Antichrist: but
this must be understood de Roma ethnica, non religiosa: of Rome under the
Pagans, and not of Rome under the Pope. A childish evasion, not worthy a
consutation. It must be Rome Christian, as it appears from a double
departure. The first of Babylon from the Church, Revel. 17. 1. Babylon is
called an Whore, which does presuppose Apostasy: and an Apostasy is peculiar
unto Christians, no way pertaining unto Pagans. The second departure, is of the
Church from Babylon: Rev. 18. 4. Exite, Come out of her my people. Now we know
that many of Gods people did remain in old Rome, who would have made some
scruple to reside in Babylon. Again, S. Paul says, that the Temple of God is
the seat of Antichrist: But Rome Heathen is not the Temple of God: Therefore,
Rome Heathen is not (Babylon or) the seat of Antichrist.

Let us try this distinction a little further: and we shall discover it to be
mere dross. Thus we object: Rome is Babylon, or the seat of Antichrist. They
grant it: but distinguish betwixt Rome Heathen, and Christian. As if they
should say, Indeed Rome is the seat of Antichrist: but Rome, as it was, or
shall be under the Pagans, and not as it is under the Pope. So we dispute of
the Place, and they distinguish of the Time: whereby they yield the Cause, that
in regard of the Place Rome is the Seat of Antichrist. But for the Time: that
is another property, which I will handle in another place. For this, it is
sufficient that Rome is the place of Antichrist.

Since therefore Rome does stand on seven hills: since it did reign over the
Kings of the earth: since it is aptly resembled to old Babylon: and since it
does usurp the Temple of God, claiming it self to be the Principal, yea the
whole Church of Christ* I conclude, Rome is Babylon, the City, the Court, and
Seat of Antichrist.

And is Rome Babylon? Now me thinks I hear that voice from heaven, Revel. ^8.
4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues. Babylon will bring sin to your souls, plagues
to your bodies, perdition unto both. Let us therefore come out of Babylon: let
us therefore ke^pe out of Babylon. Saint John did run out of the bath from
Cerynthus, for fear he should have been buried in it. And Lot was haled out
of Sodom, for fear he should have been burned with it. But Babel is worse
than Cerynthus his bath, worse than Sodom: we shall be burned, we shall be
buried in destruction, if once we be bewitched with that Babylonish sorcery,
Popery. Yea the seat of Babell, is like the Furnace of Babell, it will destroy
those who come but near it. And Popery is like a Whirle-poole, it will swallow
those who come but within the brinke thereof.

Let us therefore Come out of Babylon, and keep us far from the deceits of
Popery. I say not, Trade not with them, Eat not with them, Company not with
them: I say not this; yet Modicum non nocet: Si non sumatur. A little
Acquaintance with Popish People will do little harm: if we entertain no
acquaintance with any Papists at all. This I say, Beware of Babylon, and her
papisticall instruments. Keep your Children from them, keep your Servants
from them, keep your Persons from them: But above all, keep your Hearts and
Affections from them.

Now the God of Jerusalem keep you from the Man of Babylon ^ that he may
never prevail upon your Persons, upon your Friends, upon your Children, upon
your Servants, nor upon any thing which appertains unto you.

Amen.
SERMON VIII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. Who exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped.
Antichrist shall not exalt himself above the true God. The Pope does: and
above all that is worshipped. The Popes Ambition. The Pope exalts himself
above Kings. Above the Emperors. Papists are Traitors.

THis branch of this verse contains the first property of Antichrist:
concerning the exposition whereof, there is a great breach betwixt us and the
Papists. (...), id est, Bellarm. Apolog. cap. 9.
extollit se Antichristus supra omnem Deum, qui dicitur Deus, sive per
essentiam, sive per participationem, sive falsum, sive verum, says Bellarmine:
That is, Antichrist shall exalt himself above all that is called God, either
by Essence, or by Participation: be he a true, or a false god. Sive Suarez
Apol. lib. 5. 6. 17. nu. 7.
vere, sive falso, sive metaphorice: be he a true, false, or metaphorical god,
such as Princes are said to be, says Suarez. (...) supra omne quod colitur,
sive superstitiose, sive religiose: either religiously, or superstitiously,
says the same Suarez. (...), Verbum extollendi Suarez Apol. lib. 5. c. 17. nu.
11
significat excessum, arrogantiam, and usurpationem: by exalting is meant an
excessive arrogant usurpation, over God, and all things belonging to God.
According unto which our English Rhemists seem to state the question and
controversy Rhemists in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Sect. 11.
betwixt us. Who exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped. That is, Antichrist shall abolish all religion of the Jews,
Gentiles, and Christians: and shall suffer none (no not God) but himself to
be worshipped alone.

A most grossly absurd exposition: as it may be made manifest four ways.
First it contradicts reason: in reason, if a seducer should plainly profess
and proclaim himself to be greater than God, would any be so stupide and
senseless to be seduced by him? If a mortal wretch should exalt himself
above the great and true God: men would rather deride him for his folly,
imprison him for his frenzy, and stone him for his blasphemy* than to follow
such a foolish, frantic, and blasphemous Impostor. Secondly, it does
contradict his name, who is named Antichristus, that is, The Adversary of
Christ; and not Antitheus, that is, the Adversary of God, which should be his
proper name, if directly or expressly to exalt himself above the true God,
were his true property. Thirdly, this is contrary to their own popish
positions. Antichrist (say the Papists) shall be a Jew: how then shall he
abolish the Jewish religion? Again, they affirm that he shall be a Magician,
and that he shall worship the Devil. Therefore Antichrist shall not exalt
himself (supra omnem Deum) above every God, not above the god of this world.
And finally, this interpretation is contrary to this very Text. The superlative
of all his excessive properties is this, (...), and (...), that he shall rule
as God, and show that he is God: this is the height of his audacious,
incomparable arrogance: but that incredible, impossible, unlimited insolence,
that a man shall exalt himself above God, we must leave this as a frenzy and
fiction, to wave the imputation of other frantic and fabulous paradoxes,
which they are unwilling to acknowledge, much less to reclaim.

Having rejected their exposition, we proceed to our own. Above all that is
called God: in the original some read (...), above every thing which is called
God: and others, (...), above every person which is called God. The first
reading is (...), the error of the Printer, contrary to the most Greek
copies, as it is acknowledged by M. Beza himself. With the warrant Beza in ^
Th^s. 2. 4.
therefore of the most copies, we follow the latter reading, and the
interpretation of our late Sovereign, now with God. (...), Rex Iacobus
Praemonit.
the persons whom the Scriptures do call Gods, are Princes and Magistrates,
Psalm. 82. 6. Dixi Dij estis, I have called you Gods. Which exposition is
affirmed by a learned French Bishop, Pater omnium Deus d^citur, and est: at
Iren^^s lib 3. cap. 6.
non super hunc extolletur Antichrist us, sed super eos qui dicuntur quidem,
sed non sunt dij: The Father of all things (says he) is called God, and is
God: but Antichrist shall not exalt himself above him; but above them who
indeed are called gods, but are not in deed. Which Exposition is also confirmed
by as learned an English Bishop: Ecqua nervosior consequentia, quam ut dicantur
Andrews Apol. cap. 9.
Dij ab Apostolo, quos Deus ipse dixit d^os in Psalmo? Can there be a more
strong consequence than to collect that those are called Gods by Saint Paul in
this Text, whom God himself does call gods in the Psalms? And if the Apostle
had not alluded unto some whom the Scripture does call gods, he might with
like facility have written, that Antichrist should exalt himself (supra omne
quod est, vel saltem supra omne quod vel est, vel dicitur Deus) above all that
is, or at least above all that either is, or that is called God. Here then S.
Paul says not, that Antichrist shall exalt himself above all that is God, (to
wit, by nature) but above all which is called God, (to wit, in title:) which is
proper unto Kings. The meaning of the first member of this distribution, is
this: Antichrist shall exalt himself above all that is called God, that is,
above all Kings and Princes.

The second member is (...), all that is worshipped: which indeed does
signify, quod colitur, the object of any kind of worship or thing worshipped:
as Altars, Idols, etc. as it is rightly rendered by Bellarmine out of the Acts
Bell. de Pont. Romans 314.
17. 23. and Wisdom 15. 17. This acception of the word, though it be true, yet
it is improper to this place: because the letter does run (...), supra omnem
qui dicitur (...), above every person, not above every thing which is called
(...) therefore in the text, I take to be a synonima, signifying the same
thing with (...) in the 25, of the Acts, 21, and 25. where it is expounded
Augustus. The sense being that Antichrist shall exalt himself above the
Emperor. For he speaks of such an exaltation, whereby Antichrist should be
revealed: as he was to be hindered for a time by the Roman Emperor. The sense
of all is this: Antichrist exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped: that is, Antichrist does exalt himself above all Kings and
above all Emperors.

Such an one is the Pope: if there ever was, is, or shall be such an one under
Heaven. But in so plain a cause, to deal freely with them: This sense I say
is true: yet their own interpretation may exactly be fitted to the Pope.

First, take the name of God metaphorically, for Bishops and Kings. The Pope is
avouched by all Papists, to be Episcopus Oecumenicus, the universal bishop of
the World: and by some to be solus Episcopus, the Only bishop. And Suarez
Apolog. li. 5. ca. 17. nu. 12
his authority over Kings and Emperors, Suarez calls jus suum, his right and
proper indowment. For false Gods those of the Heathen had power limited: the
Pope unlimited. With them Neptune ruled the Sea, Ceres the Earth, Jupiter
Heaven, and Pluto Hell. But the Pope has three Crowns, to show his power in
three places: in Heaven, Earth and Hell. And for the true God: no Power can
dispense with any Law, but the same, or a greater authority. Now the Pope does
dispense with the Scripture of God* therefore he exalts himself above God.
Again, whilst the Pope does make that to be lawful, which God has made
unlawful: as the exemption of Clerks from their Sovereign, Romans 13. 4. and
those things to be unlawful, which God has made to be lawful, as the
exception of Clerks from marriage, Heb. 13. 4. But principally whilst he does
make the whole State of Religion to depend upon the Oracle of his resolution:
hereby he does exalt himself, above God himself. Thus the Pope does exalt
himself above all that is called God, metaphorically, falsely, or truly: that
is, above Kings, Bishops, Idols, or the Author of the Scripture. And thus
far from their own Popish premises, we may conclude: that the Pope is The
Antichrist.

The (...), or things worshipped in the Roman Church, are these five: the
Saints, Angels, Altar, Cross, and Host: Above all which, all men know, that
the Pope does exalt himself. He shows himself superior to Bell. de Sanct^
Beat. cap 8.
the Saints, quoad (...), in regard of their Canonization: he does Canonize, or
make men departed to be Saints, and to be worshipped. Where the argument of
Athanasius is strong Athanasius Ora. contra Gentes (...) ^. col. 9.
and evident: (...), Efficiens, effecto melius esse oportet, the maker must be
more excellent than the work of his hands.

The Angels are commanded by the Pope, Corn. Agr^p. de vanit sci^^t. cap. 61.
( Clemens 6) to take such souls as dyed by the way, going to the Jubilee, out
of Purgatory, and to carry them immediately into Heaven. This he commanded: and
this commandment, is an argument, that the Pope does exalt himself above
Angels: yea that he does show himself to be God. For by this very argument
does Saint Paul prove, Christ to be God: because he Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. fol.
16.
is above the Angels, Heb. 1. 4, and 5. Thirdly, the Popes Throne, is placed
above Gods Altar: Argue from the thing to the persons: and we shall sinde them
not much inferior, to any thing which is worshipped.

Fourthly, the Cross is laid at the Popes feet: evidence enough, that he does
exalt himself above it. And finally, in his solemn Processions, the Host
(that is to them Christ, God) is carried on an Horse, but the Pope on men's
shoulders. But to bring all within the infinite orb of his unlimited
Arrogance: Tibi genua ^urventur, Aug. Triumph. Epist. Ded. ad Ioh. 22.
caelestium, terrestrium, and inferorum: To the Pope every knee shall bow, of
things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, says their
Augustine de Ancona. And I think Saint Paul could say not much more of our
Savior Christ, Phil. 2. 10. The Pope therefore does honor himself, above the
Saints, Angels, Altars, Cross, and the Host. In their own sense: He exalts
himself above all that is worshipped.

I do not then decline their own interpretation: that Antichrist does exalt
himself above the very God in some sense. But I defer that Property, unto
his proper place, the third point: where I must show, that Antichrist does show
himself, that he is God. In the mean time: ex ungue Leonem, you may guess by
this, who it is, which does exalt himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped. Even by their own interpretation.

But to insist more particularly, upon the proper meaning of the words, Three
points I propose to pass through: the Act, who exalts himself: exercised on
a Double object, above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: that is,
above all Kings and Emperors.

The Act, (...), who exalts hmselfe; is an incomparable ambition: which is
incomparably, in the Pope, and Papacy. For the Pope was first a Bishop, over
many Priests, in one City. Secondly, a Metropolitan over many Bishops, in one
Province. Thirdly, the Pope was a Patriarch over many Metropolitans, in one
Diocese: (for amongst the Romans, there were seven Provinces in one Diocese.)
Fourthly, he usurped the title of Oecumenicus, to be the universal Bishop of
the whole world. Fifthly, he is styled Laynez Iesui^^ Trent. Hist. lib. 7. 610.
Trent Hist. li. 7. page 655.
solus Pastor, the only shepherd, or Bishop. And finally, that Pius Pope, the
fourth of that name, in the year 1563, signified to the Council of Trent, by
his Legates, that he was the Master of all Christendom. Pretty steps of
ambitious incroaching: and yet here is not the height of his ambition. The
Tower of Babel must touch the Heavens: the Pope does exalt himself yet farther.

To which purpose Marta, does expound, Tortura Torti page 177.
that saying of the Psalmist very laudably, Psalm. 8. 6, and 7. Thou have put
under his feet, oves and boves: that is, under the feet of the Pope,
Christianos, and Saracenos: all Christians and Saracens, says that Gloss of
Orleance. For, For every Extrav. de Major and Obedient. tit. ^.
humane Creature, to be subject to the Pope, omnino sit de necessitate salutis,
it is necessary to their salvation, says the popish extravagant. In the year
1585. in the yeeld-Hall of St. Domingo in India, our English observed the
Spanish Cambden ^nno 1585.
Arms: under which was planted a Globe or Map of the whole world, and on it
the picture of an Horse Prauncing and spreading his forefeet beyond the verge
of the Globe, or compass of the world, with this inscription, Non sufficit
Orbis, i. the world is too little for me.

An exact emblem of the Popes insatiable ambition, non sufficit orbis, all the
world is too Antonin sumnia 1. Did. 22. cap. 5.
little for him; whereof his own Antoninus gives an ample testimony,
expounding the following verses of the forenamed Psalm, Thou Psalm 8. 7, and 8.
have put under the Popes feet, the beasts of the field, that is, all men: the
Fowls of the Air, that is, the Angels: and the Fishes of the Sea, that is,
a^imas in Purgatorio, the Souls in Purgatory. So Heaven, Earth, and Hell:
Men, Angels, and the Spirits, must all be subject to his Holiness, if holy
Antonine may be believed. But durst ever man imagine, that any man durst
usurp upon Christ's own Peculiar, Matthew. 28. Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 7.
c. 6.
18. Omnis potestas, all Power is given me in Heaven, and in Earth? Yet this
was the saying of Sixtus Quartus, in the solemnity of his sacred Ceremonies.

Add, that their whole endeavor is only to support this Papal Omnipotence:
and that the other points of controversy concerning religion, are but only
Pretenses. To that purpose, Trent. Hist. li. 1. page 94.
consider that anno 1541. at the Diet of Ratisbon, Paul 3, sent his Legate
Jasper Cardinal Contarine, with all manner of power, to agree with the
Protestants, provided that they did not deny the Principles, that is, the
Primacy of the Apostolic See, etc. Pius 4, did offer the Cambd. Annal. anno 1
560. p. 59
same to England, by Parpalias Abbot of St. Saviors. And Pope Paul 4, did
tender unto Tort. Torti page 142.
Queen Elizabeth leave and liberty to use all the points of Religion, as we
then did, and now do enjoy them, Modo in Primatum ipsius, consentire vellet^^
only, if she would give place to his Primacy. Consonant to which, is Trent.
Hist. lib. 2. page 164.
that Caveat which Paul 3, gave to his Legates at the Council of Trent, that
they should by no means permit the Popes authority to be disputed of. Thus the
maine drift of the Pope is, to advance the Papacy. I may therefore advance him
to one Title more; He is (...) one that advances himself, more than all the
world beside.

The Act, we find apparent; that the Pope does exalt himself. The object
follows to be inquired after: over whom does he exalt himself? Over all,
but first, over Kings: in the phrase of my Text, above all that is called God.
Concerning which consider we, their Positions, and their Practice.

Their Positions, I think none can deliver more truly, than their most learned
Cardinal Bellarmine. Who does plainly profess, both what authority the Pope
does take from Princes: and also what authority he does exercise upon Princes.
Which is exaltation enough above Kings, and all that is worshipped. We say
Bell. de Pont. Romans lib 2. c. 26.
(says Bellarmine) that the Pope cannot be judged; by any Prince or Prelate on
the earth ^ neque ab omnibus simul in concilio congregatis, no not by all the
Princes, and Prelates in the world, though in a Council. Asserimus, it is our
position (says Bell. lib. 5. cap. 6. initio.
he again) that although the Pope has no mere temporal power, yet in ordine
ad bonum spirituale, for a spiritual purpose, he has Power disponendi de
temporalibus omnium Christianoru^, to dispose of the temporalls of all
Christian persons. And that we may not mistake him: let Bellarmine express
his own meaning: Potest mutare regna, and uni auferre, ac alteri confer: the
Pope (says he) has power to dispose Bell. de Pont. To. lib 5. cap. 6. versi^a
sinem.
of Kingdoms, to give them to some, and to take them away from others. Or let
a Pope confirm the position of their Cardinal. Nos Dominus inter Principes,
imo supra Principes sedere voluit, and judicare de Principibus, (says Pope
Innocent Innocent 3, lib. 2. ep^st. 188
3,) that is, It is Gods will that the Popes should sit among Princes, yea
above Princes, and to be Trent. Hist. lib. 4. 314. Trent. Hist. lib. 5. 395.
Judges of Princes. Anno 1551, Julius 3, told the Ambassador of Henry 2, if
the King took Parma from him, that he would take France from the King. Paul 4,
at his Table publicly said, He would not have any Prince for his Companion,
but all subject under his feet; So he said striking his foot against the
ground. Which is as nobly seconded by Becanus, in his Treatise Novus Homo page
133.
termed Anglicana Controversia: the Pope (says he) is universal Shepherd of
the Church; according Ioh. 21. 16.
to the Scripture, Pasce ^ves, feed my sheep. Per Canes intelligantur Reges,
and the Kings are the Dogs of that Shepherd. Therefore so long as those
Dogs (or Kings) are watchful, Pastori ad ma^^me esse debent, they must wait
upon the (Pope or) Shepherd. But if they become idle, the Shepherd. But if
they become idle, the Shepherd may turn the^ away, ab officio submovendi
sunt. Again, which is less material, but more authentical) a Taxa Ca^era
Apostolicae part. 2. cap. 9.
Queen may not adopt a child, nor a King exact contributions from his Clergy,
without a License from the great Clearke of Rome: and their Synod of Trent
1563, returned this answer to Trent. Hist. lib. 8.
the French Ambassadors, saying, that Kings are given by God; that his was
Heretical, and condemned by a Pope, Bonifacius 8, in this Extravagant, unam
sanctam: If he did not distinguish that they were from God, but by the
mediation of his Vicar.

Finally, Carerius concludes all these premises, Carer. de Potest. Romans Pont.
lib. 1. cap. 3.
with an egregious Comment upon Jeremy, 1. 10. Behold I have set thee over
Nations, etc. This (says he) does the Prophet speak, in the person of Christ,
unto the Bishop of Rome, that if Kings be wicked he may punish, and correct
them. Of whom I may truly say, Plus quam regnare videtur, cui it a liceat
censuram agere regnantium. Monarchomach. part. 1. Tit. 2. page 89.
Certainly, the Pope is more than a Prince, who takes upon him so to censure
Princes. The text does frame him a fit title: it is the Pope, who does exalt
himself, above all that is called God.

All which premises, are come to a complement, The Quarrels of Paul 5, lib. 4.
page 206.
and complete conclusion in our age. Anno 1606. in the contentions betwixt Pope
Paul 5, and the State of Venice, the current doctrine, and consent of the
Roman writers concurred in this; That the Temporal power of Princes, is
subordinate to the power Ecclesiastical, and subject to it. Consequently, that
the Pope has authority, to deprive Princes of their estates, for their faults,
and errors: which they commit in their government: Yea though they have not
committed any fault, when the Pope shall judge it fit for the good of the
Church. This is related and avouched by a Venetian, who was no Protestant; but
lived and dyed in the outward communion with the Church of Rome.

Their Practice does make good these Positions. Hist. Albing. lib. 1. cap. 3.
About 1209, the Legate under Pope Innocent 3, commanded Remond, the Earl of
Toulouze, to perform a penance (for the Murder of Friar Peter de Chateancuf,
whom he neither killed, nor caused to be killed) in form following. He
commanded the same Earl to strippe himself, stark naked, (only having
linen breeches) without the Church of St. Giles. Then he put a stole about his
neck; by which he led him nine times about the grave of the said Friar.
Afterward he scourged him, in the presence of many Earls, Barons, and
Prelates. And finally, having forced him to ab^ure the Rel^g^on of the
Albingenses, he constrained the miserable man, to go Captain over the
Soldiers of the Cross, against those poor persecured Protestants in Beziers.

The usage of a more noble man than this, Dr. Beard de Antich. page 76.
was yet more ignoble, Francis Dandalus Duke of Venice, was chained like a
Dog, and did eat meat with the Dogs under the Popes Table.

Anno 1563 Pius 4, cited Ioane Queen of Hist. Trent. lib. 8
Navarre, to appear within six months, to show reason why he should not be
deprived of all her dignities and dominions: and the marriage between Anthony
of Vandosme, and her made void, and their issue illegitimate. John Tortura
Torti page 271.
King of Navarre was deposed by Julius 2, Henry 3, King of France, was slain
by a Popish Assassinate: and Pope Sixtus 5, pronounced a panegyrike in the
praise of that bloody Monk who was the murderer.

Pope Zachary deposed Childericus, commanding Bell. de Pont. To. lib. 3. cap.
16.
that Pipin should be crowned King of France, in his stead. Besides these
particular precedents of personal Kings: in general for successive Princes;
The Bishops of Rome have driven out of Rome and Italy three Kings. First the
Grecian Emperors, secondly the French, and thirdly the Germans. Not
altogether unsuitable to that Prophecy of Antichrist, either in the Type, or in
the Antitype. Behold before the little horn, were three of the former horns
plucked up by the roots, Dan. 7. 8.

To finish these precedents, with our own Malmes. in Gest. Reg. lib. 2.
Nation: which cannot but touch the heart of every true Englishman. 1031
Canutus went to Rome himself with an humble supplication to the Pope for some
relaxation of the insupportable impositions, he had burdned this Realm withal.
Under Henry 1, Anselme Archbishop Matthew. Paris. Hen. 1.
of Canterbury, exhibited the like petition to his Holiness, in the behalf of
our oppressed Countrymen. Richard 1, was sent of the Popes errand into the holy
land, and received much relief from his Holmesse, when he was captivated,
Tortura Torti page 269.
returning from that expedition. Henry 2, was wh^pped by the Popes injunction.
In Antiqu. Brit. page 154.
the reign of King John, the Monks at the command of Innocent 3, elected
Steven Lanction Archbishop of Canterbury: contrary to their faith and
sidelity, which they both owed, and (more) had sworn to their Sovereign. Upon
some opposition which the King made against this Popish Tyranny, the whole
realm Matthew. Paris. page 117.
was interdicted from the Sacrament. In which time, the dead were buried more
Canum, says Matthew Paris, like dogs, in Ditches and Highwayes, without any
Christian solemnity. So that in conclusion, the poor King being over-tired
with the over-tyrannising of the Antiquit. Brit. page 158.
proud Pope, he was compelled to stoop to the basest submission, that ever the
Sun saw in our Hand, before or since. He delivered up his Crown to
Pandulphus, the Popes Legate, and received it from him again: as a Romish
Legacy, or largis of liberality. Hereupon Matthew. Paris. page 508.
Gregory 9. exacted the fifth part of the goods of the Clergy, suspended the
Bishops till they had collated their best benefices and prime Prebends on
Strangers and Boys. Innocentius the 4, commanded the Clergy to find for his
use five, and some fifteen men a piece: and if any Clearke did dye Intestate,
all his goods should fall to the Pope. So that the whole Land groaned under the
burden of Egyptian bondage, says our Historian; and it became a common Matthew.
Paris. page 358.
subscription of all the Nobles in their letters to the Prelates: Talt
Episcopo, and tali Capitulo, universitas little qui volunt mori, quam a Romany
confundi, salutem: that is, These be delivered to such a Bishop, or to such a
Chapter, from us, who with one consent conclude, that we had better dye, than
be ruined by Rome or the Romish Taskemasters. On these grounds, Antichrist
stood on Tiptoe. Innocentius Matthew. Paris. page 844.
4, insulting in that insolent phrase over our dejected King Henry the third,
saying: Nonne Rex Angliae, noster est vasallus? and ut plus dicam Manciptum?
qui eum possum nutu nostro incarcerare, and ignominiae mancipare? Is not (quoth
he) the King of England my Vassal? nay more, is he not my slave? Have not I
power with my beck to disgrace him, or to imprison him? Certainly, if our King
was a slave to the Pope, then was our Kingdom inthralled in an untolerable,
unutterable popish slavery. In the year Walsing. Rich. 2. page 344. Antiqui.
Brita. in (...) page 273 p. 278.
1391, Richard 2, was much perplexed, that so many Benesiced English were
constrained to reside at Rome. Anno 1399, the Clergy petitioned to King Henry
4, to assist them against the Tyrannical usurpations of the Pope. 1419, and
1420, Pope Martine 5, in the time of King Henry 5, in the space of two years,
usurped, and collated Thirteen Bishoprics, within the province of Canterbury
alone; maugre many the Edicts of the King, and Statutes of the Kingdom, and
frequent threatenings of both Peers, and People against his intrusions. About
the year 1497, Pope Alexander Antiquit. Brit. page 300.
6, exacted a contribution from every Curate through England in general. And
in particular, he put such a project upon Thomas Franc. Hereford de Presul.
Angl.
Merchir, as can seldom be paralleld out of any Histories. This Pope
translated this man, being Bishop of Carlisle in England, unto the Bishopric of
Samoes in Graecia, being merely Titular, a trim trick to beggar a poor
Clearke. Yet those things did the Clergy suffer, even in the latter times of
Henry the seventh: when the Popes pomp, was drawing to a periode. Paul 3, in
the reign of Henry 8, would Trent. Hist. lib 3. page 275.
have given the Kingdom of England unto Charles 5. But that prudent Prince
perceived that these were sour Grapes; and therefore he did inhibite his
appetite from gaping after them. And the same Pope commanded the subjects of
the same King to throw him out of his Kingdom by force of arms. The purport
of which impious Bull, ran in this transcendent Mr. Higgo^^ Mist. Babylon 1.
97.
phrase; We being placed in the seat of Justice, according to the prediction of
the Prophet Ier. 1. 10. saying; Behold, I have set thee over Nations, and over
the Kingdoms, to pluck up, and root out, and to destroy, and to throw down.
Neither could his own Proselyte wave his Trent. Hist. lib. 5. page 392.
imperious usurpation: but Pope Paul 4, inhibited Phillip and Mary from using
the Title of Ireland, affirming instantly, that to give the Name of a King,
belonged unto him only.

But of all, the ^ull of Pope Pius the fifth, does Cambd. Annal. Anno 1570.
concern us most, because it did dishonor her, whom we are bound to honor
most. Thus did he advance himself above our blessed Queen Elizabeth. Ex
plenitudine potestatis, quam regnans in excelsis Pontifici tradidit, quem unum
supra omnes gentes constituit: qui evellat, destruat, dissipet, disperdat, etc.
Elizabetham privamus jure regni -- and subditos omnes, ab omni juramento
fidelitatis absolvimus. That is, By that fullness of power, which he that
reigns above, has given to the Pope, whom alone, he has set over all
Nations and Kingdoms, to root out, and pull down, to destroy, and throw
down, etc. We depose Elizabeth from all right in her Kingdom. -- And we
absolve all her subjects from all manner of oaths of Allegiance, which they
have sworn unto her. This is the testimony of Master Cambden, our learned
Countryman, and Chronologer.

Without offense therefore, I think that Monarchomachia tit. 5. p. 248
I may conclude, and censure these popish exaltations, in the very words of a
most censorious Papist. I will change but one word: I will only use Rome for
Geneva. But these Minions of Rome, bring Religion to plead for the defense of
their union: and that they endeavored only to punish Ochosias for consulting
with the Idol of Accharon, and to root out superstition. Here indeed is the
voice of Jacob, but the roughness of Esau: words of piety, but the actions of
Babel. Can you show as good a warrant, as Elias had? did God call you, did God
authorize you, to deprive your Princes? Per me Reges regnant, was Gods
proposition: and Saint Peter, 1 Epist. cap. 2, verse. 13. Be subject to every
humane creature for God, whether to a King, as excelling, or to Rulers. His
counsel, and yours vary much, for he wills them to fear God, and honor the
King: but you d^rect your auditors to degrade, and depose Kings. S. Paul, Romans
13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for t^ere is no power
but of God: and he who resists that power, resists Gods ordinance, and
purchases damnation: and v. 5. not of necessity, but for conscience sake. But
this matter needs no disputat^on: Grace and piety can best decide it. Thus
return I his own words: and I hope, far more justly, than ever he did apply
the^. Thus also, have we heard (and felt too) satis superque, enough and
enough of the Popish positions, and of the Popes practice, in deposing of
Kings, and disposing of Kingdoms.

Thus has the Pope usurped upon many Kings. Now the King of Heaven bless our
King from the like Pop^sh usurpations. Neither are the Emperors exempted from
his Papal Power: but the Pope does exalt himself above them also. Concerning
whom let us again consider, the Popish Positions and Practice. Pope Paul 4,
anno 1556, said, that he had called a Council at Rome, and named it the Trent
Hist. li 5. page 400.
Laterane: that he had given commission, to signify it to the Emperor and
French King, in courtesy, but not to have their counsel, or consent: because
his will was, they should obey. Pius the fourth 1563, wrote to the Emperor
Trent Hist. lib. 7. 684.
Ferdinand, that he had called a Council, with participation of him, not to
expect his consent, but as a mere executour of his will. Innocent 3, in the
Decretall which begins Solitae, puts as great a difference (which is also
confirmed by Carerius) betwixt the Pope and the Carerius de Potest. Pontif.
lib. 2. cap. 12.
Emperor: as there is between the Sun and the Moon: which according to the
rules of Astronomy is 6539 times less than the Moul^ns Accom. page 116.
Sun. But by this arrogant title, which the Pope does arrogate, that he is
the Sun, he gives a little light to discern Antichrist. Antichrist shall
be called Titan, says Irenaeus, that is, the Sun. But the Pope calls
himself the Sun, that is, Titan: Therefore from his own assumption, to
conclude him to be Antichrist, may pass at the least for a probable
conjecture.

Besides these, we may collect a cloud of witnesses, which does pour down
confirmations to this conclusion. Imperatoria majestas, O^i^ hovius in Chymer
fell. 97.
tanto est inferior Papae, quanto creatura Deo: look how much the creature does
differ from the Creator, our God: so much does the Emperor differ from the
Pope, their God. A pretty difference. Imperator ad motum summi Pontificis,
Capistranus f^l. 70.
and ejus nutu, tanquam ejus Minister, movebit inferiora corpora: that is, The
Emperor moves others, at the motion of the Pope (as the Orbs do under the
first Sphere,) a mere servant to his Holiness. The Emperor Aug. de Ancona
quaest 35. 1. Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22 cap. 5. sect. 13. Bell. de Trans. Imp.
lib. 3. and De Pontif. Romans lib. 5. c. 8. Carerius de Potest. Pap. lib. 2. cap.
14.
is the Servant of the Pope. The Pope does make the Electors of the Emperor:
therefore the Election of the Emperor depends on the Pope. All which
Carerius does confirm by a comely distinction: Potestas triplex est: scil:
Immediata, derivitiva, and in Ministerium data. A threefold power there is,
quoth he, the first immediate, which is found in the Pope alone, who has
universal jurisdiction over all things, as well spiritual as corporal: the
second derivative, in the Bishops and Prelates: and the third ministerial, in
the Emperor, and other secular Princes, who have their power, but mediante
Papa, as Feudaries to the Pope. To him therefore do they swear an oath of
Allegiance. And Antonine says therefore, that the Pope Antonin. part. 3. tit.
22. c. 5. sect. 16
does give Administrationem Imperatori, Power to the Emperor.

This Exaltation is satis pro imperio, imperious enough, for a Pope thus to be
exalted above the Emperor: which they say is de jure: but I am sure it is so
de facto. For their practice does not give the lie to their positions, but
makes good every point thereof: as is apparent by these particulars.

Henry 4 Emperor, was dug out of his Tortura T^rti page 261.
grave by Gregory the seventh, Pope of Rome. Frederick the first did kiss the
feet of Alexander the third. Henry the sixth was crowned by the feet of Pope
Coelestine. Philip was made away by the plots of Innocent the third. And
Gregory the seventh caused Henry the Emperor, with his wife and children to
attend three days together, bare-headed, and barefooted. And that none may
cavil at the Chronicles, let us entreat Bellarmine himself to be our Bell.
de Pont. Romans lib 3. ca. 16
Historian. Gregory (says he) the second, excommunicated Leo the Greek
Emperor, inhibited the Italians from paying him tribute, and by little and
little got from him the government of Italy, then called the Exarchate of
Ravenna. Gregory the seventh deposed Henry the fourth. There is extant (quoth
he) an Epistle of Freder^^^^ the second, wherein he averreth that the
^ingdomes of Italy, Germany, and Sicily, were constrained to serve the Pope of
Rome. Moreover it is manifest, Otho the fourth, by Innocent the third, and
Frederick the second, by Innocent the fourth, Depositos fuisse, and reapse
imperia amisisse: to have been deposed, and absolutely deprived of their Empire.

To make all sure: the Emperor does take Gratian. Distinct. 63. Can. 30 and
3^. Pla. in. in Greg. 7 Sacrar. Cerem. l^b. 1. Sect. 5. cap 2. Cornel. Agrip.
in Hist. Caroli 5. Matthew. Paris. page 227.
an oath of Fealty to the Pope. The forms whereof though they be different, yet
they concur in this: that the Emperors must swear to be subject to the Pope.
Thus was it taken by Lewis (the son of Charles the great) to Paschal the
first: by Otho the first, to John the twelfth: by Henry the fourth, to Gregory
the seventh: by Frederick the third, to Nicholas the fifth: by Charles the
fifth, to Clement the seventh: and finally, by our King John to Pope Innocent.

Add hereunto, that the Emperor does Sacre^ Cerem. lib. 1. fol. 26, 35, 54,
56, 113, 120, 163, etc.
perforce serve le offices to the Pope. He must bear up his Train when the
Pope does walk: Hold his Stirrup, when he does ride: he must support his
Chair with his shoulder, when he is carried: pour water on his hands, when
he does wash: and when he does eat, the Emperor must bring in the first
dish, and present the first cup to his Holiness: his Highness we may term
it, for he does Exalt himself above the Emperors in an high measure. And as
the Pope does testify his exaltation historically to our ^ares: so does he
represent it also emblematically to our eyes. The Pope has a Triple Diadem,
Dr. Sheldon Mot 4. page 51.
which some say does signify that the Roman Emperor does receive three Crowns
from him: one of Iron, at Aquisgrave: another of Silver, at Millane: and the
third of Gold, at Rome. I may censure this action of the Pope, in the phrase of
a servant of the Pope: Too many crowns Monarchomach. part. 1. Tit. 5.
so purchased, to expect any in Heaven. Innocent the second caused his own,
and the Emperors Picture to be set up in the Laterane Palace, himself sitting
in his Pontifical Throne, and the Emperor kneeling before him, and holding up
his hands: with this inscription:

Rex venit ante fores, jurans prius Vrbis honores

Post, homo sit Papae, sumit quo dante Coronam. That is, When the King of the
Romans is elected, he attends on the Pope: who first administering him an
Oath to become his man, or servant, does afterward give him the Imperial
Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 4. fol. 48. Trent Hist. lib. 8.
Crown. But his prime insolence is without peradventure that oath of
Allegiance. Hence I conceive it came to pass, anno 1563 that Ferdinand the
King of the Romans demanded the words of the Oath, which when he had perused,
he refused, saying: that Thereby he should confess himself to be the Vassal
of the Pope.

This is the universal insolence of the Pope:
to bring under both Kings and Emperors.
That is, to exalt himself above all:
that is called God, or that is worshipped.
I will deliver plainly what answer the Papists shape, to extenuate this
shameless usurpation of the Pope over Kings and Emperors: three ways, three
sorts of Papists assay to build up this Palace of Babel. Some by negation, some
by dissimulation, and the third sort by qualification.

For the first: All Papists do concur that the Pope has supreme power over
the sovereign Majesty of Kings and Emperors. But concerning the nature of
that power, they are divided into three several opinions. The first is of
Carerius, and other popish parasites, who affirm Alex. C^rerius de Potest. Romans
that the Pope has power absolute over the whole world, both in things
Ecclesiastical and Civil. Pont. lib. 2. c 9. Bellarm. de ^^rt. Romans lib. 5.
cap. 6.
The second is of Bellarmine and his followers: who maintain that though the
Pope has not mere Temporal power over Kings directly, yet he has supreme
authority to dispose of the Temporalities of all Kingdoms, by an indirect
prerogative, tending (in ordine ad spiritualia) to the advancement of the
spiritual good. The last is of Barclaius, and the moderate Papists: Barclaius
lib. cap 3.
that the Pope has Spiritual power to excommunicate Kings, but no temporal
authority to meddle with their Persons, Subjects, or Dominions. To all these
assertions, let me propose these inevitable consequents. So many as defend the
first opinion, declare themselves to be ( ipso facto) actual Traitors
against the Crown of those Princes under whom they live. The supporters of the
second, are habitual Traitors, being always disposed to execute the sentence
of deposition, if the Pope please to command it. They have no Obex, but dum
desunt vires: no hindrance, but the want of Ability and Opportunity. And the
third, howsoever indeed it is not perpitious to the Soul of the Estate, to
take away the life of the King: yet is it dangerous to the estate of the Soul,
to invest a man with a power, which is not compatible to any pure creature;
with a faculty of Occumenicall Excommunication. I know not how to term it,
otherwise than a paradox dangerous, and in some sort damnable also. But in
truth, this opinion thus blanched, is not absolutely popish; nor they absolute
Papists who do maintain it. I suppose that there are many moderate Papists,
even in our own Land, who are of this last opinion: that the Pope has no
temporal power over Kings. But what is the opinion of the Romish Church? did
not the Jesuits persecute Blackwell and his partakers, because they would not
be Iesuited in this point? and was not learned Withrington disgraced, if not
excommunicated by the Pope, for confuting that damnable opinion of Suarez, That
the Pope can command Kings to be killed, etc? And finally, are not they
themselves esteemed Schisinatickes for this opinion? as appears by Barclaius,
confuted by Bellarmine, for avouching this assertion.

Others dissemble this usurpation: by the title of Servus servorum. Such an
apology is that which Lessius does frame. The Popes (says Lessius de Ant. Them.
7.
he) do call non se solum servos Dei, themselves not only the servants of
God: sed etiam servos servorum Dei: but moreover, the servants of those that
are the servants of God. I wonder (says he) what secular Prince did ever use
such an humble title, in his Letters and Addresses? I answer: Non minuit
f^stum, sed auget hypocrisin. This humble title does not suppress their pride,
but rather express their hypocrisy. For it follows in the very next lines:
No Catholic is so gross, as to think that the Pope is to be adored, pro Deo
proprie dicto, as God himself: although by some he be termed Deus in terris,
their God on earth, Quia in terris est supremus: because he is the highest of
all the earth. We see then, the same Jesuit avoucheth the Pope to be the
Sovereign of the whole World; notwithstanding the pretext of his humble Title,
that he is called the Servant of the servants of God. They make it yet more
clear by their own distinction. The Pope (says Baldus cited by our M Higgons
mist. Babylon Sermon. 1.
The Pope (says Baldus cited by our learned Convert, and truly converted
Countryman) He is Dominus Dominorum quoad potestatem, the Lord of Lords in
regard of his Power: though Servus servorum, quoad humilitatem; he is called
the Servant of Servants, in regard of his meekness. Finally, their own
Archbishop of Granada, assistant in the Synod of Trent, did Trent Hist. lib. 6.
confess, that it was an absolute Dominion, to make use of the quality of a
servant, and of a Lord also.

To conclude: others mince the matter, by Suarez Apol. lib. 5. c. 17. nu. 12
terms of Qualification. Est ^us suum a Deo da tum, propter bonum Ecclesiae,
says Suarez: this superiority and authority is in the Pope for the advancement
of the Church. Bellarmine Bell. Apolog. cap. 9.
says, Qua Vicarius Dei: that the Pope requires no such honor for himself,
but only as he is the Vicar of Christ. We cannot but remember the case of
Frederick Barbarossa: when his neck was under the foot of Pope Alexander the
third; the Emperor said to him, Non tibi, sed Petro: that is, I do this
submission, not to thee, but to Peter. But the Pope answered the Emperor, Et
mihi, and Petro: that is, Now thou shall be subject to Peter, and to me also.
So will the Pope say to any Prince, when he has got his neck under his foot;
yea but his head under his girdle. Et propter bonum Ecclesiae, and propter
honorem Pontificis: that is, he shall be a Vassal, not only to the Vicar of
Christ, which is the Pope of Rome: but also to the Pope of Rome, though he were
No Vicar of Christ.

But to make all manifest, in their holy book Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 1.
of Ceremonies, dedicated by a Romish Archbishop to a Pope of Rome, to Leo the
tenth: The phrase of the Cardinals Election runs thus: Ego investio te
Papatu, ut praesis Vrbi and Orbi: that is, I choose thee to be Pope: who must
govern this City, and the whole World. And that we should not suppose this
superiority to be claimed Sacrar. Cer. lib. 1. sect. 2.
in things Ecclesiastical only: it follows in the foresaid book, that when
the Pope does mount his horse, the Emperor must hold his stirrup, and a King
his bridle.

And if any should except, that this is but a Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 7.
c. 6.
ceremony, and therefore no substantial argument: I instance again: Pope
Sixtus Quartus did solemnly pronounce this sentence of absolute and successive
sovereignty: Figurat hic Gladius Pontificialis, potestatem summam Temporalem, a
Christo Pontifici collatam: juxta Psalmum 72. 8. Dominabitur a Mari, etc. that
is, This Pontifical Sword does signify the supreme Temporal power which
Christ has conferred on the Pope: according to that saying, Psalm. 72. 8. His
Dominion shall be from one sea to the other: and from the flood unto the worlds
end. What tongue can so exalt it self against the Truth, as to say, The Pope
does not exalt himself above Kings and Emperors: that is, Above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped?

It is a popi^h brag, that they have made many Proselytes: and that many more
Protestants are wavering. Would God these few words might touch the ears and
hearts of every honest Papist. This is plain: The Pope does exalt himself
above all Kings and Emperors. Now it is avouched by a learned Convert, Dr
Sheldon Motive 4.
(who does know them better by their living, than we can by their writings)
that some Papists make it an article of their Faith, that the Pope has power
to depose Kings. I may add, the most Papists: for I am sure this is the drift
of Bellarmine, Suarez, and of the most, and most learned of their Writers.

On this ground I build this Dilemma: which no evasion (I think) can escape:
Therefore, Every Papist is either an Heretic, or a Traitor. If he believe
that the Pope has power to depose Princes: then is he a true Papist, but a
Traitor to his King. If he believe it not: then is he a true Subject, but an
Heretic to his Church.

Now what a wretched Religion is this, which does so inthrall a poor soul:
that either thy Church shall hate thee as an Heretic, or thy King fear thee
as a Traitor? And can thou yet follow, nay favor that profession, whose
very Religion is Rebellion? Now whatsoever thou art, I entirely beseech thee,
by thy obedience to thy King, by thy honor to thy God, and by thy compassion
on thine own soul: consider those things which I object, seriously, and
impartially. Conclude as God shall incline thee. Be it so, as they boast; that
we are weak, and they wise: yet there is a God in heaven, who can make his
power strong in our weakness. 2 Cor 12. 9. 1 Cor. 1. 19.
There is a God in heaven, who can confound the wisdom of the wise. Now! That
God, even that God exalt his Truth above that adversary, who does exalt
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.

SERMON IX.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. So that he as God, sits in the Temple of God.
Antichrist shall not sit corporally in the Temple. The Pope usurpeth the same
power with Christ. The same titles. That he is above Councills. Can make a
Creed. The Pope is not; the King is Head of the Church. The Pope countermands
all the Commandments.

IN this fourth verse, Antichrist is expressed by three properties: First, that
He exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.
Secondly, So that he as God, sits in the Temple of God. This second does
succeed, and exceed the former. There, Antichrist did exalt himself above
Kings and Emperors: here, above all Christians. There, over the Common wealth:
here, over the Church. There, in things Temporal: here, in things Spiritual.
There, he does usurp upon the Estates and persons of Kings and Princes: here,
he does dominiere over the Consciences of Princes, and Subjects; of Lay and
Clergy; of Rich and Poor; of All. The Text does say, He does sit as God, in
the Temple of God.

The Papists expound this sentence in this manner: He as God sits in the
Temple of God: that is, Antichrist in an horrible insolence, shall sit in the
Temple; and command the same adoration to be given to himself, which is given
to God. To take it literally, is to err grossly, and wittingly: every word
does gainsay it.

First, in the Temple: Baronius, and the best of the Romists avouch, that the
Temple cannot possibly be built again: Antichrist therefore cannot possibly
sit in the Temple.

Secondly, he shall sit: the Papists understand this phrase; as if a Protestant
should demand, how long has Gregory the fifteenth sat in the Church of Rome?
If he should mean a local sitting, in a material Church; they would hiss at
such an absurd question. The sitting then of Antichrist, in their own formal
phrase, cannot be local or corporal.

Thirdly, He sits as God: now God has no bodily position, unless their
pens shall second their pictures, and incline to the Anthropomorphites. God
has no body: therefore, to sit as God, can be no bodily sitting. To say
therefore, that Antichrist shall sit bodily in a Temple, to be worshipped
religiously: is a sense implying nothing but Absurdity, Impossibility, and
Blasphemy.

The Protestants exposition remains to be propounded: which I suppose to be
uncontrollable.

First, in the Temple: I will expound this phrase by that of Occumenius upon
this place: (...): that is, by the name of the Temple in this text, we must not
understand the Temple of Jerusalem, but the Churches of God.

Secondly, he sits: that is, he rules, or reigns: in which sense God
himself is said to sit in his throne, Psalm. 9. 4. and their Aquine on this
place renders our interpretation: Sedeat, id est, principetur and dominetur:
He sits, that is, (says he) he governs and domimereth. Nay, as if he
would digito demonstraner, ac dicier hic est: as if the Pope would point at his
own person, to be prophesied of in this place, he does appropriate this
phrase, to his own style: whereas Kings are said to reign, and not to sit;
the Popes are said to sit, and not to reign: as if they would verify this
prophecy to the letter.

Thirdly, He shall sit as God; to wit, as God incarnated: that is, as Christ.
Tanquam Deus, scilicet, incarnatus, i. tanquam Christus. His name implies as
much: the man of sin being called Antichristus, non Antitheus: that is,
Antichrist, and not an Anti-God. The true sense is this: The man of sin does
sit in the Temple of God, as God: that is, Antichrist does rule the Church of
Christ: usurping the very power of Christ.

I frame this Syllogism, as the foundation of my following discourse.

Whosoever does rule the Church of Christ, pretending the same power with
Christ; has this property of Antichrist: or rather is the very Antichrist.

But the Pope does rule the Church of Christ, pretending the same power with
Christ.

Ergo, the Pope has this property of Antichrist.

Or rather,

Therefore, The Pope is the very Antichrist. The proposition has been proved
by the premises. The proof of the minor now remains to be proposed. Which
also may seem to be superfluous, if that Sermon of Steven Archbishop of
Patras, which he made Council. Lateran. sub Leone 10. in Concione Stephani
Ar^b. Patracensis Sess. 10.
at the Council of Laterane be authentical. Where he preached publicly of
the Pope, and to the Pope: that the Pope had potestatem supra omnes potestates,
tam coeli, quam terrae: that is, Power, above all power, either in Heaven, or
in Earth. And therefore the same, if not superior to that of Christ. Or that
Treatise of Augustus Ambomitanus, in the 45 question whereof he delivers,
Idem esse Dominium Dei, ac Papae. Gods Dominion and the Popes is all one. As
the Jurisdiction of the Delegant and Delegat is one. Especially where the
delegation is plenary and total, as he presumes it is in the Pope. But to
proceed in our proofs, though we have their open confession: All the power of
Christ over the Church, is expressed in his Titles: by which he does approach
to him, yea incroach on him very palpably. Let that pass but for a formal
preface unto his more pompous style, which their Sacred Ceremonies Sacrar.
Cerem. lib 1. ^ect. 1. cap 3. fol. 10.
do solemnly invest him with. That the Pope is the Vicar of Jesus Christ, the
Successor of Saint Peter, the Pastor of the Lords Flock, the Keykeeper of
the Court of Heaven, and the Prince of all Christendom. But Bellarmine (lest
any of Bell. de Con. Auth. lib. 2. c. 17.
them should be defective, either to our plain proof, or to his plainer pride)
teaches directly, That all the Titles which the Scriptures give to Christ, are
by them given unto the Pope. His words are these: Quae in Scripturis tribuuntur
Christo (unde constat eum esse supra Ecclesiam) cadem omnia tribuuntur
Pontifici.

Furthermore, the Titles including the power, will make it appear yet more
particularly: The Pope does usurp the one, and therefore he does usurp the
other. Christ principally has three Titles. He is called Princeps Pastorum, 1
Pet. 5. 4. Our Chief Shepherd: Pontifex, Our High Priest, Heb. 3. 1. and
finally, Caput Ecclesiae, The Head of the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. And all these,
it is generally known that the Pope does ordinarily assume. Yea more than
these! Is Christ termed Princeps Pastorum, the Chief Shepherd? the Pope has
been styled Solus Pastor. Is Christ called Pontifex, the High Priest? Vah!
Parum est, the Pope is called Pontifex maximus, the Highest High Priest. Is
Christ called Caput Ecclesiae, the Head of the Church? the Pope has the same
Name: yea and more also. He is Caput fidei, the Head of our Faith (a strange
title) Tortura pa. 329.
says Bellarmine. Nay he is not only Caput, but Vertex capitis, the very Top
and Tip of the Head, says Schioppius that impostume of scurrilitie. Thus then
the Pope does arrogate the same Titles (with some addition also) which are
ascribed unto our Savior. Saint Paul does prove the Excellency of our Savior
to be far above the Nature of Angels, because he has received a more
excellent Name.

The Pope likewise does infer that he has the same Excellency and Power,
because he has the same Name with our Savior. Nay wherefore does he not
directly call himself Christ? as well as High Priest, Chief Shepherd, and
Head of the Church, which are equivalent thereunto? When Edward of England
intended War against Philip of France: he assumed his Prime Title, and
proclaimed himself King of France. So the Pope assuming the Principal Titles
of Christ, makes even a Proclamation against Christ: that He is (...), The
adversary, who as God, sits in the Temple of God: that is, rules in the
Church of Christ, pretending the same power with Christ.

But indeed, the whole power of Christ in ruling the Church, is comprised in
this one Title, The Head of the Church; the Pope therefore arrogating that one,
does usurp all. To clear the way by a brief digression; Two things they
reply to this point. First, they urge argumentum ad hominem, and prove the Pope
to be Suarez Apolog lib. 5. c. 17. nu. 5.
their Head, from our Tongues. The English protestants (say they) call the King
the Head of the Church: therefore the Romish Catholics may Monarchomachia part
2. tit. 3 page 323.
likewise call the Pope the Head of the Church. We reply, who gave our King
this Title? Even the Romish Bishops themselves, in the eight and twentieth
year of Henry the eight, Statute 1, which was afterward explained by the words
Supreme Governor, 1. Elizabethae. But the former Lib. M, S, Sacr. Syn* Guil.
War^h 11. Feb. 1530. page 115.
title, Head of the Church, did a Synod of Romish Bishops give to our King
Henry the 8, amongst whom also, was that grand Romanist, John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester. Yea and the same Fisher did persuade the said Bishops to consent
unto that Title: as Sanders does witness, Sanders de schism. page 77.
We also, remembering the sense, may retain the title without any scruple. So
Saul is termed the Head of the Tribes of Israel, 1 Samuel 15. 17. and the Husband
the Head of the Wife, Bin. tom. 3. 363.
Ephesians. 5. 23. Anno 813, in the Council of Mentz, their Preface did entitle
Charles the great Religionis Rector, the Ruler of their Religion: no less than
if they had called him The Head of their Church. Again, 847 the same Bin. Tom.
3. page 631.
Title was given to another Emperor, by another Council at Mentz: Lewis also
was called Rector Religionis.

An hundred years before both these, the Bin. Tom. 2. page 1183.
Council of Emerita, anno 705, acknowledged that King Reccesuinthus did regere
secularia, and Ecclesiastica, that is, govern them in things both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; the formal phrase of our Sovereign. I may therefore Bell.
Apolog. cap. 1.
invert this argument ad hom^nem, and say: the Papists cannot gainsay this
Title of our King, because they themselves did give it him; which he does yet
retain: but with two maine differences, from the Papal usurpation: both in
regard of the intent and extent thereof. First, he has it, and does use it,
only quoad externum regimen, to settle the Truth, Prohibit Error, reward or
punish Church Ministers. Not to define matters of Faith, much less to
administer Suarez Apolog. lib. 5. cap. 17. and lib. 6. prooemio. Champnaeus in
Mason. 573, 594 Masonus de min. Angli^ano lib. 4. cap. 2.
the holy Sacraments, as the Papists scandalously and shamelesly charged our
Princes withal. We answer, with our most learned Countryman (now with God) The
power of our Prince, is spiritual: Objective, because it is employed about a
spiritual matter, or things Ecclesiastical, scil. the establishing of
Religion in their dominions. But it is spiritual, not formaliter, formally:
because it is not exercised in things spiritual, modo spiritual: that is, in
a spiritual manner, as Preaching, Administering the Sacraments,
Excommunicating, etc. Nay we can wipe away this imputation, with Bellarmines
Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 1. c. 8.
own syllables. Respondemus, reges nostros esse Custodes non Interpretes legum
divinarum: that our Princes are Maintainers, not Explainers of Gods true
Religion. Whereof our late incomparable learned Liege Lord, printed a public
protestation; That he never did, nor Jacob. Rex A^o^g pro juram. Fidei.
ever would take upon him, to make any new article of faith: neither would he
presume to make himself the Judge of any Article. But that he would be a
Pattern of obedience, and submit himself to all the Articles of the faith,
with as much humility and modesty, as the meanest of his subjects. A profession
plain enough to stop the mouth even of Malice it self: but that some men's
Throats are open Sepulchers. And secondly our King is styled Caput Ecclesiae
Britannicae, The Head of the sole Church, which is within his Dominios. But the
Pope does term himself Caput Ecclesiae Occumenicae, the Head of the whole
Church of Christ. No less a difference, than is betwixt One little Island, and
the whole world or universe.

Next, Gladius Delphicus: Their common distinction, is, that the Pope is the
Head of the Church, Ministerial, not Principal. To display the weakness of
this Rome-coyned distinction: let us consider but thus much. That ever any
Monarch made One Viceroy (i. Ministerial head) over all his Provinces: I
believe it will exercise the best Antiquary to allege but one precedent.
Therefore, an Head Ministerial and Occumenicall are (...) terms incompatible.
Especially to arrogate the Prime title of his Lord (as the Head is of Christ)
such an arrogance, would be suspected, if not censured for some Traitorous
usurpation.

But to wave word-contentions, and to clear all cavills. If the Pope does
usurp the thing signified, by the Title: then can they not, but confess, that
he is The Head Imperial, not Ministerial. Now the Head (says Plato) is the
Emperor of the members. And all the power of any Head, Ministerial,
Spiritual, or Political, comes within the compass of these distributions.
It is either in direction or correction: directing either by Command or
Countermand: the command is either given, injunction: or obeyed, which is
subjection. But the Pope does exercise, exact, and atchieve equal injunction,
and subjection* equal commanding and countermanding power: equal power
directing or correcting with Christ himself. The Pope therefore as the Head,
as Christ, rules in the Church of Christ: That is, as God he sits in the
Temple of God, and him I take to be The Antichrist.

First, for Direction: the Pope is the grand Directour, indeed the very
Steere-man of the Church, commanding all Christians to sail by Sacrar. Cer.
lib. 1. sect. 8. cap. 6. fol. 94.
his Compass. Which may seem no mervaile because he does style his
Cardinals, Senatores Vrbis, the Counsel of the City, and Conjudices orbis,
(with him) the Judges of the world. And alluding to the Etymology ( Cardinales
from Bell. de Pont. Romans 4. ^. 56. Ioh. de Turrier lib. 2. ^. 109. and. 110.
Cardines) he terms them persons, super quos militantis ecclesiae ostium,
volvendum and revolvendum, upon whom the whole Church must be moved. Now,
Christ is the only un-erring Teacher: and that the Pope cannot Err, is a
common popish assertion. Pontisicis verba, cum e Cathedra docendo desinit: the
words of the Pope when he does desine any thing, and teach it out of the
Chair: that desinition is of equal certainty, with the doctrine of Christ
himself says Suarez. Yea his Translations in Latin are preferred Suarez
Apolog. lib. 1. c. 22. 1. essi. de Antich. Demonst. 15. Innocent 4. i^ cap.
Sup^^o de Big. nu* 2. Aug. de (...) quaest. 67. art. 2. Nicholaus Did. 19. Si
Romanor^^ Antonin. Sum. part. 3 ca 22. Cupers 124. nu. 9. Ioh de Turrier. lib.
2. cap. 101. Cupers page 42. nu. 15. Is^d^r. Moscon page 27. Ioh. Cephal. lib.
1 Cons 97. nu. 10. Aventin. l^b. 7. page 547.
before Christ's own Original, before the very Scripture in Greek and Hebrew:
avouched by Lessius. It is his prerogative, non solum interpretari, sed etiam
condere, not only to interpret, but also to make Scriptures. And that the
Scriptures are to be received by virtue of the Papal Decrees. Incredible
popish blasphemies, did not the Pope and Popish Doctors publish and print them.

Hence they conclude, that he has Plenitudinem potestatis, and scientiae, the
fullness of knowledge. That he has judicium coeleste, infallibile, and
indefectibile: an Indefective, infallible, and heavenly judgment. And if the
whole world define against the Pope: yet the Popes desinitions are rather to be
embraced, than that of the whole world. Thus they conclude. I conceive another
conclusion, to be more probable: viz. that which was published at the Synod of
Reignsburg by Everard Archbishop of Salsburg; That the Pope by saying Errare
non possum, I cannot Err: does say as much, as if he had said plainly, Deus
sum, in Templo Dei: I sit as God, in the Temple of God.

These Erring Paradoxes, of the Popes unerring Prerogative, to some other
inferior usurpations, in the Church Directions, are as the sons of Anak,
compared to the Grasse-hoppers: Notwithstanding, these may not be omitted, Nec
vox hominem sonat: some part of Christ's own power is trenched into by these
also. Bishops are directours to the Church, but Friar Hist. Trent. lib. page
599.
Simon a Florentine said: that every spiritual power depends on that of the
Pope. And that every Bishop might say, I have received of hic fullness. And he
is Episcopus Episcoporum, the Bishop of all Bishops, say their sacred
Ceremonies: Sacr. Cerem. lib. 1. fol. 129.
or the Great Wheel, in the great work of directing the Church: without whose
motion all the directive authority, of all the Bishops in the world besides, is
plainly immovable.

Finally, the Councils have been esteemed to have the chiefest authority of
directing the Church, next to Christ: But now, therein the Pope is to the
Church, as the Church is to the moon, Rev. 12. 1. He keeps it under his
feet. Besides what I have already delivered of this point to this purpose:
Hear the beginning of their great Trent Council. The Bishop of Trent. Hist.
lib. 2. page 133.
Bitonto, anno 1545, invited (in his Sermon) the whole world to submit it self
to that Council: which if it did not, then might it be justly said, That the
Popes light is come into the world, and men loved darkness, better than light.
Blasphemously mis-applying that to the Pope, which the holy Ghost does apply to
Christ, John 3. 19. And at the end of the same Synod, in the last Session, it
being propounded whether the Confirmation of that Council did depend on his
Holiness? All those holy Fathers did say Amen: Three only excepted.

Or if any mention the Creeds as a shorter directour, or nearer to Christ than
the Councills; Know we moreover, that the Pope has composed a new Creed,
proposed it to the whole Church as necessary to salvation, and imposed it on
the Bishops especially, by the obligation of an oath. This was the Act of Pope
Pius the fourth: and is the History of Onuphrius in the Onuphr. in Vit. Pij 4.
lise of the same Pope.

Hence therefore, from two propositions of one of our own learned Countrymen
(implying Mr. Mountague his Appeal, part. 2. cap. 15.
the assumptions of them fully cleared) I will frame one conclusion: which
would God al our Countryme^ would take into their serious considerations. To
dissent from the Rule, or to propose any thing as Credendum, against the Rule,
is Antichristian. (Give me leave to insert this parenthesis: and he who does so
(...) is an Antichrist (...), or The Antichrist.) But the Pope, etc. Ergo.)
Again, Mr. Mountagu Appeal part 2. cap. 3.
the prerogative of Not erring does advance a man into his Makers seat.
Therefore the Pope is advanced into his Makers seat. Therefore, The Pope is an
Antichrist: yea even (...). In the phrase of my Text, He as God sits in the
Temple of God.

Secondly, The Pope does direct all: yet is direction, all the Rule, which the
Pope usurpeth over the Church. Directtion may be genile, it persuades: but
direction, by way of command, it is coercive, it constreyneth. And this way
also, does the Pope rule the Church. Hence Turrecrem. lib. 2. cup. 107.
the Papists style his See, magistra, and matter fidei, the mother and Mistress
of their Faith. Again the Evangelists command belief on the pain of
damnation. To imply the Papal command to be such the Pope is termed by one,
Humble Gabriel, Evangelista 5, the fifth Evangelist. Baron. to. 6. appendice.
Capistr. fol 1. ex Distinct. 19. Cap. Sic omnis. Bell. de Verbo Dei, lib. 3.
ca. 10. Trent. Hist. lib. 7.
Pope Clement 8, did not reject it: Nay Baronius does approve it. Yea the
ordinances of the Pope, are to be embraced, tanquam ipsius Dei: as the
ordinances of God himself. And Bellarmine the industrious qualifier of all
Popish paradoxes, does say: Verbum Pontificis docentis e Cathedra, est aliquo
modo verbum Dei: that is, The word of the Pope out of the Chair, is in some
sort the word of God. But Laynez more plainly and peremptorily says, that that
saying of Saint Matthew 18. 17. He who will not hear the Church, is to be
esteemed as an Heathen, is to be understood there, of the Pope. And that the
suffrages of these Authors, may not be shifted of as private opinions; hear a
full Council: that of Trent (a Council which was the mouth of the Pope, as
the Pope was the head of that Council,) Omnibus Christi fidelibus interdicit,
ne posthaec de sanctissima Eucharistia, aliter Council Trid. Sess. 3. sub Iul.
3. page 108. B.
credere, dicere, aut praedicare audeant, quam est in praesent hoc decreto
definitum. Such a command as Christ himself cannot give a greater. The matter,
the Eucharist: one point whereof the same Council confesses to be contrary to
divine institution. The manner, to believe: to command belief is proper to
God. The measure, that they should not Dare to believe, an imperious command.
And the men, Omnibus, all: Princes, and People. Now to command, all the Church,
not to dare, to believe what God instituted, I take it to be imperious without
parallel. And thus does the Pope as Christ, Rule in the Church of Christ.

Thirdly to direct, and by way of command, direct and command: but man only.
But to direct by way of countermand, is to set his face against heaven, and to
control God himself. Now to make up this measure of sin, and to make plain
who is the man of sin: this does the Pope also. Herein observe what they say
he can do, and what he has done. That of the Canonists is common. The whites
way, sect. 30. p 1. 125.
Pope has fullness of power to dispense against the Apostles, against the old,
and new Testament. Trent. Hist. lib. 7.
D. Cornelius in a disputation at Trent, brought the authority of the said
Canonists, that the Pope may dispense against the Canons, against the Apostles,
and against all the Law of God; except the Articles of Faith; and Laynez
concludes Trent. Hist. lib. 8.
as roundly, It cannot be denied, that Christ had Power to dispense in every
law: therefore it must be confessed, that the Pope his Vicar, has the Bell. de
Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 14.
same authority. Bellarmine I acknowledge, does mince this point: The Pope
(says he) non potest dispensare contra, sed juxta Apostolum; the Pope cannot
dispense against, but with the Apostles: that is, Apostolorum praecepta, potest
moderari, ac mutare, prout Ecclesiae expediret: the Pope (says he) may
qualify and change the precepts of the Apostles, when it shall be expedient
for the Church. This is but a more courteous controlling, and a more cunning
countermanding. To moderate, and to alter the Apostles precepts is enough: yet
a Pope said more, Data mihi est omnis Sacr. Cerem: lib. 1.
potestas, Pope Sixtus Quartus said it, in the very words of Christ, Matthew. 28.
18. that he had the very Power of Christ. But deeds are the best expositers of
words. A substantial Sacra. Cerem. lib. 1. 6. 2. sect. 1. fol. 4.
example in which kind, I may urge out of their book of Ceremonies. Christ
said unto Peter Pasce oves, feed my sheep: by virtue whereof, S. Peter did
nominate Clemens to be his successor. But the Senate of Rome, consisting of
four and twenty Priests and Deacons (who afterward by Silverster 1, were
entitled, the Holy Cardinals of the Roman Church) foreseeing that such a
denomination of successors, in succeeding ages, would become very incommodious
for the Church: they rejected Clemens, and elected Linus to succeed Peter, and
Cletus, to succeed Linus. And after Cletus, then Clemens was admitted, but not
from his first institution. Thus we see that not only the Pope, but the
Cardinals, have countermanded not only Christ, but Saint Peter also. In two
words, to annex two other examples: Drink ye all of this, this is Christ's
command, Matthew. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. cap. 1.
26. 27. For which we have the Popes plain countermand, ye shall not drink
all of this: not the Laity, no nor some of the Clergy, neither, the non
Conficientes, which is according to their phrase, in the Gloss, which is
second Gloss. in D^st 4. cap. Statuim.
to none, Statuimus, id est Abrogamus. We ordain, that is, we abrogate: many
of the Popes Ordinances, being ( Countermands) plain Abrogations of Christ's
Ordinances. Again, Let every soul be subject to the higher power: this is
Christ's plain Command, if Saint Paul says true, Romans 13. 1. To which we have
as plain a ^ountermand from the Pope, if Bellarmine says Bell, de Exemp.
Cler. cap. 1.
true: not every soul, not the soul of a Bishop, not the soul of a Priest,
not the soul of any Clearke. To proceed to more particulars.

I will propose precedents of the Papal countermanding power in instances from
all the Commandments. The first says, Thou shall have but one God: the Pope
gaine-sayeth it. Every City, every Country, almost every person, has a
several God; Saints they call them, but Gods they make them: by praying to
the^, vowing to them, making Pilgrimages to them, consecrating Churches to
them, and in their distress putting assiance in them: things proper to God.
Thus have they many gods against the first Commandment. The second commands:
Thou shall not worship Images: the Pope countermandeth. Thou shall worship
Images: and thence in their ordinary Catechismes they leave out the second
Commandment, lest every ordinary capacity, should conceive this gross
contradiction. The third commands, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord
in vain: but dispensations with Oaths, is the Popes familiar action.
Otherwise Bellarmine never had been, and no Jesuit ever shall be Cardinal.
The fourth commands us to keep holy the Relation of the Religion in the
West. sect. 14.
Sabbath: but their greatest markets are on that great day. The fifth injoyneth
Honor to thy Father, to thy civil father, thy King. But the Pope does exempt
the Clergy from performing this Honor, yea says Emanuel Sa, Clerici rebellio
Casaub. ad Front. Duc. page 54.
in Regem, non est crimen laesae Majestatis, quia non est Principis subditus:
that is, the rebellion of a Clergy man against his King is no Treason, because
he is no subject to his King. The sixth is, Thou shall not kill, yet do the
Papists teach that a Tyrant may be killed by a private person: Suarez Apolog.
lib. 6. ca. 4. nu. 7.
and this King-killing Craft, is not only authorized, but also practiced by
the Pope, as many even Princes fear, and some feel also: and such a
murtherous fact was praised by the Pope, by Sixtus Quintus, concerning Henry
the third. The seventh says, Thou shall not commit Adultery. Besides their
public Toleration of public Stews, the degrees of marriage forbidden by God,
Levit. 18. are dispensed withal by the Pope: yea in their Taxa Cancellaria
cap. of Pardons Moulins Accom. page 108.
page 36. Incest with ones Mother is fined at five groats. In the eight, Thou
shall not steal: I make no question, but their Canon, Fides non est servanda
cum Haereticis, that faith ought not to be kept with Heretics, will stretch
even to contracts also: and the Pope would permit his Papists to robb^^us
Protestants, as God did the Israelites to rob the Egyptians, Exodus 12. 36. In
the ninth, Thou shall not bear false witness: to bear false witness, Popery
has made an Art. To bear false witness before a Magistrate, on an Oath, and
against their knowledge; This is affirmed, maintained, and defended by that
wretched Art of Popish wicked Equivocation. And finally, Non concupisces, Thou
shall not covet, says the Lord in the last Commandment: but the Pope and
papists say, concupiscentia non est peccatum, Concup^scence say they is no
sin. Here indeed is no d^spensation, but a plain abnegation of this precept.
I conclude with the judgment of that judicious Author of the Relation Relation
of the Religion in the West sect 13.
of the Religion in the West parts of the world (whom I honor as the Phaenix of
all our English Travelers) There is almost no Law of God or Nature, which one
way or other, they find not means to d^spence with, or at least wise permit
the breach of it, by connivence, and without disturbance. In this point
principally, peremptorily. The Pope as Christ does rule in the Church of
Christ: that is, in the phrase of my text, The Adversary as God, sits in the
Temple of God.

These are mighty matters: howbeit in Pope does direct only by Theory or
proposition. Besides this, the Papal tyranny does proceed to commands of
Practice and Imposition. The Pope does moreover direct, by way of Injunction.
To which purpose they premise their imperious positions. Note what is said of
the Pope, and by the Pope. The Cardinal Sacr. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 10. cap. 5.
who is to invest any Bishop with the pall, uses this phrase, I deliver this
to thee, for the honor of God Almighty, of the blessed Apostles Saint Peter,
and Saint Paul, and Domini nostri Papae, and for the honor of our Lord the
Pope. Again Sacr. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 10. cap. 1.
in his injunctions the Pope himself speaks in this form: I commit unto
thee the administration of such or such a thing, by the authority of God, and
Saint Peter, and Paul, and nostra, and by mine own authority. Here were a
complement of coequall commanding power, betwixt Christ, and his Vicar: if the
Pope would have used but one Rhetorical flower (one (...) and (...)) which did
once grow in his own Cardinals Garden: and have said Ego and Deus meus, I and
my God: as he once said Ego and Rex meus, I and my King. Howsoever, they going
thus, hand in hand, and being apparelled in the same commanding power, we can
hardly distinguish betwixt the Man and his Master: hardly discern, the Vicar
of Christ, from the person of Christ, if we credit their own positions, we
may conclude, that the Pope as Christ does rule in the Church of Christ.
Neither do they much descend from this transcendent power, in their ordinary
positions. The Papists do ordinarily preach, that Mason de min. Angl. lib. 4.
ca. 3.
the Church is like a City, wherein there is but one Fountain: that Fountain
does import to great rivers, the rivers to the lesser brooks, and the brooks
to the channels, and conduit pipes, which disperse the water to the several
families through the city: but still with an Item, that all the water runs
from that one Fountain. The Pope (say they) is the Fountain: the Patriarks,
Metropolitans, and Archbishops those great Rivers: the Bishops the lesser
brooks: and the little Channels and conduit pipes, are the Priests, Monks and
other inferior Ministers: yet so, that ( salva semper Ecclesiae catholicae
authoritate) all Papists acknowledge, that all their power is derived unto them
from the Pope, that singular Fountain: this also they explain by distinctions.

Christ (say they) said unto Peter, Matthew. 16. Mason de Min. Angl. lib. 4. ca.
3.
19. To thee will I give the keys of Heaven: Mark (say they) Christ did not
promise unto Saint Peter, clavem a key, but claves, two keys, scientiae and
potestatis, one of knowledge, the other of power. By the key of knowledge, he
does open the door of the Scripture: absolving all mysteries, and resolving
all controversies. By the other key of power, he does open the door of the
Church: either by ordination, admitting Pastors into it: or by Jurisdiction,
commanding, injoyning, or correcting the inferiors in it, or expelling the
disobedient from it, having power over them all, in all cases both in foro
externo, (in their Courts) by Excommunication, Absolution, Dispensation, and
Injunction: as also in foro interno, (in their consciences) to remit or retain
sins. Now what servant dare refuse to run on the errand of such a master?
And surely so it is. The Pope himself sits at Rome: where at his feet are
resident the Generals of all Orders through the world. The Generals under
them have several Provincialls in all Kingdoms. The Provincialls under them
several Priours in all Covents. And the Priours have every person in their
several companies, at their becks and instant behests. Thus the Pope as the
great wheel, does infuse or enforce a speedy motion into every nimble
instrument.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. The Popes Secretaries are
called, and there is written according to all which the Pope does command, unto
the Lieutenants, and Governors, and Rulers, over every Province, of every
people, in the name of the Pope is it written: and the Letters are sent by the
Posts into all the Provinces: and so forth as follows, Ester 3. 12, 13.

If ever there was a Sic dicit Dominus, from God: if ever an (...) from man:
this Papal injunction is the shadow of the one, and the substance of the
other. No State in the world does dispatch their Addresses through the world
with like awful severity, and careful celerity. And this also does show, that
the Pope as Christ does rule in the Church of Christ. In the phrase of my text;
Antichrist as God, sits in the Temple of God.

This is sat is pro imperio: The Pope does command. But may he not go without?
He does give injunction; But does he receive submission? Incomparably. The
Obedience of the Roman Regulars was admirable: if it were warrantable and
conscionable. Well may he be termed their Head: for never were members so
pliable to the Head, as the Papists are to the Pope. I admire their obedience,
as much as I do detest the drift thereof. The Pope may truly use so much of the
Centurions phrase, Luke 7. 8 I have men under me, and say to one go, and he
does go: to another come, and he does come: and to my Servant do this, and he
does it. Take a taste of all their professors, from the profession of one
learned Papist. They are the last words of Malvenda's long discourse concerning
Malvenda lib. 11 cap. 9.
Antichrist. Nos totos, ingenium, cogitationes, studia, lucubrationes,
scriptionem hanc integram, and omnia nostra, ad sacrosancti Apostolici
Principis, Christi Vicarij, Successoris Petri, Romani Pontisicis pedes
sanctissimos submittimus, venerabundi procumbimus. My translation cannot
express the emphasis of his devout submission. Yet thus I translate it: With
all reverence I prostrate my learning and thoughts, my day studies, and night
watchings, all my writings, all that I am, and all that I have, before the most
holy feet of the thrice holy Pope, the Successor of Peter, the Vicar of
Christ, and the Apostolical Prince. Neither does their practice give the lie
to his promise. If a precept come from the Pope, by the Provincialls, to any
particular person, they presently perform it. As Luthers phrase is; they are
no Quaeristae, they do not examine, but execute the Popes injunction. To
delay, they esteem disobedience: to inquire, curiosity: to dispute, insolence:
and to deny, rebellion: as the sin of witchcraft: Though it be to take a
journey into China or Peru. Nay, a strange obedience! If the Pope command to
excommunicate a Queen; he shall not want a Papist to publish it, though he be
hanged for it. If the Pope command to murder a King, he shall have a Iacobine
to stab him, though he be tortured for it. And if the Pope does breathe out
threatenings against a Church; that he would blow up a Nation with a blast of
Gunpowder: Instantly Jesuits will abet it, and Iesuited will act it: though
their quarters be poled up for a spectacle and perpetual monument of their
graceless obedience, and matchless treachery. And thus also does the Pope as
Christ (yea more than Christ ever did) Rule in the Church of Christ. That is,
Antichrist as God, sits in the Temple of God.

But if these injunctions be not obeyed; scrupulously, or rejected resolutely;
what then? Then, such incur correction insufferable, with an awful
apprehension unutterable: as it were under the hand even of Christ himself. I
take it to be a principle in Popery, to esteem it so. Hence, at the Council
Trent Hist. lib. 8.
of Trent, Laynez the Jesuits General delivered it for a general conclusion,
that the Pope and Christ have the same Tribunal, and the same Authority: and
the same assertion is avouched by Capistranus. The first degree of Capistran.
so 124
correcting their disobedient, is by way of Excommunication. Concerning which,
this is the opinion of Withrington, a moderate Papist, in Withring^. of the
Oath of Allegiance, preface.
his Admonition to the Reader, concerning the Oath of Allegtance. The Church
(says he) has power to impose a Temporal punishment by way of command, if it
be necessary for his souls health, not by way of coertion. So that if he
will not obey the command of the Church, imposing such a temporal punishment
on him: she can only for our disobedience punish finally with spiritual
punishments, as by inflicting censures: not by depriving our lands, or lives.
This is the judgment of Withrington, our learned and (excepting his errors)
our honest Adversary. He calls himself a Romish Catholic: I am sure, his
opinion in this point, is Catholic, but not Romish. And I am persuaded, if
Rome did sway the Land where he does live, he should feel the Romish fire for
this Catholic opinion. Howsoever, the first punishment for disobedience is
Excommunication. But we esteem this to be but brutum fulmen, the Protestants
reject the Popes Excommunications like Sampsons cords, like a thread of tow
which touches the fire. What do they to such? From such (if they be in their
power) he takes away their liberty: they cannot buy and sell in safety: as I
fear some of our own Merchants have found it. Next, he raketh from them
their lands, forcing them to fly their native country, as the poor French
have felt in our days. Then, their lives: as our woeful English could
witness, in Queen Mary's reign. And finally, he will take from them, (that
which is dearer unto them then their lives) their Names. Thus did the Papists
to Calvine, whom they published to have died desperate, when as many years he
survived that presumptious calumny. Yea he will saevire in cineres, punish
their carkeises, and command their bones to be raked out of their graves, as he
did to Paulus Fagius. Neither shall Kings disobey the Pope uncorrected. For he
has authority to take away their Scepters, and lives also, says Suarez in
the sixth book of his Apology. But for that fatal Inquisition! It is a
correction like the fourth Beast, in the seventh of Daniel, and the seventh
verse: It is dreadful and terrible, devouring all, but it has no Name.
Although Gonsalvius has, in some sort discovered it, yet I am persuaded that
none living (but the tormentours and the tormented) can fully tell, what the
intralls are of that Bull of Phalaris: it is the very emblem of Hell: none
return from thence to tell the torments thereof. And certainly, whosoever is
caught within the compass of that engine of cruelty, (if he be fortified with
courage from Heaven, in a rare measure) he may alter the Prayers of the old
Leturgie: they prayed (...), that is, Save us, by those unknown torments;
these may pray, (...), that is, Lord save us from those unknown torments. And
thus does this Tyrant both usurp and out strip the correcting power of a King.
The Pope, as Christ, does rule in the Church of Christ: in the phrase of my
Text, Antichrist as God, sits in the Temple of God.

I add briefly: Me thinks the Empire of Christ in his Church, is most briefly
and emphatically expressed by Christ himself, John 14. 6. Ego sum Via,
Veritas, and Vita: that is, (says Calvine) I am the beginning, the means, and
the end of saving knowledge. Or (as Saint Augustine) Christ is Via sine errore,
the Way without error: Veritas sine falsitate, the Truth without falsehood: and
Vita sine morte, the Life without death. Others interpret these words
otherwise: that Christ shows the means, descryeth the things, and gives the
end, concerning eternal felicity. All these does the Pope usurp.

First, that he is Via, the Way, that he cannot err, a property of Christ,
never communicated but to some persons, and at some times only.

Secondly, that he is Veritas, the Truth. His Council of Trent commanded all,
credere, to believe that, and only that, to be Truth which he taught.

And lastly, he arrogateth himself to be Vita, to be the Life. No salvation,
except a man be a member of the Church, say Christians: not unless he be a
member of the Pope, say the Papists. And therefore Bellarmine in his third
Book de Ecclesia, and the second Chapter, makes the Pope to be an essential
part in the definition of the Church. So, No Pope, no Church: and no salvation
but in the Church, and under the Pope. Hence some begin to think that the
name of a Papist is more honorable than the name of a Catholic: because the
last does imply a communion but with the Body: but the first with the Head. And
how far this Tyranny has prevailed on the consciences of the blinded
Papists: you may perceive by this proverb, which they say is familiar in
Italy: I believe God and the Pope. And thus does he dominiere in the highest
nature. The Pope as Christ, does rule in the Church of Christ: that is,
Antichrist as God, sits in the Temple of God.

Thus has the Pope exalted himself. Give me leave to exalt him one step
higher: and in the words of a Papist: Qui desiderat Primatum interris, inveniet
confusionem in coelis: that is, He that will reign as Christ on earth, shall
never reign with Christ in heaven. This is the period of the Popes primacy:
and this is the censure of Stella upon Luke 9. 48.

Can, notwithstanding all these premises, any protest with Cupers, that he is
mancipium Romanae Ecclesiae? that he is a professed Slave of the Church of
Rome? inthralling himself by a servile inflexible obedience, in any case, and
against any person? where a spiritual Sovereignty, Tyranny, does command man,
and countermand God: imposing injunctions uncontrollable, exacting subjection
unutterable, or inflicting correction unsufferable: ruling in the Church of
Christ, as Christ: urging his own Laws with more severity than Christ's Laws?
I hope: I know. No servant of Christ will be, can be, such a slave to
Antichrist.

This truth have I delivered plainly, painfully, impartially: even in the sight
of a great God, and of an innocent conscience. I have done my duty: I have
delivered it. For your duty: to believe it. I must leave that to him, who is
the Author and finisher of your faith.

Now the God of all truth, give you all his holy Spirit: that you may fulfill
all his holy will.

SERMON X.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, and 4. Showing himself that he is God.
Antichrist shall not call himself the true God. The Pope does show himself
to be God. The Pope does show himself to be God plainly.

THis fourth verse contains three properties of Antichrist: First, He
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.
Secondly, He as God sits in the Temple of God. Thirdly, He shows himself
that he is God. I may call them the three degrees of Antichrists pride: amongst
the which, this third is the superlative. By the first he does tyrannize over
the estates of men: by the second, over the consciences of men: and by the
third, he does usurp to be the God of men. Before, he ruled, and appeared as
God, in one particular: here, he insinuates himself to be God, in many
particulars. Or to follow Bellarmines phrase: Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 3. c. 14
There he took upon him authoritatem Dei; the authority of God: here, nomen
Dei; the name of God. The Text says, He shows himself that he is God.

In the matter (that Antichrist shall vaunt himself to be God) Papists and
Protestants all consent* they dissent in the manner. We say he shall attempt
this secretly and cunningly, by his insolent God-like actions. They say he
shall do it ((...),) plainly and openly: Professing himself to be the true
and only God. Se jactabit Lessius de Antichristo demon. 7.
verum Deum: He shall vaunt himself to be the true God, says Lessius. And
Bellarmine as acutely, more falsely: Antichristus se, non solum Deum Bell. de
pont. Romans lib 3. c. 14
sed etiam solum se Deum esse dicet: that is, He shall not only say, he is
God: but moreover he shall say that he is the only God.

Contrary to the properties, practice, and person of Antichr^st: and therein
contradicting himself also. Bellarmine himself does teach, that Antichrist
shall pretend himself to be the Messiah: but there must be some difference
betwixt the Messiah, that is, God which is sent; and God which does send him.
Therefore this may pass for one of their incredible fictions: That Antichrist
shall call himself the true and only God. Moreover, it is contrary to the
property of Antichrist, who is confessed by the Papists to be an Hypocrite:
but to say plainly, that he is the only God, is not hypocrisy, but blasphemy.

Secondly, his practice shall be to seduce: the Jews, say they: the
Christians, say we: indeed all, say all. But who would be seduced by such an
open Atheist? And therefore Less^us our Lass. de Antich. part. 2. them. 2.
adversary acknowledges that Antichrist the Adversary, in fighting against the
Militant Church, shall use rationabili aliquo pretextu, and specie quadam
rationis, ac pietatis, ut homines decipiat: that is, he shall use some pretext
of piety, and show of reason to deceive. But to proclaim himself to be the
only God, is both impious and unreasonable: and therefore his practice shall
be to no purpose: None will be deceived by him.

Finally for his person, Antichrist is a man. Now Nero and Nebuchadnezzar,
though they would be adored as gods, yet did they not deny other gods. Nor can
we imagine that a man shall depose the God of Heaven, although he would Exalt
himself to be a God on earth.

Thus they. But we say, or rather the Text says so to us, and by us: that
Antichrist shall not say, but show that he is God. For (...) signifies the
arrogance of works, and not of words. And if any such blasphemous word shall
fall from him, or from his flatterers: they will have a pretext for that
blasphemy. Alexander Justin. hist. lib. 11
would be called a God: but how? Not of himself; but under the pretense of
being the Son of Jupiter Ammon. So Antichrist if he shall call himself God,
he will sweeten this blasphemy with some hypocrisy. As that he is not so
simply: but as he is the Son of God, as Bell. Apolog. p. ^60. Less de Antich.
part. 1. them. 7.
he is the Servant of God, as he is the Vicar of God, or as he is the
Vicegerent of God, etc. In a word, in plain words, Antichrist will never say,
that he is God.

Thus I frame my argument:

Whosoever does show himself that he is God, has this property of Antichrist:
or rather is the very Antichrist.

But the Pope does show himself that he is God:

Therefore, the Pope has this property of Antichrist: or rather, is the very
Antichrist.

The Major is apparent from the opening of the phrase: indeed it is the (...),
the very syllables of my Text. The Minor I must make good by this ensuing
Sermon. Which I will make to appear by four particulars. The Pope does show
himself that he is God: either hypocritically, by way of insinuation: or
openly, by plain profession. He does insinuate it by what he does, or by what
he does permit: he does profess it both by assuming the very name of God, and
the very worship of God. Now, when I have made it plain, that the Pope does
show himself that he is God, both cunningly and plainly: both by his actions
and permissions: both by arrogating the Name of God, and the worship due to
God: I think this will be no injurious conclusion. Therefore, The Pope is the
Antichrist.

By that which he has done, the Pope has showed enough that he is god. I will
borrow of Baronius my preface to this point. Baronius Baronius an. 364
to show the pride of Donatus, cites this saying out of Optatus: Cum super
Imperatorem non sit, nisi solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem: dum Donatus super
Imperatorem se extollit, jam quasi hominum me^as excesserat, ut se ut Deum, non
ut hominem aestimaret. Mutato nomine: changing the Africane name, into a
Latin, thus I English it: Since none is above the Emperor, but God: because
the Pope does extol himself above the Emperor, (as I have plentifully proved
Sermon 8.
before) therefore, as if he had exceeded the bounds of man, he seems to
esteem himself as God, not as man: To proceed: It was the suspicion of
Frederick the second, that the Pope did affectare Aventin 7.
Divinitatem, that the Pope did seek to be esteemed a god. That suspicion is
now made evident by the Popes own actions: things proper unto God.

First, the Pope does dispense against the Council. Trid. Sess. 24. Ca^. 8.
Scriptures: permitting and admitting Marriages pronounced by Gods Law unlawful
and incestuous, Levit. 18. But he who does control the word of God, by that
act, does show that he is God. Again, he does command Christians credere, to
believe: but to command Faith, Con^. Trid. Sess. 3. sub Iul. 3. Item prooemio
ad Sess. ^. sub Pi^ 4.
is the work of God, not of Man. Thirdly, if Tertullians judgment, and
argument be good against the Senate of Rome, we may use it against the Pope of
Rome: Qui facit Does, Divosque, Deo major est: that is, He that makes gods or
Saints, is greater than the gods, or the Saints. But the Pope does make Saints,
says Bellarmine. Yea, the Pope has such heavenly Bell. de Sanct. Beat. cap.
8. Troilus Malvitius de Sanct. Canoniz dub. 3.
power (says Malvitius) Vt quem velit defunctum, canonizare possit: etiam
invit is Episcopis, and Cardinalibus omnibus: that he can canonize whom he
l^st, although all the Bishops and Cardinals through the world should
withstand him. The Pope thus does make Saints, Divos: therefore he is greater
than divus, than a Saint: Deus, even God. He does show that he is God, by that
action. Fourthly, the Pope has Ius creandi Apostolos, (as Baronius is quoted,
and confuted by Casaubonus) the Pope has power to create Casaub. Exerc. 14.
Sect. 14.
Apostles: which I conceive to be Christ's (...), our Saviors sovereignty. And
therefore whosoever does usurp it, does show himself to be more than a man by
that action. Fifthly, the Pope does term his Decrees his Oracles: but Oracula,
according to Tully his derivation, are so termed, Quasi inest his Deorum
oration, because they are the Dictates of God. And thus again does he show that
he is God: for his speech does bewray him. And finally, the Pope does arrogate
to himself that prerogative of not erring at all: whereby he does advance M.
Mountagues Appeal part. 2. page 3.
himself into his Makers seat. Not altogether within the Sphere of humane
activity. Non vox hominem sonat, O Dea certe: It is the voice of God, and not
of man, Acts 12. 22. He shows that he is God by this action also.

But these are Papal actions, by way of proposition, what they can do: I will
add others, by way of imposition, what they command, that others should do:
viz. prostrations and adorations, which St. Peter would not permit, Acts 10.
25. nor the Angel, Revel. 9. 10. Hetherefore who does permit them, the world
must conceive him, at least conceit him to be greater than Peter, greater than
an Angel: and therefore by S. Paul's own argument, Heb. 1. 4, 5. God himself:
a petty god, at the least. Now the Pope does not only permit prostration, but
does enjoin that which is more and greater: that all, Princes, and people shall
kiss his foot. In the year 828, Pope Valentine made Pless. Mist. Progress. 28.
all the Senate of Rome come kiss his foot. He was the first who imposed that
impious insolence, says Honorable Plessie, the Honor of Learning. About the
year 1227, Gregory 9 Pless. progres. 51.
persecuted the Emperor Frederick with implacable hatred, because he did
only kiss his knee, when he should have kissed his foot. And not long since
there was a Pamphlet put in Whitaker in Bell. Contr. 4. quaest. 5. Aug. de
Ancon. quaest. 9. art. 4. Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5. sect. 4. Bellarm.
Apol. page 160.
print by Joseph Steven, De adoratione pedum Pontificis, concerning the
adoration of the Popes feet, dedicated to Pope Gregory 13. His personal
adoration is acknowledged and avouched, though somewhat excused by Bellarmine.
But let me put this Quaere into their ears, which our most learned Bishop
has put into my mouth. Eccuinam mortalium adhibetur jam Andrews ad Apol. cap.
12.
adorandi vox, praeterquam Pontifici soli? Is this word of adoration now
applied to any mortal man, but to the Pope alone? Therefore this word alone,
does exalt him above all men. And thus from his own actions, do I conclude my
first argument: The Pope does show himself that he is God: therefore, The
Pope is Antichrist.

Yet for a man to vaunt his own greatness, this were great insolence, indeed
impudence also. It seems therefore expedient that some Brokers should breach
such a business.

Alexander when he attempted to purchase Just hist. lib. 1^.
and publish his Deity, he did not proclaim it himself, that he was a God;
but suborned the Priests of Ammon to preach it to the world, that in sooth
Alexander was the son of Jupiter. Psapho was that witty fellow, who tamed his
Malvenda lib. 7. cap. 11.
Pies, and having taught them their lesson, he turned them abroad, and then in
every corner they cried nothing but Psapho est Deus, that is, Psapho is a God.
So the Pope does suborne his Priests, and has taught his Parasites to chatter
this lesson through the world, Papa est Deus, that is, the Pope is a God, say
they: or the Pope is Antichrist, say we.

Marcellus Archbishop of Corcira in his book Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 2. Sect. 1.
cap. 4.
of holy Ceremonies, gave the Pope a substantial title, when he termed him
Sanctissimus Dominus noster, Our most holy Lord: a Christian could not have
given a much greater epithete to Christ himself. A Trent Bishop supposed
Mol^^. Consil. de Trid. Council. nu. 22.
this to be somewhat superlative; and therefore he advised the Fathers of the
Synod, because that in the Scripture God is called sanctus, holy, therefore it
might suffice to call the Pope also, sanctus, holy, and not term him
sanctissimus, most holy, lest they should invest him with an attribute beyond
God himself. But this Bishop was summoned from Trent to Rome, where he was
better informed what became him to talk concerning the Popes Holiness. Others
therefore, that they might not incur the like displeasure, would be sure to
give him attributes enough. The Florentine Antonin. Hist. to. 3.
Ambassadors told Pope Pius the second, that their City sanctitatem illius
Hyperdulia adorat, did adore his Holiness with Hyperdulie, which is a kind of
worship they ascribe only to the Virgin Mary. This is somewhat contiguous to a
Deity. Proportionably therefore, his parasites preach, the Pope non esse purum
hominem, Gloss in Prooem. Clem. in verbo Papa. Moscon. de Potest. Milit
Ecclesiae lib. 1. part. 1. c. 4,
not to be a mere man. In reverence whereof it is defined to be a profane
sacrilege, if any should date to put on Papae indumenta, the Popes Apparel.

To ascend a little higher, let us hear a little touch of Scripture proper to
our God, Christ: which they apply to their God, the Pope. The Sicilian
Ambassadors, asking pardon of Pope Martine 4, delivered their Embassage, in no
other terms, but three times saying that of Saint John 1, 29. Agnus Dei, qui
tollis peccatum mundi miserere nobis: O thou Lamb of God, which take away
the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. It is a decree of a Council held
at Rome under Gregory 7, Anno 1057. That there is but one name in the world, to
wit, of the Pope, and that this name, ought only to be named in the Churches.
Is not this to appropriate to him, our Saviors Prerogative mentioned, Act. 4.
12. That of Saint John 3. 31. concerning Christ, Qui de coelo ve^it, super
omnes Capistranus de Pa^ae E^^les^^ a^^^o^^a^e ^ol. 13O. Francis White page 126.
est, He that comes from above, is above all: may be understood of the Pope
says Capistranus. A Sicilian Bishop supplicated to Nicholas the third, in the
words of Bartimaeus, Mark 10. 47. Miserere mei sili David, O son of David
have mercy upon me. Paulus the fourth Paulus 4 Bulla ^d Du^em Florent.
does usurp that royal title of Christ in the Rev. 19. 16. stiling himself
Regem Regum, the King of Kings. Iansenius does expound that Iansen. Har^. cap.
66.
Matthew. 18. 16. Upon this rock will I build my Church, of the person of Peter,
and of the Pope his successor. Augustine de Ancona attributes Aug. de Anco.
epist. Dedicat. ad John 22.
that of Saint Paul to the Philippians 2. 10. To him shall bow the knees of
every thing in heaven, and earth, and under the earth; unto Pope John 22.
Bellarmine does apply that Prophecy of Bell. de Pont. Rom* Praefat.
Isaiah, 28. 16. I lay in Sion a stone for a foundation, to the Pope. And
elsewhere he does apply Bell. de Chr. lib. 1. cap. 4.
the same words to Christ, proving thereby that Christ is true God. By the same
argument therefore, does he imply that his Pope, is his God. Of which
blasphemy, he seems not to Bell. de Council. Auth. li. 2. c. 17.
be very nice, avouching That all the Names in the Scriptures, which are
attributed unto Christ, may be ascribed to the Pope also. As also Sixtus Sixtus
Senensis in praef. Biblioth. Sanctae.
Senensis does involve the application of many texts (peculiar unto Christ,) to
the Pope, speaking to Pius the fifth, as unto God, says: That he has adopted
him for his son, and regenerated him by his spirit. But of all other that
golden B^^^* tom. 11. anno 1073. number. 16.
Legend of Baronius may not be passed by: that Pope Hildebrand being a
Carpenters son, and playing where his father wrought, did by chance frame
letters which expressed the eight verse of the 72 Psalm, His dominion shall be
from the one Sea, to the other. And to help Sacr^^^^ l^b. 1. sect. 7. cap. 6.
fol. 35.
them out, the Pope himself Sixtus the fourth does arrogate that of Christ, in
Matthew. 28. 18. Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo, and in terra: all power
is given to me in heaven, and in earth.

Moreover, this Seraphicall Divinity of the Papal Deity, is not consined to
the Latin only: but they have English Doctors who preach these Italian
instructions. What good do we say, we receive from God principally, yea
only? a threefold: The Church in which we live, the faith by which we live,
and the Commandments according to which we live. All these we asscribe unto
God: all these they ascribe unto the Pope. First the Church is the visible
congregation George Dowly in his Instruction, cap. 3.
of all true Christians and Catholics, which are scattered over the world,
whose head next under God, is the Pope. Secondly, Faith is a gift of Greg. de
Valent. in Thom. t. 3. p. 24.
God in our souls, with the which, we do firmly and Catholikely believe, all
that God has revealed unto us, according as it is taught us, by our holy
Mother the Church. By the Church we understand, Suarez Apolog. lib. 4. cap. 6.
whom they understand, e Cathedra: indeed the Pope. Thirdly, the work of a
Christian, Trent. Hist. lib. 4. page 321. George Dow^ey his Instruct. cap. 12.
is to know well the Commandments of God, and those of our mother the Church.
Observe, the Commandments of God, and the commandments of the Church, that
is, of the Pope, are members of the same division: therefore equally enjoined.
To which purpose, as he has made the whole seventh Chapter to teach the ten
Commandments of God: so he spends the eight Chapter in teaching the five
Commandments of the Church, to wit, to hear Mass on sundays and holidays,
to confess once a year, to communicate at Easter, to Fast when the Church
commands, and to pay Tithes. To which he adds the sixth, not to celebrate
marriages prohibited by the Church. So then: without the Pope, no Church, no
Faith, and the Commandments of the Pope ranked with the Commandments of God.
The Church, Faith, and Commandments, all these we ascribe unto our God; all
these they ascribe unto their Pope. The Pope permits this doctrine:
therefore from his own permission, I hope I may be permitted to pronounce my
conclusion; The Pope does show himself to be God. Therefore, The Pope is the
Antichrist.

Notwithstanding these plain evidences, Bell. de Pontif. Romans lib. 3* c. 14.
Lessi. de* ^nti^^ Them. 7.
evictions: this truth is not acknowledged; because say they, Antichrist will
say plainly, that he is God. This sense is not suitable to the text: which
says He shall show, not say that he is God. Howsoever, I will follow them into
this ((...)) starting hole also, and beat them with their own weapons, I say
therefore, The Pope does plainly profess himself Dr Beard de Antichristo.
to be god. Of late, Pope Paulus Quintus, and the Cardinal his cousin, caused
every piece of their plate to be marked with this inscription Burghesianae
eternitati dicatu^, that is, this is consecrated to the Eternity of the
Burghesian family. What more godlike Title could they ingrave Thom. Stapleton
in Prin^ip. Fid. praefat.
on a Challice? Our English Stapleton utters this blasphemy somewhat more
plainly, styling Pope Gregory 13, Optimum, Maximum, and supremum Numen in
terris, that is, their most great, most gracious, and most sovereign god on
earth. Less^^s de Antichristo. Them. 7.
Lessius does acknowledge that the Pope is called by the Papists Deus interris,
Their god on earth: but, says he, metaphorice, it is by a figure: poor
fig leaves, to cover their apparent blasphemies. Others are downright, and
mince Gratian Did. ^6 cap. 7. Satis Evidenter.
not the matter. Pope Nicholas boasts, Pontificem a Constantino Deum
appellatum: that the Emperor did call the Pope a God: and from thence
infers Deum non posse ab hominibus judicar:, that no men may judge the Pope,
because he is a God. Whence also Augustine Aug. Steuchus de Donatione Constant.
(...) 1547. page 141.
Steuchus, does tell us, praeclaro illo edicto eum adoravit ut Deum; that by
that egregious edict, Constantine did adore the Pope as God: Et divinos honores
ei, quoad ejus potuit, contulit* and that to utmost of his ability, he
tendered to him divine honors. Again, one Pope in the Council* Later* s^ss. 4
s^b ^^^^* 2.
Laterane Council, is saluted by the Name of God.

In the year 1514, in the last Laterane Council. Later. Sess. 9. Moulins Accom.
page 89.
Council, one of the Popes Secretaries called Leo 10, his divine Majesty. Upon
the gates of Tolentum in Italy, is this inscription, To Paul the third, the
most high and mighty God on earth. A book also was printed with this
inscription; Tort. Torti page 361.
PaV Lo V^^ VICc Deo, that is, To Paul the fifth, a Demi god: where I may not
silence, the remarkable observation, of our most learned Bishop: that the
letters in this title, do exactly even the Number of the name of Antichrist,
recorded in the 13, of Revel. and the last verse, 666. Upon one of the gates of
Rome was ^unius in R^v. 17. 13.
written to Pope Sixtus Quartus, Et merito in terris, crederis esse Deus, that
is, we do certainly believe, that Thou art our God, on earth. Bell. de Pontif.
R^^ lib. 2. c. 16. Decim. tertius.
Yea Bellarmine himself, (who does use to blanch the blasphemies, and broad
assertions of the Romish synagogue) says of the Pope, Thou art the great
Priest -- in power Peter, and in unction Christ. Here the very Name of Christ,
is given by Bernard to Eugenius, accepted by the Pope, and allowed by Bellar.
But the most gross Extrav Ioh 22. c. Cum int^r.
blasphemy of all, is that popish gloss of their Canon Law, Credere Dominum
Deum nostrum, Papam, conditorem hujus Decretalis, non potursse statuere, prout
statuit, Haereticum censeatur: that is, it is heretical for a man to believe,
that our Lord God the Pope, had not power to Eud^^: contra Abba^um lib. 1.
sect. 9.
decree, as he did decree. I know how Johannes Eudaemon, does endeavor to
blurre this evidence, saying that this word Deum God, was erratum Typographum,
that it crept into the gloss, through the fault of the Printer, whereby he
discovers himself to be a true Cretian. For it is cleared (by the
Coryphaeus of all co^batants against Antichrist) by the Bishop of Dr. Downam de
Antichristo lib. 4 cap. 10. sect 4.
Derie, whose answer is this; Pope Gregory the thirteenth, employed and
enjoined certain of the Cardinals to revise and correct the Gloss of the
Canonists. When as, many editions thereof had this word Deum, God, and yet some
had it not: they set forth a new Copy, and by the authority of Pope Gregory,
they restored that word Deum, which before had been wanting in some few of
their editions. Neither in the Censures of the Gloss, set out by the command
of Pope Pius the fifth: nor yet in the Index Expurgatorius, is the least mention
made, of any mutation, or alteration of the word Deum, for which we challenge
the^. Let no Papist therefore be offended, if I conclude from the Approbation
of so many Popes; The Pope does show, nay say that he is God. I infer,
therefore, The Pope is The Antichrist. Furthermore, I will finish this section,
with other apt instances observed by my learned friend (Master Boswell Pastor
of Saint Lawrence London) while he resided in Spain. To which I will only
premise one odd disticke out of Zanchie concerning the Pope.

Angelicum nomen solvit pius ipse Michael
Nam tanquam Deus est, qui ante Michael erat.
Let others riddle these Aenigmaticall Hyperbolicall verses; that here they
style him, Tanquam Deus, and Michael, is enough for my assertion, too much for
his Holiness. That transcendent inscription on their triumphall Arch, when
Pope Alexander the sixth entered Rome, is worth my friends observation, and all
men's admiration.

Caesare magna fuit, nunc Roma est maxima; Sextus Bernardiro Corio Hist. de
(...) part. 3. page 452.
Regnat Alexander, Ille vir, Iste Deus. Our Rome was great: Great Caesar made
it such,
By Alexander now, its greater much:
Why great by him? great reason give I can,
The Pope was God: The Emperor but a Man.
That day was borne a twinne in prose to this meeter. This was another
inscription to the same Pope, Alexandro invictissimo, Alexandro pientissimo,
Alexandro magnificentissimo, Alexandro in omnibus maximo, Honor and gloria:
that is, to Alexander the most invincible, to Alexander the most holy, to
Alexander the most magnificent, to Alexander in all things the greatest of all,
be Honor and Glory. What greater inscription could be consecrated to the
greatest God? (...): such singular inscriptions, they suffer not to be single:
a third speaks the same language.

Viventibus aeternitatem laetam danti, aeternam gloriam.

To him who gives immortality, he given immortal glory.

Again: Vide Sarium.


Libertas pia, Iustitia, and Pax aurea, Opes quae Sunt tib. Roma, novus fert
Deus iste tibi.

Thy Freedom, Justice, Wealth and Peace, O Rome,
From thy new God, the Pope alone they come.
Finally, to this Pope, I will give a Vale, in that Salve, whereto the Papists
were so solemnly invited.

Accumulant fora, laetitiam testantia flammas,
Scit venisse suum, Patria grata Deum.
In every street, huge Bonfires great,
The Pope approaching to them:
For Rome knows well, this day to dwell
Their God is come amongst them.
A fourth:

Prisca novis cedant, rerum nunc aureus ordo est,
Invictoque Iovi est, Gloria, primus Honor.
The former times fall short of ours,
In golden age we live:
Unto our God, Jehovah great
We Praise and Honor give.
And that this may not seem to be a personal, but a successive usurpation
upon God, we shall see the same godlike attributes ascribed unto Pope Gregory
the thirteenth. And first that he is (...), and therefore (...). both God and
Man, and therefore The man of sin. This is the Jesuits Elogie, indeed Elegy.

Laurea Christiadum, qu^m totus praedicat orbis, Laetitia publica Iesuitarum
Matriti, Mart 1^. 1579.

Demi Deumque viru^, S^^^virumque Deum.
Cum t^a^a, est* ^s, nullis (...) or is
Cumque regas terram, syd^r^umque Polum.
O Crown of Christians, who^ the world does preach
^o be both God and Man: Pope-Christ; because
Thy boundless power above the earth does reach,
For Heaven it self obeyes thy Papal Laws.
The like to the same.

Sancte Pater, Cus^os Ovium, qui Tibridis arces
Vnus, and imperijs fraenas calestibus orbem:
Qui verbo obstructi port as recludis Olimpi,
Et sontes damnas tenebris, and carcere caeco.
Cum tua se extguo non claud^^ fine potest^^s
Proque Deo, sis pene Deus, pro Numine Numen, etc.
Holy Father, great Shepherd of the sheep,
Thou who alone, the Roman Lordly State
And the whole world besides do guide and keep,
And with thy heavenly reins do moderate:
O thou who with thy word, Heaven gates do open,
And by thy word damned souls sendst down to hell,
Since such thy power is: most blessed Pope
Thou art almost a God, in thee does dwell
A Godlike De^^ie.
To piece up that blasphemy, they put to this parcel of prophannesse:

Has tu divitias, Pater O mortalibus aegri^
Cum lubet indulges, vitaeque piacula donans
Communes esse tuis.
These rich indulgences, O Father thou do give
For every grievous sin, wherein poor men do live.
Which is conferred by him, whom they style

Christiadum Princeps, fidei custodia nostrae,
Cujus adimperium rerum se machina curvat,
Et quo ver a fides veluti se cardine vertit.
The Prince of Christian men,
The prop of Christian Faith:
Commander of our life
And ground of true belief.
And if we think, that the Pope does not by all this arrogate to h^mselfe, and
derogate from Christ sufficiently, even as sufficiently, as may become The
Antichrist; Let Pannonius absolve Pannonius in Apocalypse. cap. 12. se^^ 5.
punet. 4.
this conclu^ion, in his ^alse latin* Who avoucheth the Pope to be Sum^^us
Princeps universae terrae, the supr^me Prince of the whole world, qui potest
and terrae Princip ^s sub^ugare, etiam Haereticos profligare, put down Kings,
and root up Heretics, to which purpose he has gladium mater^^le, habet
sp^rituale, both the swords material and spiritual. And, All power both in
heaven and earth, according to Matthew. ult. Again, the Pope is Dei charismatum
Dispensator, the dispencer of Gods grace: the Pope Virgam directionis,
Pannonius in Apocal. cap. 16. sect. 2. Punct. 1.
the Scepter of righteousness mentioned Psalm. 45. ^. In a word, the Pope is
Parens salutis, the Father of their salvation says Pannonius, and therefore,
The son of Perdition.

Finally, as the Pope does usurp the Name, so does he also the worship which
is peculiar unto God. First by their common gesture of kneeling to the Pope,
they make the Pope a god, and their Idol: and their very kneeling is a token
thereof. For (as profound Zanchy does fully Zan b^in praec. ^. cap. 17.
inform us) although we English did kneel to our Queen of ever blessed
memory, and do and may kneel to our King her successor, without any
superstition; because it is merely Political, and after the manner of our
nation: Yet for the Papists to kneel to the Pope, who they believe cannot
err; and in whom they are persuaded that there is a fullness of power to
forgive sins, to give Heaven, and to doom to Hell, ascribing those properties
of God to him, so far they make him a God: and to such men even their
kneeling is an Idolatrous Adoration.

Again, the Pope does too grossly show himself Moulins (...). sect. 118.
that he is God (especially to the ignorant) by those absurd images and
pictures of the Trinity, frequent in the Romish Churches, and found printed in
the Title pages of their Bibles, set forth by Sixtus Quintus, and Clemens 8
where they picture an old man, sitting in a Chair, apparelled like the Pope,
with a tripled Crown, also with a Pigeon hanging at his beard and a Crucifixe
in his arms. Whereby it is not impossible, that the ignorant people should
either embrace, or invert the error of the Anthropomorphites, supposing either
God to be the Pope, or the Pope to be God. Since by the Popes permission, they
are both expressed by one Picture.

Moreover, certainly it is more than a play Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 2. sect. 1.
cap. 33.
which they act in one of their Papal Pageants, in the Popes own presence. In
their solemn service upon Palme-sunday at Rome, three of the Queristers of the
Popes Chapel apparel themselves one in white, bearing the person of the
Evangelist, the second in red representing a Jew, and the third in black,
being in show our blessed Savior. Toward the end of the Antheame, he who
acts the part of the Evangelist, praecedit, sequitur Iudaeus, deinde
Christus. They all in order, the Evangelist first, the Jew next, and Christ
last, go and kiss the Popes soot. That Christ (though personated) should kiss
the Popes foot! Surely, if any indifferent person did see this show, he would
think that the Pope did show himself that he was God.

It will not be impertinent, if to this play Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. sect 12.
cap. 5. Item lib. 2 sect. 1. cap. 35.
of their men, I annex what their Children act also: when the Pope in his
Pontificalibus does enter into any city, they provide a multitude of Children
(in imitation of Matthew. 21.) and if they can, Hebrew Children, to meet his
Holiness with their Acclamations, and Palms in their hands. If they would
add what is also done in the text, and cry Hosanna, he would do more, than
show himself that he is God.

To show yet more plainly, that the Pope does plainly show himself to be God*
Suppose we our Bezain 2 These. 2. 4.
selves to be present at the great solemnity of the popish Iubile, and that
there we saw a Man, whom they themselves term ( terrestrem Deum) an earthly
god, hemmed in with a throng of his creatures; pompously carried with a triple
Diadem, in a golden Throne, on Noble men's shoulders: Then (in their own
phrase) breaking open the gates of Paradise, with a golden Hammer, and the
Ambassadors of most mighty Princes and Potentates, yea the Kings themselves,
and the Emperor if he be there, kneeling full low, and adoring him aloft,
reapse alterum Deum, as if he were indeed another very God: And withal, the
thronging multitude round about him, expecting and praying for remission of
sins, and eternal life, as a largess from his blessed Holiness: What should
we suppose our selves to see, if we did see such a sight? Certainly an ordinary
man, who yet never wore the spectacles of Pope-patronizing prejudice, would
think that he saw an insolent Man, in an incomparably glorious pomp, showing
himself that he is God.

But that they themselves may seem to take all blanching qualifications, from
those Protestants who will not have the Pope to be Antichrist, the Papists
make good the very Letter of my text. After the Popes election, they Sacr. Cer.
lib. 1. fol. 17.
cause him to sit upon the alter, to whow all the Cardinals, with all
reverence, in their order, exhibit their obeisance, kissing first his foot,
next his hand, and then his Cheek. And a little after this, ((...):) that
which is well done, is twice done) he descends unto Saint Peter's Church,
where again the Cardinals seat him upon the Altar with his Miter, and the
chief Cardinal pronounces on his knees, Te Deum, We praise thee O God, we
acknowledge thee to be the Lord. Those supporters of that fiction, of the
Trienniall singular Antichrist: what can they feine that he shall do, more
than this man has done already? Thus gloriously, and grossly showing himself
that he is God.

This may suffice, but I will add a surplusage, that I may add a sufficient,
yea a superfluous satisfaction, to any who will be satisfied, I say, this
Prophecy, that Antichrist does sit in the Temple of God, as God, showing
himself that he is God, is literally fulfilled in the Pope. If the God of
Heaven, should be on earth, visible and incarnated, in the shape of a man; what
solemn worship should we imagine, to tender unto him? The Place! should it not
be in a Church? The Church! should it not be the chief of the world? The
Part! should it not be the highest and holiest part thereof? Our gesture:
should it not be an humble kneeling before him? Our affection to him: could it
be more, than humbly to desire to kiss the feet of that most Holy Body? Nay to
content our selves, as unworthy of that Honor? And our Speech! Can it be more,
than to make an acclamation of praising and acknowledging God the Lord in his
holy presence.

All these are literally performed to the person of the Pope. (I deny not, but
learning may give, and charity may receive some qualifications of those
actions, otherwise it were the boldest blasphemy, and blasphemousest Idolatry,
that ever man broached, or God spared from a thunder clappe: yet all these are
literally performed to the Pope) Sacrarium Ceremoniarum lib. 1. fol. 17. a
book which no understanding papist, can, will, or dare deny. The Pope
immediately after his Election, is carried into Saint Peter's Church (which I
suppose, they esteem the Prime Church of the world) They set him (as before in
his Chapel) upon the Altar. That ever a man should be set upon the Altar of
God, it is incredible, did not they themselves relate it: There a solemn
Adoration is performed, with bended knees, the Cardinals kiss his feet: the
People being not admitted unto it.

Finally, the chiefest Prelate upon his knees, says that Psalm, Te Deum; We
praise thee O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. And thus has the Pope
shown himself to be God: and thus have I shown the Pope, to be the man of
sin, The Antichrist.

Thus have I delivered you Antichrists description: Would God it were an
inscription: would God I could inscribe it, write it in all your hearts, as it
were in Tables of Brass, with a Pen of Steel, that your memories might be
handmaids to your judgments: that you might judiciously and continually
examine the truth of these particulars.

For my conscience tells me, that I have taught these points without malice,
I need not repent it: and without idle ignorance, I need not recant it. And
before I ever retract any point, especially the whole parallel, I must first
be convicted by better arguments than yet I could ever find in Bellarmine,
Suarez, Lessius, Steuartius, Eudaemon, Malvenda, Sanders, Monarchomachia, or
the whole College of Rhemes. Although I think they have not many who can say
more than these have done in this controversy: I have made it plain, and
(with Gods assistance in my succeeding Sermons) I will make it plain, yet more
fully, that the Pope is the head, and the Papists the members of that wretched
body, Antichrist.

Concerning the Papists, I say of them, as S. Paul did of the Jews: My desire
is that all Israel may be saved, that all Christendom may be reformed.
Especially, for our own Countrymen, it is the prayer of my soul, that God
would open their eyes, that they may see where they are, in Babylon^: and whom
they serve, even the very Antichrist. But if they be blinded, by pleasure, by
profit, by affected ignorance, or which is worst, by partial affection: we
must leave them to God. Howbeit, if they will not turn to us, let us pray,
that we may be preserved from them. Let us pray continually, That God will
preserve from them, our persons, our children, our families, our friends, our
Church, our Common wealth, our King, and all his Kingdoms.

Now, from the Pope and Antichrist: and from all popish and antichristian
invasions, rebellions, and persuasions:
The Lord preserve us all:
Even all the days of our lives.
Amen, Amen.
SERMON XI.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. Remember you not, that when I was yet with you I told
you these things?
What hindered the revelation of Antichrist. The Roman Empire not to be
abolished. It is removed. Of Travelers, and traveling to Rome.

THis point of Antichrist being delivered from the third verse, unto the
thirteenth: therein I proposed five particulars to be passed through.
Antichrist described, revealed, destroyed, confirmed, and received. The
description I have dispatched, with the four branches thereof. I have showed
his Time, Titles, Place, and Properties. I proceed to the Revelation of
Antichrist, set down in these four following verses* Which administer two
things considerable: a digression in the fifth verse, and a progression in the
remnant of this Text. The digression is a putting them in mind of so^e private
doctrine, wherein he had secretly instructed them: Remember ye not, that when
I was yet with you I told you these things. In the progression there are three
points, How, When, and What.

First, How Antichrists revelation was hindered: And now you know what
withholds, in the sixth verse; and he who lets, in the seventh.

Secondly, When Antichrist shall be revealed: He shall be revealed in his time,
when that which withholds, and he who lets, shall be taken out of the
way, in the sixth and seventh verses.

Thirdly, What is the thing which then hindered, after to be revealed? A strange
work of Antichrist, called by as strange a name, (...), The mystery of
iniquity, in the seventh verse; and the name of the Worker is very suitable, in
the eight verse, (...)* That wicked one. My discourse shall be answerable to
this division: I will also deliver the same two points, a digression, and a
progression. First, That the point of Antichrist is necessary to be known in
our time. Next, How the person of Antichrist was hindered to be known in S.
Paul's time.

Having accomplished the half of this treatise: I seem to be like a Bark in
the midst of our English sea, betwixt Dover and Calais: When I look
backward, I see a large Sea which I have sailed through: and yet I see as much
(which also must be cut through) lying before me. Now that God, who did guide
his Israel through the red sea, notwithstanding the persecution and
prosequution of the Egyptians: he bring my labor and your understanding to
the end of this Prophecy, maugre the Chariots and Horsemen of those
Babylonians, who pursue us with the spirit of contradiction.

The first point is, that the Point of Antichrist is necessary to be known in
our time. Herod Iuells Apolog. page 134.
caused all the Records of the Genealogies to be burned; lest the Israelites
should thereby know that he was an Edomite. So the Pope, and such as are popish
in faction or affection, would inhibite the people such Scriptures as speak of
Antichrist; fearing (the truth) that those Records would discover the Pope to
be Antichrist, and the Papists Antichristian. But they must first sponge out
this verse, before this inhibition will be esteemed justificable. Sermons are
worth the hearing, which have a repetition; and Books the reading, which have a
second ed^tion. Concerning this point, in this verse, S. Paul does more. First,
he does preach it in private: Secondly, he does write it for the public: and
thirdly, he does urge the remembrance thereof. Ter si pultanti, he does mention
it three times, as a motive to make us Search into it at all times. Et aes illi
triplex circapectus, his heart is girded with a threefold gable of untamed
obstinatenesse, who will be negligent where S. Paul does urge us to be
diligent: (...), Remember ye not (says my Text) that when I was yet with you,
I told you these things?

But to frame my conclusions from their own conce^sions. Sanders renders five
causes Sanders de Antichrist^dem. 2.
of Antichrist: the Efficient, a just God, that thereby he might ma^e known
the malice of Satan, the power of Christ, and the patience of the Church. The
next, or subordinate efficient, the subtle malicious devil, who makes
Antichrist his instrument to seduce miserable men. The Material is Antichrist
himself, a mere man. The Form is the powerful working imp^etie of Satan.
And the End of Antichrists coming, is that they may be punished who will not
rece^ve the truth.

All which causes are contained in this chapter. The Efficient in the eleventh
verse, God shall send them strong delusion. The Subo^dinate in the ninth, He
comes after the work^ng of Satan. The Matter in the third verse, he is
termed The man of sin. The Form in the seventh, Antichr^stian^sme is called
the Mystery of iniquity. And the End is set down in the end of the Prophecy,
in the twelfth verse, (...), Antichrist shall come, that they all might be
damned, which believe not the truth. As therefore we love God, or hate the
Devil: as we hope for salvat^on, or fear our damnation: so are we bound to
search this necessary point, this point of Antichrist.

Finally, let a Dutch Papist concur in this conclu^^on with this English
Papist: Multa Lessius de Antich^isto praesat.
apud Damelem, Paulum, and in Apocalypsi Iohannis de Antichristo habeantur, and
valde sit necessaria, eorum notitia, Ecclesiae -- ut sideles possint tempestive
moneri, ne ab illo circumveniantur: That is, there are many things written by
Daniel, Paul, and in the Revelation concerning Antichrist, the knowledge
whereof is very necessary for the Church -- whereby the faithful may in time
be admonished, lest they should be intrapped by that son of perdition. We
therefore are less beholden to that learned Protestant whosoever, which shall
inhibite any faithful man, members of the Church, from laboring to know
Antichrist, than we are to the popish Jesuit Lessius, who acknowledges that
knowledge to be very necessary for them.

But it may be objected; This point is difficult; and therefore it may not be
searched into. And it may be answered, This point is difficult; and therefore
excellent: and therefore it must be searched into.

Moreover, the Holy Ghost did deliver this excellent matter, in a difficult
manner, for three reasons: for those who follow Christ; for those who follow
Antichrist; and for those who follow neither, Christ nor Antichrist.

First, for those who did follow neither: lest the Heathen and Romans should
have been exasperated, if they had been informed that a Viper should have
proceeded out of the Church, to devour the Dragon of their Empire. Occumenius
in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 5.
(...) (...), says Occumenius. That is, S. Paul uttered this prophecy thus
obscurely, that he might not provoke the Romans unto unnecessary enmity. And it
is the opinion of many of the learned, that many of those heavy persecutions
were commenced and continued by the Romans against the Christians, because
from this prophecy they had apprehended an inkling that the Church of Rome
should teeme him, that should subvert the Empire of Rome.

The same obscurity is used, because of those which follow or favor
Antichrist, that (by an (...), a just recompense of reward) God might harden
them judicially, who had hardened themselves habitually. This mystery of
Antichrist is spoken to them in Parables, that seeing they may see, and not
perceive: and hearing they may hear and not understand, Mark 4. 11, 12.

And finally, this prophecy is penned in these dark and difficult terms, for
their sakes who do truly follow Christ: that true Christians might be hereby
excited unto industry and invocation: to read constantly, that they may know;
and to pray continually, that they may eschew that Man of sin, and Son of
perdition.

Let my heart therefore exhort you, in the words of our Savior, John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures: for certainly these do testify of Christ; yea and of
Antichrist also. Do that noble act of those noble Bereans, Acts 17. 11. Search
the Scriptures daily, whether these things be so. I desire not to obtrude any
thing upon facility, or credulity: but ponder every point. I distrust not my
ability to satisfy the hearer, or to justify the speaker, in any reasonable
manner, or measure. In the phrase of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. I dare
appeal to the judgment of any indifferent auditors: Prove all things: Hold
fast that which is best. Hear me: Read others: Examine all. I say
confidently, Prove all things: and God grant you may hold fast that which is
best.

The digression being dispatched in the first verse: I proceed to the
progression in the next: to wit, How the person of Antichrist was hindered to be
known in S. Paul's time. A point worthy to be commended to our consideration,
for on this ground does Bellarmine build his second Bell. de P. R. lib. 3. c. 3.
Demonstration. The Pope (says he) cannot be the Antichrist, Quia impedimendum
nondum sublatum est; because that which hindered, is not yet removed out of the
way. And withal, Bellarmine Steuartius in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 5.
following the Greek and Latin Fathers, says, that the Apostle does here
speak De Romani imperij eversione, of the eversion of the Roman Empire.
Whereof he made mention to the Thessalonians, plainly, when he was present with
them: but being absent from them, he durst not write it, for fear that this
prophecy might be published to the notice of the Romans, whose hatred he knew
thereby he should incur.

Moreover, those Fathers, and Bellarmine, conceived the sense of this sentence
to be this, Ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed: that is, The
flourishing estate of the Roman Empire did hinder the coming of Antichrist.
Answerable to which exposition is the tradition of Tertullian, Optatus, and
Lactantius; Pererius in Dan. li. 14. p. 677
that it was a prime prayer in the Primitive Church, Pro conservatione Romani
Imperij, that God would preserve the Roman Empire: the Christians (says
Pererius) persuading themselves, That Antichrist could not come, so long as
that did flourish. The probable cause whereof is assigned by Chrysostom, by
way of precedents: that as the Babylonian Monarchy was subverted by the
Persians, the Persian by the Macedonians, and the Macedonian by the Romans: so
in the conclusion, the Romans themselves should have their Scepter wrestled
out of their Herculean fists, by the Herculean labor of Antichrist. And the
event says Amen, to all this. It seems that the Roman Empire, by their
tyranny and persecution did hinder the rising of Antichrist. For so long as the
Church was under persecution, the Man of sin could not rise to his
greatness: which he did immediately upon the fall of the Roman Empire. And
(as I touched before) it is thought that the very suspicion that the Christians
should be the overthrow of the Roman Empire, was the cause of many bloody
persecutions.

The (...), or reciprocal consent, is this: that the Roman Empire did hinder
the coming of Antichrist, and that Antichrist would come immediately on the
fall thereof. The (...), but we dissent concerning the manner thereof. To
borrow Bellarmines phrase, we say it is inclinatio, they desolatio: we say a
diminution, they that an absolute dissolution of the Roman Empire shall be (as
Cyprian spoke of Decius) Metator Cyprian. Epist. 22
Antichristi, the Harbinger of Antichrist.

Before I proceed to this point, I will in two words propose four theses, and
as many parentheses: the first be allowed by the Papists, and the last
inferred thence by the Protestants.

First, out of the sixth and seventh verses, (...), and (...), What
withholds, and who lets: these articles imply rem, personam, both the
Empire and the Emperor: yet no singular person, but a long succession of the
one and the other. Therefore (...), and (...), The Antichrist, and the Man of
sin signify (in like manner) a succession, and not one singular person.

Next, in the seventh verse, (...) he who now lets, that is, the Empire and
Series or succession of those Emperors, which was in S. Paul's time. Therefore
no Empire nor Emperor of our time is meant in this prophecy.

Thirdly, out of the same verse, (...), who only lets, as if he had said
that the Empire was that only impediment, and so soon as it should be
removed, Antichrist would instantly be revealed. The revelation therefore of
the Popish Antichrist, and Jewish Christ, will be both ad Graecas Calendas, in
no time future: for their Revelation is long since passed already.

And finally, (...), de medio tolli, to be taken out of the way, does not
signify to be abol^shed out of the world, but to be removed out of the way. In
this sense runs this phrase in other places of the Scripture. Thus actively,
Act. 17. 33. S. Paul departed, de medio illorum, the meaning is not that he
departed out of the world, or dyed; but that he departed out of the way, or
left their company. Again, passively, Matt. 13. 49. the Angel shall sever the
wicked, de med^o justorum, we cannot imagine that the wicked shall be
abolished* but only that they shall be separated. Therefore it is a paradox not
to be named, to affirm that the very name of the Emperor must be
extinguished, before Antichrist can be revealed.

Therefore our position and exposition is warranted by the ((...)) very letter
of the Text: Imperium esse e medio tollendum, non prorsus delendum, as our
worthy D. Whitaker does Whitaker in ^ell. Contr. 4. qu. est. 5.
deliver it: that is, the Roman Empire must be removed out of the way, not
abol^shed out of the world, before the revealing of Antichrist. To add light
to the Sun; we may annexe two reasons.

First, the Emperor, or he who lets, must be removed no farther, than only
that Antichrist may have room to seat his Throne in the City situated on seven
hills, which S. John has foretold to be the Metropolis of Antichrist, Revel.
17. 9. and is by Bellarmine acknowledged Bell. de Romans P^nt. lib. 2. c. 2.
to be meant of Rome. Now for this it is enough, that the Empire be removed
into some further part; not utterly to be abolished, or cast out of the world.
Which the Pope seems to M. Higg^nsin Apoc. 182. Ser. 2. page 40.
approve by one of his own actions. Of late time (because he pretends some
particular interest in that kingdom) he installeth the Kings of Naples, with
this caution: That they shall never take the Empire upon them; Fearing the
potency of so near a neighbor, to be a prejudice to his triple Crown. It is
therefore the power and neighborhood, not the name and title of the Empire
which is the let to Antichrist.

Secondly, S. John says in the third verse of Revelation the thirteenth, that
one head of the Beast (which is interpreted to be the Roman Empire) was
wounded to death: but so, that that deadly wound was healed. The Empire
therefore is not to be abolished.

Finally, that which did let was not inane nomen, the bare name, but the power
of the Empire. Now when the power was abolished, that which let ((...)) was
removed. Therefore the Empire was not utterly to be extinguished. This
experience it self does abundantly testify: for the seat of the Roman Empire
is removed from the City of Rome: and that Imperial imperious power is long
since expelled out of Italy. All which I will shut up with one singular
Syllogism, shaped out of their own assertions. The old Empire of Rome was to
be divided into ten kingdoms or more: this is most certain, says Suarez.
But no Roman Catholic Suarez lib. 5. cap. 9 sect. 15. Christo^^ors^n part. 2
page 49.
did ever dream that this present Roman Empire shall ever be divided into ten
kingdoms: this is the assumption of Michael Christophorson. Therefore the
Present, is not the old Roman Empire. That is abolished, though not utterly:
yet so far as it can let the kingdom of Antichrist. The name thereof and
title is only surviving. Therefore ((...)) that which lets is taken out of
the way. What hinderance then can be in the way of this conclusion? Antichrist
is revealed: and sits in that City which once was the seat of the Roman
Empire.

Thus I conceive it to be manifest, that the Roman Empire was not to be
extinguished, but only to be removed. Howbeit, I will follow them on their
own grounds; and show them that there is a dissolution and desolation of that
Roman Empire Saint Paul speaks of in this place, the bare name only
excepted. I begin with Bellarmines words: Desecit imperium in Bell. de R. P lib
3 cap. 5.
Occidente: Orientis autem imperium per Turcam destructum videtur: that is, The
Roman Empire did fail in the West: and in the East we see it destroyed by the
Turks. Indeed (as he says) the western Empire was raised again by Charles
the great: therefore that Empire was once removed: therefore at that time
Antichrist was removed. Again, when the Empire was overthrown by the Goths,
there was no Emperor in the west, for the space of 325 years: where was
(...), he that let that long season? If we be not out of our wits, we must
acknowledge that he was removed out of the way. Antichrist then had opportunity
to come, there was none to let him. And finally this present Emperor is
Germane Germanus, in truth the Germane Empire, not the Roman: whereof he is
only the image: Having neither the seat, not the Tribute, nor the Territories,
nor hardly one Town of the old Roman Empire: in derision Knowles Hist. of the
Turks.
whereof the Turk terms this Emperor the King of Vienna. And I suppose that
that title is not the (...), that which did or could let and withold the Man
of sin to be revealed. Therefore the Roman Empire (qua (...),) so far
forth as it did, or ever could hinder the coming of Antichrist, is utterly
abolished, and absolutely extinguished: and nothing now but the mere Name, and
bare Title thereof remaining. To confirm our conclusion by a cloud of their
own witnesses: with all reverence I acknowledge the author of this catalogue to
be the same famous man from who^ I have borrowed many of my materials for
these Sermons, D. Downame of Dery. The falling Dounam. Episc. Derensis de
Antichrist. part. 2. Them. 8. Anselmus in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Thomas in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
away of the Nations from the Roman Empire is already accomplished, says
Anselmus. Thomas secondeth him, Iam diu^gentes a Romano Imperio recesserunt,
that is, those nations have long since revolted from the Roman Empire.
Imperium quod s^orebat tempore Pauli -- caruit Imperatore plurimis Lyranus in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
annis, (says Lyranus) The Empire in which S. Paul did live, and of which S.
Paul did speak, did want an Emperor many years. Everhardus said, The
majesty of the Roman Empire, Aventinus Annal. 7.
by which the world was once governed, Sublata est e terris, is taken out of
the earth. The present Emperor, vana appellat^o, is a vain name, and sola
umbra, the only very shadow thereof. Stapulensis propounds it by way
Stapulensis l. b 9. in 2 Thessalonians.
of interrogation, which is the strongest assertion: Vbi nunc quaeso Romana
Monarchia? I Viegas in Apoc. Com. 2. sect. 17. nu. 2.
pray you where is now the Roman Empire? Dominicus a Soto said, Temporale
Romanae urbis imperium jam cessavit; that the Temporal Empire of the Roman
City is gone long ago. Iustinianus, Vix tenuem quandam umbram Imperij
retineat, Benedict. lust. in 2 Thessalonians 2.
This Empire is scarcely a poor shadow of that old Empire of Rome. Salmeron,
Totidem syllabis, concludes our cause in our very words: Imperium Romanum jam
diu eversum est, The Roman Empire (says he) is destroyed long since. All
addition is superfluous to so plain an assertion.

Though this be plain enough, yet peradventure some will require an
Historical relation of the particulars of this point: and thus I render it.
Concerning the removing of the Emperor, who let the Papacy, the pair of
Popes, who finished this feat, were Constantine and Gregory the second.

It is the observation of that noble Knight (who is the Champion of our
Calling, and thereby Sr H^n^y Spelman a^ non temerandis Eccles^is page 83.
the Honor of his own) that there were two special Persecutors of the Church,
Dioclesian and Julian: but the last was most pestilent: Dioclesian, occidebat
Presbyteros, did kill the Ministers; but Julian, occidebat Presbyterium, did
kill the Ministry. For he spoiled their Revennues, whereby Ignorance issued,
and Religion decreased. Semblably, the hinderer of Antichrist, had two notable
Adversaries, Pope Constantine and Gregory the second: but the last was most
notorious. Constantine occidebat Imperatorem, did kill the Emperor: but
Gregory, occidebat Imperium, did (as it were kill) extinguish the Empire, that
it never revived again in the West. So that removing both (...), and (...), e
medio, both the hinderer, and the thing hindering out of the way; Antichrist
did march in the Popes High way, to the Temple without any impeachment.

About seven hundred years after Christ, Mornaeus Mist. Iniq. Progr. 27.
Philippicus the Emperor, commanded all Images to be taken out of the
Churches. On this pretense Pope Constantine, pronounced him an Heretic, and
commanded, that neither his Picture should be placed in their Churches, nor his
Name mentioned in their Prayers. Which administered Platin. in vit. Constant.
occasion, and audaciousnesse, to one Arthemius to rebel. This rebel did
beat his Master, take him, put out his eyes, and put him from the Empire. But
though (...) the Emperor was removed, yet (...), the Empire remained: and so
there remained one rub, that removed, the way were wholly cleared. Therefore
about the year 717 the Emperor Leo 3, surnamed Mornae. Mist. Pro^^es. 27. ^^
ar. 10. 3. (...) ^3. (...) page 373.
Isauricus, publishing an Edict against Images, Pope Gregory 2, excited the
Venetians, the people of Ravenna, and of Rome it self to Rebellion, arming
those Rebels with an Absolution from the oath of Allegiance, and an
inhibition, to pay any more Tribute to the Emperor. The Bridle being taken
from their necks, these beasts fell with a brutish fury on their Emperors
Lieutenants. They invaded Paul Exarch of Ravenna, plucked out the eyes of Peter
Duke of Rome, murdered Exhileratus the Duke of Campania, and filled all Italy
with blood, and robberies. And to bolt the door, when they Ba^on. te. 9. Anno
726. Artic. 34.
had shut their Master out: they took a solemn oath of Fealty to the Pope.
And thus anno 729, by the Holy means, of the Popes Holiness, was the Emperor
taken e medio, wholly Removed from the Western Empire.

The Hinderer, being thus removed out of the way: the prudent Popes, put this
politic project in practice to keep him out. Least the Emperor should
return to renew the old, or to be a new hinderance in his way. To this
purpose, about the year 750, Zachary, Steven, Mornae. Mist. Im^u. Progr. 27.
and Gregory, struck in with Pipin, Charles, and Charlemaine: that ( Mulus
Mulum) the Pope should anoint him, and them Kings of France: and that he and
they should gratify the Pope, with the Donatives of Rome and Ravenna. In
pursuit of which purchase they prosecuted ^^stuphus, and Desiderius Kings of
the Longobardi (then possessing those provinces of Italy) with (...) hostility:
But in the performance thereof, the Emperor of Constantinople interposed his
entreaty by Ambassadors, that there might be Restitution made of those
provinces, to him, the right Owner and Heir of them. To whom Ripin returned a
ready, and resolute reply; That for his souls sake, he had promised them as a
Patrimony to Saint Peter: and for Saint Peter's sake, he must and would perform
it: which he did indeed. And so, about 757, was the Emperor, and his Exarchs,
utterly excluded out of Italy. He who lets being thus removed, what now
let, that That wicked one was not, even Then revealed.

To sum up all these in a shorter Synopsis: we must consider the time of the
Empires removal, to be distributed into three degrees: the Inchoation,
Augmentation, and Consummation thereof.

The Inchoation, and beginning of the Emperors removing out of the Popes way,
was anno 332, when Constantine, went from Rome to Constantinople, leaving that
City empty, and so a fit seat for the Pope. Then that saying was verisied,
Hodie venenum effusum est in Ecclesiam, that is, That day poison was poured
into the Church, because Antichrist had then opportunity to be admitted into
Rome. And although afterward, after the death of Constantine, and of
Constantines son, the Empire was divided, into the Eastern and Western: yet
the western Emperor did never after this reside at Rome, but at Millan, or
Ravenna: a fair ground for the erecting of Antichrists Metropolis: The
Augmentation and increase whereof followed anno 475, the Western Empire being
extirpated by the Gotthes: the succession of those Emperors was in that year
absolutely extinguished in Augustulus: Neither was there any other Emperor in
the West, for 325 years after that calamity. Nevertheless Antichrist did not
appear in his lively colors, because the Grecian Emperors, after they had
wrested Rome, and Ravenna out of the hand of the Gotthes, by the Arms of
Narses, and Bellisarius, did exercise their authority (by the Exarchs of
Ravenna their Deputies) over the Popes themselves. But the Consummation, full
and small removing of this Empire was accomplished about the 727 year of the
Lord. When Leo Isaurus, (because of the contention concerning Images) was
excommunicated by the two Gregory's, the second, and the third: those
Emperors, lost all their interest in Italy, and were wholly expelled: Now,
sublato impedimento emergit actio: therefore, the Empire is gone, and
Antichrist is come sitting in the very seat of the Ancient Roman Emperors.

Intus existens, prohibet alienum: If water, be in a vessel, Air can have no
entrance, nor residence. Pour out the water, and the Air enters
immediately, and remains constantly: So was Rome to the Emperors and the
Pope. That we may say Rome, the great City, was the seat of the great
Emperor: but is the Throne of the great Antichrist.

Here I cannot say, whether I should more dehort men from going to Rome, or
rather bewail them who have traveled thither already, I may truly say of
those Travelers what Lypsius does of all Travelers: vagari and discurrere
Lypsius ep. 22. Cent. 1.
quivis potest: indagare, and disquirere pauci. Many purpose to travel, few
travel to any purpose. If there be one of ten, who reapeth benefit by
traveling to Rome, he is Decumanus Peregrinator, he shall be chronicled for
the mirror of travelers. That Roman Hieroglyphick, S. P. Q. R. our
Countryman Beda has prophetically expounded of our Countrymen, traveling to
Rome, S. Stulius, P. Populus. Q. Quaerit, R. Romam, that is, Foolish Gallants
are fond to see Rome. For by going to Rome, do they bring back any glory to
God, good to their Country, or grace to their persons? Yea I fear that some
of them may say with Saint Augustine, Ibam and Perebam: Curiosity led them, and
Christianity left them: that they have learned the Italian Tongue, but lost an
English heart, that they change the Catholic for the Roman Religion.
Miserable Travelers are they! and God grant we may no more have any such
Travelers.

I condemn not all, who have traveled to Rome. All such travelers are like
Hierams Navy 2 Chro. 9. 21. Some indeed bring home gold and silver, increase
their knowledge, confirm their Religion, and enrich their Country with
observations of both. But most bring home as it follows in that text, Apes
and Peacocks: nothing but apish mimicall gestures, and Peacocke-like
fantastical apparel.

I may range our Travelers unto Rome into three ranks: some travel
seriously, some simply, and some subtlely. Some travel to Rome seriously, as
Joshua and Caleb did to Canaan, Number. 14. 9. to tell us of the weakness of our
Enemies: and to show us, that their Practice in Italy is worse (if worse can
be) than their Positions in Popery. But such travelers are like Joshua and
Caleb, hardly two of twelve, yea scarcely two of a Tribe, of a whole Country.
Others travel of simplicity, only because they may say, that they have been
travelers: they spend their Fathers means, and their own time, and there is
an end of their travel. These travel, as Saul and his servant would have
traveled to the Land of Zuph. 1 Samuel 9. 5. They bring the Fathers asses ^ome
to his house again, and there is the end of their Journey. But some travel of
subtlety to Rome: as Ismael did to Ammon, Ier. 40. 14. to return to murder
their Countrymen. Papists under the pretense of traveling, go to the forge
of Treason: and return armed to apprehend any opportunity, to ruin our Church
and Commonwealth. I will say therefore of Rome, what God said of Sinai, Exodus
19. 12. Take heed, go not up to that City, touch not the borders thereof.
Forwhosoever does touch that City, is in danger of Death! he may hazard either
his body or his soul.

I must add to my entreaty; Let me entreat you moreover, not only to beware
that you do not go to Rome, but also beware that Rome do not come to you.
Novimus longas Regibus esse manus, our proverb says that Kings have long
hands: the Pope therefore (who styles himself Rex regum the greatest King) he
must have the longest hands. And indeed, so he has. The Pope has two (too)
long hands, which will reach men beyond the Walls of Rome, or bounds of Italy
either. He has one hand to reach you on one side, at the Spa, when ye go for
Physic: and another hand to catch you on the other side, in Spain, when you
go for Traffic. Yea the Pope is another Artaxerxes, Longimanus, he has a
mighty long hand, which can reach as far as England: to catch you in your
friends houses, by cunning disputations: or in your own houses, by a more
private persuasion. Longimanus! yea Centimanus, the Pope has an Hundred hands,
to compass Sea and Land, to make one Proselyte, one child of the Devil.
Neither are his hands wooden hands, dull and heavy, without joints, and
sinews: but every Agent is an hand of flesh, yea of spirit, full of nimble
activitie; those Popish, to boast themselves, and slander others: to seduce
you, traduce us, and belie all: to bring Pamphlets to you, or to bring you to
the Mass. Wheresoever the Pope has an hand, these actions are at his fingers
end.

But how may a man withstand these mighty, these many hands? To withstand all
these hands: take but one thing: one Heart. Let every English man be like the
men of Zebulun, 1 Chronicles. 12. 23. to have not (...) a double Heart, one heart
for Rome, and another Heart for England: one heart for the Papists, another for
the Protestants. But to have one true heart, in sound obedience to God, and in
unfeigned innocence to Man. Such an heart is murus ahene us a coat of maile,
against all the hands of Rome, yea and their tongues also. Now he that has
given us all our hearts, give such an heart, such a true heart to every one of
us; Amen. Amen.

SERMON XII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. He shall be revealed.
The Time of the Revelation of Antichrist. Where our Church was before Luther.
Affected Ignorance of Antichrist.

I Have discoursed on the Digression in the fifth verse: and on the first point
in the Progression, what hindered that the man of sin could not be revealed.
I proceed unto the second point in the 8 verse, when he shall be revealed. The
third, (...), the mystery of iniquity, in the seventh, I must reserve to
another exercise: it is a point of much moment, and more material, then any
that has yet, or shall be hereafter handled in this controversy.
Nevertheless, this also, (...), Suarez Apolog. lib. 5. cap. 5. Bell. de P.
Romans 3. 3.
He shall be revealed, is very necessary. Suarez makes it an argument,
Bellarmine a demonstration, and Lessius argues in the same manner, Lessius de
Antichr. Them. 8.
that The Pope is not Antichrist, because Antichrist is not yet revealed.
Again, to know Antichrist, is the end of all Controversies! to know Antichrist
revealed is the end of this controversy. Matthew. 3. 10. Psalm 90. 17.
Here I lay the Axe to the root of the Tree. In the performance whereof,
Prosper the works of our hands, O Lord prosper thou our handie work.

In the eight verse we have it, He shall be revealed. That we do not shut our
eyes, we may take notice, that the Ancients did always open their eyes to
observe this thing, The Revelation of Antichrist. Even within 200 years after
Christ, the Christians had even then an expectation of the revealing of
Antichrist says Nicephorus, in the time of Al: Severus. About Nicephorus lib.
4. cap 39. Baron. 10. 2. page 533.
250, Gallus being Emperor, the same expectation was revived says Baronius.
After 300 sprang Arrius, by the common voice of the Christians in those days,
called Christomachus, and Principium Antichristi, the Adversary of Christ, and
of spring of Antichrist, this being as it were a watchword to expect the grand
Antichrist. After three hundred and fifty years under Valens and
Valentinianus, the militant Baronius tom. 4. 296.
Church was rouzed by the same Alarm, as if Antichrist had been approaching.
About 400 Hieron. epist. ad Geront. de Morogamia. Epist. Episc. Gall^^ and
Germ. ad Anast. 2.
Saint Hierome did put it beyond peradventure, that Antichrist was at hand.
About 500 diverse French and Germane Bishops did imply unto Pope Anastasius the
second, that Antichrists throne was expected to be erected in Goldastum in
Constitut. Imperialium Rationali part. 1. fol. 48. Greg. lib. 4. epist. 38.
Hilar. adversus Arianos page 311 Baronius Anno 900 sect. 1, 2, 3.
Italy. About 600 Gregory wrote Rex superbiae prope est, that Antichrist
followed at his heels. And Hilary mentioned imminentis Antichristi praevios,
the Harbingers of Antichrist, who come immediately before him. But in the year
900, even Baronius professes visurum se abominationem desolationis in Templo,
tum a Daniele tum a Domino ipso praedictum, that, in that age (of those wicked
Popes) he saw the Abomination of Desolation in the Temple, mentioned by
Daniel, and by Christ himself. After Epist. Episcopo. Germaniae and Belg. ad
Nicholaum 2. apud Goldastum in Constitutionum Imperalium part. 1. fol. 50.
Author vitae Henrici 4. Aventinus lib. 5.
a thousand years after our Savior, the Bishops of Germany wrote to Pope
Nicholas the second, that Rome was Babylon, and the Romish Bishop, the person
who made himself, as if he were God, subject to no error. Fifty years after
this, Henry 4 Emperor complained of the tyranny of the Pope Gregory 7, calling
him Antichrist. The same Henry 4, (according to some Henry 3,) published the
same thing, to all the Princes of Christendom, concerning Pope Pascall the
second, that he labored to sit more Antichristi in templo Dei, as Antichrist
in the Temple of God. Toward 1150, the Bishop Magdeburg. Cent. 12. cap. 9.
of Florence did preach publicly, that Antichrist was come: against whom Pope
Paschal 2, called the Council of Florence. Yea in that Bernard ^p. 125 Sermon.
33. in Cant. Sermon. 6, and 7. in Psalm. 91. Baronius Anno 1130. Artis. 6.
age, no phrase was more familiar to Bernard, than Bestiam Apocalyp. 13, Sti
Petri Cathedram occupare, that that Beast Revel. 13. did sit in the Chair of
Peter. Where Baronius his answer is not solid, that Bernard spoke this against
schismatic Antipopes, for hereby Bernard acknowledges, that Antichrist may
sit at Rome, which is enough for this present: although Bernardus non vidit
omnia. About 1200 years after our Savior, Everard Archbishop of Saltzburgh
made an oration in the presence of Otho Duke of Bavaria at the synod of
Ratisbone, wherein he avouched Pope Gregory 9, to be Antichrist. In the same
age, the Emperor Petr. de Vi^cis lib. 1. ^p. 31.
Frederick 2, in an Epistle directed to all the Prelates of Christendom,
called the same Pope, the Father of distord, the Dragon, the 2 Balaam, and
Antichrist. So did their Ioachim Roger Hovend. Annal part. post. Bell. de P. R.
lib. 3. cap. ^. Avent. lib. 6
of Calabria, says our Hovenden. So did our Wickliffe, says their Bellarmine.
Gerochus Bishop of Richemburg put forth a pamphlet to that purpose, and called
it De Antichristo. Hellen queen mother to Richard the second Petrus ^^es^^s.
epist. 14^.
of England, spared not Pope Caelestine 3, but styled him, The son of
Perdition, and his City Babylon.

Anno 1300 arose Marsilius Patavinus, Franciscus Pless. mist Oppos. 53.
Petrarcha, the Prophecies of Hildegarde, Petrus Cassiodorus, and principally
Johannes Bitterensis a Franciscane Friar, who composed Postills on the
Apocalypse, calling the Pope the mystical Antichrist: who being dead he was
dug out of his Grave for his labor. Anno 1350 our William of Ockame accused
Clemens 6, to be Antichrist: and Nicholas Orem said as much of, and to Pope
Vrbane 5. Toward Avent. lib. 7.
1400, many Bulls were set forth by the Popes, and Antipopes, whereby each
denounced other Biblia P^uperu^, Anno 1363. Pless. Progr. 58.
to be Antichrist. If it be an infallible truth which the Pope pronounces e
Cathedra: it may go for a probability, that an Antipope (at the least) may be
the Antichrist; for so their own Bulls have defined it.

Finally, in the 1500, arose Hieronimus Savanarola, Mantuanus, and many other,
who spa^e more boldly and broadly, that the Pope was Antichrist: till Luther
and the Lutherans did fully accomplish the revelation of the Church
Antichristian, and happily begin the Relation of the Religion in the West.
reformation of the Church Christian. Nay some say, that at this day, some of
the Popish Church (vid. diverse in France) do hold The Pope to be Antichrist.

Thus these Ancients had a glimmering twilight of Antichrist: the elder were
before him, the later under him. To the first he was as an object too distant
from the eye: to the other, as an object too near the eye. Therefore neither
could see him clearly, as we may and do at this day. Of them, I may speak
that sentence of our Savior, Matthew. 13. 17. Verily I say unto you, many
Prophets, and righteous men have desired to see these things which you see, and
have not seen them.

But to show that he is, and how he is revealed in our time: (...), Saint Paul
says, He shall then be revealed, to wit, when the Emperor is ruined, then
shall Antichrist be revealed. This is Saint Hieromes prediction, Quitcnebat,
Hieron. ^^ist. ad Geront de Monogami^.
de medio sit, and non intelligimus Antichristum appropinquare? He who did
withold, is taken out of the way: and conceive we not that Antichris^ is at
hand? And this is Machiavells (...). Hist. Flo. cat. l^^ ^.
collection: The falling of the Emperor was the rising of the Pope. Moreover,
betwixt the desolation of the Empire, and the revelation of Antichrist, Saint
Paul ponit nullum medium, as Ni^^. Or^mus Biblia P^^, (...).
Orem well observes, no distance of time. But the Emperor who heretofore had
the power of Election, Investiture, Calling of Councills, and Le^e 27 ^e Episc.
and ^^. ^. ^ ^. theodos.
of imposing Laws on the Popes: has now nothing left him, but nomen sinere,
the bare Name of the Emperor. As the Emperor himself acknowledged,
Frederick by name (...), Radevicus lib 2. cap. 31.
it follows then that Antichrist is come already. Now I must reveal to you,
how God has revealed him to us.

Revelabitur, id est, regnabit says Carthusian: Dimysius (...) in 2. ^hes 2.
(...) in B^ll (...). 4. Quaest. 5.
he shall be revealed to the Church, that is, he shall reign in the Church.
Concerning which we must consider 3, points; Quando Antichristus erat Natu^,
Revelatus, Adornatus: the Preparation, Revelatio^, and Exaltatio^ of his
kingdom.

All Errors generally, Prepared the way and ^shered in Antichrist. In the 7
verse Saint Paul says that (...) the Antichristian mystery was even then a
working. And Saint John, that there were many Antichrists in his time, 1 John
2. 18. who did prepare for the Coming of the maine Antichrist, in our time.
Yet principally, that error of ascribing so much, too much to St. Peter,
confounding Petra and Petrus, expou^ding, Mat. 16. 18. of the person of Peter,
which occasioned such arrogance to the pretended successors of Peter. And this
point deca^tatur in versibus Ambrosij, August. Retract. cap. 21.
it was published in the Poems of S. Ambrose says St. Augustine: but St.
Augustine did retract it as Erroneous. At the least he prefers our
exposition as Bellarmine himself confesses Bell. de Pont. To. lib. 1. cap.
10. ad August. etc.
in that same place, where he labors to retract this retraction of Saint
Augustine. Thus the Error of the Church of Christ, and the Pride of the Church
of Rome were (...) was the preparation to the birth of Antichrist, in the first
four hundred years: yea immediately after the birth of Christ. The Elephant
is said to go with young, ten entire years: but this Monster, was half ten
centuries, 600. years, before she teemed: before Antichrist was borne into the
world.

His Revelation could not but succeed his Preparation. Et ecce duo gladij hic,
Luc. 22. 38. The Revelation of Antichrist has two degrees or Times, in regard
of the twofold Monarchy he aspired unto: Spiritual, and Temporal. In regard
of his spiritual Monarchy, the Pope was revealed to be Antichrist, about 606
years after Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 38.
Christ. Gregory a Pope, called John of Constantinople, the Forerunner of
Antichrist, only because he did claim the Title of Universal Bishop.
Fidenter dico (said he in the fourth book of his Epistles) I conclude
confidently and definitively: the desinitive sentence of a Pope could not be
erroncous. Erroncous therefore it cannot be if we say, that he who atchived that
Title of universal Bishop, was more than a Forerunner, even Antichrist
himself. And I may annex the words of the same Pope, in the same place,
Sacerdotum exercitus ei praeparatur, an Army of Priests serve Antichrist as
their General. Hereupon sidenter di^o, I peremptorily pronounce it, that
Antichrist began to be revealed, about the year 606, when Phocas conferred
upon Pope Boniface 3, the title of Universal Bishop, that thereby he might
regaine the love of the people, which he had lost by the murdering of his
Master Mauritius, (so that Policy, not Piety or Equity gave it him.) But the
Pope pretended sor this, a certain Constitution of the Emperor Iustmian,
wherein he commanded that the Bishop of Rome should have the Preced^nce, and
Prime Place in their Clergy-Convocations; Which Pre-eminence of the Pope, was
afterward ratifyed by the Pope in a solemn Synod celebrated at Rome, under
the said Boniface 3, in the year 607. After that also, about 646, the Pope was
saluted with as illustrious a title, from a Council out of Africa: Rolloch. in
2 These. 2.
Domino Apostolico, culmini sublimato, Sancto Patrum Patri, ^heodoro Papae
summo omnium Praesulum Principi: That is, To the Apostolical Lord, the ^^^
best top and tip of the Church, the holy Father of the Fathers, the Prince of
all Prelates, Theodore the Pope. Add to this that observation of the religious
and reverend Bishop Dounam. E^i^c. Derensis de Antichrist. l^^. 2. cap. 8.
sect. 5.
of Dery. The name Pope (which before was communicated to all Bishops) at this
time began to be appropriated to the Bishop of Rome. I may conclude: in this
time was the beginning of the Papacy. In this time Antichrist began to be
revealed.

In regard of his temporal Monarchy, there are 2 famous numbers in the
Revelation of S. John: and both in the Revelation of the Pope to be
Antichrist. The first is in the last verse of Rev. 13. where the number of the
Beast is said to be 666. And the second is in the second verse of Rev. 20. The
Devil is bound a thousand years. For the first, whether it be the number of a
name, or of a time, or of both, I dispute not: but it is admirable, when in all
senses it shall concur in one man. I say therefore, the Pope was revealed to
usurp an Antichristian temporal Monarchy about the 666, when under
Constantine the third, Pope Vitaliane (who in former times had been Ambassador
for the Emperor) shaking off the yoke of a superior authority, usurped the
government of Rome. Then also began the Mass to be celebrated Rolloch. in. 2
Th^ss. 2. 8.
in the Latin tongue.

The second time is the very time wherein Antichrist was let loose: this time
was the second birth of Antichrist. Wonder not that I name two births of one
Antichrist: for every Monster has something extraordinary. Antichrist
therefore being such a Monster as never was, he may have something which the
world never had: two births. The first anno 666, and the second in the
thousandth year, the Epoch, perfect birth, or complete revelation of
Antichrist. Or like Zarah, Genesis 38. 28. He made a show to be borne, but drew
himself back again for a season. Some say, a Snake will teeme her young, and
being affrighted, will take them into her body again, till they be strong to
shift for themselves. So Satan having teemed Antichrist about the year 666,
finding some opposition, the Dragon might recall him into his womb again, till
he was strong enough for his invasion and usurpation.

From the sixth century, unto the eleventh, Antichrist was come to the birth,
but the Papacy wanted strength to bring him forth: the Temporal Monarchy was
long in hatching. Certainly, the Woman, Revel. 18. 4. was with child, and did
long for something: when Pope Constantine about seven hundred years after
Christ, durst Platina in Constantino. Onuph. apud Plat. in Constable. Sacrar.
Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 5. cap. 7.
pronounce the Emperor Philippicus an Heretic, and disgrace his pictures. And
something was toward coming into the world, when toward eight hundred years
after Christ, Charles the great was the first who received the Imperial Diadem
from the hands of the Pope: the Pope taking upon him to translate the Empire
from the Greeks to the Latins. Gregory the sift did well, (if he did what
Platina Platina in Greg. 5. Bar. an. 996. Artic. 71.
and Baronius relate of him) when anno 996 he consined the Imperial dignity
only to the election of the Germane Nation. And after a thousand years; Inno
Lucina fer opem obsecro; the Lady of Babel was like a woman with child, Isay
26. 17.
that draws near to the time of her delivery: when Silvester the 3 did make
a Law, That no Prince Glabro. lib. 1. in fine.
should presume to seek the Scepter of the Empire, nor take upon him the title
of the Emperor: but only he whom the Pope should elect, and to whom he should
bequeath the Imperial Cognizance: which was a golden Apple, enclosed in a
square, beset with curious Jewels, and a golden Cross on the top thereof.
Accordingly, in the vacancy of the Empire, by the death of Conrade, he
presented it unto Peter King of Hungary, with a Crown, and this inscription:

Petra dedit Romam Petro, tibi Papa Coronam. That is, Christ gave Rome to S.
Peter, and the Pope gives the Empire to King Peter.

But in the thousandth year, according to Revel. 20. 2. Peperit, peperit;
Babell brought forth her first begotten. Hildebrand was the first that did
actually depose any Emperor, as it is avouched by Otho Frisingensis: and Otho
avouched Otho Frising. lib 9 cap. 25. Epis^. R^ffensis de Potest. Papae, cap.
^^0.
by the laborious Treatise of our most learned Bishop. I say about the year
1090, which was a thousand years after S. John wrote the Revelation, the Pope
was fully revealed to be Antichrist. About that thousandth year, the Devil
was unloosed, and Antichrist unmasked. Then did Hell bring forth her first
begotten, and best-beloved Hildebrand, indeed Hell-brand, called Gregory the
seventh. This Pope did tyrannize over the Emperor Henry the fourth, yea and
did transfer the Empire unto Ralph the Duke of Su^v^a:

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho. That is, Christ d^d give the
Empire to Peter, and Peter does give it to Ralph. And although the Empire
prooved to the Duke, (...), yea, (...), the heaviest gift that ever unhappy
Prince entertained: yet this Pope (as is acknowledged by Sigonius, Aventine,
Machiavil, and Guicciardine, Italian Historians:) did so fortify his
predecessors intrusions, that from thenceforth the Emperor lost all his
Sovereignty in Italy. And from thence the Popes have usurped that transcendent
authority, tyranny, to depose the Emperor, and dispose of the Empire.
Therefore fidenter dico, I considently conclude, about the year 1090, some
thousand after Saint John, and some five hundred years before us, The Pope was
plainly revealed to be Antichrist.

Concerning the exaltation of Antichrists Kingdom, this was performed by the
several actions of several Popes: for the enlarging, or rather the executing
of their Papal authority and Antichristian tyranny. To tell all the
particulars were tedious: I will propound a few instances.

The Papacy did not meanly advance it self Otho Frisingens. lib. 7. cap. 10.
anno 1123, when the Emperor Henry the fifth resigned all his right of
investiture unto Calixtus the second. About 1132 Innocentius the second, did
bravely second his assay, when he Kranzius in metro l^b. ^ c. 35
commanded the Emperor Lotharius to be painted at his fee^, as it were
praying the Pope to indow him with the Empire. But Pictures are but shadows:
Our Adrian the fourth came substantially to cope with the Emperor, when about
1153 he suffered Frederick to hold his Pless Mist. Pr^gress 45.
stirrup: and constrained William King of Sicilie, on his knees to crave his
pardon, and confess that he was his Vassal. Alexander the third (as another
Alexander the great) greatly promoted the Papal Monarchy, when he set his foot
on P^trus Iustiu. lib. 2. Rerum Venetarum. Matthew. Paris. in Henr^ 2.
the neck of the Emperor Frederick, 1177. Which may extenuate the insolence
offered by the same Pope to our King Henry the second: although I conceive him
to be the first which was, and the last King that ever shall be whipped by the
command of a Priest. It was a pretty Baron. anno 1191. sect. 1. 10.
Emblem of some incomparable Sovereignty, which the Pope affected, or
achieved over the Emperor, anno 1191, when as Caelestine the third, unto
Henry the sist, did put on his crown, and instantly kick it off with his
foot. It is Innocentius 3. Sermon. 3. de Consecrat. Ponti^.
somewhat incredible which Pope Innocent the third relates of himself, that
he called himself Sponsum Ecclesiae, the Spouse of the Church, about 1210. But
it is intolerable, that Gregory C^^bi pericul. de electione and electi
potestate, in Sixto.
the tenth durst put it into a Decretall, 1272, that the Pope is Sponsus
Ecclesiae, the Spouse of the Church, blaspheming in Print against our Saviors
prerogative. Out-stripped notwithstanding C. Fundamenta de electione and electi
potestate.
is this blasphemy by that of Pope Nicholaus the 3, 1280: who has registered
also in a Decretall, that God did assume Peter, In consortium individuae
unitatis, I dare but relate, not translate such blasphemy.

Anno 1300, Boniface the ninth was no Kranzius in Saxonia lib. 8. cap. 36.
idlesby in promoting the Papacy, when he laid claim to the double power, both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal. In insinuation whereof, at his solemn Jubilee,
one day he appeared unto the people in his Pontisicalibus, or Popelike
apparel: but the next attired like the Emperor. And finally, more solemnly
and arrogantly, Extra. Tit de majoritate and minor. and obedientia. C. unam
Sanct. Ecclesia^^.
subesse Romano Pontifici, omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus,
desinimus, and pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis: he pronounces
it, as his definitive sentence, that No creature can be saved, who is not
subject to the Clementin* unica de jurament.
Pope. Anno 1325, John 22 or 23, did not desire that the light which he added
to the Popish blasphemous usurpations should be put under a bushel, when he
made his additions to the Decretalls, and in his Extravagants or Constitutions,
wherein he claims authority superior to the Emperor, and little inferior
unto God. All these particular Popes have proclaimed themselves to be
Antichrist, and all the Papists in their general popish Council of Constance
cry Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
Amen: Etiamsi Christus instituerit, and administraverit sub utraque specie
Sacramentum: Although Christ did institute and administer the supper of the
Lord in Bread and Wine: Nonobstante: Notwithstanding: -- Pro lege habenda sit:
The Church of Rome does command it as a Law, that no Lay man shall receive it,
but in one kind only. Thus about the fourteen hundredth year of the Lord,
did the Man of sin, who sat in the Temple, exalt himself to the top of the
Temple. Afterward Pius the second, and other active Popes, did add (as it
were) certain scaffolds to raise their Monarchy a little higher. Especially
that Pius plotted how to Epist. Pij 2. ad Princ. Turcarum anno 1532.
bring the Turks also under the Popes authority. To which purpose he
presented their Emperor Mahomet with a large labored learned letter: but the
barbarous Prince was not capable of such a transcendent mystery of
Christianity. His predecessor Eugenius the fourth attempted a little less, and
achieved a little more, when anno 1438 at the Florentine Pless. Mist.
progress. 62. Council. Florent. Sess. ult.
Synod, he enforced Joseph Patriarch of Constantinople to kiss his feet: and
enticed Palaeolagus the Emperor, with some few Greek Bishops, to acknowledge
the Pope to be the Head of the universal Church. The denial whereof Pope Pius
made the maine cause of the irreconciliable Epist. Pij 2. ad Princ. Turcar.
Hist. Papatus cap. 7.
schism between the Grecian and the Roman Churches. The memorial whereof I
conjecture to be the cause of that triumphant posture* which the Popes to this
day usurp in their Chapel; setting their feet on the brass picture of the
Constantinopolitane Patriarch. But in the 1500 year, and time of Leo the
tenth, the Papacy was mounted up to the pinnacle of the Temple. Then was the
(...), the uttermost of their growth, and highest pitch of all the Papal
exaltation: as may appear by these particulars.

Then it was disputed in his Schools, An Papa possit abrogare quod scriptis
Apostolicis traditum Erasmus in 1 Timothy 1.
sit: Whether the Pope could abrogate what was decreed by the Apostles. An
posset statuere quod pugnet cum doctrina Evangelica? Whether the Pope can
command what is contrary to the Gospel: An possit novum articulum sidei
condere? Whether he can make a new article of faith: whether he had equal
power with, or a greater than Peter: Whether he can command the Angels to
dissolve Purgatory: and whether he were a pure man, or participated of two
Natures like Christ. Then was it preached before him, Psalm. 72. 11. Council.
Lateran. Sess 9.
Omnes Reges terrae adorabunt cum, and inservient ei: all Kings shall fall
down before him, all Nations shall do him service. And that he was Leo
detribu Iudae: the Lion of the tribe of Judah. Council. ^ater. Sess. ^. Saciar
Cer. lib. 1 sect. 1. c. ^. Lib. 1 sect. 1. c. 4 Lib. 1 sect. 2. c. 3. Lib. 1.
sect. 3. c. 3. Lib. 1. sect 5 c. 1. ^ Lib 1. sect. 6. c. 3. Lib. 1. sect. 7. c.
6
Then was that Synopsis of Blasphemies dedicated to him, the Book of
Ceremonies: wherein he is termed, the Prince of all Christians; the governor
Vrbis and Orbis, of the whole world; that de facto the Emperor must hold his
stirrup, and Kings carry him on their shoulders: that Emperors and Kings must
wait at his Table: that the Emperor must swear fealty unto him: that Emperors
and Kings must kiss his feet: that he can give a full indulgence for all men's
sins: that Dominabitur a mari usque ad mare, and a slumine usque ad terminos
orbis; that is, His dominion shall be from one sea to another, and from the
flood unto the worlds end: which was spoken of Christ Psalm. 72. 8. and that
Omnis potestas mihi data est, All power is given to me on earth, and in heaven:
which was spoken by Christ, Mat. 28. 18. and so it proceeds in like
senseless endless Blasphemies. Then was it concluded for him, by a Council,
that of Lateran, Papam esse Ecclesia, Whitaker contr. Bell. Contr. 4. Quaest. 5.
and generali Concilio majorem, That the Pope is greater than a General
Council, or than the whole Church. And that we may collect out of the
abundance of what hearts these mouths did speak: Then it was said of him, that
it should Pless. Mist. Progress. 65. Pless. Mist. Opposite. 68.
be said by him, that the Gospel of Christ was a Fable: and nullum esse Deum
secredidisse: and that he did believe that there was no God.

Let now any incredulous English Protestant, who does deride it as an
incredible paradoxe to affirm that the Pope is Antichrist: let any such
imagine how their imaginary Antichrist can say, and do, more Antichristianly,
than this man. And then will I revoke this assertion, which I yet apprehend to
be an incontroulable truth. The Pope is Antichrist: but personally, Leo decimus
was Decumanus Antichristus. In the year 1500 he attained to the pitch of
Antichristianity above all other.

Since that time, the Papacy has been somewhat eclipsed in the luster
thereof: yet so as Antichrist appears through his actions to this day as the
Sun does through a thin Trent Hist. lib. 2. page 260.
cloud at noone day. An hundred years since the prerogative of Antichrist was
nobly established, when their last and great Council of Trent was transacted
with these two cautions: Proponentibus Legatis, and salva semper authoritate
Ecclesiae Apostolicae, that nothing might be propounded but by the Popes
Legates, and nothing concluded against the Popes authority: Whereby that great
Council was made but an engine to fortify their Papal greatness. Much about
that time, the Pope (imitating the magnificence of his Father, who would have
given the whole world, Matthew. 4. 9.) the Pope, I say, did give one quarter of
the world, and divided the two Indias betwixt the two Kings of Spain and
Portugal. Yet half an hundred years since, more peremptorily, Pope Pius the
fifth, e Cathedra, pronounced his power: in a solemn Bull, that he was
Princeps super omnes gentes, and super omnia regna: Prince over all Nations,
Cambd. Annal. Anno 70.
and over all Kingdoms: that he had Plenitudinem potestatis, fullness of
power; Vt evellat, destruat, dissipet, and disperdat: To pluck up, and Ier. 1.
10.
to root up, to destroy, and cast down: Which he the^ indevored to have
exercised upon the person of an (indeed) a Woman, but such a Queen, as did blow
in pieces that swelling bubble. And his Bulla did break like a squib, without
frighting so much as children. Since him, and before him, since Leo the tenth,
the Papacy has Paulus Quintus hi^ Quarrels with Venice page 1. and 3.
been in a reciprocal increasing and waining: One Pope impairing, another
Pope repairing the magnificence thereof: as the judicious Italians themselves
have observed it, in the persons of Clemens the eight, and Paul the fifth. Thus
may we see the two horns of him, that is like the Lamb: and the two swords of
him that speaks like the Dragon: the two Monarchies of the Man of sin. And
surely such want their two eyes, who do not see the Sun at Noone: who do
not see Antichrist to be fully revealed: and that The Pope is that Antichrist.

Thus have I discovered the time of Antichrists discovery. If you desire
moreover testimonies of his Revelation: some particulars I have premised in
this Sermon. But a Catalogue, a Cloud of Witnesses, almost an hundred Dr.
Featlies Appendix to the Conference 1624
names are registered by our ingenious and ingenuous Champion. Yet for the full
declaration of this point: know that the Pope has been revealed to be the
great Antichrist, according to the public testimony of four great Nations.
The French, English, Bohemians, and the Germans, have long since revealed to
the world, what the word revealed unto them the revelation of Antichrist. That
Rome is the place, and the Pope the person.

The French claim the precedence. Their Pless. Myster. Opposite. 46.
Kings are called Christian, (...), because they first received the plantation
of Christianity. We add, because they first received the reformation of
Christianity. Anno 1126, (some 500 years before Luther) Peter Bruis Priest
began: and anno 1147, his Scholar Henry a Monk seconded him: and both of
them were succeeded by the Waldenses and Albingenses, anno 1164. And their
doctrine was spread throughout the Diocesses of Orleance, imbrum, and Gap:
through the whole Provinces of Languedoc, Anvergne, and Guienne, the
professors whereof were called Tolosant: condemning Transubstantiation, the
Mass, Praying to, or for the Dead, worshipping of Saints, or Images,
Inhibition of Marriage, etc. stiling Popish Prelates the Princes of Sodom, and
Rome Pless. mist. Oppos. 46.
Babell, the Mother of fornication. These Lights that prudent Church have
politikely endeavored to put under a bushel, extinguishing their writings. So
that we have nothing but what is collected out of their adversaries books who
confuted them: who testify what we do, that the French so long ago did
renounce the Pope, and Popery.

To the French, our English are next in situation, Matthew. Paris. Compend. hist.
Angl. an. 1250.
and in reformation also. Anno 1250, our learned Bishop of Lincoln assayed
first to light this Candle, by inveighing against the Pope and Popish
usurpations, for which invections he was excommunicated, and dyed under that
excommunication. Under half a hundred years after him, some sparks fell from
the hand of Paess. Mist. Opposite. 57.
our William Ockam, by the coll^sion betwixt Pope John the 22, and the Emperor
Lewis the 4, of whom he was so undaunted an assistant, that he durst call
Clemens the sixth Antichrist. The tinder almost took fire, when our King Edward
the third inhibited our English Pel. Virgil. l. 19.
Bishops from running to Rome for their Creation. But 1360, the fire was
kindled, and the Tho. Waldensis Ep. ad Mart. 5. Tho Walsingham in Rich. 2.
Candle put in a Candlestick, when John Wickliffe of Oxenford maintained that
the Pope was an Arch-hereticke, and Antichrist, and he was maintained by the
Vice Chancellor and Proctors of that University; by the Mayor and chief
Citizens of our chief City of London: by some of our Prelates and prime
Clergy: and by the Duke of Lancaster, and some of the principal Courtiers and
Peers of the Realm. Although Pless. Mist. Opposite. 59.
being dead, he was by the command of Pope Martin the fifth dug out of his
grave at Lutterworth in Leichestershire, 1428. Yet could not the Pope, nor any
popish power put out this Candle. The Candlestick indeed was removed, his
person was exiled, and so his doctrine translated into Bohemiah; where it gave
increase to the profession of the Waldenses, and a beginning to the Hussites.

From these two, the French Waldenses, and our English Wickliffists, sprang the
third, the Hussites of Bohemia. Whose praecursor I conceive to have been
Militz, a Preacher of Pless. Mist. Opposite. 59.
Prague, about 1350, who professed that he was constrained by the Spirit to
go to Rome, there publicly to preach in the presence of the very
Inquisitours, that The Pope was the very Antichrist.

But after 1400, John and Hierome, Husse, Aeneas Silvius Hist. Bohem.
and the Hussites, did more openly and undoubtedly profess the Pope to be
Antichrist. Such a number of opposers, and in such a nature of opposition as
the Pope never felt before, till the Sword in the hand of Zisca, and the word
in the mouth of John Husse, and Hierome of Prague, durst tell the Pope to his
face, that he was the Antichrist. To extinguish which stain, the Council of
Constance was called: where they sawed the log, but could not cut the
Sunbeames: they killed the Preachers, but their Preaching still survived. The
Faggots (with which they did cruelly and perfidiously overwhelme Poggius in
Epist. ad (...) Aretinum.
John and Hierome) did indeed dampe, but not put out the fire of the Gospel.
For out of the ashes of the Goose (so some say signifies Husse in the Bohemian
language) arose a Swan, (such is the signification of Luther in the Germane) or
a Phoenix rather, who gave a complement to the reformation of Religion, and to
the Revelation of Antichrist.

The Papists then may reserve their Crambe or their own Tooth. Ordinary
judgments cannot digest their ordinary Quaere: Where was the Reformed Religion
before Luther? These premises may tell them, that there was a Visible
Reformation and separation from the Romish Church, full four hundred years
before Luther was borne. The Hussites being an hundred years before him: our
Wicklissists half an hundred years before them: the Waldenses more than an
hundred years before them: and the Tholosani almost an hundred years before
the Waldenses. Thus Lumen de lumine, the light of reformation was derived (by
Centuries) from the Tholosani to the Waldenses, from the Waldenses to the
Wickliffists, from the Wickliffists to the Hussites, and from the Hussites to
the Lutherans. Then Luther did set it up as a Beacon on the top of an Hill, to
give an Alarm to all the Militant Church, that the Adversary was discovered,
and Antichrist now plainly revealed.

To these four famous Nations I may add a fifth: the Italians are not blind,
though they wink at the Pope. That the popish projects have no other end, but
to acquire unto the Pope the Spiritual and Temporal Monarchy of the whole
world, is the judgment of that prudent Venetian Polity: what policy soever
Paulus Quintus his Quarrels lib. 1. page 1.
does interrupt them from a plain embracing of the Protestants Reformation,
and acknowledging the Popes revelation. But whereof, they have a confused, we
have a clear knowledge: we clearly know that Antichrist is revealed.

You know, says Saint Paul (1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.) how we exhorted, and comforted,
and charged every one of you, as a Father does his children. A father does
heartily exhort his sons against drunkenness, his daughters against
unchastnesse, and all his children against all kind of wickedness. And yet
his tender heart would tremble to imagine that there should be but one drunkard
amongst his sons; one strumpet amongst his daughters; or but one reprobate
amongst all his children. Such a Father am I: and give me leave to call you,
and to esteem you such children. Heartily have I exhorted you against
Antichrist: and surely my heart would tremble if I should think that there
were but one Antichristian Sectary in this whole Congregation.

Howbeit, although I would not wish one of you a Papist; yet I would that all
the Papists heard me, what I have, do, and shall deliver concerning this point
of Antichrist. And if there be any of the Romish Religion here present, let me
entreat them to hear me in love and patientnesse, even as I will speak to
them in truth and soberness. If there be any such in this place, I direct my
speech in two words unto two sorts of them.

There are two sorts of Papists, the Ignorant, and the Learned: the first
cannot, the second will not understand this controversy: both adhere to the
Pope, and spit at the name of Antichrist, if applied to his Holiness.

The first are like Navigius, whom when Aug. de vita Beat. cap. 16.
Saint Augustine came to instruct concerning the saving of his Soul, he could
not be persuaded that there was such a thing as a soul in (...) in his Body:
So the ignorant Papists, instruct them concerning the shunning of Antichrist,
and they will not be persuaded that there is such a thing as Antichrist in
(...) in the whole World, much less in Christendom, in Italy, in the very
Chair of Saint Peter.

The second sort are like the Donatists, that August. epist. 48. Vincentio.
when as S. August* preached of them, wrote to the^, and disputed with them:
yet says he, noluerunt veritati consentire, vel victi, that is, though they
were convicted by the truth, yet would they not consent unto the truth. So (am
I persuaded that) many a learned Papist, though they are staggered to see so
many points of this Prophecy, fall so naturally to the person of the Pope: yet
they will hold the Conclusion, and hiss at him, who shall call him Antichrist.

But thus much I will be bold to say of both of them: If the ignorant go on
obstinate in his blindness: and that at that great day, he be found a member
of Antichrist: if then he shall plead, my learned Priest did teach me thus:
such a plea shall prevail as much for him, as the like did for Adam, Genesis 3.
12. the woman gave me, and I did eat. Notwithstanding he shall be cursed,
because he was seduced. And the learned, if they go on in their wilfulness,
if they shall then pretend, that the Honor which they bare to the Church, made
them to hoodwinke their followers, from searching into such an hateful
question; God will speak to them (I doubt not) according to that phrase of
Saint Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves the Church more than me is not worthy of
me. This I must add moreover: the ignorant, who do not know Antichrist, shall
(like the servant, Luke 12. 48.) have stripes notwithstanding. But the learned
Papist that will not know this point, shall be like Lamech, Genesis 4. 24. If the
ignorant be scourged seven fold, the learned shall be scourged seventie times
seven fold. Indeed of either of them, their Conclusion will be their Confusion,
if God be not infinitely merciful unto them. Therefore I beseech them, be not
blinded. If God has revealed Antichrist, let no man shut your eyes against
Gods own Revelation. Search, fifth the question, impartially, laboriously, in
which search, I do not entreat you to believe me, but to examine me; Upon your
examination, believe not me, but the truth. If the truth tell you, that these
parallels, are proper to the Pope, without any forced application; know that
Antichrist has been revealed long since: and suspect, nay be assured, that
your Pope may be the Antichrist.

One word for our selves. Antichrist is revealed, and therefore should be
shunned, forsaken, and abhorred. The snare is discovered, be not entangled:
the Pit is laid open, plunge not your selves into voluntary perdition. I will
use that phrase to you, which Saint Paul did to the Athenians, Act. 17. 30.
Your times of Ignorance God winked at: but now he commands you to beware. The
blinded Papists which did live in the Times of Ignorance some 300, or 400
years since, or do live in the Places of Ignorance, Spain, Italy, etc. Their
invincible ignorance may give us some hope, that there is an extenuation of
their fault, and may be a mitigation of their punishment: But for men in our
age or nation! for the Papists, who may: for you, who do see so many books,
and hear so many sermons, which are so many Proclamations, that Antichrist is
revealed. Now, for Papists to cleave to him, or Protestants to fall to him: our
fault is unexcusable, our punishment will be unsufferable, and our estate is,
and will be most miserable.

An honest man may dwell in a stye of Strumpets, not knowing it, to be so: and
a civil man amongst the seditious. But so soon as the brothell is notorious,
and the rebels proclaimed: none can reside with them without uncleanness, and
apparent rebellion. So for us: (what excuse soever may be pretended to blanch
ignorance) Now, to go out of the way, when the Lantern is before us: to
serve Antichirst, or to favor Antichrist, after he is revealed: to be
Papists, or to turn Papists Now -- I do not, I dare not judge another man.
But for mine own self, if it were mine own Apostasy, this must be mine
own judgment; It were better that a millstone were tied about my neck, and
that I were cast into the bottom of the sea, Luke 17. 2. But beloved I hope
better things of you. Even such as accompany sanctification, and foregoe, yea
foretell salvation.

Thus as God has showed me, have I showed you, that Antichrist is revealed.
Concerning which point, concerning all points: God himself reveal the truth
unto you all, by the illumination of his holy spirit.

It is time to End: here is the End of this point: here is the End of this
Sermon: here is the End of this Term: and here may be the End of our Lives.
We are mortal, and we are not sure to return to another Sermon. Howsoever,
I End this Sermon, as if it were the End of my Life. I will speak a few words,
plainly and heartily. Some labor ye see I have bestowed on a great question:
wherein the event, has answered my expectation.

(...). I am thought to have erred in both the Extremes. Some say, my sermons
have been excessive, that they have been too hot: some say they have been
deficient, too cold against the Papists. That they say I am in both extremes:
me thinks they conclude, that I am in neither, but that I am in the midst,
without Partiality. To answer them, and to satisfy you. I say to the one, my
Sermons have not been Extreme: for I do not hate the Papists. I say to the
other, they have not been deficient: for I do not love the Papists. I do no^
hate the Papists, because I know they are Men. I do not love the Papists,
because I know they are Erroneous. And indeed, I desire to separate the men
from their Error: not by a mathematical abstraction, in my discourse only:
but I would make such a Real separation, that (if it lay in my power) I would
bring their Persons to Heaven, but send their Errors to the Pit of Hell: to
the Devil who hatched them.

I say to both: Again I renew my old protestation. I do so speak to you: as
I mean to speak to God: as I must account my Sermons at that dreadful day of
Judgment.

And in truth, that I should be partial any way, I can imagine no motive to
lead me thereunto. Surely it can be neither ambition, nor covetousness: no
covetousnes, to discharge such a labor: no ambition, to follow such a
labourer. And if I understand mine own Heart: surely by these labors, I am
covetous of nothing, but to enrich you with knowledge: and ambitious of
nothing, but to promote you to be the heirs of the kingdom of Heaven. Now I
hope you will pardon such a Covetousness, I hope you will not be angry with
such an Ambition. To purchase both which, for your behoof, you see my labor:
the Talent which God has given to me, I employ for you. Part of this Talent,
you have had already: the remnant, I will now carry home with me. There I will
not bury it, nor hide it in a Napkin: but I will endeavor to increase it: that
I may return it with abundance, for your future benefit.

In the mean time, we are to depart, all of us, for many days, some of us
for many Miles also. One thing therefore (at parting) I will leave you, till it
please God we meet again: either in this place, or in a better. I will
bequeath that to you, at the End of my Exercise, which Saint Paul did bequeath
to these Thessalonians, at the End of this Epistle;

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all, Amen.

SERMON XIII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 7. The Mystery of Iniquity, does already work.
The Mystery of Iniquity. Popish Mysteries to advance the Papacy. Popish
mysteries to advance Popery. Baits, to catch Papists. Hooks, to hold Papists.

THat I might breathe a little, before I entered this great point, I craved
leave, and have taken it. But thereby inopem me copia fecit. Fluent matter
furnished my meditations, in such abundant manner, that I feared this Exercise
would resemble your Cisternes, run at wast. One hour cannot suffice for so
many particulars. But I remember a story in Tacitus Atcius Capito, fearing the
overflowing of Tiber, diverting the stream into other branches, prevented the
Inundation of the maine River. So here the mysteries of Antichrist being so
many: I will reserve some of these points unto the 11 verse, where Antichrists
working, is called, efficacia deceptionis, strong delusion: to the 10, where it
is termed seductio iniquitatis, deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness: to the 9,
where his coming is said to be potentia, and prodigijs, in all power, and
signs, and lying wonders: and unto the 8 verse where Antichrist is styled
iniquus, that is, the Fountain of iniquity. All these do contain Mysteries:
but now I will deliver and discover mysteria iniquitatis, Only such things, as
are plainly and primely mystical above all other.

A Mystery! Weak blows are mortal, fastened on a feeble adversary. And in a
plain case, to speak but superficially, is to disclose it sufficiently. Here
it may stagger even a sound Papist, to see how sitly, the Pope may be invested
with this word mystery. He is apparelled with it: whatsoever he wears is
Povel de Antichristo lib. 1. cap. 25. sect. 7.
mystical; His white linen (Surplesse, Rochet or) Vestiment, they say, is to
signify the whiteness of the Popes Innocence and Chastity: there is one
mystery. His two-horned M^ter signifies his knowledge in the two Testaments:
there is another mystery. In his triple Crown is involved a treble mystery:
First it signifies the three Graces: Faith, Hope, and Charity. Secondly, his
Three Kingdoms, of Heaven, Earth, and Hell. Thirdly, yet more mystically, more
majestically, it shadoweth the mystery of the Trinity. Baculus his Crosier
imports the rod of Moses and Aaron, with which he does correct the Erring
people, another mystery. Annulus, his ring, is pignus desponsationis cum
Ecclesia, a pledge of his contract with the Church: a strange mystery.
Chirothecae, his Gloves are signs that his hands are clear from corruption
and bribery: would this were true and no mystery. Yea the very name of the
mystery, the brand of Antichrist, which is written in the forehead Danaus de
Antichristo C. 11 Dounamus de Antichristo lib. 1 cap. 7, Sect. 10.
of the whore of Babylon, Rev. 17. 5. has been written above the forehead of
the Pope in his Miter. And the mystery of the Name, Rev. 17. 4. Poculum aureum,
plenum abominationum: that is, a Golden cup full of abominations: implying how
the mystery of iniquity shall intoxicate miserable seduced people. The mystery
of this Name is involved in the Popes Name, Papa:

P Poculum, a Cup, A Aureum, of gold P Plenum, full A Abominationum, of
Abominations.
So that both according to the Letter, and sense also, that word falls to the
Pope, as an individual property. But I desist from these Velitations, and come
to grapple with the cause, and to settle my self to more solid, and serious
observations. And first by way of Explication for the phrase: then, by way of
Application to the Person.

I must pause a little: a little interruption does injoyne it. Some of our
adversaries speak of this phrase, in that phrase which Christ spoke to the
man, Matthew. 22. 12. Friend how came thou hither, this clause ( the mystery
of iniquity) they say, it concerns not the cause, and it is no appurtenance
unto Antichrist. This text is to be understood of Heretics, and cannot be
understood of Antichrist himself, says one, who goes under the name
Christophorson. in Down. part. 1. cap. 14. Rhemists in 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 14.
Stuartius in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
of Christophorson. I answer in the words of as learned Papists, this mystery
of iniquity, is referred to Heretics (but to such Heretics as) which work to
the same Antichrist. Antichrist even in Saint Paul's time did work by this
mystery: non quidem in persona sua, not in his own person, but in suis
Pseudoprophetis, but in his Heretics, who labored his projects, says the
Vice Chancellor of Ingolstade. That this mystery of iniquity is the Covert
working of Heretics, toward the manifestation of Antichrist, we agree with
them: and if it were no more, this were not impertinent to our purpose.

But I will proceed farther, and will prove that this mystery of iniquity is
the work of the very Person of Antichrist, by these five arguments. 1 The
scope of this Prophecy is to dispute of Antichrist: concerning whom, that Saint
Paul might premise some speech of his Precursors in the first verses, and
preface to this Chapter, it may seem somewhat probable. But in corpore, in the
serious part of the discourse, that he should insert such a Circumsta^ce,
itseemes somewhat is improbable. 2 Compare the equipolent phrases: the strong
delusion in the 11 verse, the deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness in the 10,
and the lies and wonders in the 9, were the Personell works of Antichrist,
after he was revealed. What hinders then, that this mystery of iniquity, may
not also be his personal work, before he was revealed. 3 One word in this
text, a mystery, is opposed to that in the eight verse, he shall be revealed.
Now the same thing which was to be revealed, was in a mystery in Saint Paul's
time: but it was the person, not the precursors of Antichrist which was to be
revealed: therefore it was the person, and not the precursors of Antichrist (or
Heretics) which was in this mystery in Saint Paul's time. 4 A second word in
this text, does offer a fourth argument to this assertion, the mystery (says
Saint Paul) does work already, which implies that it would proceed to work
afterward: but that which should work afterward is not to be understood
only of the Heretics, but of Antichrist himself: therefore this mystery is
not to be understood only of the Heretics, but of Antichrist himself. 5 A
fifth term in this text, is the adjunct to this mystery, Iniquity: it is called
(...), the mystery of iniquity. There is near affinity betwixt (...), in the
eight verse, and (...) in this: But (...), that wicked one is Antichrist:
therefore (...), this wickedness (or mystery) is the work of Antichrist.
Accordingly the Syriak translation does read it plainly, mysterium iniqui
illius, that is, the mystery of that wicked one, or of Antichrist himself.

Having untyed the knot of this rush, and removed this straw, out of the way. I
proceed as I purposed to take this phrase literally, that the Mystery of
iniquity did, (and does) work: and how that personally it is, and was the
work of Antichrist. Only covered in Saint Paul's time; but discovered in our
time; in both a mystery.

A Mystery is by use, both a Latin, and an Casaubonus in Annals ^aror.
Exercit 16. Sect. 43.
English word: but derived from a Greek or Hebrew root, (...) Sotar is
occultare, to hide: (...) Mistar is res occulta, a secret or hidden Mystery. In
Greek (...) is arcanam doctrina^ tradere, to teach some secret doctrine: (...)
is doctrina illa imbui, to be taught that secret doctrine. Whence comes our
word in the text, (...) so called, some say, (...), from shutting up the mouth,
because it may not be disclosed: or rather (...), from shutting up the senses,
as it is in the great greek Etymologist, stopping both the mouth and the ear:
that they themselves might not speak of it, nor strangers seek after it. Thus
concerning the mysteries of Ceres, Hercules might not be permitted to know
them: and Alcibiades was convented because he did show them. This word (though
abused by the Pagans, in their idolatrous ceremonies of Ceres, Isis, Anubis,
Lupercalia, and their Bacchanalia, yet it) is used in the Scriptures: as Luke
8. 10. the Christian Religion, is termed a mystery, quam Deus ab aeterno
absconditam apud se habuisset, cum postea suo tempore, came mortalibus
patefecit: because God had it from all eternity concealed with himself, which
afterward in fullness of time, he revealed to mankind.

The mystery of iniquity: that is, a secret sin, Josephus lib. 1.
in a high degree: and therefore matchless Antipater was called (...), an
unknown villain: so here the mystery of iniquity is a sacred, secret,
unknown, unseene impiety under the cloak of Religion. It is iniquitas, sed
mystica, id est, pietatis nomine palliata (so the ordinary Gloss expounds
this place) an iniquity indeed, but mystical, that is, cloaked with the name
of Piety. Let a learned French man, express the phrase: Mysterium
iniquitatis, id Casaubonus ad Annals Baron. Exercit. 16. sect. 49.
est, occulta quaedam iniquitas, alta, profunda, and omnibus numeris absoluta:
the mystery of iniquity, that is, (says Casaubone) a secret iniquity,
Bradshaw in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
deep, profound, and absolute; Or yet more exactly by our own Countryman: a
mystery of iniquity, that is, an Art of sinning, by secret and cunning
conveyances. The demand then of Lessius de Antichristo Them. 4.
Lessius in his fourth Demonstration, is not unanswerable, Quando facta sit
haec horrenda mutatio? When was this fearful change, that the Church of Rome
became the seat of Antichrist? I answer, the change was made in a mystery, or
in the dark, when none could discern it.

It does already work: that is, Satan does even Moulins in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
now draw out the threads, and spinne the beginning of Antichrists doctrine,
which shall be woven together, by abominable art, and full of wicked craft:
says another learned French man. Or otherwise, he means that the foundations
of Antichristian Religion, were even then secretly laying, Bradshaw in 2 Thessalonians.
2. 7.
says the same English Author, on the same place: as an House is long a
squaring, and preparing in private, but at length it is joined, and reared in
public. The sense of the text ( the mystery of iniquity does already work) is
this: There is a Diabolical stratagem, under the show of Religion, secretly
and cunningly to undermine, and overthrow Christ's true Religion, which has
been working even from the Apostles time, to our time. That Popery is this
mystery: this is the point (which by Gods assistance) I undertake to make
plain at this season.

That your understandings, and memories, may follow my discourse the more
easily, I will chalk out the way, by which I mean to lead your attention.
First I will show you their quaerere, and then how they did parta tueri: the
means of their gaining, and of their retaining the Papal greatness. Which
two stratagems, are two great mysteries. In their retaining it, (which for our
time involveth the enlarging of the Papacy also) they use one mystery to
inveagle men, and another to entangle men: they have their baits to catch them,
and their hooks to hold them. Both which, they practice by a secret
undermining, and by a subtle countermining of their opposites. Each of those
exploits, is like the woman, Revel. 17. 5. the word Mystery is written in the
very forehead thereof.

For the first: how Saint Peter, poor Peter: rich indeed in spiritualls, but
poor in temporalls; so poor, that he was imprisoned by a Roman Magistrate,
Act. 12. 3. Crucified by a Roman Emperor: and certainly the basest Roman
subject would have spit in his face, and trod on his neck, if he should have
dared to have lift up his finger against the Roman Empire. Eusebius lib. ^^ 25.
Moreover, that the Bishops of Rome his successors did succeed and exceed him
in poverty: (they had more ordinary frailties, but far fewer extraordinary
abilities than Peter) the whole succession was so poor, that they were
persecuted, above 300 years: and so persecuted above 200 years, that they met
in cryptis, in caves, corners, and conventicles: and had not so much as one
Church for their religion. Calixtus about the year 222. did build the first
Church, Platina in Calixto. Discourse des temps depuis les Apotres, anno 222.
for public Christianity. Now (according to the parable propounded to the
triumphant Tyrant) how the Nail which was in the bottom of the Wheel, should
sensim, and sine sensu, by a motion insensible and incomprehensible, climb to
the top, and bring the lofty Nail to the Counterpoint: How the Roman Church,
which was under foot, should rise up, and bring down, the lofty, Lordly,
Lording, Roman Empire: to be her underling, and the whole Church of Christ
together with it. This is a wonder: and this is the secret, and the Mystery,
which Saint Paul says did work, even in his time.

For the framing of this plot, which they have so admirably effected at this
day, it is generally said, that the Heresies which were sown in the Apostles
times were the seed thereof. And indeed so they are in general: but I suppose
that the more particular prosecuting of their plot, was by the publishing of
those two doctrines of Devils (mentioned, Read the 19 Sermon.
1 Timothy 4. 3.) forbidding of meats, and marriage, which we see at this day to
be the two pillars of Popery: in truth the Iachin and Boaz, the very strength
and establishing of the Roman Monarchy. 1 Reg. 7. 21.
Notwithstanding I conceive the maine engine for this stratagem to be another
point, the point of the Primacie, which was an hammering in the Apostles times.
Not only that of Diotrephes, who loved pre-eminence in the Church, as Saint
John taxes him, in his third Epistle; Nor that of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.
12. where some were for Paul, and some for Peter, there called Cephas. But
principally the Primacy attempted by the Church of Rome Romans 11. 10. Be not
high minded, and in the 22 verse, otherwise thou shall be cut off. For this
instruction against Pride, though it be general to the Gentiles, yet is it
more special to the Romans. And Saint Paul in the same place seems to me,
to Prophecy in two fashions: first by way of instruction, telling what they
should then eschew: secondly, by way of prediction, foretelling what afterward
would be their ruin. Now let us briefly ponder, how this project of Primacy
has been prosequuted to this present age.

We see that the seeds of ambition were sown in S. Paul's time. But the power
and persecution of the Roman Empire cut down the blades thereof, that their
aspiring was fruitless, for many centuries. But at length the harvest of their
pride became ripe; and they have reaped their Primacy, or rather supremacy, by
these degrees and devices.

The first which I find to appear in promoting Hist. Popatus cap. 4. Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 22, 23, 24.
the Roman Primacy, was Victor Bishop of Rome, about the year 194: who
ordained that Easter should be celebrated by all on the Lords day: but therein
he was instantly opposed by Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, and by Narcissus
Bishop of Jerusalem, and others. Victor notwithstanding confirmed his decree
by a Council held at Rome, anno 196: yet so, Bardus and Pavin. in Chronico
anno 196. Histor. Papatus cap. 4.
as that it was received only within the Roman Diocese.

About 240 years after Christ, Fabius Bishop of Rome called a Council at
Rome, and condemned Novatiane: herein he did somewhat go beyond the bounds of
his Bishopric ((...), 1 Pet. 4. 15.) Novatus, and Novatiane, being both
Africans: but the piety of the Bishops, and the persecution of the Emperors of
that age, cut off all jealousy, suspicion, or scruple, that any Primacy was
affected. And the godly Christians were glad that Schism might be composed by
any men or means.

Two hundred and fifty years after Christ Steven Bishop of Rome, incroched a
little more, Pless. Myster. progress. 2.
and more plainly upon Spain, where Basilides Bishop of Asturia, and Martial
of Melida, being deposed, because they had sacrificed to Idols for fear of
persecution: Steven writ to the Churches of Spain peremptorily for their
restitution.

Three hundred and fourteen years after our Savior, Silvester obtained from
the Emperor Constantine, to build Churches, and many other privileges. Whence
his Successors plead also the donation of Constantine, that he gave unto the
Pope, Rome, and a great part of Italy, under the name of S. Peter's patrimony:
Although Johannes Diaconus in the Charter of D. Collins in Eudam part. 3. cap.
46.
Otho the third, is discovered to have been the father of that memorable
fiction.

Anno 336, Athanasius being condemned by a Baronius anno 34^. sect. 5, 6.
Council of the Arrians at Antiochia, sought for succor from Julius, then
Bishop of Rome, who intertaining a good cause (under the pretense to advance
the authority of the Church of Rome above the Eastern Churches) commended the
same to the patronage of the Emperor Constance. But the Eastern Bishops wrote
unto Julius not to support Athanasius. Julius replied that all might have
recourse to Rome for succor, as to the Superior. This they utterly
disclaimed, by diverse Epistles to that purpose. Notwithstanding, Gratiane the
Monk out of those selfsame Epistles, composed those Hist. Papatus cap. 4.
Canons, whereby he labors to prove the Popes Superiority.

Four hundred years after Christ, godly men, to prevent tedious Lawsuits,
chose Bishops their Arbitrators, to compose such Controversies as arose amongst
them. Which arbitrary courses, the Emperors, Arcadius and Hist. Papatus cap. 4.
Honorius did not only approve: but moreover they authorized the arbitraments
of those Bishops, definitively to conclude all controversies: first in causes
of Religion, afterward in Civil Causes also, ex consensu, with the consent of
both parties. Hist. Papatus cap. 4.
In process of time Justinian assigned the Bishops to judge causes, as
Commissioners to the Emperor. So long did the Emperors give leave, till the
Bishops did take leave to judge: and by those privileges to wrest the
authority of Jurisdiction from the prerogative of the Imperial Majesty.

Anno 413, Apiarius a disordered Priest of D. Sharp Dogmaticus Antich. page 273.
Africa, being deprived by Vrbane his Bishop, appealed unto Sozimus Bishop of
Rome: who sent three Legates to require the right of appellation from those
African Bishops, that he might decide the controversy. To which purpose his
Legates alleged a Canon of Nice: which those Bishops avouched to be forged,
because they had a Copy of that Council. For a full satisfaction, they sent
to Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, and to Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, to
confer with their copies of that Council, but (it was only a copy of the
Romish Bishops countenance) such a Canon could not be found extant in neither.
Whereupon the Council of Carthage consisting of 207 Bishops, and S. Augustine
one of them, did condemn Apiarius, and rejected the authority of the Bishop of
Rome. Nevertheless Romish parasites have coined a strange fiction, that
certain Canons of that Nicene Council were burned by the Arrians.

Anno 450, Leo did persist in the promoting Leo ^. in Anni ver. die Assamp^.
Sermon. 2.
of that Primacy: to which purpose he did strongly insist on that, Tu es
Petrus, Thou art Peter, Matthew. 16. 18. Petrus (says he) Petra dicitur dum
fundamentum pronunciatur, Peter is called the Rock, to show that he is the
foundation. Whence he frames a conclusion for his own purpose, and person,
stiling himself Papam Ecclesiae Catholicae, The Bishop of the Leo epist. 12.
ad Theodos.
whole Church; and omnium Episcoporum Primatem; the chief of all the Bishops.

Anno 533, the Emperor honored John Baronius.
the second with a solemn Embassage, and by it with an obsequious
protestation, that he traveled, Omnes Sacerdotes universi Orientis tractus,
and subjicere, and unire Sa^ctitati vestrae: To cause the union, and compass
the submission of all the Clergy, of the whole Eastern Country, to the Bishop
of Romes Holiness.

But about 606, Pope Boniface the third, Dounam. Derens. de Antichristo lib. 2.
c. 8 sect. 5.
(so now I must style the Bishops of Rome by that name: for this Boniface the
third was the first to whom the name Pope was appropriated) I say this
Boniface, in that year, upon the murder of Mauritius, apprehended an occasion
to insinuate Pless. Mist. Progress. 21. Aimoinus lib. 4. cap. 61.
himself in the favor of bloody Phocas, who gratified him with the title of
Universal Bishop.

About 740, Pope Zacharies judgment being demanded, whether best deserved the
kingdom of France, either he who had the Name only, or he who day and night
spent himself in the service of the Commonwealth; the Popes definitive
sentence being pronounced for the latter, as the better worthy of the Scepter:
Hence did France take occasion to depose their King, translating the Crown
from Chilpericus unto Pipine. And hence Rome did take occasion to claim power
to dispose of that kingdom: as this very example is alleged to that purpose
by Suarez. Apol. lib. 3. cap. 23. nu. 15.
Suarez, in his Apology.

Toward the eight hundredth year, Steven the third, and Adrian the first,
joined with Carolus magnus, to expel the Grecian Emperor out of his Latin
Dominions: which being Pless Mist. Progress. 27.
effected, (and so one good turn requiring another,) Charles being made
Emperor of the West by the Pope; the Pope received from Charles the
Confirmation, if not the donation of the City and Seigniory of Rome.

Thus far these Popes proceeded, and to some purpose: Notwithstanding, still
the Pope was Histor. Papatus cap. 4.
subject to the Emperor, till he began to incroach, by a mere accident.

Anno 817, Paschal being constrained by the people to be Pope, sent Legates to
the Emperor to excuse that election. The Emperor Ludovicus Pius, being
according to his name, a sweet natured courteous Gentleman; did easily admit of
satisfaction: yet with a check to the Clergy, and to the people for their
audacious act: adding a caveat, that they should no more dare to incroach upon
his Royalty. Howbeit, the clawbacke Library Keeper inserted this clause,
Ludovicus Pius did remit the power of electing the Pope, unto Paschal the
first. Since which time, the Popes have proceeded by more general jugglings.
As namely, by proposing preferments, promotions, and brave encouragements,
attractive Loadstones, to invite the prime learned of the whole world unto
Rome. Keeping public Registers of all the Benefactors unto Peter's Patrimony,
praying for the souls of such charitable persons being deceased. One while
trumpetting out the charity of the Popes: another time sowing discord betwixt
Princes, that they might fish in troubled waters. These made some pretty
additions to their greatness: till about 1080, Gregory the seventh so advanced
himself against the Emperor, that his successors have advanced themselves
above the Emperor. The Emperors at this day acknowledging themselves
confirmed by the Pope, and tendering a kind of fealty to the Pope: as the
Sacrar. Cerem. l. b. 1. sect. 5. c. 7.
form of their Oath is authentically extant, written by Marcellus Archbishop
of Corcira, to Leo the tenth. And thus Giges-like, has the Pope invisibly
advanced himself into the Throne of his Master.

Having heard the History, or Matter, That the Church of Rome is made a
Monarchy: hear we next the Mystery, Manner, or the Means whereby this miracle
was effected. Which was so politikely prosequuted by such secret plots, and
super-subtle projects, that their cunning carriage and cleanly conveyance of
their purpose, does merit the title of my Text, to be termed the Mystery of
Iniquity. The means which these politicians used, as they were invisible, so
were they innumerable also. I will reduce them to eight heads only.

It is a memorable fact, mentioned by our Fox Mart. t^m 1 1505. page 860.
Martyrologist, concerning Pope Julius the Marshall, who cast the Keys into
Tyber, and laid his hand on the Sword. The succession of Popes for many years
have made use of both to erect their Monarchy. The Keys 3 ways they have made
their Picke-lockes to enter at the Posterne of the Church: and as many ways
they have used the Sword, to cut down all opposition, which shall interrupt
(...) Entrance, and usurpation. To which I will add two more, and then their
projects are eight in number. Excommunication, Indulgence, or dissimulation,
and Appellation, are the acts of the keys: in regard of all which, it seems
Saint Peter's keys have hanged at the Popes girdle. The Sword also they have
permitted: establishing and raising the Papacy by wars, into which they
suffered Christendom to fall. Sometimes the Sword they submitted: and secretly
sowed discord in Christendom, out of which they have sucked no small
advantage. And many times the Sword they have immitted, and sheathed in the
sides of their Sovereigns, and other Princes, whom they assaulted by the hand
of Treason, and open Rebellion. To which add, their corrupting of Books, and
abusing of Favors received from Princes and Prelates, as precedents of their
right: and we have the entire number of all the old Popish Mysteries, I mean
to instance in at this season.

First, Excommunications of Princes especially, have been very advantageous
for the advancing of the Papacy. The first that I find who made use of it in
this kind, was Pope Platina and Onuph^ius in vita Constantini.
Constantine, who did excommunicate the Greek Emperor Philippicus, under the
pretense of the heresy they termed Iconomachy (or opposing Image worship:)
which produced so fatal an effect, that Arthemius encouraged thereby,
rebelled: and deposed the Emperor, anno 716. And then this audacity became
afterward hereditary: many Popes excommunicating many Emperors, and many
other Princes. Sigonius lib. 3. de Reg. Ital.
By this means Gregory the second raised Ravenna and Venice in rebellion
against Leo, and expelled the Greek Emperor out of the Italian territories. By
this, Gregory the seventh caused those tragical commotions against that noble
Germane Emperor, Henry the third: Bar t. 9. an. 726. Artic. 34. Pless. Myster.
Opposite. 40.
which ended not, but with his life. I need not travel far for examples: our
own Princes (John, Henry, etc.) are the woeful patterns of this wicked
subtlety. Nor was the fear of those Princes in those days causeless, for
probably the Popes excommunications caused three notable consequents. First,
the Clergy would either withdraw themselves out of the Country, or withold
the execution of their Calling. Hence the people, yea and Peers also, would
murmr, yea and mutiny also; that they were deprived of the exercise of their
Devotions. And finally, their neighboring Princes, from this pretense, had a
fair cloak for their ambition, and color for their invasion. Princes
therefore in those days were compelled to keep correspondence with the Popes,
for dread of their excommunications.

Secondly, the hiding away of the keys, did sometime help them to keep the
stolen goods of the Primacy. Thus Phocas having murdered Pless. Mist.
Progress. 22.
his Master Mauritius, being disallowed (and deserving to be excommunicated) by
Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople: the holy connivence of honest Boniface
the third salved all: and well was he rewarded for it. For it, he achieved his
glorious title of Universal Bishop. Bastlius also having murdered Michael his
Master, who had assumed him into the society of the Empire, Photius the
Patriark of Constantinople rejected the traitorous parricide from the Lords
Table: but he was instantly Anastasius in Adriano 2. Baronius anno 869.
Articulo 81, and 82.
countenanced by Pope Adriane the second. And verily he also had his reward:
for his sake Basilius called the eighth Universal Council, into which every
man was inhibited entrance by his Imperial authority, unless he did first
subscribe to the point of the Popes Primacie.

3. The third is near of kin to this second particular: Vice, or the vicious
discord of the Clergy, has been the cause of Appellation, a prerogative so
highly esteemed by them. So the improbity of Apiarius, and the Heresy of
Caelestius, a condemned Pelagian, disordered Antonie Bishop of Fussala, who was
deprived by his comprovincialls in Africa, and damned Eutiches himself: all
these ran to the Church of Rome for refuge, and found it a Sanctuary.
Zozimus, Boniface, Caelestine, Dr. Sharp Papae speculum page 273. Pless Mist.
Oppos. 10. and 11.
and Leo, did not reject them: but (the last only excepted) they did accept,
encourage, and defend those Appellants.

These are three ways therefore, the Pope has used the Keys, whereby he has
entered into the Temple of God: and there now He sits as God, showing
himself that he is God.

4. Tam Mart, quam Mercurio: the Popes have not been so cunning with the
Keys, but they have been as courageous with the Sword. Full politikely did
this prudent generation permit Princes to bleed under the Sword of their
over-potent Adversaries, that so they might be constrained to cast themselves
into the arms of the Bishop of Rome for succor. The Greek Emperors were in
a manner confined to the East, either by the invasion of the Sarasins, or by
domestical insurrections: which did cause them not only to use connivence to,
but to seek and sue for correspondence with the Popes in the West.

Hence Justinian the first did profess such Novel. lib. 8. cap. de Sum.
Trinitate. Baron. tom. 7. Anno 533. Artic. 31. etc. Pless. Myster. Progress.
26. Pless. Myster. Progress. 27.
solemn honor to the Sea Apostolic, and to the holiness of Pope John the
second. And Justinian the second, communicated his own majesticall honor to
the entertainment of Pope Constantine, that by his assistance and countenance
he might recover his Throne, and revenge himself on his Rebels.

In the West, he permitted Aistulphus King of Lumbardy to expel the Greek
Emperor out of Italy: and afterward excited Pipine to drive AISTVLPHVS out
of Lumbardie, not omitting his own commodity, that part of his conquest
should be rendered to Saint Peter for his Patrimony. Sigonius de regno Ital.
lib. 5. Platina in Sergio.


Pipine thus gratifying the Pope Steven 2, was rewarded in his offspring by
Pope Sergius the second: who nourished the Papacy, by nourishing discord
betwixt Charles, Lewis, and Lotharius, brethren: till that the French were
expelled out of Italy, and the Empire translated to the Germans. And how the
Germane Emperors have been wearied with wars in the Holy Land, and worried
with wars in Christendom, it is superfluous to relate. The effect is this:
by them they are reduced to the mere shadow, and bare name of the Roman
Empire: but the Roman Pope thereby has substantially advanced his Primacy.

5. If they cannot prevail permittendo, by permitting the sword to devour
such as (being in peace) might oppose them: then submittendo, did their
subtlety assay secretly to send a sword among such Princes: their agents
blowing up the coals of contention, which at length might flame out into an
open combustion.

A cloud of witnesses might dissolve it self into a testimony of this truth:
but (I have an instar omnium) at the mouth of only one witness, it shall
uncontroulably be established.

These are the very words of a great Pope, to the great Turk: of Pius the
second to Mahomet.

As our Predecessors, STEVEN, ADRIAN, Epist. Pij 2 ad Princip. Turc. page 9.
and LEO, did call in PIPIN and CHARLES to their aid against the King of the
Longobards, HAISTVLPHVS, and DESIDERIVS: and being delivered from their
tyranny, they transferred the Empire from the Grecians, unto these their
Champions. So may we in the necessity of the Church, make use of your
assistance: and vicem reddere, and return a retribution. Even the translation
of the Christian Empire to the Turk: if his Turkish sword would make good the
Popish quarrels. An excellent motive to make the Turk turn Christian: but
more excellent to make Christians take heed of the Popes subtletie.

6. Rather than their sword shall fail them Pless. Mist. Opposite. 28. Pless.
Mist. Opposite. 40.
they will sharpen it at the shop of Rebellion. Gregory the fourth conspired
with the Sons against the Father, the Emperor Lewis. Gregory the seventh
instigated the Germans to an insurrection against Henry the third, the
Emperor, and invested Ralph the Duke of Burgundy, with the interest to his
Empire. Paschal the second Pless. Mist. progress. 42. Pless. mist. progress. 51.
excited Henry the son, to rebel against Henry the Father. Gregory the
ninth did infuse the same poison into the heart of Prince Henry, that he
unnaturally rebelled against his noble Father, Frederick the second. All which
wolvish attempts had this one Foxe-like scope, that the Italian Cities by these
means becoming free States, and obtaining a new form of government, ( divide
and imperia) would be less able to oppose the Popish affected Monarchy, than
if they had remained under the Emperor entire, in an united subjection.

Seventhly, to make these mysteries yet more mystical, they have ( Sepia-like)
overspred these acts with an inky darkness, forging and purging the ancient
Authors, that they make those old Writers to speak those things now they are
dead, which they abhorred when they were alive. Their additions to Cyprian, and
Augustine, Goulartius, and Erasmus, have declared: their subtractions from
other old authors, their own Indices expurgatorij have sufficiently
acknowledged. And how they have extinguished all the writings of the Waldenses,
is more than notorious. But their Triarij, their principal corrupters, are
three learned men, famous in their generations, in three sorts of learning.
Gratiane who compiled all the old Canons in one body of the Decrees. Peter
Lumbard his brother (indeed brethren in the Mystery of Iniquity) who brought
the Fathers sayings into his four books of Sentences. And Baronius, who spent
thirty years Casaub. Epist. Dedic. Exercit. ad Baron.
employment to comprise all the Ancient Historians in his Tomes. All their
endeavors meeting in this Center, to advance the Papacy. Gratiane making the
Law, Lumbard Divinity, and Baronius History to speak what was sit for the
corruption of that doctrine, and ambition of those Doctors. But what is the
effect? Notwithstanding their cunning conveyance, the careful eye of an
impartial Reader may discern the footsteps of Antichrist, and Antichristian
errors: even in their writings. And their labor preventeth mine: it proves
my conclusion: The mystery of iniquity is a working, even in their writings.

8. Finally, the favors of Princes and Prelates, has the Pope framed to be a
rare furtherance for his Prelacy and Principality: registring their voluntary
actions of love and courtesy, as precedents of their necessary observance and
duty. Thus Honoratus Bishop of Marseille, and Possessor a Bishop of Africa,
sent Gennad. de Script. Eccles. cap. 100.
their Books (peradventure to entreat their judgments) to the Bishop of Rome,
the one to Gelasius, and the other to Hormisda: Hence Baron. 1. 6. 490. Artic.
43, 45, 46 Bar. ^. 7. an. 520. Artic. 12, 13, 14. Duorenus de Benefic. lib. 1.
c. 2. Bell. de Imag. lib. 2 c. 13. init. Suarez Apol. li. 4. c. 31. nu. 13
^ess. de Antichr. part. 2 page 267. Bellarm. de P. R. lib. 1. cap. 8. L.
Volumus C. de Epist. and Cler. Hist. Papatus cap. 4. P^ess. Myster. progress.
64. ^
Baronius constrains a conclusion: therefore the approbation or suppressing
of Books belong to the Pope. The Ancients held the judgment of the Church of
Rome in high esteem: and to it even their Councills had recourse, as to the
most solid advisers, concerning their Canons and Constitutions. But the Pope
has forced this their arbitrary reverence into a rule of necessary obedience:
that now there is no Council above the Pope, and can be no Council without
the Pope. Charles the great granted that the Clergy should be judged by their
Bishops in all causes: on which pretense the Pope has arrogated power to
determine all causes, concerning all persons, even against the Emperors
themselves, who gave them these privileges at the first. To give you a taste
of many, in this one example: The King of France Charles the 8, having forcibly
entered Rome, yet coming into the Vaticane, on his knees he kissed the foot of
Pope Alexander the sixth: and on another day, he held the Basin and Ewre whilst
his Holiness did wash. All which that humble Pope caused to be painted in a
Gallery of S. Angelo, as a pattern of Princes duty, which this heroic
Conqueror did out of his redundant courtesy. And thus have I discovered their
Quaerere, the History, and the Mystery of their attaining their Papal
greatness.

Thus much concerning their Mystical Art in attaining: now they are no less
artificial in retaining their greatness: and in enlarging it in our times.
For which purpose they use both baits and hooks: and both by way of
undermining and countermining the poor Protestants.

First, they undermine us. Machiavil says, Match. Hist. Florent. lib. 2.
the old Florentines had a Bell, called Martinella, which was rung continually
for a whole month together, before their Army took the field, that the Enemy
might prepare for defense. We must dream of no such fair war from our
Adversaries: the Papists will follow Machiavils policy, not his History.
Therefore like the Beleaguerers of strong Forts, they use secret Engines to
blow up, when suspect nothing, but are secure as upon sound ground. They
undermine us admirably: they have Engines and baits answerable to every Sex
and Condition.

Women, especially devout women, they work wonderfully on, and by, for the
spreading of Popery. They do not only creep into houses, and captive silly
Women, as Saint Paul foresaw and foretold long ago, 2 Timothy 3. 6. But moreover,
they stir up honorable women to persecute professors, and to expel them
out of their coast, as the Jews did at Antioch, Acts 15. 50. Nay they surpass
the Jews, in their Antichristian Mystery: They say there is now, not only a
femall sex, but a femall sect also amongst the Papists, Women Apostles,
Frieresses, Iesuitesses, called by some spectatrices, by Withrington
Ambulatoriae Moniales, employed to reconcile people to the Church of Rome.
Surely they want but the Chair and the Pulpit: and then these Shee-praedicants
would do Pope Joan singular service. In the mean time, I wish our women, to
take heed of these women. They do undermine them, and are engines of this
mystery of iniquity. If this seem incredible, or extraordinary, they have more
ordinary employments for femall Pioners. The women entice their servants,
instruct their Children, yea and attempt their husbands also. I have heard a
Fowler discourse, that he does first catch one Bird, and then he makes that a
Brace-bird: which he setting by his net, hides himself. This bird draws
others, that they may fall into the net also. The subtle Jesuit, is the
Fowler: he hides himself (and will not deal openly with an understanding
man) but inticeth him by his Brace-bird: the Philistine does plow with his own
Heifer: and the Jesuit does employ a man's own wife to ensnare him unto
Popery. Now therefore I warn Women and men too, to take heed of those women:
for in their service there is a secret of Rome, a mystery of Iniquity.

Concerning the conditions of men, they have cunning to Undermine all sorts.
The Common people are caught by common Baits, bragges and braveries. If
therefore they be in popish Kingdoms, they will present to their eyes the
pompous ornaments of their glorious Churches: Marbles worn with kissing them,
and Pavements made hollow, with the knees of devout Beadsmen. Virtus laudetur
in host: I honor even the Papists, for their outward devotion, and from my
soul I abhor the profaneness of too many Protestants, who have no knees to bow
in the congregation. But if the common people be in the Reformed Countries,
then they protest to their ears the strange Proselytes, which crouch to the
Pope for Reconciliation. Thus Eugenius 4, published that the Graecians sued to
be reconciled. Paulus 3, that the Armenians did the like. Julius 3, did receive
with Hist. Trent. lib. 5.
public solemnity one Simon Sultakam, elect Patriarch of India, as sent from
those Churches, to be confirmed by the Successor of Saint Peter, and Vicar of
Christ. And Pius 4, caused Hist. Trent. lib. 6.
it to be published in the Council of Trent, that Abdisu Patriarch of Muzzah
in Assyria, was come to Rome, to render obedience to the Pope: which shameless
lie, was then contradicted by the Ambassadors of Portugal, who protested that
there was no such Patr^arke in that Country. In Italy more lately it was
reported, that the Patriarch of Alexandria, with Malvenda de Antich. lib. 3.
cap. 8. Eudaemon. in Abbot. lib. 3. sect. 6.
the great Church of Africa, had by their Ambassadors, submitted themselves to
the Pope. Eudaemon the Cretian does protest on his faith that the Patriark of
Egypt, and the people of Aethiopia did submit themselves to Clemens 8, and that
their submission was seconded by the Russians: and that the Maronitae
Inhabitants of the mountain Lybanus kept communion with the Church of Rome to
this day. The next are Scholars, and they have their baits for them also:
goodly Colleges and rare Privileges. No man, Magistrate, nor Monarch to
control them: but by a transcendent prerogative to be exempted from all
secular authority. They promise (and sometime perform it) Preferments,
answerable to their indowments. If they be covetous, they angle for the^ with
hopes of Abbeys, Priories, Bishoprics, and Archbishopricks, the rents of some
of them equaling the revennues of some Kingdoms. If they be vainglorious,
they hit that vein also. Then their baits are glorious Titles: Fathers,
Benedicti, Angeli, Archangeli, Cherubini, Seraphini, and Jesuits. That very
name of all awefull honor, to whom all knees should bow, is communicated unto
them. These are the baits for Scholars, but I hope our (great Rabbi our)
Master Jesus Christ, will give Scholars grace and eyes to discern them.

Merchants also, must not think to be free from his ginnes, who makes
merchandise of men's souls. I doubt not but they have freer Traffic into
Countries which are Popish, if they seem so. But in the Popedom, and in Rome
it self, there are small impositions, and seldom inquisitions, to touch their
States or fear their minds: two notable Baits for worldly men, whose scope
is worldly gain. And in truth, the Pope himself does imply this mystery: for
one of the late Popes forbade Relation of the Religion in the West. sect. 36.
all Merchants, under the pain of Excommunication, to trade in any Heretical
Country. The Fishes of Jordan are said to sport themselves swimming in the
sweet streams thereof, the stream carrying them on, till that suddenly they
fall in mare mortuum, and are there choked with Sulphur: So Merchants being
carried with the pleasant current of their profit, and evident commodity, may
fall suddenly, and before they be aware swallowed up by Popery. But verbum
sapienti: I hope they will learn to love God, better then Mammon. For
Gentlemen, they have gentle allurements; If they be young and strong, O let them
travel: France is full of Activity, Spain of Gallantry, Italy of Novelty: all
of Popery. If they be weak and sick, let them travel too: the Spa is a
sovereign medicine: but metuendum magis a medico, quam a morbo: it is a
dreadful Disease which makes a man travel so far for a Jesuit to be his
Physician. This is a mystery, but so plain, that he deserves to be
deceived, who cannot or will not discern it.

Moreover for Noblemen, they have Noble Attractives, worth the biting at: they
can prefer them, even to the highest pitch of earthly pomp, that is, to be
Cardinals. In place equal to Kings, yea they have the Precedence of kings.
Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 5. ca. 3.
For that the greatest Cardinal must take place before the greatest King it is
a ruled case amongst them: And by this policy, the Pope has glued to his
faction, the greatest families in Christendom, as in France alone, the houses
of Lorraine, Guise; yea and of Burbon also: a pretty mystery.

Finally, the pretended successors of the true Fisherman spread out their nets
for the greatest: the Popes have their Baits, even for Princes also. But! ne
Suitor ultra crepidam, those great Persons are in my Prayers, no subjects for my
Sermons. From my soul will I pray for them perpetually, for all Kings (for our
kings especially) that God may perpetually preserve the mystery of their
estates, from the Popish plots of the mystery of iniquity.

To conclude: it is a tradition of the Jews, Aug. Retr. 2, 20.
concerning Manna: unicuique secundum propriam voluntatem in ore sapiebat, the
savor thereof answered the appetite of every several palate: So the maine
mystery in Popery, is that they frame the points of their Religion, to ravish
all men's affections, and to fit every humor. As if Epicurus had been the
pretended successor of Saint Peter, or Saint Peter's pretended successor had
been Epicurus: aut (...), aut (...) This was the practice of Epicurus:
Lactantius lib. 3. cap. 17.
Vt adse multitudinem contrahat, oppositis singulis quibusque moribus loquitur.
Desidiosum vel at literas discere, avarum populari largitione liberat -- qui
claritati studet, huic praecipi^ur reges colere: fugienti turbam, solitudo
laudatur: qui nimium parcus est, discit aqua and polenta vitam posse tolerare:
qui uxoremodit, huic enumerantur bona Caelibatus, etc. Translate it into
English, and an ordinary English person would take it to be the Popes ordinary
practice: That he may draw the multitude unto him, he has positions for every
humor, of every person. If he be a Dullard, he gives him an Indulgence for
ignorance, as the mother of devotion. If Covetous, he exempts him from popular
taxations: the exemption of the Clergy. If he hunt after preferment, Kings
Courts shall employ him: if he cannot endure the troubles of the world, a
solitary life (of the Hermites) is extolled: if he be frugall, fasting (and
such austeritie) is assigned him: and if he dislike his wife, the singular
benefits of a single life are preached unto him, and a Monastery prepared for
him. To honor my conclusion, I will conclude with the words of him, who
Relation of the Religion in the West. sect. 13.
is the Honor of Travelers. Whatsoever either wealth can sway with the Lovers,
or voluntary poverty with the despisers of the world: what Honor with the
ambitious, or obedience with the humble: what great employments, with the
stirring spirits, or perpetual quiet with the restive bodies: what content
pleasant natures can take in pastimes and jollities, what contrariwise the
austere minds in discipline and rigor: what love either chastity can raise in
the pure, or voluptuousness in the dissolute: what allurements are in
knowledge, to draw the Contemplative, or in action of State, to possess the
practicke disposition, etc. In a word, whatsoever any humor can fancy, they
have some object to feed it. And this I call the maine engine to undermine
Christian Religion: it is (...) the very Mystery of Iniquity.

This is their Mystery in undermining: their pojects are no less in
Counterming. Five things I observe whereby the protestants have prevailed
against the Papists. Preaching to men, schooling of children, catechizing the
ignorant, writing of Martyrs, and calling for Councills. In all which they do
now proprijs pennis percellere, as Julian spoke: they would beat us at our own
weapons: if plain Truth did not shield us.

1 In our primitive Reformation, the industry of our Preachers, and dexterity
of our preaching, did ravish the multitude, who had been so long buried in
Egyptian darkness. The politic Papists perceiving the effect, used the same
means: and now have provided plenty of excellent Preachers, which they send
forth especially on solemn times, and to public places. In Lent, and in
Cities, their pulpits be furnished with men, using such diligence in their
labors, eloquence in their speech, making such show of Reverence toward God,
of zeal toward their Hearers, and of love to the Truth: that they seem to
want nothing, but a good cause. But that such brave abilities, should patronize
such gross idolatry, Popery! this is the secret which in my text is termed,
The mystery of iniquity.

In the mean time, let our Coat contend with their cunning in countermining
us. Let us Preachers strive to equal their labors, in our painful and
laborious preaching.

A second point whereby the Protestants prevailed, was their schooling of
Children: especially in the principles of religion; whereby they did sow the
seed betime. Bend those twigges whiles they were young, and ( quo semel imbuta
recens servabit odorem, testa diu) season them with that love of the truth in
their youth, which old age could never extinguish. The Papists have undertaken
us in this also: especially the Jesuits. Wheresoever they come, instantly they
open free Schools, which they discharge so industriously, that presently they
procure a confluence of all children. Whom under the pretense of teaching the
Arts, they artificially instruct them in the principles of Popery: infusing
withal such a prejudice against our part, as makes them incapable of
converting by Protestants, and implacable of conversing with Protestants: Yea
it is said that some Protestants have sent their children to the Jesuits
Schools, because of their dexterity in teaching. Where it is to be feared,
that they will train them up like Ianizaries, to return to the confusion of
their own Parents and Country. This is a Masterpiece in their popish
policy: a great Mystery.

Here would I exhort our Schoolmasters (like our English with the French in
the reign of Henry 5,) to meet their Counterminers and combat with them in the
Mine: and to contend with them in the instructing of their Scholars, in
knowledge both humane and divine: whereby they may abate, if not defeat this
Jesuitical mystery of iniquity: to rob us of our Children, and God of his
servants.

A third instrument to enlarge the reformed Religion has been catechizing:
whereby the ignorant has taken heart and ability to defend their own, and to
oppose the Popish Religion. Herein also, the Jesuits are said to equal, and
outstrippe the Protestants: having solemn Catechizing in their Churches on
Sundays and Holidays. To which purpose their Trent Catechism is published by
Pope Pius 5, yet we must take notice, that this serious and solid
catechizing, they exercise principally, if not solely, where they dwell among,
or confine upon the Protestants. In places and ages distant from them, their
Catechizing is a mystery muffling the miserable ignorant people in another
manne. About Granata, and other Gonsalvius de Inquis. praefat.
Provinces of Spain, where the Spanish Inquisition reigned, they taught the
simple people their Ave Maria, Pater Noster, their Credo, with salve Regina in
Latin. But the five Commandments of the Church, which they say are necessary
to salvation: i. the hearing of Mass on Sundays and Holidays, the going to
shrift and Confession, the receiving of the Holy Bread, the due observing of
Fasts, and the true paying of Tithes, are accurately taught them in the Mother
tongue.

Here again my tongue speaks what my heart thinks: for us Ministers, I
wish that either our Consciences would incite us, or authority injoyne us, to
be more careful and painful in Catechizing: the only means to throw down
their Mine on our Counterminers Heads, and to make the meanest capacity able to
discern their Popish Sophistry.

A fourth means to propagate the Protestants cause, at least to procure
compassion, was composing of Martyrologies, the stories of poor persecuted
people, put to death for the Reformed Religion. Whereby they published unto the
world, the innocence and patience of Protestants fiered and faggotted by the
Papists, with more than Pagan cruelty and inhumanitie. Hereupon the Papists,
not to be behind Tortura Torti page 152.
hand with them, have printed and painted Legends and Legions of their Martyrs.
To wit, that even here in England, their men have been sown in Bear skins,
and baited by Bandogs: that their women have been bared in their breasts, for
starven Mice to eat into their entralls. And that the Romish Catholics of
both sexes; have been haltered to eat hay with horses. These are Lies to us
who know them: but they make our Persons, our Religion, our Country, a
loathing, and a detestation to those who know us not. This then is a
mischievous point in their mystery of iniquity.

The last Countermining craft, of our undermining Adversaries, I mean to
instance in, is the Council. A Council because it was so confidently called
for by the Reformed Churches in Germany, that gave great credit and countenance
to their Cause. It persuaded the people, that certainly the Protestants were
the Honest men, that called for judgment: and the Papists the Malefactors who
trembled at the trial. There by also the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantsgrave of
Hassia were confirmed: the King of Bohemia, and the Duke of Bavaria were
staggered: and the heat of Charles the Emperor much abated, in persecuting the
Protestants. Yea, the Popes themselves, eight in number, for 40 years together,
were as hardly haled to call and continue a Council at Trent, as ever old
bitten Bear was dragged to a stake. But when necessity compelled them to
appear, they so contrived the carriage of that Council, that whereas the world
expected, that by it, the Pope would have been Reformed, if not ruined: it was
inverted to the Confirmation, and Exaltation of the Papacy. For now, the Pope
(who before dreaded a Council, as much as ever thief did a candle,) knowing
by experience, that he can coin Decades of Italian Bishops, and Centuries of
Titular Bishops, to extort the suffrages from all Christendom. Now he calls
for a Council, as for his Servant and Handmaid. The wresting of this weapon
out of our hand, or rather the turning of it into our Bosom, I esteem the
prime policy, they ever put in practice, to support the Papacy.

And thus have I discovered our Enemies, in their Trenches: how by undermining
and Countermining, they would ruin our Religion, by their politic popish
Mystery of Iniquity.

Ye see the bait, by which they attain: now will I show you the Hook by
which they retain the Papal magnificence. I must obey the time: and omit many
particulars. Concerning their undermining cunning to keep their Greatness,
that is an Hook ore trisulco, with three teeth: three ways they hold it. The
Priests hold the people, the Pope holds the Priests, the politic Cardinals
hold the Pope (...) and all of them hold together, to hold up the Papacy. Like
the hook, with the three teeth, 1 Samuel 2. 13. to be sure to hold whatsoever
they touch for the High Priests.

1. First the Priests hold the People: by Auricular Confession. I say not that
Confession is the mint of Treason: their Absolution injoyning a Resolution to
undertake any thing, against any man, who is an Enemy to the Catholics. Nor
do I tell you it is a Discloser of State-secrets: by it the Pope sitting at
Rome, as Elisha did at Dotham, 2 Reg. 6. 12. he is informed of the very words
which the King speaks in his Bedchamber. But by this the persons, which
confess their secret sins, are made Slaves to their Confessors. For
whatsoever they talk of that secret sacred Sacrament: I doubt not, but they
will print that Sigillum Confessionis in the forehead of the Penitent, and have
tricks, at least threats, to publish his crime and shame if he dare to fall
from them. This is an hook to hold thousands of their Proselytes: this is no
small mystery of their popish Iniquity.

2. And the Priests do not hold the people so fast by auricular Confession:
but the Pope does hold the Priests as fast, by inhibiting to mary. For the full
streams of the Church Treasure, would feel a shrewd Ebb, if they should
run out into those little branches, Wives, and Children. And which is of more
moment, the dis-inheriting of the Children, is a dis-heartning of the Parents
to prove Traitors. But where there are and can be no such Pledges of loyalty
to the Country: the Church of Rome may (possibly) command some good Catholic,
to stake his life, for to stabbe his King. Thus single life does hold in the
Priests unto the Pope, against their Prince, against their lives, yea against
their souls. This is another Hook: another rare mystery, in their popish
Iniquity.

3. Yet this is most memorable: that the Hook is put into the nostrills of the
Fisherman himself: for the Pope is held by the Cardinal, to hold up his
Greatness. I cannot imagine but some Popes have had some motions to regulate
some heteroclite abuses in the Papacy. But the politic Cardinals (whose
pomp depends on his papal magnisicence) to prevent any reformation,
forestall all information: as the third Chapter of our New book, called the
New man, makes it plain that Cardinal Burghesius, opened and concealed all
the letters from Pope Paul 5, which should have informed him of any abuse in
the Roman Church. And thus abyssus abyssum invocat, one instance does occasion
another, to discover this mystery of popish Iniquity.

To conclude, with their mysteries in Countermining us. In this also, there are
8 things ( multa paucis) which our Church does approve and use. These the
Papists do pervert to the ruin of our Church, if Christ did not mightily and
mercifully support it.

1. Obedience: Is it not the persuasion of our lips, the meditation of our
hearts, and the Theme of our Sermons? Cry we not out against refractary
faction, as against the Viper, which will eat out the bowels of our Church?
Yet, the strange practice of this, in the Church of Rome, they make their
Engine to subvert the Church reformed. The Jesuits leave the vows of Poverty
and Chastity unto other orders, and bind themselves chiefly to the Vow of
Obedience: whereby they swear to obey the Pope, in omnibus, and per omnia,
caeca obedientia, that is, to Moulins Accompl. page 145.
execute the command of their superior, without, asking why. This obedience
prostrateth the^ to practice, any thing, against any person. Is not this a
Mystery? a dreadful damned mystery of Iniquity?

2. The Scriptures: Does not every Christian Church, yea every Christian man,
trumpet out that command of Christ, John 5. 39. Scrutamini Scripturas, Search
the Scriptures: yet is not the very reading of them, contrived to be a
Lime-twigge of Popery? They may read them, but they must swear unto the second
article, of their second Creed, composed by the Council of Trent, commanded by
Pope Pius 4, 1564. Sacras Scripturas, secundum sensum, que^ Ecclesia tenet,
recip^o, that is, I Receive the scriptures according to the sense which the
Church gives them. They must take the Letter from God, but the sense from the
Pope: though that sense be contrary to the Letter, yea to God too. Is not this
a slavery? is not this a Mystery of Iniquity?

3. An Oath: Do not all Christians, all men embrace it, as an (...), the
uncontrollable umpire of Controversies? and the vnsoluble Gordian knot of
Contracts, and Covenants? yet we see it is a popish trappe, to ensnare poor
Relation of the Religion in the West. sect. 16.
Protestants. Whence all Protestants fear justly, that the Pope will play fast
and loose betwixt us, and the Papists Romish Catholics, as father Parsons did
with his own punies; Pretending to make peace betwixt the English Scholars,
and the Jesuits at Rome. First he swear the Scholars, then he left the
Jesuits unsworne. Is it not a miserable advantage that in all Contracts, the
Protestants are fettered by an oath, and that the Papists can be assoyled ad
placitum? That we dare trust a Turk, rather than a Christian, if he swear to
us? Is not this treachery, perjurie, a deep point in the mystery of Iniquity?

4 Interdicting of heretical books, at least the Consining of them to the
learned languages: we approve, and would God we did practice it also. On this
ground have they built the maine mystery of Popery. In the Popish Dominions, in
Italy especially, all Protestant Authors are interdicted: yea Bellarmine,
Gregory de Valentia, and their own Authors are not permitted. Nay in their
ordinary Sermons, not so much as a Text is read in their native language. The
very sound Relation of the Religion in the West. sect. 35.
of the truth is kept from those miserable people: whose poor souls are like
to perish through this politic working of this mystery of Popish Iniquity.

5. But the nemo s^it of all mysteries, I conceive to be that engine of
inhumanitie, and shame of Christianity: that Pejerarium, a secret Cyprian
epist. 22 Lactant. 5. 1.
cruelty, indeed the secret of cruelty: surpassing the invention of Domitius,
and the execution of Domitian: the Romish Inquisition. The Institution thereof
was commodious, commendable, conscionable to discover (not to Torture) it may
be to expel, (not to kill) the Maurani, and the Mahometans, which swarmed in
the south part of Christendom. But now the edge of that implement of
destruction, is turned upon the poor Protestants: and there is not only a
cruelty, but also a Mystery in the execution thereof. I believe there shall be
few fires to burn the Protestants, any more Publicly: but the Inquisition
shall catch them, and examine them, and affright them, and torture them, and
kill them, in secret, where no eye, (but the eye of God) can see them. This is
a secret, and a mystery of their cruel iniquity.

6. There are other projects, less mischievous, but as mystical, namely, to
disclaim those unchristian, and unnatural assertions, of Aequivocation Sharp.
Epist. Dedic.
and lying to men, of Excommunication and killing of Kings: we approve it,
exhort it, and commend it. Yet it is the suspicion of some men of judgment,
that some of those Papists, whom we term moderate secular Priests, do
declaime against the Jesuits, for these opinions, that thereby they may
insinuate themselves, with more freedom, and less suspicion, into
acquaintance, and so work men unto the Romish Religion. This is a mystery
worthy of our observation, and of our caution too.

7. Another thing, we all approve: that children of Papists should be brought
up by Protestants. This I also wish: though I dare not avouch the taking of
them without the consent of their Parents. But it is reported that some subtle
Papists, for some secret drift, do voluntarily, put their children unto
Protestant Tutors. Here is a depth, which my dullness cannot dive into. I
wonder at this mystery: yet I wish that it were an History. That if our
necessity, and necessary labors would give us leave, that they would put
their Children even to my self, and to such as I am. And then let them prove,
what their mystical projects could produce, when their children are under our
Education.

8. It is our common call and cry: that the Papists should come to Church: some
of them do it. But so: as that they have occasioned a proverb; The Church
Papists, the worst Papists. The more heavy Papist, (who goes to Church, as he
sends his daughter, to a Nunnery, to save charges,) in the fullness of his
devotion, he falls fast a sleep, and dreameth not of one point in the whole
sermon. But the active spirit, the learned Lay man, it may be a Priest, or a
Jesuit; He intertaineth his neighbor with talking to divert his own Pew, to
disturb the next pew, and industriously to discontent the whole congregation.
Otherwise if the Preacher be but of slender gifts, he will hear him, to
deride him, if he be learned, to intrappe him. And it is thought, yea said,
that there are some of those Assyrians daily, at these our Lectures: as they
did to the King of Israel, 1 Reg. 20. 33. so these Papists, Politicians,
Priests, or Jesuits, or all: they observe diligently, whether any thing do
fall from us, and they catch at it. But let them come: and then Catch in Gods
name. While they come to Catch us by their Policy, we may catch them, by our
Verity. This indeed were a Great mystery.

Thus (according to the shortness of my time, and smalnesse of my ability)
omitting many, abreviating all, I have shown you some mysteries of the
politic Popish Religion. You have heard the Papacy has been Hammering from
Saint Paul's time, to our time, 1600 years. The shop of those Politicians has
been at Rome: from that forge, the sparks of their mystical policies, have
flowne throughout the world. They have cunningly apprentised our own
Countrymen, our kinsmen, yea our Wives and yoke-fellowes to work in their
mint, and to spread the projects which they have coined. They tyrannize on the
bodies of their foes, by the Inquisition: and they tyrannize on the souls of
their friends, of their own children by Auricular Confession. Their
insinuating mystical Agents, creep into our houses to inveagle our people:
into our Churches to entangle our Preachers. What now? Can we say less than my
Text, a mystery, yea more! Legion. There are a thousand thousand sly
subtleties, and secret cruelties. Now the mystery of the blessed Trinity,
Bless us all from the mystery of their cursed iniquity.

SERMON XIV.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 7. That wicked one.
The Pope is (...) or the Lawless Person: in regard of the Scriptures, Creed,
Oaths, Laws humane, National. Childrens Obedience. Marriages. And in regard
of his own Constitutions. Exemption of the Clergy.

IN the two verses before my Text, we have heard Antichrist described: here
we have heard him discovered. Wherein I have unfolded three particulars: How
he was hindered, when revealed, and what the thing was, which was hindered in
Saint Paul's time, and to be Revealed in our time: a strange work of
Antichrist, called by a strange name, the mystery of Iniquity. All these I have
absolved. Now your attention will anticipate my Sermon: and expect that having
passed this point, all the points proposed in this text, that I should proceed
to another. In the ninth of Matthew, and the twentieth verse, there is mention
made of a woman diseased twelve years who touched but the hemme of Christ's
garment, and she was healed. I have indeed perfected the body (if you please)
the Garment of my discourse on this Text. But the last word (...), Exlex, that
wicked one, or Outlaw, remains as it were the Hemme of this Garment. I will
but totch it, and it may heal some who are diseased, even twelve years, who
have been brought up in Popery. I proceed therefore to open this point also,
in the fear of God, and love to our seduced brethren, to heal such as are
infected with Popery. But if they be either absent that they cannot be healed,
or obstinate that they will not be healed; Yet I proceed notwithstanding: that
if they be incurable, and will not be healed by us, yet that we may be careful
not to be infected by them.

(...), That wicked one. This last word of my text, must be my text at this
time: indeed containing a point as material as any I have yet spoken of: if I
had time to study it. But I depend on a great God, to enable my little
strength in a little time, to unfold his truth. This word is the tertium, where
both sides meet, both Papists and Protestants join issue in this point. I
suppose there is no Papist, but will grant that (...) is (...) that the
Outlaw, is The Antichrist. And for mine own part, I do profess, the Pope
not to be Antichrist, if I do not prove him to be (...), The Outlaw in the
highest degree that ever man was, since the Creation.

First to preface an answer to an ordinary objection. The Papists ordinarily
do urge (...), That wicked one, this article of this word, as if it were, an
article of their Creed. (...), That wicked one, is, (say they) the singular
Number, therefore Antichrist is a singular person. This cause, (indeed this
causlesse cavil) I have already disputed, and consuted. Now I only entreat
you to look back, into the last verse, where the same article is used in the
same sense. (...), He who lets, themselves expound the Emperor: not one
person, but the whole succession. By the same Grammatical law, it is lawful
for us, to expound (...) That wicked one, of the Pope, yet not one person, but
the whole succession. And why is Antichrist here called (...), That wicked one,
as if he were but one? The reason is rightly rendered by Aretius^: because his
government Aretius in 2 These. 2. 8.
is Monarchical: because in one place, to one purpose, and by o^e State, in a
long succession, their plots and projects have been prosecuted, and perfected,
to the rearing and supporting of their Antichristian Monarchy, (...). as it
were one man and one mind, This is a singular reason, for which the holy Ghost,
does here term Antichrist (...), That wicked one, in the singular number.

(...) signifies Lex a Law; (...), Exlex, a lawless person: a man consined
within the compass of no Law: such a one was the Type, Antiochus, Dan. 11. 36.
He shall do according to his will. But the Antitype, Antichrist the Pope is
such a one in the superlative degree. The Popes lawless actions (compared to
those of Antiochus) are like the Suns reflections, they double the precedent.
But I must not relate them out of the popish writers of Controversies (though
even they also shall be produced for witnesses) who use to set a fair gloss
on those soul extravagancies. But I must allege the Canonists as our
principal authors in this cause. For these tell us plainly, Who the Pope is,
and what he does: but the other cunningly dispute, What manner of man the Pope
should be, and what manner of things he ought to do. Yet Vis unita sortior, I
will unite both their testimonies, that their evidence may be the plainer. Thus
they testify: Papa Ber^ach in repert. part 4 in Dict Papa. H^sti ^s Casu^
Pa^ales 9. q. ^. Cunc^a Aug de An^ona quaest. 5 Artic. 3. Distinct. 96. c. 7.
satis T^u^enter. Bertachin. in repent. part. 4. in Dict. Papa Tiber. Dec^an.
vol. 1. Resp. 20. nu. 1.
est solutus legibus says Bertachine, that is, The Pope is loose from all
Laws. Solutus est omni lege humana, the Pope is loose from all humane Law,
says Hostiensis. Nec ullo jure ligari potest, he cannot be bound by any Law,
says Aug. de Ancona. He is so exempted from the Laws, that non potest
judicari, their popish Laws say the Pope can be judged by no Law. Nay Cum sit
solutus legibus, non potest accusari, he is so far from the limits of the Law,
that none may accuse him, says the said Bertachine: yea, but to dispute of the
power or actions of the Pope, est instar sacrilegij, yea sacrilegium, it is
near sacrilege, nay Barow. in L. Sacrile^ijs, de crim. Sa^ri^. Hostiensis
casus Papalis. Iso^o. Moscon. de Majest milit. Eccles* part. 1. lib. 1.
Capistranus f^l. 130. Extrav. Ioh. 22. cap. Apollol^tus de Council. Praebend.
mere sacrilege, if we condescend to those Canonists, Legi non subjacet
ulli, He is subject to no Law, the common axiom of the Canonists, which they
prove from this Title, he is called Summus, that is, the Highest, because
(says Mosconius) He is, supra jus, contra jus, and extra jus: above Law,
against Law, and without Law, (...) the word in my text. Capistranus concurreth
with a little addition of some spice of blasphemy: Apud Deum, and Papam
sufficit pro ratione voluntas: God and the Pope have their will for a Law. And
the Pope himself does testify of himself, none can say to him, Domine cur
ita facis? Sir why do you this? Which is seconded by another Pope, Sixtus is
said to have answered his accusers, in this phrase, in meo arbitrio est,
judicer, an non judicer: It is in my choice, whether I will be judged or not.
And Bellarmine Bell. de P. Romans lib. 2. cap. 26.
proposes this as his problem, to be maintained, Pontifex a nemine
judicatur, in his 26. chapter of the second book of the Pope of Rome, that the
Pope of Rome can be judged of none. And stating the question, he says that a
King has no Superior in Temporalls: but the Pope in regard of Temporalls and
Spiritualls, can be judged by none in the world, no nor by the world in a
Council: whereby he professes, that none in the world is absolutely (...),
that is, without Law, but the Pope. Finally, what the Canon^sts speak for
slattery, and the Writers of Controversies out of their judgment, Gunther and
Tiethgaudi, Archbishops of Cullen and Morn. Mist. Iniqu. Oppos. 31.
Trevers spoke out of experience of, and to Pope Nicholaus the first, Quod tibi
libet, licet, that is, thou have no law, but thy lust. All which does but
amplify this title in my text, that the Pope is (...), lawless, like the
Judge, Luke 18. 2. that he fears neither God, nor man.

Though these be plain, yet the plainest proof of any men's positions, is
their own practice, let their tongues and pens preach and publish what they
will, or can, to the contrary. To this purpose I say, laws are of two sorts,
divine and humane. The first are given by God, the second by Man. The Law given
by God is either a Law of constraint, Primarie, imposed, the Scripture: or a
Law of Consent, secondarie, collected, the Creed. Again, the Humane Laws also
are twofold, Oecumenicall, and Oeconomicall. Those are Public, for all
Nations; these private for all Families. Now if I do not make it appear, that
the Practice of the Pope, is lawless in all these particulars: I will confess
that I do him apparent wrong, to call him (...), The Outlaw, and The
Antichrist.

The great law is the law of God: and that great law of God, is that of
co^straint, the Scriptures, which should constrain every conscience to awful
obedience. But the Pope has practiced the contrary to that authority; was it
ever credible, that that law, give^ with such consternation (with thunders, and
lightnings, and a thick cloud, and the voice of a trumpet, so that all the
people trembled,) Exodus 19. 16. confirmed with such a protestation (that
Heaven and earth should pass, before one jot or one ^ittle should pass from
the Law,) Matthew. 5. 18. and sealed with such a Commination (I testify unto
every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book. And if any shall take away from the words of the book
of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life) Revel.
22, 18. and 19. So precious to the Jews, that they thought it their
prerogative to keep it, Rom 3. 2. So highly esteemed by the Christians, that
they poured out their blood to profess it, Heb. 11. Was it I say ever credible
that this Sic dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord, should be changed into a Sic
jubet servus servorum, so commands the servant of servants? That this Law of
God, should ever be vil^fied, and nullified by a wretched man?

This is the Popes practice, Is not the breach of Gods Law, avouched by his
dispensations and indulgences? are not the books thereof checked by
inhibitions, and public interdictions. The Scripture indeed, is called (...) 2 Timothy 3. 16. Gods straight rule, to our crooked affections: but the Pope does
bend it to his own liking. As their own gross phrase is, he makes it Lesbia
Regula, and Nasus Cereus, a Leaden H^^^us and Pig^ius.
Rule, and Nose of wax, which they may wrest and wring any wrong way,
according to their own will and pleasure. Or as Bellarmine Bellarm de P. To.
lib. 3. c. 14.
speaks in a better phrase, but to the same purpose, the Pope does
Apostolorum praecepta positiva moderari, ac mutare prout ecclesiae expedierit:
the Pope (says he) does moderate and change the positive praecepts of the
Apostles, as he shall think it convenient for the commodity of the Church.
But since that, Bellarmines plain mind Hist. of Paul 5, and the Venetians lib.
4. page 198.
is discovered, by some of found judgment. For anno 1606, he composed a little
book against the Treatises of Gerson, wherein he aimed to exalt the authority
of the Pope, so far as to make it equal to that of God. That Law does not
constreine, neither him, nor his, to keep their bounds: but he will be (...),
Lawless. They make the Scripture (in their own base phrase) mutum magistrum,
a dumb Teacher, to say nothing: as their Trent phrase speaks more mannerly,
secundum sensum quem ecclesia tenet, to say nothing, but according as the
Church will understand it, that is, what the Pope prompteth. In old time
Demosthenes said, that the Oracles of Apollo did (...): that they were taught
to speak nothing, but what pleased Philips Greatness. We may say in our time
(but God be blessed not in our Country, not in our Church at the least) that
the Oracles of the Scriptures do (...): they are taught to speak what does
please the Popes Holiness. To shut up this point with the wicked words of
Hosius, and with the witty words of Durandus: ipsas scripturas facessere Iuell:
Apolog. page ^31.
jubebimus, we will bid the Scriptures to be packing, said that blasphemous
Papist. But the Other speaks in another vein: male cum rebus humanis actum
est, ex quo Decretis alae accesserun^, idest, ex quo Decretales in ecclesia,
volare ausae sunt supra scripturas, said that popish Canonists: that is,
Christendom came into thraldom, ever since the Law of the Lord, has been
trodden down by the Law of the Pope. The last words of which sentence, are too
true: if that Decree of Pope Steven 6, recorded by Gratian be canonical, and
categoricall, Gratianus D 19 C Eni^^^r^.
Quicquid Romana ecclesia statuit, quicquid ordinat, perpetno quidem, and
irrefragabiliter observandum est: Whatsoever the Church of Rome does appoint,
whatsoever it does ordain^, it must be observed perpetually, and without
gainsaying. Is not the Pope then, that (...), that lawless man, that man of
sin, indeed that very Antichrist?

Next to this great Law, the Law of Constraint, the scriptures: is the Law of
Consent, a great law too, the Creed, which being collected out of the
Scriptures, the whole Christian world has submitted it self to the authority
thereof, as to the touchstone of their assertio^s. Now, the Pope does not only
oppose the old, but says that he can also compose a new Creed. In the old
Creed he directly thwartheth three Articles, that of Christ's remaining in
Heaven till the judgment, bringing him down daily to the Earth, by that
monstrous miracle of Transubstantiation. That of the forgiveness of sins, by
his presumptuous doctrine of merits.

And finally, the third Article of the Catholic Church, by inserting the word
Roman, which overthrows the sense of the Article, and is contradictio in
adjecto, an absurd contradiction: as if we should term Lewis the Parisian
French King: or Charles our Kentish English Innocentius 3, Extra. de Excessu
Pr^lat.
Sovereign. Nay it is the saying of the Pope, Articulos solvit, Synodumque
facit generale^: thatis, the Pope has power to call a general Council, and
to disanul every particular Article.

Thus far he fares, for the opposing of the old Creed: then for the
composing of a new. Though some affrighted with the absurd audacity of this
assertion, do seem to mince it: yet the whole Church of Rome concur in the
conclusion. The Pope has power Edendi novum Aquin. 22 ^. ^, artic. 10.
Symbolum, says Aquine, to publish a new Creed: Condendi, to compose a Creed,
writes Vig^erius: Ordinandi novum Symbolum, to ordain or authorize a new
Creed, quoth Gabriel Biel. Finally, what these and other Papists have avouched
in words, Pope Pius the fourth makes good ( de facto) in deed, by whose
authority the Trent Creed is published with Pij 4. Bulla ann^ 1564.
twelve articles also as a parallel to the Apostles Creed, and urged with as
authentical injunction. First to believe the doctrine of traditions. 2 The
authority of the Church (of Rome) to expound the Scriptures. 3, that there are
seven Sacraments, 4 all the points concerning original sin, and
justification as they are defined by the Council of Trent. 5 The Mass, and
that it is offered a propitiatory sacrifice for the living, and the dead. 6
Transubstantiation, and that the Lords Supper, is to be received but in one
kind. 7 Purgatory and prayer for the dead. 8, Invocation or praying to the
dead, as also worshipping of Saints, and their Rel^ques. 9, The adoration of
Images, 10 Indulgences. 11 The Popes Supremacy, namely that the Roman is the
mother and mistres (matter and magistra) of all Churches: and that the Pope is
Peter's successor, and Christ's Vicar: and finally, to believe all the
definitions of all Oecumenicall Councills, but especially of their last, of
that of Trent. And that these are the Catholic faith, extra quam nemo salvus
esse potest, which except a man do believe he cannot be saved. The subscription
running as peremptorily, as if they were the very Dictates of the Apostles, or
of Christ himself. Profi^^or, spondeo, voveo, juro: that is, I profess, I do
believe, promise, vow and swear, that I will obey all these Articles of the
Catholic faith. This man therefore who contradicts old Laws, makes new
Laws, and breaks all law: I think I may lawfully call him lawless, and
conclude him to be (...), The very Antichrist.

Thus these laws of God, (both of constraint and consent) both Scripture, and
the Creed are infringed, by this man of sin, without impediment, with like
facility, does this hornet break through ( those cobwebs) humane laws, be they
oecumenicall for all nations, or oeconomicall for all families. Those laws of
nations are of two sorts when faith is either contracted betwixt equals by an
oath, or exacted from inferiors by Allegiance. Each way is no way to bind the
Pope, who is every way boundless and lawless.

The law of oaths, is so general amongst nations, as that all nations observe
them, as most sacred and inviolable: in so much that Pagans would not infringe
them. Regulus would be rather tortured than perjured, though he could have
escaped by breach of oath. It was Aristotle's saying, that he who did double in
his oath (for that is (...), to swear with a mental addition) Arist. Rhetor.
18. ad Alex.
has neither fear of Gods vengeance, nor shame of man's reproof; and
Dionysius in Plutarch was condemned by all, whose saying was, that children
were to be mocked with toys, and men with oaths. Surely it shall be easier
for those Pagans at that day, then for some Christians. Some Christians (said
Matchiavell) make oaths Matchiav. Hist. Flor. lib. 3.
obligations, not equal to profit: and they use oaths not to observe them, but
rather to deceive those that put their trust in them. And I take it, that no
one thing has done such harm, and brought such shame to Chri^^^^dome, as this
particular. Simancha teaches very solemnly, Simancha In^^it. Cath. cap 4.
art. 14. edit. Hiss.
Fides data haereticis non est servanda, nec a privato nec a magistratibus:
quod exemplo Concilij Constantiensis probatur. Nam Johannes Huss and Hieromus
legitima slamma concremati sunt, quamvis permissa illis securitas est: Promises
(quoth he) are not to be kept with Heretics, neither by private men, nor yet
by public Magistrates: He proves it, by a precedent from the Council of
Constance: by whom John Husse, and Jerome of Prage, were legally burned,
although from the^ they had received a safe conduct. Tr^nt. Hist. lib. 1.
And the same had been practiced on Luther also, at the Diet of Worms in the
year 1521 had not the noble disposition of Charles 5, the Emperor, and the
plain opposition of Lewis the noble Elector Palatine preserved him. Finally,
Becanus does avouch Perjury by a maxim: juramentum non est vinculum
iniquitatis, that is, an oath is no obligation of iniquity: iniquity he
esteems it for a Papist to perform his promise to an Heretic (or a
Protestant) although he sealed it, by swearing an oath, which all sober men
suppose to be the surest, and most solemn obligation of all others: yet of
all others, the Popes themselves, are the most remarkeble patterns and patrons
of perjurie. About the year 1080 Rodolphus duke of Saxony instigated by Pope
Hildebrand or Gregory 7, to rebel against Henry 3, the Emperor, joined battle
with him, wherein having his sold^^^s cut in pieces, and his hand Pless.
myster. Opposite. 40.
cut off; Lo (said he to his friends and followers) with this hand I plighted
my troth to my Liege Lord Henry, but the Popes authority and importunity urged
me to the breach of that oath: and now in the same hand I have received my
deaths wound, and so be dyed.

On the two and twentieth of May 1526, Trent. Hist. lib. 1.
there was a confederacy betwixt Pope Clemens 7, Francis 1 of France, and the
Princes of Relation of the Religion in the West. Sect. 15.
Italy, against Charles 5, the Emperor, under the name of the most Holy League,
wherein the King was absolved from his Oath taken in Trent. Hist. lib. 5.
Spain. And some think the Pope had promised the King to dispense with that
Oath, before he made it: upon the hope whereof he also took it. Anno 1556
Paulus 4, by Cardinal Caraffa persuaded Henry 2 of France, to break his
league, and oath made with Spain (though the Princes of the Blood, and the
Grandies of that Kingdom, abhorred the infamy of oath-breaking yet) he
received absolution from the Pope, and such an overthrow from the Spaniard at
Saint Quintin, that it made his whole Kingdom to tremble and totter. Instances
are infinite, I will add only two, one most remarkable, and the other most
miserable. The first, If the Pope swears to his servants, Friends, yea
Cardinals, yet they cannot depend on that Oath. They have a custom in the
Vacancy, to compose capitulations, and all the Cardinals to swear to the
performance of them, whosoever shall be assumed to be Pope: but so soon as he
is elected he denies it, and says he is at liberty by gaining the Papacy:
a pattern whereof is proposed in that Trent. Hist. lib. 5.
pamphlet, termed The new man. And it was likewise practiced by Pope Paul 5,
anno 1550, who complained of those that said he could make but four
Cardinals, because he had so sworn in the conclave: saying that this was to
bind the Popes authority, which is absolute: that it is an Article of faith,
that the Pope cannot be bound (^cce (...)) much less can he bind himself.
And to say otherwise is a manifest Heresy. And if any should hereafter say,
the like, he would take order that the Inquisition Hist. Turk Knowles 297.
should proceed. The other, anno 1445. Vladislaus King of Hungary, having
sworn a Peace with Amurah the Turk, he was persuaded and assoiled by Julian,
Legate for the Pope. Upon this breach was the great battle of Varna, where the
Turks being at the point to loose the Day: Amurah dismayed with the slaughter
of his soldiers, plucked the Articles of the League out of his Bosom, and
said thus: Behold thou Christ, this is the league, which thy Christians have
made with me and violated. Now if thou be a God, show thy power on thy perjured
people, who deny thee to be God, by their Deeds. Instantly, the Christians
were routed, and so that unhappy King, by the breaking of his Oath, at one time
lost his faith, his life, a noble Army, and the Honor of the Christian
Religion. The Pope therefore, the Author of this, and the practiser^ of like
Oath-breaking. I think I may call (...), a lawless, faithless body. To add
one example more, will be Avent. lib. 6.
neither impertinent, nor superfluous. In anno 1111, an accord was made betwixt
Paschall the second, and Henry the second, for the irrevocable confirmation
whereof, they received the Sacramenu. The Pope (says Aventine) administered it
to the Emperor in these words: Sir, This is our Lord God, borne of the Virgin
Mary, and crucified for us. -- -- Take this pledge of my true love, and of our
unfeigned reconciliation. Sigonius says he said more, breaking the Host
Sigonius lib. 10.
he said, as this part is divided from that life-giving body: so let him be
divided from the Kingdom of Christ our Lord, qui pactum hoc violare. tent
averit, which of us soever shall go about to break this Covenant. Which was
most holily retracted by his Holiness himself. The very next year (the
Emperor returning into Germany in considence of this reconciliation) anno 1112,
he called a Council at the Laterane, to revoke this solemn, sacred,
sacramental obliligation, and devoted the Emperor to his former
excommunications. Neither do the Popes only do the same, but they have
pleasure in them that do them: yea and profit too, to the great advancement
and establishment of their temporal greatness: they make men to swear to the
Pope, though thereby they forswear themselves to others. These are the Sacrar.
Cerem. lib 1. Sect. 7. cap. 2.
formal words of that solemn oath, which every Captain does make to the
Pope, and before the Pope at the Mass, meekely kneeling on his knees. I. N. By
divine promission, elected Captain, do heartily promise (promitto, spondeo,
polliceor, ac juro) protest and swear, that from henceforth I will be reverent
and obedient to the holy Apostolic Church, and to you my Lord the Pope,
etiamsi alias obligatus sum: although I be otherwise obliged, which must be
understood of obligations of this nature, of oaths: which must be broken to
others, that this may be kept with the Pope. And thus I break off this point
of the Popes oath-breaking perfidie and perjurie.

The next National Law, is that of subjection which in every nation, the King
does expect and exact from his subjects, and all men acknowledge, and discharge
it. Only the Pope does plead an exception from this rule, and exemption from
this Law. First for his person, Papa est ab omni jurisdiction exemptus, says
Suarez. Suarez Apol. lib 4. ca. 4.
This were enough, if enough could satisfy pride and ambition. This the Pope
will have and more also, it is their own Decree, That although the Pope draw
millions of men to Hell, Catervatim, Distinct. 4. Can. 9. qu. 3.
by heaps, yet is he to be judged by no man: Nay so far is he from obeying
National laws, that national laws are reversed by him. In this kind, the
Laws of three Nations were assayed, and two were retracted by the Pope, in one
year, 1605. The Republike of Luca published an Edict, that none of their
subjects, The quarrels of Paul 5, with Venice, lib. 1.
should have any commerce with any of the Reformed Religion, because diverse of
their Citizens had lately turned Protestants. This Edict although it was for
the service of the Pope, and Popish Church, yet was it revoked by Paul 5. only
because it was published without his Pontifical authority. The Republike of
Genoa, by public authority, published certain Edicts to prohibit certain
private Conuenticles, which they sound to tend to the ruin of their The
quarrels of Pope Paul 5, with Venice, ^ lib. 1.
Common wealth. The foresaid Pope Paul 5, instantly, expressly enjoined them
to revoke those Edicts, otherwise he threatened the^ with Censures. Finally, the
State of Venice imprisoned and intended to proceed further against a Venetian
Abbot of Nervose, who had poisoned many men, of whom, one was his own Father,
desiled many women, of whom, one was his own sister: exercised a most unjust
and cruel Tyranny on his neighbors, and practiced in sorcerie, and other
magical operations. This Paul the Pope sent out a Prohibition, and although
the Venetian Ambassadors, made remonstrance unto him, that the just title and
possession which the State had to judge Ecclesiastical persons, in causes
criminal: were founded on the natural power of a sovereign Prince, and on
Custom never interrupted by the space of a Thousand years, and approved by
the Breves of the Popes themselves: Yet the Pope commanded the deliverance of
that person, and the abolishing of that Law. But here his Holiness did
command, and go without. That stout State would not Porrigere pulvinar
Diabolo, but made the Pope sit besides the Cushion in that contestation:
although he assayed them by arms, both spiritual and temporal: both by
Excommunication, and invasion. Notwithstanding the popish Doctors did write,
that that Republike did rebel against the Popes right: The quarrels of Paul ^,
with Venice, lib. 4.
who might give Laws to all Princes, and annull those which were made by them.
Surely heat of contention caused the^ to forget that there was such a word in
Saint Paul, as (...) the lawless person, which here they ascribe to Pope Paul,
by their open confession, and profession: which practice of the Pope, and
position of The quarrels of Paul 5, with Venice, lib. 2.
those popish writers, was justly censured by Sir Henry Wotton, then Ambassador
for his Majesty at Venice, who said for those pretensions of the Pope, that he
could not understand this Roman Theology, which is contrary to all Justice
and honesty.

Next the Pope proceeds to his Bishops, Suarez Apol. lib. 4. cap. 10. number. 6.
that they are exempted also, Quia Episcopi sunt Patres Principum, and
simpliciter ijs superiores, ideo indignu^ est, and indecens ut ab ijs
judicentur says Suarez; Bishops (says he) are the Fathers of Princes, and
plainly their superiors, therefore it is incongruity and indignity that they
should be judged by them. Moreover the popish Priests too, must enjoy the same
Privilege; because Constantine said to such (says Gratian) Vos a Great* cap.
12. quaest. 1.
nemine iudicari potestis, Ye may be judged by no man. Fourthly, their
servants, si tonsuram deferant, si incedant habitu Clerecali, si ecclesiae
alicui Suarez Apol. lib 4 cap. 28.
inserviunt: if their Crowns be shaved, their apparel of the Clergy fashion,
and their service Trent. Hist. lib. 1.
belong to any Church, they are exempted from all secular authority. Nay their
Doctors have affirmed, that the very Concubines of Priests, were of
Ecclesiastical judisdiction. All which particular sentences I may sum up in
that one saying of Antoninus in his Sums, The Antonin. Sum. part. 3. tit. 22.
Pope may make new Religions, change the ordinances of Councills, and dispense
with all Laws, a very paraphrase of the word in my text, the Pope is (...) a
lawless person.

Observe withal, that these Law-transcende^t hyperbolies, are not pinned on
the Popes sleeves, without their own approbation. Platina. Leone 3
Here the Popes speak in their own phrase, and in their own likeness. Pope
Leo the third being accused to the Emperor, Charles the Great, for certain
offenses, the Emperor intending to examine the matter, he received a flat
answer, Sedem Apostolica^ omnium ecclesiarum caput a nemine, Laico praesertim,
iudicari debere, that the Apostolic See, being the Head of all Churches ought
to be judged of no man, of no Lay man especially: and about the year 1132
Lotharius the Emperor demanded Pless. Myster. Progres. 46.
of Innocent the second, whether he would observe the Imperial laws: that
Pope returned a round and ready answer, Mantum Pontificiale se potius abd
caturum, and pedibus conculcaturum, that he would rather resign his
Pontificiall apparel, and trample his triple Diadem under his feet: So that
the Pope and the Imperial laws are (...) Dagon and the Arc, one must down.
And so it becomes him who is surnamed, (...), The lawless person. The effect
of which lawless usurpation must be to wrong the King and the Laws and
Justice of the Kingdom. The King must suffer in his power and jurisdiction,
which is much impaired thereby: to instance in France. In France (says
Duarenus) Duarenus de Benesicijs Praef.
the whole people are divided into three degrees, the Clergy, Nobility and
Commonalty, of which the first is the most: whereby the King is stripped of one
third part of his subjects, by this Papal Exemption. Next, it does blunt the
edge, or rather break the sword of the Law: that Exemptio^ being a Buckler to
all the Clergy, what malefactors, or how obnoxious soever. Whence sprang that
proverb (mentioned by Duarenus de Been. 1. 17.
the forementioned author) Detonsum caput impunitatis symbolum, that is, a
shaven Crown is the sign of a person who may not be punished. From whence
will issue 3 (...), necessary consequents. 1 that a Priest or Jesuit cannot be
a Rebel, or a Traitor, although he do the actions of Treason or Rebellion.
Clerici Rebellio non est crimen laesae majestatis, quia non est principi
subditus, Emanuel Sa.
says Sa: that is, The rebellion of a Popish Clergyman is no Treason, because
he is no subject to that Prince: which is confirmed (and almost translated) by
the current of the Controversie-writers in the contentions betwixt Paulus 5,
and the State of Venice, who all consented The quarrels of Paul 5, with Venice,
lib. 4.
upon this, that the Clergy are not subjects to the Prince, even in the case of
Treason. The second paradoxe, issuing from the same Fountain is, that it is
not lawful for the Popish Clergy without the Popes leave, to pay tribute, or
give any subsidies to their Princes, although they themselves be willing to
those payments. This Duarenus Duarenus de Benef. 7, 8.
complains to have been the Constitution of Pope Boniface 8. The last
lawless absurd paradoxe, is proposed by way of Quaere. They put the question,
whether an Heathen Prince, denying the Exemption of the Clergy, may be admitted
unto Baptism (sub condition) on this condition, that he may not be deprived
of that jurisdiction. Suarez shapeth an answer suitable to the Suarez Apolog.
lib. 4. cap. 11. number. 18.
Popes lawless supremacy: that it is so injust a condition, ut sub tali pacto,
neque Baptismus alicui Principi sit concedendus, that on these terms, a Prince
may not be admitted by Baptism. In plain terms, a King, and his whole
Kingdom must be permitted to be damned, rather than the Popes Praerogative
over national laws, must be prejudiced. Thus the Oecumenicall laws are
broken by the Oecumenicall Bishop. And if there be, or ever has been such a
one as (...), ( a lawless person) in the world, the Pope is He. For all the
laws in the world cannot consine him.

The last, indeed the least Law, is the Law Oeconomicall, in private Families:
which needs least to be stood upon. If the old Babylon carried captive the
people of Israel, and the Tribe of Judah: think we that the family of David,
or House of Iechonias could be freed? So, since the new Babylon has
inthralled, the Prime Law of the Scriptures, and the public law of Nations: it
were impossible to imagine, that the private law of every poor family, and
every personal interest should not submit their necks to his usurping
tyranny. For Families! the great tie therein, is twofold: either of superiority
betwixt children and Parents: or of equality betwixt husband and wife. Now how
both of these are torn in pieces, by popish intrusion: it may be this point
wants plaints, rather than proofs. For children, how sons are wrought into
popish orders, without, and against their Parents consent; and daughters, that
they are kept in Popish Nunneries, against their Parents, nay their own
consents; I would this were only suspicious, and not notorious. Yea the Pope
has haled children, to the height of disobedience, rebellion, and to the
height of rebellion: perjurie, Morn. Mist. Progres. 41.
persidie, and parricide. Mathilda was instrument to Pope Vrbane 2, whereby
Conradus was incited to an insurrection against the Emperor Henry 3, anno
1091. And about Morn. Mist. Progres. 42.
1100, the same Henry 3, had another son (afterward Henry 4,) instigated by
Pope Pascal 2, who surprised him at a treaty, permitted his Father to beg a
Clerkesh^p in Saint Mary's Church at Spire, whereof himself had been the
Founder, of the Bishop of Spire, to whom he had been Patron: by whom he was
most churlishly rejected. Through the grief whereof, and of other occurrences,
the noble Emperor died. And his son Henry 4, Paulus Deacon. ^ib. 4. cap. 38.
though he k^lled him, yet could not bury him, but he lay without a grave for
many years together; for so the Pope did injoyne it.

Concerning Marriage: from marying they are inhibited, if married, divorced: such
as are under the Popes Jurisdiction. I will give one instance, to affirm each,
and a third to avouch both. Gregory 7, was infinitely incensed, Sigonius lib.
9. de Reg. Italiae.
that Mathilda was wedded to Atestanus the Marquess of Azan; and the next
year divorced her, under pretense of neernesse of kindred: whereas nothing was
more common with him, than to dispense with degrees of nearer affinity.
Innocent 3, divorced Ralph Earl of Vermandois, from his first wife, that he
might assume a second, Petronilla the sister unto the Queen of France. Of
which lawless act, Saint Bernard did complain. God (says he) did Bernard
Epist. 216. ad Innocent.
join Ralph, and his wife, by the Ministry of the Church. Quo modo quos
Ecclesia conjunxit, Cumera disjunxit? How could the Popes Chamber put a sunder,
those whom Gods Church has joined together? Bernard might have satisfied his
demand out of Saint Paul in this Text. The Pope did do it: because he was,
and is (...), lawless, and therefore not tied to give an account of his
actions. Finally, four hundred years after that, anno 1556, Pope Paul 4, sent
a monitorie, to Dame Joan of Arragon wife of Ascanius Columna, that she should
Trent Hist. lib. 8.
not marry any of her daughters, without his leave: or if she did, the
matrimony though consummated, should be made void.

Some peradventure will here interpose a diminution, that though the Pope be
(...), yet is he (withal) (...) though he outleapeth the Laws of God, and
man, yet he will consine himself to his own Constitutions; to those
conclusions, which himself has established, either privately in his Conclave,
or publicly in the Councils. Be it so, this is no hedge to his lawless
out-leapes, for in b^th these, he will leave a gappe, for his free egresse.
The Councills are proponent ibus Legatis, and salva semper authoritate sedis
Apostolicae, with caution not to touch the hemme of his Primacie. And for the
Conclave, it is a Quarrels of Paul ^, with Veni^e. lib. 1.
thing without doubt (quoth that judicious Author of that Venetian story) in
the Court of Rome, that the Cardinals voices are taken in Consistory, only
in appearance, and by way of ceremony, in as much as they are never informed of
the affairs whereof they are to treat; -- so that the Popes go with assurance
to propound in Consistory, whatsoever is to their humor: grounded upon the
custom, which is amongst the Cardinals, to consent to all that is proposed;
which is openly derided in the Court of Rome, changing the latin word (by the
figure of agnomination, assentiri, into assentari.

Howsoever, were the Popes Conclave, and Council-conclusions fair, and far
from fraud, when they are constituted, yet are they but twine-threeds to their
Prerogative, they cannot bind it. In that contention 1605, betwixt the Pope
and Venice: The Venetians The quarrels of Paul 5, with the Venetians.
pleaded for their action, the Law of Nature, Possession for a 1000 years, and
the Popes approbation, by his own Breves, extant in their public Archiues.
This threefold cord was easily broken: and Paul the fifth, commanded the
revoking of that Venetian Law, although the Popes own Breves did establish
them.

Neither are their Councills any thing stronger, Sigonius do Reg. lib. 6.
Baron. An. 897. Artic. 2.
Pope Formosus, was by Pope Steven in a Council dug out of his grave,
condemned, and censured about 900. After whom Pope John 10, in another Council
at Ravenna, did abrogate that act of his predecessor, and that Council which
concurred in the countenancing, and commanding that action. Finally, the Pope
himself Paschal the second; shall determine this question, who said (if
Aventine Avent. lib. 6.
say true) debere homines pro legibus habere, quae dicat: that men ought to
esteem The Popes words, to be their Laws. As much is here said by the Pope,
as I can say of the Pope: although I give him that name which Saint Paul gives
to Antichrist, (...), the lawless person.

From hence, let understanding men conceive what manner of arguments, the
Papists can use to persuade them to their parties. Do they dispute from the
Scriptures? Alas the Pope does dispense with the Scripture, and make his
Decrees equal to the Scriptures? Do they plead an Article of Faith? The Pope
does contradict the old Creed, and has made a new Creed. May persons prevail
with thee? their reverend and learned Priests? the best of them (if an absolute
Papist) is but the Popes creature, and like Balaam, Number. 22. 38. He has power
to speak nothing, but what his God (the Pope) does put in his mouth. Does thy
child entreat thee. or thy wife entice thee? The Pope can cancel the bonds of
Nature, and of wedlock: His agents can make thy wise undutifull, and thy
child unnatural. Or do (those awefull motives to an honest heart) oaths
move? Alas, alas, if thou could see all the blood which the Pope has caused
to be shed, by breaking of oaths, the Thames would seem to be but a
Channel, compared to that Ocean. In a word, when thou can trust a man, who
neither obeys the scripture, nor keeps an oath: then believe the Pope, and
Popish. ^ ill then my Tongue shall tell you, what my heart does pray for you.
The Pope is (...), one, who breaks all Laws: Humane and Divine. Therefore;
From that lawless, awelesse, faithless, graceless Man of Sin, Good Lord
deliver us.

SERMON XV.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 8. Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and
shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.
The Destruction of Antichrist. The beginning of Reformation. Popery may
return into England. Popery may not be put down by force of Arms. The final
destruction of the Pope uncertain. Popery shall not be extinguished till the
last day. The destruction of Rome.

THis part of this verse contains the third part of this Discourse,
Antichrist destroyed. Where we have his double destruction, or rather two
degrees of destroying him. First, the diminishing of Antichristianisme, in the
first words, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth: and
secondly, the finishing thereof, in the remnant of my text, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming. In each observe the Instrument, and the
Agent: the instrument of the first, is the spirit of his mouth: the instrument
of the last, is the brightness of his coming: and the Agent in both, is, the
Lord: whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy
with the brightness of his coming.

The first degree of the destruction of Antichrist, is his diminishing in the
first words, whom the Lord shall consume, (...). This one word, has two
significations, and answerably it occasioneth two translations: it signifies
both consumere and consicere, both to consume, and to kill. The latin popish
translation, has the latter: but Beza has the former. In English the Rhemists
read, the Lord shall kill that wicked one by the spirit of his mouth: our
translation has it, the Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth. I
follow our new translation, as the most true translation, for sour causes.

First the killing of Antichrist is in the next part of this same verse (...),
and shall destroy, and so sudden a tautologie cannot be very convenient, nor
probable.

Secondly, the manner of Antichrists rising, it was not simul and semel, on the
sudden, but sensim and sine sensu, by little and little, so his fall must be
by little and little, indeed a very Consumption.

Thirdly, the hinderer of Antichrist, the Emperor did not fall at once, but by
little and little, in the tract of many years, yea Ages: so also shall
Antichrist consume away.

Finally, the nature of the word and use thereof is more proper to his
signification, (...), to consume away ones estate, not to play it away at one
game: so also is time said (...), to wither beauty, and that is Chrysosto^^^s
(...).
withered in time, not in a moment: (...), the similie is Saint Chrysostomes.
As fire being far off, does cause slies to be benumbed, and to wast away
before it does burn them, with the flame thereof. So does CHRIST consume
Antichrist, and cause him to waste away, before he absolutely destroy him with
the brightness of his coming. We may not think, that Christ has smit, or
will smite Antichrist, as Gedeon did Zeba and Zalmunna, Judge. 8. 21. to kill
him at one blow: but as in likelihood ^ether would have smote them, to have
given them many small wounds, before he cut them down.

That phrase in the Psalm 58. 7. fitteth this action, Antichrist is consumed
like a snaile, and wasted away like the untimely fruit of a woman. The sense
then, of this first phrase is clear: Antichrist being at the height of Earthly
Pomp, and perverting the people, he shall be destroyed and consumed, by
little and little, in a long time. This is the first kind, or degree of his
destruction.

Experience applies this, to the Papacy: the Trent Hist. lib. 1. page 3.
pomp and pitch whereof, was about 1500 years after Christ. When there were
in all Christendom, only some remainder of the Albigenses about the Alps:
and some relics of the Hussites, and Calistini in Bohemia. So few and so
ignorant poor people, that they had neither learning nor ability to oppose the
Potent Tyranny of the Antichristian Papacy.

Concerning the fall whereof, there have Pless. Myster. Progres. 65.
been observed many prodigious precursers. Instantly before that time a
Thunderbolt beat down, the Angel on the top of the Tower of Saint Angelo:
this was in the time of Alexander 6. But anno 1517, on the very day, and in
that very Church, when pope Leo 10 at Rome, did create one and thirty
Cardinals, a sudden tempest dashed the keys out of the hands of the Image of
Saint Peter. About which time, the necessity of the Papacy, forced the Pope, to
permit the house of Austria, to grow a little too great, to the lessening of
his Antichristian authority. But in the self same year, 1517, it Trent Hist.
lib. 1. page 4.
pleased God to smite the greatness thereof, by a poor instrument* Leo giving
the Indulgences of Saxony, and that side of Germany, unto his sister Magdalene,
wife to Francischetto Cibo, the bastard son of Pope Innocent 8. This money
being exacted by Arembaldus, then a Bishop, before a Merchant of Genoa. This
opened the eyes and mouth of Martin Luther, to discry and discover the
Antichristian Church of Rome, which brought such a Consumption thereof, that
Saxony fell from Rome, Hassia followed Saxony, the Palatinate Hassia, and
Helvetia the Palatinate in a few years.

How since, their greatness has decreased, their Consumption increased: I
call to witness Bellarm* de P. R. 3, 21.
one of their own authors, an uncontrolable testimony. Thus Bellarmine
relates it: The Lutheran Heresy possesses (says he) almost all Germany,
Denmark, Norway, Suevia, Gotthia, Hungaria, Pannonia, France, England,
Scotland, Polonia, Bohemia and Helvetia: yea (says he) it is climbed over the
Alps also, and entered in Italy also. Omitting their fabulous Indian
Conversions, true Perversions, and subversions. I think Rome has received a
blow, and Lessius de Antichristo Demonst. 16.
does (...), it is fallen into a deep Consumption.

This point may we use to expel security. though Antichrist be consumed, yet
is not he yet dead. And as persons sick of a Consumption, a little before
they dye, recover fresh color and new spirits: So for Antichrist, although his
death cannot be far off, because we suppose the day of the Lord to be nigh:
yet what strength he may recover, in any particular Country, before that day,
God knows. Woeful experience does teach us, that Popery has re-entred
Bohemia, and the Palatinate. And what return it may make into Holland and
France, I believe the stoutest heart, does now rather rely on the mercy of
God, than on any power of Man to prevent: Yea even in England, there are those
that hope, that their Consumption is not desperate: but that Popery may have
recoverie, even amongst us also. But I trust their Hope is groundless, and
shall be fruitless. Blessed be God, we have such a King: we may dormire in
utramque aurem, we may rest secure under the shadow of his wings. He does not
only profess the truth, but know the truth. The uncomparable son of an
unmatchable Father. The Father: Never did Prince suffer more, never did Prince
write so much, for the Reformed Religion: And the Son, he has the same
affection to it, though (God be blessed) not the like affliction for it. He
has the same heart, though not the same pen. We had a James, we have a
Charles, This is, he was, here is the Anchor of our hope, against all
Antichristian attemps. Notwithstanding let us shake off security. Let us watch
and pray, least we enter into that fearful temptation. Let us lift up our
hands and our hearts unto God; that amongst us Antichrist may consume, til the
Consummatum est. That Popery may consume, and wast away in our Land, if it be
his blessed will, even till the second coming of our blessed Savior Christ.

The instrument diminishing Antichrists tyranny is the spirit of the Lords
mouth. The interpretation whereof is fair without forcing: delivered by
Damascene, (...), Damascenus 4, 27.
that is, (...): by the spirit of his mouth, that is, by the word of his mouth,
says Damascene. The like phrase we read in Isaiah, 11. 4. He shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay
the wicked. The same phrase, in the 4, of the Hebrews, and the 12. The word of
the Lord is sharper than any two-edged sword. And a twoedged sword, to come out
of his mouth, is the description of Christ, given by Christ, Rev. 1. 16. Such a
simily also do Interpreters raise from Revel. 6. 2. He who sits on the white
horse, is expounded to be the Ministers, who are said to have a Crown, the
emblem of Victory, and a Bow, signifying the easiness of his Victory: the
Lord will overcome his enemies a far off, and strike them by his Word (as it
were with a Bow) without any labor. Three reasons make good this exposition.
First Antichrist did attain his Dominion, by false expounding of the word:
therefore the true expounding of the word shall lessen and diminish the same.
Next, he does maintain his tyranny by the ignorance of the word: therefore the
knowledge of the word, shall diminish and discover the same. And finally, God
does use his own mouth, and not the hand of man, his word, and not the sword
of Princes, to consume the Adversary; that the honor of that Conquest may be
wholly and soly ascribed unto him. Not unto us, not unto us O Lord, but unto
thy Name do we yield the glory. The son of David comes against this
Goliath, not with a sword, and spear, and shield, but in the name of the Lord
of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel, who^ this man of sin has defied.
I will seal up the exposition of these words, with the saying of our late
learned Sovereign: Praemonition page 54.
The word of God, and the preaching thereof is meant by the spirit of the Lords
mouth, which shall piece by piece consume and diminish the power of that man of
sin, till the brightness of the Lords second coming shall utterly abolish
him.

Here must I speak a little of that great question, whether it be lawful for
Protestants to put down Popery by force of Arms. I profess my self to be
both (...), and (...) both a Peacekeeper, and a Peacemaker: to be bound both
to persuade, and to practice Peace, by a double bond: as I am a Christian, and
as I am a Preacher. I say therefore to take the proposition plainly; It is
unlawful for Protestants, to put down Popery by force of Arms.

These are the arguments which persuade me; 1, the phrase of my text does teach
us, (...), words, not swords, must be the instruments to consume Antichrist.
2, The same lesson have our forefathers learned in the school of Experience;
their testimony tells us of Henry's and Frederickes, of many famous Germane
Emperors, who have contended to break the yoke of Papal Tyranny from their
necks by their Arms: but they have gotten nothing (unless it were the
changing of a wodden yoke, into one of Iron) by their warlike contention. 3, I
prove it a Pari: We ought not to make War upon the Turk, only for
Religion: therefore, neither against the Pope. I conceive it unlawful for any
Christian Prince to invade the Turk, upon the pure, and sole title of
Religion, who has interest in those territories, jure belli, by Conquest, by
the peoples submission, and by a long possession. Because the matter of faith
and Religion, neither gives to any Prince, nor takes from any, the propriety
of his temporal estate. Barbarous Mahomet Ep. Morbisani ad Pium 20
had art enough to urge this argument against Pope Pius the second: that he
erred in exciting Cruciados to invade Turkey, for (said he) ex lege ipsius
Christi, non potestis aliquem, ad credulitatem compellere: that is, by the Law
of Christ, it is not lawful for Christians, to compel any to Christianity. 4,
Ab exemplo, we have no such precept of Christ, or pattern of the primitive
Christians, to propagate the Gospel by war: gladio or is, not ore gladij: ever
they did it by the word, never by the sword. 5, Ad hominem, we our selves
condemn their Cruciados and Renegados: the Popes enticing of Princes to
public invasion, or of subjects to domestical insurrection. 6, Conversion by
compulsion, is not of Christian lenity: Christ himself comparing it to the
piping of children. 7, All this I confirm with the sentence of our earthly
King James, on Rev. 20. Quaerunt impij and persequntur fideles: Fideles
inquisitione^, and persecutionem patiuntur: that is, the ungodly do inquire
for and persecute the faithful: but it is the property of the faithful to
suffer their Inquisition and Persecution: and 8, with the saying of the King of
Heaven, Impij obsident, fideles obsidentur: the wicked are the Besiegers, and
the faithful the besieged, Rev. 20. 9. For never did the Lamb hunt the wolf,
nor the Dove pursue the Hawk: but the contrary is continual. Therefore simply
it is unlawful, for Protestants to put down Popery by force of Arms. It
remains then, that we distinguish of the Persons moving the war, and of the
reasons moving the persons.

The Person moving this war must be Summus Magistratus, a Sovereign: No
subjects may take up Arms for propagating their Religion.

This indeed is objected, by the Papists, unto Monarcho^ach. ^art. 1. tit. 6.
Fra^in. oratione habita Lovanij anno 1565. Melancton lib. Consil. Evang. part.
1. p. 314. ^ilson.
the French, Dutch, Germans, and Suevians, and indeed to all the Reformed: that
they reformed Religion by Rebellion. Some answer, they did take up arms, only
se defendendo, to save their lives from implacable violence. Some, that they
took up arms against their fellow subjects, who abused the authority and
minority of their Kings. Some, that their sovereign was not an absolute
Prince, but only ex Abbot de Antic. cap. 7. sect. 6.
condition. Some, that those wars were managed jure suo, non aliquo
ecclesiae privilegio, for the infringing of the fundamental Laws of those
Lands, not for any reasons of Religion. Others, render other reasons. For my
self: I say, I know not the Laws of those Republikes, nor the circumstances
of those wars. I will therefore speak judicio contemplativo, not practico,
Sayrus Clavis Regia lib. 12. cap. 3. number. 26.
proceed to the Position, and pass by the objections against the Persons.

It is I say absolutely unlawful for subjects in the cause of Religion, to
take up arms against their Prince, nay without their Prince: be the War
offensive, yea but defensive. Suscipiendi belli authoritas penes Principem,
says Saint Augustine: August. contra Faust. lib. 22. cap. 75.
it is the Prerogative of Princes, to move War: no subjects may usurp upon
it. Nay though the persons be Religious, and the cause Religion: yet is it
Rebellion or Treason, to take up Arms against, or without the Prince.
Damhouderius in prax. Crimin. cap. 82.
Four things, say the Lawyers are required to make a war just, and
warrantable, justa causa, recta intentio, personarum idonietas, and authoritas
Principum, sine qua est laesa majestas, there must (say they) concur, a just
cause, a right intention, fit persons, and the Princes authority, without which
the war is high Treason. War made by a subject is unjust though the cause
be just: for the justness of the cause, cannot give lawful power. A just
cause, good intention, power, and jurisdiction must concur to make such
public actions warrantable. War (we see) without the Prince is unlawful,
though for Religion: but against the Prince, though for Religion, it is far
more unlawful. Take Saint Augustines judgment for the ancient Christians: ye
see, said he, to Marcellinus, the Powers of this world August. Epist. 5. ad
Marcel.
which once did persecute Christians in behalf of their Images, they are now
conquered, non a Repugnantibus, sed a morientibus Christianis, not by the
Wars, but by the (patience and) deaths of Christians. Take Master Bezaes
judgment Bezalibro Confess. sidei cap. 5. sect. 45.
for the later Christians: Quod autem ad Privatos Homines attinet, concerning
Subjects, says he, ^^juriam pati nostrum est, it is their duty to suffer,
neque ullum aliud remedium proponitur privatis hominibus tyranno subiectis,
praeter vitae emendationem, preces, and la^rimas: and though they be subjects
to a Tyrant, they have no other remedy, but amending their lives, and
commending their cause to God. And the judgment of all Christians is recorded,
in that primitive perpetuated proverb, Arma Christianorum, sunt preces and
lachry^^e: Prayers and tears are the only weapons of Christians. Their
practice also, has made good their proverb. Valentius decreed to banish
Eusebius from Samosata: Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 14.
the people took up Arms: Eusebius appeased the people, opposed not the
Prince, but submitted himself to banishment. Valentiniane sent Calligonus his
Chamberlain, to terrisie Saint Ambrose from his opinions, by menacies of death
and torments. That holy man returned no resistance, but this reply; Deus
permittat tibi, ut impleas quod minaris. Indeed says he, God may please to
permit you, to put in execution, what you threaten. Ego patiar quod est
Episcopi: tu sacies, quod Spadonis. I will discharge the duty of a Bishop, do
you the Office of an Eunuch. It was the famous onset which the armed Christians
gave to their Emperor, though a Pagan: Caesar oramus, non pugnamus: Sir our
tongues beseech thee, our hands, shall not touch thee. In general: From the
passion Hist. Papatus cap. 9.
of Christ, to the persecution of Dioclesian the poor Christians were savagely
persecuted, with intolerable, innumerable* incredible tortures, 20000 put to
death at once, and whole nations extirpated, yet it was never known that
(though they were of equal number and force) ever they armed themselves
against the Emperor any otherwise, than with Patience. To shut up all in the
example of him who should be all in all: Christ himself commanded Peter to put
up his sword* it is no proper weapon to defend his quarrel. And in truth,
those that maintain Wars warrantable, in such cases of Religion, they pluck
the flower from the Garland, or rather the Garland from the Head of the Church.
There will be no Martyrdom, if private men may make resistance against
persecutors.

The occasions of war, are either Proper or Accidental: the proper occasion
is that which makes men take up arms of it self, without any other reason
adjoined: the accidental, is the occasion which concurreth, but not of
necessity. Thus it is not lawful for one Prince which is a Protestant, to
invade another who is a Papist, as he dissereth in Religion: but as he is a
Trucebreaker, Incroacher, or a Disturber of the Public Peace, etc.

Thus Constantine warred against Lucinius Dan^us de Antichrist c. 29.
his Colleague, not because he was an Infidel, but because he persecuted the
Christians, contrary to their capitulations, one Article of their league
betwixt them, being this, to permit the Christians to live in Peace. I say
therefore: I do not approve the shedding of Christian blood, in the cause of
Religion. But this I add: if the Pope shall proceed to maintain them, who
maintain these Traitorous positions, (such as Bellarmine, Baronius, Becanus,
Suarez, etc.) That the Pope has power either directly or indirectly, to take
away the subjects, Crowns, or Lives of any Princes; I say, then these Princes
may justly take arms to defend themselves, and to invade their adversaries.
Yea more: as Hanibal invaded Rome, but the Romans setched him home, by
a^saulting his Charthage: So when it is apparent, that Rome sends forth
advice, and agents to raise Rebellions, or Invasions against Protestant
Princes: then may Protestant Princes justly raise forces to raze that City,
which is the shop of Treason, and to ruin Rome it self. This we may
conjecture to be the foretelling of that prophecy of Grosthead: Matthew. Paris.
in Henr. 3.
nec liberabitur Ecclesia ab Aegyptica servitute nisi in ore gladij cruentandi,
the Church (said that Bishop of Lincoln) shall not be free from that
Egyptian slaverie, but by effusion of blood. And this we may conceive to be
the fulfilling of Saint John's prophecy, Revel. 18. 6, 8. Rome shall be burned,
even by those Princes in whose territories, the Pope has kindled many
combustions. Morn^us mist. Progres. 65.
Hence Lewis the twelfth King of France, caused to be disputed in a Synod at
Tours, Number liceret Papae, absque causa, Principi bellum infer? whether it
were lawful for the Pope, on no cause to make war on any Prince? and when it
was answered negatively, that it was not lawful; He propounded a second
question. Number non tali Principi, pro sua desensione, fas sit eum invadere?
whether it were not lawful for such a Prince, thereupon to invade the Pope?
their suffrages did return the conclusion, That it was lawful. Hence also the
same King commanded these words, to be stamped on his coin, Perda^ Babylonem,
I will destroy Babylon.

Without these limitations: the Sword which we must use against the Papists, is
Ephesians. 6. 17. the sword of the spirit, the word of God, preaching; yea, ecce
duo gladij hic, Luke 22. 38. we may unsheath two swords against them, our
public preaching, and your own private Catechizing. Would you more weapons? I
showed you some before, Christianorum arma, sunt preces and lachrymae: Prayers,
and Tears are our weapons. Yea yet more, Ephesians. 6. 14. we must arm our selves
with the Breast Plate of righteousness that is, with Innocence. Here is the
Magazin of Protestants. Do we desire the confusion of Antichrist? Do we
desire (I know we do desire it) do we indeed desire that Popery may be
expelled ont of our Country? then must we sight against it, by our Preaching
and Praying: Prayers and Tears, Penitence and Innocence, are all our weapons.
Therefore the God of Hoas^s grant, that all of us may use all of them.

The third point, but the second part, or degree in the destruction of
Antichrist, is the finishing of his Tyranny in the word following, (...) the
Lord will destroy him. I need not labor in the interpretation of this point:
for we have a concurring consent without contradiction: all confess that
Antichristianisme shall be finished, and that Antichrist shall be absolutely
destroyed. Thus they quote, Dan. 7. 11. I beheld till the beast was slain, and
his body destroyed, and given to the burning slame. Thus they and we cite,
Revel. 18. 21. A mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast
it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. As also Revel. 20. 10. The
Devil, the Beast, and the False Prophet, shallbe cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone.

Only the word is emphaticall, (...) that is, The mystery of iniquity, is
(...), a cunning work: but Christ shall make it (...), that is, ineffectuall,
and utterly defeat it. Though the Antichristian attempts against the Church be
tempestuous: yet shall Christ say to the Sea of Rome, as he did to the Sea of
Galilie, Marc. 4. 39. Obmutesce, be still: and came reddet placidam magis, quam
est mare, c^m Alcedo pullos edit suos, as Plautus his phrase is, he will
becalme all his tempestuous projects. And Antichrist shall inherit his fathers
fortunes. Diabolus Dei servis Ambros^in Ephesians 6.
tempestatem commovet, sed ipse nanfragium facit: Antichrist shall raise
storms and tempests, but he himself shall suffer shipwreck: for the Church
is built upon a Rock. Or if their super subtle devises do undermine the
Gospel, Christ will make good his own phrase, Cant. 2. 15. Prehendam vulpes,
vincam corrumpentes: I will destroy the Foxes, who would destroy my poor
Church. And indeed if it were not for this expectation, we Protestants might
take up that saying of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 19. We were of all men the most
miserable. For considering their Number, and Learning, and Plots, and policy,
and power, and implacable hatred, how can we ever hope to escape destruction?
But that Christ is here said to destroy the destroyer, (...), he will give a
period to all their projects.

Again, I think the Israelites did never groan more under the yoke of
Pharaoh, than the Protestants do under the tyranny of Antichrist. Some by
passion, some by compassion, and some by propassion. The torments of some in
the Inquisition, may have surpassing sense, for they are surpassing
understanding. That Po^^rarium: Cyprian. epist. 22
on the R^cke torments draw confession from (...) in the Inquisition (if there
be not a miraculous patiened) tortures draw men from confession; Hic pressura,
ut illic usura: their hellish torments are there, like our heavenly joys
hereafter: eye has not seen, nor care heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which those devils have prepared for them, which love
God. 1 Cor. ^. 9.
Further more, their passion does produce our compassion. Alij ferendo
patiuntur, alij cognoscendo compatiuntur: Saint Augustine tells Italica Aug.
^pi^^* ^^^ Italica.
that some Christians did seele afflictions, and had a Passion, others did know
the afflictions they felt, and had a compassion: communis tamen sit afflictio,
and so were both Afflicted. In prostrat is fratribus, and me prostrauit
affectus, said Saint Cyprian, and all the Saints say so with Cyprianus de
Lipsis.
him: to think of their torments is a torment to all truc Christians. We
cannot but have fellow feeling of their miseries. Finally, for our selves by
propass^on: Hod^e mihi, cras tibi. To think, that we also may fall into the
hands of the same Tormentors. I think it will make a stony heart to tremble.
But Saint Paul does here add comfort, and courage unto us, (...), the Lord
will destroy him. And Cypriam does second St. Cyprian epist. ^^. number. 6.
Paul, venit Antichristus: super venit Christus: Antichrist does come upon us,
and Christ does come upon him, the Lord will destroy the destroyer: there shall
be an end of all their Antichristian Policies, and cruelties.

Me thinks the potent Papists speak to the poor Protestants, in the dialect
of Rabshekah 2 Reg. 18. 22. 25. and 27. You say unto us, ye tr^rc* in the Lord
your God, is not that he whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah has
taken away, and has said to Judah and Jerusalem, you shall worship before this
Altar in Jerusalem? Am I now come without the Lord, against this land, to
destroy it? the Lord said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it. And
has our Master sent us to your Master, and to you, to speak these words? Has
he not sent me to the men, which sit on the walls, that they may eat their
own dung, and drink their own piss with you? And me thinks I hear the
Protestants answering in the phrase of Solomon, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O strong
man in thy strength, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy
strength, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes:
but know that for all these things, GOD will bring thee to Judgment.

Again the distressed oppressed Protestants, seem to cry to God, in the voice
of those Martyrs, Revel. 6. 10. How long Lord, do thou not judge and revenge
our blood? and GOD to reply in the words of the Psalm 27. O tarry thou the
Lords leisure: and he will give thee thy hearts desire. What can our hearts
desire more than this? an end of all Antichristian mischievous bloody
proiects, an end of our brethrens torments, and an end of our own fears? The
text implies as much: if we will tarry the Lords leisure, we shall have our
hearts desire. (...), the Lord will consume, and destroy Antichrist with all
his Adherents.

The instrument of destroying Antichrist is (...), the coming of the Lord:
which interpreters take for the last coming of Christ to judge the quick and
the dead, mentioned in the Creed. In this sense is this phrase used, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 19. and 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13. the same signification is established from the
epithete (...), the brightness of his coming. Which Saint Paul to Titus 2.
13. does term the glorious appearance of the great God. So also is it
expounded by Saint Augustine De Civitate Dei, lib. 18. c. 4. The meaning then
is, Antichrist shall be destroyed utterly at the coming of Christ unto
judgment.

Concerning this great question, the finishing and final destruction of
Antichrist: I must speak both briefly and very cautelously. For this point is
future. And prophetare non praesumimus, nec de futuris contingentibus scientiam
Dounam Derensis de Antichr. part. 2. Them. 16. Sect. 1.
assumimus: we neither assume to foresee, nor presume to foretell things
future, contingent, to come: says our judicious Bishop. The destruction
therefore of Antichrist being to come I cannot dispute nor define particulars
thereof. I disclaim all curiosities in this discourse. I dare not wade so
far, as some Papists, who describe the very circumstances thereof. For the
Place: Occidetur in Oliveto; he shall be slain in Mount Olivet, says
Hoveden. The person slaying him, Occidetur ab Archangell Raphaelc, the
Archangell Raphael shall be the Matthew. Westminster, aetat. 4 c. 16.
Executioner, says their Sibyl, in our Matthew of Westminster. The manner:
Ascendente Antichristo Steuartius in 2 Thessalonians 2. 8.
per era, audietur vox Christi, coelo missi, morere, and confestim fulmine
percussus, interibit: says the Vicechancelor of Ingolstade. When Antichrist
(says he) shall slye in the air, there shall this voice be heard from heaven,
Morere, Dye wretch: in which moment he shall be shattered in pieces with a
thunderbolt. But these are groundless predictions, and gross contradictions
to the truth: therefore only to name these fictions is enough, if not too
much. Neither dare I follow some Protestants: who are too confident in defining
of Antichrists fall, and final overthrow. Johannes Aventrotus assigns Johan.
Aventrot. ad Regem Hisp. page 43.
the Popes universal overthrow, unto the very year 1621: experience has
confuted his over-confident conclusion. Napeir does precisely determine, the
utter destruction Napeir in Apoc. cap. 14.
of Rome to fall out anno 1639. The Pamphlet set out under the title of T. L.
is T. L. dedicated to Q. Elizabeth page 108.
peremptory, that the period of Antichrists reign shall pitch upon the year
of our Lord 1666, unto which he makes that number 666, Revel. 13. to accord.
Learned Moulin is as punctual, The persecution under the Pope, Peter Moulin
Accompl^shment page 412. and 250.
shall have an end in the year 1689. And the Epoch, and full point of his
Hierarchicall Empire must be in the year of our Lord 2005. I dare not
subscribe to any of these: no, nor to those who dare desine any time: saying,
that Rome, the Pope, or Antichrist, must be destroyed within such a compass.
Prophetiae non intelligantur, donec compleantur. Time is the only interpreter
of Prophecies. We therefore who are before them, cannot declare them.

In two words, take notice of two things: there is Romana seeds, and Romana
sides: that is, there is the Seat or possession of Antichrist, and the Service
or profession of Antichrist. The last doubtless shall continue to the last
day. Papistry shall not utterly be extinguished: but as the Text speaks, by
the brightness of Christ's coming.

But for the seat of Antichrist, for Rome it self, it may be said boldly,
that that City shall have (...), an utter subversion before that day. Revel.
18. 19. and 21. it is said there shall be a cry, that in one hour she is made
desolate. And an Angel cast a great Millstone into the Sea, saying; that with
violence the great City Babylon shall be thrown down, and shall be found no
more. Which Babylon if it be a particular City, Suarez does acknowledge, Suarez
Apol. lib. 5. cap. 7. Malvenda de Antich. lib. 4. cap. 4.
that it can be no other than Rome. And Malvenda more positively and
pere^ptorily: Non potuit manifestius Romanam urbem, veluti digito demonstrari:
he says, that Saint John does as it were point at Rome with his finger. Both
concurring that there shall be a fearful subversion, and final eversion
thereof. So that the prophecy of Valerius Probus may be verified, R R R and F
F F, that is, Regnum Romae Ruet, the Republike of Rome shall be Ruined, Ferro,
Flamma, and Fame, with Famine, Fire, and sword. And Suarez seems to anticipate
some Suarez A^olog. lib 1 cap. 5. number. 5.
such eve^t, by a suppositio^ he makes: although he muffleth it up in a pie
credendu^, that it shall never be so: posset particularis Ecclesia Romana
deficere, and Episcopum suum abijcere: that is, the Pope of Rome may be forced
out of the City of Rome. It may be that old Jesuit did dream of some new
Prophecy answerable to our old Proverb: Avignon was, Rome is, and Toledo shall
be. The Sum is this: The Papacy may be ruinated, but Popery retained: the
pomp may be diminished, extinguished, but the profession of the Church of Rome
shall remain so long on earth, as the Sun does in heaven. The Text says,
the man of sin shall not be utterly destroyed, but by the brightness of
Christ's coming.

The Agent which does use his Spirit to diminish, and will use his brightness
to finish the force and fury of Antichrist, is the Lord. The Lord is the
ordinary epi^hete of Jesus: implying that that Lord is now our extraordinary
Savior. He did save us from our sins, Matthew. 1. 21. he does save us from
our enemies also, from our grand enemy, Antichrist. The Lord does consume, and
will destroy that wicked one, says my Text.

At this time the Church christa^ may truly be termed the Church militant. And
we may suppose us all as it were encamped in the valley of 1 Samuel 17. 2.
Elah. The Papists having pitched on the one side like the Philistims, and the
Protestants on the other, like the Israelites. They approach us, in the guise
of Goliath, with Swords, and Verse 44, 45.
Spears, and shields, to give our slesh to the fowls of the air, and beasts
of the field. And we encourage our selves in that phrase of David: The Lord
saves not by sword nor spear, that all the earth may know, that there is a
God in Israel. All our comfort and courage against Antichrist is in our
Captain: The Lord will consume him.

Alexander was so great a Captain, that Iustine Justin. hist. l 12.
reports three rare things of him. First, Cum nullo hostium unquam congressus
est, quem non vicerit: He never sought battle but he won the field.
Secondly, Nullam urbem obsedit, quam non expugnaverit: He never did besiege
City but he carried it. Thirdly, Nullam Gentem adijt, quam non calcaverit: he
never invaded Country but he conquered it. So great a Captain was Alexa^^er
the great: but behold a greater than that great Alexander is here. No power,
place, nor people, can protect Antichrist against Christ: but the Lord has
discovered his heresy, and in the fullness of time will root out the very
memory of Antichrist. And for his Throne also: Jericho did fall, Babylon is
fallen, and Rome may fall. For the Lord will consume the Man of sin, even
besore his coming.

To acknowledge mine own frailties. When lately my meditations looked upon the
Pope, (as men use to look) according to the outward appearance: I confess his
greatness did astonish me. When I considered his own Temporal Dominions,
that obeyed him, power no way contemptible: his Creatures that depend on him,
people indeed innumerable: Princes that support him, Potentates invincible: his
riches and revenues, a mass of money incomparable: and his private friends in
every public wealth, who walk like Gyges, unsuspected and invisible: and how
all these are knit together with rare magnanimity and unanimity, to prosequute
their purposes. On the other side, when I considered the declining Church of
our dismal times: the loss of ^ohemia, and of the Palatinate: the despair of
Hungary, distress of Denmark, and danger of all Germany: the poverty of
France, and jeopardy of the Netherlands: the unsoundnesse of some Calvinists,
and unkindnesse of many Lutherans: and which concerns us nearer; the
divisions and subdivisions in our own country: such factions and fractions:
so many disloyal Papists, so many discontented Professors: and so few -- so
very few true Protestants, who truly love both verity and unity: who
impartially love both the Common wealth, and the Church of England.

This meditation made me almost to cry out with Elishahs servant: Alas what
shall we 2 King. 6. 15.
do? behold an host compasses our Church, both horses and chariots. And it
brought me almost to the same point with the man of Benjamin, 1 Samuel 4. 12.
and 15. To run with earth on my head, to rend my garments, and report, The
Israelites will slye before the Philistines, there will be a great slaughter of
the people. And certainly the Ark of the Lord will be taken.

But my spirits were recalled, by remembering who was our Captain, even Christ,
even the Lord: the Lord of Hosts: and therefore a great Captain.

It is reported of Alexander the great, that Just. hist. l. 12.
great Captain: that he infused such courage into his Soldiers, ut illo
praesente nullius hostium arma, vel incrmes timuerint: that in his presence
they would decline no armed enemy, although they themselves had been unarmed.
So Christ (let the comparison be made with all reverence) his presence will
encourage every child to become a man, every man a soldier, and every
soldier a champion: a Worthy, like Eleazer the son of Dodo, to fight Gods
battles, 2 Samuel 23. 10.
as he did David's battles, till our hand cleave to the sword. Or like those
other Worthies, Verse. 16.
in the same Chapter, to break through the host of the Philistines, in Gods
cause, though we dye for it.

The whole difference is this: They come against us with Fire, and Sword, and
Power, and Potentates, and Powder, and Poison, and Invasion, and Arms: But we
to withstand Antichrist, and all his Armies, we have nothing -- we have
nothing -- but only -- the Lord. Oh! exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici:
Let the Lord arise, and his enemies be confounded. Let the Lord fight for us,
and the Agents of Antichrist be converted. But if they will not, let the
brightness of the Lord consume them: even like the dust before the wind^, the
Angel of the Lord scattering them. In a word,

The Lord is on our side:
Therefore the Lord give us
courage, that we do not fear,
what Antichrist can do unto us.
SERMON XVI.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 9, 10. With signs and lying wonders.
Of lying Miracles. Of Popish Miracles: to prove Pilgrimages: Prayers for the
Dead: Purgatory: Invocation of Saints: Adoration of Images: Adoration of the
Host: the Primacy. The miracle, Revel. 13. 13. explained. Whether Papists do
any Miracles. Whether Miracles should persuade unto Popery.

OF the five points, which at the first I purposed and proposed to be handled,
concerning Antichrist: having accomplished three, I address my discourse to
the fourth. How Antichrist is described, revealed, and to be destroyed, you
have heard: Hear now how he is confirmed. Confirmed he has been, is, and
shall be, by two means: the Principal and Isntrumental. In the means
principal, ponder we two points, the person, Satan: and his potency, with all
power. The means isntrumental is also twosold, Miracles, his coming shall
be with signs and lying wonders: and Oracles, with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness. I foretold you in the seventh verse, discoursing of that
Mystery of iniquity, that my meditations did flow in such abundance, that I was
constrained to divide that great stream into lesser channels. Part therefore of
that plentiful theme I reserved unto this verse: yea unto one part of this
verse: nay unto one branch of that part: the Miracles contain a great mystery
of Popery, that it is supported and propagated by Miracles, by signs and lying
wonders.

The first instrument I must speak of at this time: of which the Apostle does
speak in these words, and with signs and lying wonders. This is a grant and
ground of the Papists themselves, in this point of Antichrist, that he shall be
confirmed by miracles. This is Suarez Suarez Apolog. lib. 5. cap. 17. nu. 12.
Bell. de P. Romans lib 3. c. 15. Less de Antich. them. 19. Sanders de Antich. them.
19, 20, 21, 23.
his argument: this also is Bellarmine his argument: Apodicticall Lessius
makes this a demonstration: yea Sanders draws four Demonstrations from this
property. I will propose with the consent of the Papists,

To come with signs and lying wonders is the property of Antichrist.

I assume, and will make it good.

But the Pope does come with signs and lying wonders

Therefore the Pope has one property of Antichrist.

(...), whose coming shall be with signs, and lying wonders. Whose coming,
that is, after he is revealed. As it is in the 7 verse, When the hinderer is
taken out of the way, Then (as it follows verse 8.) shall that wicked one be
revealed: and then (says my text) shall his coming be confirmed with signs
and lying wonders, (...) a sign, does properly signify a thing which is done
praeter communem consuetudinem, contrary to the common use, and manner of
actions. It is termed (...) when it happens praeter natural, contrary to the
course of Nature: but usually they signify the same thing, according to the
observation of Hervetus. Gratian. Herv. in ^l^m. Alex. (...)
In this place they are Synonima's: signs and wonders, as if he had said,
wonderful miracles. But Occumenius gives the reason why they Occum. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
are surnamed (...), lying wonders: (...). I may expound Occumenius in S.
Augustines phrase: Sunt aut figment a mendacium Aug. lib. contra Epist. Petil.
c. 16.
hominum, aut potentia fallaciu^ spirituum: that is, they are either the tricks
of iuggling men, to deceive our eyes, or the works of potent devils to
deceive our hearts: in both, lying wonders. Otherwise they may be lying
wonders, in regard of the four causes. First, the efficient of those miracles
is a liar: justly therefore are they styled lying, since the author of them, the
Devil, is the father of lies, Ioh. 8. 44. Next, they are not real in regard
of the matter: many of the^ being ficta not facta, fictions to support their
superstitious factions, strong delusions to weak judgments.

Thirdly, they are formally false: those few that be, being mira, not miracula:
marvells, not miracles, because they do not exceed the power of Nature.

Finally, they are sitly termed lying, because the end of those wonders is to
establish, countenance, and confirm a lie. Let us therefore take the former
argument into our second considerations. Antichrist does come with miracles,
some forged, some to deceive, all lying. But the Pope does the same: therefore
this property will be a pretty probability, that The Pope is Antichrist.

(...) Signs and wonders. I determine not to discourse of Miracles positively,
by way of common place. But only comparatively, so far only as they have
reference unto Antichrist, and are ingredients into the Mystery of Iniquity.

Of miracles there was a most necessary use in the Primitive Church, that the
Infidels might be converted to the Faith. But the Church, Faith, and
Conversion, being accomplished, at this time they are not necessary. (...):
Ch^ysost. in 2 Cor. 2. Hom. 6
in their days they were profitably established, in our days they are
profitably abolished. In the beginning of the Christian Faith, they flourished:
in the establishing thereof, they were finished. As Christianity increased,
Miracles decreased. They seemed to be languishing in Saint Augustines time:
Caecum illuminatum ad corpora Martyrum noveram, on Aug. Retract. 1. cap. 13.
his own experience he does assure us, That one blind man had his sight
restored him, by touching Aug. devers Relig. cap. 25.
the bodies of certain Martyrs. But the same Father does avouch moreover, Cum
Catholica Ecclesia per totum Orbem diffusa sit, since the Church was
universally planted, miracula in nostra tempora durare non permissa sunt, God
did not permit miracles to continue till his time. Saint Chrysostom says
also, they were ceased Chrysostom. tom. 5. page 605.
in his time: yet elsewhere he relates some miracles done in his days. The
meaning of both was this, Miracles were ceased in their times from the frequent
and ordinary use. Yea, their Bellarmine does pronounce our conclusion: Bell. de
ossic^o Princip^^ lib. 3. in vita S. Henr. Imperat.
Nunc tempora miraculorum non sunt: signa enim debentur insidelibus, non
fidelibus. These (says he) are no times of miracles: for miracles belong to
unbeleevers, not to believers. Their vaunting therefore of miracles, does
proclaim them to be both Antichristians, and Insidells. For none but these two
generations have any interest in Signs and Wonders.

But concerning these Miracles, this is the mystery: that cleanly conveyance
makes them means to countenance Popery. It Is true, in the primitive time, some
good men wrote some good books, and wrought some good works: Since, some
Favorites of Rome, have forged other Books, and feigned other Miracles for
their own purpose, and fathered them on those holy Ancients: as if they had
been either the Authors or Writers of those Miracles. This I take to be no
mean Mystery.

Thus Cyprian who lived about the year Cy^rian. to^ ^. page 590. edi^. an.
1593.
250, was an excellent man, and Martyr: but among his excellent writings is
foisted in a treatise de revelatione capit is Iohannis Baptistae, of the
revelation of the head of John Baptist: the sum whereof is this: The Head of
John Baptist being hid by Herodias, it was revealed by an Angel to certain
Monks: by the Monks it was removed into France: in France it was received by
the French King Pipine, with singular respect and reverence, because in his
presence twenty dead men were revived by the virtue thereof. Now this is a
gross lying wonder (to credit Monks, and to countenance Pilgrimages) coined
by some not very cunning Papist. For Pipine lived five hundred years after
Cyprian: then it was another miracle that he should write of that miracle.
Indeed both lying wonders to spread the mystery of iniquity.

About four hundred years after Christ lived Saint Martine, a good man, one
who did God good service in converting the Gauls, and certainly he did some
miracles. But Severus Sulpitius has added many others, both Popish and sottish
miracles.

To instance in one: After his death, his Dog barked at one passing by, the
Passenger rebuked the Dog, saying, In the name of Martine, I charge thee to be
quiet. A charm to chain up the tongue and teeth of any dog whatsoever.

Thus also, about the year 600 flourished Gregory, a good man, I am sure the
best of all his Successors: He was the author of many good writings: yet some
agent for Antichrist has inserted such a bundle of Miracles, so Popish, that
even children may discover them to be childish. The sourth of his Dialogues is
nothing but Legends of Souls in Purgatory to establish that gross paradox of
Popery. Guess at the truth of the rest by this one example. Once on a time
there was a brave Gentleman of Greg. dialog lib. 4. cap. 30.
Constant inople called Steven: it came to pass that this man dyed: but the
Judge of the Ghosts would not admit him to come into their company: for (said
he) I did not send for this Steven the Gentleman, but for another Steven, his
neighbor, a Blacke-smith. And so master Steven did live again, and goodman
Steven dyed immediately. See ye, whether they do not lie, who make this Holy
Man the Author of such a lying wonder.

If any have superfluous time to impart on such superstitious tales, I can give
them an Index of such popish Legends: and if any could make it Purgartorius, he
should not demerit Purgatory for his labor. Classicke Catholic Authors in
this kind, are the Conformit^es of S. Francis, the Golden Legend of Iacobus de
Voragine, the Sermons of Dormi Secure, the History of our Lady by Lipsius,
Baronius in his Annals, and Bellarmine de offiicio Principis, Dr. Featly
Praeface page 6.
lib. 3. and many of these ye shall find extracted and contracted by our worthy
Champion, in the preface to his conference: to him and them I refer you.
Only for honor to the Author, I will relate one miraculous legend out of
Bellarmine. Saint Lewis King of France, Bellar. de officio Princip. in vita ^^
Ludovici.
like Jeremy in his prayers and pious exercises, thirsting for a fountain of
tears, in a familiar conference with his Confessor, he did acknowledge unto
him, that sometimes as he was praying such a heavenly dew of tears was
miracuously poured down upon him: that his tears would trickle down his
cheeks, and so run into his mouth, wherewith the sweetest taste which can be
imagined, did affect his heart, yea and delight his mouth also. I believe
Bellarmines mouth did run over, when he did chronicle this royal wonder.

Moreover, to show that these men are wise in their generation, they do not
only pretend old Miracles, but they produce new miracles to persuade their
Popery. There are six points in Popery, which I suppose do most support the
Papists, and most scandal the Protestants, and are most senseless in
themselves. Pilgrimages, Prayers for the dead, Purgatory, Invocation of Saint,
Adoration of Images, and Transubstantiat^on: I add a seventh, the Primacie.
Now for these, Flectere cum nequeunt superos Acharonta movebunt: because they
cannot prove them by the Oracles of God, they will prove them by the miracles
of the Devil. They urge many wonders, lying wonders to avouch them.

First for Pilgrimages: Not long since, at Sheldon Motive 5. page 78.
Saint Omers, in the Jesuits Church, there was an Image much frequented: in a
poor Church in the same City, was the Picture of the Virgin Mary, which having
stood a long time in an obscure place, suddenly it was bruited that That Image
had removed it self into another place, the principal of the Church, and
fitter for Adoration. Presently was the picture frequented by some
superstitious people, and the Miracle defended by some Jesuits: but the
forgerie was discovered by the Magistrates, and the Clerk of the Church
punished for his knavery. The Papists fable also, that Saint Mary of Loretto
(so called from the Hill Loretto) Rollech in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
was transported by Angels out of Galilie into Italy. Out of which they sucked
no small advantage, Italy thereby becoming the center, to which the motion of
infinite Pilgrims Bell. de officio Principis lib. 3. vita S. Stephan.
do tend. Bellarmine it seems would have the Pilgrims to travel into
Bohemia too, to which purpose he tells, that the whole body of their Bohemian
Saint Steven is mouldred in dust: only his right hand, skin, flesh, nerves,
Bellar. de cultu Sanct. lib. 3. c. 8.
etc. is there fresh and fair without any corruption, or alteration. And the
same Author in another book, tells us another story to the same purpose out
of Sulpitius. That at Jerusalem, in the place whence Christ ascended into
heaven, the Print of his feet, are to be seen at this day: and although every
one of those infinite Pilgrims, who address their confluence thither,
transport with them some part of that dust, yet there appears no diminution
of the sand. But to save them some labor Dr. Featly Confer* Preface.
in so long a voyage, our English are invited into France, by a strange
miracle: that Saint Denis carried his head, in his hand, three miles, and rested
at each of the posts that are between Paris and Saint Denis. This is a taste of
their miraculous arguments, and allurements unto Pilgrimages.

To persuade the living to pray for the dead: Bellar. de Ponti. Romans lib. 3 c.
15. Greg. dialog. lib. 4. cap. 40.
Bellarmine to this purpose, does allege (out of the same famous Legend,
fathered upon the same Gregory) the miraculous apparition of Paschasius his
Ghost, beseeching Saint Germanus to pray for him. Augustine the monk did a
feat, as merry as miraculous, in saying of one Mass, he raised two ghosts out
of their graves: one of a layman, who dyed excommunicated, for not paying his
tithes an hundred and fifty years before: and another of the Priest who had
excommunicated him, who at the honest monks ^^lation of the Religion in the
West. sect. 38.
holy request absolved the poor ghost, and so both returned in peace unto
their Grave; within our age at Luca, a wealthy Citizen dying, and (according to
his will) being buried in the night, without their ringing, tapering, censing,
etc. he had a rumor presently spread on him by the Friars, that he was haunted
by Rats on his death bed. Finally, Costerus does urge it Coster. ^nchirid. cap.
16. d^ Purg. Gregory Dialog. lib. 4. Beda Hist. lib. 4. and 5.
as a maine argument for the benefit accruing to the dead, by the prayers of
the living, from the manifold miracles, related by Gregory in his Dialogues,
and Beda in his Histories. Yet it seems this argument is not catholically
convincing, if that story be an history which is mentioned by my reverend
friend and Collegiate Dr. Beard: For when a certain peasant Dr. Beard de
Antichr. part. 3. cap. 1.
of Burgund^e, near unto a town called Chascule, was praying unto a Crucifix,
for the soul of one newly deceased, and for whom the bells rang, the Crucifix
instead of making unto him a sign by nodding his head, by the weight of him
that was behind it, fell down right upon him, and so crushing the poor man,
that the ringers were feign to leave the bells, and carry him, to his house
half dead: where he lay sick a long time. After which sickness returning to
the Church, and seeing a fair young Crucifix, with a smiling countenance in
place of the old, which had broken his neck in the fall, he could not
forbear, but say thus unto it: What good countenance soever thou do cast
upon me, yet I will never trust thee, for if thou live to be an old man, thou will be as wicked as thy father, who thought to kill me.

Notwithstanding these arguments appear to be unreasonable, and ridiculous to
men of reason: yet are the same urged again by Bellarmine Bell. de Pontif.
Romans lib. 3. c. 13.
seriously for Purgatory also. And indeed all their miraculous apparitions,
are framed especially for the establishing of this point* Damascene in his
discourse de defunctis, declares devoutly that a dead man's skull spoke to
Damast. cone. de Defunctis.
Marcarius saying, when thou do offer Prayers for the dead: then, (...), i.
then do we feel some little consolation. But certainly Damascene was a
little deceived, when he said those souls in Purgatory, did receive but a
little consolation. For it is said to have been the common allegation of many
Popish preachers, to confirm their Croysados, Dr. Beard de Antich. part. ^.
cap. 2. sect. 3.
that when the living gave money to the Priests for the dead, the souls which
were in Purgatory, hearing the sound of the money ting in the Basin, fell a
laughing for joy of their deliverance. Moreover, it seems that the Pope Dr.
Beard de Antich. part. 3. cap. 2. sect. 3.
and Popish Church has been sometimes somewhat defective in miracles to
establish their Purgatory. For Pope Clemens being besieged in the Castle of
Saint Angelo, a Gentleman of Rome was bold to say thus; Hitherto have I
believed that the Pope could deliver souls out of Purgatory: but now since he
cannot free himself out of prison, I am constrained to think, that much less
he can deliver souls out of that place. Here certainly the Prince of
Purgatory was something wanting in his miracles. But the Papists supply the
want of that time, with the instance of his unlimited power at another time;
The miracle of Immas. Simpsons Hist. part. ^. Ce^t. 7.
Immas a prisoner and Captain of England, no bands could bind, because his
brother being a Priest, and supposing Immas had been slain in the battle, and
that his soul had been in Purgatory: he made Prayers unto God, and said Mass
oftentime, for the relief of his brothers soul, the benefit whereof, as Beda
supposes, redounded to the weal of Immas soul and Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib.
3. c. 5. Suarez in 3. part. Thom. ^o^. 4* disp. 45. sec^. 1. Coste^. Enchirid.
de Purg. cap. 16.
body. These all seem wonders to the Papists: but it seems more wonderful
to the Protestants, that the learned of the popish side, shall not be ashamed
to support their religion by arguments drawn from such idle dreams, devised
in times of darkness, to delude the world withal.

Fourthly, they follow the same course, for the confirmation of the Invocation
of Saints. The Consistory of Cardinals, being set against Watsons Quod* lib*
lib 8. Art. 7.
Saint Thomas of Canterbury (says a Papist) finding him a dinner on Saint
Marks day with a Capon, they would have delivered him up for a Lollard: but
that God bewrayed their malice, by converting the Capon into a Carpe. And many
have been observed to recover their health, by being covered with a Coule of a
Eras^. Colliqu. page 11.
Franciscan or Dominican Friar. Proper fables to prove, at least to procure
that Saint Thomas, Saint Francis, and Saint Dominicke may be prayed unto. And
it is to be hoped that some such Invocation may be purchased to St. Garnet
also: especially if Eudaemon can Euda^ advers. Abbot. lib. 3. f. 4. Vsh^rs
Answ. Ar^i^. 9.
persuade credit to his strawne sign, and lying wonder. One singular precedent
to this purpose, is produced by that singular, and rare Bas^l Sele^e. de mirac.
San* Thecla lib. 2. cap. 10.
Primate. Alipius a Grammarian, unto whom being forsaken of the Physicians,
Saint Thecla did appear by night, and demanded of him what he ayled, and what
he would. He to show his art, and to win the virgins favor, with the apnes
of the verse: returns for an answer unto her that verse, wherewith Homer
makes Achilles to answer his mother Thetis.

(...): Homer* Ili^d 1.
Thou know: why should I tell thee that know all? Whereat the Martyr
smiled, and being delighted partly with the man, and partly with the verse, and
wondering that he had answered so aptly: conveyed a certain round stone unto
him, with the touch whereof, he was presently set on foot, from his long and
perilous sickness: we need not travel so far for Miracles in this cause,
our English Legends, will commend their popish Saints to our invocation. The
Barber of King Edmund being Matthew. Paris. in He^r. 3.
informed by the spirit, that God had admitted him into the College of his
Saints, reserved the hairs which he did shave from his Beard, hoping they
might become medicinal: which when the Bishop of Durham understood, being at
the point of death, he commanded those Ha^res to be given him to drink in
Holywater, which gave him a gentle vomit, and a speedy perfect recoverie. This
for our Saint Edmund. Bellarmine tells us the like of St. Bellar. de offici^
Princip. lib. 3. vita S. (...)
Edward; That good English King (says he) did cure a Irish Criple, by carrying
him on his back, ut spiritualis fortis Asinus, like a lusty spiritual Ass.
Bellarmine in the same book Bellar^^. Ibid.
adds a second, which in truth is second to no wonder. The Cathedral Church
of Westminster was built by Sebert, repaired by Saint Edward, but consecrated
by Saint Peter in his own person, who descended from heaven to do that chare
only. If any English Zelote should Bell* de offic. Princ. lib. 3. vita Sancti
Wenceslai.
follow Bellarmine in these legends, certainly it would wonderfully warm his
devotion, even as Podivinus did heat his feet in a deep Snow, only by
treading barefooted, in the very footsteps of Saint Wenceslaus of Bohemia. But
the Franciscans, with yet more affection indeare Lib. Conform. St. Francisci.
their found Friar Francis, to a Catholic devotion. His wonders are many, and
he cannot but give wonderful help to them, who call upon him, because he did
help himself so wonderfully. This their holy Saint being pursued by the
Devil, fled to a Rock where finding not place to hide himself in, he thrust
his face close to the Rock, which softning like wax, received impression, and
hid him a long time from the Devil. This is a new trick to escape the devil
by swiftness of foot, and by the softning of a Rock: and surely they have
sto^e hearts, who do not believe it. And that the Papists should not dole out
their devotion over partially to St. Francis, the Dominicans devoutly tell the
world of as many great wonders wrought by S. Dominicke their Patron, and they
have an Archbishop for his Chronicler. Antoninus Antonin. part. ^. Tit. 2^*
cap. ^ sect. 8.
says, at Venice, before Dominicke was borne into the world, there were in St.
Marks Church two Images to be seen of all, whereof one was in a very
religious habit, of the order of the Preachers, with a Lilly in his hand the
other had the similitude of St. Paul as they use to paint him, over who^ was
written (...) Paulus, St. Paul, but under the feet of the jmage was written,
Per istum itur ad Christum, by this man we come to Christ. Above the other was
written (...) Dominicus, S. Dominicke, but under him facilius itur per istum,
the way is easier by Antonin. Hist. part. 3. tit. 23. cap. 3.
this man. Yea, ecce nobile par fratrum, those precius pair of Friars, were
made yoke-fellowes by a miracle: as it is in the vision of S. Dominicke whereof
holy Antinine is the Historian. One night at Rome, St. Dominicke in his
devotions, saw the Son of God, stand at the right hand of the Father, in his
fury, with a full intent to kill all sinners, and to destroy all the workers of
wickedness in the world: To which purpose he stood in the sky with a terrible
countenance, and shaked three spears against the world: with the first he
intended to wound the haughty neck of the proud: with the second, to let out
the hungry guts of the covetous: and with the third, to thrust through the
bodies of Fornicators, and Adulterers. Whose ire, when none durst oppose, his
merciful mother Mary undertaketh to appease: and falling at his feet, she
besought him to spare those whom he had redeemed, and to mingle mercy with
justice; To whom her Son replied, see you not (says he) how infinite iniquity
is multiplied against me? and my justice cannot suffer impiety unpunished. Then
(quoth his mother) thou who know all things, do know this also, that this
must be the way to recall them to thy service. I have a faithful servant, him
shall thou send into the world, and by him shall the world be converted unto
thee their Savior; also I have another servanr whom I will assign to be his
helper. Her son then said, I am appeased and do accept thy entreaty: but show
me the person who^ thou have destinated to this great work: Then our Lady
brought S. Dominick to Jesus Christ, and our Lord said unto his mother, this man
indeed will faithfully and effectually perform all that thou have promised.
The Lady likewise showed him S. Francis, whom the Lord likewise lauded:
therefore S. Dominicke in his dream taking good notice of S. Francis, whom he
had not known before; Next day seeing him at church, he remembered him, and
hugging him with many holy kisses, he said to him, thou art my Companion, thou
must travel with me, let us stand to it, and no adversary shall be able to
oppose us. And relating unto him his Revelation, from thenceforth they became
one heart and one soul in the Lord, says Antonine the Italian, and credat
Iudaeus Apellat: every good Catholic has good cause to believe it.

Fifthly, they establish by miracles, the adoration of Images in general, but
of the Cross, Crucisix, and Image of Christ in especial: Bellarmine abounds
with arguments of this Bellar. de R. P. lib. 3. cap. 15. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 14.
nature. Eusebius says (says he) that a golden statue of our Savior was
erected to our Savior, by that woman whom our Savior did cure of her bloody
issue: and that a certain herb did usually grow under it, which when it
sprang so high as to the hemme of the garment of that Image, it cured all
diseases whatsoever. The same Author does allege Bell. de Sanctor. Imag. lib.
2. c. 12
another example, to the same purpose, that the Jews having stabbed an Image
of Christ, that Image did issue out much blood, which cured many sick people.

Baronius backeth Bellarmine with a brave Baronius anno 975. number. 12.
English story: There was a Synod at Wilton to condemn the marriage of the
Clergy, where the crucifixe cried out, non fiet, non fiet, ye shall not yield,
ye shall not yield, to grant that Ministers should marry.

Costerus commends the Cross, from the Coster. Enchir. cap. 13.
like comment, in the year 590, the Turks being ready to starve, a Christian
taught them to make but the sign of the Cross, and so not one perished by
that famine. All which serious Malvenda does shut up with this Malvenda de
Antich. lib* 3. cap. 12.
solemn History, Anno 1546, at Meliapore in India, the Portugalls erecting a
Chapel on an hill in the suburbs, where Saint Thomas was killed by those
barbarous people: digging to lay the foundation, there they found a square
stone, in it a bloody Cross, and an inscription recording that in that place,
that Saint was slain, in the very act of kissing and adoring the Cross. Hence
did they finish the Chapel with more ardent devotion: and the Chapel being
finished at the very beginning of the Gospel, in the sight of the whole
multitude, the Cross did sweat abundantly: the sweat being wiped off, drops
of blood appeared in the Linen, with which they did wipe it. The Cross it
self in the mean time changed color, from white to pale, from pale to
black^, till in conclusion, it came again to the luster of his own native
color. And ever since, every year, in the same place, and on the same day,
there is the same miracle: the intermission whereof they apprehend as a presage
of some fearful disaster, which that year will fall upon them. Thus much for
the Cross and Images of Christ: next follow the Miracles of the Images of our
Lady: For as their devotion utters more Ave Mary's, than Pater nosters: so
they allege more mircacles wrought by the Images of the Virgin, then by the
Images of Christ. The Image of Saint Mary of Cracovia, walking on the water,
from the Sermon on the second Command. Baron. 728. number. 5, 6, 7.
fury of the Soldiers, etc. I have elsewhere mentioned. Baronius tells us
when Damascene (a stout champion for Images) had his hand chopped off at the
command of the Emperor, and hanged up in the market, he praying before the
Image of the Virgin for his hand, had it restored entire unto him, at the
conclusion of his devotions. Bellarmine annexed Bell. de Sanctor. Imag. lib. 2.
c. 12
another. A foolish fellow, ( Iconomachus) an Image-hating Heretic, threw
stones at the Statue of the blessed Virgin, and thereby brake the head thereof.
At night the Virgin in a vision, did rattle him soundly, saying, in caput tuum
hoc fecisti, Sirrah your Pate shall pay for this; and accordingly within a few
days after, the fellows own head was broken with a huge stone in the same
manner as he has cracked the crown of her Image. I must not balke
Bartholmaeus Hisp. Convers. page 19.
de Bellaro of Valence in Spain, who testified before a public Notary, that
one night he saw an Image environed with a world of Tapers, walking through the
Air, directly toward the Altar of Saint Mary del Pueg, which he credibly did
believe to be her Image, which returned from v^siting some sick person, who
called to her for succor. To these strange wonders, I will add one yet more
wonderful. A certain Gentleman called Theophilus, being Promp, Discip. de
mirac. B. Mari^ exemp. 42.
fallen into great poverty, and thereby brought into despair, gave himself
unto the Devil, with abjuration of his Baptism, of God, and of the Virgin
Mary: which abjuration he wrote with his own blood, and it was sealed with the
devils signet. But a while after this poor Theophilus repenting himself of
that he had done, prostrated himself most devoutly before the Image of the V.
Mary, imploring her help with tears, who, as always merciful and gracious,
took pity on him and pardoned him. But the Image of Christ, which was in the
arms of the Virgin, as being offended, would not hear, but turned his face
backward. Which the Image of the blessed Virgin perceiving, laid the Image of
her Son upon the altar, and went to find out the Devil with Theophilus, who^
she restored to the favor of God again: and commanded the Devil to render up
again, the writing of his abjuration. That mentioned by Platina is not so
Platina in vita S^rg^^ 3.
eminent as these, yet not impertinent. When the body of Pope Formosus was
carried into St. Peter's Church, all the Images which stood there, did him
reverence. All these premised, have been Images by way of proposition and
confirmation: I conclude with one, by way of exposition, and explanation. Let
this be the interpreter Dr. Dounam of Antichrist, lib. 1. cap. 7. sect. 6.
of all the rest; I saw once (says our judicious Bishop) an Image of S.
Nicholas burned in the market place of Chester, which was made with such a
device, that some standing behind did pull a string, which was in the back
thereof, whereby it would move the hand, as if it did bless the people, verbum
satis: the meaning of their Image miracles is not fadomelesse.

Sixthly, the Adoration of the Host, is made good by an Host of miracles: I
produce the Antesignani, some of the worthies of those wonders. An Angel showed
unto Plegilus a priest, Christ Guili^^n. Malm. de ges^^s Reg. Angl. lib. 3.
in the form of a child upon the Altar, whom first he took in his arms, and
kissed, but eat him up afterward, when he was returned to his former shape
again. And Simeon Metaphrastes Sim. Metaphr. vita Arsenij.
reports that a little Child was seen upon the Altar, and an Angel cutting
him into small pieces with a knife, and receiving his blood into a Chalice, as
long as the Priest was breaking the bread into little parts.

Again, Sir Ambright Earl of Venice, Legend. in die Corporis Christi.
because he could not receive the Sacrament of the Altar, at his mouth for
casting, having done all his worship unto it, laid it next his heart: and
therewith in the sight of all the people, his Side opened, and the Host went
in, his Side closed again, and so he died.

Saint Francis finding at Mass, a Spider in Liber Conformitatum.
the Chalice, he would not put it out for shedding some drops of blood, but
drank it: immediately his thigh itching, the Spider issued whole thereout.

Bellarmine tells us of a hungry Mare kept Bellar. de Euch. lib. 3. cap 8.
three days without meat, yet when provender was poured unto her in the
presence of the Host, she forgetting her meat, with bowed head, and bended
knees adored the Sacrament: Lessius de Antichrist^ Them. 10 Bell. Explicat.
Doctr. Christ. page 175.
which is avouched also by Lessius. In like manner, Bellarmine in his
Catechism, undertaketh to prove the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament,
to be at one time in many places: because S. Anthony of Padua, was once
preaching in Italy, and at the very same time in Portugal executing some
other good office. Here we might smile at the ridiculous acclamation Surius
tom. 5. de prob. sanct. cap. 8.
and exclamation of Surius concerning this point: upon the exhortation of Friar
Francis, a Ca^e Lamb did kneel before the altar and adored at the Elevation
of the Host; O discant Haeretici vel a pecude adorare Eucharistiam. O says he,
that this very beast could instruct Heretics Bellar. de Euch. lib. 3. cap. 8.
to adore the Sacrament. But Bellarmine commands a serious conclusion, by a
sad wonder, which betided a Tailor, here in London. That Heretic being
convented before the Archbishop in Paul's, having said that a Spider was more
worthy to be worshipped than the Host. Instantly a horrible spider, ran down
by a thread from the roof of the Church, directly to his mouth, and was hardly
hindered by the multitude present from entering. Risum teneatis amici? Bellarmine
does relate these miracles in good sadness: and shall we be so ridiculous as
not to believe them?

Finally the Pope himself, and the promoting Pless. mist. Opposite. 16.
of his Primacie, has been the beginning, and is the end of Popish Legends.
The first appearance of these fictions was about the year, 524. King
Theodoricus sent John the first Bishop of Rome, his Ambassador to Iustine the
Emperor, to treat for the Churches which he had taken from the Arians: Upon
the miscariage of this Embassage, and for accepting the boundless honor which
Iustine tendered Theodoricus (though an Arian, yet otherwise esteemed a just
man) put John into prison, where he continued unto his dying day. Being dead,
a rumor was spread amongst the common people, That a certain good man Paul.
Diacon. lib. ^5.
saw the Soul of Throdoricus carried betwixt this John, and Symacus (a Senator
whose head he had taken off) into the I Will of Liparaby Sicilie, there to be cast
headlong into Vulcans boiling lead.

About 796 the Nobility of Rome grown Pless. mist. iniq. 27.
weary of the Popes yoke, set upon Leo the 3, as he went in solemn
procession, threw him from his horse, and left him there half dead: his
followers took him up, and carried him into the Vatican: It is reported that
they plucked out his eyes, but that God by miracle put them in again.

They report moreover, that a certain Bishop Aventin. lib. 5.
being excommunicated by Pope Hildebrand (that grand projectour for, and
promoter of the Popes primacy) bitterly inveighing against him, was smote with
a thunderclap, for his labor.

Baronius (that Miracle-monger) is not behind Baron, an* 1145. number. 14.
in relating miracles to this purpose. As (says he) Pope Eugenius the third,
did celebrate the Mass, a Beam of the Sun did shine upon his Head, with a
wonderful luster: in which were seen two Doves ascending and descending:
which an Eastern Legate did behold, and instantly he submitted to the Sea of
Rome in all obedience.

But the most memorable miracle concerning Relat. of the Relig. in the West.
sect. 44.
our Nation, and Religion, was the Nun of Portugal, anno 1588, who had five
wounds bleeding on her, and the image of the Crucisixe on her breast: to whom
their Armado went for a benediction, before they set forward. She was afterward
discovered to be an impostor: the wounds were a forced rawnesse of the flesh
caused by the continual binding of a Crucisixe to the part so printed. And
those who hunger after miracles, if they repair to the Romish religion, they
shall be glutted with signs and lying wonders in abundance.

I cannot conceive that these sictions can carry credit with many understanding
Papists: much less that they should command credence with any Protestants.
Howbeit, if they would enforce belief to such incredible stories; we can pay
them in their own coin. A Cardinal relates this Miracle: Pope Benedict
Petrus 'Damian. in libr. qui inscribitur gratissimus.
the ninth, after his death appeared to a certain Hermit, near to a mill, in
a most horrible shape, being in body, head, and tail, like an Ass: and being
asked why he so appeared, he answered, Because I lived in the Popedom like a
Beast, without Reason, without Law, and without God.

At (...) I will not cast such dirt in their faces: although I may rake much
with much Mele^. Canus lib. 11. cap. 6.
facility, from their own Dunghills. We produce their own miracles, against
their own persons, and their own propositions.

There remains one maine miracle, a maine argument: wherein some Papists do
triumph, and whereat some Protestants do stumble: From Revelation 13. 13. thus
they dispute.

Antichrist does cause fire to come from Heaven:

The Pope does not cause fire to come from Heaven:

Therefore, the Pope is not Antichrist.

I answer, this cannot be taken literally: because the whole Chapter is
mystical. None can be so gross, as to think that a Beast indeed, shall rise
out of the very Sea, having seven heads, and ten horns, as it is in the first:
nor that the people shall worship a very Dragon, as it is in the fourth: nor
that there shall be another beast like a Lamb, and a Dragon, as in the
twe^th: neither shall it be a very sire, as it follows in this thirteenth. I
say therefore is an Allusion unto 1 King. 18. 24. This exposition, though it be
singular good, yet is it not singular: besides our own learned Expositors, it
is so expounded also by Paulus Bernriedensis, Paul. Bernried. in vita Greg. 7.
who mentioning diverse wonders of fire wrought by Pope Gregory the seventh,
does sundry times resemble him to Elias. According to that resemblance, and not
literally, I say, Antichrist shall cause sire to come from heaven. In 1 King.
18. 24. there being a difference in Israel, betwixt Baals Priests and the
Prophet, which was the true Religion; Elias testisieth his to be the truth, by
causing sire to come from heaven. So here: there being a difference in the
Church, whether the Religion of Christ, or of Antichrist was the truth: the
text says, Antichrist shall cause sire to come from heaven, in conspectu
hominum: that is, he shall make his salse Religion to appear to men to be the
truth, as effectually, as if (like Elias) he should cause sire to come from
heaven, for a confirmation of his doctrine. Which is most agreeable to the
Pope. The caeca obedientia (blind obedience) of the Clergy, and the implicit
says of the Laity: the one believing whatsoever the Pope teaches, and the
other obeying whatsoever the Pope commands, without examination, or
disputation: and both as consident in what the Pope teaches, as if they saw
sire come from heaven, to confirm his doctrine. Here I profess, that argument
which once did most stagger me, does now most strengthen me in this point. I
take this to be an insoluble syllogism:

Whosoever makes his followers as confident in their errors, as if they saw
fire come from heaven to confirm them; is That Antichrist:

But the Pope makes his followers as confident in their errors, as if they
saw fire come from heaven to confirm them:

Therefore, the Pope is that Antichrist.

I desire that every honest and understanding Papist may take this argument
into their conscionable and serious consideration.

I will but touch upon two points, and so conclude. First, Whether the Papists
do work any miracles? Secondly, If they do: Whether those miracles should
persuade us to be of their Religion? a Proposition, and a Supposition.

To the first, the phrase of Arnobius will Arnob. adve^s. Gentes lib. 1.
frame a fit resolution, by a most apt application: Saepe sciamus, and
scierimus: Full often have we known, and as often shall we know (say the
Papists) many cured by miracles. Inquiro, Quis? Quo loco? Cui auxiliatus
fuerit? By what person? In what place? and of what disease, have those
miraculous cures healed them? Again, An sine ullius adjunctione materiae? have
they been healed without application? If any thing has been applied to those
Creples, Clinikes, etc. benesicia ista rerum, non sunt curantium potestates,
they were then healed by the secret virtue of the things, not by the miraculous
manifest power of the Agents. Finally, Quod millia debillium, how many millions
of miserable creatures can we show you? who Cum per omnia supplices irent
Templa, after they have gone Pilgrims to all the Saints and Shrines in
Christendom: Cum deorum ante or a prostrati, after they have prostrated
themselves before all the holy Images: Cum limina ipsa convererent osculis:
after they have swept the very pavement of their Churches with their lips:
Nullam omnino ret^lisse medicinam, and yet to have received no Benefit to their
diseased carkeises. These are the words of Arnobius: but mine own
interrogations. I request any sober papist, to render a solid resolution. Some
join issue, and say that at this day they can instance in Miracles wrought
beyond the Seas, and in England also. Beyond the Sea, and beyond our Belief
also, Lipsius his chronicles are Lipsius de Virg. Hallens. cap. 12. Acosta de
salut. Indorum lib. 6. cap. 4. 12. and 17. Melchior Canus lib. 11. cap. 6.
fraught with miracles, of the Lady of Halls, as giving sight to the blind,
etc. We answer: For such miracles in general, Acosta who has traveled as
far, and Melchior Canus, who read as much as did Lipsius, dare not venture
their credit in countenancing those Popish miracles. And for the Popish
restoring of the blind in particular: a French impostor was discovered at our
Ladies of Renand in Paris, ^^^. S^^v. Apology. Fox Monum. to. 1. vita Henr. 6.
and an English counterfeit at S. Albons in Hartfordshire; both, by the self
same impudent ignorance, and ignorant impudence (a brace of borne-blinde
Bayards) would take upon them, at the first moment of their miraculous sight to
judge of colors. Also here at home Eudaemon cries us down, with an instar
Eudamon advers. Abbot. lib. 3. sect. 4.
omnium, with one amazing miracle: Quantum vobis? Quantum vestris
Magistratibus? Quantum Regio Consilio admirationis attulit? Quantum terroris
incussit? Garnetiana illa palea? Oh (quoth he) what wonderment and astonishment
overwhelmed you, your Magistrates, yea and your Kings privy Counsel, because
of Garnets straw? We answer: we value it, as it was: it was a miracle of straw.
Our boys deride it, because none of our men believe it. As one speaks, it
was done artificio, by Art: and by no wonderful Art neither. If any lust to
spend Abbott Antilog. cap. 14.
time to know toys, reverend Abbots Antilogy, to Eudaemon his ridiculous
Apology, will give him a superabundant information.

To unty the first knot: we say, The Papists do no miracles, here especially.
This I make good, on two grounds. First, consider what God will do: not
confirm an error by his suffrage. Which he should do, if an error were
countenanced by a true miracle. Secondly, what the devil can do: no true
miracle. Therefore his assistance avails not. Therefore, neither digitus Dei,
nor digitus Diaboli: neither can the devil, nor will God enable the Papists to
work true miracles.

I will go no further for the proof of this Bell* de P. Romans 3. 15.
latter point, than to Bellarmine himself: Vera miracula dicuntur, illa sola,
quae a solo Deo fieri possunt: Those are true miracles only, which can be
wrought by God only: that is, such works, as have no natural causes, neither
known, nor unknown. And therefore they are wonderful, not only in conspectu
hominum, but Daemonum and Angelorum: not only in the sight of Men, but of
Devils and Angels also. But the miracles of Antichrist have natural causes,
but occultas, although they be unknown to us. I instance: Ab Exorcistis, raro
videmus ut exigatur spiritus: It is a rare thing to see the Devil dispossessed,
as Erasmus observed long since, Nihilominus adhibent Erasmus in ^^^. 4. 75.
ceremonias Magicis non dissimiles: although those Popish Exorcists conjure
them, almost after the manner of Magicians; We may conceive, that either they
cast out none, or by compact (cum Daemone, aut Daemoniacis) either with the
Devil possessing, or with the person pretending to be possessed. I say, the
Papists do mira, not miracula: some wonders, no true wonders; many many lying
wonders.

But admit the Proposition, and assume the Supposition. Suppose the Papists
could do (what they pretend) miracles: yet ought not those to be sufficient
arguments to draw us unto Popery. If our eyes could see Bellarmines Mare, or S.
Francis his Sheep kneeling before the Host: or (according to that childish
fiction) a little Child in the hands of the Priest, after the words of
consecration. Yet all this should not make us believe Transubstantiation. For
consider the end of those wonders, and Gods command in the Scripture.

The end of miracles, which shall be performed or vaunted in the end of the
world, S. Paul does here foretell, shall be to deceive men. Christ does say
the same, Matthew. 24. 24. and Saint John, Revel. 13. 13. says, those miracles
shall be wrought, in conspectu hominum, as it were casting a mist before men's
eyes. They are (...) mere ^ugglers, doing their fears mirabiliter quidem, sed
mendaciter, as S. Augustine speaks, indeed wonderful-ly, but a Aug. de civ.
lib. 10* cap. 19.
lie is the end of those wonders.

Such an one was Marcus, mentioned by Irenaeus: that Arch-Hereticke, by his
Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 9.
prayers caused the Wine in the Chalice to seem converted into blood. Eusebius
the So^rat. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Arian, under the reign of Constantius, had the gift of working miracles,
says Socrates. Platina makes mention of miracles wrought Platina in vita Ioh.
4.
at the Sepulcher of Rhotaris, King of Lombardie, an Arian Prince.

Finally, Simon Magus (says Baronius) Baronius an. 68. sect. 22.
made Images to walk, rolling himself in fire, flew in the air, turned
stones into bread, caused shadows to walk before him, which he said were the
souls of men: and if any durst term him an Impostor, he either smote them
with diseases, or tormented them with spirits. Nay, all the Miracles which the
Papists say they have wrought, are no more than what the Pagan Idolaters have
done before: as our accurate Doctor has prooved by a punctual parallel:
Crokenth^rp in Spal. cap. 66.
and therefore they are no sound arguments.

Moreover, such a phrase has fallen from Corn. Agrippa de Vanit, Scient. cap.
97.
the Papists themselves, as this: Piae frauds, that is, godly deceits: a
caveat sufficient to the godly, that they be not deceived by them.

Next, consider what God does command in this case, affirmatively, negatively,
exclusively.

Affirmatively, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life: and they are they which testify of me, Ioh. 5. 39. The Scriptures make a
man wise to salvation: and are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction: that the man of God may be perfect, 2 Timothy 3, 15,
16, 17. What is there concerning our soul, which comes not within the
compass of this distribution? Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, Instruction,
Perfection, Wisdom, our salvation, our Savior: all are taught us by the
Scriptures. Therefore demonstrations by Miracles are superfluous. Consider
again what God does command in this case, negatively: Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, and 3.
If there arise amongst you a Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
sign or wonder: and the sign^ wonder come to pass whereof he spoke unto thee
saying, let us go after other Gods: thou shall not hearken unto the words of
that Prophet, for the Lord God proves thee. And exclusivelie, Christ says
plainly, those who will not hear Moses, and the Prophets, neither will be
persuaded, though one rise from the dead, Luke 16. 31.

If a Papist can convince us by Scripture, God forbid, but that we should
yield unto them. But if our conscience and understanding do tell us, that the
plain Scriptures are plainly on our side; Then, though a Papist could move
mountains, we will say He is nothing. Though he could call down Fire from
Heaven: yea though he could command an Angel to come down from Heaven to
persuade us to Popery: we should answer in the words of Saint Paul, Gal. 1. 8,
and 9. let him be accursed. Let them that love the truth, have a care they be
not seduced from the truth, by no Miracles, by no Signs nor lying wonders.

I have dispatched this discourse of Lying wonders, in the words of truth and
soberness. Whereby we may see the Papists entangled in their own nets. It is
their own grant: Antichrist shall come with many Miracles. They themselves
assume also, in the phrase of Eudaemon, Eudaemon in Abbot lib. 3.
apud nos unos miracula siunt, that none in the world work Miracles but they.
We may therefore Conclude out of their own mouths: None in the world can
have Antichrist but they. And I think they cannot greatly brag of this
Conclusion. But if they should deny the Assumption; as indeed Sanders seems
Sanders de Antich. Them. 24.
to do, we appeal to their Practice, a perpetual boasting of Miracles, and
can evict them by an Induction.

There are but three great Religions in the world, the Jewish, Turkish, and
Christian. The Jews and Turks utterly disclaim Miracles, as do also the
Reformed Christians. Only the Papists lay claim to them, branding their
Church with this mark of Antichrist.

Hence also ye may conceive, if ye have any pronenesse, either to adhere to the
false religion, or to apostate from the true. Hence I say, you may conceive
what means they will use to draw you to Popery. Even signs and wonders: but
lying wonders. All acted and enabled by the power of the Devil. But the God of
truth bless us all from the Devil, and from all his devill^sh lying wonders.

SERMON XVII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 9, 10. And with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.
Of the Antiquity, Universality, Unity, and Infallibility of the Church of
Rome. Of disputations with Papists. The care of the Popish Church, for
Controversy writers. Of Popish Persuasions: Devotions: Prayers: and Discipline.

IN these two verses, Antichrist is confirmed, by two means: by the means
principal, and isntrumental. In the means principal I have observed two
things: his person, and his potency. The means isntrumental is twofold,
miracles, and oracles. For the Kingdom of Antichrist being both the corruption
and the imitation of the Kingdom of Christ: as therefore, Christ did send
forth his Apostles to publish the truth, enabled two ways, both to do
miracles, and to speak Oracles, Lu. 9. 1, and 2. so Antichrist does send forth
his Apostles, to propagate error, both by Miracles and Oracles. Of the
miracles ye have heard the last day, that Antichrist shall confirm his false
doctrine by miracles, by signs and lying wonders. Now I proceed to the next,
his Oracles, that he shall persuade with men, and prevail on men, with all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

And with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness. ^ Consider briefly four
words in this short sentence. First, the connective particle And: the sense
runs thus: Antichrist shall persuade both by affecting the eye of the body,
with miracles: also by infecting the eye of the soul, the understanding, with
strong perswasio^s, even as the Oracles of God, 2 Samuel 16. 23. His coming
shall be (says Paul) with signs and lying wonders, And with all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness. Secondly, with deceiveablenesse, Eudaemo^
in Abbot lib. 2. sect. 5.
(...) which comes from (...) (according to their own Etymologists) that is,
the Way: because, Qui seducit, a via deducit: the deceiver does draw the
deceived out of the way: that is, Antichrist shall employ many ringleaders,
wrongleaders, who shall deceive, and draw many out of the way of truth. For the
third word, unrighteousness: we have opposed to another word, v. 12. (...)
and (...) truth and unrighteousness. Unrighteousness is therefore here taken
for untruth or falsehood, and (...) deceiveablenesse, for the strong, strange,
and cunning persuasion of that untruth to be the very truth. Fourthly, because
a particular enumeration of every several fraud and fallacy, would be
tedious: Saint Paul does close up all with this term of Universality, (...)
in Omni deceptione iniquitatis: his coming shall be with all deceiveablenesse
of unrighteousness.

As in Logic, we have the Topickes, and Elenchs, the first containing
arguments drawn from right heads to confirm the truth: the last fallacies, to
make falsehood have the appearance of truth. So in Theologicke, in Divinity,
we have our fair arguments drawn from the evidence of plain Scripture, to
convince and content the conscience of all, learned and illiterate. But the
erroneous have fallacies, and sophistry, to make their error probable, yea to
appear to be the very truth. Of this, this text does speak, that Antichrist
does prefer his Mystery of Iniquity, with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness. Of this I must speak, that the Pope does confirm his
Errors, with strong arguments, but potent sophistry. A strong argument, that
Popery is the Mystery of Iniquity.

I must begin this Sermon, as I did end the last. In the Revel. 13. 13.
Antichrist shall cause fire to come from heaven, in the sight of men, that is,
he shall confirm men in his errors as effectually as if (like Elias) he
could cause fire to come down from heaven, for the confirmation 1 Kings 18, 38.
thereof.

This powerful persuasion is here termed the deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, whereby men are so deceived by Sophistry, that they embrace
unrighteousness and untruth, as confidently, as if it were truth it self. Now
that the Pope does this, I make this appear four ways. Four ways does
Popery spread it self, by persuasion, and by practice. They persuade both
publicly and privately. Their practice is the pretense either of Devotion, or
of Discipline, which is a maine help, if not a part thereof. By these (to use
the words of Augus^od nensis) tantis viribus laborant, ne soli Dialog. Honorij
Augus^odi^ensis ad c^l^em 2, To^ ^ Biblioth Patrum.
ad Tartara ven^ant, their Learned labor not to go alone to the Devil*
studying to accomplish that Prophecy of Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 13. there shall
be deceivers, ((...) Iugglers, Imposters, Inchanters) who shall wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived. These are four mighty motives to the
ignorant, unstable, and unregenerate especially, to draw them to Popery, and to
sement them to the deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

Concerning the Papists power in persuading publicly, we must consider three
things: the matter, the manner, and the men concurring in that point of
persuasion. The matter of their persuasion, indeed the very materials of their
Babel, consists in these four particulars, which are the corner foundations
of Popery.

They plead the Antiquity, Universality, Unity, and Infallibility of their
Roman Religion. They pretend that it is from the beginning, through the world,
and without either division, or error. No mean motives to allure Proselytes.

First our Religion, say our adversaries, is perpetuated by an undivided line
of a long succession: Even from Peter the first, unto Paul the last, for many
scores of Bishops, and hundreds of years. Where as yours, (say the Papists
unto us) is but an hundred ye^res old. Luther was the Father of Reformers: and
therefore the Reformed must be a new upstart, bastard Religion.

They say secondly, our Religion is universal and Oecumenicall. Beside Italy
and whole Spain, besides France, Germany, England, Polonia, Bohemia, Hungary,
Graecia, Syria, Aethiopia, and Egypt, in all which many Catholics do abound.
Besides all these, in the new world, there are a world of Papists: Eastward in
India, Westward in America, Northward in Iapan, and Southward in Brasil: sine
intermis^ione Haereticorum, entire Papists, not one Protestant. Miratur orbis
se factum Arianum: the whole world is now under the Roman Bishop, as in times
past it was under the Roman Emperor. The Roman Religion is spread through the
world: the Reformed Religion, is couped up in a Corner, only in England, and
those Islands: in some few Cantons, as it were Cantles of Christendom: in
Geneva, and some part of Germany. Hence they urge, Are these Millions of
Christians Heretical, and only those few Heretics Orthodoxall, and of the
true Religion?

Thirdly, Omnes Catholici idem sentiunt, nec Bellar. de Notis Ecclesiae, lib.
4. cap. 10.
aliter sentire possum, (says Bellarmine) cum omnes submittunt sensum suum,
sensui Vnius: Summi Pontisicis: that is, All the Papists are of one opinion,
neither can they be of diverse opinions, because they submit all their opinions
unto one man his opinion: unto the Pope. But (says he) Bellarm Ibid.
the Lutherans are divided, and subdivided, into insinite factions, and
fractions. Now (say they) let the world judge whether Unity be not the sister
of Verity: And therefore the Romish Religion, must be the only, and the true
Religion.

Finally, Ecclesia non errat, The Church cannot err: this is the Principle of
Popery. And they build this position, on that promise of Christ, Matthew. 16. 18.
Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. Hereon triumphing Suarez does insult, in Romana Petra
fundatos, frigida Suarez Apolog. p^aes.
Aquilonis procella dimovere non potest, the cold northern blast cannot move,
nor remove such as are built upon that Roman Rock. Upon that Roman Rock!
prove that, and we submit to the Roman Religion. He does prove it Suarez
Apolog. lib. 6. ca. 5. nu. 2.
from an axiom amongst Expositers. Consuetudo est optima interpres, Custom is
the best Interpreter. But the Church has perpetually interpreted this of
Peter, and therefore of Rome; Therefore Rome must be the Rock of our faith;
and the Romish Religion, the only true Religion.

On these premises, thus they conclude; Our Religion is the old, Yours the new
Religion: Ours little less then Oecumenicall: Yours little more than
Provincial. Ours united under one head: Yours divided into many schismatic
members: Ours the Rock of Truth: Yours therefore which is fallen from us, must
be Erroneous, Schismatic, Heretical and Diabolical. These are the seeming
arguments to persuade unto Popery: in the phrase of my text, the
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness.

This is the History of Iustine, the Historian. Justin. lib. 24.
Strangers arriving at Delphi, as they spoke amongst themselves, by them was
heard Sonus multiplex, ampliorque more and louder speeches, than they uttered:
At this they stood amazed; till intelligence and experience taught them, that
this sound did proceed personantibus and resonantibus inter se rup^bus, from
Empty caves, which did not return their real voices, but imperfect and
inarticulate resemblances. So, when our own speeches, acknowledge the worth of
those worthy graces, Antiquity, Universality, Unity and Infallibility: the
Papists redoubling these words, as if they were their own, may make us amazed
at the first: but intelligence and experience will assure us, that these are
the reports only of empty mouths: and that they speak no true realities, but
very Echoes, only the inarticulate and imperfect resembla^ces of those
excellent words, Antiquity, Universality, Unity and Infallibility. Let us
therefore unmaske these reasons, and look upon the face of these Fallacies.

First, they argue, their religion was the first: and therefore it is the best.
They plead Antiquity; We join issue with them: Antiquity is the badge of
verity. Herein, even Apollo spoke Oracles, who being demanded of the Athenians,
which Religion was the best? answered the Anc^entest: the demand being
seconded, which was the Ancientest? he answered the second time, that which
was the best. To (...) Logic phrase, we acknowledge that the true Religion,
and the old Religion are convertible terms. Id verum est quod antiquum est,
Tertull. Council. Nicen.
says a Latin Father: and (...), was the consent and conclusion of that Greek
Council, that is, the old Religion, is the true religion. But we add of the
Papists, they pretend, but they have not antiquity, for their Religion. Justly
therefore may their Vaineglorie ebb, from those swelling words of vanity, the
Romish Religion, that Ancient Romish Religion! whereby they presume, that they
must sweep all away before them, as did Kishon, that Ancient river Kishon,
Judge. 5. 21. If pretense of antiquity might prevail, those very Magicians
would persuade us, that their Treatises have been made by, and received from,
Athanasius, Cyprian, Moses, Adam, yea even from Raphael Iuel. Apolog. page 141.
the Archangell! and the Devil himself can plead Age, an Old Serpent, and a
Liar from the beginning. To come to the point: if the Popish be truly the old
Religion, we will confess it, and embrace it, as the true religion. But what
is old? Quod ab Apostolis, that which has been taught by the Apostles, says
Tertullian. Tertul.
And Saint Augustine gives the right rule to Vincentius, Audi, dicit Dominus,
non dicit Donatus August. ^p. 48.
aut Rogat us. We may English it to our purpose: we must say that Religion is
old, not that which Rome calls old, nor that which England calls old, but
what the Scripture shows to be so. Now for the Scriptures: we call to the
People to read them, they command the people not to read them. Whether we or
they are afraid to try the Antiquity of our Religion by the Scripture, the
only true trial, of true Antiquity: Let any impartial man, give the Verdict.

2 Universality; We say it is no note of the true Church: and yet we say the
Papists have it not. Arianisme was, and Mahometisme is more universal than
Popery is at this day. The Mahometans do as far exceed the Papists in
multitude, as the Papists do the Reformed. Nay to speak properly, there are
full as many of the reformed, as are of the Romish Religion. Let us estimate
either Church by the number of Professors, and not of Persons, and this will
appear to be no paradoxe. Professors are such as do believe what they
Profess explicitly, and can render a reason of their Profession: herein our
number, is no way inferior unto others. We say therefore for Universality, We
equal them, and the Turks go far before them. And howsoever, that does
Bellarmine and Bell. de notis Eccle. lib. 4. ca. 7. Suarez Apolog. lib. 1. cap.
15. number. 6.
Suarez do acknowledge that Universality, properly taken, is not the proper
note of the Church.

Unity I confess the want of it, the blemish of the Reformed Church: and
bewail the want thereof in our own English Church; yet I add, False Churches
have had it: and the Romish Church has not it. The Turks are termed Islami,
that is, men of one mind: they are Pius 2 Epist. ad Mo^hisanum page 68.
so far from differing, that they do not so much as dispute of any points in
their profession. I hope the Papists will not conclude, therefore, the Turkish
is the true Religion. And for the Papists, they have been at as good unity
amongst themselves, as the Midianites were, Judge. 7. 22. When the sword of
every man was against his fellow. I will not rehearse the discords, Vsserius de
Christ Eccles. Succes. cap. 9.
betwixt the Thomists, the Franciscans, and the Dominicans, the Sorbonists, and
the Mendicans, or the Priests and Jesuits. I will instance in their
dissentions of an higher nature. There have been three Popes at one time, one
in France, another in Spain, and a Wats. Quodl. 7. Artic. 9. page 200.
third in Italy. Two Antipopes, Urban the sixth, and Clement in France, had many
battles, and many were slain, even thousands. There have been 23 Schisms in
the very seat of Rome: sometimes 2, and sometimes 3 Popes at once: and so
continuing in schism, sometimes 3, 7, 20, 30, 40, and 50 years together. This
is no Protestants imputation, it is a Papist who relates Willets Synops.
Contr. 2. qu. 3.
it. Amongst their undoubted Popes: About the year 900, Pope Steven 6,
abrogated all the Decres of Pope Formosus his Predecessor, and took up his
body, cut off two of his fingers, commanding his body to be buried again. But
his successors, Romanus, Theodorus 2, and John 10 ratified all the doings of
the said Formosus, but Sergius who succeeded them, excceded the other in over
barbarous cruelty. He again disanulled all the acts of Formosus, cut off his
head, and cast him into Tiber. Let them therefore first excuse their own,
before they upbraid us, with our dissentions.

Here let me tell our brethren who are divided from us, either in place or
affection: They cry out against us, for having the Ceremonies of Antichrist:
when we may more justly cry out against them for being the Soldiers of
Antichrist. They put the weapon into the hand of Antichrist. Their division
uniteth the Papists to reproach our reformed Religion. The Lord lay not that
sin to their charge.

Finally, for their Infallibility: the Popes themselves have trenched into
this papal prerogative. You have heard that the Popes own Decrees have been
reversed, and re-established by the Popes own successors. And for Suarez his
urging of the customary and usual interpretation of Math. 16, 18. to be
concerning Saint Peter, and therefore the same infallibility to be Hereditarie,
to the Popes, his successors. Besides that, both the antecedent and consequent
are false: Let his own fellow answer him: Consuetudo est optima interpres
Legis: modo nulli crant contradicentes Legi. Custom (says Withrington) is the
best interpreter of the Law, provided there were none who contradicted that
Law, and that custom. But his pretended Infallibility of the Pope, has been
opposed by a perpetual contradiction, as honorable and honored Mornie has
made it good, instancing Philip Mo^ni^ Mist. Iniquit.
in more than half an hundred oppositions. Yea let his own mouth answer him,
Ecclesia Romana particularis possit dificere: that Suarez Apolog. lib 1. cap.
5. sect 5.
is, the particular Roman Church may fall away: we say defecit it has fallen
away. Both concur, that the City and Diocese of Rome may fall. Therefore
they cannot brag of their Infallibility.

Now ponder these persuasions to Popery. They plead Antiquity: we have proved
it to be but pretended antiquity. Universality, but a forged universality.
Unity, but a feined unity. and Infallibility, but it is an infallibility
usurped by them, never granted to them. Yet with these glorious titles,
Antiquity, Universality, Unity, and Infallibility, do they tenebras inducere
terris, blind a world of poor people. This is one part of that Mystery of
iniquity, that deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness. These are the strong
persuasions unto Popery. Strong indeed, but only unto them who are weak in
religion, and weak in understanding.

This is the matter: the manner of their deceiving follows: Disputation: a
course which they have long since much declined, lately much required. Campion
was their Champion, in this kind. Now to beard out the Protestants, with a
brazen brow; this bold trick, is an old trick. Venire studio contradicendi,
magic quam voto discendi: Demetrianus came to confer with Cyprian, but
resolved (notwithstanding Cyprian. ad Demetrian.
the conference) still to hold the conclusion. Cum superatos sentiant, mentium
tamen venenum non amittere: Saint Jerome experienced Hieron. Epist. 24.
some that were determined to proceed in their erroneous hearts, though their
tongues were brought to a Non plus. Quid promovebis Tertul. de praescript. cap.
17.
disputator, etc. said Tertullian, what will thou gain by confronting these
men? they will not yield, though they be never so plainly confuted. Nay
consciscere sibi mortem ne in Ecclesiam August. epist. 48. Vincent.
intrent: to go to Tiburne, rather than to Church; this was the wonted
obstinatenesse of the old Donatists, Pelagians, Heretics, and Pagans. The
Papists refine such grossness, and they add thereunto, brave learning to
support, and boasting lying to report their disputations for their party.

In the discharge of them, they will use such subtle distinctions, such nimble
evasions, such acute interpretations, and acete (sharp) irritations: that they
will confirm the partial Henrer, and sometime confound a sufficient
disputant, as (some say) it befell Beza in the Colloq^^e Trent. Hist. lib. 5.
of Poisi, Anno 1561: yea they will spinne into small threeds, with subtle
distinctions, many times, the plainness and sincerity of the very Scripture it
self: their wits being like that strong water which eats through and
dissolveth the parest gold.

But if they proceed not that way, yet they will triumph both before, and
without the Victory. Bristow is bold in this behoof: There are Brist. Qu^^st.
41. Motive 31.
few Students (says he) in either University, who dare dispute with any
ordinary Papist: And if perchance they be constrained to conference, every
Common Catholic can answer our best arguments: nay they can speak better for
our part then the prime of our own Professors. After disputations; they will
report themselves Conquerours, although they be conquered. Lutherus vester sent
ens se victum ab Ech^o, dixit: haec res nec propter Deum coepta est, ^ec
propter Deum finietur. When their Eckius had foiled our Luther: Luther (says
Duraeus lib. 1. sect. 2. Whitakerus in Duraeum lib 1. sect. 2.
Duraeus) brake out into this exclamation! This disputation was never begun in
God, nor ever will it end in God. Mischievously mis-alleaging that as spoken by
Luther of himself which he uttered concerning the impudence of his Adversaries.

This Catholic Custom may not be destitute of Precedents in this kind. In
this very time, have they put the same trick on the matchless discharger of
this exercise, the worthy Dr. Featlies Relation of the Conference. 1624.
Lecturer before me, and on his learned assistant. But (I doubt not) it shall
shortly appear that that Sepia has spit out his inkie imputations on these
men's worth, with this effect: that his own causeless insolence may appear
the more manifest and remarkable. On these Mysteries they are so frequent to
dare us to disputation: which if they ever shall obtain, they shall also find
those, who dare resist them to the face, and before the eyes of indifferent
judges, to lay open their subtle sophistry, and all their deceiveablenes of
unrighteousness.

Next, the men, the instruments of this deceiveablenesse follow to be
considered. Non e quovis ligno sit Mercurius: they choose, and use extraordinary
persons, for this extraordinary purpose. In old time it was said, the Church
had excellent treasure in earthen vessels. We may invert it concerning the
Church of Rome; their doctrine is earthen treasure, in excellent 2 Cor. 4. 7.
vessels. With us indeed he that will may set pen to paper, and sometimes
Controversies are written by Ministers surcharged with their own Pastoral
charge, yea sometimes forced to take some other charge, or calling for their
own necessary maintenance: unless like Daniel, they can feed themselves with
Pulse and Dan. 1. 12. Math. 3. 4.
Water: or with John Baptist, unless they could cloth themselves with Leather
and Hairecloath: and these men undertaking the common cause (as a learned man
has already observed) they discharge it accordingly.

But with them, I will speak of the Pope, Pius 2, ad Morbisanum.
the same words which were spoken by the Pope, but to the Turk and of Mahomet.
Vtina^ tam bonus suisset tuus legifer, quam callidus, tam virax quam versutus,
tota artificiosa, and fraudulenta lex ejus. Nam qui divinum sibi abesse
auxilium non ignorabat, ad humanas confugit astutias. Would God the Pope were
as pious, as prudent, as conscionable as he is cunning, he is composed of
artificial deceivablenesse: for he knowing himself destitute of divine
verity, must furnish himself with humane subtlety and fallacy. With them
therefore the choicest of their youth, are trained up to be Jesuits: the
choicest of their Jesuits to be Professors: and the choicest of their
Professors, to be Writers. And these Writers are supplied with all manner of
Necessaries: countenance, maintenance, books, leisure, yea Scholars to read
to them, and to be employed by them. As it was apparent in Bellarmine and
Baronius: the last of Casaub. Exerc. epist. Dedicat.
whom was thirty years in shaping his Annalls, before he did show them to the
public view of the world. And Malvenda in this very Malvenda calce post
indicem.
cause composed a treatise concerning Antichrist, which cost him twelve years
continual labor day and night without any other employment or interruption.
So that whatsoever either inward faculties, or outward abilities can produce,
we may expect so much to be performed by the Papists. Betwixt them and us,
there is only this difference. They have all the helps in the world: only --
they want a good cause. We have a good cause: only -- we want all the helps
in the world. So diligent are their inferiors, so provident are their
superiors, to propagate their party, by strange persuasions, which is here
called, a seeming truth: and the deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

With such industry, they provide for their public persuasion: but their
private endeavor is no less persuasive and industrious. We have public
leave, and command to preach publicly, (the Lord be blessed and long continue
it) I say we have leave and command to preach publicly. But it is the nature
of men, to neglect public instruction, and not to reap that personal profit,
which our hearts desire, and (it may be) our labors deserve. Now the Papists
being deprived of liberty to preach publicly: they undertake a course more
profitable. They insinuate themselves into private acquaintance, and persuade
with people privatelie. When I consider the devoutnesse of women, the
credulousnesse of Children, the ignorance of servants, and the unstablenesse of
some men also: I cannot but imagine that subtle Papists, do wonderfully
prevail upon us, by this private Persuasion. An hypocritical engine, long
ago exercised and discovered. In Saint Paul's time they did creep into houses,
and led captive silly women, laden with sin, led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy
3. 6. And St. Cyprian says, that in his age, oppidatim and ostiatim, that
Heretics did skulk up and down from town to town, and from house to house to
pervert the people. Arrius being contemned by the Council of Papp. Hist. page
283.
Nice, his condemnation was confirmed by Constantine the Emperor. Against this
public opposition, they employed private persuasion. Constantia and Eusebius,
both Arrians, commended a learned Arrian Minister, to the Emperors service, who
prevailed by private persuasion, against the public decree, that Arrius his
sentence was revoked, and his person restored: so powerful are those private
persuasions.

Take two other stories, in two words, Dominike the popish Saint, and
Arch-Inquisitour, being entertained by a noble man of Provence, Nicol.
Bertranduta in gestis Tholosanorum, ^ol. 30.
did so effectually deal with him in private, that he both turned him from the
Waldenses, and wrought him to give his person to be a Proselyte to Dominike;
and his house, to be an Inheritance to the Dominicans. There are Dominicans
surviving, or rather Jesuits surpassing the Dominicans. And the public want
of coin in England, may proceed from the private persuasion of Jesuits in
England.

In Milan, there was one Cola, a schoolmaster; Matchiavel. Hist. Florent. lib.
7.
learned and ambitious; he taught the chief children of the City, three of
whom, Giovandrea Lampugnano, Carolo Visconti, and Girolano Olgeato by private
conference he dealt with: concerning the Duke Galiazzo. First he informed them
of his disposition, next he infused into them an hatred of his person, and
finally he bound them by oath, when they were men grown, to free the City from
his tyranny. Accordingly they murdered the Duke, and they themselves were
executed for that murder. Now what he persuaded in private for treachery,
others may persuade as much for Popery. But Lord bless our English Gentry from
such Schoolemasters: Yet still you see the prevailing power of private
persuasion.

I say therefore with Bernard, agnoscite dilectissimi, Bernard Sermon. 1. de
Convers. Pauli.
and expavescite consortia eorum, qui salute^ impediunt animarum; know beloved,
and fear them which ye intertaine into your private families; for they may
deceive your children, and destroy your Religion: or, according to S. Peter's
phrase, do ye so sufficiently instruct your families, that the meanest there,
may be able to render a reason of their religion, to discry popish sophistry,
and to discover their deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

Thus do they persuade to Popery, both publicly and privately: which they
promote moreover by their Practice, a silent kind of persuasion. And practice
persuades many: for men do know the tree by his fruit, Luc. 6. 44. And in
charity we are to conceive that devotion and discipline cannot be the fruit of
a false Religion: nor Profaneness and liberty the fruit of a true. But the
horrible. Hypocrisy of the Papists, and shameful neglect of the Protestants
have verified both those effects, in both our religions.

The Papists make a show of Devotion, their bait to allure our simple devout
people. To insist in Prayer: for the place, they have their Churches gloriously
adorned, whereas ours (especially in the Country) lie slovingly neglected. For
the G^sture, they pray with their bare knees, on the bare pavement, whereas we
will not vouchsafe to kneel, though a Cushion case us: For the Time: their
Canonical hours, are seven times every Day, whereas we cannot draw our people
to two hours in one day, once the whole week only to our public prayers.

This understanding men do perceive to be indeed but the show of devotion: yet
this very show is sufficient to allure them, whose understanding can pierce no
farther then appeara^ce.

I add, that in Germany the Carthusian Monks at Machline spend seven hours
every day in solemn prayers. And in Italy, at the sound of a Bell, at one
instant, three times a day, (sun setting, sun rising, and at noon) Relation
of the Religion in the West. sect. 4.
all people, in every place, street, market, house, fields, etc. kneel down,
and send up their united prayers unto heaven. Admirable devotion: if it were as
it seems. I argue but four small frailties in the performance thereof:
nothing but Ignorance, Superstition, Pride, and Hypocrisy. They pray in
Latin: whereby he that occupyeth the room of the unlearned cannot say Amen: a
custom condemned long since by S. Paul in the Corinthians, and yet some 1 Cor.
14 16.
will have him at this day to approve it in the Romans.

Next, they employ their devotion in Ave Mary's, to the blessed Virgin: and
prayers to a creature cannot be cleared from sacrilegious superstition.
Thirdly, the Devotion of those Hypocrites is as the house of the Spider, they
place affiance in their Orisons, and depend upon their prayers as meritorious.
Finally, they draw near to God with their mouth, and with their lips they
honor him, but they have removed their hearts far from him, Isay 29. 13. Qui
caret devotione non peccat, He that has no devotion in his prayers, sins
not, says a learned Papist. This doubling in their devotion, Jacob. de Gra.
D^cis. A^r. part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 53. nu. 16.
does double our detestation of their dissembling Religion. Nevertheless, to
the simple, and the credulous, it is persuasive, attractive, indeed the
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

The last device which they practice, to draw men to Popery, and to confirm
men in Popery, is a show of Discipline. Discipline indeed discharged, is indeed
necessary. As necessary to a man, as it is to an Army. It is to the body of the
one, as it is to the Soldiers of the other, it keeps it from rebellion. Of
Discipline the Papists vaunt much, to the humble, simple, and sorrowful
sinner. They tell them of their penance and poverty, of their sacke-cloth and
ashes, and of their Lent and fasting. And that in our Religion there is nothing
but looseness and liberty. I answer: for us, the defect of discipline is the
fault of our persons, not of our Church. What person may not give as much to
the poor, and take as much from his delights, as his conscience shall persuade
him? Nay more: we know our Church does injoyne, Fasting, Lent, Penance, and
other points of Discipline. For them: I say, it is better not to use Discipline
absolutely, which we do not: than to abuse it superstitiously, which they
do. And again: there is no greater liberty in any Religion under heaven, than
in the Romish. I appeal to their magnificent indulgences, and indulgent
penances.

But by this you may conceive what arguments and instruments they use to
confirm and enlarge the Dominions of Antichrist. They will persuade you
publicly, by their writings, and privately in your houses. They will blind you
with the pretense of sincere devotion, and austere discipline. The Agents which
use these, are infinite, industrious, and learned men: but such as the text
speaks of, who are set on work by Satan, to draw men to a false Religion.
But the God of heaven make us all constant and conscionable in the practice and
profession of the true Religion.

SERMON XVIII.
2 THE^S. 2. 9, 10. After the working of Satan, in all power.
Of Satan. Papists refuse all communion with Protestants. Why so many learned
turn Papists. No reconciliation with Rome.

I Have showed you the means isntrumental, whereby the coming of Antichrist
is confirmed: Miracles and Oracles. I proceed to the principal means: his
person. Satan of (...) Adversarius qui obsistit, an enemy who does resist,
says Erasmus. Or Satanas, quasi Satanachas, that is, a Serpent, or an
Impostor, as Aretius delivers it out of Iustine Martyr: so both force and
fraud shall concur in the confirming of Antichrist. As Christ does work
mightily in his Ministers, Coloss. 1. 29. so does the Devil work mightily in
his ministers: both in eis, and per eos: in them, and by them: making them both
to teach and believe his devilish errors. As 1 King. 22. 22. the Devil was a
lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, and the text says, they did
persuade and prevail. So, according to this text, the Devil shall stir up,
and enable learned men, to confirm the coming of Antichrist: and they shall
persuade and prevail. And that in an admirable manner, as it follows in the
next point: his potency. (...) in power: (...) in all power: (...), when we
cannot express the power of an Agent, we term it in Latin energeticum, and
energeticall in English; here translated the working of Satan. The meaning is,
The Devil shall enable men to spread and persuade the doctrine of Antichrist
in a mighty powerful manner, beyond admiration.

To proceed: this mighty power we may perceive exercised on, and by the
Papists, to support Antichrist. I insist in one instance. The Powerful agents
of Antichrist have so powerfully prevailed with inferior Papists; that they
refuse all community, with all Protestants, in all the exercises of Religion.
Concerning Religion in general, and Prayer in particular: these ought to be
the rules of true Christians. First, to separate in the exercises of the
contrary Religion, only in those things wherein they dissent. Secondly, to
refuse to pray with the contrary, only if there be scandal. Thus may they
refuse to communicate with us, and we with them, because of
Transubstantiation, a point of difference and scandal to either part. But when
there is no difference, nor scandal, there should be no refusal of communion.

With the Papists it is far otherwise: they with us abhor all community.
They reject our Books before they read them: our Sermons before they hear
them: our persons before they see them: and our positions before they know
them. They will not do us that Christian right, which the Bereans did Saint
Paul, Act. 17. 11. to examine our doctrine by the Scriptures: but they wrong
us, as Demetrius did him, Act. 13. 32. making the multitude to cry out against
us, and yet the most of them know no cause for it. For Prayers: Our Ch^rches
they enter not, though our Leiturgy has nothing offensive to them. If by
chance they hap into an house where the household settle to pray, out ruuneth
the Romist from a Protestant, as Saint John did from Cerynthus: as Iren lib. 3.
cap. 3.
if our very prayers were abominable enough to make the house fall on them, or
sink with them. At our meals, if we thank God, a Papist must not say Amen.
At their own meals, they will rather eat their meat without Gods blessing,
than ask it in the presence of a Protestant: though for this later, some few
in England have lately a little refined this fancy.

I would demand but this: if an Arrian should say the Lords Prayer, would they
refuse to say Amen? If they should eat with a multitude of Turks, and that
they should thank the Creator for feeding them with his good creatures; would
a good Christian refuse to join with them? If they were with Pagans in a ship
(like Jonah in the ship of Tarshish) would they not pray with them, to be
delivered from the shipwreck? Nay, according to their own Legends of
Bellarmine, Surius, and Francis, if horses, sheep, and oxen should worship
God, would they not do what they exhort us to do, to adore God, even for the
company of those bruit creatures? Yet either so miserable are we, or so
uncharitable are they, that they will not vouchsafe that to us, which they deny
not to Arrians, Turks, Pagans, and the beasts themselves. They will not join
with us in the worship of our common God.

The effect whereof is admirable for the strengthening of Popery two ways.
First, they can never be informed by us: Secondly, they will ever be inflamed
against us. By the first they remain in ignorance of our positions, and
believe (as their Teachers slander us) that our Preachers are Cobblers, Tailors,
Tradesmen, Stella in Luc. 9. 16. Stella in Luc. 3. 11.
Artisans and that our Preaching is magnifying Faith only, and then that men
may live as they list. By the second they are made to hate us worse than the
Turks: whereupon their Crusadoes are published as well against the
Protestants, as against the Sarasins.

Now that ever Religion should ever work such an hatred in men, toward their
Countrymen, Kinsmen, yea Friends and Parents, that they will not join with
them in any thing concerning Gods worship: though never so far from offense
or scandal: I take this to be a strange mystery of iniquity, persuaded in all
power after the working of Satan. A feat, not of man, but of the Devil
himself.

Here I take just occasion to satisfy one scruple, which is perpetually
objected. If the Pope be that grand Antichrist, and Popery so grossly
erroneous: how then are so many learned men of the Romish Religion? the very
phrase of my text is answer sufficient: The coming of Antichrist is after the
working of Satan in all power: and therefore learned men may be entangled.
Again, Matthew. 24. 24. If it were possible, the very Elect should be deceived:
therefore for the learned to be deceived, is no impossibility. Again, Rev. 17.
^, 2. Antichrist is termed a Whore which makes men drunk. Now a graceless
yongster, who is corporally enticed by uncleanness, and entangled by
drunkenness, how will he defend himself, and despise the plain advice of his
understanding friends, to enjoy his bewitching beauty. And has not spiritual
drunkenness and uncleanness equal power to beat down all persuasions?
Sampson, though he had many gaine-saying strugglings, yet could he not deny
his Dalilah: So am I persuaded, that great learned men of the Romish Religion,
have many checks of conscience, but the magnificence of that Synagogue does
extinguish them. I will enforce and enlarge this answer, in the words of Pope
Pius the second, with a very little alteration: Sciunt Christiani, etc. The
Protestants do know that Pius 2. Epist. ad Morbisan.
their Religion is sincere, holy, and saving: nor can they be removed from it:
quamvis aliqui, aut libidine ducti, aut avaritia tracti, aut voluptate illecti,
aut metu mortis attoniti, aut cruciatu superati: although some, either allured
by licentiousness, or entangled by covetousness, or astonished by the fear of
death, or vanquished by tortures, are shaven, do abjure, and turn Papists:
Quorum corda si possis inspicere: but if you could search the hearts of those
Apostates, you should see that there is not one of them who does forsake the
Gospel upon advised motives, and serious deliberation. In a word, this may
suffice: Antichrist is come after the working of Satan, in all power. And
therefore many learned are of the Romish Religion.

For suller satisfaction. Four causes I conceive, wherefore so many learned
are of the Antichristian Roman Religion: their Study, Prejudice, Pride, and
Gods just judgment to blind them.

First, they study the Scriptures in general, and this prophecy in particular,
depending upon their wit, learning, languages, and reading of the Fathers.
These means external I acknowledge to be excellent, and pray that all our
side may excel in them. But these, without the means internal, Humility and
Invocation, are like the stasse of Elishah, without the presence of Elishah,
they will give no true life to the understanding, for it is written, I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding
of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1. 19. And the natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can they know
them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. A presuming upon
their own learning, I conceive to be the first cause, that so many learned are
ignorant in this point of Antichrist.

Secondly, at the coming of Christ, who did, or could speak more of his
coming than the (...) and (...) their Scribes and Pharisees, the Learned? and
yet who farther from the apprehension of the evident arguments of his coming,
than those Lawyers, than those learned men? The reason! Prejudice. They had
beforehand persuaded their expectation to attend a temporal Messiah, that when
Christ came, the spiritual Messiah, all plain signs, which were apparent to
Children, were riddles to those Rabbis. For prejudice had possessed them with
a contrary expectation. So concerning the coming of Antichrist, the Rabbis of
Rome, their learned men, prescribing to their expectation: that Antichrist must
be a Jew, an open Tyrant against the Church, and to tyrannize three years
only. If you now tell them that Antichrist is a Christian, a famous Bishop in
the Church, and that he has tyrannized therein many hundreds of years; If now
an Angel from heaven, should say, Oh come out of Babylon! yet would he seem,
to their learned, as Lot did to his Sons in Law, Genesis 19. 14. He would seem
as one that mocketh. They mock at all arguments, proving the Pope to be
Antichrist. So potent is prejudice to keep even learned men in ignorance. But
herein I could wish that all Papists, and some Protestants also, would practice
the advice of a Pope, Pius the second, Noli falsum dicere, nisi Pius 2. Epist.
ad Mo^bisan.
cognoveris esse: do not say that our reasons are false, before you know them
to be so. Deride not our objections, besore you can clear them by plain
solutions.

Thirdly, in the Jewish Church there were many who did believe on Christ, John
12. 42, 43. but they did non confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue, and they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. They
would not confess the truth which they did believe, sor their pride did
withhold them. So in the Church of Rome, doubtless there are many who sear
the Pope to be Antichrist, and know themselves to be erroneous: but the pride
of themselves, and praise of others, withhold them to confess it. As S. John
speaks, 5. 44. They receive honor of one another, and therefore they receive
not the truth, and reform not their error. In Italy; their Cardinals,
Churchmen equal to Princes, they could not subsist, if the Pope or his pomp
should fall: and therefore they must uphold him. In France; if the Clergy
should turn, they should turn admirable immunities and dignities to undoubted
poverty, peradventure necessity: and therefore they will never reform, but
nourish (...), implacable hatred against the Protestants. Some, even
Protestants can tell, how an argument will sway with men, which is drawn ab
utili, from praise, profit, and promotion. And therefore it is no paradoxe to
conclude: Many learned Papists are obstinate in their errors. for pride does
detain them.

Fourthly, the Judgment of God is the cause that so many learned men are so
ignorant, that they do not, or will not know Antichrist, though plainly
discovered to the whole world. Thus Deuteronomy. 29. 4. the Israelites fell from God,
though miracles were ever before their eyes: the reason is there rendered, The
Lord gave them not eyes to see, nor an heart to conceive. Again, as it is in
Isa. 44. 16, 17. that Idolaters should be so grossly graceless, as to take a
block, to burn one piece and to adore another, is it not a wonder? but that
we are there told by God himself, that God himself did shut their eyes, that
they could not see, and their hearts that they could not understand. At the
coming of Christ, his own City Jerusalem did reject their Messiah, they bragd
of. Does not Christ give the cause? it was hid from their eyes, Luke 19. 42: In
like manner, at the coming of Antichrist, the most glorious part of the Church
of Christ does serve the enemy of Christ: the reason whereof is evident out of
the verse following this Text: God does send them strong delusions. Thus their
Study, Pride, Prejudice, and the just Judgment of God, I conceive to be the
sour great causes that so many great learned men are the slaves of that great
Antichrist: These are the means that according to the working of Satan in all
power, he so admirably prevails upon them. But that he may never in like
manner prevail upon any of us; the Lord of heaven prevent, for Jesus Christ
his sake.

There remains the principal: the person supporting Antichrist. The mystery
of Iniquity is vpheld by the working of Satan. 1 Timothy 4. 1. the working of
Satan is called the doctrine of devils: and that doctrine of Devils is there
named verse. 5. to be forbidding of meats and marriage. But the Church of Rome
does forbid meats and marriage: Therefore the Church of Rome does teach the
doctrine of devils: Therefore the Church of Rome is supported by the working
of Satan: Therefore the Church of Rome is the Church of Antichrist. I will
exercise them a little to untwine these plain connexions.

Here appears the erro^^, to say no more of our Reconcilers: of those who
undertake to reconcile the Protestants to the Papists. That work is a Chimaera
in their intention, and will be abortive in the execution. When there can be
no atonement betwixt God and Satan: Christ and Belial: the Christians and
Antichristians. In a word, when truth may be reconciled unto falsehood, which
is supported by all power, after the working of Satan: then will I imagine that
there may be achieved a reconciliation betwixt the Church of Rome, and the
Church Reformed. Till then, I must susspect all pretense of reconciliation, to
be an error in them, if not a trap for us. Psalm. 120. 6.

The best that I ever heard, or read any speaking Relat. of the Religion in the
West. sect. 48.
to this point, is that learned Gentleman, who proposes his project of Union,
by the distribution of Unity: Whether poor Christendom may hope for Unity of
Verity, or Unity of Charity, or Unity of Persuasion, or Unity of Authority, or
Unity of Necessity. Yet nunquam magis dubit at am de finibus, quam quum legebam
Ciceronem de sinibus: his discourse has confirmed me more, that Reconciliation
is impossible. For he himself confesses, that it is a thing to be wished, not
to be effected. To which I add that sentence of our divine Seneca: Sooner may
God create a new Rome, than reform Dr. Hall: No Peace with Rome. sect. 22.
the old.

Grant that, which all the world is never able to prove: Suppose the Pope be
not Antichrist: Notwithstanding, we must suppose reconciliation unto Popery to
be impossible. First, these Reconcilers have been always fruitless in their
endeavors, and sometime fatal unto Christendom. As the learned insist in the
Trent. Hist. lib. 3.
(...) of Zeno, the (...) of Heraclius, the (...) of Constance, and the Interim
of Charles the fifth: all which did not reunite, but rend the division wider.
And what effect produced the laborious treatise of that learned Papist, set on
work by two several Emperors, Ferdinand, and Maximilian, to compose the
Quarrels of the Church? Only of Cassander, he became Cassandra: although he
spoke as a Prophet, yet no body would believe him. Hereupon politic Pope Paul
the third did laugh at Charles the fifth, who attempted a reconciliation betwixt
the Papists and the Protestants, anno 1548. and it stands with great reason.
For the most cautelous phrases of the most c^ri^ us Reconcilers, when they come
to the scanning, will be ambiguous. Superficially considered, they may receive
good sense: but seriously sifted, they contain the old errors. And the effect
was, as the Pope presaged: the Emperor indevoring to reconcile two contrary
opinions, he made them both agree to impugn his: and each more obstinately to
defend his own.

Then consider the parties: and Reconciliation will appear on our side to be
improbable: on their side impossible. God knows, some of our side are
intractable and obstinate enough. For mine own part: I profess, I love peace,
next to truth: and for the enjoying thereof, I would submit my self to any
thing that does not evidently infringe a good conscience. I could be
contented: First, that the Pope should enjoy those Temporal dominions which
the skill of his Ancestors has left unto him. Secondly, (with our King, with
God) I would be content to acknowledge him, the Patriark, of the West, and
Prime Bishop of the World: so that he keep him within the compass of his own
Dioces. Thirdly, that in deep disputes, of Election, Freewill, Real (not
Carnal) Presence, and such like: Vnusquisquis abundet sensu suo, that every
man might enjoy, the freedom of his own judgment, without any bitter
invections, or uncharitable censuring. Fourthly, I could permit them, their
Discipline, even Penance and Confession, provided that they impose it not upon
others. Finally, I could yield (for Peace) to any thing which can admit any
Conscionable or Charitable interpretation. For (I thank God) I have learned to
hate Opinions, not because they are Popish, but because they are Erroneous.
This profess I for my self: I dare not promise so much for all. We know there
are some, who only for the Cap, and the Knee: though we come with the Cap, and
with the Knee: yet will they never be entreated to be Reconciled to^^^s. What
hope then can there be, to draw them to a Reconciliation in those great points,
which indeed are a great deal more difficult.

Thus Reconciliation on our side is improbable: but on their side, plainly
impossible. The most moderate, learned, and most sanctified of the Protestants,
speak and seek to the Papists, in the words of St. Paul: If it be possible we
will have Peace, Romans 12. 18. But long and lamentable experience returns the
attaining of such Peace to be impossible in the phrase of Zachary 7. 1, and
12. They refused to harken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their
ears: yea they have made their hearts as hard as an Adamant. Which
impossibility of Peace, or of any Peaceable Reconciliation, we may conceive,
it we consider their Positions, Dispositions, and the Composition, or the very
Being of the Papacy.

Their Positions, or Paradoxes are intolerable: and such as contradict, if not
Ruin the Foundations of Christianity. The Lords Prayer, is as good as,
annihilated to the Common People, because ( praying in Latin) they cannot say
Amen, to that they understand not. In the Creed, the tenth Article is plainly
gainsaid, by that arrogant opinion of merits. In the Decalogue, the second
Commandment is grossly transgressed by the worshipping of Images. And in the
Sacrament, the Adoring the Bread, and the withholding of the Cup: the one
against the apparent Truth, and the other against the Confessed institution of
Christ. In all these there can be no amity with Rome, without enmity with God.
Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend, Hosea 4. 15. Add to
this the interdiction of the Scripture, against the express precept of Christ,
John 5. 39. and the Popes Power to Depose Hook^r in Hab. 14. Sect. 27.
Princes (accounting himself, Lord Paramont over Kings, and Kings his Servants
Paravaile) the very Character of Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 4. As also his Divorces
in marriages, and Dispensations in Oaths.

Moreover, all their errors are imposed as Crakenth. De* ^^^s Eccles Aug. cap.
83.
matters of faith: and no faith is to be kept with Heretics, this is a decree
of Pope Vrbanus the sixth, which you may read in Dr. Crakenthorp against
Spalato. For us, to yield to these is no less than the loss of our ( lives
peradventure) salvation. For them to reform, it is no more than to persuade
the Pope to yield up his keys and Crown: which I think those Reconcilers
have no great hope to perform. Howsoever, we may say in the words and
judgment of judicious Hooker, Let them hate Hooker in Hab. 1. 4. sect. 27.
and forsake all their Idolatry, and abjure all their errors and heresies, and
we will meet rhem Tolet. In^^r. lib 1. cap. 9.
with Olive branches: But if they will not: we have the warrant of their own
Cardinal, and Casuists, to avoid Heretics and Heresy. And we are confident
for our selves, that we may shape the same answer to these reconcilers, which
Iehu did to Ioram, 2 Kings 9. 22. What Peace so long as the whoredoms of your
mother Iezabell are so many?

Next, if their positions might be reconciled, yet their dispositions are
irreconciliable. For in Relation of the Religion in the West 48.
all their Conferences, ere they have departed they have plainly discovered,
that they came not with any such intent, as to yield any thing for Peace, much
less for Truths sake: but only to assay, either by manifold persuasions to
entreat or reduce, or otherwise to entrap or disgrace the Adversaries.
Moreover, the Popes themselves are Patrons and patterns of this inflexible
Whit^ker in Bell ^ont. 4. Q^^st. 5.
perverseness. Hereupon when as Pope Adrian at the Norimberg Diet, promised a
Reformation, but Pedetentim, deliberately, foot by foot. Luther did interpret
that Pedetentim, that the Pope meant to have in^er pedes singulos, centum
annos, that is, an hundred years betwixt every foot, before he would set hand
to Reformation. And the same Luther had the like jest against Paul the third,
that his summoning of the Trent Council, was much like unto them Dr. Hall, No
Peace with Rome, sect. 22.
that mock an hungry dog with a crust, and a knife; who in stead of giving
him the bread, let him feel the haft. But that was no jest which was related
by Hugh the Cardinal to the Citizens Matthew. Paris. in Henr. 3.
of Lions, in the name of his Lord the Pope, taking leave of them, 1250; Since
our coming to your City, we have done you one benefit: when we came first, we
found here three or four stews: but going away we leave but one, and that
reaches from the Eastern to the Western gate thereof. And the only piece of
ground which all those Popes sought and fought to make good against the forces
of Christendom at Trent, was that that Council should not touch upon the
point of Reformation, the elder sister to Reconciliation. And this their
unreasonable obstinatenesse stands with some reason: for Reconciliation
presupposes some errors on either side, which must be reformed, and some
extremities which must be remitted. But they will acknowledge none. Ecclesia
non potest errare: that the Roman Church has no Error: this is the Basis of
the Romish Religion: if they will say, that the Pope notwithstanding will grant
to us a connivence, that we may practice our Religion, without hindrance; this
were permission, indulgence, and no reconciliation. And I think the
Protestants will hardly admit of a dispensation, in stead of a Reconciliation.
Neither are the Popes and Papists over-free even in this. For at the Council
of Trent, the King of Bohemia, the Dukes of Saxony, and Bavaria, the Lantgrave
of Hassia, and diverse of their own learned Bishops, could not entreat a
permission, but in two points, Marriage to the Clergy, and the Cup to the
Laity. Therefore their resolute disposition is a gulf betwixt them and us: No
hope of Reconciliation.

That you may not suspect me to misreport their resolution, hear the Papists
speak in their own language. Non de uno, aut altero Bell. Epist. Dedi^at.
capite, Bellarmine says, we contend not about one or two points, sed de tota
propemodum religionis Bell. de R. Pont. Praefat.
summa dimicavi: but our contention is concerning almost the whole Sum of
Religion. The same Author in his Preface to his Treatise of the Pope,
propounds a question, De quare agitur? Whereof are we now to dispute? de
summa Rei Christianae, of whole Christianity. Dut. C^nsid. Consid. 1. cap. 1.
There can be no union made, no Communion had: no Peace to be offered nor
treated of. For they are no brethren and can be no brethren? Quid vobis paci, 2
King. 9. 18. This was peremptorily uttered to King James, by the Pen of a
Papist. Nay George Dowly is yet more peremptory: G. Dowly Jnstr. cap. 3.
although the Pope would, yet can he not dispense in this point.

Finally, Father Parsons closes up all with a Parsons ^f Mitigation cap. 2.
nu. 5. Monarchom. part. 2. tit. 3.
clear conclusion, for both parties: we agree with the Protestants in this,
that there can be no agreement betwixt us and them in Religion. Where was then
the honesty of that Papist, who penning the Monarchomachia, has published to
the world, that it is a surmise raised by Boutefeus to nourish division: that
the Catholics are unsociable, or hold the Protestants as Heretics and
Excommunicate. The premises may return this shameful imputation, that the
Antipathie is theirs: and that Bellarmine, Parsons, Dowley, and the rest of the
Romish Rabble, are those Boutefeus, and nourishers of Division. 1. Bou^her in
Approbat. calce libri.
Nay his own friend, in his own book, does tell him in Latin, that he does
grossly lie in English. I do, says he, approve this book because it does
discover, quam perniciosa fuerit Anglicana professio Haeresis, that is, how
pernicious an Heresy is the English Religion. By these, even by this
assertion, ye see how the Romists are resolved for Reconciliation.

Lastly, the Composition, Being and Entitie of the Popedom, is their unlawful
gain. The rents of their Church have four fountains. One is temporal, the
revenew of the Ecclesiastical estate. The other spiritual, Indulgences,
Dispensations, and Collations of Benefices. Now a true Reconciliation does
imply a reformation of two, if not of three of these: that is, a nullity of the
Papacy. For without these Elements of the Papal dignity, such a thing as a
Pope, or a Cardinal cannot subsist in rerum natura. Sensible of this truth, ^
as Pope Adrian 6, when he complained Trent. Hist. lib. 1.
to his familiar friends, that he himself desired, and endeavored a
reformation in the Court of Rome, but he himself was not able to perform it.
Whence that word also Morn. Mist. Progres. 62.
galled the Fathers of the Council of Constance, which escaped from Sigismund
the Emperor: who, to some that said Reformation should be begun a minoritis,
with (the Friars) the meaner sort, answered, yea rather a majoritis with the
greatest, meaning the Pope and Cardinals; which Reformation, moderate
Cassander modestly imploring, was coursed for his labor, by a laborious
treatise composed by Ioh. a Lovanio, who is also seconded by Bellarmine in his
book de Laicis, cap. 19. Like the shadow in the Dial of Ahaz, it will be a
miracle, if the Pope and Papists, ever go back from any of their profitable
and pompous corruptions. Consider we then, the grossness of their Errors,
the obstinatenesse of their resolutions, and the neerenesse of their usurped
gain: and we cannot but conclude, that if these Reconcilers were the wisest
under heaven, although they should live to the worlds end, yet would they be
brought to their wits end, before they could come to their works end, to
compass a Reconciliation, betwixt the Church of Rome, and the Church Reformed.

I will seal up all with the judgment of The form of Prayer at the Fast,
1628.
our Church of England. The Church of Rome are Idol-worshippers, vilifiers of
Gods sacred Oracles, Innovators and forgers of new Faiths, Corrupters of Gods
sacraments, Polluters of his holy worship, abandoners of the Catholic Church,
and Antichristian Tyrans! perfebrim. who can dream of a Reconciliation?

We see then, this pretended Reconciliation, is a mere notion of the Brain,
the atchieving whereof is impossible. What is now our duty? 1, we must preach
painfully and conscionably, that the breath of the Lords mouth may by little
and little consume the man of sin: that some Papists may be reconciled,
though the Reconciliation of Popery be plainly impossible. 2, We and ye also,
must pray to God, for all Christians: but especially for our gracious King,
that he may persevere in that Hereditarie resolution of his religious Father,
who in his answer to the petition of the Parliament touching Recusants, April
23. 1624, professed his Bishop of Meth to a lesuite Epist. Dedic.
most sincere integrity in these words; My Lords, if I knew any way better way
than other to hinder the growth of Popery, I would take it: and he cannot be an
honest man, who knowing as I do, and being persuaded as I am, would do
otherwise. Next we must pray for our seduced Countrymen, that it may please
God, to open their eyes, that at length they may see the strange Tyranny,
which as yet they feel not. 3, We must all add our Piety, that we do not
contradict the Papists of perverseness, because Papisticall, but because
Heretical. And withal 4, we must embrace a Christian prudence and policy:
to discry and decline one strange engine, to move the Mystery of iniquity:
which is pretended Reconciliation. Vlphila a Theodoret. 4, 37.
Bishop of the Goths, did sometime ensnare the credulous and ignorant people:
assuring them, that the differences betwixt the Catholics, and the Arrians did
consist rather in the form of words, than in the substance of matter. I doubt
not but we have English Jesuits, who can equal that Gothian Bishop, in
blanching Papisme, as he did Arianisme, and to ensnare credulous ignorants,
with a pretended Reconciliation. Understanding professors I fearenot: if these
Reconcilers come to them, as the Adversaries of Judah, and Benjamin came to
Zerubbabel Ezra 4. 2. saying, Let us build with you, for we seek your God as
ye do: They will answer them, as Zerubbabel did those adversaries, Ezra 4. 3.
You have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our God, but we our
selves together will build unto our God of Israel. And we may justly suspect
these Reconcilers, to be the Agents of Antichrist. They would reconcile
publicly, as their phrase is, that their Priests reconcile privately: that is,
they would draw men to be Papists, not the Papists to Reform any point of
their errors. I fear they would reconcile us and the Papists, as Parsons did
reconcile the English Scholars and the Jesuits at Rome: under the pretense of
Reconciliation to tie us, and to leave them at liberty. And as the Popes own
phrase is, that these Reconciliatory Doctrines Paul 3* Trent. Hist. lib. 3.
are not to unite both parties, but to curb the Protestants. This is a potent
subtletie, after the working of Satan, and it concerns us to consider it.

To conclude, since Reconciliation is impossible: and we can have in hope no
Peace from Rome. Since we cannot have That peace, let us seek another peace.
Let us labor to have peace with our God, to have peace with our Church, to
have peace with our neighbors, and to have peace with our selves in our own
souls and Consciences. This were a blessed Reconciliation. Blessed are such
Peacemakers. Now the God of Peace grant, that this blessed Peace may dwell in
all this Kingdom, in all this City, in all this Congregation; Even in all our
Houses, Souls, and Friends: From this time forth, for Evermore, Amen.

I will make the End of the ninth Chapter of Matthew, to be the End of this
Sermon, and the end of this Term: (...). We Ministers are Laborers,
Harvest-men, Husbandmen. I remember once when I stood hearing where you do:
the learned Lecturer, who stood speaking where I do: used this comparison.
That like the poor Country Husbandman, now he had sown his Corn, he must
home, and labor for more. I hope I may use the samephrase, for I am sure I
have the same cause, and more also.

We are both Husbandmen: but in a different degree. He was a Seedsman: and I
a Thrasher. The Seedsman when by filling the furrows, he has emptied his
seed-code: instantly he goes to the Tilths end, and finds whole sackes of
cleansed Corn, which he had prepared beforehand to furnish his Task. But
the Thrasher must back to his Barn, and with many a tugging stroke, labor
out a supply to his want. He was that Seedsman, God be blessed, he had brave
store, prepared before hand. But I am that Thrasher as the Kentish phrase is, a
Tasker. I must to my Task, to my Fail, and take some pains for my seedcorne.
But if his humble ability will stoop so low, as to take up that lowly
comparison, and call himself a Thrasher: then are we both Thrashers also, but
still in a different degree. I have heard that in Africa, they thrash with
great facility, beating out their Corn, only with the tread of a foot. But we
know that in England (the Husk being more tough) they force it out with the
Flaile, and with great pain and violence. He was that Affricane Thrasher, he
labored for his corn, but with admirable facility. But I am an English man,
and must thrash it out, with sweat and pains, and notable difficulty. I being
then a Labourer, like an Husbandman, like a Thrasher, as -- -- more than he
was: I will be bold to speak as he did.

Now I have spent my store, I am going to labor to provide more seed, to shed
into the fallow grounds of your hearts. Now he that ministers seed to the
Sower: both minister bread, for your food: and multiply your seed sown: and
increase the fruits of your righteousness, Amen.

SERMON XIX.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 9, 10. The Doctrine of Devils.
The Doctrine of Devils. The Church of Rome teaches the Doctrine of Devils.
Popish forbidding Marriage. Popish forbidding meats.

IN Judges 14. 8. we read, Sampson going from his fathers house, he slew a
Lion. But, post aliquot dies, the text says, that after a few days, he
returning and turning aside, to take a second view of his work, he found
favum mellis, some honey in the carcass of the Lion. Whereof he took and sed
himself, his Father, and his Family. So, when I last left this place, ye
thought, and indeed I thought that I had absolved this Text, having spoken
something of all the parts thereof. But being to return ((...)) I have taken a
second serious review thereof, and therein have I sound favum mellis, some
honey, some farther observations not altogether distasteful to an in ^ifferent
attention. Of this I have taken to feed my self, and you my Fathers and
Brethren, and the family of the saithfull, even this whole congregation. And I
pray, and hope this Sermon to be not only like Sampsons Honey, found at a
second review: but moreover like Ionathans Honey, 1 Samuel 14. 29. Your eyes may
be inlight ened, if you will taste but a little of this Honey. Now, to quick
on your attention, I have but one motive. I shall set before your eyes the
truth of the Lord! Lord open all our eyes, to see this truth for evermore.

Ye remember the Sum of this Text: It is the fourth of the five points
concerning Antichrist: Antichrist confirmed. Confirmed by two means: the
means Principal, whose coming is after the working of Satan: The means
Isntrumental, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness. The isntrumental means are of two
sorts, Miracles, signs and lying wonders: and Oracles, in all power -- and
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness. The principal means contains two
things, his Person, Satan: and his Potencie, after the working of Satan, in all
power. The Principal means, is the point on which I have fastened my
Principal Review: from whence I have framed this Syllogism.

Those who teach the Doctrine of Devils, mentioned, 1 Timothy 4. 1. it is
probable that they confirm Antichrist, after the powerful working of Satan,
as it is in this 2 These. 2. 9.

But the Church of Rome does teach the doctrine of Devils mentioned, 1 Timothy 4.
1.

Therefore, it is probable that the Church of Rome does confirm Antichrist,
after the powerful working of Satan, as it is in this, 2 These. 2. 9.

The Major or first proposition is avouched by the exact harmony betwixt the
phrases in these two Scriptures, here (...), the working of Satan: there (...),
the Doctrine of Devils. Here (...) v. 11. strong delusion: there (...)
seducing or deluding spirits, (...), voces convertibiles, phrases of the same
signification, concurring prophecy in this sense, That Satan, and his spirits
shall set men on work, powerfully to persuade Antichristian errors, here
called the deceit of Satan, or the doctrine of Devils. But that the Church of
Rome does so, this is the Minor, which I must make good by my Sermon, and
discourse following; Thus I discourse:

Those who forbid meats and marriage, do teach the doctrine of devils: this is
the Apostles Proposition, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2.

But the Church of Rome does forbid meats and marriage: this is the Protestants
Assumption.

Ergo, (I would wish the Papists to deny the Conclusion) Therefore the Church
of Rome does teach the doctrine of Devils.

Before I proceed I must clear the way of two rubbes. One whereof is cast in
by the hand of Curiosity, and Popery does oppose the other impediment. Those
cavil against the Proposition, these at the Exposition: the one except against
our Preachers, the other against our Apostle, both against God. But with Gods
grace, I will vindicate both the truth, and our selves against both of them.

Forbidding Meats, and marriage.] The quirks of some curious brains, quarrel
at this Severity. Are these slight inhibitio^s (say they) so heinous crimes, as
to merit such a doom: that the Doctrine should be damned for Diabolical and
Antichristian? and the Doctors for Hypocrites, Apostates, and seared
Consciences, set on work, by the powerful working of Satan? Only for
forbidding meats and Marriage.

I answer, this is a sin unchristian and Antichristian, in an high nature:
being indeed a threefold Luciferian usurpation: both upon the Creator, and also
upon the Creature, 2 ways: upon the Creatures used, and the Creatures using.
1, All Creatures are pronounced Good, from the Creation of God, 1 Timothy 4. 4.
and the work of Marriage good, from the Institution of God, Heb. 13. 4.
Therefore to restrain, what God does permit, is from Satan, the doctrine of
Devils. Next, the Creatures using meat and marriage, are men: on whom, these
usurp, interdicting them by a Law, from things that are lawful. So,
dominiering over their Consciences, according to one exposition, and a true
exposition: this is to sit in the Temple of God, as God; the pitch of the pride
of Antichrist.

Thirdly, they urge this as the worship of God, an audacious intrusion upon God
himself, who abominateth (...), all willworship and inventions of men, Colos.
2. 13. And these are causes sufficient to give a name answerable to the crime:
that these impious inhibitions are doctrina Daemoniorum, the doctrine of
Devils, and the very badge of Antichrist.

The Papists do approve the position, that to forbid meats and marriage is the
doctrine of Devils: but they decline the accusing of themselves, by the
appeaching of others. This prophecy say they, was of old time accomplished in
the old heretics, in the Encratitae, Tatiani, Manichies, and others of like
sort. Therefore the Church of Rome is guiltless of this imputation. I answer
to these also. Josephus Josephus lib. 2. cap. 3.
reports that certain Ruffians, who had committed a murder: but in show
they seemed the most diligent to search out the murderers that thereby they
themselves might escape unsuspected. So the Romanists have raised a Cry against
the Encratitae, Tatiani, Manichies, and other old heretics, for teaching the
doctrine of Devils: that they themselves might go unsuspected of that
Doctrine. But the truth is, they fall under the same accusation. I entreat
therefore any understanding Papist to look both forward and backward: and so
shall they easily see the unsoundnesse of their answer.

First, for the Heretics which have been before them; they may use the same
answer: If the Papists may say, the Prophecy of the doctrine of Devils is
accomplished, in the Manichies: and therefore Saint Paul does not prophecy of
them. The Manichies may likewise say, this Prophecy is accomplished in the
Tatiani, and therefore Saint Paul does not prophecy of them: and the Tatiani
may also say, it was accomplished in the Encratitae, and therefore Saint Paul
does not speak of them. The same answer which is proposed for the Papists,
does justify the Manichies and the Tatiani. And therefore it is probable, that
it is a just answer, for neither of them.

Again, for their own pretended Antichrist, which they themselves feign,
shall come in the Evening of the world, and muffled with the veil of Chastity.
Simulavit se non esse in concupiscent ijs foeminarum, he shall faigne that he
does not regard the desire of women, says Sanders. Sanderus De mon. 10.
Simulabit castitatem, he shall saigne chastity, says Pererius: and they
quote for the Pererius in Dan. lib. 14.
confirmation thereof, Dan. 11. 37. and Saint Jerome on Dan. 11. 37. Now, their
own answer puts an un-answerable argument into his mouth. If they shall
say, that they do fear him to be Antichrist, because of this one note amongst
many: Simulabit se non esse n concupiscent ijs foeminarum, because he does
faigne himself to have no regard of women, as Daniel did foretell: or quia
docet doctrinam Daemoniorum, because he shall teach the Doctrine of Devils,
forbidding Meats, and Marriage, according to the prophecy of Saint Paul. May
he not cry out, that they do him notable injury, to Brand him with the
Doctrine of Devils, (although he do forbid Meats and Marriage) because the
prophecy is already fulfilled, in the Encratitae, Tatiam, and the Manichies?

To this we may add: the Manichies did impose this double Abstinence, both
from Meats and Marriage, in the same manner, that the Papists do at this day.
Augustine makes August. de Morib. Manich l b. 2 c. 14.
mention of the Fast of the Manichies in his second book which he composed
concerning the manners of the Manichies. A Manichie says he) Nil gustans
Carnium, nil Vini, will touch no Flesh, and taste no Wine (wherein the Papist
fall short of their Fast) exquisitas, and peregrinas fruges, multis firculis
variatas, and largo pepere aspersas, l. benter assumit: but he will have
Variety of Dainty Dishes spiced, and of the farthest fetched finest fruit:
Bibit aut mulsum, aut Caraenum passum, and nonnullorum pomorum expressos
succos; Vini specie satis imitantes, and sua vitate vincentes: and bibit, non
quantum sitit, sed quantum libet: and they drink their skins full, of (a kind
of) Sider, Peary, and Methegline, no way inferior to Wine. For the second sort
of Abstinence: the same Author says, in the same book, Hic non dubito vos
esse clamaturos Aug. de Morib. Manic. l. ^. c. 18.
invdiamque facturos: here I make no question says he, but you will exclaim;
Castitate^ perfectam vos vehementer co^mendare, non tamen nuptias prohibere:
that you do indeed extraordinarily commend Chastity, but that notwithstanding
you do not forbid Marriage, because your professors, of whom there are two
sorts (not unlike the Ecclesiastikes, and Seculars) ducere ac nubere vxores non
prohibentur: their common professors (whom they call Auditors) are permitted
to marry. If we knew not the Title of this Treatise, we should take this to be
the Apology of the Papists, and not of the Manichies. Tam been conueniunt: the
same hand must clear the Leopard, which does blanch the Ethiopian. And the
same pen must plead for the Manichies, which does persuade that the Papists
do not teach Doctrinam Daemoniorum, the Doctrine of Devils.

The truth is absolutely declared by Calvine on this place. Paulus no^ de
Persona hic agit, de Re-ipsa: that is, this prophecy of Saint Paul, does not
speak of the Person, but of the Action. So, that if there were an hundred
several Sects, yet they all concur in this one Point, to Teach the Doctrine
of Devils: if they all forbid Meats, and Marriage. I say, he does prophecy
of all such generally: but of the Papists principally. And this appears unto
me from these four reasons. First from the adversative particle, (...), Now
the Spirit speaks, etc. alluding to the precedent chapter, 1 Timothy 3. 2 and
12. Bishops and Deacons have Wives, (...), 1 Timothy 4. 1 and 2. But there will
come those who shall forbid Bishops and Deacons, yea all the Clergy to marry.
Me thinks he does as it were point at the Church of Rome. Secondly, the
phrase of Time does exactly fit our Time, and free the old time, from
accomplishing this prophecy: (...), in the later Times: but the old
Heretics, the Encratitae, Tatiani, and the Manichies were, in the Former
Times: their feined Antichrist (as they say) must be in the Latest Times:
only the Papists are in the Latter Times. Therefore only the Papist have
fulfilled this prophecy. Thirdly, the word of propriety in the second verse,
(...), they shall injoyne this inhibition in Hypocrisy, seems to be a badge
of distinction to the Pope only. The old haeresie was, that Rhemists in 1 Timothy
4. 1.
Meats were unclean, and that the very Act of Marriage was of Satan, say the
Rhemists. These spoke not Lies in Hypocrisy, but in open blasphemy. But under
the pretense of Holiness, Religion, Chastity, and Purity, to forbid Meats,
and Marriage: these are they of whom the Spirit speaks expressly, that they
teach the Doctrine of Devils. And this is proper to the Papists only. Finally,
the word of Authority Verse 3. Prohibentes, forbidding, does constitute the
fourth difference, unto the Doctors of Rome, that They teach the Doctrine of
Devils. Zanch. de Spons. cap. 1.
For he does not say simply Docentes, those that Teach, but Prohibentes, they
which forbid Meats and Marriage, that is, by way of Authority. Saint Paul
therefore, does not only, nor principally speak of the Old Heretics, who did
condemn and preach against Meats and Marriage, but they had no authority to
forbid. Never any but the Church of Rome, made a Law, never any made such a
Law, against Meat and Marriage. Therefore, never any but the Church of Rome,
has accomplished this Prophecy. On these plain evidiences, I will be bold to
speak plain English: a Spade, is a Spade: and the Latin Church imposing a
Law forbidding Meats and Marriage, does Teach the Doctrine of Devils. And those
Doctors who do maintain it, do it through the working of Satan, in all
power of Deceiveablenesse of Unrighteousness. This objection is best Abbot. de
Ant. cap. 12.
enforced against the Papists by our worthy Bishop of Sarisbury. Wherein I
desiring to give to the Papists, what I desire to receive from the Papists, to
hear both sides, before either be censured, I sought satisfaction from their
learned writers, but especially from Eudaemon, who undertook to confute our
Bishop in three books. In all which (as I remember from my first reading, or
sinde by my second review of them,) he wisely silenced this point, and spoke
not one word thereof. It may be, he did presage that treatise ominous, that his
name should have been translated from Eudaemon to Cacodemon, if he had
Defended this Doctrine of Devils. Since therefore this argument was declined by
this papist, and satisfied by no papist: it made me confident to conclude,
that Many Heretics have taught the doctrine of Devils, but the Church of Rome
surmounteth them all.

Thus I have delivered this History, how this Doctrine of Devils is practiced
in the Church of Rome. Now I must show you the Mystery, how the two branches
thereof, forbidding Meats and Marriage, are the Sinews of Antichrist, and the
maine Engine of the Mystery of Iniquity. Concerning which let us consider two
things: the means by which, and the motive for which, they so eagerly pursue
this double inhibition, here termed the Doctrine of Devils. First for marrying:
the means to countenance the forbidding thereof, is that which in my Text is
termed the Deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, that is, a wonderful seeming
godliness. Thus Bellarmine Bellarm de Monar^h* cap. 34. Mason. de Min^st^. 2.
8. Suarez Apolog 5. cap. 18. nu. 22.
does so far extol Virginity, that he styles the Marraige of Clerks,
Sacr^ledge: whom our Champnie also follows in the like phrase, Sacrilegium,
Ministers Marriage is Sacrilegious says he, and Suarez calls Continentiam
statum perfectiorem, a more Perfect Estate of life than Marriage. Hence in the
time, and by the doctrine of Hildebrand, the Annals of Aventine witness, that
the people in some places trod under foot the Hosts, which were consecrated by
married Priests. And they daily upbraid us with the Angelical continence of
their Clergy, as if our Ministers were incontinent, and Carnal, because they
marry, I say, Roma amor est -- Nolo dicere plura, scio: I say no more. But this
intrusion of forced Continence, has insinuated it self into the Church, in as
Mystical a manner, as any point of Popery, that one of the Primacy only
excepted. Our learned Bishop of Sarisbury, relates Abbot. de Antich. cap. 1.
the Original thereof. In the very age of the Apostles, a certain Asian
Minister, set forth a book, the title hereof was, Periodus Pauli and Teclae,
The progress of Saint Paul and Teclae: In which he saigned, that a noble
Gentlewomen called Tecla, was so affected with a Sermon, preached by Saint Paul
at Iconium, concerning Virginity: that she renounced Marriage, being
Contracted, and Vowed to remain a Virgin. For which she was apprehended, and
condemned to Dye: but neither had the Fire power to burn her, nor the wild
beasts to tear her: and thereupon she became Saint Paul's Companion in his
Pilgrimage. But the Author being afterward convented before, and convicted by
Saint John, confessed that he had forged this story, out of his affection to
Saint Paul: For which he was turned out of the Ministry, and his book
condemned. Notwithstanding, this Legend was afterward revived again, by some
of the Ancient Fathers: which opened a fair entrance, to this soul
Tyrannical intrusion.

Notwithstanding, this was yet but the Praising of Single Life: after that it
was Persuaded, by Siricius Bishop of Rome, about the year 300. after him about
the year ^60. it was urged (and the Marriage of Priests pronounced M^^^. Mist.
Opp^s. 37.
to be Heresy) by Pope John 13, who was so much swayed by that famous Strumpet
Theodora. But it was finally imposed by Hildebrand, or Pope Gregory 7. anno
1074. Now this Gregory 7. was the worst of all the Popes: and it may be this
was the worst of all his actions: although his actions in this nature, were
Morn Mist. Oppos. 39.
innumerable, and incomparable. To instance in that superlative wretchedness:
at the same time he exiled married Ministers from their Ministry, and admitted
Fornicators, Adulterous, and Incestuous Priests to serve at the Altar. Single
life, I acknowledge it Excellent: most excellent in the Clergy, if they all had
that Gift of Continence, which God has given to Some, and but to Some. Such I
suppose might give more time to their Studies, more relief to their poor*
Neighbors, and more Devotion to their God. Although (God be blessed) our
Married Clergy, cannot be much touched, for their defect in any of these
particulars.

But considering that Ministers are Men: to enforce them by a Law unto Single
life: is little less then frenzy in the Inferiors, and Tyranny in the
Superiors. There is a Disease Justin. Hist. l. 36.
(which Galene never dreamed of) mentioned by Saint Paul 1 Corinthians. 7, 9, and
experienced by Saint Hierome in his Epistle to Eustochium, It is better to
marry, then to burn, said Saint Paul: and Saint Hierome says, that he knew
some, who could not drive out the Devil by Hieron. ad Eust.
fasting and prayer: Pallebant ora jejuniis, and men's desiderijs aestuabant in
frigido corpore: Their countenances were wanne with Fasting, and yet their
thoughts burn through Concupiscence in a cold body. The Disease then is
Burning, and the medicine marrying. Now for one infected with that Disease, to
vow not to marry, is as if a sick man should swear to take no Physic, which
it may be in some would be censured for Phrenensie, at the least for folly.
Next, the Lording Superiors, who shall enforce this restraint by Law: do put
a sunder those whom God has joined together, Matthew. 19. 6. which is the act of
Antichrist, through the working of Satan, here called Doctrina Daemoniorum, the
doctrine of the Devils.

The means are thus Mystical, the motives no less mavelous: powerfully
persuasive unto single life. There are two Pillars of the Papasie, both built
on this one ground: the greatness and richness thereof, are the issue of this
inhibition, of their Clergy to marry. It was Timons apophthegme: duo esse
maloru^ elementa, (...), that the concupiscence of Greatness, and Richness,
were the two Elements, causes, or principles of wickedness. I am sure that
Forbidding of Priests marriage is the element and aliment of these: and these
of the Papacy.

1. Hundreds and thousands: yea hundred thousands of people throughout
Christendom, are incorporated into the Pope, their Father, because the Pope
forbids them to have Wives and Children. Children are Pignora, Pledges: both
Domestical, of love, betwixt the Husband and the Wife: and also Political of
Loyalty from the Subject, to their Sovereign. This bond, inhibition of
marriage has Cancelled. And therefore so many, so many thousands, in every
Kingdom, acknowledge themselves obliged to none, but to the Pope. And which is
yet more mavelous, miraculous: whereas, all other Parents multiply by
marriage: their Art (as it were in despite of Nature) has begotten many
Children, to the Father of Rome, by inhibition of marriage. And the Effect
thereof: want of Legitimate Children, makes them the more firm to the Pope,
and the more fierce against his enemies. As Hellanicus attempted that famous
conspiracy, against Aristotimus, Justin. hist. l. 26.
Prince of Epyrus, Quia Senex and liberis orbus: ut qui nec aetatis, nec pignor
is respectu timeret. Because he was old, and had no Children, so that neither
respect of his Life, nor of the pledges of his posterity could daunt him. Thus
inhibiting of Marriage ingendreth a multitude of Subjects, and Servants to the
Pope. This is his Greatness, one P^ller of the Papacy.

2. Their Riches also are increased, (as in all Mysteries) by an (...), and
(...), an inversion of ordinary actions. Ordinarily the Parents, are made
Tenants for life, that the Children may be assured of their Inheritance. Here
by an extraordinary skill, the Children are made Tenants for Life, that the
Father may be assured of the Inheritance. That the Riches of Rome may not be
alienated, the Romish Clergy are forbidden Marriage: which may be a Cause
thereof. They know by experience, that every Nephew to the Pope, and other some
such Anomalons, and Anonimals, have gleaned something from the Sea of Rome.
Therefore the Natural Children, of so many Popish Churchmen, would carry away
Sheaves from that Church: which now is like the rich man's Barn, Luke 12. 18.
It is not great enough to receive their goods. But this they have prudently
prevented, by their Prohibition of Priests Marriage. Some other petty pretty
quillets accrue to the Papacy, by their Papal nuptial Inhibitions, even to
the Laity, also. Concerning them therefore, there are invented, and pretended
infinite obstacles: of affinity and consanguinite, of kindred Legal and
Spiritual, of times and seasons, Lent and Ember, etc. All which rubs must be
removed out of the way, by the hand of the Popes Indulgence: out of which their
Indulgent Father, sucketh no small advantage. Thus the Forbidding of marriage,
is set on work by Mammon and Belial: for their Riches and Greatness. Great
cause therefore have I to call it Operatio Satanae, and Doctrina Daemoniorum,
The working of Satan, and the Doctrine of Devils.

Concerning their Fasting, they have the same Means, and Motives for that
also. For Fasting (say they) we have Moses, Elias, John, and Jesus himself,
our Captains: and so long as we are Militant, all Christians must fight under
their Banner, trained up in the School of that Discipline. It is true: the
Practice of Fasting, we acknowledge from these precedents: but the enforcing
thereof, came not from their examples. Saint Paul after them, Romans 13. 4.
says: Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him
that eats not, judge him that eats. And Saint Aug. Ep. 86. Casulano.
Augustine after him, does urge and allege (the same (...), Christian mutual
moderation) the same sentence in the same words, though in another language,
Qui manducat, non manducantem non spernet: and qui non manducat, ma^ducantem ne
judicet. That impious imperious interdiction, came not from our Captain: but
from our Adversary. It is Doctrina Daemoniorum, the Doctrine of Devils.

Moved to this notwithstanding is the Church of Rome, both by their gain and
Glory. All Flesh and such like being inhibited: some people will prevaricate;
either of infirmity or curiosity: then Confession or Absolution must succeed.
Whereby I conceive their Church-Coffers will not be much the emptier. But their
Glory is much enlarged by this pretense of Fasting. Iejuniorum sudoribus laus
importuna ungit, Cyp. de Christi Iejunio.
pungit, said Saint Cyprian: in a sense suitable to this phrase, that Papists
vaunt their Fasting, as a grace to them, and disgrace to the Protestants,
Vrbicus Ventricolas tanquam magnus Iejunator Aug. Epist. 86. C^sula^o.
accusat. Thus Saint Augustine spoke of him, and we of them: their empty
stomachs preach us to be Belly-Gods. And they make it a Royard Po^^il. in dic
(...).
threefold branch of their mortification: Quod peccamus in Deum, per Orationem:
quod in Proximum, per Eleemosynam: and quod in Nos ipsos per jejunium
emendetur. That is, what offense we commit against God, we must correct by
Prayer: if we wrong Man, we must revoke it by Alms: and if we stray from our
own temperance, or Innocence, we must recall our souls by fasting: Let them
practice, persuade, and preach such a fasting: and we will commend it and them
also. But their Supposition, and Imposition, that they suppose this fasting as
meritorious, in the sight of God: and impose it as necessary on the Conscience
of man, by a Law, and by a Law Occumenicall. This is the Tyranny of him that is
(...), Lawless. It is the Act of the Man of Sin, through the working of
Satan: to spread abroad Doctrinam Daemoniorom, the doctrine of Devils.

Furthermore that this mystery, may appear yet more mystical: they know that
some tender feet, would kick against these pricks, that wise religion has
therefore transubstantiated, these thorns, into Roses. To such as are
altogether not so austere, they frame their fasting to be like Jacobs hands,
Ge^. 27. 22. rough indeed in the outside and appearance: but smooth enough,
when you come to touch them in the inside, by experience. Great, and rich
persons, who are dainty, and have plenty: to them though they forbid esum
carnium, and cibi cujuslibet qui carne Royard. Po^^il. in die Ciner. Aug. de
Mor. Man. c. 14.
originem sementinam trahit, (though they forbid them flesh, and white-meates)
yet they provide for them, fruges varietas, (as Saint Augustine says the
Manichies did) Variety of fruit. And more then the Manichies did: not only
mulsum, a kind of Bastard Wine, made of Honey: but merum ipsum, the purest
Wine, and quintessence of the Grapes; yea, after the manner of the Montanists,
they allow them (...), and more also, dried Suckets, Candied Conserves,
Preserves, and sundry such like curiosities: yea, (...), they give them leave
to feed on the exquisitest fish, fish being the exquisitest of all food: food
being called (...), for the daintiness thereof: and Apicius, the grand
Glutton, was called Opsophagus, the Fish-eater. I conceive therefore, that
those which have liberty to satiate themselves with the daintiest drink, and
delicatest diet, that their appetite can long after; Though they be inhibited
from flesh, for a season; yet is there no fear they will fall into David's
consumption, Psalm 109. 24. that their Knees should wax weak with fasting,
or their flesh be dried up for want of fatness. But that any politic
religion should sit their most austere fasting, to the most dainty disposition,
and yet cry down their Adversaries, with the show of discipline and devotion!
I take this to be a mystery: the deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness: and
indeed doc^rinam Daemoniorum, the cunning doctrine of devils.

To conclude: conclude not notwithstanding, that my discourse does patronize
Liberty and licentiousness: or that I plead against Fashing and Chastity.

Of fasting, I use that phrase of Danaeus: Danaeus in 1 Timothy 4.
Eorum usus frequens fuit in Ecclesia, atque utinam inter nos esset
frequentior. Fasting, has been always used in the Church of Christ: and
would Christ it were more usual in the Church of England.

Concerning Chastity, it comes of (...), orno, to adorn: I confess it to be
an Ornament to all: Excellent to the married, superexcellent to the Single.
Withal I wish that their Clergy were adorned with it, as truly in
Virginity, as our Clergy is in Matrimony.

But this I must pronounce with Ignatius. Whosoever does call (...), Ignatius
epist. 6. ad Philadelph.
that is, marriage impure, or meats impious; (...): such an one is wrought by
the Devil, to fall from the faith. Or yet more plainly with Saint Paul:
Whosoever does prohibere, forbid (that is, by a Law restrain) meats, and
marriage, such do teach the doctrine of Devils. Now how I should free these
Doctrines, Devils, Satan, and Apostafie from the Church of Rome; This is that,
which surpasses my understanding.

Howbeit there are those that will plead for Baal. Yea Legion: even many will
defend this doctrine of Devils. And so eagerly: that if God should expostulate
with them from Heaven, Do you well to defend this Doctrine? I fear that
phrase should be returned of Jonah 4. 9. We do well to defend it even to the
death. But I must oppose them, as Abijah did Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 13. 11. We keep
the charge of the Lord our God, but ye have forsaken him. And behold God
himself is with us, for our Captains, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets
cry Alarm against you. O Children of Israel, fight not against the Lord God of
your fathers, for you shall not prosper. I hope I may end with this indifferent
Invocation: One side must Err. Therefore the Lord of truth preserve the
Church of England from the Doctrine of Devils.

SERMON XX.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 10, 11, 12. In them that perish.
All who are deceived by Antichrist are damned. Whether all Papists be damned.
Of Apostates to Popery.

THus far has the grace of our GOD, furnished my feeble meditations, whereby
I have finished four of the five parts proposed to be handled in this point
of Antichrist. Ye have heard him described in the 3, and 4 verses: Revealed in
the 5, 6, 7. Destroyed in the 8. Confirmed in the 9. and part of the 10. The
remnant is how, and by whom he is received: by a rout of Reprobates here
displayed in my Text. Concerning whom we are to consider their Persons, Them
that perish, in the tenth verse, and their Properties, which are twofold,
Active, and Passive. Their Active properties were either negative in the 10
verse, They received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: or
affirmative in the 12, They had pleasure in unrighteousness. Their Passive
properties, are their Punishments, to wit, internal in the eleventh verse,
Strong delusions to believe a lie: and Eternal in the last verse, which they
shall suffer at the last day, that they might be damned. I see land, but I must
wade yet more, before I can arrive to a full conclusion.

The Persons are here said to be, Them that perish: where Saint Paul gives
consolation, by way of anticipation. Fearful Christians might indeed say,
Shall there be indeed such a damning, and damned Caitive? A man exalting
himself above God? A man of sin, who shall infect others? a son of
Perdition, who shall destroy others? and draw them to the Devil, by the
Devil, by Mysteries, Miracles, Oracles, and all deceiveablenesse through the
working of Satan? Alas, alas, whither shall we fly from Antichrist? and the
Devil? from these dreadful and powerful adversaries? Comfort your selves
(says our Apostle) (...): Antichrist shall prevail, but it is In them that
Perish.

Those that are deceived by Antichrist shall be damned. Saint John speaks
plentifully, and Saint Paul plainly to this purpose. Take two testimonies from
each: Those who wonder at the Beast, are men whose names are not written in the
Book of life, Revel. 17. 8. Hence is that heavenly proclamation: Come out of
her my people that ye receive not of her plagues. Here it is said, Antichrist
shall prevail in them that perish, that they might be damned, as it follows
in the twelfth verse. Proofs are superfluous in this point, both parts
concurring in this proposition: They that are deceived by Antichrist, shall be
damned.

From hence may be propounded a double demand by way of inversion.

1. Whether none be deceived by Antichrist, but such as perish?

2. Whether all such do perish who are deceived by Antichrist? I answer to
the first: even Gods Children are deceived by Antichrist. For Revel. 18. 4.
their command to come out of Babylon, does imply that they were once in
Babylon, that is, deceived by Antichrist: yet not according to the two
dreadful degrees thereof, mentioned in my text, They received not the love of
the truth, inferring an obstinatenesse in their error: and took pleasure in
unrighteousness, implying a persisting in that obstinatenesse. The Elect are
not so deceived by Antichrist, that they adhere to Antichristian errors, with a
final obstinatenesse. To the second I say: All who are deceived by Antichrist,
according to the two premised properties, do perish: to wit, if they proceed
in their Antichristian errors obstinately, and finally. I will answer both, in
one proposition. The very lims of Antichrist, are a damned crew of desperate
Reprobates. Who (as Saint John says) are not written in the book of life: as
Saint Jude says, who are ordained to condemnation: and as Saint Paul says,
Who do perish, and shall be damned, because they take pleasure in
unrighteousness.

Here I must undertake an unpleasing task: unpleasing to the Papists,
unpleasing to some Protestants, and unpleasing to my self also. The Papists I
know will entertain this discourse, as the Jews did Saint Stevens rough
Sermon Act. 7. 54. it cutteth their hearts, and makes them to gnash their
teeth: it may be if their Hands were not tied, they would hale me out of the
City, and stone me for my labor. Some Protestants also will be somewhat
disaffected to this discourse: for -- Veritas odium parit, right Protestants
have many crooked adversaries. Finally, for my self: Brethren, my hearts
desire, and prayer for England is, that they may be saved. And I had rather a
thousandfold preach Gods mercies, then his judgments: and man's salvation, then
his damnation. But be it never so displeasing, to never so many, and never so
much: unto them, and unto my self: howsoever, as Ezekiel speaks, Ezekiel. 31.
17. Since God has made me a watchman, the word I hear from his mouth I must
give them warning of: I must say to the wicked, Thou shall surely dye. Hereby
liberabo animam meam, I shall deliver mine own soul: and would it might
please the Lord of heaven, that I might do the like for them also.

Whether all Papists be damned? I remember Hooker in Hab. 1. 4. Sect. 37.
a Christian Rule of charitable Hooker: it is a great deal meeter for us, to
have regard of our own estates, than curiously to sift out what is become of
other men. We may both blush at the check given to the curious, John 21. 22.
What is that to thee? and fear the censure on the censorious, Matthew. 7. 1.
Judge not, that you be not judged. And in my private judgment, I have always
held, that curiousness and rashness of judging others, have been things
least befitting, and most indangering Christians. Yet in a public and
Charitable discourse, an evident Text, may cause even such a Theme to be
discussed. And in these dangerous times it is yet more expedient. If the Pit
be open I must show it to you, lest I be guilty of your downe-fall. And I
would be very sorry at the day of judgment, to hear that phrase of Saint
Cyprian, heu Parentem sensimus parricidam, our Preacher betrayed us into the
hands of Antichrist, by his silence. If through my Silence, any of you should
embrace, or retain any damnable Errors: thereby I shall be culpable of your
damnation. Therefore in the fear of God, and love of man, I proceed to
determine this question, Whether all Papists be damned.

That all Papists be damned: some define it generally, and peremptorily. All
the souls which Helwis Mist. of ^^^^. page 12.
submit themselves to Antichrist, and so die, they perish to everlasting
destruction: though they do it ignorantly. These are the words of Helwis, the
Apostle of the Anabaptists. But this is the Anabaptisticall charity: they are
as charitable to us also. They say not only that all Papists, but that all
Christians are damned, except themselves. These know not what spirit they Luke
9. 55.
are of. We say, That we acknowledge that an honest ignorant Papists may be
saved, All Papists Answer to Fish^rs 3. Relation page ^8. Vsh^r de st^^n E^^^^^
^histiano. ^um c. 6. sect. 8. Down. in Less. part. 2. Them. 2. Sect. 5. Hooker
in Hab. sect 12. Povell. l. 1. ^. 34.
are damned some say: but we say in the phrase of Saint Jude, Have compassion
of some, and make a difference. We may observe a threefold difference amongst
Papists: we may distinguish them, in regard of the Time when they lived, in
regard of the Place whero they lived, and in regard of the Errors wherein they
lived.

First for the Time. What became of our Forefathers, dying before the
Reformation? This is a common head from whence they setch their Rhetorical
flourishes. Ergo perierunt Lessius de Ant. Demonstr. 2. Jesuit in the Path.
way, sect. 61.
omnes majores nostri, perierunt tot. animae Deo addict^ssimae, sapientia,
sanctitate vitae, and miraculorum gloria celeberrimae? So many millions? so
many of them being innocent, and virtuous: some that shed their blood for
Christ's sake: were they all hated of God? all damned? Oh impious, cruel, and
incredible assertion! Thus does an English Jesuit, almost translate the Latin
of their Lessius. I answer in the words of two of the fathers. Saint Cyrian
says thus: Si quis de antecessoribus nostris, vel ignoranter, vel simpliciter,
non observavit, Cypr. Epist. 63. Sect. 13.
and tenuit, quod nos Dominus facere docuit: potest simplicitati ejus, de
indulgentia Domini venia concedi. Nobis autem ignosci non poterit, qui nunc a
Domino instructi, and admoniti sumus. That is, If any of our Forefathers,
either out of ignorance or Simplicity, has not observed or practiced, what the
Lord commanded us to perform: the indulgence of Gods pardon may be vouchsafed
to their simplicity; but pardoned we cannot be, who are now taught and
instructed by the Lord. This spoke that Martyr, concerning but the alteration
of one of the elements in the Lords Supper: conceive how he would have coursed
such, if any in his days durst have taken away an element from the same
Sacrament. He who had Rodds for the Aquarians, would have found Scorpions for
the Papists. Next, what Saint Augustine spoke of the Aug. de vera Relig. cap. 4.
Platonikes, we may speak of our Ancestors, who lived in the former time of
Popish purblind superstition. Illi si reviviscerent quorum nominibus
gloriantur, and invenirent Ecclesias refertas, templaque deserta, -- dicerent
fortasse (si tales essent, quales fuisse memorantur) haec sunt quae nos populis
persuadere non ausi sumus, and eorum potius consuetudini cessimus, quam illos
in fidem nostram voluntatemque traduximus. If those men could return from the
dead, of whom the Papists do so much brag: when they should see our Churches
full, and theirs empty: peradventure those very men would say (if they were
such, as they are recorded to be) these are the things which we never durst
preach unto the people: but we did rather yield connivence to their
profession, then labor to convert them to our superstition. Thus certainly
would some of our Forefathers say if they were alive. They would not condemn
us, who are alive: We will not condemn them who are dead. We doubt not but
God was merciful Ho^ker in Hab. Sect. 9.
to save thousands of our forefathers, who lived in popish superstition: in as
much, as they sinned ignorantly.

For a more full satisfaction: our forefathers, who lived in the time of Popery,
before the Reformation; they lived indeed in a time of blindness, when the
blind did lead the blind: and it is to be feared that many fell into the Ditch.
But withal it may be hoped, that many also escaped, and were saved.

I ground this charitable and comfortable conclusion, on these three probable
premises. Many of our forefathers although they lived under the Pope; yet were
they not Popish, fundamentally, obstinately, nor finally.

1. Many were partakers of the error, who were not of the haeresie of the
Church of Rome. Many did not hold those opinions, which either directly, or
indirectly, overthrow the foundation of Christian Religion. I instance in one:
that ingens hiatus, Luke 16. 26. that great gulf betwixt the Papists and
Protestants. Acts 4. 12. Salvation is by no other: I say we hope, that there
were many who did not ascribe any part of their salvation to themselves, or to
any other Creature, but to Christ alone. As Waldensis is said to observe, that
the point of merits was not known in England in the time of Henry the fifth:
and such we hope, in such a time, might find Mercy with our Savior, and be
saved.

2. Many also practiced Popery, but they were so far from obstinate rejecting
of the truth; that we may believe they would have received the truth, if it
had bin offered unto them, and if they had not been hindered by invincible
ignorance. Yea, we may conceive that some of them did groan under the
gossenesse of Popery. According to that which is said to be the common saying
of Dominicus Chalderine concerning the Mass; Let us Quarrels of Paulus 5.
Epist. De^ic.
(quoth he) go to our common Error. And even in our age, the learned Author
of that excellent History of Trent, generously vindicated the illustrious
Venetians, from the Empire of the perpetual Dictator of Rome. These
certainly, and many besides these did groan under the Yoke of Antichrist:
Although Gods wisdom did permit none in our fathers age, to take it from
their Necks: yet may we comfort our selves in that comfortable saying 2 Cor. 8.
12. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has,
and not according to that he has not. I say, and hope therefore, that many of
our Forefathers were saved.

To conclude this point in the words of Hooker in Hab. page 28.
profound acute Hooker. From the man that labors at the plough, to him that
sits in the Vaticane: to all the Partakers of Babylon: to our Fathers,
though they did but erroniously practice that which the guides did teach
heretically: to all without exception, plagues are due. The Pit is ordinarily
the end, as well of the guide, as of the guided in blindness. Again, those
who knowing heresy to be heresy, do notwithstanding in worldly respects,
make semblance of allowing that, which in heart and judgment they condemn: as
also they who maintain heresy heretically: obstinately holding it after
wholesome admonition; I make no doubt but that their condemnation without
actual repentance is inevitable. Yet what hinders, but that I may say, The
ignorance of many others, does make me hope, they did find mercy and were
saved? What hinders salvation but sin? Sins are not equal: and ignorance
though it does not make to be no sin; yet seeing it did make their sin to
be less, why should it not make our hope concerning their life to be greater?
Great hope therefore I have, that many of our Fathers were saved.

3. Many of them did not proceed in those points, and Popish errors finally.
As Pighius himself, is reported at his death to have disclaimed that damnable
opinion of Justification by works. Nay, we exclude no Papist, no not a Pope
from the possibility of salvation: if Antichrist himself should prostrate
himself, at the Feet of Christ, Christ would not spurn at him. The whole
succession of Persian Princes, Daniel resembles to a Bear, 7. 5. because of
their successive cruelty toward Gods people: But Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes,
and other particular persons, were not guilty of that general cruelty, but
favorers of the Church of God. So we say, that the whole succession of Popes,
for these thousand years, have been Antichristian persecutors of the Church:
yet amongst them there may be a Marcellus, Coelestine, and Adriane, who might
repent themselves, though not reclaim others, for Opposing Christ. Of whom,
that Caelestine did resign Platina in Caelest. 5. and Bon. 8.
the Papacy to save his soul. I affirm that in ipso vitae articulo, at what
time soever, GOD might call them out of Babylon, at the last hour. And we hope
that even then he gave our Fathers either indulgence for their errors, or
penitence of their errors: that even then, they might repent, and be saved.

There are many Scriptures to confirm us in this comfortable conclusion: Luke
12. 48. That servant which knows not his Lords will, shall be beaten with few
stripes, Act. 17. 30. The time of ignorance God winked at. Iam. 4. 17. To him
that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is a sin: and 1 Timothy 1.
13. Saint Paul confesses of himself, who was a blasphemer, and a Persecutor:
But I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.

I conclude therefore: many of our Fathers were the Children of Abraham, and
had they seen Popery, and Antichrist in their time, as we see them discovered
and displayed in our time, they would have detested the Tridentine and
Jesuitical assertions as much as we do. Whereupon I dare pronounce them, in
all Christian probability to be saved: through the abundant mercies of our
indulgent Savior.

Concerning the place, I may frame the same conclusions upon the same grounds:
but in a less measure. I may conclude, that at this day there may be some
appertaining to the Bosom of Abraham, who now live in the very bosom of
Antichrist: in Spain, Italy, in Civil and in Rome it self. For invincible
ignorance, may be an argument of invincible mercy: And where Antichrist is most
malicious, we may hope that Christ is most gracious. Possible it is that
salvation may break through the Inquisition it self.

I have read of many Protestants eve^ in Civil. And I have heard a Romish
Convert confess, that his Conversion was wrought in Rome it self. So far
will I be from condemning all that live under the Authority of Rome; that I
will rather hope, that that may be true of the Romans, which Saint Paul wrote
to the Romans 11. 4. That God has reserved to himself many thousands, who
did never bow their knees to Baal. Though the maine Bulk be Chafe, yet who
dare take Petilians part, to be Ventilabrum ar^ae Dominicae, and say there is
no Wheat amongst it? As some Philosophers say of the extracting of Gold, out of
other me^^^s* Difficultas non insert impossibilitatem: so say I in this cause,
though it be difficult, yet is it no^ impossible, that Christ should have some
servants under Antichrist: and that some Papists may be saved; even at this
day, in Spain, and Italy.

Concerning Popish errors, we must consider their kinds, and degrees. The
kinds of them are of two sorts: some are Capital, such as contradict the
Articles, or hinder the means of Faith: as Adoration of Images, Invocation of
Saints, Justification by works, inhibition of the Scriptures, etc. Other
Popish errors are less principal, which of their own nature do not destroy
any Article of faith, nor absolutely hinder our salvation, as Pilgrimages,
Penance, Vows, etc. Next, the degrees of them are threefold: some do command
those Popish errors, as the Pope and popish Councils: some do teach them, as
the Friars and Jesuits: others do only follow and believe them. Answerable
to which is that distinction of St. Aug. Haeretici and credentes haereticis,
there are erroneous Au^. de utilitate credendi cap. 1.
seducers, and erroneous se^uced. Now if my charity could frame a mathematical
abstraction: that there were a credulous Romish Catholic, led with the name of
Catholic, and with the show of Antiquity, who with an innocent though ignorant
devotion should follow the Pope, as those two hundred did Absolon, 2 Samuel 15.
11. in their simplicity: I should not despair of their salvation. But to
speak of Papists, as I fear most Papists are at this time, and in this land.
A Trent-Iesuited Papist, a complete Papist, refusing, hating, and persecuting
the truth offered; Such are certainly (...) those that perish. I know not how
to excuse them, and the Scripture shows no means how to save them.

Now follows the durus sermo: I come to that unpleasing conclusion:
concerning the salvation our English Papists. For the time, I have showed, that
of the old Papists we have great hope, that a great number were saved. For the
place I have showed also, that we have some small hope, that some small number
may be saved, even in Spain and Italy. But for our time, and our place, we
have hardly any hope, that hardly any English Papish can be saved. My reasons
are two, drawn from the two former heads, from the time when, and the place
where they live.

1. In old time, though the Papists held horrible errors, yet they professed
them at large, without any precise, particular, and personal submission, and
subscription. But now by the Counsel of Trent, they are imposed as Articles of
faith: and they subscribe that they believe them, and swear that they will
maintain them. This I take it, is the mark of Antichrist. And I fear all
English Papists, are such Papists.

2. In the next place, consider the Place. Here they live, where the truth is
taught: and not by Authority as in Italy, but by their own voluntary
refusal, they are debarred from the sound thereof. All Papists are
Antichr^stian. This is too much: and yet (it may be) not enough to pronounce
them damned. But our English Papists are Antichristian, according to the two
Characters of Damnation in my Text. First, as it is in the 10 verse, they do
not (...), they do not receive the truth offered unto them: they reject all
instruction, both public by preaching, and private by persuasion. Secondly, as
it follows in the twelfth verse, they do (...), take delight to remain in
their ignorance and errors. That I may conclude in the words of a Papist:
Haereticorum Ste^art. in 2* These. 2. 10.
qui obstinate nolunt veritatem inquirere, ignoratio sit culpab^lis, and
damnationi obnoxia: quia sic affecta est, ut si scire vel^^^, possent
debentque. that is, the ignorance of Heretics, who do obstinately refuse to
seek the truth, is culpable, and damnable: because it is of such a nature,
that if they would, they might, and ought to know the truth.

This is the best that I can say or hope, of the best of our English Papists:
but of the most and worst, I must say their estate is ^arre worse, and of them
my conclusion must be more peremptory.

Our English Iesuited Papisis, (who are indeed almost all our English Papists)
these are the limbs of Antichrist in an high nature. These hold the same
haeresies with the former, but far more arrogantly, and obstinately. To use
the words of one of their own Jesuits: Iungantur in unum, dies cum nocte,
tenebrae Apologista c* 3. page 119. C^sa^b. ad Front Duc* page 52.
cum luce, calidum cum frigido, sanitas cum morbo, vita cum morte: and erit tum
spes aliqua, posse in caput Iesuitae haeresin cad^re. That is, when it is
possible, for day and night, light and darkness,, cold and heat, health and
sickness, life and death to be united: then will there be some hope, that a
Jesuit, may be capable of heresy. Can a greater unerring prerogative be
assumed by an Apostle? by an Angel? yea by the truth it self, by Christ
Jesus himself? so arrogant and obstinate are the Jesuits in their heretical
assertions.

But here is not all: to these damnable presumptuous Haeresies, they add as
damned desperate positions of Morality. As their breaking of faith with
Haeretikes, denying to swear allegiance to their King, avouching the Popes
power to depose him, absolving of Oaths, and that devilish trick of
Equivocation: paradoxes rasing the foundations, and principles of Morality,
Christianity, and Humanity. And with these poisonous doctrines they infect
their followers, in all power, through the working of satan. Watson. Quod. 1.
Art. 7.
To use the words of a Papist: Some Romanists, (either of gross ignorance, or
wilful blinded affection) have said no less in effect, then that though they
knew they should be damned for it, yet would they for obedience sake, do
whatsoever the Jesuits should command them.

This is limen inserni: Their estate is damnable, Hooker in Hab. page ^6.
when (as profound Hooker speaks) heresy is thus heretically maintained, by
men obstinately holding it against wholesome instruction. Thus the truth does
extort from me this peremptory conclusion. I fear the estate of all English
Papists: But for a Iesuited English Papist (^or all that I can conceive) it is
impossible to be saved.

From hence you may take a view of that inheritance, which those purchase unto
themselves, who in these days of English Protestants, turn to be English
Papists. Nothing but this. Thereby they become the Limbs of Antichrist:
Children to him who is the Son of Perdition: servants to him who is servus
servorum, the slave of the Devil: the Devils Proselytes, men sure to perish,
and of undoubted damnation. But beloved I hope God has provided better things
for you. If therefore you be inveagled: as Demosthenes said, when he was
enticed to Lais, that beautiful but common Strumpet, (...), I will not buy
repentance at too dear a rate. So, if the Whore of Babylon, does reach forth
her Cup of Poison unto you, whether she pretend Commodity, Affinity,
Preferment, or promotion, fear, favor, or vainglory. Let none of these
glorious, but vain pretenses prevail with you. Say you will not gain the
world, to lose our souls. Yet these dangerous times are full of Satan's snares.
But from haeresie and Popery, and from the Power of Satan, and seducing
Jesuits, good Lord deliver us.

SERMON XXI.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 10. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved.
Antichrist not a Jew. The Church of Rome does use the Scriptures for their
own turn. The Ambition of the Church of Rome. Consolation against Antichrist.
Five notes of such as love truth.

HEre we may have the remembrance of the Psalmists saying, Psalm. 101. 1. I will
sing of judgment and mercy. And here we have the resemblance of Sampsons
Riddle, Judges 14. 14. Out of the Eater comes meat. Devouring judgment is
contained in the Body of this discourse: and nourishing Mercy in this ^ext, the
Part thereof. For what judgment ^ore terrible, can we conceive than this? To
consider either in general, that Antichrist does so devillishly deceive
millions of such as are men, and seem Christians: or in particular, that even
true Christians shall be so far deluded, by the deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, that they shall not know him, though indeed they do not
serve him. The first is notorious in the Catholic Apostasy of the Roman
Church: and the second is too manifest, in too many of the Reformed, who will
neither teach nor believe, that Rome can be Babylon: But by distinguishing
betwixt an Antichrist, and the Antichrist, they infer their position, that
the Pope is no Antichrist. But then, what mercy is more comfortable then this?
that any Christian, if a true Christian, may conclude; Though I am not able to
dive into this deep disputation, pro and con, of Antichrist: yet can I
infallibly collect, that ( whosoever Antichrist shall be, whenever Antichrist
shall come, and whatsoever Antichrist shall do) I shall not serve him. For,

Antichrist shall deceive finally, only those who do not receive the love of
the truth;

But my soul tells me, I do receive the love of the truth.

Ergo, My soul is assured that Antichrist shall not deceive me finally.

This clause contains the cause, that so many are captives unto Antichrist:
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. A
double cause being a double error. The error of their mind, and the error
of their end. The first, because they received not the love of the truth: the
last because they did not receive it to the right end, that they might be
saved. And therefore they are deceived by him, who comes in all power, and
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

The first cause of so many Christians captivity Less^^s de Antic Them* 6. Bell.
de P^n^^^^ Romans lib. 3. c. 12.
unto Antichrist, is, Because they received not the love of the truth. Lessius
following Bellarmine, and Bellarmine some of the Fathers, does expound this of
the Jews; that the Jews did refuse Christ: therefore the Jews shall receive
Antichrist. And to put a show of probability on this real impossibility,
Bellarmine disputes from the Tense, receperunt: Saint Paul says (says he)
those shall receive Antichrist, who have not received the truth: that is,
Christ: and these were the Jews.

I borow my answer, from our good Bishop: Donnam de Antich. part. 2. ad Them. 6.
the best that ever put pen to paper in this point. For his Argument; he erreth
in the Tense, Saint Paul does use the Aorist, not the Praeterperfect Tense. The
sense whereof is not non receperunt, they that did not receive, but non
receperint, they that shall not receive the love of the truth. For such is the
signification of the Aorist* Marc. 16, 16. (...), Qui credidit and baptizatus
est, hoc est, qui crediderit, and baptizatus erit: not he that did believe,
and was baptized: but he that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be
saved. So Ioh. 5. 22. (...), procedent (according to the vulgar translation) in
resurrectionem, qui bona fecerunt, hoc est, qui fecerint, Christ says there,
those who shall do good works, shall enter into the Resurrection of life. So
here, in the same Tense, and sense also, (...), those that shall not receive
the love of the truth, shall be deceived by the deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness. Saint Paul's words in this place being to be referred, not to
the time of the Epistle he wrote in, but to the time of the Punishment he
wrote of.

But for the thing it self, that Saint Paul here speaks only of the Jews:
this conceit, has no color of probability: as it will appear if we consider
these four particulars. The Phrase, the Persons, the Punishment, and the
purpose of Saint Paul in publishing of this prophecy.

1. Take the word truth, for the word Christ, (which is not the true sense
thereof in this place) and yet Saint Paul does not say that those shall be
deceived by Antichrist, who do not receive veritatem, Christ, as the Jews
did: but who do not receive Amorem veritatis, the love of Christ, which is not
proper to the Jews, but to the false Christians.

2. The Jews refused to receive Christ, 1600 years since, It must follow
therefore, that the Jews received Antichrist so long also. For the prophecy is
of the same persons: those who do not receive the love of the truth, those
very men are delivered into the power of Satan.

3. The punishment of Antichristians, is damnation: but Antichrist shall be
the accidental cause of Salvation to the Jews, which shall come with Enoch,
and Elias to convert the Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 3. cap. 6.
Jews, say the Papists. The Jews therefore are not those who are spoken of in
the Text.

4. The purpose and maine drift of this prophecy, is to proclaim to the
world, the Catholic cause of being captives unto Antichrist, to be this:
Because me^ do not receive the love of the truth. Whosoever does not receive
it, shall be deceived and damned. And therefore I conceive neither reason, nor
authority, why any man should make a particular of that, which Saint Paul does
propose as a general.

The conclusion therefore is plain, and true. The Apostle does here describe the
adhaerents of Antichrist, non a natione, sed condition ipsorum: Down. part. 2.
Them. 6.
not from their Region, but from their Religion. Antichrist shall prevail on
such as receive not the love of the truth. Now whether these men be Jews or
Christians, it skilleth not.

Having cut off this cavil, I come to the natural exposition. The Object of
Antichrists prevailing power, is here foretold to be men, who will not receive
the love of the truth. Of the Truth I may distinguish, as the Greeks do of
the Word: there is (...): Veritas Christi, and Veritas Christus: the truth
written, and the Truth begotten: the first Matthew. 22. 16. thou teach the
way of GOD (...) in truth: the second John 14. 16. I am, (...), the Truth*
Christ did the former Doctrinally, and he was the latter Essentiallie. The Text
speaks of both, but of the first properly, and primarily: it being most
convenient thereunto. For the fallacy is a deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, that is, false doctrine. Therefore the Apostasy is from the
true Doctrine, or the truth taught us in the Gospel.

By the truth then, here we are to understa^d the Gospel. The Gospel is
termed the truth for three causes: from the infallibility, use, and efficacy
thereof. First, each syllable is true, and shall come to pass Math. 5. 18.
Secondly, it makes a man true, and absolute in the knowledge and practice of
Holiness, 2 Timothy 3. 16. Thirdly, the Gospel is veritas magna, and
praevalebit: the Gospel is that truth which above all things bears away the
victory. The Gospel is a true sword, to cut down all error, and
transgression, Heb. 4. 12.

Mark moreover (it is the observation of our blessed Bishop Jewel) mark, he
does not say, Because they receive not the truth, but because they receive not
the Love of the truth: therefore God sends the^ strong delusions. Of which
sin, and punishment, we have an example, (and withal a wonderful
resemblance of the Roman Church) in the persons of Hophnie and Phineas, 1 Samuel
2. It is said in the twelfth verse, They knew not the Lord. Now that they did
know the Lord, and his Will, it is evident: first from their Vocation in the
thirteenth verse, they were Priests, and therefore their Lips did preserve
knowledge. Secondly, from their Information; both by the people in the
sixteenth verse: and also by their Father, who verse 24: said, Nay my sons:
for this is no good report that I hear. The meaning then is, they did not love
the Lord, which is all one, as if they had not known him. Add to these, three
other remarkable observations: First, their Sin, Whoredom, verse 22.
Secondly, the cause of their continuing therein, they made themselves fat with
the offerings of the people, verse 24. And the punishment, which was twofold,
They would not hearken, because the Lord would slay them, in the same verse.

The parallel whereof we may perceive in the Papacy, punctually in all
particulars. The Church of Rome cannot be said not to know God, it appears
from their Vocation, they have a Priesthood, and (...) the holy Word Romans 3.
of God, and learning, labor, and languages to peruse them. We cannot say
therefore, They do not know God; but alas, (which is far worse) They do not
love God. To know him, they have information sufficient: from the Fathers, most
of their opinions have little, some of their opions having no mention made of
them, in those ancient Writers: from their own fathers, diverse of the Bishops
of Trent relenting, but the Pope did control them. Finally, they have had
information from our Father: I doubt not but God does check the consciences of
many of their learned, that they see the truth, but do not receive the love
thereof.

Their sin also, is whoredom, spiritual whoredom: their See, Babylon,
spiritual Babylon: and the Mother of Fornication. Their cause of continuing
therein, They make themselves fat with the offerings of the people, they swim
in worldly wealth and honor. The same Punishment they may fear, and shall
feel. Hophni and Phineas did not hearken, because the Lord would slay them.
And my Text tells us, that those who receive not the love of the truth, God
will send the^ strong delusion, that they may be damned.

Now that the Church of Rome, does not receive the love of the Gospel, (though
they have the Gospel) I thus demo^strate it. Because they use the Gospel,
either only, or principally, for their own turns: They have Gods Covenant in
their mouths, but hate to be reformed. Quia superbi Ps. 30. 16. and 17.
sunt, nec noverunt Moysis sententiam, sed amant suam: non quia vera est, sed
quia sua est, says Saint Augustine. They are surly, and selfe-conceited, and
receive not the judgment of the Gospel, but the judgment of the Church of
Rome: and they love the Romish opinion, not because it is the true opinion, but
because it is the Romish opinion. Those words of the men in Matthew. 26. 73.
St. Matthew. to St. Peter, may be aptly applied to this purpose; Certainly thou
art one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee: Herein the Bishop of Rome is
Saint Pet^rs Successor. Certainly they are those who use the Gospel to their
own turns, for their speech does bewray them: although they swear and curse
that they do it not. Thus they speak; Docet spiritus sanctus omnes, modo
ordinato, Suarez. Apol. lib. 1. cap. 11. number. 8.
communem scilicet plebem, per Doctores: ipsos autem Doctores, per Concilia,
and maxim per Vicarium Christi: The Holy Ghost (says Suarez) does teach all,
but in an ordinary manner, to wit, the common people, by the Doctors: and the
Doctors themselves he does teach by Councils, but principally by the Vicar of
Christ. Pontifex potest Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 3. c. 14
moderari praecepta Apostolorum prout Ecclesiae expedicrit. Bellarmine says,
the Pope can moderate the Precepts of the Apostles, as shall seem expedient
for the Church. Scripturas recipio, secundum sensum Ecclesiae: it is the second
Article of their second Creed, established by their Council of Trent, that
they receive the Scriptures indeed, but as the Church shall expound them. Their
words are plain enough, containing a plain injury against man, and as plain
an indignity against God.

First, they and we contend Who has the truth. The Judge? We call for the
Scriptures, peradventure they will permit them. But with this proviso: Prout
Ecclesiae expedierit, and prout Ecclesia exposuerit. The Scripture shall be
Judge betwixt the Reformed, and the Church of Rome. But -- As the Church of
Rome shall be pleased to expound it. Let any impartial man judge, whether this
be not a most partial judgment.

Secondly, we all concur, that the sense of the Scriptures, is more than the
letter of the Scripture: but the Pope gives the sense thereof, and God only
the letter. Concerning the Scriptures therefore the Papists ascribe more to the
Pope, than they do to GOD himself. Which was wisely concluded, at the
conclusion of the Council of Trent, by Hugo Bishop Trent. Hist lib. 8.
Bestice, that no law does consist in the terms, but in the meaning: not in
that which the Vulgar, or Grammarians give it, but in that which Use, and
Authority do confirm: that Laws have no power, but that which is given them,
by him who governs, and has the care to execute them: that he by his
exposition, may give them a more ample, or a more strait sense, yea a
contrary, unto that which the words import. This certainly cannot be to love the
Gospel, but to use the Gospel to serve their own turns.

I retort their own words, on their own Dutif. Consid. 3. cap. 2.
persons. It comes to pass, that that Word, which was given as a Pillar of
fire, to direct and lighten them in all Verity, is turned into a Pillar of
Smoke, so darkening, and infatuating their Understanding, that they rush
headlong, into all kind of Heresy. As Areas, the Spartan General, by the
smoke of Houses, which Just. Hist. lib. 24. Sect. 1.
himself had fired, blinded himself, and his own Soldiers. Conspectum sibi
suisque abstulit, says Justin in that History. Even so: the Church of Rome,
rejecting the love of the Gospel, being blinded with the love of their own
errors, have cast themselves into the arms of Antichrist, and are
inextricably inthralled, by the deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness.

I have discovered the mind of those that embrace Antichrist: they have the
Gospel, but they have no mind to it, they do not love the Gospel. Next,
follows the end, why they love Antichrist, but not the Gospel. Negatively,
Ne salvi fierent, the neglect of their salvation.

Their salvation, do they neglect, not absolutely: but comparatively. As
before, they did not absolutely reject the Gospel, but the love of the
Gospel: that is, they did love some earthly commodity, better then this
heavenly treasure. So here; they do not grosely reject their salvation; but
there is some Person, Profit, Pomp, Pleasure, or Preferment; There is
something which they prefer before it, or the means thereof. They receive
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

To propose an authentical exposition. I will take the sense as it is
expounded, by a learned Papist, Dr. Steuard on this place. Saint Paul (says
he) does speak of such men, Steuartius in 2 These. 2.
at are mentioned by our Savior, John 5. 44. How can ye believe, which receive
honor of one another, and seek not the honor which comes of God only? Quasi
diceret Dominus, perditionis multorum causam esse Ambitionem, ne Christo
credentes, ad veritat is lumen pervenient. That is, Ambition is the cause, that
many receive not the Truth, that they might be saved. Which he confirms out
of Hilary: Immoderati animi affectus, saepe mentem de suo statu deijciunt, ne
veritatem agnoscant, neque cognitam sequantur. That is, the immoderate
affections (such as Ambition) do put the mind out of frame, that it cannot
know the truth, nor follow it being known.

To which we may add woeful examples. Pappus de Haeresibus page 194. etc.
Thebutes refused the love of the truth, and did spread his Errors in Jury,
Valentinus in Egypt, Novatus in Africa, Aetius in Antiochia, Donatus in
Numidia, and Arius throughout the World. All forgetting, Damnosum lucrum
Erasmus in Luke 4.
est, quod pietatis jactura emitur: What advantage will it be for a man to
gain the whole world, and to lose his own soul? Mat. 16. 26. Yet to them was
Honor, what the Sparrowes dung was to old Tobit 2. 10. It put out their eyes,
whereby they could not see, or would not see the Truth, at least, the love of
the Truth, that they might be saved.

Such, and so Ambitious is the Sea of Rome, as any, that ever the Sun shown
on. To make this plain, ponder what the Pope was, and what he is. The Pope of
Rome was a Bishop at first; over many Ministers, in one City. next a
Metropolitan over many Bishops, in one Province: after that, a Patriarch over
many Metropolitanes, in one Diocese (for the Romans had seven Provinces in
one Diocese.) Finally, he attained to be Occumenicall Patriarch of the whole
world. But now he is (...) (...), climed higher then the top of the Ladder:
Ecce duo gladij hic: he does usurp a double Supremacy, both Ecclesiastical,
and Temporal. He will be Lord Paramount, in all Causes, and over all Persons
under the cope of heaven.

Now! when our English took Saint Domingo, Cambden anno 1583.
in India; amongst many memorable things, they sound in the Towne-house, the
Arms of the King of Spain, under them was painted an Orb, or Picture of the
World, with a pransing Horse, spreading his fore-feet, over the Verges thereof,
with this Motto, Non sufficit Orbis, that is, the World is too little for me. A
Posie passing fit for the Pope: Non sufficit Orbis, the World cannot suffice
his Ambition. Nay, the Latin appetite, does equal that Chrysin 1 These. 1. 8.
Gracian Dropsy, even (...) a world of worlds, cannot content him.

So that we may speak of the Pope, what a Pope once spoke of his Cardinals.
Benedict the 12. being on a time moved to create more Cardinals, answered, that
he was pressed to perform their petition: provided, Si modo novum mundum creare
posset, provided that it were in his power also, to create a new world; for the
world which now was, would hardly suffice those Cardinals, who were now. In a
word, the world will not suffice the Popes Ambition. This therefore I suppose
sufficient, to show that the Pope is Ambitious.

To add plenty of proofs, to the plainness thereof. I suppress the gross
sayings of his Clawbacks, and Canonists. I will quote only the
Controversie-writers, who we know, can, and do blanch the most notorious
absurdities of the Papacy.

Thus they speak: Primatus Pontificis est Bell. de Romans Pont. Praef.
summa totius rei Christianae; Bellarmine places the sum of our Christian
Religion, in the Superiority of the Pope. Suarez does profess Suarez Apol.
Prooem.
as much in his Preface to his Apology: On the Popes dignity, does depend
Salus Ecclesiae, the safety of the Church. Martinus Alphonsus M. Alphons.
Praef. Apol. Suaris.
a Mello raises this one note higher; Sumi Pontificis est potestas
supranaturalis; it is (says he) a Supernatural power which we must
acknowledge to be in the Pope. Yea (says Lessius) it Lessius de Ant. Them. 14.
is granted by the Princes themselves, that the Pope is their lawful head, in
things Spiritual, and indirectly in things Temporal: Nempe quatenus id ad
gubernationem spiritualem est necessarium: Eudaemon de Ant. l. 2. Sect. 14
so far forth, as shall be necessary for the spiritual government. It is
the judgment of all Papists, according to Eudaemon, Authoritative, unum esse
Pontificem, qui cum omnes judicet, ipse a nemine judicetur: that is, they hold
that the Pope alone is he, who alone has authority to judge all men, and no
man has authority to judge him. Finally, Malvenda concludes, Malvenda de Ant.
l. 1. cap. 2.
and comprizeth all, in a more short and plain sentence, Pontifex Romanus est
Ecclesiae Dei Monarcha, the Pope is the Monarch of the Church of God: I wonder
what more could be said of GOD himself? I conceive therefore no blasphemy, in
that speech, for which Bellarmine does so blame Beringarius, Bell de Romans Pont.
Praef.
calling him Pompificem, instead of Pontificem: that the Pomp of Rome, is the
Pope of Rome, for that indeed is the Essence of their Religion.

I will end this point, as I began this point: with the words of Dr. Steuard,
Ambitto est Steuartius in 2 These. 2.
multorum perditio, the Ambition of the Church has been the perdition of the
Church. By it is Rome become the Seat: the Romanists the servants; and the
Roman Pope, the Person of him, who is here termed Filius Perditionis, the Son
of Pedition.

Thus by way of contestation, for them: that the Papists have not received the
love of the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore they have received
Antichrist, that they may be -- I will not add the Sequel: that they may be
damned! no! God avert that, and convert them, if it be his blessed Will.

Briefly, by way of Consolation for our selves: That we have received the love
of the truth, that we may be saved. And therefore we shall not receive
Antichrist, nor be damned.

Lutherans they call us: we may take up the Trent. Hist. l. 1.
phrase, and courage of Luther. Luther said, that he would to Worms, without
fear: although there had been as many Devils in that Town, as there were
Tiles on the houses. So, (if we indeed love the Truth) we may say, We will not
fear, though there were as many Antichrists on the earth, as there are Tiles
on the Houses thoughout the World. For, if we do receive the love of the
truth, then shall we be saved; both from Antichrist the Son of Perdition,
and from Satan his destroying Father.

But I fear I may use that phrase of this Iam. 2. 14. 18.
love, which Saint James does of faith. If a man says he, has love, will such
a love save him? will it save him from Antichrist? Now show thy love by thy
deeds. Let thy deeds show it, that thou do indeed love the Gospel. Solvitur
in cinerem fit vana favillaque Pomum. Saint Cyprian in his Sodoma, says, The
Apples of Sodom seem delicate to the eye, but indice tactu, but so soon as
they were touched, they turned into dust, and vanished. I fear the fruit of
our love to the Gospel, to be of that nature: Heavenly to the eye, and to the
ear too; but touch them, and they turn to dust, indeed nothing but Earthly
affections.

Let us touch our love to the Truth, by this fivefold Trial. If we love the
Truth, then have we an Ardent desire of it, then will we seek to know it, use
the means to obtain it, bestow cost on it, and rejoice in it. 1. If we have
love to the Truth, we would long after it, as Ahab did after his Neighbors
Vineyard, 1 Reg. 24. 4^
and be sick for the want of it: nay, as Rachel did for Children, we would cry
give me the Genesis 30, 1.
truth, or I die. 2. If we did love the truth like the Ethiopian Eunuch, we
will plod on Act. 8. 30.
the Scriptures, although they appear not at the first, altogether so plain,
and perspicuous. 3. If we love the truth, we will frequent Heb. 10. 25.
the Assemblies, and be constant hearers, of public exercises, on public
days, of Sabbath sermons. 4. If we did love the Gospel, our affections would
be like Fire, which both is light, active to ascend: and has Heat to consume
all Obstacles. Such men would like Hezechias, Give the portion of the Priests,
that they might be encouraged 2 Chronicles. 31. 4.
in the Law of the Lord. And 5. they would speak that phrase of David, with
the heart of David; We love thy Commandments above Psalm. 119. 127.
Gold, yea above fine God.

But come to the trial, and experience will tell us, that England is like
Zebulun, 2 Chro. 30. 10, 11. the most laugh at the love of the truth: Only
some (God be blessed) humble themselves, and go to embrace it. If Bishop
Jewel Iewelin 2 The. 2
complained of his time, that they had much Preaching, and little practicing: I
suspect we may increase that complaint of our time, and say, we have more
preaching, and less practicing. We have many who receive the truth; but few,
very few, who receive the love thereof.

1 Do men desire the truth? Yes, as Agrippa Act. 26. 28.
did peradventure; as almost persuaded to desire it. They are not ardent, but
ardelios, in a short pang of zeal, they will breathe out that transitory
ejaculation, Lord evermore John 6. 34.
give us of that bread. But as Christ there told those, they will not take
pains for it. As some for the Corporeal, so these for the Spiritual, they
will not get their bread in the sweat of their brows. 2. Do men seek to know
it, and read it? I believe from the Idiot at his Ballade, to the Statesman at
his History: most men are more conversant in the writings of men, then in the
Scriptures of God. 3. For the Sunday-Assemblies, we see some in the Streets,
hear others in the fields, and know of a third sort in their Houses, when the
Church is not full, or not so full, as it should be, if they did indeed love
the truth. 4. Do men in our age bestow cost on the Word? Some few I must
exempt from this general rule, of this general misserule. For the most;
Hezechias is transformed into Ananias; Men will rather withdraw, or Act. 5.
withhold that which is Consecrated, then Consecrate any thing to the Priests
Portion, to encourage them in the Law of the Lord. 5. Finally; Hah! Did men
love the Truth, as they do gold: then were our Church walled with Brass.
Antichrist would find it impregnable, and impossible to be entered.

It is reported of the Indians at Brasil; that Dr. Beard of Antichrist part. 1
they have a Tradition, of one, long since, who came and preached the Gospel
unto them; But when those Barbarians would not believe him, another came after
him, who gave them a sword; and ever since there has been nothing but wars
amongst them. We live in a time of Wars, and rumors of Wars. In England,
the contempt of the Word is gone before! God grant the sword do not follow
after it. We fear our Antichristian Enemies, because of their learning,
number, industry, policy, power, and malice. Alas, alas, (...), Perdit to tua
ex te o Israel. It is our contempt of the Word, that betrays, and delivers us
into the Hands and Bands of Antichrist. I will therefore pray for you; yea pray
unto you, in the words of our Common Prayer; From all Sedition, and privy
Conspiracy; from all false doctrine and heresy. But -- From hardness of
heart, and contempt of thy Word, and Commandments. Good Lord deliver us.

SERMON XXII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 12. But had pleasure in unrighteousness.
(...). The Papists surpass the Pagans in Idolatry. Angels: Saints: Marie:
Images: the Cross: the Sacrament: Every Creature made an Idol.

IN my last Sermon, I have declared the first property of those men, by whom
Antichrist shall be embraced: in this, I will unfold the second property. That
was Negative; the servants of the man of sin, Do not receive the love of the
truth. This is Affirmative: but they take pleasure in unrighteousness.

That we may consider this property the more seriously, let us take two points
into our consideration: the Action, and the Affection of Antichristians. The
first is (...), unrighteousness, the second (...), pleasure therein.

(...), Injustitia, unrighteousness, is suum cuique non reddere, Not to render
every person his due. Which must be twofold, answerable to the twofold object
thereof. There is a Moral unrighteousness, when we do not man his right, as
Luke 16. 9. (...), ^nrighteous Mammon: when men cozen men by their
covetousness and unrighteousness. Moreover there is a Spiritual
unrighteousness; when we do not God his right: as Romans 1. 18. the
Philosophers did (...), keep down the truth of God in obstinatenesse and
unrighteousness: Expressed in the 25. verse of the same Chapter; They changed
the truth of God into a lie. They loved their own errors, more then they did
the true knowledge of God. This was their (...), their Spiritual
unrighteousness. My text may speak of both, but principally of the
principal, the last; the Spiritual unrighteousness: As appears both from
the drift of Saint Paul in his Doctrine, and from the drift of Antichrist in
his doctrine. First, Saint Paul does describe those that embrace Antichrist, by
not receiving the truth, verse 10. this therefore is an unrighteousness
against the Truth of God, and not against the Estate of man, a spirirituall
unrighteousness. Secondly, the drift of Antichrist, is the deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, verse 10. false Doctrine, a denying of God his due, his
Truth, by a* spiritual unrighteousness.

I conclude: this Unrighteousness, is false Doctrine in general; but in
especial, the grand false doctrine of al other, Idolatry. For St. Paul himself
does lead us to this exposition, Romans 1. 18. he tells us of (...),
unrighteousness against the Truth. That also he tells us what it is verse
25. (...), To serve the Creature, more then the Creator; that is, Idolatry.
Idolatry therefore is the unrighteousness in my text: which is the property of
those that embrace Antichrist.

To make the Property full and absolute, the Apostle adds the Affection to
the Action: it is not a light slight practice or propensitie; not only a
natural inclination, or a seduced aberration: but they are affected to it, and
infected with it, in high measure. (...) they take pleasure in
unrighteousness, and delight in Idolatry.

(...). Theophilacts int^rpreter renders Dr. Sclater in 2 These 2. 12.
it, Qui oblectati sunt in injustitia. The word signifies a willing, pleasing,
selfe-propension: not without much contentment, says the Reverend Author of
those religious Sermons upon these Epistles. If I add a Candle to his Torch,
the light will not be supersluous, but the point more clear. I therefore say
moreover; (...), is an emphaticall word, implying an infinite affection to any
thing men delight in. The most precious thing, which Saint Paul did ever desire
to receive, he expresses by this word, (...), 2 Corinthians. 5. 8. (...), We are
willing to be present with the Lord. And the most precious thing, which Saint
Paul did ever desire to give, he expresses by the same word, (...), 1 These. 2.
8. (...), we are willing to impart unto you, both the Gospel, andour own
souls. And when he would extol to the heavens, that heavenly affection of
the Macedonians to releeve the poor, he doubled this word, Romans 15. 26. 27.
(...) it pleased them, it pleased them, that is, they delighted in Charity.
Finally, when God himself would express his un-expressible affection to his
Son, and in his Son to man; he makes this word his Finger, to point at the
back parts of his incomparable, and incomprehensible delight, (...), in whom I
am well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. By this we may conceive the absolute reciprocal
property, quarto modo, of those that be Antichristians: To wit, They are
Idolaters, and delight in Idolatry, in the highest nature, and measure of any.
If the Papists can wipe away this imputation. I will recant, and subscribe that
the Pope is not Antichrist. But if I shall make it as clear as the Sun, I
hope none will shut their eyes against the truth; but acknowledge that the
Church of Rome does embrace Antichrist. For they delight in unrighteousness.
and take pleasure in Idolatry.

Triplex Nodus, triplici cuneo: a threefold Cord is not easily broken. I object
the manner, matter, and measure of their Idolatry: in all which, the Papists
surpass all the world. So that I may speak of the Romans concerning idolatry,
what St Paul spoke of the Corinthians concerning 1 Cor. 5. 1.
Fornication: It is reported commonly, that there is Idolatry amongst them, and
such Idolatry as is not named amongst the Gentiles.

For the better knowledge of Idolaters, who they are: let us know Idolatry,
what it is. It is (...), says Saint Paul. Servire creaturae, Romans 1. 25. Aug.
de mor. Manich. 1. 30. Aqu. 22. 94. 3.
says Saint Augustine. Honorem divinum impendere Creaturae, according to
Thomas. To whom assent other Papists; that it is Idolatry to worship a
Creature.

The Papists I say surpass the Pagan Idolaters. Spal. Council. Red. page 35.
First, the Pagans exercised their Idolatry, with an open show of impiety: but
the Papists acting the mystery of iniquity, cover their wickedness with the
Veil of Piety. As wicked Ahab was made the more wicked, by marrying Iezabel:
So the popish Idolatry, is made far more execrable, because of the Yoke
fellow thereof, Hypocrisy; Because it is persuaded as a point of Christianity.

Again, the Pagan Idolaters did err not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22.
29. But the Papists know the Scriptures, and (as they say) they only know the
Scriptures. Now to profess, that they abhor Idols; and ^e^ to preach and
practice Idolatry: To be confident that they are Guides to the blind; and yet
to blind their followers, with the grossest part of impiety, Idolatry. I may
pronounce them in the phrase of Saint Paul (...), not to be excused from Romans
2. 1.
the excess of Idolatry. That they receive not the love of the truth, but take
pleasure in unrighteousness.

The next is the matter of their Idolatry, wherein we may avouch it, that the
Popish Church, has more variety of Objects, than any one Nation or
Congregation of heathen Idolaters. Seven sorts of Idols (including innumerable
subdivisions) may seem sufficient. And of such Idols we may pronounce that
sentence of Solomon, Pro. 6. 16. These six things does the Lord hate, yea
seven are an abomination unto him.

The Angels are the first. Angels are Creatures all confess; that they worship
Angels, themselves confess: and therefore we must confess, that they make
them Idols. It is Athanasius his Argument, and cited by a Papist, Malvenda:
Making Christ a Mere Creature, and yet Adoring him, Cur sese non annumere^t
Malvenda de Antich. 1. 22. Baron. tom. 1. an. 60. sect 20. Dutis. Consid. Co
sid. 3. cap. 5. Bell. de Sanctor. Beat. l. 1. c. 14.
gentibus? to worship any Creature (though an Angel) is gross heathenish
Idolatry.

Such Idolaters are the Papists. They consecrate Churches unto them, they offer
solemn prayers unto them, in the public Church. Yea Angeli Adorandi, The
Adoration of Angels is absolutely avouched by their Doctors; though an Angel
inhibiteth this Adoration of Angels, Revel. 19. 10. And Saint Paul pronounces
it impious: viz. That the worshippers of Angels do not hold the Head, Colos.
2. 18, and 19. Moreover, those that do (...), that is, (...), to pray to
Angels, as Theodoret expounds it. And we have the Theodor. in 2 Colos. Just.
Hist. l. 24.
like Latin phrase in Iustine; Alexandri, Philippique nomina, velut numina, in
auxilium vocabant, they called upon the Names of Alexander, and Philip as if
they had be^ne gods. Now those that do (...), or nominare Angelos, that is,
Pray to Angels, the Council of Laodicea pronounces an Anathema against them,
and condemns them for accursed Idolaters. I will sentence the Papists in the
very words of that Council, Canon 35. The Papists by Council. Laodic. Can. 35.
worshipping of Angels do (...), Apostate from the Church: (...), Renounce
Christ: and (...), become Absolute Idolaters.

The second Creature worshipped, and the second Bell. de. B^at. Sanct. l. 1. c.
13.
Idolatry committed, is the Adoration of Saints, amply affirmed by Bellarmine,
de Beatitudine Sanctorum. But Suarez spinneth this Suarez Apol. l. 2 c. 8. nu.
4. 5.
thread so fine, that he must have good eyes, who can discern his words, not to
acknowledge palpable Idolatry. Catholica Ecclesia non Civilem tantum, sed
Sacrum and Religiosum cultum, Sanctis tribuendum esse censet; he affirms that
the Church of Rome does ascribe unto Saints, not only civil, but also Holy
and Religious worship: and hic cultus est Divino conjunctissimus, he says that
this worship is very like Divine Worship. Ideoque consuevit Ecclesia eisdem
fere rebus, quibus Deum colit, Sanctos honorare, and therefore (says he) it
is the custom of the Church to Honor the Saints, almost with the some things
wherewith they worship God: and he does in^^^nce in Fastings, Watchings,
Prayers, etc. yet ^od the Father says, Call upon me, Psalm. 50. 15. and God
the Son says, Come to me, Matthew. 11. 28. And I suppose the whole Trinity
says, My Glory I will not give to another, Isay. 42. 8. To give therefore the
glory of Invocation, Adoration, etc. to any Creature, yea to the very Saints,
is far from True Religion; if we may believe Saint Augustine of True
Religion: Aug. de vera. Relig. cap. 55.
Hear his plain profession; Non sit nobis religionis cultus mortuorum
hominum, We must not worship men who are dead. Which he fortifieth by a
reason, tales non quaerant honores, for they cannot expect such honor. And he
makes all yet more apparent by a distinction, Honorandi ergo sunt propter
imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem: Our imitation of Saints (says
he) is commendable, but our Adoration of them is detestable. I may conclude of
the Papists, as Clemens does of the Pagans, Adoring Clem. Alex. Protrept.
the dead, (...)! Miserable men, to be so senseless of such apparent Idolatry!
and take such pleasure in unrighteousness.

Thus they confess that they adore the Saints, with almost the same worship,
they do God himself. I will show in the next place, that they adore a Saint,
with more worship, then they do God. This third Object of their cursed
idolatry, is the blessed Virgin Mary; That in the Hand of the Antarades S.
Peter erected Malvenda de Antich. l. 3. c. 3.
a Chapel unto her, where he himself did celebrate the first Mass. To pray
seven George Dow!. instruction c. 9.
times as much to Mary, as to God, may seem sufficient; yet ten times as much
is practiced and professed in their Rosary. Beata Maria, Jewel Defens. page 362.
salva omnes qui te glorificant; Blessed Mary, save all those that glorify
thee. Et monstra te esse Matrem, Show thy self to be a Mother: are familiar
phrases in their solemn invocations. Moreover, her Adoration is climed aloft,
in Bonaventures high style, and transmutation of the Psalms, from Dominus to
Domina. As Psalm. 110. 1. Dixit Dominus ad Dominam meam, sede a dextris meis,
donec ponam inimicos tuos scabellum pedum tuorum: that is, The Lord said unto
my Lady, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy footstool.
And it is avouched by Lessius. No way inferior Less. de Antich. part. 1. Them.
15.
unto this, is that Stately Litany, pronounced to Saint Mary, surnamed Del
Pueg, anno 1588. at Valence, which they performed for a prosperous voyage, unto
their Spanish armado, bound for the invasion of England. Peccatores te rogamus
andi nos; that is, We beseech thee to hear us good Lady. But that Gods own
Prayer, the Pater Noster, should be uttered to a Iacobi Regis Med. in Orat.
Domin. calce.
Woman, to the Virgin Mary, this may seem more then absurdly, even profanely
ridiculous: yet this is avouched both by our English, and Scottish (therein
both Sottish) Papists. To George Dewly's Instruct c. 6. Hisp. Conversus page 10.
come to comparisons (this must be odious) paralleling Vbera, and Vulnera, they
make the milk of Mary, to be as precious as the Blood of Christ: so much is
related by a Spanyard in Lewis Owen of Eugl. Seminary.
England. And it is not much less which is reported of the English in Spain.
I saw (says a traveller) in the English College at Valladolid, a Picture of
the blessed Virgin Mary, spreading out her Mantle with both her hands, over
many Jesuits that kneeled unto her, with this superscriptio^ over her head,
Anglia dos Mariae, England is the dowry of the Virgin Mary: and the Jesuits
presenting a Paper in her hands, wherein was written, Sub umbra alarm tuarum
man^bimus; donec transeat iniquitas: that is, Under the shadow of thy wings, we
will remain, til this Tyranny be overpassed. Notwithstanding, al these are
surpassed by the superlative blaspheming Idolatry, broached by Bernardine de
Busto. There was (says he) a Vision Bern. de Busto Marial. part. 9. Sermon. 2.
^ssi^. ^.
showed to Saint Francis, wherein he saw two Ladders, that reached from earth
to heaven, the one Red, on which Christ leaned: from whence many fell back ward
and could not ascend. The other White; upon which the Holy Virgin leaned: the
help whereof such as used, were received with a cheerful countenance, and so
with facility entered into heaven. Lud^lph. de Vi^a Christi part. 2 cap. ^6.
Their positions are of the same stamp: Velocior est non^unquam salus memorato
nomine Mariae, quam invocato nomine Domini Jesus Vnici filij sui: that is, A
more present relief is sometimes found, by commemorating the name of Mary,
Machiavel. hist. Flor. lib. 7.
then by calling on the name of the Lord Jesus, her only son; which they
have so graffed in the Ears if the Popish people while they l^ve, that it is
rooted in their Hearts, even when they dye also. Thus Galeazzo the unfortunate
Duke of Millan, when he was stabbed in the Church, closed up his life, with
this cry only, O Lady help me. This is indeed (...), yea, (...), nay (...):
such an Adoration to a woman, as never could be imagined by a man; till that
Man of sin had intoxicated the men of the world, and made them impudent in
idolatry, and to take pleasure in unrighteousness.

Concerning the fourth instance of intolerable idolatry, Adoration of images: I
will spare some labor in this point, because I have spent so much therein
already, in my Treatise on the second Commandment, which I composed for that
purpose. And if any Papist can render a sufficient answer to the arguments
therein composed, I will recant: and confess that the Pope is not Antichrist,
nor the Popish Religion Antichristian, idolatrous, heretical, or any way
Erroneous.

Briefly, I say, that this fourth kind of idolatry, is more soul then all the
former; because directed unto a more gross Object, Images. I may exclaim
against this Heathenish idolatry, Clem. Alex. Pr^trept.
as Clemens Alexandrinus did against the heathen for the very same thing,
(...), to adore a Block, is it not a blockish Idolatry? There is a double
cause of Idolatry, says Aquine; Vna ex part* ho^inu^, altera Aquin 2 ^.
qu^st. 94. 4.
ex part daemonum: Men and Devils concur in the generation of this Viper. In
the phrase of my Text, the working of Satan deceives men that perish: plainly
prophesied by S. John Rev. 9. 20. that Antichristians should worship idols of
gold, and silver, and of brass, and stone, and wood. Things most palp^bly, and
literally, performed in the Papacy.

Where it is worth our observation: that the Papists plead for their Idols in
the same terms, wherein the Pagans did. Tell a papist what a gross
absurdity they act, who adore an image. Oh say they, mistake us not, it is
repraesentative, not determinative: we do not worship the Image, but the
Saint in the Image. Iulians own distinction: Non Lapidem, sed Iovem Zanch.
Tom. 4. cap. 15 these. 3.
in lapide, that he did not worship the Statue, but Jupiter in the Statue. If
we object Quae amentia est, aut ea fingere quae timeant, aut ea timere quae
sinx^rint? What a frenzy is it, either to make those things which they
worship, or to worship those things which they have made? They reply in the
Pagans owne-phrase recorded by Lactantius, Non ipsa timemus, sed Lactant. Just.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
Eos, quorum nominibus sunt consecrata: We do not (said the Pagans) worship the
Images, but the Persons, to whom those Images are consecrated. Object again,
even our eyes can censure those Images to be senseless, and therefore they are
senseless who adore them. The old Pagans Arnobius lib. 6.
will put an answer into the mouths of our modern Papists, Deos per simulacra
veneramur, we adore the saints by those Images. Nay more: if we should oppose
them with the same instances that the Ancients objected against the Heathens, I
believe it would exercise their Logic to acquit them. Quid si coli se
nesciunt? (said the christians in Arnobius) what if the saints Arnobius l. 6.
do not see this worship, which the papists perform to their Images? Is not
then that image worship blind idolatry? Cur invocat is deorum nominibus, oculos
in coelu^ non tollitis? sed lapides, et ligna spectatis? Lactant. l. 2. c. 2.
If you worship not the images on the wall, but the saints in heaven, why do ye
not lift up your eyes to heaven? but fasten the^ on the picture before you?
These were objected by the fathers to the heathen, concerning their idols: and
I believe our idolaters cannot easily and ingenuously assoile them.

But to put all out of doubt. What is an heathenish idol? Shall Gods own
description stand for authentical? Then, The images of the heathen are silver
and gold, the works of men's hands, which have mouths and speak not, eyes and
see not, and ears and hear not. Ps. 135. 15, 16, 17. What branch of this
description concurreth not with their popish images? And if the Italian men in
their Carnival should deal with the Lady of Loretto, as the Arcadian boys did
with Diana in Clem. Alex. Protrept.
their pastimes, put an Haltar about the neck of the Image, might they not
cry, (...), that that Picture had not power enough to put the Rope from her
throat, as those Boys did? and be called (...), the Haltred Goddess?

Finally, to prove this Popish Image-Adoration, to be more Paganish, then that
of the Pagans themselves, I add; the Pagans were never interdicted, from such
a kind of worship, by their gods. But our God has expressly inhibited it unto
Christians, Deuteronomy. 4. The Observation is proposed in the 12. verse, You saw no
similitude: The Illation annexed in the 15. Take heed therefore that you make
not any Image: And the Commination threatened in the 24. The Lord is a consuming
fire: as if Hell fire were the reward of image-worshippers. Again, in the
second Commandment very bowing to an image is forbidden. Whereupon the Church
of Rome fearing that by the light of this evident inhibition, their Mystery of
iniquity should be discovered, they leave this Commandment out of their
books, and Catechismes, which come to the hands of the Common people. And
Vasques to show his love to the truth, goes yet Vasq. de Ador. l. 2. disp. 4.
c. 4.
farther, and affirms, that the second Commandment is Ceremonial, and ought
to be abolished.

Lactantius his words shall be my conclusion for this point: Non est dubium
quin religio nulla est, ubicunque simulacrum est. According to whom thus I
conclude; Without peradventure they have no religion, who worship images: But
the Church of Rome does worship Images: Therefore, without peradventure, the
Church of Rome has No Religion: But are the Apostates; Who do not receive the
love of the Truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness.

The fifth is the worshipping of the Cross; a worship altogether unknown to
the Heathen: and therein therefore more then Heathenish. Cruces etiam nec
colimus, nec optamus: vos plane Arnobius lib. 8.
qui Ligneos Deos consecratis, Cruces ligneas forsitan adoratis, ut deorum
vestrorum parts, says Minutius: that is, We neither wish, nor worship
Crosses: but you who do plainly hallow wooden gods, peradventure you adore
wooden Crosses, as parts of your gods. The Christians apology is absolute,
that they did not worship wooden Crosses: their recrimination to the Heathens,
that they did worship Crosses, is qualified with a peradventure. It is
therefore without peradventure, that the worshipping of a wooden Cross, was
abhorred as abominable, both by the Christians and Heathens.

Indeed, some heretical Christians have Pappus Hist. page 345.
been known and taxed for that Idolatry: The Armenij thence were termed
Charinzarij, that is, (...), the worshippers of the Cross: And since, in the
dotage of the Church, and nonage of Antichrist, that Idolatry has crept in
amongst Christians. Aquine undertook a Aquin. 3. 25. 4.
solemn disputation of the worship of the Cross. And Cornelius Mussus is
transported with the Corn. Mussus to. 1. 662.
adoration, admiration of that wooden Idolatry. O Crux admiranda -- O Salus,
Vita, Resurrectio: Salus animarum, Vita coporis, and Resurrectio animae, simul
and corporis: that is, O admirable Cross -- O Health, Life, and Resurrection:
Health of the soul, Life of the body, and Resurection of both soul and body.
And that these may not be put off as private opinions, of some particular
persons; hear the universal practice of their whole Church;

O Crux ave, All Hail O Cross.
Spes vnica, Our only Hope.
Hoc Passionis tempore, This time of the passion.
Auge pijs justitiam, Augment the godlies devotio^.
Reisque dona veniam, And forgive the ungodlies transgression.
Never could I conceive, the just cause of such senseless idolatry, till my
text suggested it: They have not the love of the truth; but take pleasure in
unrighteousness.

The sixth is the Sacrament. Be that blessed Bread, as Sacred, as the most
sanctified heart can conceive; yet it is but Bread notwithstanding. Howbeit,
the Papists give unto it cultu^ latriae, that worship which is due to God.
Dominu^ Deu^ tuu^ Council. Trident. Sess. 13. Can. 5. Costerus Enchir. cap. 7.
adorabis, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, says Costerus, speaking of the
Sacrament. The whole Church does cry to it, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccatamundi,
O thou Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world. According to which
is that stupendous superscription of our Sanders to his Treatise, on the Lords
Supper: To the Body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, under the form of
Bread and Wine, all Honor, Praise, and thanks be given for ever and ever. Now
we knowing that the Carnal presence is but a carnal conceit; and that the
trick of Transubstantiation is as true, as any of Ovids Metamorphoses; We
cannot but pronounce the words of Costerus, (which he delivers by way of
supposition) Colere frustum panis pro Deo, to worship a piece of bread, is
worse then to worship viva animalia, the brute Beasts, as the Egyptians did: or
Imagines, images, as the Heathen did: or to worship rubrum Stannum inhas^am
elevatum, a red Clout, clapped on a Pole, as the Lappians do. Nay, it is
(says he) such a gross idolatry, qualis in Orb terrarum non fuit, as the
like whereof was never in the world, never seen among all the Heathens.

Those stupid Idolaters, did absurdly-execrably. The first did make their god,
and furthermore they did worship it. But these (to show that they are
superlative) go a degree farther. 1. They make their god. 2. They worship it.
3. They eat it. Now that men should make their god, and eat their god, none
can believe, it, but those that do not receive the love of the Truth; but have
pleasure in unrighteousness.

Thus the Papists do make this Holy Sacrament, a profane Idol, acording to
our positions: and they may make it so also, according to their own opinions:
It is their opinion, yea a ruled case confirmed by a Canon of the Council of
Florence, That three things are required Conc. Flor. in Dec. Euchar. sect.
Quinto.
to the perfect celebrating of the Sacrament; Materia, Forma, and Persona. 1.
That there be a right matter. 2. A right Form, that they use the words
belonging thereunto. 3. That the Minister do celebrate that Sacrament, cum
intention faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, with an intention to do what the
Church does: quarum si aliquid desit, non perficitur Sacramentum: if any of
those three be wanting, it is no Sacrament. I assume: but it is possible that
the Priest may forget to have the same intention with the Church: possible
therefore it is, that the Sacrament which he administreth, may be no
Sacrament: And therefore it is possible that the Papists may worship a mere
piece of Bread, which (in the judgment of their own Dr Costerus) is the most
absurd and abominable Cost. Enchir. c. 7.
idolatry, that ever was in the world. They will therefore be constrained unto
Gersons (...), and to adore the Host with this Caution: Scilicet, si recte
consecrat a sit, that is, I adore thee O Host (must the Papists say) if thou
be consecrated aright. Otherwise they cannot escape that concession, and
confession, which our Doctor Featly extorted from their Dr Featly's Cons. with
Mr Musket, touching transub. die. 1.
Mr. Musket: That the Popish Communicant may sometime commit Idolatry,
materially. Salva res est erubescit.

Finally, the World is their Pantheon, and according to some Papists, every
Creature therein is an Object of their religious adoration. The opinion is but
of one private man, but the Church makes it General, by their public
approbation. For I suppose they print nothing, but permissu Superiorum, by the
allowance of Authority.

It is the assertion of Vasquez, in his treatise Vasq. de ad^r. l. 2. Disp. 1.
c. 2. sent. 5, 8, and 10.
of Adoration: That any thing (in the nature of the thing, and if the matter be
discreetly handled) may be adored with God. His instances are odious. God
(says he) may be worshipped, even in a Wisp of straw. Yea God (says he) may
be Tortura Torti. page 312. Dr. Coll. contra Eud^m. part. 3. cap. 93.
lawfully adored, in the apparition of the Devil, as it is avouched by our
learned Bishop, and confirmed by his Avoucher.

Nay if the World be barren of Creatures, they will feign phant asies of
their own Heads. Saint George, and Saint Christopher, were Allegories, not
Histories. Their own Authors dare not ventvre their Credits, that there were
ever such men. Is it not monstrous then, that they should be Saints? How often
have our old deluded Forefathers of England cried God, and Saint George at the
onset of their Battles? And how many have called on Saint Christopher in the
peril of Shipwreck? and yet these potent Saints, were according to Saints
Paul's phrase, 1 Cor. 8. (idolum nihil est in mn^do) plain Idols: there were
never any such creatures in the world. Thus mightily are they mislead by the
working of Satan: not to receive the love of the Truth, but to take pleasure
in unrighteousness.

At length, to wade out of this Ocean of idolatry; concerning the measure
whereof, I confess Popery to be fadomelesse; and compared even to Paganism,
it is like the Sea, resembled to a little River.

The ignorant Pagans, did adore Images, as gods; peradventure, and some of
them: But that ever their learned Doctors did teach, that an Image made with
hands, was to be adored in the same kind, and height of worship, with that
God, whom they professed to be the Maker of heaven and earth; Herein are they
out-stripped by the Papists, in an incomparable exorbitance. An Image is to be
worshipped with the same worship, wherewith God himself is to be worshipped:
this is the Catholic Doctrine of the Roman Church.

Imagini Christi, Latria debetur; Aquine says, Aqu. 2 2. qu. 94. Art. 2. ad
Arg. 1.
that to the image of Christ, is due Latria, or the proper worship of God. And
although Aquine was a private Doctor, yet can they not infer this to be a
private Doctrine; because he is Pater Doctorn^, the father of their Doctors,
says Malvenda. And I suppose the Thomists will not easily gainsay, or unsay
what Thomas has affirmed.

Hear the natural Doctrine of this Popish Father: Cruci exhibemus Latriae
cultum; quia in Cruce Christi, ponimus spem salutis; that is, We exhibit
Latria, or Divine worship unto the Cross, because in the Cross of Christ we
place the hope of our salvation: And he confirms this from the consent of
the Church, sic cantat Ecclesia. And that he may insanire cumratione, he
renders two reasons, for this affertion; Crux Christi, tum propter
representationem, tum propter membrorum contactum, est adoranda, Latria: the
Cross of Christ is to be adored with Divine worship, both because it does
represent, and because it did touch the members of Christ. And Pares cum
paribus, like will to like, to couple blasphemy with idolatry, he adds: Crux
Aquin. 3. quaest. 25. Arti^. 4.
Christi fuit unita verbo aliquo modo; that is, the Cross was in some sort
united to the Word. All this we may read in Aquine.

To exclude all evasions: Constans est Theologorum Azor. Inst. mor. part. 1.
lib. 9. c. 6.
sententia imaginem eodem cultu, and honor, coli and honorari, quo id colitur,
cujus est imago: Azorius affirms it to be the constant opinion of all Popish
Divines, that an image is to be worshipped with the same worship, wherewith
the thing whereof it is the Image, is worshipped. Pontificale Romanum.
And this determination of this question, must be infallible unto them,
because a Pope has defined it. Crux legati erit a dextris, quia debetur ei
Latria; that is, The Cross of the Legate must be placed on the right hand,
because Latria, or Divine worship is due to it. These are the words of the
Roman Pontifical, published by the Authority of Pope Clement 8. Now whether
they be not idolaters, who communicate that worship to an Image, which they
themselves acknowledge to be due to God alone: let themselves give sentence.
Hereupon, as some have called Rome, (...), that is, the Abstract of the World:
so may we term it, (...), that is, the Compendium of Idolatry.

Pardon my peremptory conclusion: Revel: 22. 11. He that is filthy, let him be
filthy still: and he who is a Papist, let him be a Papist still. But let him
know, that he is poisoned with the most filthy Idolatry, that was ever
supported on the face of the earth. Woeful is their estate, who receive not the
love of the Truth: But have such pleasure in unrighteousness.

SERMON XXIII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 11. God shall send them strong delusion.
Precedents of obstinatenesse. The Papists obstinate, and deluded. No
reconciliation with Rome. The Papists are deluders. Want of provision for
Converts an hindrance to reformation. Pronenesse of People to be deluded by
Popery. GOD does send delusion. A caveat to the Church of England, against
obstinatenesse.

IN this verse follows one of the Passive properties; the punishment
internal of those that embrace Antichrist. A strange blindness, videlicet,
that God shall send men such strong delusions, that they should believe a lie:
Whose blindness our Apostle does declare, by two degrees thereof. First, per
(...), by way of admiration, in the first words, God shall send them strong
delusion. Secondly, per (...), by way of amplification, in the last: That they
shall believe a lie. Blinded in both. The first clause is my Text for this
time: God shall send them strong delusion.

(...), says Theodoret; With what sin men are affected, by that sin men
are afflicted. In this cause, and clause: never did the impression of Wax
render the image of any Seal, more exactly, then here the punishment of God,
does the offense of Man. In general, culpa and poena, the sin committed, and
shame admitted, are both one, Ignorance. In particular, first they scorned the
Truth, and are scourged with a delusion. Next, They received not the love of
the Truth, that is, they heard it not effectually; therefore they are deluded
effectually, even with strong delusions. Thirdly, these Swine trampled on
Pearl, and they contemned the very Word of God: God therefore does revenge his
own Cause: For this cause (says my Text) God shall send them strong delusion.

To support your memory, and mine own, I propose this method. Observe here two
things, two works: the first of the Creator, obduration: God shall send them.
The second of the Creature, obsirmation: strong delusion. In the last I will
show two points; the (...), and the (...): 1. That men are deluded. 2. By what
men are deluded. The latter of these must involve the cooperation of the
Agents, and of the Patients: the Activity of the Deluders, and the Passibility,
Capacity, or rather receptivitie, and proclivity of the deluded. Of these
ordine retrogrado: of the last, first. To which I will preface Precedents, of
some who have been deluded in the same nature, though not in the same Measure.
And as a Preface to that Preface, I will premise the signification of the
phrase, what is meant by these words, a strong delusion.

Strong delusion, in the original, (...). The phrase is like it self, very
Energeticall. (...) is a Deceit, or Cousenage: and (...) is one who does
profess an Art of cousening men, etiam spectantibus, although they look on
them, says Eustathius upon Homer. Let then (...) pass for a Iugler, and (...)
for Iugling. But Antichristianisme is not only (...), a slight light
Legerdemaine: it is moreover, (...), an actual, and effectual imposture.
Again, it is (...), the Genetive used in stead of the Adjective, is very
significative: as Vir dolorum, a man of grief, that is, a most grieved man. So
(...), the strength of delusion; that is, a most strong delusion. Yea it adds
to the strength of delusion, that the word strength is reiterated: in the ninth
verse is mentioned (...), the strength of Satan: in this (...), the strength of
delusion. So that what strength of delusion can be either hatched by Satan, or
acted by man, this shall be al employed, to plead for Antichrist. Excellently
expressed by Occumenius, on this text: (...), Oecumen. in 2 ^h^s. 2. 11.
that is, Saint Paul does call Antichristianisme, the strength of delusion,
that is, a strong delusion, and potent to deceive. A delusion to make men
desperately obstinate: according to the Greek proverb, (...), You shall not
persuade them, although you do persuade them. And according to Job 21. 14.
Recede a nobis: viam scientiarum tuarum nolumus: Depart from us for we will not
the knowledge of thy ways. In a word: men shall be so persuaded by Antichrist,
that all the world shall never persuade them from Antichrist: that they will
remain confident, Obstinate, and immovable in their errous. This is (...),
their strong delusion.

These are strong delusions of Antichristians: that they may not seem strange
delusio^s to Christians, impossible, incredible: I might allege many
precedents to avouch them. Take a taste of a few only.

Amongst the Hebrews in the old testament, 2 Chronicles. 30. 5. a Decree was made,
and proclaimed, from Dan to Bersheba, that the people of Israel should repair
to the Passover. Here was the command of their King, that they should do what
they themselves knew to be the Commandment of their God. And although they
professed themselves to be the Church of God, yet being become Obstinate,
neither their King, nor their God could persuade them, Verse 10. As the Posts
passed through Ephraim, Manasses, and Zebulun, the people laughed them to
scorn, and mocked them. In the new Testament, all the Oracles and Miracles,
which Christ spoke and did, could not persuade the Jews, to receive their own
Messiah, whom they looked for, Matthew. 27. 42. they said, Let him come down
from the Cross, and we will believe him: but their hearts knew that their
tongues even then lied. For Matthew. 28. 15. they themselves knew, that he did
more then come down from the Cross, He came up from the Grave; and yet they
lay buried in their obstinatenesse, and gave money to disgrace him, and to
damn themselves. This I think was (...), as I take it, a strong delusion.

Amongst the Graecians: (...); Ignatius ep. 5.
that is, They are possessed with ignorance, because of their affected
madness, says Ignatius. And Clemens complains, (...), Clem Alex. Protrept.
that ignorance, and obstinatenesse had transformed some into stones: so hard
were they against the impression of the Truth. Amongst the Latins, Saint
Ambrose accuses some perverse Ambr. in 4. ad Ephesians.
people, who were wont, Mala quae noverint defendere, ne viderentur cedere, to
defend points which they knew to be false, lest they should appear to be put
to the worst. Cyprian tells Cypr. ad Demet. Sect. 1.
damned Demetrianus to his teeth, Facilius est turbidi maris, concitos fluctus
clamoribus retundere, quam tuam rabiem tractatibus coercere: that it was easier
to hallow to the tempestuous Sea, than to appease his siercenesse with writing
books. Lactantius has the like. Si solemn quidem in manibus gestemus, sidem
non commodabunt Lactant. lib. 7. cap. 1.
ei doctrinae: in we could carry the Sun in our hands, yet would they not
vouchsase credence, to the apparent Truth.

To proceed further, amongst the Africans; Saint Augustine administreth a
pregnant example. Aug. ep. 162.
The Donatists did accuse Caecilianus unto the Emperor Constantine: The
Emperor assigned Meltiades Bishop of Rome, and some other Bishops, to the
disquisition of that cause: by who^ Caecilianus was acquitted. The Donatists
appealed again from them to the Emperor; and were again condemned at Orleance,
by a Commission appointed by the Emperor. Notwithstanding they appealed to the
Emperor the third time, who hearing their cause in his own person, and with
singular diligence; concluded Caecilianus to be most innocent, and condemned
his adversaries for most perverse people. For all this the Donatists persisted
in their Schism. Nay he relates yet a stranger obstinatnesse, Aug. Epist. 50.
Bonif.
then this: Diverse of the Donatists, were so strongly deluded, that they did
kill themselves, because they would not be constrained to go to Church.

Among the Jews: in the reign of Theodosius Pappus Hist. page 58.
the Emperor, there was an Imposter in Crete, who persuaded them that he was
Moses; sent thither to lead them into their Country, through the Sea.
Whereupon he brought the multitude unto a Rock, commanding them, to cast
themselves into the Sea, with a general warrantize, against all danger and
drowning. Leap some did, and drowned they were: only the Mariners, then
there-by, repressed the madness of the maine multitude. But the Imposter
conveyed himself out of the company.

And finally, for the Mahometans at this day: they term themselves Ishlami,
that is, men of one Mind: Living in their Idolatry, as the Disciples did in
the place of Prayer Act 2. 1. (...), all in one mind: impossible to be
reclaimed. All these make good this phrase of my Text, (...), they were
besotted with a strong delusion

I have already inverted my Method, I must moreover alter it again, that I
may proceed in order, as the points offer themselves naturally to be
considered. The next point is the (...)* That the Papists are the Deluded:
which indeed is a probable conjecture, if not a plain Demonstration, that they
are the limbs of Antichrist. Bestiae character intelligi potest, obstinata
malitia: Aquine says, that by the mark of the Beast, we may understand
Obstinate malice. Aquin. Su. 3. qu. 63. Art 3 ad 3.
But none under heaven are more Obstinate for their side, nor more malicious
against their gainesayers that the Papists. And Aquine says, this is the mark
of the Beast: let the Papists mark this. This also does S. Paul prophecy of
the Papists, in the 8 verse. Mark (says our blessed Bishop Jewel, mark: S.
Paul, says Antichrist Jewel in 2 These. 2. 12.
shall be Consumed, not Converted. From whence we may conceive what hope there
is of Reconciliation and Reformation from Rome; which is the censure, not of
that Bishop alone, but of all the Church of England. The error of Popery,
Homily of good works, part 1
was so spread abroad, that not only the unlearned people: but also the Priests
and teachers, partly by glory and Covetousnes, were corrupted; and partly by
Blindness, deceived with the same abominations: that as Ahab having but one
Elias, but one Teacher to persuade him to the Truth of God, but 450. false
prophets, to persuade him unto Baal: So of the Papists, both Priest and people
are strongly deluded with Idolatry. This is the judgment of Our Church,
concerning their Church.

We may say of all Papists, of our English Papists especially, in them is
fulfilled that fearful prophecy Revel. 17. 6. They are made Drunk with the
Golden cup of the whore of Babylon. Idolatry is spiritual whoredom.

And it is a Catholic grant, that Rome is the Head of Image Adoration,
Concedimus Catholicae Suarez Apolog lib. 5. cap 18 number. 20.
doctrinae, de Cultu and Adoratione Imaginum Ecclesiam Romana^ caput esse,
says Suarez. Whence we infer, Therefore it is the Fountain of Spiritual
whoredom. Again, the Pope does not Sext. Decret. lib 3. tit. 23. de
Jmmunitate Ecclesiae.
only term himself the Head, Caput, but sponsum ecclesiae, the Husband of
the Church. Which thing alone, is a sufficient cause to call Rome meretricem
Babylonicam, the whore of Babylon: because the Romanists do teach that there is
another Husband of their Church besides Christ: the Pope. By which enchanting
Circe, the ordinary Papists are so bewitched, that they take themselves, to
be the Best of men, the only Catholics: when as indeed they are very Homer.
Odys. lib. 10.
Beasts ((...),) made Drunk with palpable Idolatry. But so drunk, and so
strongly deluded, that we may ignatius Epist. 5
speak to the Romist, that phrase of the greek father, (...). Lactantius may
Lactantius lib. 7. cap 1.
translate that of Ignatius into Latin, ij sunt homines qui contra veritatem
clausis oculis quoquo modo latrant, these are the men who shut their eyes, and
then open their mouths, in any manner to bark against the Truth. Should we in
the yearning bleeding bowels of Christian compassion, by Sermons, Books, or
Arguments, endeavor to draw them from Idolatry: We know our intertainement.
2 Chronicles. 30. 10. They will laugh us to scorn, mock the messengers of God, and
despise his words, and misuse his Prophets. Now this, as I take it, I may term
(...), a strong delusion.

But that you may not suspect that I delude you, by faining this Popish
delusion: when as they have no such stupide obstinatnesse: I will both refer
the reader to the large and labored treatise of Dr. Beard, on this point; And
also render him present satisfaction, by a present brief catalogue of their
own Confessions. Dr Beard of Antichrist part 3. Lessius de Antich part 1. Them.
11.
From Boniface, to Vitaliane: for the space of three score years, the Church of
Rome was woefully perplexed, with a perpetuated misery: by Plagues, Famines,
Inundations, Earthquakes, and the Invasion of the Persians (wherein fourscore
and ten thousand Christians were slain at one time) by Seditions in the East,
the Heresy of the Monothelites, and the Captivity and banishment of St.
Martine, the sacrilegious robbing of the Church Treasury, which had been
many years a gathering. Finally, in the time of Vitaliane, Rome it self was
Ransacked, and the greek Emperor took away all the Ornaments thereof. Where
note, that the Beginning of the misery of the Church of Rome, was about the
beginning of that arrogant usurpation, of that title of Oecumenicall Bishop.
Well, how was that Boniface moved with this Bonerges? This Thundering Preaching
by those Destroying miseries, which smote them, as thick and swift as
Lightning, prevailed not with the Pope, to lay aside the pontifical title of
Universal Bishop. But to show of whom St. John did prophecy Rev. 9. 20. The
Pope by these plagues repented not yet: But from Pride, they proceeded to
superstition. Boniface began with the Universal title, and Vitaliane added
unto it, the Universal Latin Service. And all these Plagues (which went
between for 60 years) of Fire, Famine, Blood etc. could preach, neither
Penitence for the first: nor Prevention for the later. But still they persisted
in their pride, and superstition. This I suppose, is somewhat semblable to the
phrase in my text: (...) a Strong Delusio^. The particular profession, of
particular Philip. Nicolaus de Antich c. 15.
papists, is yet more pregnant: thus writes Luther of his Popish Devotion,
before he was Converted. The Authority of the Pope (said he) was so potent
with me, that I thought it a crime demeriting Damnation, vel in minimo
dissentire ab illo, to differ from him, even in the least thing. And that
conceit carried me so far, that I esteemed John Husse, to be so cursed an
Heretic, vt vel de eo cogitare, sceleratum ducerem: that I held it to be a
sin, but to think of him. And in defense of the Popes authority, I my
self, would have carried fire and faggots to have burned that heretic, and
therein I did persuade my self, me summum praestare obsequium Deo, that I
should have done God singular service. His passion might be built on that
Catholic position, Nullus homo potest se asserere in veritate christianum, aut
esse Turrecre. lib. 3. c. 30.
in statu salutis, qui subesse renuit Romano Pontifici: that is, no man can
affirm that he is a true christian, or that he is in the state of salvation,
if he refuse to be subject to the Pope of Rome. Neither is this the singular
querk of any one particular papist, but the solemn definitive sentence of the
Pope himself: Romano Pontifici, Onuphri^^ in Vita Pij.
beati Petri Apostolorum principis successori, ac Jesus Christi vicario veram
obedientiam spondeo ac iuro. Obedience to the Pope of Rome, the Pope of Rome
Pius 4. did exact it from the Clergy Papists by oath: and did impose it on all
papists, as an article of their faith, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest,
without which there can be no salvation. The fruit whereof at this day is this.
Quarrels of Paul 5. lib. 4.
In Italy, it is an universal approved axiom: that the Pope cannot err or
fail, because he has the assistance of the Holy spirit, and therefore it is
necessary to obey his commandments: whether they be just, or injust. That to
him appertains the clearing of all difficulties: So that, it is not lawful
to depart from his Resolution: nor to make reply, though his resolution be
unjust. That though all the world differ in opinion from the Pope, yet it is
meet nevertheless, to yield to him. And he is not excused from sin, who
follows not his advice, though all the world judge it to be false. Thus far
the learned Author, which is the very application of my text: (...), the
papists are under a strong delusion.

That of Cupers, I have already quoted: Mancipiu^ Romana Ecclesiae, he calls
himself the slave of the church of Rome. A slave is servile enough to any
profession. Malvenda notwithstanding Malvenda de Antichristo lib. 4. cap 5.
does protest himself yet more Slavish: Moderetur -- Sacer ipse Romanus
dictator, cujus pedibus caput submittimus: we (says he) do lay our head
under the feet of that Dictator of Rome. Our own countrymen, Lewis Owen of
the English Colleges. 16.
err not from the same mark. The English students at Rome, did once profess,
that they were ready to suffer martyrdom for the Popes sake: that thereby his
authority might be enlarged, his power increased, and his kingdom enriched.
We are yours (said they) both Bodies and Souls: by our lives to do you
obedient service, and by our deaths to do your Holiness honor. By name
english Throckmorton, Dr Prideaux Conc. in. 1 Samuel 14. 26.
is a miraculous instance, of the monstrous delusions, in these bewitched
Popelings; who is reported at his last gasp, to have refused the giving up the
ghost, until he had entreated leave of his superior. And indeed for all our
Trent. Hist. lib. 5
English Papists, me thinks I hear our seduced countrymen of the laity to
speak out of the mouth of the French nobleman. This is the story recorded by
the author of the Trent history. Francis of Guise, concerning the point of
Religion said, he referred himself to the judgment of the learned; But
protested that no council should have so great authority with him, as to make
him decline one jote from the old belief. And that the forenamed English
monkish delusion, may not be monastical, and walk alone, I present you with
a pair of Italian instances, out of Bellarmine, who per saxa, perignes, Bell.
de Mon. lib. 2. cap. 21.
waded through Fire and Water, to be pliable to their Imperious deluders. One
at the Lordly command of a Lord abbot, did thrust himself into a burning Oven:
and the other upon the like injunction, three years together, day and night,
fetched water two long miles, to water a dry stick, that it might grow: only
because his superior did command it.

I would that from these particulars, I could not frame a general conclusion.
Malvenda mentions two hundred thousands of the followers Malvenda lib. 1.
cap. 8.
of an impostor called Barchosba, who had every man abscissum digitum, a
stubbe-finger. Because at their admission, by way of probation every of them
did cut off a finger, to tender an infallible testimony, how resolute, they
were to do him any service. I fear the Pope has the same number of the same
nature, 200000, even an army, who will cut off their hands, yea and pluck out
their eyes too, and grave in their hearts, what was the poesy of Erasmus his
King, nulli cedo: an obstinate Papist will yield to no man. They fail not to
practice that precept Abbot in ^^uda^ c. 6.
of a Pope, (Pius 5 as I take it) who sent his Agnus Dei*s into England, unto
our English Papists, with this inscription: Fili, da mihi cortuum, and
sufficit. O my son give me thy heart, and it is sufficient. To give man,
Gods portion, Proverbs 23. 26. as I conceive it, is a potent delusion.

Which is a sufficient warrant unto me, to retort their own words, upon their
own deluded obfirmation. Infoeli^ hominum etc. a Eudemon in Abbot. epist.
miserable generation of men are they, in whom error has taken so deep root,
that their minds being blinded with the hatred of the truth: they do not only
not acknowledge those things which they themselves do read, write, and preach;
But which is far more miserable, de sua sibi miseria blandiantur, they
flatter themselves in their own misery. Thus go they on, deceiving, and
being deceived. Behold the plain accomplishment of this prophecy in my text:
(...), a strong delusion.

When our eyes look on a curious webb: our ears cannot but listen after the
Artists, who have woven it together so cunningly. Here, Popery is the one: and
the Pope the Other. The Pope has drawn, and does detain the Popish, in this
foresaid strange obstinatnesse. Whom may we suppose to lock up men's hearts in
obstinatnesse, rather than him, who has the keys for his emblem? And whom
may we suspect to enclose a world of obstinate people entangled in errors,
rather than him, who has the net for his cogn^sance?

In which errors, and delusions, the Pope does ensnare his people and
proselytes, both by the os^entation of miracles, and by the subtletie of
sophistical doctrine. First, by miracles: for it is said, there shall arise
false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so
that they shall deceive, if it were possible the very Eleci, Matthew. 24. 24.
And experience has long since taught us, how pliable the minds of people are,
to be transported with miracles. The old Gentiles were confident, Herod. in
Thaleia
that there was a divine power in Jupiter, because the Lord permitted the
Devil, to raise a mighty slorme of wind, to overblow and overthrow with sand
the army of Camb^ses, which went to Pentapolis on purpose to spoil the Temple
of Jupiter. Of these delusions, for the promoting of popery, I have discoursed
already. I proceed to the second.

The Popish obstinatenesse I may describe, in the very description, which the
Papists themselves have given of the obstinatenesse of other men. Malvenda thus
puts the case: The cause (says he) of the obstinatenesse of the Chinese,
that it is impossible to convert them, Malvenda de Antich. l. 3. c. 10.
consists in three things: In the men the Seducers, in the Motive to the
seducing, and in the men seduced. The first cause that China's conversion is
impossible, is, (says he) Co^spiratio Antistitum, the cunning of the learned
to keep out all foreign instruction. The second, Ne nefarij quaeslus
extorquentur, and mendacia coarguerentur: their gain and glory do move them
thereunto. And thirdly, the people are made pliable to be hoodwink't, Superbia,
suarum rerum infinito amore, and pueruli educatione: by the pride of
themselves, and prejudice of others, which they have sucked in from their
Cradleinfancy. In Popery also: since we see such a sympathy, betwixt the
seducers, and the seduced; that the Priests hands are not so cunning to temper
the bait, as the peoples mouths are open to swallow it; We may infer this
Prophecy is in them accomplished: The Papists, both Priests and people, God
has sent the^ strong delusion.

The Papists do, as they speak: the cause that their conversion is impossible
is this: Conspiratio antistitum, ne peregrina in eas terras inferantur sacra:
their Prelates and Priests concur, and conspire, to cut off the sound of al
foreign religion, that may occasion any reformation. The case is plain and
notorious. By their inhibition of Books, confession for their souls, and
inquisition for their bodies, by their prayers in a strange tongue, and the
Scriptures indeed in no tongue. The world knows they have so immured in their
adherents, that it is as easy for a Christian to enter into China, as for
Christianity to enter Rome, or reformation the breast of a Romist. By the
policy of their prelacy, they have made the way to reform Rome, as narrow as
the eye of a Needle. If God please not to alter, the very nature of the
Creature, there is no hope to effect it.

Spurred on are they to this desperate delusion, by a double instigation, as it
follows in Malvenda's phrase, Extorquere nefarios quaestus, and coargui
mendacia non patientur: to confess their errors, and to forsake their Pomp,
flesh and blood cannot endure it, they will never perform it.

Their gain alone, is a sufficient obstacle to make them Obstinate. Preach
reformation unto the Papists, and according to that, Acts 16. 19, 20, and 21.
The Masters when they see that the hope of their gain will be gone, they will
exclaim against Paul and Silas, saying; These men do exceedingly trouble the
City, and teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, being
Romans. To descend from the dignity of an Archbishop to be a Dean, we see it
is enough to apostate the unstable: and has been an occasion, that our
modern Ecebolius did return to his vomit. Therefore when the Conversion of
their religion, shall be the subversion of their Estates: when learned men,
(both Priests and Monks) by leaving their Church, in our Church must of force
become, aut medici aut mendici, either to dig or to beg; either to exercise
some other calling, or endure poverty, if not extremity; Now to go from plenty
to penury, is a wide step, and few will venture it. I do deplore, that our
Proselytes are so poorly provided for, and do conceive the expectation of
Poverty, to be a Remora to reformation. Flesh and blood will rather be
obstinate in a false Religion, then beg in the true.

Next, it concerns their Credit, to support their delusion. That men learned
and great, should acknowledge such gross absurdities; as the adoration of
Images, the exalting of a Bishop above Kings, equal to Christ, and (in truth)
to make the whole Church, the slave of one man, it is incredible: and therefore
they must exercise strong delusion to veil it.

The Panther is said to hide his head, when he Pliny l 8. c. 17.
draws the poor Beasts to destruction. Even so, the Papists will hide those
horrible Heads of their religion, for fear the ugliness thereof should
affright away men, even of an indifferent understanding or conscience. And
therefore Beza said well, that Ignatius was the Angel, Revel. 10. 1. Clothed
with a Cloud: by Mystery of Jesuits, page 51.
which is meant, that he (and they) cover their enterprises, and hide the
mystery of their religion. So that for many of their learned, I may speak of
them, as Lactantius does of the old Lactant. l. 3. c. 24 Malvenda lib. 3. cap.
14.
Heathen: I know not what to say of these men, qui cum semel aberraverint,
constanter in stultitia perseverant, who when they have once erred, will
constantly proceed in their folly, and vana vanis defendunt, and defend one
falsehood with another. Unless I may suspect them, aut joci causa philosophari,
aut prudentes, and scios mendacia defendenda suscipere, that either they
dispute in jest, or willingly and wittingly take upon them to defend those
things, which they know to be false: quasi ut ingenia sua in malis rebus, aut
exerceant, aut ostentent, as if their study was, either to exercise, or to show
their wits in the Patronizing of Paradoxes. Or I may speak to them as
Augustine Aug. de Mor. Cath. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 31.
did to the Manichies: Non dicam quae vos ignoratis, sed quae vos occultatis.
Many of the Papists, I cannot persuade my self, that they do not know their
errors; but they will not show their errors: and to this purpose they use
learning to avouch them. (...) says Clement of Alexandria, Clem Alex. Protrept.
concerning the Idolaters of Grecia. We may say the same of the Latin, in
English: the Papists in our time have more learning, and cunning, than they had
in old time. Now, when the height of error, and the height of learning, are
wedded together; may we suspect, expect, that the Monster of my Text, may be
engendered betwixt them, (...), a strong delusion.

Hurl a Boule down a steep Hill, and it will run passing swiftly: the
cause of which swiftness is principally, the outward violence of the hand, and
concurrence of the Hill. But withal, it proceeds from an inward propensitie,
which that body has to move downward. So in Popery: Facilis est descensus
Averni. The Learning and Policy of the prime men in that religion, is
admirably potent to persuade, delude, and to deceive if it were possible, even
the very Elect. Yet, besides that, there is an inward propensity, which does
forward people unto Popery. It is their nature, altera natura, August. epist.
167 Festo.
custom and prescription, which makes men so obstinate in the Romish
Religion. Cum tam perspicua Verit as, aures ac corda hominum feriat, tantae
quosdam malae consuetudinis vorago submersit, ut omnibus authoritatibus,
rationibusque resistere, quam consentire mallent. When as so clear a Truth
(says Saint Augustine) does smite men's Ears, and Hearts also, yet so vast a
whirlepoole, of an evil custom, does so swallow some, that they will rather
gainsay all arguments, and authorities, than yield. Their Fathers were Papists,
therefore the Children will be Papists: This is the Grand child's argument even
to the third and fourth generation. In Saint Paul's phrase to the Ephesians. 2. 2.
(...), filij contumaciae, they are the children of obstinatenesse. Popery
therefore they will profess, as their inheritance. This makes every ignorant
Papist, like the Accipencer, to swim against the stream of all arguments; And
as it is the nature of the Carpe, when the Fisherman does spread his Net, to
thrust his head into the Mud, and so he cannot be caught: Semblably, when the
Fishers of men, Preachers, would persuade a Papist, he does thrust his head
into the mud of superstition, the example of his Ancestors, saying as the Jews
did in Jeremy 44. 16. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us, in the
Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto it. And thereby the Preachers,
become like Peter, Luke 5. 5. They fish a long time, but catch nothing. Thus
are they under the pretense of custom, transported with a strong delusion.
Here in two words, let us learn two lessons; one of imitation, another of
commiseration.

First, I will speak of the Papists, what Saint Aug. ep. 167. Fest.
Augustine spoke of the Donatists: Si pertinacia insuperabiles vires, habere
conatur: Quant as habere debet constantia? If the Papists be obstinate, shall
not Protestants be constant? If they be (...), shall not we be (...)? If
nature teach them to be perverse in the Romish religion; because they think it
old: shall not grace make us resolved in the reformed religion; because we
know it true? God forbid!

Secondly, that we supplicate to our God, for our seduced countrymen, in the
phrase of Saint Augustine,: Nil prote nobis aliud quam Aug. contr. Academ. l.
1. c. 1.
vota restant: quibus ab illo, cui haec sunt curae, Deo, si possimus
impetremus, ut te tibi reddat, ita enim facile te reddet, and nobis. We must
pray, that God would break the snare, that those seduced souls may escape
like a Bird out of the hand of the Fowler. Magna est veritas, praevaleat. Pray
we that God would restore them, to themselves: and then they will be restored
to us. Pray we that God may be pleased to give them his strong truth, which
may open their eyes, to see this strong delusion.

I have ended the first part, and now draw toward the end of the whole
discourse. The first point was the obsirmation, how men are made obstinate by
men, by two means, both by the outward policy of others, and by the inward
proclivity of themselves. The second is obduration, when men are made obdurate
by God; as in this, Deus mittet, God will send the^ strong delusion. Hence our
Divines distinguish obduration Zanch. in Ephesians. 4. 16.
into three parts: Natural, habitual, and judicial. Natural is that
hardness of heart, which proceeds from Nature: this was in the Disciples,
whereby they could not discern Christ's power, although they saw his miracles,
Mark 6. 52. Habitual, is when the habit, or Custom of sinning brings a
Callum (or thick Skin) over the Conscience of a sinner, whereby he becomes
insensible of sin: as unapt to do good, having been accustomed to do
evil, as the Ethiopian is to change his skin, or the Leopard to change his
spots, Ierem. 13. 23. The judicial obduration: when out of Gods judgment our
hearts are hardened! Peccatum being poena peccantis, one sin being the
punishment of another: and (...), a recompense of their error, Romans 1. 27. All
these are included in this Text. First, men have a pronenesse to Antichristian
superstition, that is Natural. Secondly, they delude themselves, by
prescription, and plead custom of their Idolatry: that is habitual. Thirdly,
God smites them in their error, with their error, for their error: this is
a just Judicial obduration, or hardening of men hearts. The text tells us,
for this cause, God shall send them strong delusion.

Now how GOD does send delusion, and how far God may be said to make men
obstinate: I dispute not. It is enough, if I say only with the Greek Father,
(...): Oecumen. in in 2 These. 2. 11.
That is, we must not read the phrase, God shall send, literally: as if God did
simply send delusions, but by it we must understand, Gods permission. Or with
the Latin Father; Non obdurat Deus* Aug. ep. 105. Sixto.
impertiendo malitiam, sed non impertiendo gratiam: that is, God does not
harden men, by giving them malice, but by not giving them grace. And a third
Father gives a reason Fulgentius.
for both those former: God is not Author of that, whereof he is Vltor.

As water, though the Sun does not exercise on it any actual hardening
power: yet the very absence of it, is cause sufficient, that it shall frieze to
the hardness of a stone. Nay some take Crystal to be Ice, in an high
degree; and that only the perpetual absence of the Sun, does transform it
into a Rock, and makes it malleable. So sinful man, if God shall remove from
him the beams of his Grace, yea but for a time, he will freeze in the dregs of
his sin, and be hardened by the custom of impiety. But if God shall please
perpetually to absent the Sun of his softening grace: such a man will become
a Rock malleable; and sooner shall any person make an impression on a Smiths
Anvile, with his finger, than in the heart of such a one with his tongue.

This I say is enough, but we may say more: That this strong delusion, does
proceed from God, not only by permission, but by immission also. His just
judgment does not only suffer, but strengthen the instruments of strong
delusion: who whip those that have pleasure in untruth, with their own Rod, a
scourge of Scorpions: to make them obstinate and obdurate in their errors. For
this delusion is a punishment, every punishment is an action, every action an
ens; and every ens has God for the efficient cause thereof. And thus it
runs plainly in my Text. Obstinate men would not receive the love of the
Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness: and for this cause, GOD does send
them strong delusion.

Which fearful plague we may see fearfully poured out upon the Romish Church,
upon the Romish Nation especially. I will retort the Less. de Antich. part. 2.
Them. 2. Comp. 9.
saying of Lessius: Philosophi quia juxta veritatem cognita^ no^ vixerunt,
merito in reprobum sensum sunt traditi, Romans 1. quanto justius id accidit
nostris haeresiarchis: that is, it was just with God, to deliver up into a
reprobate sense, the heathen Romans, for covering the light of Nature: How
much more justly does he send strong delusion on the Christian Romans, who
extinguish the light of grace? Such as go out of the way, with the candle in
their hand, demerite to have the Candle put out, and themselves to wander in
unextricable darkness. Since the Romans Malvenda de Antich. lib. 4. c. 4.
do brag of themselves, that Rome is the Arc to preserve Gods Oracles; that
in Rome the Gospel of Christ, has been sealed with the blood of two
Apostles, seven and twenty Bishops, and of three hundred thousand holy Martyrs;
Now that these Children of such fathers, shall so degenerate; and these
Successors of such Predecessors shall so apostate; that they transgress the
Commandments of God, to observe the traditions of men, that they advance the
honor of their Church, above their love to the Truth; Is it not now Gods just
judgment, to cast them into the Arms of Antichrist; and for this cause to send
them strong delusion?

In a word, you have the absolute accomplishment of this Prophecy. Consider
what the Church of Rome has been, what it is, and what Romans 11. 33.
it shall be. O altitudo! Lord how unsearchable are thy judgments, and thy
ways past finding out?

To end, but I must not end thus: These judgments on them, are for another
end; to cause Gods mercies unto us. These things happened 1 Cor. 10. 11.
to them for ensamples, to admonish us, upon whom the ends of world are come.
Wherefore, Let our Church which stands, take heed that it do not fall. If the
glorious Church of Rome did fall, what may be the fate of the Church of
England, which in old time was but an obscure part of that Body, whereof the
Roman Church was the most illustrious member. Let us therefore consider, and
decline the cause of their obstinate Apostasy. They did not love the Truth.

I would I could wipe away this blot from the face of our English people. I
fear I may pronounce that saying of Saint Augustine Aug. ep. 121.
concerning Africa, Tanquam servus sciens voluntatem Domini sui, and non
faciens, multis vapulet: The Church of England know their Masters Will, but do
it not; And therefore we deserve to be beaten with many stripes, and the Pope
to gather the Rod. God may justly send on us strong delusion. To which I may
add, what Saint Augustine adds in the same Epistle, Attendunt quanta
celeritate Evangelium praedicatur, sed non attendunt quanta perversitate
contemnitur: that is, we rejoice because there is such plentiful preaching of
the Word; but we do not lament, to behold the common contempt of the Word.

Require you an instance? I neither flatter nor slander. Clero Anglicano, etc.
it is Campians scornful exprobration: The people of England (says he) love
preaching, but not their Preachers. Gladly would I apprehend an Apology; but
the Truth must be confessed. In England we have many Colossians, the Word does
dwell plentiously amongst them, Colos. 3. 16. But very few Galatians, who will
give their eyes for their Pastors, or that which they may spare somewhat better
then their eyes. And the ground of our reformed unkindnesse, is the selfsame
of the Romish blindness, custom. Let not your Charity be offended at my
Verity. I suppose there be few Parishes through England, but the Preacher, (if
he be their Pastor, and comformable, then) though his pains be never so
great, and his gains never so small; yet they think the phrase of Laban
Genes. 29. 26. will justify their actions, and Conscience in the sight of God,
and man: Non est nostro loco consuetudinis, it is our custom, and it may not
be broken. Yet pass not your censure, as if I did winch, because I am galled;
as if a personal dislike, did put me into this passionate declamation: No, (I
thank my God, and my Parish too) my Parish does give me supplies for my
labor, in a poor Vicaridge.

But beloved this ought not to be done in Israel. If men do love the Treasure,
they cannot despise the Vessel, although it be earthen; though their Pastors
have their Personal infirmities. And certainly, this judgment of men, shall
not escape the judgments of GOD, though they have custom to plead for them.
I will not say with Saint Augustine, Dabis impio Militi, quod non dabis
Sacerdoti, that you take from your Preachers, to treasure for soldiers. I say
not so: the Body of Christendom has bled enough already! The Lord prevent
future effusion for JESUS CHRIST his sake. But I may tell you out of my Text:
Ideo -- mittet Deus operationem erroris: for this cause -- God may send you
strong delusion. Those that will not be persuaded by their English Preachers,
they may be perverted by Popish Priests, by strong delusions; because indeed,
they do not love the Truth.

It is the end of the Term; and may be the end and Term of our lives. If I
were like old Isaac Genes. 27. 28. at my last end, and to make my last Will,
and had but one Blessing to bequeath you my Beloved, it should be this
blessing; a blessed reciprocal affection, betwixt the Pastors, and people. My
heart could spend her last spirits, in such a persuasion, to leave this legacy
of Love. And blessed were I, if I should so dye in the Lord: For I should rest
from my labor, and that work would follow me. If it be possible, let the
people, and Pastors be like Jonathan and David; let them love one another as
their own souls. If not so, yet let them be like Abraham and Lot, Let no
strife be amongst them, for the Canaanites are in the Land: the Papists will
rejoice, and increase by our unkindnesse. To stop their mouths, and to save
our own souls: Let the Preachers feed the souls of the people, and let the
people feed the bodies of their Preachers: both cheerefullie, without grudging.
But I am a man, not God; I can speak to the ear, not incline the heart; that,
I must leave to the Lord. Only, the Lord preserve us from a wicked custom, and
from all strong delusions.

SERMON XXIIII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 11. That they should believe a lie.
Popery supported by lies. The Primacy: the Cross. ^opish lies against the
persons of Protestants. Against Calvin: Beza: Luther: B. King: Q. Elizabeth.
Popish lies against the profess on of Protestants. Concerning the Sacraments:
our Government: Preachers: the Scriptures: our Obedience; to our King: to our
God. Popish lies concerning their Persecutions: in England. No Papist put to
death for his Religion. English Laws against Papists.

THe verse contains the passive property, or the punishment internal, of
those that embrace Antichrist. Wherein I have absolved two things. I have
showed you an (...), and an (...): one thing notable, that they should be
seduced by strong delusion: another admirable, that they should be so deluded,
as to believe a lie. The admirable delusion is the subject of this Sermon.
Wherein two other things offer themselves to our admiration: a double admirable
delusion: the first in regard of the deluders, the second in regard of the
deluded: that the one should be so wicked as to preach a lie, and the other so
besotted as to believe a lie; If we can admire any thing, we shall apprehend
both these to be most admirable. Both which are admirably evident in the Church
of Rome.

In the former clause, as the Dipsades or Iansen. in Evang cap. 83.
Vipers involve themselves in the eggs of Ostriches, so, by the appearance of
food, to draw on the hungry creatures to their Destruction: So the Romanists
seduce the superstitious with the probability of truth, a strong delusion, a
cunning lie, if you will, as it were by Equivocation. But in my text, like
Frogs (as they are aptly resembled Revel. 16. 13.) animal impudens,
obstreperum, loquax, coaratione and garrulitate intolerabile, like the
unappeasable croaking of Frogs. Blaterones ministri Antichristi (to Malvend
lib. 5. c. 18.
borrow Malvenda's own words to invest his own friends withal) the clamorous
agents of Antichrist, with open mouth will publish gross untruths, as it were
by protestation. In plain English, they persuade the plain people to and by a
plain lie. And which is most admirable, in truth lamentable, the plain people
do believe them. This also I make evident in the Church of Rome.

But I must be cautelous on prosecuting this point. I am advised by a friend to
take heed of two things: of my quotations and imputations wherewith I charge
the Papists. I do thank him and will obey him. His counsel is good: yet I had
a better counselor before, mine own conscience. I thank God my conscience
does teach me to shun that sin in my self, which I reprove in others. My
Conscience does prompt me to speak in truth, when I speak of lying. And my
conscience tells me, and you also: Catholicus sum, et non August epist. 48.
Vixcentio.
audeo mentiri. Precipitated lies, I decline: premeditated lies, I detest, but
Pulpet lies, let God and man abhor me, if I do not abhor them. To assure
you of my truth, concerning their lies: I have wrote nothing in this book, but
what has fallen from their pens. I will speak nothing with this tongue, but
what has been spoken by their own mouths. Their own mouths, and pens shall
testify against them. That as Caligula, who had a frowning face by nature, yet
did he compose his countenance by a glass, that it might appear yet more
grimme, and terrible: So though their nature, be prone enough to that
faculty, yet they add art to their audacious lies. And as it were set their
faces by a glass, that they may be able to utter such vast lies. Such lies
that we can hardly imagine it to be true, that any of them should speak such
lies: but that any should Believe such lies! This surpasses imagination.

They believe lies. Since the Devil is called the father of lies Ioh. 8. 44.
devilish doctrine is called the doctrine of lies, 1 Timothy 4. 2. devilish
power, is termed lying wonders in this chapter: devilish teachers the teachers
of lies in this text: and Christ himself, is called the truth it self John.
14. 16. That Church therefore which we shall see supported by lying: we may
suspect it, if not detect it to be no true Church of Christ, but rather the
Synagogue of Satan, and indeed the very seat of Antichrist. Suchis the Church
of Rome. Some sprinkling of this aspersion, I may cast on the Church of Rome:
And I suppose, it will exercise the best of that infallible Sea, to wash away
the supition of a lying religion.

Their lying doctrine (as all Divines do all doctrine) the papists establish
two ways: (...) and (...), astruendo and destruendo: first by way of
confirmation, and finally by way of confutation.

The groundwork of their Religion, is lying: and the grandworkers in their
Religion, are liars. All Popery is Sopistrie: and so is all heresy. All Popish
controversies contradicting the Protestants, and contrary to the truth are
false: that is, lies, although supported by sufficient learning. But for plain
palpable lies, let the Popish legends triumph in the whet-stone. To an
abridgement of which voluminious lies I refer you, in the treatise of our
learned Dr. Featly in Fisher pap. 370. Pius 2 epist. ad Morbisan.
Doctor. For the authors of lies, I will oppose their Italian St. Francis, and
their Spanish St. Dominicke, to equal and exceed in more, and more foolish and
blasphemous fables, even Arathes and Marathes, those sottish Mahometane fables
mentioned so scornesully by Pope Pius 2. But that ever even B Aronius, and
BELlarmine, should be Architects to build up Babel, with such untempered
mortar: I thought it uncredible to be true: till I did transcribe abundance of
apparent, and transparent lies, out of theirs, into this treatise. Neither do
our Dr. Featly preface to the Conference.
English Popish Doctors blush to father such Bastards. Within one week after
that conference, the Earl of Warwick at St. Omers, was assured by father
Weston, that in the disputation betwixt Father Fisher and Father Sweet, and two
Ministers in London, the Jesuits quited themselves too well. That they
conquered the disputants, and converted two Earls, and an hundred of the
auditory. Which number popish reports did afterward augment unto four
hundred. The pity was, the good old man was foiled in two mistakes. That
worthy Earl, was one of those two, and still is, a constant member and lover,
of the Church of England. Again, at the conference there were not fully one
hundred present, of whom almost twenty were professed Papists. How out of
these: two Earls, and an hundred other could be converted to Rome, it must be
a cunning lying Romist, who can persuade it. Yet such tricks as Geo: Black. de
Aequivoc. page 96
these pass for Piae frauds, devout deceits. Profitable for procuring popish
Proselytes. The phrase is owned by Blackwell: and he might have remembered the
practice of a Pope, to have been the pattern thereof. It is the Ples. mist.
Jniq. Oppos. 41.
record of Aventine, that when Pope Urban 2. for the advantage, and advancement
of the Papacy, purposed to send the Emperor Henry 3, of his errand into
Palestine: there was raised a rumor, that a voice from Heaven was heard, Deus
vult, God will have it so: whereupon a thrave of people, of all sorts, thrust
themselves into that expedition. Concerning August. Soliloq. lib. 2. cap. 9.
which I will give you St. Augustines item: Acute quidem falleris, sed ut falli
desinas, acutius attend: They take great pains, to teach you lies: take you
the like pains to examine their teaching, and you shall descrie their lies.
Careful industry, will undoubtedly discover their Sophistry.

To give you a taste thereof: take you a little notice, of that maine matter we
contend about: the primacie. Incredible lies, are the Malvenda lib. 1 cap. 8.
sinews of that assertion. The grand pseudochrist amongst the Jews, called
himself Barchochab, that is, Filius Stellae, or the Son of a Star: when as
his right name was Barchozeba, that is, Filius mendacij, or the Son of a lie.
So, the grand Antichrist among the Christians, calls himself Stella, a
Star, which gives Light to the whole World: but in sooth he is Filius
mendacij, it is a lie: and they have a strong delusion, who do believe it.

Thus they say the Church of Muscovia, has Malvenda lib. 5. cap. 16.
renounced the Greek Church: and the Greek Church, has renounced it self:
and both submitted themselves to the Pope, as the Oecumenicall Patriarch: in
the year 1595 was the first surrender made to Pope Clement 8. Eudam. de
Antichristo lib. 3
Yea the mighty Church of Aethiopia, was reconciled to the same Pope, on the
same condition, says Eudaemon another popish Tell-troath, because a Cretian.
Nay their Dominicans, Franciscans, and Jesuits, have reduced insinite Malvenda
de Anti^hristo lib. 3 cap 26.
people, and provinces to the Romish Religion, in both the East and West
Indies, says Malvenda.

For the Greek and Mosco Church: we have both Graecians, and Muscovites which
frequent our land, and such a famous submission, would not be untold by them,
could not be unknown to us. Indeed Aethiopia and the Indias, Africa, Asia,
and America, are somewhat far off: and it is far more ease, for men to
believe it, than go try it. Howbeit we have English Navigatours, who are no
novices, in the new world also. And this new christendom, could not be
concealed from the^, if these conversions, and Submissions, were as true, as
famous. But I doubt, that the stoutest favourer, and favorite of the Roman
Primacie, will but speak that phrase of St Paul 1 Cor. 11. 23. Quod accepi a
Domino, tradidi vobis, they teach that to the Papists which they have heard,
from their Lord the Pope. But none dare say with that other Apostle, 1 John 1.
1. Quod oculis nostris vidimus and spectavimus, that they themselves with their
own eyes have seen those converted countries. In truth they are mendacia
decipientium, and Insipientium: they are foolish lies, and those are not very
wise who believe them.

These lying reporters, have been the true supporters of the Popes primacie;
but his shop of false forged lying writers, have shaped out most classical,
and authentical instruments to that purpose, both in spiritualls and
temporalls. I will grace this proof, with the testimony of the glory of
Ireland. The Donative Vsserius de Ecclesiar. Successione cap. 2. sect. 29.
(says he) of Constantine, was forged, by John surnamed Digitorum: whereby
the Pope would persuade the world, that that Emperor had bequeathed unto his
predecessor Silvester not only the City of Rome, but also all the cities and
provinces of Italy, and of the West. This is the first lie, the great lie: the
second is like unto this, to confirm the Popes power spiritual, as that
former did his temporal. Out of the same forge, proceeded the fiction of the
Decretall Epistles, which they pretend to have been indicted by the Primative
Roman Bishops, of the purer ages: but first urged as authentical in France,
by Riculsus Archbishop of Menz in the reign of Charles the great. Thus were
these two great Popish points, (the Temporal and Spiritual Primacy)
established by two great lies. Both which (the Donative of Constantine, and the
Decretals of the Pope) were compiled into one volume, by that notorious lier,
who s^rowdeth his shameless Leasings under the name of Isodore; yet out of him
the Popes have sucked no small advantage, for the supporting of his Primacie.
One Whelp out of which Kennell, we have experienced here in England. When the
Chamber Ples. Mist. e Matthew. Par. in Henr. 3.
of Pope Innocent 4. at Lions, was by chance set on fire, then was burned the
same Charter, whereby King John had made England Tributary to the Pope;
whereupon the Pope sent secret Messengers into England, who made every Bishop
to subscribe to that lamentable Charter of that King John* namely, (as it is
likely) to supply the want of the Original, with a Copy thus made
authentical. Such considence do they place in their practicing the phrase of
this prophecy, if they can make the world believe a lie.

They have another petty point of Popery, which follows this Pillar of the
Papacy, as a little Pinnace does the Admiral of the Fleet. And both are borne
on with the same Gaile, a brave-winde of wonderful lies. This is the sign of
the Cross: a profitable servant for the Church of Rome, and therefore they
must lie for their advantage.

At Meliapor, men, Gables and Elephants did Malven. l. 3. c. 7.
tugge at a huge Tree, to no purpose, all were not able to stir it: But Saint
Thomas twining his Girdle only to a twigge thereof, drew it twelve furlongs:
Signo tantum Crucis Malv 5. 8.
facto, only by making the sign of the Cross. Anno 1520. a Portugal ship in
an Indian voyage, in the night, running mainly before the wind, suddenly it
stood still: The amazed Mariners, searching the cause with Candles, they beheld
an hideous Fish glued to the ship, her body spread the length of the Keele, or
bottom of the ship: the tail being wrapped about the Rudder; and over the
Deck she put up her head, as big as a Barrel. When the Sailers thought,
that a Fiend of Hell had been come to swallow them, out steppeth an heavenly
Priest, Et signo Crucis delinita est Bellua, that Monster was made tame, only
with the sign of the Cross. And so the men sailed merrily to the place they
were bound for.

More! It is their doctrine, that the sign Malven. l. 6. c 8.
of the Cross, is an Antidote against all Devils; as Malvenda does dispute at
large: and his conclusion is, when Antichrist shall come, Quo fugiendum est?
Christians must fly to the sign of the Cross, as to their only City of
refuge, against all his sorceries. These are Stories, indeed mere stories;
Falsa, sicta, fucata omnia; fictions to bolster up their factions. A true
testimony, that God has sent on that Church strong delusions, that they
believe such lies.

Yea, the Papists are so exquisite in that Art, that whilst their religion is
supported by lies, they would persuade the world, that the Protestants are the
notorious liars: and they had done it, if only one popish project had
proceeded without discovery; their Index expurgatorius. For when we allege
Romish Authors, against their Romish errors; in time to come, no such places
being extant in their new editions of their Books, which we had quoted, and
they rased; they would have clamoured crimen falsi, that we had belyed them by
false quotations, when they have prevented us by their lying false Inquisition.

Thus they build up their Babel, with boasting, and bold untruths: But
Falsehood advances it self highest, when it takes her rise on the Neck of
Truth, and trampleth down the reputation of the Professors of the Gospel.
Heretics make themselves glorious, by making the names of the Orthodoxall
odious. Thus like the Amphisbaena, the Romish thrust out their Tongues, against
the reformed, ore trisulco, and sting us with their slanders, three ways. By
palpable lies they disgrace our Persons, Profession, and Practice. And which is
most miserable, some of them do believe these forged Calumnies: so fearfully
has God sent them a strong delusion, to believe a lie.

Concerning Calvin, if any can read brazen Lessiu^ de Ant. Append. p. 277.
imputations without blushing, let him look on Lessius, in his Appendix to his
Demonstrations de Antichristo: as also on the namelesse Author of the
Monarchomachia, both overflowing Monarch. part. 1 tit. 2.
with shameless aspersions. That the cry may be made full, let your
observation add to these, Frarinus, Campian, Duraeus, and a world Petri
Frarini Orat. Lovanij anno 1565. Camp Rat. 3. Duraeus in Rat. 3
of that sort; but principally Bolsecus, their Homer, the Vomit of whose foul
mouth, all the rest have licked up, to make up the materials for their
fictions. To all which I propose but one Antidote: Let impartial men read
only the life of Calvin, penned by Beza, and Bols. de vita Calvin. Beza de
vita Calvin. Calv. Inst ep. Lect.
by him prefixed to the Epistles of Calvin; Or a more brief satisfaction they
may conceive from Calvin's own words, in his Epistle to the Reader of his
Institutions, 1568. that the Papists had raised a rumor in Ausburge, and in
the Courts of diverse Princes in Germany, of his revolt unto Popery: when as at
the same time, he was printing his institutions, in a second edition. Calvin
did Beza succeed, in his charge, and defamations also. Beza did underhand
murder the Duke of Guise, says that Libell called Monarchomachia. Publicly
his custom was to go into the Pulpit at Orleance, Monarch. part. 1 tit. 2.
Frar. Oratione Lovanij 1565. Frar. ib.
with a sword and a Pistol, instigating the people, to fall upon the Papists,
says Frarinus. The same Beza, says the same Frarinus, as he was Preaching,
caused certain Popish Priests to be killed before him, that their blood, and
Brains, sprinkled into his very face, in his Sermon. Luther as he was before
them both in reformation: so they vouchsafe him the precedence in defamation.
To omit their frantic Libells. Mavenda, who seems to be more Malvenda ^e
Antich. l. 2. c. 6.
sober then their ordinary Pamphletters (and indeed a learned man of great
reading) yet this man chronicleth it, as a probability: that Luther ex Incubo
Diabolo genitus, that he was an incarnate Devil, begotten by an Incubus. and
in the same place, the same Author does publish it to the world as an
undeniable truth, that in the year 1518. at the diet of Ausburg, in the
presence of Maximilian the Emperor, Luther came into the assembly having
Daemonem tetr^, and horribili specie humeris insideme^, an ougly Monarch in
Appendi. c.
Devil sitting upon his shoulders. Our namelesse countryman indeavoureth to
draw him a little nearer unto Hell, and affirms that Luther had his Vocation
from the Devil. Frarinus Frar. Orat. Lovanij 1565.
farceth in this frantic fiction, that Luther held a solemn consultation, to
banish, and abolish those two learned languages, the Greek and Latin. But the
notablest applause Loniceri Theat. page 246.
the Father of lies, and all his Children must give to the Theater of Lonicer,
who published in print the soul death of Martin Luther, damned in body and
soul. viz. as he lay dying, he desired that his body might be laid on the
Altar, and worshipped. Being dead and buried, a tumult arose, as if the earth
had been moved, whereupon they opening his grave, they sound neither Body, nor
bones, nor Clothes; but a stink of brimstone, which had almost killed the
standers by. And to make all this appear to be true, all this while Luther
was alive; and lived after that time to publish a pamphet in print, with this
title, Contra Papatum a diabolo institutum, against the Papacy founded by the
Devil. This might have shut the mouth of that forenamed Monarch p. 521.
unnamed Author, that he should not have shown his Teeth against Luther,
forging a treatise to traduce him, which he termed a Touchstone, wherein he
deserves the Whetstone, and discovers his Cognizance, that he serves him,
who (by Gods judgment) makes men to believe a lie.

Eudaemon comes a little nearer us, and Eud. de An^. ^. 3 3
smites the deceased late learned Bishop of Sarisbury, with such a impudent
imputation, that hundreds of that University and City, are yet alive to give
him the phrase of my Text, a lie, and strong delusion. For our late learned,
religious, zealous Diocesane, when they could not defame him alive, they would
damn him being dead, and have published him to turn Papist on his death bed.
But their malice (like that Soldier to Jason) has given life to his honor,
which they stabbed at. Their lie occasioned Mr Archdeacon Kings Sermon at the
Cross.
his natural Issue, to make a gracious Apology, which satified the world,
concerning the Truth of his innocence: And if any Cobweb has escaped his hand;
if any scruple yet remained in the breast of the suspicious, they are swept
down, by the labor of that Prelates Mr Mason of Equivo^.
learned Chaplain, discovering principally how that lying Impostor, in his
Libel, called the Bishop of Lo^dons Legacy, did give himself the lie, by a
double Editio^ thereof. For in the year 1622 in his first Edition, he makes
the Bishop to speak those motives: but in the year following, 1623. and in
the Edition following, in the preface, the Author is contented to own his
own Brat, which in his former he had without shame fathered upon that worthy
Bishop, and wishes that himself may be taken to have written those motives,
as a precedent, or a pattern warranting any Protestant in the change of his
religion, though by a Poetical freedom, peculiarly applied to the Bishop.

Finally, in the year 1621. the Papists published a pamphlet, entitled The
Protestants, Plea and Petition for the Priests and Papists. Wherein most of our
learned Prelates, and sage Peers, are smitten all, by some slander by name.
Yea that Egyptian frog entered the Princes Chamber also, and croaked
dishonouble defamations against our dead blessed Queen, our Elizabeth of
ever-blessed, and everliving memory. Nor is he alone, or the first. Besides
him, Eudaemon says it as a solemn Eudaem. Ap. pro Garnetto c. 8.
sooth, the Queen employed a serious inquiry, Whether any of Machiavels
offspring surviued; that such an Italian should be of special entertainment for
her service. Before him, Bellarmine Bell. de Notis Eccles l. 4. c. 9.
blushed not to affirm, Mulierem in Anglia extitisse Pontificem, that in
England a Woman (Queen Elizabeth) was Pope. And Sanders says, that in England
Elizabeth did exercise the function of Priest, in Preaching and teaching.
Master Sanders was Mr Slanders, and Sand. de Visib. Mon l 6 c. 4.
Bellarmine a Jesuit, to outface us with such a Brazen Brow, and shining lie.
A fairer probability of which foul imputation, we can fasten on the Church of
Rome. A lay Prince at Sacra. Cere. l. 2: Sect. 1. c. 7, and 8.
a public Mass does exercise the proper function of a Priest: and has the
precept and presence of the Pope to warrant him. The Emperor Frederick 3.
before Paul 2. 1468. at Rome, in a Surplice, Hood (Pluviali) and habit of a
Bishop did read the Lesson, and a Sermon (Homiliam:) Show the shadow of such a
Clerkly action, in our Queen, or King either. Now you must know, that we can
throw the same Dirt in the faces of our Adversaries, not (as they have done to
us) by the hands of Bolsecus, Coclaeus, Sanders, and Campian, notorious
Apostates and Traitors: But by the hands of Petrarke, Platina, Bellarmine, and
Baronius, their own and approved Authors. Nevertheless I refrain from this
retribution. My God, and my King command me not to return evil for evil.
and to suffer, not to offer Personal reproaches. And indeed the Truth of our
cause, will be little the Whiter, by unmasking the Ethiopian countenance of
their black conversation. I therefore pass the slanderers, only concerning
the slandered: concerning them all, concerning her especially, I must conclude,
in the phrase of the Angel to the Devil, Iud. 9. Increpet te Dominus, these
are hellish lies, and the Lord of Heaven rebuke them.

These slanders are uncharitable, but yet they seem somewhat tolerable;
because they take not all excuse from us. Nowithstandtng, these premises,
impartial people might extenuate our guilt, and say; Gens mala, religio bona:
though our Persons be bad, yet our Profession is good. But this have their
Pamphlets painted out in such colors, that (if they said true) we had no
color, but to confess our Church, the most execrable that ever professed
CHRIST, or ever profaned Christianity by their profession. What can be said
of those, who have neither Sacrament, nor Government; neither Preachers nor
Scriptures; neither obedience to man, nor obedience to God? What can be said of
such, but that they be Rebels, Atheists, and Pagans, the shame and scumme of
Christendom? And such the Papists trumpet us Protestants to be. Their books
are fraught with these forged Calumnies.

1. As a Preface to these, Malvenda proclaims Malv. l. 2. c. 6.
it, that Multitudes of us turn to be Turks every day. Would God we had no
more turned Papists, than turn Turks; and then let them lie on to their
satiety! But for our Sacraments! Nullum, nullum, non duo, non vnum Christ
Sancte: O Christ, the Protestants Camp. Rat. 8.
have no Sacraments; not two, not one, not one Sacrament have they, cries,
clamoureth Campian.

Furthermore, their impudent imputations force faith on the prejudicate, and
credulous; that we do not only Heathenishly, and profanely reject the
Sacraments in our own Church; but that we damnably and diabolically profane
them in their Church, where by force of Arms we can make any intrusion. The
reformed in France (say the Romish in Flanders) in a furious impiety, trampled
Frar. p. 56.
the most holy body of Christ under their feet, threw it into the water, cast
it into the fire, and slabbed it with their weapons. The Protestants in other
Frar. p. 58.
places (say other Papists) like Hellish Harpies, did disburthen their filthy
paunches, into the water consecrated for the holy Sacrament of Baptism; and
turned the sacred Fonts into nasty Close-stooles. Pius 2. ep. Morbisano.
I will answer these Papists in the phrase wherein a Pope did answer the
Turk: Corruptionem imprimis sacrarum literarum obijcitis; hoc ei probandum
fuerat qui sactum asserit, nobis satis erit negare factu^. That is, You deeply
declaim against our impioas rejection, barbarous profanation, and beastly
pollution of the blessed Sacraments. The Papists who report it, should prove
it: it is enough for the Protestants to deny it, and to detest such desperate
calu^nies.

2. Secondly, because they are like the Todestoole, all head; therefore they
would persuade the world, that we are like the Acephali no head, an absolute
Anarchie without any government. That the Church of England, is like the
Commonwealth of Israel, Judges the last, that there is no King amongst us, but
every man does that which seems right in his own eyes. Amongst the
Protestants, every private person is guided by his private spirit: thus are we
Less. de Antich. part. 2. De^^. ^.
charged by the Jesuit Lessius. Conciliorum quidem authoritatem non
admittitis; and for the Councils, ye admit not of their authority, says
Eudaemon. They presume that they are Eud. de Ant l. 1. sect. 10.
taught without the Ministry of the Church: that dutiful considerate subject,
durst tell his Dut. Consid. Cons. 3. c. 1.
Sovereign so much in his dutiful considerations. Lately, one with a Gagge,
cries out with Gagge of the Gospel, preface.
open mouth, that we prefer the private interpretation of a Cobbler, before
Saint Chrysostom, of a Baker before Saint Basil, and of a Tinker before
Tertullian. Nay they charge us so to detest the Government of the Church, that
in detestation thereof we hate the Governors of it, both alive and dead.
Hence (say they) ^rar. ^r. Levan. 1565.
did the French Protestants at Lions, rake open the graves of those Saints and
holy Bishops, Irenaeus, Pictavius, and Hilary, and after a scornful abuse,
they burned their bodies to ashes.

3. Our Preachers (say they) ordinarily, are Eud. d^ Antich. l. 3. Stel. in
Luke c. 9.
ordinary Cerdones, and Sartores, Tradesmen, Handecrafts-men, Cobblers, Tailors
etc. which they seem to translate out of Harding, Your Ministers Hard. ^ons.
Ap. 2^9.
be Tinkers, and ^apsters, Fiddlers, and Pipers. And another of our own
Countrymen, Dut. Consid. Cons. 2^1.
does imply that we have no, at least use no Preachers. He is so inspired that
(if you believe him) he needs no direction, no further instruction. Finally,
that they may raze the very foundation of our Church, (down with it, down
with it, even to the ground) with virulent lying tongues, they have set their
violent hands to the Pillars thereof; reporting it for Champ. in Praef. Dis^ns.
Sacrobos^. de Invest. Eccl. Christi c. 4.
a Catholic certainty of our Primitive reformed Bishops, that Iuell, Sands,
Scory, Horn, Grindall, etc. were made Bishops, or Consecrated in a Tavern; by
name at the sign of the Nags Head in Cheapside. Where is the crediblenesse
Kellison Repl. to Dr Sutcliff. p. 31.
of the cause, or credit of the Authors? Can malice imagine them so foolish, to
be Consecrated in private, when by public allowance they had an Archbishop,
Parker of Canterbury of 25. ^^. 8. c. 20.
their own religion? or so mad as to incur a Praemunire for such a
Consecration? and the truth is, they were all Consecrated by the Archbishop of
Canterbury at his Palace at Lambeth, Mr Nowell, and Mr Pearson preaching at
their several consecrations. But I will not add a Candle to the Sun. This
foul lie, is unmasked to the full, by the Pattern of Ministers, and Patron of
our Ministry, Master Mason, Mason. de Min. Angl. l. 3. c. 8. and in Append.
Bell. de. Amiss. Great. l. 3. c. 8.
in his most learned Treatise on that theme. Only I will add out of him.
Bellarmine might well maintain officious lies, to be but venial sins;
otherwise I cannot see, how any can spy out, not so much as a shadow, no not
of a Stasse of Reed to support their officious, yea pernicious Calumnies. In
all which, against whom do you sport your selves? against Jsay. 57. 4.
whom make you a wide mouth? and draw out your tongue? are ye not the Children
of transgression, a seed of falsehood? and at length they shall know lying lips
are an abomination to the Prove. 12. 22.
Lord.

Concerning the holy Scriptures; they would bear the world in hand, that we so
trample Eud. de Ant. l. 3.
them under our feet, as that we stick not to prefer Luther before all the
Apostles, Saint Paul only accepted. And our conscionable countryman shameth
not to avouch it to our Dut Consid. Consid. 2. c. 1. Sect. 28. Frar. Or. Lov.
1565.
King, that the Protestants use the Scriptures as a Visard. Both being as
probable as that prodigious calumny fastened by the Papists on the Protestants
in France; that they poisoned all the wels about Lions, to bring innumerable
innocents to an inevitable destruction.

5. In regard of our obedience to our King, their lies would make us seem to
be (what truth has shown them to be) very Rebels. The Protestants teach,
says Campian, Christiani liberi Camp. Rat. 8.
a statut is hominum, that Christians are, free from the laws of men. And it
is the drift of the Calvinist Ministers, by their books Less. de Ant. ep.
Dedic. Fr^r. Or. L^v. 1565.
de Antichristo, to cause war, and kindle rebellion, says Lessius. And
Frarinus fathers it upon the French Protestants, that they poisoned King
Frances 2. and digging up his heart, which was buried in the Church of Saint
Cross at Orleance, that they put it on a Gridiro^, and broyled it to ashes. A
Popish pamphlet printed at Turnay, Monarch part. 2 Tit. 3.
1623. terms our English Ministers Bouteseus, (that is, sowers of sedition)
because they they say that the Romish Catholics hold Page 410.
Protestants as heretics, and Excommunicated. But he is told of this loud lie,
by Doctor Boucher, Approbatio calce libe^^i.
Chancellor of Turnay, who licensed this Libell, for this cause, because he
did herein dexterously discover, quam perniciosa fuerit Angliae professio
Haeresis; what a pernicious Heresy was professed in England. Accordingly that
Author frames a double Title to that Book, terming the first part Babel, or
Monarchomachia, meaning the Protestants; and the other Jerusalem, order or
obedience, to wit, the Romish Religion. Blood and Murder! far be it from our
thoughts, Happy were we, if it were so far from theirs also.

6. Lastly, for our obedience to God; they report us mere Libertines, and
Epicures. Nil nisi fidem requirunt, Lessius says, that the Protestants Less.
de Ant. part 2. Comp. 10. Suar. Ap. ^. 10.
require nothing but faith. Suarez more fully and foully too: Quocunque modo
vivant, per solam fidem, gloriam sibi promittunt: and neque mandatorum
observationem neque panitentiam esse necessariam praedicant: the Protestants
preach (says the Jesuit) that it is no matter how men live, promising glory
by faith alone: accounting both the keeping of the Commandments, and
repentance, to be unncessary. Legem ad salutem nequaquam esse necessariam,
impie dicere non veriti sunt: their Trent Cat. Trid. de Decalog.
Catechism says, that we are not afraid to say impiously, that the law of
God is not necssary to salvation. Our own Countrymen are as confident in this
shameless calumny, Decalogus nil ad Christianos: Campian does charge Camp.
Rat. 8.
us with this profane paradoxe, who may aptly be translated by George Dowly;
They Dowlie cap. 8.
have (says he) no other scope of their whole life and religion, but mere
liberty and sensuality. Against which loud, lewd lie, we appeal to our GOD,
to our Conscience, to our Books, to our Sermons, to our Hearers, to our very
Children in their Catechismes, who never were taught one sylable of such
damnable Doctrine. Lord let their lying lips be put to silence, which cruelly,
disdainfully, and dispightfully speak against Psalm. 31. 20.
the righteous.

Hear all these slanders falling in one breath, from the mouth of Malvenda:
Omnes Malv. l. 2. c. 6.
fidei articulos, omnia capita Christianae religionis, sacramenta, omnem
ordinem, usum, ac sensum communem ecclesiae, loco movit, concussit, miscuit,
convuls^^t, evertit, destruit. Nil denique est in republica Christiana, seu
sacrum, seu politicum, quod Lutherus per se, aut per suas proles, non
distorserit, corruperit, ac depravaverit; that is, All the Articles of the
says, all the grounds of Christian Religion, the Sacraments, all order,
custom, and common sense of the Church, is removed, shaken, confounded,
plucked down, plucked up, plucked in pieces, and destroyed. In a word, there
is nothing in the Christian commonwealth, neither Ecclesiastical, nor
Political, which Luther has not, either by himself, or his followers,
wronged, corrupted, or depraved.

I say therefore. The Papists like Plinies Camels Plin. 8. 18.
(which troubled the water with their feet, that they might not see their own
ougly shape) so they raise mudde by slandering our religion, lest in our
integrity they should behold their own deformed impiety, and Apostasy. But I
Nehem. 6. 8.
will answer our Adversaries, as Nehemiah did Sanballat; There are no such
things done as thou say, but thou fainest them of thine own heart.

If their foul tongues have thus forced our reputation; publishing unto the
world, that both our persons in particular, and our profession in general are
thus impious: Defamed England may take up the complaint of defiled 2 Samuel 13.
13.
Thamar: and I whether shall I cause my shame to go? Nevertheless, they
desist not here. In regard of our Persons, and profession, their tongues have
wipped us with scourges, but with Scorpions in regard of our practice. The
practice of the Church of England, they proclaim Genesis 34. 25.
to be like Simeon, and Levi, that the instruments of cruelty are in our
habitation; that we have murdered the Papists, as they did the Shechemites,
even under the pretense of religion. And they do this, to make England like
Israel, to make our land stink among the Cananites.

For (if the phrase of my Text, were not true, that Antichristians shall lie)
if they wronged us not by their reports, then were the reformed Church, but our
English Church, in a superlative degree, not only like their Romish Pope
Alexander 6. Spongia sanguinis, a Sponge of blood: But like the Roman Emperor
Nero, (...), Clay (not mingled but) macerated with blood. Yea Cosroes, Totilas,
and Domitian, were but Grasshoppers, compared to us Anakins and Giants in
Cruelty; If their writings were not incredible Liars, concerning their
incredible Martyrs here in England.

I mean to insist especially, in the infinite impudent aspersions, wherewith
they charge our Church of England. Only, I will give you a Frar. Or. habita
Lovanij 1565.
taste out of one Author only, Frarinus, of their usage of their beyond* sea
Protestants; whom I could wish to have been tied to his own conditions, he
relates this history: Amongst the Locrenses there was this statute: if any
should attempt to bring in any innovation, he should motion it to the people,
out of a high Room, ea lege ac condition, that he did speak unto them with
a Rope about his neck; so that if his advice did appear to be profitable to
the Commonwealth, he was to be dismissed with Honor: but if it were a vain
fancy of his own brain, for his own ends, the Rope should be the reward of
his rashness. So for himself! if his accusations be true, let him ride on
with honor: and let the Honor of the Protestants be buried in perpetual
ignominy, and everlasting shame. But if this indictment be false, and forged,
as full of malice, as empty of truth; His own Rope had been a condign
reward, for so false a witness. These are his Articles: That the French
Protestants in Paris, ran up and down the streets thereof, with drawn
swords, crying Frar. Or. Lov. 1565.
Evangelium, Evangelium, the Gospel, the Gospel. Answerably, says he, they
proceeded Page 12.
unto execution: A Priest stealing away in the Frar. p. 46.
Habit of a Beggar, they examining and discovering him, led him back bound
into the town, where they set him to sale for money; but the Inhabitants
abhorring such Merchandise, they took the Priest, beat him with Cudgels,
Plucked out his eyes, cut off his two forefingers, fleyed away his skin of
his shaven crown, and so led him through the town to be laughed at by the
Potestants. And when they had glutted themselves with scorning him, they bound
him to a tree, and shot him to death with Harquubuses. At Paris a Protestant
being hanged for such bloody villainies, on the Gallows, told it with great
delight, that he had made him a Chain, which he wore about his neck, ex
Auriculis Sacerdotum, of the Ears of Priests; exhorting all his Brethren of
the religion, therein to follow his religious example. Which it seems by him
they did, for they (said he) Fra^. p^ 50. page 49.
did hang two innocent Priests, one on the right, another on the left side of
the Cross of Christ, in contempt thereof. A holy Priest passing betwixt Paris
and Orleance, the Hugonots dragged him into their Inn, where they shamefully
cut off his Privities, plucked out his Guts (whilst he was yet alive) and
slung them about the house: And (says he) that ye should not suspect me to
feign this barberous cruelty, I was told it by an honest Canon of Saint
Crosses in Orleance, (quem honoris causa nominarem, si nomen occurrerit, and I
would name the reverend Clerk, but indeed I have forgot it) who good man, all
this while, lay himself in a chest, through a crany whereof, he was an eye
witness of this woeful action. They familiarly did bury the Papists when they
were alive, and did dig them up again, when they were dead and buried. Nay
(quoth he) like the Anthropophagi, the Protestants did usually eat the
Papists. Pretty bold assertions; but that which bears away the Bell, he thus
relates: Certain Frar. ^. 50. and Roman, Veronensij l. 2. p. 70.
Protestants caught a poor Papist, him they compelled to cut off his own
privities and to eat them broyled on a Gridiron, and then ripped up his belly,
to see whether his stomach had put over that sweet Morsel, with a fair
concoction. We may conclude with a compendium of all his Calumnies, and our
cruelties from his Preface. In our age (says he) those Sectaries have ravished
Vigines, cut children Frar. ep. Dedic. p. 7.
in sunder with their swords, tried their strength by hewing the bodies of men,
cleaved the heads of Priests in pieces, fleyed off the skins, and worn the
ears of Priests for bracelets. Thus frantikly far the French Protestants, if
there be any faith in Frarinus that flemish Papist. But why boastest thou? thy
tongue imagines mischief, Ps. 52.
and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp Rasor. Thou love unrighteousness
more then goodness; and to talk of lies more then righteousness. Thou have
loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue. Therefore God
shall pluck thee up, and root thee out, and destroy thee for ever. But as for
these slandered innocents, They shall be like a green Olive tree in the house
of God. Their trust shall be in the tender mercy of God for ever, and ever.

All the intolerable infamies against the French, are very tolerable, compared
to the Cruelties, wherewith they charge the Church of England. (...) Cle. Alex.
Protr.
(...). To make the Church a Stage, and Religion a feigned Tragedy; sure this
cannot be commendable, let it be acted never so handsomely. Attend to
Baronius, pronouncing the Prologue out of the mouth of Suarez, Macte animo,
macte virtute, Anglicanorum Suar. Apol. l. 6. c. 11. nu. 5.
nobilissime, ac gloriosissime caetus, qui tam illustri malitiae (I acknowledge
this is misprinted, but the Printer has not wronged them so much, as they have
done us by the misprinted acclamation) qui tum illustri malitiae nomen dedisti,
ac sacramento sanguine^ spospondisti. Nobilissime caetus? a noble army of
English Martyrs. What English man ever saw those English Martyrs? I would not
willingly that we should answer them as they answer us: Persecutio Les de
Ant. part. 2. Deuteronomy. 9.
in haereticos, n^^ turbat pacem mundi, sed tollit faces seditionum, and
tranquilitatem mundi conservat: unde nemo sentit persecutione^ illud esse, nisi
eo modo quo punitio Furum, Latronum, Proditorum, ac Seditiosorum. It is no more
persecution to kill a Protestant, than to hang a Thief, or a murderer, says
that charitable Jesuit Lessius. I will not retort that phrase; no, Let their
Church have the honor of cruelty. But this I say, where is that Army of English
Martyrs? Indeed I have heard of Story, Sherwine, Campian, Watson, Garnet, Vaux,
and Catesby; the cause of their ignominious death, is known to have bin their
ignominious actions, Treason. But that ever any one Professor of the Romish
Religion, was put to death, for hearing their Mass, or refusing our Church,
etc. Mine ears and eyes have impartially inquired after these men: but Gyges
is revived, this glorious Army of Romish Martyrs does march invisibly: not one
precedent can be produced.

That parallel of Popish and Protestant Persecutions, Ab. in Eud. c. 6.
proposed by the Lord Coke, is plain, and to the purpose. In the five years
of Queen Mary's reign, three hundred Protestants, were put to death only for
religion. But under Queen Elizabeth (and she reigned forty and four years)
not fully thirty were put to death, and some five who concealed them, and all
for Treason, not one only for religion. Where we distinguish of the Popish
religion. The plain Popish religion, which consists in those cases
controverted, betwixt the Romish and Reformed Churches: as concerning
Purgatory, Pilgrimages, Prayer for, or to the dead, etc. besides, there is a
Gregorian Popery, or the Papacy rather, brought in by Hildebrand, and borne up
by the Jesuits, concerning the Popes power over Princes. Never did any die for
the former. For the latter, these thirty did dye, and meritoriously, being
therein ipso facto, notorious Traitors. And whereas Eudaemon makes the
objection in his Apology, that we make their mere points of Religion, to be
Treason; as to be made a Roman Priest, to reconcile, or to be reconciled to
the Romish Church, to bring into our land Agnus Dei's, Holy Beads, etc.

The learned Bishop of Sarisbury, does Abb. in Eud. c. 6.
render a full satisfaction in his Apology; who answers, that these also
call not their lives into question, dummodo per se sunt, if they go no
further. But when under the pretense of them, the people were incited to
rebellion, the Crown, and Kingdoms hazarded; then such persons were arrested,
and Suffered for Treason. Which is most apparent, both because many of Queen
Mary's Priests lived without any danger of death under Queen Elizabeth: and
also because Heart, Bosgrave, Horton, and Rishton, learned, and through Papists,
enjoyed their lives, in as much as they meddled not with those public affairs.
But the others who preached that the Pope had authority above the Queen in her
own Dominions; that the Pope had Authority to depose her; that the Pope could
give authority to her Subjects to take up Arms against her: that those Priests
did persuade the Papists, not to take the Oath of the allegiance, herein they
became actual Traitors, and were put to death for palpable treason. But for
mere religion, and plain popery, never did any one papist dye, in all the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, no nor of King James, nor of King Charles neither.
Where then is extant that glorious army of Popish English Martyrs?

Think not now, that these are single reports, and that Baronius and Suarez
are singular, in charging our Church with persecutions. You shall find an Army
of Writers, who chronicle this Army of Martyrs. The foresaid Suarez has a
large disputation in two Chapters: An vexatio, quam in Anglia patiuntur
Catholici, sit Suar. Apol. l. 6. c. 10, and 11.
vera Christianae religionis persecutio? that is, Whether the vexation which
the Catholics do suffer in England, be a true persecution of Christian
Religion? Malvenda saying, that the persecutions Malv. de Ant. l. 8. c. 1.
which the Papists do sustain under the Protestants, but under the English
especially, exceed all that ever Christians did suffer in the world before,
breaks out: O Christ, stupeo patientiam tuam; O Christ, I am amazed at thy
patience. Baronius in his Martyrology, has this Prosopopoeia, Baron. Mart. 29.
Dec. Festo sancti Thomae Cantuariensis.
to Papists in England, persecuted, and martyred amongst us, O moriatur anima
meamorte Iustorum, and siant novissima mea horum similia: O let my soul dye
the death of the righteous, and let my end be like to theirs. Has not all
Europe talked of our English persecutions, quoth Watson? In the year 1621. The
Papists put up a Petition to the Parl. 1621.
Petition unto the Parliament, pleading against their persecution: But above
all, their Prophetical Psalmist, who surely lived about the Gunpowder Treason.
In the first Psalm of the seven sparks of the soul, thus devoutly do they
pray to God; and slander man.

Persecution follows us like thu^dring and lightning, The seven Sparks of
the soul p. 16.

Fire, Hail, and Brimstone.
More cruel are our foes than Unicorns;
More outrageous then swift Tigers.
As David sought to death by Saul; as the
Israelites in the bondage of Egypt;
As innocent Susanna in the hands of her Accusers;
As Daniel in the Lions Den; Such is our case O Lord.
Can any English man, understand this English Psalm? when did England seize on
the Papists like Tigers and Unicorns? What this obscure Psalmist speaks to
our God, Christopherso^ Christ. in Down. ep. Dedic.
speaks somewhat more plainly to our King, in his treatise against Dr Dounam:
What insolences and vexations are they constrained to endure? And to omit the
generality, and severity of this persecution; from which neither frailty of
Sex, nor Laws of Matrimony, nor Nobility of birth can exempt any; How many
things lie hid, and unkowne, which would astonish and amaze the world if they
were open to the view thereof? Again, in the page following; How many have
been beaten and tormented even to death, in private houses, without public
trial? some Prentises in London can give good testimonies thereof. And in the
Treatise it self he shameth not Christopheron part. 1. c. 7. The Picture of
which is in Oxens. Library.
to avouch that shameful shameless lie, That some Catholics have been
baited by Dogs, in Bears skins.

That we may therefore hear them utter their persecutions in plain English,
let us pass from these general accusations, to their particular instances.
Hear their complaint in two languages, from two Authors: (these two alone do
I quote in this cause, and Sermon, which are not their own: yet their witness
will be sufficient, the one being the most learned King, and the other the most
learned Bishop of the world) thus writes that Bishop. In Tortura Torti p. 152.
Oxens. Library.
Legenda illa, etc. In your Legend of our English persecution, which is so
frequent among you; you may read and see the Pictures of English Papists, some
in the skins of beasts, and torn in pieces by Bandogs: others having Basins
closed to their Breasts, within which are mice, enforced to eat into their
intrals: and others tied to Mangers, to eat hay, or to starve. The King has
the like in his conclusion to Christian Kings. The Walls (says he) of their
Monasteries, and Iesu^te Colleges are filled, and their books farced with the
painted lying histories of the innumerable torments, which their Martyrs are
put to in England, viz. some torn with four horses, some sown in Bears
skins, and then killed with Dogs, nay women have not been spared. Surely the
Charity of our Father the King, and of our Mother the Kingdom, is very
admirable, if these intolerable defamations, extort not from them, that
imprecation against these their degenerate Children, Prove. 30. 17. The eye
which thus mocketh his Father, and despises (yea belyeth) his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it.

But the malicious effect has not wholly erred from the villainous scope they
aimed at. These English liars caused Spanish Malvenda Malv. l. 8 c. 10. Niceph.
l. 14. c. 19.
to be so confident, in his senseless Blasphemy. Cutis detractio apud
Nicephorum: Nicephorus (says he) mentions the fleying of Christians.
Saevius multo erat, but a more excessive cruelty, has been exercised in
England in the reign of Elizabeth: Where the Martyrs are bound hand and foot,
laid on their backs, Basins fastened to their bellies, in which enclosed Mice,
madded with fire, applied to the Basins, are forced to eat into their bodies,
and to hide themselves in their Bowels.

Pass we over to our Outlandish liars, and those eve^ of their principal
Authors. Suarez charge Suar. Ap. l. 6. c. 10. number. 11.
us and our King deeply enough, saying, Hoc color, that his Majesty's
Pursevants steal away the Plate of Gentlemen, and the Apparel of Gentlewomen,
pretending that the Plate is for the service of the Altar, and the Apparel the
Suar. Apol. l. 1. c. ^. number. 9.
Onaments of their Relics. Nay, his tongue shameth not to tell the King to his
face, that English Papists, licet essent moribus, and innocentia vitae
praeclari, although they have been never so innocent, and endued with never so
rare virtues; Vna confessio Romanae fidei, yet only because they were of the
Romish religion, asperius eos quam sceleratissimos punirent, they were punished
more severely, than the most wicked Malefactors. Certainly this learned man
would Pulions Abstract an. 1577. Under the Head Rome.
never have printed, nor believed this gross lie, if he had been truly
informed of our Statutes against the Papists, even they having put a
distinction betwixt them and other Malefactors by this Proviso; that the
Papists in the highest nature, who did maintain, and set forth, the usurped
authority, and jurisdiction of the Pope: although the Statutes condemn them as
guilty of Treason; yet they provide that there shall be no Attainder of blood,
no disinheriting of any heir, no forfeiture of any Dower, no prejudice to any
person besides the offender, nor no hinderance of any charitable giving of
reasonable Alms to the offenders. These are the laws for Papists in England:
would God they had the like laws for Protestanes in Italy, and in Spain too;
And would God Suarez had been able to say as much concerning the Inquisition,
and his holy House by Lisborne in Portugal. Finally, it is well known, how
seldom and sparingly these are put in execution. Those therefore deserve to
be put in execution, who mis-informe strangers, and dishonor our Land with
such a lie, That we use the most innocent Papists, as we do the wicked
Malefactors.

These general Calumnies against our laws, Lessius labors to make good, by
particular Less. de Antich. part. 2. Them. 2. Comp. 9.
Instances. 1. That by the Laws of England, it is Treason for a man to be made
a Popish Priest. 2. That it is Treason to persuade any to the Romish Religion.
3. Conceditur impunitas, that there is no law against, nor punishment for
Anabaptists, Familists, Libertines, and Atheists: omnes tuto degant, and se
propagant, all these may live safely, and propagate their professions
publicly: only the Papists are persecuted as Traitors. 4. To entrap the
Papists, Judicial Acts, and principal Edicts are forged, and so published. 5.
False witnesses are suborned against them. 6. And finally, the Papists are
compelled to put their Children to be brought up by Protestants. Recitasse, est
refutasse; to recite them, is enough to confute them, they are such apparent
Antichristian shining lies. The English people are strangers to the knowledge
of such cruel, injust bloody, barbarous laws; and therefore it surpasses
our admiration, how strangers can believe them* much more how they can be so
confident to avouch them. The two first only, having only some show of truth,
but miserably mis-interpreted: the four following horrible accusations, not so
much as a show of truth or probability, but are most notorious untruths, and
most audacious Calumnies.

Concerning the two first, to be made a 25. Esiz. 1.
Priest, or to persuade to Popery, is Treason, and most justly; If most
impudent liers did not 3. Jacob. 4.
most maliciously mis-interpret those Statutes. Observe three things which
qualify the Watson. Quod^. 9. art 4. Quodl 8. Art. 8. and 9.
seeming severity of those Statutes. 1. The State had never made these statutes
of treason, but that they were constrained thereunto for the prevention of
Popish Treasons: this is the confession of Watson a Popish Priest. 2. Those
Priests 25. Eliz. 2.
and Jesuits against whom these Statutes were enacted, had leave to depart the
land, and so to save their lives; a favor which few Protestants found from the
Papists under Queen Mary. And 3. though the Letter be against all, yet the
scope of those statutes of Treason, aims only against such as have made
themselves 5. ^liz. 1.
actual Traitors. As the Statutes interpret themselves, they mean such as
maintain 23. Eliz. 1.
the Popes usurped authority; such as withdraw the subjects from obedience; and
such as reconcile 3. Jacob. 4.
them from the natural obedience to his Majesty: plain points of palpable
Treason, practice also (no bad expositour of the laws) does expound it so:
which has turned the edge of those Statutes of Treason, only upon Traiterous
Priests, not touching the Innocent in that, though popish Priests: As Heart, and
others in the Queens reign, and Preston, and others in the Kings reign, do
undeniably testify. Who did, and do live, without any danger of their lives:
because the State suspected no danger of Treason, from their plots or persons.
But the execution of these Laws has been upon such as Story was, whose pious
counsel concerning our Queen Elizabeth Abb^ti Antilog. c. 6.
was, That the Papists should not cut down the boughs, but pluck up the roots
of our Religion. And against such as brought into England from Rome, Agnus
Dei's with this inscription, Mi sili da mihi cortuum, and sufficit, that is, My
son give me thy heart, and it is enough. Such Subjects as shall give their
heart from their King, if their King give an haltar for their Heads, it is no
injustice. And finally, those Statutes lay hold on such papists, Lay or
Clergy, ^p. Card. de Como ap. Abbot. p. 94.
Reconcilers or Reconciled, who were like Parry, who was a Traitor, and
encouraged in his Treason, by a Cardinal from the Pope, as the Letter yet
extant does witness, bearing date Roma Ian. 30. 1584. But that ever by those
Statutes any papist or Priest lost his life, merely for being a papist, or a
Priest, this is a popish lie, surnamed Antichristian.

The next is notorious, to those who are not notably selfe-wild, and
selfe-blind. That there is impunitas, no punishment nor penal laws for
Anabaptists, Familists, Libertines, and Atheists: I may fear them to be
Atheists, who dare to presumptuously lie, in the sight of God and man. The
penalty for every Recusant is 12 pence a Sunday, 20 pounds a month, 2^. Eliz.
1. 3^. ^l^z. 1.
and to be bound to behavior: The perswaders of others to be Recusants, are to
be punished with imprisonment: The obstinate are forced to abjure the Land, if
they refuse to abjure, after abjuration go not out, or return again into the
land, are made guilty of felony, though (I think) never any of them were
executed as felons therefore. The punishment of them by their Purse, and of
their persons by imprisonment, Protestants esteem satis. To proceed (...),
unto blood, we leave that as a Popish superque. These are the penalties of all
recusants, 35. Eliz. 1.
only from some of them, some Popish Recusants are exempted. Lessius therefore
did more then my Text speaks of; He did both Believe, and write a lie, when
he printed his impunitas, that Anabaptists, Familists, Libertines, and
Atheists, have no punishment in England.

Those three last, That judicial Acts are forged, and witnesses suborned
against the Papists; and that their Children are taken by force from Papists; I
dare say there are a thousand Papists in England, would be ashamed of this
lie; and their very Children will never believe that such lies were ever
utter^d, much less printed, by the Fathers, the Jesuits; and yet Lessius was
one of them, and did all those.

That the world may see our severity against the Papists, I will here show a
synopsis of those statutes, not willingly omitting any material branch of
them. According to the general Statute for all recusants, the Papists who
refuse to 23. Eliz. 1.
come to Church, their penalty is 20. l. a month. The obstinate, of Means, are
consined to their 35. Eliz. ^.
houses, and the compass of 5. miles; and the obstinate of small ability to
abjure the land; convicted Papists forfeit their Copyholds. For not paying
their 20. l. a month, they forfeit two thirds of their lands to the King;
since two thirds of 1. Jacob. 4.
the Lands of convicted Papists, are absolutely to 3 Jacob. 4.
the King. Refusing of the Oath of Allegiance, they incur imprisonment, and a
praemunire, 7. Jacob. 6.
and are excluded from exercising any Office of judicature, and from the
practice of the Law, Physic, Surgery, and such like. To maintain the Popes
Authority above the King, is Treason. Priests and Jesuits, to come into the
land, 5. Eliz. 1. 27. Eliz. 1.
Treason. To reconcile to the Pope, from obedience to the King, Treason. To
bring Crosses, Agnus 3. Jacob 4. 13. Eliz. 2. 27. Eliz 2.
De*s, etc. into the land, Treason. To harbor Jesuits, and Priests, is
felony. To send relief to Priests and Jesuits in Seminaries beyond Seas, a
praemunire. To conceal Jesuits or 3. Jacob. 4. 3. Jacob. 4.
Priests, imprisonment. To keep a Recusant in his house, ten pounds a month.
No Popish recusant to come to the Court: none to remain in London: no Popish
man to be a guardian, nor woman to be an executrix: No Papist may send their
Child beyond seas, nor present a Benefice: Finally, All Papists must be
disarmed.

If these Laws should seem to the pitiful or partial to be too sharp;
Such must know, 1. This sword is not always drawn: I fear our Land concerning
Papists penalties, to be more defective in their executions, than they are
excessive in their constitutions. 2. I can use the phrase of Lessius more
truly of the Papists, ^^^^. D^m. 2. C^mp. 9.
than he does of Anabaptists and Atheists: Omnes tuto degunt, and se
propagant, vel legum promissu, vel Magistratuum conniventia: for many years,
most of the Papists have practiced their religion privately, and professed it
publicly, either by the permission of the laws, or by connivence of the
Magistrates, securely. 3. This severity, we will esteem great lenity, if in
Spain, or in the Spanish Dominions, the Papists will do no more to the
Protestants. 4. Howsoever, we see these clamours of Lessius, to be groundless
Calumnies, the fruit of a Heart deluded, that it does believe a lie.

Though these be lies enough, yet there remains mandra mendaciorum; I must
produce Cypr. de Al^at.
another Popish Author laden with lies: Eudaemon writes thus; Quod Synagogas
vestras Eud. de Ant. l. 3. c. 4.
adire, etc. Because the Roman Catholics will not come to your Churches, nor
hear your sermons, nor receive your Communions, therefore you vex them with
most bitter proscriptions, and intolerable penalties, till they be beggered in
their estates, or rot in prison, or condemned for treason, without any lawful
trial. The same Author, in the same Treatise proceeds in the same lying, but
with a more stretched out mouth, and a tongue set on the Tainters for that
purpose, Membra Christi exilijs, etc. The members of Christ you destroy by
banishments, imprisonments, Bonds, and confiscation of their goods: you batter
them with whippings, tear them in pieces with rackings, and torment them with
new kinds of Tortures, which through hatred of Religion, and love to do hurt,
cruelty does every day invent for you, and prompt to you. Finally, for his sake
do you slay the holy Martyrs all the day long, and you account them sicut Oves
occisionis, as sheep led to the slaughter. Quae urbs, quod oppidum, qui vicus,
quis pagus in Anglia, nostro Catholicorum sanguine non redundat? What City,
what Town, what Parish, or Village through England, does not slow with the
blood of us Catholics?

I cannot but plead with this man, if I now hold Job. 13. 19.
my tongue, I shall give up the ghost. What City what Town, what Parish, what
Village through England is there, wherein the blood of Papists have not been
shed in abundance? Whether is this man's challenge more audacious, or his lie
impudent? Surely this Eudaemon was Endim^on, he was a sleep when he wrote
these Butcheries in Germany, which we did not so much as dream on in England.
Or rather Johannes Cretensis, is in truth a Cretian, Tit. 1. 12. Semper
mendaces, an incomparable liar. I suppose in this congregation, some have seen
the City, and some the Country, and some both; and is there not one in this
whole congregation, that can gainsay this imputation? But from Dan to Bersheba,
from London to Barwick, from Saint Michaels to Dover; throughout England! Not
one City, Town, Parish, or Village, which has not shed some blood, and in
abundance, of the persecuted, martyred Roman Catholics? Dic aliquem, dic
Quitiliane colorem. You are all forgers of lies; but of all! Eudaemon, Edaemon!
his Job 13 4.
tongue, like Tarquins Rasor, will cut a Whet stone Val. Max. l. 1. c. 4
in pieces: such a strong delusion is sent on that man, to believe a lie.

To conclude: Some, it may be, will extenuate their crime, and term these Pias
frauds, popish policies, to terrify the papists from turning protestants; and
though they urge them, yet do they not believe these imputations; And
therefore we cannot conclude them to be Antichristians; because the members of
that Monster, go one degree further, They believe lies. I say; these impudent
slanderers, go on deceiving, and being deceived. So long have their learned
Priests taught the ignorant people, these horrible lies, that they believe them
themselves also. To show this to be true, let their own protestations
testify it, if lying be not to them become natural* and that these also be
false and untrue: that they have them printed in their books, this is some
probability, that they are printed in their hearts, that they do in good
earnest believe them. I will produce Malvenda, our first witness: Haec nos
omnia Malv. 2. 6.
quia vera narramus, etc. All these things because we know them to be true, we
do not whisper them in dark and obscure corners, but publicly, and in the
midst of the world; and if we were able, we would proclaim them with
Trumpets, and Stentorean voices, to the teeth of the Lutherans and Calvinists:
with a wonderful constancy do we object them, parati pro veritate, millies
mortem oppetere, being prepared to dye a thousand deaths, in testimony of the
truth. And what is the cause wherein the good Friar is so confident and
courageous, that he will live and dye in it? Nothing but this: That we have
annihilated omnes Articulos fidei, and omnia capita Christianae religionis; and
quicquid sacrum est, aut politicum: That we have disturbed all things
Ecclesiastical, or Civil in the Commonwealth; and destroyed all the Articles
of the Creed, and all the grounds of Christian Religion. In witness whereof, he
does set to his hand, and will seal it with his blood. To testify this he
protests that he will dye a thousand deaths. As sure as death he does believe
them.

Lest that a Friar should be more fervent then a Jesuit, let Lessius speak
his says. Thus Less. de Ant. part. 2.
he begins the last part of his Treatise; Let none suspect me, that I write
these things covitiandi causa, to disgrace the Protestants: Deum testor, qui me
judicaturus est, I call God to record, who must judge me. And thus he ends:
Far be it Less. ib. page 278.
from me, that I should falsty charge any man, etiam Haeretico, although he
were a Heretic, either concerning their lives or Doctrine, ita mihi Christus
sit propitius, so Christ help me, who does know my thoughts, and shall judge
my actions, and I know that the mouth which belyeth, slays the soul, Wisd.
1. 11. Well! what has he inserted, betwixt these fearful protestations,
attestations, imprecations? besides a Catalogue of calumnies in general,
nothing but the premised persecutions of England in particular; To wit, that
all Anabaptists, Libertines, Familists, and Atheists live amongst us, with
leave, and liberty: Only all Papists dye for their Religion, that judgments
are forged, false proclamations publshed, false witnesses suborned to take away
their lives; and before they die, their Children are violently taken away from
their parents. All these he avoucheth by the judgments of God, and mercies of
Christ. Verily we may believe, that he does believe these lies, and
persecutions.

Right sorry should I be, if our English should lagge in this race of
confidence. Dare any tell God what he believes not? Remember then the
forecited Psalmist: they deplore their persecutions in the presence of God. And
what is their complaint? A toy, a credible trifle, that we persecute them like
Tigers, and Unicorns; like Saul's and Lions; and that like Jews, Egyptians,
and Pagans, our persecutions fall on them as thunder, Lightning;
Notwithstanding we may believe, that they believe all this, unless their new
Art of Equivocation, have a trick, that they can equivocate even with God
himself.

Notwithstanding all this, there is one behind, who goes before all these, in
a confident dreadful imprecation. It is the Author of the dutiful
considerations, dedicated to his Majesty. If that man be either here, or
alive; if he either hear this sermon, or hear of this sermon; let him take
it into his second Considerations, what he has delivered in his second
Considerations, His syllables are these; If this be not so in their own
conscience, let me never see the face of God. And what is the cause, that this
man also is so resolute to renounce God, if he lie? Alas, I can hardly believe
mine eyes, that any heart dare pen such desperate depositions, and
selfe-damning execrations. I will not tie him to the Concometants of his
protestation; that we are willingly guilty, that our whole religion, is
nothing but absolute heresies, blasphemies, loosnesse, liberty; rejecting the
Fathers, Councils, and the Church: But I will urge him with the same words, in
the same lines; thus execrably he protests; The Protestants use the
Scripture for a Visard, if this be not so in their own Consciences, let me
never see the face of God. I think there is no moderate Papist, so
uncharitable, to suppose that we do it; and I know there is no true Protestant
so damnable as to do it, to make the Scripture a Visard, and to fight against
a known truth. Where then is the face of that man, who does renounce the face
of God? and our own Consciences must be the Judges, that we know our selves to
abuse the Scripture, and live in heresy. I want words to express my
wonderment. Lo thus shall it be to the man, whom* Antichrist has seduced, and
God delivered into strong delusion, to believe a lie.

Of him, and them, and all these shameless liars, I will conclude with Luthers
words, concerning that Popish Pamphlet which published him to be dead, and
carried away by the Devil, when he lived to subscribe to it. I cannot but laugh
at the Devils malice, wherewith he, and his (lying) rout pursue us; and God
convert them from this devilish malice, and lying. But if this my prayer be
for the sin unto death, that it cannot be heard, then God grant, they may
fill up the measure of their sin; and with such lying Libels, let them
delight themselves, one with another to the full. For us, since lies are the
Badge of Antichrist; the Lord preserve our souls from that lying Religion.

SERMON XXV.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 11. That they should believe a lie.
The Pope may err. Has erred, In his Tra^slations: Canon Laws. Papa credens,
and docens: that distinction examined. Of implicit faith.

YOu have already heard it enforced to the full, how the Romanists do believe a
lie. It may be, this may be yet extenuated, that such protestatio^s were
unadvised, proceeding from an heated exasperatio^. I insist, certainly their
belief of lies is settled, after solemn deliberation: It is Dogmaticall, not
Personal; the belief of lies, is the very rock of the Roman religion. And
observe, the Text speaks in the singular number, a singular argument, that
their belief in a lie, is the Cornerstone of the Roman Religion.

To declare this, let Saint Paul define the property of a man, Romans 3. 4. Omnis
homo mendax, every man is a liar. Some men indeed, at some time have been
enabled, to utter the infallible truth, as the Prophets, and the Apostles, but
none at all times e Cathedra, when they listed to define any thing. What was
once said by Nathan (although a Prophet) was afterward 2 Samuel 7. 3, and 5.
gainsaid by God, and unsaid by himself. Those therefore who shall believe
all the definitions of any mortal man, do depend on a liar, and as the Text
speaks, they do believe a lie. Which is performed and acknowledged by the
Church of Rome. Omnes submittunt sensum suum, sensui unius, Bellarmine says,
All of the Bell. de Not. Eccles^* 4. c. 10.
Roman religion submit their judgment to the judgment of one man. And this
they do by a double belief, Explicit, and Implicit. First, the Priests do
it learnedly, and maintain it by arguments, then the people do it
obstinately, and adhere to the Pope, as to their Oracle, by an implicit faith.
Now that both Priest and people should make a man, a god, and fasten their
faith on the Pope, that his words (like Gods Word) cannot err. Here is the
complete accomplishment of this Prophecy, God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie.

So deluded are their priests, professing that the Pope cannot err: whereby
they equal him unto God. To use the phrase of our learned Countryman, to
give him that prerogative Mr Mountague Appeal^ part 2. c. 3.
of not erring at all, is to advance him into his makers sea^e. It belongs
not to these ancients, but to the ancient of days, not to err. Nay the Popes
themselves, shame not to assume, claim, and publish this Divine prerogative:
forgetting their seeds stercoraria their close-stoole, which Platina witnesses
is an item Platina in vit. Ioh. 8.
to them, that though they be set in a high place, yet they are men not God,
subject to humane frailties, whereof I conceive erring to be one. Although I
think, they may as easily restrain themselves from disburdening of nature in
this chair, as from erring in that chair, yet do the Popes challenge that
unerring ability: three of them especially. The first emblematically, the
second dogmatically, and the third passionately. First, Anno 1099 Pope Paschal
2. was Platina in Pasch. 2.
girt with a girdle, on which there hung seven keys, and seven seals, to give
all men to understand, that he according to the sevenfold grace of the spirit
of God, had power in all churches over which he bare rule, to open and shut, to
seal and unseale. Secondly, Ecclesia Romana, nunquam errasse inventa est,
neque errabit in aeternum: the Pope definitively did deliver it, to the Turk
(et credat Iudaeus) that the Pij 2. Epist. ad Princip. Turcar.
Church of Rome never did nor ever shall err. Thirdly, when as a Friar
Minorite had proved, Zinch. Miscel de Eccles.
that the Pope might err, and might be corrected for his error, by this
argument: The Pope is either a brother or not: if he be a brother, he may err,
and may be corrected, for Christ says, Matt. 18. 15. If thy brother trespass
against thee, tell him his fault. If the Pope be no brother, why does he then
pray, Our Father which art in Heaven. This Pope Paul 3. being wroth with the
Friar, even to excommunication: an acute Courtier, taught him to answer this
argument: Ne dicat Sanctitas tua, Pater noster, amplius: let not your Holiness
ever say again, Our Father which art in Heaven, and he shall never be able to
prove you a brother: and so his argument is easily answered. Their Priests, I
say, themselves, and the High Priest himself are the patrons of believing a
lie: because they found their Faith on a man, who is (as every man) a liar. It
is probable, that the Pope may err: and infallible that the Pope did err. But
to avouch an error, or erring man to be the pillar of their Faith: this (I
take it) is a strong delusion, and such do believe a lie.

Concerning the probability, that the Pope may err: I will snew it both by
Reason, and by their own confessions. But first let their own Suarez state
the question. We must distinguish betwixt Pontifex credens, and docens: Suarez
Apol. l. 1. cap. 6. nu. 15
betwixt the Pope as he is a private person, and the Pope as he is Pope. To the
Pope, as he is Pope, belongs those promises of Christ: for so he is Petra,
the Rock, on whose firmness, the firmness of the Church does depend in his
kind. And in this sense the protestants can show nullum vestigium haeresis, not
any one jot of error. But considering the Pope, in the first sense, as a
private person and believer, adhuc sub judice lis est, it is yet an undecided
controversy among the (Romish) Catholics, whether any Pope, has been an
Heretic indeed, or only supposed to be so. In reason: examine this, and we
shall find that one leg, does here tripp up another, and therefore the
distribution, cannot go current. If the Pope may err, qua credens, as he is a
believer: it is probable that he may err, qua doc^ns, as he is a teacher. For
I cannot imagine how a man should define, that which he does not beleve nor
understa^d; and surely the Rule which is crooked it self, cannot streighten
other things. Neither is it likely, that God would commit the faith of the
Church unto him, who is not able to direct himself.

Thus have I thrown down this halting distinction: that we may keep it
down, from rising to wrestle with the truth, I will use the hand Dr. Beard of
Antichrist, part 2. cap. 9. sect. 4.
and help of our learned Collegiate. The Pope may err as a particular person,
and Doctor, but not as Pope. Who sees not the absurdity and condition of
this distinction? For the Pope is always a public person, and Doctor of the
Church, and not a particular. So that these are contradictorie propositions, to
be Pope and yet to be a private person. And therefore if Catharinus had reason
to mock at Caietane: who writing of Herod's sadness, for the demand of John
Baptists Head, distinguishing betwixt the King and Herod: as if it were the
King that was sad and not Herod. For says Catharine, if the King was sad, and
Herod was King: then by my Logic I must conclude that Herod was sad. And if
Herod would slay John, then the King would slay him: and if the King seemed
unwilling to have it done, Herod did the like. And have not we like reason, to
reduce to the same rules of Logic, those that say, that Clement may err, as
Clement, that is, as a private man, but not as Pope, that is, as a public
person. For as Herod is King, so is Clement Pope. This is as if a man should
say that Aristotle was ignorant as a man, but wise as a Philosopher: and so
should be called a wise Philosopher, and an ignorant man. Not unlike the
distinction of Pope John 22, who could not excuse the Error of Extravag. John
22. cap. Quia quorund. de verb. Signific.
his predecessor Caelestine, but by this device: Dicimus, hoc dixit, non ut
Papa, sed ut frater Petrus de Tarantasia, that is, he did speak this not as
Pope, but as Friar Peter of Tarantasia.

To proceed a little further: in reason. Suppose the Pope to be learned, whence
comes his infallible conclusions? are they inspired? or acquired? does he
attain them, by using the ordinary means of prayer, tongues, commentaries,
and such like? then every ordinary Bishop may do the like, and produce
infallible conclusions, by applying the ordinary means. Then also the Pope may
err in the application of those ordinary means, and then his conclusions may
be erroneous. But if they be Inspired, why then does the Pope condemn the
Enthysiasts, who conclude all from Insp^rations? Again, Remember some Popes
have been ignorant, or at the most but Canonists. Whence come their Unerring
conclusions in divinity? By information? or revelation? If they be informed in
this truth, by conference with, or by the studies of learned men: then are they
to be termed theirs, rather than his determinations. If they receive this by a
present Bellar. de Verbo Dei lib. 4. cap. 9.
ability revealed: then is their Church governed by Revelation: contrary to
their own doctrine.

Moreover, if reasonable men, look upon Bell de P. Romans praefat.
their persons: Nos agnoscimus and fetemur, vitia fuisse non pauca in
pontificibus. Bellarmine in the behalf of all the Papists, does acknowledge,
and confess that there has been many vices in the Popes: and he instanceth
in Leo 5. Christopher 1. John 12. Alijquc non pauci, and some few such which
for brevity and modesty, he thought good to omit. Baronius also Baro. t. 10.
An. 912. Artic. 5.
secondeth Bellarmine, in the same acknowledgement and confession, that for the
whole tenth age or century, impudent unclean strumpets, bare rule in the
Roman Church, who thrust (Amasios) their Paramours, into the seat of Peter. I
say therefore, reasonable men will suppose, that the error of the
Intelectualls, may accompany the errors of the Moralls. And it is not
impossible, nor improbable, that vicious Popes may miss of their infallible
determinations. Suppose Sacr. Cere. Sect 2. Cap. 2. Glabur. Rodu^^. Apol. These.
nu. ^6.
again, that a mere Lay man has been Pope: nay a Child, as Benedict 9. is
reported to have bin but ten years old when he was chosen Pope. Octavian or
Pope John 23, was yet younger, Pless. mist. Prog. 37. Baron. t. 10. an. 955.
Art. 2, 3, 4.
of whom Baronius records, that he did govern the spiritual regiment of all
the Christian world, when for his years he might not have been made a Deacon;
but ostensus sit tanquam mimus in scena Pontificem agens, he seemed to be as a
Player, acting the part of a Pope upon a Stage. Now to say that such ignorant,
and impious Popes, like Balaams Ass, or Caiphas the High Priest, did speak or
prophecy what they themselves understood not: there is no reason to induce any
reasonable man to believe such unreasonable absurdities; like that absurd
graceless (...) of Gratiane, that Saint Peter transmitted, perennem meritorum
Dotem and Haereditatem, a perpetual hereditary gift unto his Successors, and
locus claros aut eright, aut qui eriguntur illustrat; that the very place does
either find, or make them worthy persons.

Finally, Eras^us his reason appears unanswerable: Eras. Annot. 1 Cor. 7.
If that were true (says he) which some affirm, Romanum Pontificem, errore
Iudiciali, errare non ^osse, that the Pope cannot err by any error of
judgment: to what end are the general Councils, and to what purpose are
Lawyers and Divines called unto Councils, if pronuncians labi non potest, if he
who pronounces the sentence cannot err? I say therefore that the Lychnos,
Asbestos mentioned by Saint Augustine Aug de Civit. 21 cap. 6.
to have been in the Temple of Venus, Lucerna quam nulla tempestas, nullus
imber ext^ngueret, a Candle which no wind nor rain could put out. Truth I say
is not that Candle, impossible to be extinguished; not in the LATERANE Church,
nor in the Conclave, much less in the breast of one man. Those therefore that
pin their faith upon any man's sleeve, have a strong delusion, and must
believe a lie.

But (...) to confirm this conclusion Gerson. part. 1. de Examine Doct. apud
Goulartium in Cyp. ep. 31.
from their own confession: that quotation out of Gerson is common, Constat
plus esse credendum Evangelio quam Papae; it is plain, that men ought to yield
more credence to the Gospel than to the Pope. Therefore if any learned man
shall teach any truth, to be contained in the Gospel, ubi aut nesciret, aut
ultro ignoraret, which the Pope either does not know, or will not know: patet
cujus praeferendum judicium, it is plain, to whose judgment we must yield
credence. Mark judicium, the Pope may declare his judgment concerning a case,
in which he may be ignorant, or against which he may be Obstinate, aut
nesciret, aut ignoraret. Surely this Papist thought it probable, that the Pope
might err.

I charge Bellarmiue with the same truth; Bell. de P. To. l 2. c. 29 ad Arg.
that you may see that even he does not much recoile from this Assertion.
Itaque sicut licet resistere Pontifici, etc. as it is lawful for a man to
resist the Pope, offering violence to his body; so is it lawful for a man to
resist the Pope, offering violence to his soul: But much more may men resist
the Pope, if he trouble the Commonwealth, or endeavor to destroy the Church:
It is lawful I say to resist the Pope, non faciendo quod ^ubet, and impe*
diendo ne exequat^r volunt atem suam; that is, by not do^ng what he commands,
or by hindering his will from being done. No^ tamenlicet eum judicare, punire,
vel deponere; notwithstanding, it is not lawful to judge punish, or depose
him. His conclusion is evident, A man may at sometimes disobey the Pope:
Because, says he, the Pope may usurp a man's estate, the Pope may hurt a ma^s
soul, the Pope may disturb the Common wealth; yea the Pope may endeavor to
destroy the Church. I go not then so far as Bellarmine, if I conclude, It is
probable that the Pope may err.

Our Countryman Sanders comes yet Sand. de Antich. Demonstr. 15.
closer to the point: It is (says he) so far from being lawful for the
Pope, to change the lawful degrees of his predecessors, in expounding the
Articles of faith, and principles of nature, that if any Pope shall attempt to
do it publicly, and to that purpose shall interpose the authority of the
Apostolical Sec: for that very attempt he is to be censured, to have fallen
from his Apostolical power, tanquam deficiens a fide, as a man who has fallen
from the faith, and thereby become an Infidel, cu^ pertinaciter in errore suo,
and if he shall obstinately persist in his error, he must be deposed from being
Pope. This man puts it as a probable and poss^ble case, that the Pope may
oppose the decrees of his predecessors, interpose his Apostolical power to
confirm what is false, fall from the faith, become an Infidel, persist in an
error; yea, and be deposed from his papacy. This I hope will warrant my
conclusion as probable, that the Pope may err.

Still there remains an (...), one undeniable testimony. In their sacred
treatise of their sacred Ceremonies, it is solemnly pronounced, Sacr. Cerem.
l. 1. Sect. 1. c. 4.
that Romanus Pontifex canonice institutus, fiat haereticus; that is, an
absolute Pope, may turn an absolute heretic; and if the Pope may be an
Heretic, his Conclusion may be heretical. Doubtless then, verity is not in
the Church of Rome, as they brag victory was in the Empire of Rome: They have
not so clipped the Iuel. Ap. pa. 163
wings thereof, but that they still fear, that truth may fly from them. Now,
to build their faith an a man, whom they themselves confess may err: This
appears to me a strong delusion, and that these men do believe a lie.

To dispute ex ore, from our adversaries confession, is a strong argument; but
the argument which is drawn a facto, from their action is yet stronger.
Therefore to strengthen this assertion, I will propose infallible instances,
that the Popes have fallen actually from their infallibility. Their
Translations of the Scriptures, are testimonies that the Pope has erred.
S^xtus 5. set out one, and Clemens 8. revised it, and set it out again. It
must follow, that the Edition of the second is superfluous, or rather the
Edition of the former Pope was erroneous. Ex ungue Leonem; take a taste of such
errors. Genesis 3. 15. Ipsapro ipse, She shall ^iblia sa^ra Sixti 5. Pontif.
Maximi.
bruise the Serpents Head, for He shall bruise the Serpents head. I think it
is so translated by one Pope, I am sure it is defended by many papists. Malv.
de Ant. l. 8. c. 11.
John 21. 22. Sic volo eum manner donec venero, So will I have him remain till
I come, for If I will have him remain till I come. This is the translation
warranted by those two Popes, Sixtus 5. and Clemens 8. May not I say that they
lie, who give the lie to our Savior, who says plainly in the next verse,
That he said not, that John should tarry till he come?

Next, I have law for what I say. The Canonists Duar. de Benificijs praef.
say, Totum jus Canonicum his voluminibus continetur; All the Canon Law is
comprised in these three volumes: The first whereof was composed by Gratiane
400 years ago, which consists of Canons, and Sentences collected out of the
Fathers, and is called the Decrees, which is indeed a very profitable Treatise,
in eo tamen desiderent eruditi: yet the learned complain of some wants in it.
The second is set out by Pope Gregory 9. co^taining diverse Epistles of several
Popes, and are called the Decretals; in which there are many things much
degenerating a prisca illa disciplina, from the primitive integrity. The third
is the Constitutions of Pope Boniface 8. which are reported to have been
rejected in France, because they were inacted in hatred of Philip King of
France, and invented for the commodity of the Church of Rome. Collect, there
being but three Volumes of the Canonical constitutions; and the first, the
Decrees are defective; the second, the Decretals, degenerated from the Decrees;
and the third, the Constitutions of Boniface 8. were passionate against the
King of France, and partial for the Court of Rome. This instance justifies my
inference; The Pope has erred de facto, and therefore is not infallible.

Again, the solemn Decrees of the Popes Eras. in 1 Cor. 7.
pronounced judicialiter, definitively, have been directly contradictory; as it
is instanced in those of John 22. and of Nicholas; of Innocent 3. and
Caelestine; and of Pelagius and Gregory. That learned Lord du Plessis,
records another famous example; Pless. Mist. Progr. 36.
897. John the tenth solemnly, in a synod at Ravenna of seventy four Bishops,
demanding every man's opinion severally, published his definitive sentence, in
these words: The Synod celebrated by our predecessor Steven 6. in which the
carkeise of Formosus the Pope, is drawn out of the Sepulcher, we utterly
abrogate. Here we have a Synod, and an Antisynode; the Decrce of one Pope,
abrogated by another, Pope, and decree also. The illation is evident. A second
Pless. My. Pr. 55
famous example, I will transcribe out of the same famous Author. About the
year 1300. Peter Moron, an Hermit, being chosen Pope, and called Clemens 5.
was thus abused by Benedict that cunning Cardinal of Cajeta; he suborned
diverse, who by a trunk privily conveyed it into his ear by night, as if it
had been a warning from heaven: Caelestine, Caelestine, demitte papatum, si
vis salvus sieri, negotium est supra vires; that is, Caelestine, Caelestine,
give over the papacy, if thou meanest to be saved, it is a burden beyond thy
strength. The simple man thus deluded, intended nothing but to resign the
papacy, if this scruple could be removed, that he might do it with a good
Conscience: wherein Benedict gave him easy satisfaction, and caused a
Decretall to be passed, That the Pope might lawfully give over his charge. And
not long after this, (when himself had achieved the papacy, and was styled
Boniface 8.) he digested another like decretall, which we find in Sexto, Quod
Papa papatui libere renunciare potest, that the Pope might freely resign the
papacy; although when Caelestine was dead, he passed another, that it was
Scelus imexpiabile, an unpardonable crime, for the Pope to resign the papacy.
Before, we had Decree against Decree, here Decretall against Decretall: There a
Pope abrogating the definitive sentence of another Pope, here the same Pope
abrogating his own. Both concurring in one conclusion, these contradictions
cannot issue from one, and the same unerring infallibility.

Another instance is added, by that solidly Dr Crakenth. in Spalat. c. 72.
acute Doctor, now with God. The Council of Florence under Pope Eugenius,
Decreed that the Host was consecrated, cum Christus benedixit, when Christ did
bless it. But the council of Trent under Pope Pius 4. defines that the host
is consecrated, in the pronouncing of those words, Hoc est corpus meum, which
is after the benediction. Here therefore two Popes, and two decrees, defining
two things contrary to one another. There one Pope, and one decree must be
erroneous in his definitive sentence. Neither Mason de Ministerio lib. 2. c. 9.
are our English affairs, unacquainted with these Italian contradictions. Pope
Clemens 7. did not only condemn the dispensation of Pope Julius, concerning
the marriage of King Henry, with Queen Katharine: but in the same case,
published a definitive sentence in the year 1532. contrary to his own, which
he had formerly given anno 1528. To ordinary men, here must appear some
extraordinary error. I will shut up all these, with an history Bell. de. Pont.
Romans lib 4. cap. 14.
out of Bellarmine. Haec enim est historia etc. Formosus Cardinal and Bishop
of Porta was deposed, and degraded by Pope John 8. and being made a mere
Laike, at his departure out of the city, he took anoath that he would never
return to the city, or to his Bishopric. Pope John dying, a little after
that, his successor Martine 2. absolved Formosus from his rash oath and
restored him to his former dignity. And not long after, Formosus was created
Pope, lived five years and dyed. Him succeeded Steven 6. who being enraged
through hatred against Formosus, did not know, or did not believe, that
Formosus was absolved by Pope Martine, and did publicly decree in a council
of Bishops: that Formosus was never lawful Pope, and therefore that all his
acts should be of none effect, and compelled those who had received holy orders
of him, to receive orders the second time. This deed displeased all: and
therefore his three next successors Romanus 1. Theodorus 2. but principally
John the 9. calling a council of Bishops, desined Formosus to been a lawful
Pope. And decreed the decree of Steven (against him) to be void. After these
succeeded Sergius, who in all things imitated Steven 6. These are Bellarmines
own words truly translated. I desire the fairest interpreter of Bellarmine, to
find a fair answer to Bellarmines instances: why we may not conclude from his
pen, that many foul errors, have fallen from the Pope pronouncing even
definitive sentences.

To add more particular instances, and to instance in the names of other
particular Popes, who have erred. They report that Duarenus de B^neficijs
praefat. Council Trideat. Sess. 24. Can. 3.
Julius 3. was once in the mind to have amended the Canons. Pius 4. in the
council of Trent did decree that it might be lawful for him to allow those
degrees in matrimony, which GOD himself disalloweth Leuit 18. Marcellinus fell
to Idolatry: as it is confessed by Baronius to be B^ron. tom. 2. An. 302 nu 112
a common consent, confirmed, by all the books of martyrs, and by the Roman
breviary. Liberius did turn Arriane, and subscribed to the Bin. Notis in
Council. Sirin. Epistola 7. Liberij
impious Arriane creed: and afterward published a dogmaticall Epistle, in
defense of that damned, and damnable heresy. There is extant Baron. anno 553
number. 50. ad 2^0 Council. Genesis 6. Act. 13. and 14.
an apostolical decree, pro tribus capitulis wherein the Nestorian heresy is
dogmatically, and definitively determined and defended by Pope Vigilius e
Cathedra, but was happily contradicted by that holy Emperor Justinian.
Honorius dogmatically did defend the error of the Monothelites. Alphonsus
pronounces our Alphons^a Castro de Hae^is lib. 1. c 4. Ca^. quanto de
Divortijs lib. 4. Decret. tit. 19.
conclusion, etiam papa in side errare potest, that the Pope may err: and
proves it in the person of Pope Caelestine, concerning marriage, that if one
of the married couple should become an Heretic, their matrimony might be
dissolved: which cannot (says he) be excused, as if he had erred (velut
privata persona, and non ut papa) as a private person, and not as a Pope:
quoniam Caelestini definitio habebatur in antiquis Decretalibus quam ego ipse
vidi, and legi* because, faith he, I my self have read the definitive sentence
of Caelestine in the ancient Decretalls. Pope John Ples. mist. Progres. 57.
Council. Constable. Sess. 11. and 12.
the 22. publicly preached at Avignion, that the Souls, yea of the most
faithful, did not behold the face of God, before the last day of judgment:
which he pretended to understand from the vision of one Tundal an Irishma^; for
which heresy he was deposed by the Council of Constance. In the year 1408.
Two Popes, Gregory Theod. Niemens. ac ^^^nsm. lib. 3. cap. 44.
the twelfth, and Benedict the thirteenth, were deprived by the Council of
Pisa, terming them Heretics* departed from the faith. Finally, Pope Eugenius
died deposed by the Council of Basil, a Schismatike, and Heretic, his acts
revoked, disanulled, and made void, and never was Anton. Hist. part. 3. tit ^2.
cap. 5. sect. 3. Pless Mist. Progres. 62. A^nae. Silu. Gest. Council. Basil.
lib. 2. Theod a Niem. lib. 2. cap. 32.
thence forth authorized. I cannot conceive how they can coin any colorable
evasion from these evident instances. I expect a downright assertion of the
conclusion: that as Theodorike a Niem says, because Simony was so common in
the Church of Rome under Pope Boniface 9. therefore the Lawyers did dispute,
that the Pope could not commit Simony, although he did sell benefices. So for
these supporters of the Popes unerring prerogative, it were the fairest course
for them, fairly to conclude: the Pope cannot err, although he defend
heresies. Notwithstanding these instances, and evidences: I will not conclude
in the Sanders Them. 15.
phrase of Sanders, Papa sidem majorum suorum non amplectitur, ideo definet
esse papa, that is, the Pope does not retain the says of his predecessors,
therefore he is no Pope. I will not say so much: nor can I say less than my
conclusion; The Pope is not infallible, but has erred.

Finally, ad hominem: If the Pope e Cathedra, should be pleased to decide the
case concerning sin in the blessed Virgin: betwixt the Dominicans, and the
Franciscans: or of the oath of allegiance, betwixt our priests, and Jesuits: I
make no question, whether the side sentenced, would accord that the Pope did
not err in condemning them.

Yea for the Pope himself. When as Alexander Qu. Curtius lib. 8.
the great, was wounded in the thigh with an arrow, and the wound becoming
starck with congealed blood, and so, full of pain: he is reported to have
said. Se quidem Iouis filium dici sed corporis aegri vitia sentire: that is,
men say, I am the son of a God, but I am sure, I have sense of a wounded
body. So, if the Pope would be pleased to peruse his own acts: I doubt not but
he would say that his servants made him a God, that he cannot err: but he
finds himself a man: and subject unto error.

But that which is more admirable, or rather more lamentable, though they
confess the premises, yet they hold the conclusion. Though they say the Pope
may err, and (cannot but) know, that the Pope did err: yet they preach it, as
a principle in their faith, that the Pope cannot err. I err not surely, if I
say this is a strong delusion, that they thus believe a lie.

The Chinese have a proverb that they have Malvenda lib. 3. cap. 10.
two eyes, the inhabitants of Europe on eye, and all the world beside never an
eye. The papists are more arrogant: they vant themselves to have both eyes, and
all the world besides to have no eye. Yea they make their Church to be totum
caput, all head, the Pope: and that head, to be totus oculus, all eye: to see
all things. And all the world cannot see one mote in that eye: Papa non potest
errare, the Pope cannot err.

After the expulsion of the Jesuits, out of Quarrels of Pope Paul 5. lib. 2. ^
Padua, were found many copies of a certain writing, containing 18 rules,
under this title: Regulae aliquot servandae ut cum orthodoxa Ecclesia vere
sentiamus. In the third whereof it Quarrels of Pope Paul 5. lib. 2.
is ordained, that men must believe the Hierarchicall Church, although it
tells us, that that is black, which our eye judges to be white. To which
blasphemous purpose the Rhemists Rhemists in 1 Timothy 3. 15.
would wrest that harsh Greek phrase, (...), plainly implying, that they
would have all to believe in the Roman Church. Gregory de Valentia drives the
Nailea little further; Greg. Valen^in in Thom. tom. 3. Disp. 1. quaest. 2.
punct. 5.
if you (sinde (says he) but an Episcopal synod, only affirming such a
Doctrine to be the sentence of the Church, you are bound to believe it, though
it be a lie. Vnuses controversiarum Index; Bellarmine tells the Pope, that he
is the Bell ep. Ded^c. Sixth. 5.
sole Judge of all controversies; to whose definitive sentence, in all matters,
they wholly submit themselves, says our English Jesuit: Nay, Jesuit ^p.
Pathway sect. 36.
(which might make their hearts tremble to speak it, and our cares to hear
it) they constantly teach, that the Pope is every jote insallible, Suar Ap. l.
1* ^. 22. nu. 8.
as the holy Scriptures themselves.

Answerable to which is the parenthesis of popish Authors, avouching their
books Orthodoxall, unless his Holiness desire otherwise: As also that Popish
distinction; the Church say they, is taken three ways, Essentialiter,
essentially, for all believers; Representative, representatively, for a
general Council; and virtualiter, virtually, for the Pope. So, to affirm
that the Church cannot err, or that a general Council cannot err, and that
the Pope cannot err, are axiomatical, and identicall propositions with most
Papists. Yea, many Papists say more, that a general Council may err without
the Pope; but Bell. de P^ont. Romans l. 4. c. 4.
the Pope cannot err although he be without a general Council.

The Jews have a tradition, that God gave this grace and privilege unto
Elias, that Malvenda 9. 2.
there should be no Circumcision, whereat he should not be present, either
visibly, or invisibly. Whereupon, at every Circumcision they use to place two
Seats, one for him to sit in, who held the Ch^ld, the other empty, wherein
they suppose that Elias does sit invisibly. So the Papists think that God has
given that grace unto the Pope; that no Truth can be desined, at the
definition whereof, the Pope is not present, either visibly, or invisibly. And
at the composition of every book, two Cathedrae (two Chayres) must be
prepared: one for the Author to give his judgment, but the other to be left
empty for the Pope, who either visibly, or invisibly; either explicitly, or
implicitly must say Amen, to every assertion. Which is amply acknowleged by
Malvenda, at the end of his eleven books, and twelve years labors. Hence
they term this Papal prerogative, Papae Apostolatus, the Popes Apostleship.
To Bell. ep. Dedic. Sixth. 5.
which we return a reply, in the words of the Revelation 2. 2. We have tried
them which say they are Apostles, but are not; and we have found them liars.
In the phrase of my Text, strongly deluded, that they believe a lie.

Hence also they teach that his desinition, is petra in quam portae, etc. the
Rock, against Bell. Praf. de P^nt. R^. Suar. Apol. lib. 1 cap. 6. nu* 25.
which the gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail: and petra a cujus
firmitate pendet in suo genere sirmitas Ecclesiae, the Rock on whose
stablenesse in its kind, depends the firmness of the Church. They repeat
it again, and again, that the Pope is a Rock. Indeed he is a Rock! the Pope
indeed is a Rock; but the Lord preserve us from that Rock, lest we make
shipwreck of faith, and a good Conscience. He is a Rock!

Dum genus Ae^ea, Capitoli immobile Saxum
Accol^t, Imperiumque Pater Romanus habebit.
The old Romans said that their Empire was built upon an immovable Rock; but
it is perished. The new Romans, say that their Church is built upon an
immovable Rock, but (I doubt not) it shall perish; and the world shall see
their strong delusion, that they do believe a lie.

Finally, sicut populos, sic sacerdos, both Priests* and people also have this
strong delusion to believe a lie: they call it Fides implicita, my text may
translate it Faith in a lie. Implicita Fides Iac. de Graf. Decis. lib. 2. c. 8.
nu. 16.
est credere, secundu^ qu^d Ecclesia credit; Implicita faith is to believe as
the Church does believe. If the Church do teach that which is false, then do,
the people believe even a lie. This faith does consist in Assens^, not in
notitia says Bellarmine, in their Assent, not in their knowledge. so for ought
they know, they may, and do believe a lie, if it pleases their Church to put
any such thing upon their credulity. They themselves instance, in that famous
Colliar, chronicled by Staphilus, that the Devil tempted him, concerning his
Faith; How he did believe? who answered that he did believe, even as the
Church did believe: the Devil demanding how the Church did believe? the devout
Colliar answered ( rotundo ore) very readily, That the Church did believe even
as he did believe. And so having conjured the Devil with this orbicular
answer, the Fiend could not enter his circle, nor come within the compass of
his Catholic confession. I should offer them more indignity then wrong, if I
should apply the phrase of their Peter Lumbard unto them; Peter Lumb. lib. 3.
did. 25.
Simplices sunt Asinae in mysterio cre^^ntes, quae majores docent; Those that
shall bear any burden their guides shall please to lay upon them, such
Creatures, I think, are called Asses. But not to exasperate them with so
gross, though their own title. Like sheep, they feed only in such pastures,
as their Pastors will put them into: nay, they taste no Fodder, but only such
as the Hand of their Shepherd puts into their mouth; being therein inferior to
the very sheep, and other unreasonable Creatures. For such a Papist, his
implicit faith being defined, will prove no better then a Creature that
believes he knows not what, and crediteth it, he knows not why:
resembling the patient, which received this pracipe from his physician;

Si vis sa^ari, de morbo nescio quali,
Acc^p^as Herbam, qualem sed n^scio, vel quam,
Pon^s, nescio ubt, sanabere nesc^o quando.
If to be cured your worship please,
Of, (I know not what is) your d^sease;
Be sure you take to heal the same,
The herb -- -- I have forgot the name;
Tye't to your body, fasten it there,
But for the place, I know not where:
Do all this, I assure you then
You shall be well; I know not when.
Here is ill rithme, say you, but worse reason say I; that reasonable men
should be selfeblinded, with an implicit faith* whereby, according to St Paul's
prediction, concerning the servants and slaves of Antichrist, for ought they
know, or can say to the contrary, They believe a lie.

Now, Men, Fathers and Brethren, hear our desence, which I make unto you. Our
Adversaries, and we accord that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and that
that Word does teach us our salvation; and that the Church does expound the
Scriptures, and direct us to our salvation. Here is the disserence; We bid the
people believe the Church, but with the Scriptures; they command them to
believe the Church, but without the Scriptures, yea against tho Scriptures to
believe it, and not to read them; or if they do read them, and by reading
them their Consciences do gainsay their Popish Doctrine, yet must they believe
the Catholic Roman Church, notwithstanding.

Quid miserius est misero, non miserante seipsum? August.
But alas, who can be more deaf than those that will not hear? who can be
more blind, then those that will not see? and who can be more deluded, than
those that will believe a man, and will not see that God himself gainsayeth
him in the Scriptures? These are the people Isay. 5. 13.
who are gone into Captivity, because they have no knowledge. These miserable,
miserable Captives are our own Countrymen, inthralled in a strong Delusion,
that they believe a lie. The Lord deliver them, and in his blessed time, show
his Truth and mercy unto them.

Amen, Amen.
SERMON XXVI.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 12. That they might all be damned.
Popish points that are damnable. Latin prayers: Inhibition of the Scriptures:
Merits: The Communion in one kind: Worshipping of Images.

THE first part of this Verse, contains the last part of this Discourse, that
the Antichristians shall be damned. This is the point remaining, indeed the
great point, concerning the great Antichrist. But I have lossened this great
point by anticipation: I have, already declared this their Eternal passive
property, that they shall all be damned, when I described their persons out of
the 10. verse, Antichrist shall deceive them that perish; whereof I am resolved
to return no repetition: I am neither curious to enter into the mysteries of
the Creator, nor desirous to inquire after the miseries of the Creature. It is
no delightful disputation to the good, to discourse of the damnation, no not
of the bad. I leave them therefore to the Will of God, which will be done on
them, if it be not done by them: only, the Text says, Those that adhere to
Antichrist, shall be damned. I can say no more, I am sorry (if Gods will were
otherwise) that I can say so much, out of a bleeding unfeined compassion
toward our blinded and seduced Countrymen.

Therefore passing this cause, I proceed to two consequents, both being of
great consequence: first for the point, secondly for the profession: Once more
I undertake to make it evident, that this point of Antichrist is necessary to
be known, by every Christian: and for the Profession of Popery, I will propose
what positions it principally contains, directly Damnable, and Antichristian.

For the first, I must say it again, and again, that the knowledge of the
point of Antichrist is necessary, very necessary. Let my tongue teach you this
truth out of the mouths of our adversaries, from the persuasion of one, and
from the precedent of another.

Lessius persuades us, that there are many Less. ad Lectorem de Antich.
things in Daniel, Paul, and the Revelation, and valde est Ecclesiae eorum
notitia necessaria, and the knowledge of them is very necessary for the
Church: To wit, at what time Antichrist is to come, what actions he will
perform, by what marks he may be known, Vt fideles possint tempestive
moneri, ne ab illo circumveniantur, that the faithful may be admonished in
time, lest they be deceived by him. The practice of Malvenda, is worthy of our
imitation, Malvenda cal^e.
and admiration; he concludes his books with this protestation. This work
(says he) concerning Antichrist, cost me twelve years labor, in which I day
and night, serme continuo labor assedimus; I employed my whole study without
almost any interruption. Though I cannot persuade you, yet believe themselves,
that the knowledge of this point of Antichrist, is worth your labor, and
worthy of indefatigable disquisition.

Moreover, revise the doom of my Text, (...), they shall be damned, who follow
Antichrist. Dangerous, if not desperate, is the forlorn estate of those
frantic persons, who will Hoodwinke themselves, being to pass over a
Bottomless Gulf, when they have nothing but a plancke to transport them. The
pit, the bottomless pit, the bottomless pit of Hell, is under the path of
Antichrist, and we have nothing but the knowledge of him to support us;
Whither therefore do they travel, who neglect and contemn direction in so
perilous a^ourney.

I will shut up my sentence, with the saying Cyrillus Cateches^ page 15.
of Saint Cyrill of Jerusalem, altering only some syllables therein. Cave
itaque tibi O Homo, etc. Therefore have a care to thy self O man, and
strengthen thy soul. The Church does witness to thee, in the sight of our
living God; praedicat tibi de Antichristo, the Church does preach unto thee
concerning Antichrist; concerning whom it is good that we should admonish you
beforehand: therefore O man, strengthen thy self. The days of Antichrist are
declared unto you, therefore it is your duty, not only to remember them your
selves, but (absque invidia omnibus trade) to teach them to all without envy.
Si silium habes, if thou have a son, according to the flesh, inst^ll this
knowledge into him; quod si quem per Catechesin genuisli, if thou have a Child
spiritual, whom thou have begotten by the word, Catechize him also in the
knowledge of this point.

And my absolute Apology, shall be that phrase of Ezekiel 3. 21. I have given
you warning, Liber avi animam meam, I have discharged my soul, by showing you
this knowledge. Now the Lord himself show your souls that knowledge, which
may lead all your souls to eternal salvation.

Thus much briefly for the Point; the profession it is, on which my discourse
must enlarge it self: For if our knowledge do not conclude, that the Papists
do profess certain damnable opinions: then cannot our conscience collect
that Popery is Antichristian; whose badge is here, that it is branded with
damnation.

I must therefore show positions in Popery, which (like the sword in the last
Verse of the third of Genesis) do keep men from entering into Paradise:
positions not only untrue and dangerous, but also damnable to the professors
of them.

First I instance in their Latin Scripture a damned, and a damning inhibition:
A Tyranny, both actively and passively damnable, both to the perswaders, and
the persuaded. The Scriptures are our Pilots unto Heaven. Of the^ I speak what
S. Paul spoke of the Sa^lers Acts 27. 31. Except these abide ye cannot be
saved. Ponder but two plain portions of the Testament, Ioh. 5. 39 In them ye
think to have eternal life: Again, the Scriptures make men wise to salvation,
2 Timothy 3. 15. Cannot any ordinary capacity collect the contradictory
conclusions? Therefore without the Scriptures, ye may fear eternal death: and
therefore the want of the Scriptures, make men fools, to their Damnation.
Surely these inhibitours (I had almost said inquisitours) are Caligula's, who
lock up the Barnes for Bread; they are Holophernesses, who stop up the
fountains of water, Iud. 7. 7. Their locking up of the word in the Latin
language, is the taking away the Bread of life, and water of life from the
Lords people, a detestable, and a Damnable cruelty.

That I may lead your attention, a little further, take notice. The forbidding
of the Scriptures, is not only absolutely damnable, but also relatively
damnable: that is, a damnable antichristian policy. What is the seat of
Antichrist? All concur: Babel. What was the most famous distinctiue note of
Babel? None disagree, an unknown language. Descry we not then, the colors of
Babel hanging over the walls of Rome? This unknown language amongst them, may
put us in mind of Gods known language against them, Gen 11. 7. Confundamus,
yea confundemus, nay confundimus: God will, nay God does confound them, who do
confound his language. (...) confusion and damnation, must be the lamentable
effect, of the damnable forbidding of the holy scriptures.

My second instance, is their latin prayers: a second damnable practice.
Whosoever calls o^ the Lord shall be saved, says St. Paul, Rom 10. 13. I
think I may invert it: whosoever calls not on the Lord shall not be saved.
Therefore the Inhibition of Invocation, is the high way to damnation.

But say they, we do pray though we pray in latin. Such orators, who pray
in latin, which they understand not, the best they can say of their prayers,
is the phrase of Jacob concerning Luz, Gen 28. 16. Surely the Lord is here but
I know it not. But we may say, their prayers are like the Jews religion Rom
10. 2. They have a zeal unto God, but not according unto knowledge. Now
whether such prayers will save them, that is the question.

To omit their possibilities: that a damned dissembling Mahometane, in the show
of a Mass Priest, should curse Christ, and the Christian religion, in Latin:
and that the ignorant people should cry Amen. To omit their absurdities: that
the people give up their latin prayers, by tale, (as a Servant does his
masters Bags) ignorant of what they contain, and knowing nothing but the
number of them. Yea omitting their Blasphemies: saying Pater Dunamus de
Antichristo lib. 1 cap. 4. sect. 9. Breviar. Romans page 304.
noster to a creature: and hic nos salvet a peccatis, that a man should save
them, which is their prayer of Gregory: and O Crux ave, spes unica, calling to
a piece of wood as to their only hope. Omitting all these: This only I urge:
for an English, Italian, or for any ignorant man, to pray in Latin! First,
they understand it not 1 Cor. 14. 15. secondly, they are not edified 1 Cor. 14.
17. and finally, they cannot so much, as say Amen 1 Cor 14. 16. I think if St.
Paul himself were alive, he would apply his own phrase in my text, to the
ignorant Papists: they pray in Latin, (...) a damnable delusion, if the Lord
reclaim them not.

To refer you to the Relative, in this point also: Latin prayers are not
only a damnable, but withal an Antichristian abomination. That Number of the
Beast 666, Revel. 13. 18. is a famous mystery concerning Antichrist. Which some
conceive to be the number of a man, and others the number of a time: that
either the letters of some name, or the year of the Lord should answer this
number. Where I apprehend it not unworthy of our observation, that the Latin
service, is the knot where both those interpretations meet, in a probable
accomplishment. Lateinus is the old prophecy, of old Irenaeus, that it might
be the name of Antichrist, as it does contain the number of Antichrist. And in
666 Rolloc. in 2 These. 2.
Vitaliane the Pope first enjoined the Latin service. We may say therefore,
that at that time, and since that time, the Latin Bishop, imposing the Latin
Liturgy, thereby declared himself to be that Antichrist, the great adversary,
who captivated Gods people according to Ier 5. 15. by a language which they
knew not: and through Gods just judgment mentioned by Isaiah 28. 13. that they
might fall backward, and be broken, and be snared and taken: or as my text
speaks (...), that they might be damned, by this strong delusion.

A third instance, and in the phrase of my text a third damnable point, is that
popish opinion of merits. For a man to say, that he shall be saved by his works:
is an evident sign that he shall be damned for his works. Woe be that man, who
shall approach Gods justice, in confidence of his own works, how good soever.

To profess this point of popery plainly; To say either with our english
Rhemists, that Rhemists in 1 Cor. 38
good works are the value, price, or worth of heaven, or with Bellarmine, that
God will give Coronam justitiae, pro qualitate factorum, and disquisitione
Bellarmine. apol. cap. 7.
factorum, that is, a Crown of Justice, according to the quality of his works,
and with with a disquisition of his Deeds. Expectamus justum judicem, and non
misericordem Patrem, and that a man must expect a just judge, not a merciful
Father. I say, to a through Papist, this opinion of merits is like the pale
Horse, Rev. 6. 8. Death sits on it, and Hell follows with it. It is a
damnable assertion, without peradventure.

Cardinal Bellarmine was once a Ringleader in this path, for a long time, and
a tedious labor, throughout his large Treatise of Justification: Bell. de
Iustific. l. 5. c. 7.
But at the end of his journey, he espied Tutissimu^, a safer way, to tread in
the very footsteps of poor Protestants, reponere totam fiduciam, in sola
misericordia Dei: that is, to repose his whole trust in the only mercy of God.

Now no opera, as before, no nor operatincta, (according to that trick of
Campian; for justifying faith, betwixt mercy, and merits, is like the Infant
between the two mothers, 1 Reg. 3. if divided, it must be destroyed) Now I
say, even with Belarmine himself upon a more advised revising of this damned
opinion, no more opera, nor tincta opera, that is no works, neither by
amplification, nor yet by extenuation, but to place our whole co^sidence in the
sole mercy of God.

For indeed, to hold salvation by works in thesi, by way of disputation, that
some men may be so saved: I suppose that this may be done, and the defendants
not damned. But in hypothesi, by way of application, for a man to hold of
himself, that he has, does, or will merit his salvation. This I dare define
to be a damnable assertion.

The conclusion therefore must be; All Papists must either end their lives, as
Bellarmine did his books of Justification, renouncing this point of Popery,
Merits; or else they shall meritoriously purchase this phrase of my Text,
(...), They will be damned for such an arrogant assertion.

Moreover, this third point is second to none in furthering the building of
Babel. Good works have been a good Net, which have drawn many good quillets
to the Court of Rome. That donation called from Constantine the great, but
indeed given by Charles the great; I suppose merits was the motive to that
magnificent action. Many a sick body for his souls health, took from his
Child's Portion, to add to Peter's Patrimony. From the Pharisees Talent, to the
Widows mite: all Oblations make the Center of their motion, to be the Church,
because the Church does teach them to be meritorious, and that they may
purchase heaven with gold and Silver.

A very Character of Antichrist. The Antichristian Babylonians, Revel. 18. 13.
are said to make merchandise of the souls of men: And surely the souls of
seduced men, are bought and sold in the Church of Rome; by this advantageous
Doctrine; but it will bring bitterness in the end: (...), it is a profitable,
but a damnable delusion.

A fourth instance, is their miserable, and damnable mangling of the Sacram nt,
compelling the people to Communicate by the Half.

That I may not seem to spy a Mote in the Eye of the Head of the Church, I
will discover this to be a Beam, by a threefold consideration; Consider the
institution, injunction, and emphaticall imposition, of the blessed Sacrament,
all the works of our blessed Savior. First, this Sacrament was instituted to
be received in both kinds; Christ took bread, and gave it, and he took the
Cup, and gave it to his Disciples, Matthew. 26. 26, and 27. Secondly, the Church
was enjoined to receive it in both kinds; Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup, 1 Cor. 11. 28. And thirdly,
Christ did single out the Cup, as it were with a Prophetical Cave, drink ye
all of this, Matthew. 26. 27.

For the sirst, although the Church has great authority to alter the manner,
and Circumstances of Gods worship; yet we cannot but acknowledge, that it is
the best way to walk (if it be possible) in the very footsteps of the first
institution. And all alteration must be on good grounds, and for good causes.
For the second, if the circumstances of time and gesture were enjoined. If
Christ had ever said, eat this sitting, and in the evening, then could we not
but yield to the Reformers, that our kneeling, and to the Anabaptists, that our
morning Communions were unlawful and damnable. But thirdly, where God himself
does as it were point with his singer, we are bound especially direct our eye
to that Object, as here Drink ye all. Me thinks this Emphasis makes this
sign like the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3. 3. Moriendo, morieris, it is death
to touch it, and none dare lay hands on it, but by the Serpents instigation.

Howbeit, notwithstanding this institution, Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
injunction, and Emphaticall imposition, the Church of Rome does institute,
injoyne, and impose by two solemn decrees of two Universal councils, the
direct contrary. Drink ye all of this Council. Trident. Sess. 21. cap 1.
says Christ; drink ye none of this, says the Pope: This is a Superlative
prerogative of man, to oppose a non obstante to the Statute of GOD. Though God
says, Drink ye all of this; yet Council. Trid. sub. Pio. 4. Proam. ad. 5. Sess.
the Pope commands all his Church, that they shall not believe (credere) that
they may Drink.

Surely this is slavery, in the inferiors: tyranny in the superiors: damnable
in both. But in diverse degrees. The Peoples damnation is like Cains phrase,
Genesis 4. 15. sevenfold, but the Prelates damnation is like Lamechs phrase, Genesis
4. 24. it shall be seventy and seven fold; but in both (...), it is a damnable
practice. Neither is this only an unchristian, but also an Antichristian
error; out of it Babell sucketh no small advantage. How advances it the power
of the Pope, when we oppose obsignatis Tabulis, and they answer obsignat is
Tabulis: We allege Gods Commands, that we may have the Cup, and they allege
the Churches command, that they may not have Cup in the Sacrament: The people
must think that this is a wonderful Authority, which can so trench into Gods
injunction. Again, that the Priests only, Council. Trid. Can. 2. Sess. 5.
those Priests who are Consicients, as they call them, must drink of the
blessed blood, of our blessed Savior: Is not this a rare Honor, and
Prerogative to that Calling?

Finally, there is a mystery in this iniquity. The Church of Rome (to make up
their full number against the day of Accounts) acts the skillful
Arithmetician; As by substraction they take from the Decalogue, leaving out the
words of the second Commandment, lest the plain people should perceive their
plain Idolatry: so by addition they supply to the Sacrament, and give the
people Wine, but (there is the mystery) unconsecrated Wine in the Communion,
for fear that even sense, should inform the people (if they be not even
senseless) that the Pope does rob them of their fathers portion, the cup in
the Sacrament. Now to put a dead child into the bosom of the poor mother, in
stead of a living Infant, this was but a trick of an Harlot, 1 Rog. 3. And to
give unconsecrated Wine, according to their phrase, dead Wine, in stead of the
living blood of Christ, unto the people; whether this be a chaste act of that
Woman of Babel; I leave this conclusion to their own confideration.

A fifth instance is inferior to none of the 4 former, but is damnable beyond
comparison, and short of excuse; this is Idolatry, or Imageworship. Consider
how cautelous God is to prevent it, how copious to reprove it, how he does
comparatively condemn it, and plainly damn it. Abundans causa, God abounds
in admirable caveats, concerning the worshipping of Images in the fourth
chapter of Deuteronomy. 1. He does propound the duty or inhibition in an exact
enumeration, in the sixteenth, seve^teeth, eighteenth, and nineteenth verses,
Make you no graven Image, nor similitude of any figure, nor likeness of male
nor female: not the likeness of any beast, that is in earth, nor of any winged
foul that flies in the air: nor the likeness of any thing that creeps on
the ground, nor the likeness of any Fish that is in the waters beneath the
earth: nor shall thou worship the Sun, or the Moon, or the Stars, or all
the host of heaven. 2. God does confirm this interdiction of Idolatry by five
strong arguments: First, in the fifteenth verse, from reason, for ye saw no
manner of similitude, on the day the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, out of the
midst of the fire. Secondly, from an unreasonable absurdity in the
nineteenth, that thereby they worship or serve those Creatures, which God had
divided, or made servants to the world. Thirdly, a beneficio, in the twentieth
verse, Because the Lord had brought them out of Egypt, from the iron furnace,
to be unto him a people of Inheritance. Fourthly, a servitio, because God had
declared unto them his Covenant, which he commanded them to perform, verse
13. And finally in the 12, 15, 23, and 24 verses, a supplicio, Take heed,
animabus vestris, (as Master Calvin translateth it) to your souls, for God
spoke unto you out of the Fire, and God is a Fire. Praedictum cave, how
cautelous was God to prevent Idolatry? Next, he interdicteth the same in the
second Commandment, which is as large as eight of the other put together, so
copious is GOD to reprove it. Thirdly, when Samuel would brand that i^pudent
iniquity, which causes that double rejection, both Active and Passive, which
causes men to reject the Lord, and the Lord to reject men, he calls it
Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Idolatry therefore makes men reprobates, and causes
their damnation. And when Saint Paul would aggravate that sin, which makes
the way to heaven, as narrow as the eye of a Needle, he calls Covetousness
simulacrorum servitus Idolatry. Idolatry therefore does wholly damme up the way
to heaven: indeed, a damned sin. Finally, David denounces their doom Psalm
97. 7. Confounded be all those that worship carved Images. Where I conceive
the curse of God, and confusion, to be little less then Damnation: A damnable
offense is Idolatry.

And this spiritual Adultery, is like David's corporal Adultery 2 Samuel 12. 4.
It gives occasion to the enemy of the Lord to blaspheme. Both Turks and Jews
justly reproach our Christian Religion, for the Religious Adoration of Images.
Since therefore it excludes others from Heaven, and casts the Authors into
Hell: I may call idolatry a damnable error.

They wave this imputation of idolatry, by Costerus Euch^r.
distinguishing of idolum, and imago, an idol, and an image, and in the image,
materiale and formale, the matter and form thereof. And again, that non in ea
honorem sigunt, sed per eam transferunt in (...), that is, They do not worship
the image representing, but the Saint represented. I say, their sophistical
heads may be cast into hell, with those subtle distinctions in their mouths
without a drop of water to cool that tongue, which shall fry in Tophet, for
blaspheming, by blanching such idolatry. (...), they shall be damned; let
them elude that also by a distinction.

Advantageous is this also to the Popish Church. Idolatry is the Nebuchadnezzar
of Rome, and it may speak his phrase Dan. 4. 30. Is not this great Babel which
I have built by the might of my power? Philo Iudaeus relates, in the Temple of
Jerusalem to have been, Trabem ex auro solido, a Beam of massy Gold;
Image-adoration is such a Beam, a golden Principal in the Church of Rome;
Shake it, and the whole building will totter. The Lady of Loretto brings much
Tribute to the Lord of Rome: and infinite other images (by reason of their
Ornaments, Oblations, Processions, etc.) are Tagi, are infinite golden Rivers,
issuing out flowing full spring-tides of Treasures to the Sea of Rome. But it
is a (...), St James his Fountain, 3. 11. Sending forth at the same fountain,
both sweet and bitter water. Idolatry and Image Worship, is a profitable; but a
damnable assertion.

I will lead you no further forward in these instances, but entreat you to
reflect your eye backward, and compendiously to consider the premises. If a man
may be sure that he may go to heaven, without the Scriptures, without
prayers, with half CHRIST'S Sacrament, with a piece of Christ's merits, and
plain idolatry; Then let him repair to Rome, the Roman Church will direct
him. But if an understanding man may suspect, that the inhibition of the
Scriptures, the obscuring of Prayers, the mingling of man's merits, the mangling
of Christ's Sacrament, and the very image-adoration forbidden in the second
Commandment; If an understanding man, may suspect, that these things may be
dangerous to damnation: then let me advise you, not to take your faith on
trust, but to examine the Roman Religion.

Know moreover, that this fearful term of damnation, we mutually lay, at one
another doors: but with this difference. The Papists charge us with
damnation, principally, because we have forsaken their Church: Non Trident.
Catech. in Artic. 9.
enim ut quisquis primum in fide peccarit, Haereticus dicendus est, sed qui
Ecclesiae authoritate neglecta impias opiniones pertinaci animo tuetur; that
is, Every person is not presently to be termed an Heretic, so soon as he shall
err in faith, but he that shall obstinately maintain his wicked errors,
neglecting the Authority of the Church. Or else they charge us with damnation
consequently, because they say we err in one Article of faith.

On no such partiality or Niceity do we pronounce damnation against them: Not
because they are against our Church, but because they are against the
Scriptures; because their positions have formal contradictorie syllables to
the Scriptures, and their practice, the realty of abominable Idolatry. And
herein I submit my self to the severe law of Severus: Si aliquis Duaraenus de
Decimis l 4 c. 1.
quis praepositum accusaret, manifestis rebus probaret, aut capitis poenam
subiret: that is, if any accuse a Prelate, he must either avouch his
accusation by manifest evidence, or dye for it: So I; if in these points I
accuse the Bishop Rome wrongfully, I will subire poenam, suffer shame; if
maliciously, poenam capitis, let me dye for it: But if I do manifestis rebus
probare, but if I charge them with a plane truth in these particulars, then I
hope I may without offense entreat my hearers to take notice and heed of such
damnable errors.

Observe this notwithstanding, that even these paradoxes may be blanched, by an
understanding subtle head, and by an insinuating supple tongue, that an
indifferent, much more an ignorant, but most of all a partial Hearer may be
blinded, and persuaded: But whether to preach directly contrary to the letter
of the Gospel, and to practice that which is literally in hibited in the law;
whether distinctions will salve that sin, and save that soul, at the day of
judgment! It may be this will stagger a peremptory Papist to affirm it.

Therefore again, and again I beseech you to examine the Romish Religion; I
beseech you examine it, even as you value your salvation; and our blessed Jesus
save us from all damnable opinions.

SERMON XXVII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, ad 13.
Six opinions of Antichrist. The Devil shall be Antichrist. Nero. The Turk.
The Turk and Pope. That the Pope is Antichrist, is the opinon of the Church of
England. Antichrist shall be a Jew. The Papists Trienniall Antichrist.

AT length (by Gods blessing, and blessed assistance) I have finished my task.
For the full and final complement thereof, I will add thereto, two points
moreover: on the Negative I will build my Affirmative. I will show you all the
chief opinions concerning Antichrist, which come within the compass of my
small reading; all which being (...), directly dissonant to this description,
of Saint Paul: the Affirmative consequent will follow naturally, and
necessarily. Ergo, The Pope is the Antichrist.

This conclusion I will also confirm, by a compedious consideration, and
application of all the particulars, and properties of this prophecy; that they
punctually pitch upon the papal seat and succession. The principal opinions
of Antichrist are six; 1. That Antichrist shall be a Devil. 2. That he shall
be a man, but a man that is dead. 3. That he shall be a Jew. 4. That he is
the Turk. 5. That he is the Pope. And 6. That both the Turk and the Pope are
the Antichrist.

The first opinion, is only the true opinion; the other sive, being grossly
false, as shall plainly appear from the gross absurdities, incongruities,
and impossibilities of those assertions. And if all the parcels of this whole
prophecy, may be probably, and most of them undeniably applied to the Pope; I
suppose then that this affirmation will be neither erroneous, nor Injurious,
The great Bishop, is the great Antichrist.

The first opinion is, that Antichrist shall be a Devil, which some of the
Ancients have taught two ways, but both ways erroniously. Some say that
Antichrist shall be ipse Diabolus, in forma humana, at non vera, verum
phantastica, that Antichrist should be the Devil in the shape of a man, not in
a true, but in a fantastical shape, in show only. This Fiction was framed in
the forge of two forged Fathers, Hippolitus de consummatione Mundi, and Ephrem
in his Sermon of Antichrist. But this conceit, that Antichrist shall be the
Devil in a fantastical shape, is exploded as a fantastical conceit.

The second, is second to none, in absurd falsehood. Others say that Antichrist
shall be verus homo, a true man, but withal verus diabolus, a true Devil,
Diabolus incarnatus, a Devil in the nature of a man. The ground of which
error, is an imagined (...), betwixt Christ, and Antichrist, that as Christ was
(...), one person, God and Man, borne of a Virgin without man; so Antichrist
shall be (...), one person, Devil, and man, borne of a Virgin also. This is
conceived to be the Comment of the Author of that Commentary, which goes
under the name of Saint Ambrose, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And S. Jerome also upon the
seventh of Daniel, has let fall a phrase to countenance this conceit,
Antichristus erit unus de hominibus, in quo totus Satanas habitaturus est
corporaliter; that is, Antichrist shall be a man, in whom whole Antitichrist
shall dwell corporally. Vna fidelia, one argument, will smite through the
Loins of both these paradoxes.

First, in the third verse, Saint Paul says, Antichrist shall be homo
peccati, a man, and therefore no devil; Real, not fantastical. Reason also
argues this fiction to be unreasonable. For howsoever devils can produce
admirable effects, interventu naturaliu^ causarum, and applica^do activa
passivis, by employing natural instruments, and applying natural Agents, unto
natural Patients. Yet is it far above the sphere of the activity of any
spirit, bad or good, either generally supplere vices naturalium agentium, to
supply and perform the works of natural agents; or particularly organizare
corpus humanum, sine semine humano, to inform the body of a man, without the
seed of a man. And to fly to Gods Omnipotence, to say that he will impart
such a miraculous power of uniting hypostatically two natures (that peculiar
work in the Incarnation of Christ) unto the Devil, destinated for his
dishonor, and man's Damnation; I cannot apprehend this to be less than
blasphemy. Add that of Saint Augustine Aug. epist. 3.
unto Volusiane, to be borne of a Virgin, is such a miracle, that majus a Deo
expectari non potest, we cannot expect a greater from God. But this gross
error will fall with the weight of its own absurdity; I will follow it no
farther.

The second sentence is, that Antichrist shall be a man, but a man known to
be dead, although by some supposed to be alive, or that he shall be raised
again to act this Tragedy, at the end of the world, this is Nero. Sueton. in
Ner. cap. 57. Baron. an. 70. Severus lib. 2.
Some say that Nero is yet alive (says Baronius out of Sueton and Severus)
although he did thrust himself through with a sword, yet some think that his
wound was healed, and that he survived, according to that in the Revelation
13. 3. He was wounded unto death, but his deadly wound was healed. Whereupon a
certain slave feigned himself to be Nero, whereby he raised an insurrection:
This is oppugued almost by every verse in this Prophecy of Saint Paul. In the
third, what jote concerns Apostacy from Religion, Nero a Pagan, who never
knew what belonged to Religion? In the fourth verse, Antichrist is said to sit
in the Temple of God; but Nero was an open utter enemy to God, and to his
Temple: therefore Nero to sit in the Temple, this must be a met amorphosis
beyond imagination. In the fifth, sixth, and seventh, (...), that is, the Empire,
and the Emperor did hinder Antichrist; but how could they hinder Nero, who was
the one, and had the other? In the eight, the prophecy is, that Antichrist
shall be destroyed by the breath of the Lords mouth; that is, by the Word and
Scriptures. But his Instruction was not from the mouth of the Lord, neither
shall his destruction be from the mouth of the Lord. Therefore, The mouth of
the Lord says, Nero cannot be the Antichrist, because he has no Communion
with the Holy Scriptures. Finally, in the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth
verses, Antichrist is foretold to be a wonderful seducer, from the truth of
God. But what man can dream this ever to have been fulfilled in Nero, an alient
from the Truth? Neither is it less ridiculous which others affirm, that he
shall in the end of the world be raised from the dead: for this must be
wrought, either by himself, or by God: Not by himself, resurrection being a
work beyond the ability of any Creature: Nor yet by God, as it is well
concluded by Suarez, for Suar. Ap. l. 5. c. 10. nu. 4.
(says he) Resurrection being the proper work of God, non siet propter
iniquitatem operandum, it cannot be performed for the producing of any impiety,
but propter altiores, and honestiores fines, etc. but for more holy, and honest
purposes, becoming God, and beseeming his heavenly Wisdom and Providence. I
conclude therefore with Bellarmines phrase, which he Bell. de Pont. Romans l. 3.
cap. 12.
borrows out of Augustine, Hanc scientiam esse meram praesumptionem: to say
that Nero shall be revived and received as Antichrist, it is a presumptuos
folly. Or with Suarez, Anilem esse Suar. Ap. l. 5. c. 10. nu. 4.
fabulam, that it is a follish fable, a very Legend de futuro. And so I bury
this assertion of Nero with Nero, let such a fancy have no second Resurrection.

The third point proposed in the third place, is Antichrist shall be a Jew, I
will alter my order a little, and refer it to the sift place, which shall be
the last point in this Sermon. The fourth assertion then follows, The Turk
is Antichrist. This is said to be the opinion of Annius, Clictovaeus,
Fevardentius, and some others of Papists, and Protestants. Bellarmine and the
best learned of the Papists wonder, and are sorry that any of their; and my
wonder and sorrow is no less, that any of our side, should be of such a
groundless opinion. A very Bogge, they have no foundation for it.

They pretend some of the properties of Antichrist, which they apply to the
Turk; namely, these three, his Time, Name, and Seat. Mahomet the Arch-Turke
(say they) arose about the year 666. and him they therefore conjecture to be
the Antichrist. His name, (say they) Mahometes, does contain the number of the
Beast, Revel. 13. 18. 666. and his Seat is Constantinople, a City situated on
seven hills, Revelation 17. 9.

To the first, let Bellarmine answer; 666 is Bell. de P. R. lib. 3. 3.
the Number, not of the Time, but of the Name of Antichrist. But suppose that
his time were anno 666. yet Mahomets birth was abortive, before that time; For
he was borne in the year 597. he began to term himself a Prophet 623. and
finally, he dyed 637. All chronicles concurring that he did not live to that
time, 666. and our usual saying is, that the year 606 (60 years short of 666)
teemed tria teterrima Malv. de Ant. l. 2. c. 5.
Monstra; Mahomet, who did invade the Church with his Sword; Boniface, who did
usurp the Church by his Pride; and Carolus Martellus, who did rob the Church
by his Impropriations.

Secondly, the name of Mahomet, does indeed contain the number of the name;
and so do other names also; especially that Prophetical name Lateinus, so
long ago foretold by Irenaeus. But if from the name of Mahomet, they will
conclude Mahomet to be Antichrist, the conclusion will hold upon the person of
Mahomet only: But that the very man Mahomet, was the very Antichrist! I
suppose no man will avouch it, experience having taught the contrary.

Thirdly, Constantino^le it may be is seated on seven hills, but not on seven
hills, which are the seventh part so famous, as the seven Hills of Rome,
Aventinus, Palatinus, etc. notorious by their names, celebrated by their Poets,
chronicled by their Historians, and attributed as the renowned title ((...))
unto the city of Suar. apol l. 5. c. 10. nu. 8.
Rome. But the words of Suarez give a full answer. Licet unum, aut alterum
signum Antichristi, in Mahomete reperire valiant, etc. that is, Although men
may be able to find one or two of the properties of Antichrist in Mahomet, it
is no wonder; because there is no Adversary of Christ, who does not participate
of some of the properties of Antichrist; and therefore all are called by the
general name of Antichrists. But it is necessary to show, Omnium signorum
collectionem, the concurrence of all the properties of Antichrist, in that one
person, whom we conclude to be proprium Antichristum, that very Antichrist.

Finally, this Prophecy is the plainest consuter of this error, that the Turk
cannot be Antichrist; it appears first from the third verse, Venit Apostasia,
the great Antichrist, says S. Paul, shall be a great Apostate. Now Mahomet was
a mungrell in religion; by birth an Arabian,, and some say by education a
Manichie, and a Jew: He was no true Christian, and therefore no true Apostate.

Secondly, from the fourth verse, sedebit in Templo Dei, Antichrist shall sit
in the Temple of God. Take the phrase, either materially for the Temple of the
Jews, that was ruinated before his time; or metaphorically for the Churches of
Christians, thus Constantinople is a Temple, but Rome the Temple, the
Metropolis of Christendom; or formally for the persons professing Christ, and
Mahomet does not sit in the Temple of God, that is, he does not rule over the
Consciences of Christians, and therefore he is not the Antichrist.

Thirdly, in the seventh verse Antichristianisme is called a mystery, and
Antichrist is a mystical, that is, a secret adversary unto Christ: but the
Turk professes himself to be a professed Enemy unto Christ, and
Christianity, and therefore he cannot be the Antichrist.

Fourthly, in the eighth verse, Antichrist is foretold to be consumed, Spiritu
oris Domini, that is, by the preaching of the Gospel. The preaching of the
Gospel has converted some persons and Provinces among the Indians, say the
Papists; and some persons and Provinces among the Papists, know the
Protestants. But amongst the Turks, few persons, no Provinces have bin
converted by the Preaching of the Gospel; and therefore, this property also
sutethnot with the Turk.

Fifthly, in the ninth verse, a maine sign of Antichrist is this; that he shall
come with signs and lying wonders. But apud nos solos fiunt miracula, says
Eudaemon. The Pope will not permit this prerogative unto the Turk, The Turk
therefore is not the Antichrist.

Sixthly, the tenth verse tells us, Antichrist shall come, (...), in omni
seductione, he shall be an admirable seducer. I demand, did any ever hear a
subtle disputation, or see any Pius 2. ^pist. ad Morbisan.
learned Book, that the Turks have made to maintain and propagate their
religion, by fine force of argument, or insinuating alluring persuasions? No
Seducer, No Antichrist.

Compendiously: hence I will draw six demonstrations, that The Turk cannot be
the Antichrist.

1. Antichrist is an apostate, and the Head of apostasy:

The Turk is no apostate, nor the Head of apostasy.

2. Antichrist does sit in the Temple, and Rule the Church:

The Turk does not sit in the Temple and Rule the Church.

3. Antichrist is a mystical and secret adversary.

The Turk is not a mystical and secret adversary.

4. Antichrist is consumed by preaching of the Gospel:

The Turk is not consumed by preaching of the Gospel.

5. Antichrist shall pretend Miracles:

The Turk shall pretend no Miracles.

6. Antichrist is a Seducer:

The Turk is no Seducer.

From all these Six Syllogismes, I will frame only this one Conclusion;
Therefore;

The Turk is not the Antichrist.

Let me add one word to our Protestants, who pretend that the Turk is the
Antichrist, as it betideth Neuters: they have thanks on neither side. We
cannot greatly praise them, that divert our people from looking or listening
after the true Antichrist: by telling them, it may be the Turk is Antichrist.
And the Papists conne them no thanks for the service which they (indeed) do
to the Pope. But they disclaim their opinion, as most senseless and
erroneous: By name, Bellarmine, Suarez, and Bell. de Pont. Romans l. 3. c. 3.
Suar. Ap. l. 5. c. 10. Malvenda li. 2. cap. 5.
Malvenda: And indeed almost all the Popish Writers on this point.

Whence I conceive, it would be no disparagement, either to the learning or
judgeof any Protestant; if he would be pleased to tread in the footsteps of
Clictovaeus, who when Clictovaeus in Damasc. lib. 4. 26.
he had eagerly disputed this cause, yet he concludes with this confession;
Many things are written by S. Paul to the Thessalonians, 2 Epist. 2. which
cannot easily be applied to the Turk, and which appear not yet fulfilled,
and never to be fulfilled in him.

The Staff is plucked away: the next point must fall, which indeed does lean
on this. Some say, that both the Turk and Pope concur in opposing Christ:
and that both the Turk and Pope are Antichrist. This is said to be the
judgment of Melancton, and Johannes Draconitus on Daniel. And this was
propounded by a learned English Bishop, (...), as a probable position, for his
Co^mencement disputation: All reverence reserved to these learned authors, I am
yet to learn the likelihood of this assertion. They say, the Turkish State and
Papacy, both combine in one confederacy and combination, that both these,
though opposite ad invicem, in temporalibus, may and do make one conjoined
opposition unto Jesus Christ, and his truth, inspiritualibus. And although that
externally and in regard of civil Policy, they differ, and do deadly hate
each other, and mainly oppose one against the other: yet nihil impedit, but
they may conspire in opposing Christ, his Gospel, and his Kingdom differently:
Thus they say, and I say, on the same grounds, we may add the Jews, to this
Antichristian combination: and so Antichrist shall be, not only a Cecrops, but
a Gerion, but a Cerberus. They say moreover, that these two, respectu finis may
be accounted one in opposition, against God and Christ: though the means of
effecting it, be many, different, and diverse: Turcisin^, may one way oppose
Christ, vi aperta, by fiery force: and Popery be ad oppositum another way,
fraud and insidijs. I say, Those which have a Combination, have a Consent:

The Turk and Pope have no Consent:

Therefore, No Combination.

They have no consent, Ratione medij: because the Turk does oppose Christ, vi
aperta, and the Pope fraud and insidijs. Nor Ratione finis, because the scope
of the Turk is a Temporal: of the Pope is an Ecclesiastical Monarchy. The
Pope opposes Kings, that he may be an Oecumenicall Bishop: the Turk opposes
Bishops (all Christians) that he may be an Oecumenicall King. Finally the
Turk does oppose Christians, not qua Christians, but as they are Adversaries
to the Turkish Empire. But the Pope does oppose Christians, qu^ Christians,
only because they deny him to be the Head of the universal Church, which we
maintain to be Christ's royal Prerogative.

Finally, so (say they) Saint John remembers a Beast with two Horns: Mahomet
in the East, and the Pope in the West: both Horns fiercely pushing against the
Saints. I answer: that one beast, should assault any thing with two Horns, is
no wonder: but that those Two Horns, in one Beast should assault one another,
is most wonderful. No less admirable is it, that the Turk and Pope which
perpetually fight betwixt themselves, should be said notwithstanding to compose
one beast, and make up one body of Antichrist. And if I should suppose that the
Turk and Pope may concur to oppose Christ, as Herod and Pilate did
heretofore. I must suppose withal, that (as Herod and Pilate was) the Turk
and the Pope are friends: otherwise they cannot concur to co^pose one
Antichrist. And if it be true, which Christ does teach, Luke 11. 18. then if
these two Horns compose one Kingdom of Antichrist: though Antichrist do come
in all power of Satan: though he be established by Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils: yet, if this Kingdom be divided it cannot stand.

In two words, to add only three properties out of this text. If the Turk
and the Pope make one Antichrist; Then (as it is in the third verse) they must
have One Heart of Apostasy: to fall from the Church. Then (as it is in the 4,)
they must have one Head of Supremacy: to be Rulers of the Church: And then (as
it is in the tenth verse) they must have one Tongue of fallacy, to be the
Seducers of the Church. But that ever Turcise, and Papisme should be so
incorporated into Antichristianisme! I think few can believe it: and fewer
persuade it.

I rather conclude, that those Two States, are like the two Legs of Iron, and
Clay, Dan. 4. 43. though they should be mingled with the seed of men, and by
the wit of man, yet shall they not cleave to one another. It is impossible that
those twain should make one Antichrist.

Yea, the difference among Divines, who the man of sin should be, may be a
sufficient motive to me to persevere in my opinion: and for any learned
Protestant to retract this; if he hold that both the Turk and Pope, or that
the Turk alone be Antichrist. If either of us, have learned either of those
Rules: either that of Saint Ambrose, ad quamcumque Ecclesiam veneritis, ejus
morem servate, si pati scandalum non vultis aut August. epist. 86. Casulano.
facere: if we will neither give nor take scandal, we must submit to the
judgment of that Church wherein we live: or that of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 4. 3.
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. The premises to my
conclusion Dr. Whites Orthod. part. 2. Untruth 6.
is the judgment of that judicious Divine: the now Bishop of Norwich. These
are his words: The most received opinion, of all Protestants, is, that the Pope
began to be Antichrist, when by the Donation of the parricide Phocas, he
took unto him the title of Universal Bishop, but became a perfect. Antichrist
under Gregory 7, Paschal 2, Adrian 4, Alexander 3, and Boniface 8, by these
four actions* 1, exalting himself as a King and Monarch over the house of
God; 2, making his own word, and definitions of equal authority with the
holy Scriptures: 3, Usurping temporal jurisdiction over Kings, and civil
States: 4, cruelly murdering the servants of Christ, which denied obedience to
his traditions and tyranny. Now, via trita being via tuta; I will rather follow
the most of the Protestants in the Kings Highway, than a few in a Pathway:
and they departing from one another, into many By-waies. For mine own part, if
I should dissent from the most received opinion of all the Protestants; If it
were not for damnable errors, and with unanswerable arguments: I should
censure my self, no friend to the Protestants, and unworthy of the name of a
Protestant. But John 21. 21, and 22.

The fifth opinion is that Antichrist is a Jew: which being a branch thereof, I
will therefore relate the whole Popish opinion. And tha^ the Popish opinion of
Antichrist, never any thing was more grossly absurd and ridiculous, among the
Fictions of the Poets, the Fables of the Jews, the dreams of the Turks, no
nor among their own Legends. The points in their opinion being so improbable,
impossible, incredible, and incompatible: that recitasse est refutasse, that
the plain reciting is a plain refuting of this paradoxe, and exorbitant
assertion.

Nineteen branches there are thereof; 1. Their Antichrist shall be one man; 2,
a Jew; 3, of the Tribe of Dan; 4, begotten by an Incubus devil; 5, Borne at
Babylon in Assyria. 6, Brought up at Chorazin and Beihsaida, 7, Tutored by a
Familiar; 8, of the admirablest body, accutest wit, and accuratest learning,
that man was of since the creation: 9, he shall collect the Jews; 10, Conquer
the Pagans; 11, cruelly persecute the Christians; 12, kill Enoch and Elias; 13,
become the Monarch of the whole world; 14, He shall have more riches, power,
and wives, than any man that ever lived; 15, He must reign but three years;
16, He must build the Temple: 17, In it he shall be actually adored; 18, He
shall have Devils in the shape of Angels, visibly administering unto him: 19,
He shall ascend mount. Olivet, and from thence with a troop of Devils, in the
shape of glorious angels, he shall fly in the air, as if he were visibly to
ascend into heaven. But then shall a voice from heaven be heard, morere: at
which moment he shall be smote through with a Thunder bolt, and so tumbled
headlong into hell. Spectatum admist, risum teneatis? apretie Fiction! But that
it exceeds the laws of a Comedy; there are too many impossiblities, in the
Fable.

1. That Antichrist is but one person, this is the opinion, of every one of the
Papists. Take one, for all: Suarez disputes it, in three whole Suarez Apolog.
lib. 6.
Chapters. A thing somewhat improbable: that both in Daniel and the Revelation,
a Beast should never signify one particular man, but only in this particular:
And it is something impossible, for Antichrist was a working in Saint Paul's
time, verse 7. I conclude therefore: how one man should live, from Saint Paul's
age, to the end of the world: I conceive this to be impossible.

2. That he shall be a Jew, all the Papists agree in this also. Let Bellarmine
speak for all Bellar. de Pont. Romans 3, 12.
in this also: So he disputes a generatione Antichristi: no probable opinion:
For the same Papists, and the same Bellarmine affirm that Antichrist shall
affirm Se solum esse Deum: which cannot be done by the Jews Messiah: for
Deus missus, and mittens have some difference. Moreover, Antichrist shall be an
Apostate, verse. 3. But one borne, and brought up a Jew, cannot Apostate from
the Christian Religion.

3. Of the Tribe of Dan. That he should be Sanders de Antichristo Demonstr. 7.
that Countreyman, this is the opinion, of Sanders, our Countreyman. But it is
not very probable: for the Jews expect their Messiah, out of the Tribe of
Judah, hardly therefore will they accept him out of the Tribe of Dan. Nay, ex
nihilo, nihil sit, there is no such Tribe as Dan in the world. Bellarmine
espied this impossibility, Bellar. de Pont. Romans 3. 12.
and therefore he durst not defend their Danish Antichrist.

4. That he should be begotten by a Devil, Malvenda de Antichristo lib. 2
cap. 8.
this opinion is the child of Malvendaes brain: but it is filius populi, a
bastard Paradox, few will Father it. Besides, in the third verse, Antichrist is
termed Homo peccati, a perfect man. And yet the Devil to be his Father: these
phrases have no full congruity.

5. Antichrist shall be borne in Babylon; This Malvenda 2, 16.
is a paradoxe, not to be borne withal: being both impious and impossible. For
Babylon in Assyria, was utterly extirpated by the Medes and Persians; Neither
shall it ever be reedifyed: as God himself does teach us, Isa. 13. 19. Ier.
50. 3. 39. 40.

6. Brought up must he be in Chorazin and Bethsaida: Rog. Hoven. Richard. 1.
this was the common conceit of the old Christians, as it is chronicled by our
Hovenden. But Chorazin and Bethsaida now, are either but villages, or not
villages; Which can give no probability for this fiction; that they shall be
the famous Nurseries of the most famous Potentate, even of Antichrist, who
shall contend with God himself, (say the Papists) for Supremacy.

7, Antichrist shall have Daemone^ Paredrum, a Malvenda 2, 22.
Devil to be his Pedant. This also may pass for another improbable fiction.
Indeed that Antichrist shall come with the power of Satan, I have read verse. 9.
But that he shall be acquainted with the Person of Satan! This surely seems
to have been added to the Scriptare, and to the Truth also.

8. Audiens Cratyppum, idque Athenis: having Malvenda 2, 22.
such a Tutor, and such a Place: the Devil and Bethsaida; Young Antichrist must
prove a Rare Scholar. Erit ingenio capacissimo, forma pulcherrima, says
Malvenda; a most beautiful youth, beautified with infinite learning. An
Anti-Xenophon! he described the best of all Kings, and this man the worst of
all Kings; but both by way of fiction and imagination.

9. Antichrist shall collect the Jews; 10, Conquer the Heathen; 11, cruelly
persecute the Christians; 12, Kill Enoch and Elias; 13, become Monarch of the
whole world; 14, and have more power, and riches, and wives, than any Monarch
from the Creation: as famous achievements, as any can wish or imagine. From
whence Bellarmine and Lessius draw many a delicate Demonstration.

15. But the worst is, they put a long sword into a short scabberd. They will
have all those Conversions, Persecutions, Conquests, Marriages, and
incomparable, innumerable actions to be done in the compass of three years and
an half. Eudaemon takes great pains to fit them: but Eudaemon. in Ab^at. 1.
sect. 5.
he comes a little too short, for all his good reckoning.

16. The Temple of Jerusalem must be his Throne; 17, therein actually to be
adored. Forty and six years was the Temple heretofore a building: and will
Antichrist rear it in less than six and forty months? O admirable
expedition! More; Baronius says, and proves that it shall never be reared
again. That Antichrist therefore, shall be adored in the material Temple,
this is an impossible assertion.

18, and 19. Antichrist shall take his Rise, from Mount Olivet, and with his
army of Devils transformed into Angels, he shall soar in the air, till that
voice from heaven be heard, morere: Et confestim fulmine percussus interibit:
he shall be smote through with a Thunderbolt, in the midst of his glorious
flight, says Steuartius. But perchance what pleased Steua^tius i^ 2 These. ^.
Malvenda lib. 10. cap. 15.
him at Ingolstade, did not relish Malvenda in Italy. For he says, that
Christ shall come down from heaven, and simplici verbo (by word of mouth)
shall command Michael the Tutelar Angel to the Christians to destroy
Antichrist. Then, that Michael with lightning, shall burn down the Tent of
Antichrist into ashes: and so Antichrist, and his Achates, shall be swallowed
quick into the Earth. Peracta est Fabula: Plaudite. That Antichrist shall be
consumed by the breath of Christ's mouth, and destroyed by the brightness of
his coming: I have heard verse 8. But of flying in the air, crying from
Heaven, burning of Tents, opening of the earth, thunder and lightnings; These
are tragical inventions, without any truth to support them.

To make good my promise: to make it appear, that the popish opinion
concerning Antichrist implies, yea involveth many improbable, impossible,
incredible, and incompatible assertions; I will present unto your attention
only six points, which I have observed out of Malvenda, who has bestowed most
labor in this cause of any man, that ever set pen to paper. Consider the
Buildings, Marryings, and Persecutions of Antichrist: his Countrymen,
Confederates, and Kingdoms.

1. In his 1^. book, and 6. cap. Antichrist shall Malvenda de Antichristo lib.
11. cap. 6.
build the Temple of Jerusalem, more sumptuous than the former: besides many
other goodly and glorious Palaces.

2. Antichrist shall have far more wives than Malvenda 6, 22.
ever Solomon had: although Solomon had a competent number, a thousand, 1 Reg.
11. 9.

3. All the ten persecutions, under the Heathen Malvenda 8, 11.
Emperors: all the persecutions under the Persians, Arrians, Goths, and
Vandalls: Parvae velitationes sunt, are but light skirmishes compared to the
bloody war, which the Militant Christians must sustain under Antichrist.
Moreover, He shall rob, spoil and pluck down all the Churches in the world:
converting them into Alehouses and Stables.

4. An infinite Rabble of the Jews from all the Malvenda 5, 17.
Corners of the earth, shall swarm to Antichrist.

5. Gog, and with him the Scythians, Tartarians, Malvenda 5, 17.
Cappadocians, the inhabitants of Pontus, and of the East Countries, of the
Euxine sea, and Matis, the Iberians, Albanians, Circassians, Persians, Lybians,
Aethiopians, Galatians, Phrygians, Turks, Sarmatians, Arabians of Arabia
foelix, Dedaneans of Arabia the desert, Cilicians, and the Inhabitants of Asia
the Less, shall all have a confluence unto Antichrist.

6. The whole world, which has been discovered Malvenda 5, 17.
in the East, unto the outmost Chinese, and Tartarians; in the North, to the
inmost Muscovites and Gronelanders: in the South, to the farthest Cafrians,
Zanzibarians, and the Inhabitants of the Cape Bonae Spei: and in the West, to
the farthest parts of Spain. Cuncta dextra lavaque Antichristi portentosa
Monarchia complectetur. Whatsoever is within the compass of the old world,
shall be comprised within the territories of Antichrists prodigious Monarchy.
Yea and America also, and all those infinite Islands; And we think that
Antichrist shall be Totius orbis Monarcha, the Emperor of the whole world.

Collect, and conclude; to build a more glorious Temple, tha^ that which was
46. years a building, and infinite other buildings in 3 years. To marry a
thousand wives and more in three years. To martyr all the Christians, and to
profane all their Christian Churches in three years. To gather together all
the Jews scattered through the whole world in three years. To strike a league
with G^g, the Scythians, Tartarians, etc. in three years. To subject from
Spain to India, and from Muscovie to America in 3. years. To conclude, when
as (I think) no Popish person, dare undertake to go through the world in
three years: yet that the Popish Antichrist shall gleane up all the Riches,
Conquer all men, Defile (almost) all women, and possess all Lands, both Islands
and Continent: in all the world, and all this only in three years.

If these appear not monstrous improbable, impossible, incredible, and
incompatible paradoxes; Then must I confess, that nothing is false, and that
the Roman is no Antichristian, but a true Religion.

But such as have either Eyes in their Heads, or hearts in their Bodies: such
as are either reasonable men, or religious Christians; Such as are endued
either with the Wisdom of the Spirit, or but with the Spirit of Wisdom,
cannot but see this Palpable Delusion.

There is a remarkable discourse in an Epistle The French Anthour translated
by Dr. Beard.
of Pope Leo 9, to Michael Bishop of Constantinople: that the report was, that
those of Constantinople, being accustomed to behold Eunuchs sitting in the
Patriarchall seat; at the last they advance thereunto a Woman. A fine
invention, to make the memory of Pope Joan to vanish, by diverting this infamy
upon Constantinople, where all know never any such thing came to pass. The
like do they in this subject: for to the end, that the true Antichrist may not
be known, they cast out a report that he shall be a Jew, etc. that men in this
vain expectation may sleep under his Tyranny. Or as Michal, 1 Samuel 14. 13.
did put an Image into the bed, with a Pillow of Goates-haire, etc. that David
might escape: So the Church of Rome does dress out to our view an Imaginary
Trienniall Antichrist: that so the Pope, the true Antichrist may escape our
observation.

Again and again therefore, I beseech you open your eyes, and behold if in
the many particulars of this plentiful prophecy; there be any one point,
which can be applied to the Trienniall Antichrist, which the Pope teaches, or
any part which may not be applied to the Pope, the true Antichrist. Resolve
this Chapter, and see if all the parts thereof, be not like the parts of the
Earth lifted from the Globe. See if they return not to the Pope and Papacy, as
to their proper Center, naturally, and without any forced application. I say
therefore I beseech you open your eyes: and as you know you shall be saved by
your own Faith: and as you believe that you shall answer for your own
knowledge; so I beseech you fasten your eyes on this Prophecy. In the
expounding whereof, my Conscience tells me, my God tells me, and the plain
sense of this plain Prophecy, does tell me, that in some measure, I have
discovered the Very Truth unto you. Now the Lord of Truth open your eyes to see
it: and open your Hearts to embrace it.

SERMON XXVIII.
2 THESSALONIANS. 2. 3, ad 13.
The sum of the whole Treatise. The Paraphrase of the whole Text. The
Parallel to the Pope. The conclusion. Dehortation from Popery.

Six opinions I proposed last day concerning Antichrist; Five whereof I have
related, and resuted: The fifth now remains to be confirmed, and then the
whole cause is concluded; wherein I will pass through these three particulars,
the Points, Paraphrase, and Parallel of the Person to the Prophecy; whereby,
I hope, I shall satisfy the indifferent, and (it may be) stumble the
Opinionative, That the Pope is the Antichrist.

In this Prophecy concerning Antichrist, from the third to the thirteenth
verse, I have set out five points, Antichrist described in verse. 3, and 4.
revealed 5, 6, 7, and in part of the 8. destroyed in the 8. confirmed in the 9.
and part of the 10. and received in the remnant of the 10. and in the 11, and
12 verses.

Antichrist is described in the third and Time, Titles, Place, and Properties.
His Time is an Apostasy, which is threesold, Ecclesiastical, from the Church
in Religion; Political, from the Empire by rebellion; and figurative, the
Apostate for the Apostasy. His Titles are 3. The man of sin, here the Genitive
for the Adjective is very significative, A man of sin, that is, a most
sinful man: and so both (...), and (...), both a practiser, and a causer of
sin: The son of perdition, filius perditionis, by an Hebraisme, as much as
perditissimus, that is, one prepared to destruction, both Actively, and
Passively, whence he is termed, (...), that is, destroying, and destroyed: And
he is termed an adversary, which is the Title of the Devil; implying that
Antichrist is a devilish adversary; but per amici fallere nomen, a secret
adversary, and so an adversary both fundamentally, and universally. His place,
the Temple, taken two ways, either materially, for the Temple of the Jews, or
formally for the Churches of the Christians. The Text cannot be understood of
the first, because the material Temple of Jerusalem, is ruinated, never to
be re-edified, as it is confessed by Baronius, and the best learned on both
sides. Therefore the place of Antichrist is the prime Church of Christendom.
His properties are three; First, Antichrist exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped; which is expounded either essentially, or
metaphorically. Essentially the name of GOD cannot be here used; for if
Antichrist should so proclaim himself, who would be deceived? Therefore the
name of GOD must be here understood metaphorically. Metaphorical gods are
mentioned Psalm 82. 6. to wit, Magistrates, and Kings. And that which is
worshipped (...) has affinitive with (...) signifying the Emperor, Acts 25.
21. The meaning then of the phrase is this: Antichrist shall advance himself
above all Kings and Emperors. Secondly, Antichrist shall so advance himself,
that he as god, shall sit in the Temple of God. Consider here three phrases; in
the Temple, (...), Saint Paul (says Occumenius) does not mean the Temple of
Jerusalem, but the Churches of God. He shall sit, that is, He shall reign,
so is sedebit used for reget, Psalm 9. 4. and showing himself that he is
God, tanquam Deus, Christus Incarnatus, God Man, Christ Jesus: for that
adversary is called Antichristus, an enemy to CHRIST, not Antitheus, an enemy
to GOD. The sense is this, Antichrist shall rule the Church of Christ, usurping
the very power of Christ. And finally, Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is god, that is, secretly, not openly. For the
Text says not, that Antichrist shall say, but show that he is god; (...),
signifying, rather the arrogance of works, than of words: implying, that
Antichrist shall show himself to be God, cunningly, by insolent, Godlike
action.

Antichrist revealed, is the next point, in the how, when, and what? 1. How
Antichrists revelation was hindered 2. When Antichrist was to be revealed. 3.
What was the thing then hindered, afterward to be revealed. 1. How Antichrist
was hindered, (...), all concur, it was the Empire, and the Emperor, called:
(...), and (...), in the fourth and sixth verses, who was to be taken e medio,
to be removed, so is the phrase used Acts 17. 33. and Matthew. 13. 49. the
meaning is, The Emperor hindered Antichrist to be revealed. 2. When was
Antichrist to be revealed? (...), only, as if he said, This was the only
impediment: or that when the Emperor is removed, Antichrist shall immediately
be revealed. 3. What was then to be revealed? the Apostle terms it a
mystery of iniquity; (...), is a secret, and (...), a secret sin; which is
now a working, even in Saint Paul's age. The sense being, That the beginnings of
Antichrists Doctrine were secretly undermining the Church of Christ, even in
the Apostles time. Here I declared another Title, (...), Exlex, that is, a
lawless person. Like the Type Antiochus, Dan. 11. 36. He shall do according
to his will. The sense is, Antichrist shall be confined by no law, he shall be
altogether lawless.

We are taught in part of the 8 verse, how Antichrist shall be destroyed, of
whom he foretells a double destruction, the diminishing, and the finishing of
Antichristianisme. In each we are to observe two things, the agent and the
instrument destroying him. The instrument is first, the breath of his mouth,
and finally, the brightness of his coming. The agent in both is one, the
Lord* Whom the Lord shall consume, etc. The meaning is this, The Doctrine of
Antichrist shall be confuted by the Preaching of the Word, and the person of
Antichrist shall be confounded by the presence of Christ.

In the ninth, and tenth verses he prophecieth, coming of Antichrist shall be
confirmed, videlicet, by the means principal and isntrumental. In Him, Saint
Paul foresheweth his person, Satan; and his power, the working of Satan. In it,
miracles, signs, and lying wonders. And Oracles, all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness. From the instrument, the meaning is evident, that Antichrist
shall be confirmed by miracles: To which shall be added Oracles, where (...),
unrighteousness in this verse, is opposed to (...), Truth in the twelfth; so
unrighteousness is here taken for untruth or falsehood; and (...), is the
deceivablenesse of a strong cunning persuasion. The sense; Antichrist shall
confirm his false doctrine by sophistry, and admirable fallacies, to make his
errors probable; yea, appear to be truth. The person and agent being Satan,
it is evidently inferred, that the Antichristians shall be stirred up by the
Devil, to teach the Doctrine of Devils. And the power of the agent it
expressed by three terms; the work of Antichrist shall be wrought (...), in
power; (...), in all power; and (...), Energetically, and effectually: All
concurring in this manifest construction* The Devil shall enable men, to
spread, and persuade the Doctrine of Antichrist beyond admiration.

Finally, the fifth part follows in the whom Antichrist should be embraced,
concerning whom we are to consider their persons, and properties. Their
properties being Active and Passive, each of them are twofold; 1. Negative,
They received not the love of the truth; and affirmative, They had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Their passive properties, passions, and punishments, are
either internal, ^od shall send them strong delusions; or eternal, That they
might be damned. Persons on whom Antichrist shall prevail, are here said to
be those that perish, whom Saint Paul proposes by way of anticipation; And
shall Antichrist, and Antichr^stians be so powerful to deceive? Alas, how
shall we be able to withstand him? says the fearful Christian. Fear not
(says my text) Antichrist shall indeed prevail, but it is only in them that
perish; so the sense is, Those that are deceived by Antichrist, shall be
damned. The first active property is negative; They did not receive the love
of the Truth, that they might be saved. Here is the cause that so many are
deceived by Antichrist, a double error; the former of the mind, They do not
receive the love of the Truth, or of the Gospel: the other of their end, They
receive the Gospel, for some pomp, profit, or personal respects, not for the
right end, for the love of the Gospel. The second active property is
affirmative, They took pleasure in unrighteousness: Where we are to take
notice of the action, and affection of Antichristians, (...), and (...),
unrighteousness and pleasure. Unrighteousness is twofold, moral,
false-dealing, Luke 16. 9. the Mammon of unrighteousness, that is,
covetousness: and spiritual unrighteousness, false-doctrine, Romans 1. 18. The
Philosophers did (...), Keep down the Truth of God in unrighteousness, that
is, in their own errors and false doctrine. In the same place Saint Paul
tells us what that false-doctrine was, (...), Idolatry. This word (...),
they shall take pleasure, is very emphaticall, implying the infinite affection
which any bear to the thing they delight in: so is the word used by man, 2
Cor. 5. 8. and so is it used by GOD, Matthew. 3. 17. The sense. The servants of
Antichrist shall be Idolaters, and delight in Idolatry in an high nature. In
the first passive property, internal, we observe the (...), a strong
delusion; and the (...), to believe a lie. In the first, (...), is strong, or
energeticall; and (...) comes of (...), that is, a Iuggler* (...), signifies
(...), a strong juggling, says Oecumenius; expressing thus much, Such as
embrace Antichrist shall have a strong strange delusion, which shall make them
desperately obstinate, affronting religion in the phrase of Job 21. 14. Nolumus
scientiam viarum tuarum. The meaning of the next phrase is manifest, That they
shall believe a lie; that is, Antichrist shall make, and believe the strangest
lies of all other. The last passive property is eternal, and it is as plain,
as fearful, all Antichristians shall be damned. Some are not satisfied with
this interpretation, and would have those condemned, who say that the eternal
property passive of the Antichristians is, that they shall be damned. Let such
please to take four things into their consideration. 1. If they be of the
English Church, this is the English Translation, which I prefer before all
humane writings, next to the Original it self. 2. If they be of the Romish
Church, this is their exposition also, Iudicandi voce, condemnationis poenam
intellige, says Steuartius. 3. If they be Grecians they know (...), for (...),
is common, even in the Greek Testament. 4. It is the drift of the discourse,
if they please to peruse it. And for mine own part, I will not nodum in scirp^,
make a question where there is a consent on all sides.

Out of these plentiful points, I will contract, extract a compendious
Paraphrase.

1. Antichrist will come on a time, when there shall be an incomparable falling
away, from Rome by Rebellion, and from Christ in Religion. And Antichrist
himself shall be the Apostate and Author of them both. This Apostate shall be a
man of sin, the pattern and Patron of impiety; and the son of perdition,
destroyed himself, and destroying his adherents. He shall be an adversary unto
Christ, both fundamentally in the maine point, and universally in many points
of Christian Religion; but so cunningly, that he shall place his Throne in the
Temple, even in the Prime Church professing Christianity; Which he shall so
rule (over-topping Kings and Emperors, with command equal unto Christ) that he
shall behave himself, as if he were God incarnate: even Christ Jesus, the
very Son of God.

2. His Plots, are secrets and Mysteries, undermining the truth in Saint Paul's
time* but Hindered by the Emperor; who was no sooner removed, but this
Antichrist was immediately revealed: And then he domineered with all lawless
actions.

3. His Tyranny has been discovered and diminished by the preaching of
Christ: though his Kingdom is not wholly to be finished, but by the presence
of Christ.

4. Being discovered by preaching, Antichrist opposes such Preachers, by
Miracles, and lying wonders: and by Oracles, and strong arguments. As probable,
as Satan can infuse into man, to support the Doctrine of Devils.

5. By which they shall seduce many wretched Proselytes, but to their fatal
perdition. Because they receive not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved: but for some Pomp and corporal respects, delight in false doctrine,
and in Idolatry above measure. Therefore, Gods just judgment gives them over
to strong delusion, that they become obstinate, to believe, what they defend,
untruth. And to make and believe unmatchable Lies. The End of all, is
Punishment without end: that they be damned.

This is the Description of Antichrist: would God it were the Inscription of
Antichrist. Would God it were Inscribed, written, in all your hearts, as it
were in a Table of Brass, with a Pen of Steel.

Having passed through the points and the Paraphrase: I now proceed to the
parallel. Concerning which, let me once more premise unto you; although all
these points seem not punctually to parallel each particular: but that some
of you may apprehend that I err in the explication or application of some of
the^: Yet that so many pieces, in so large a Prophecy, shall pitch (at least
probably) upon one person: the like application, on my life no man living can
frame to any other. This (it may be) will stagger, both the partial Papist,
and some praejudicating Protestants: who push at this position, as a very
paradoxe, that, The Pope is the Antichrist.

But excepting partiality and praejudice: I indifferent men, will conceive the
Great Bishop to be described in the description of the Great Antichrist. For
the time; take it politically, for a falling from the Empire, and the Pope
fulfilleth it. Indeed Asia fell from him to the Turks, Europe to the Hunnes,
and Africa to the Maurani: but this was by Invasion: But that the Emperor
should be thrust out of Rome, his Imperial Seat, from whence his Empire was
styled Roman, by a subject! This was the maine falling away; and the Pope did
perform it. About the year of our Lord 606, Boniface the 3, obtained of
Phocas the title of Universal Bishop. About 800, Leo 3, conspired with Charles
the Great; the conditions; That the one should strip the Emperor of the West*
and the other become Lord of Rome. About 1070, Gregory the 7, added to the
spiritual Monarchy, the Temporal. And at this day the Emperor takes a kind
of oath of Fealty to the Pope. The Pope therefore has fallen from the
Emperor by Rebellion.

Take the time Ecclesiastically, and it will appear yet more plainly, if Saint
Paul may define it. What is the time? a falling away, says Saint Paul in my
Text. What manner of falling away? It is a falling from faith, says the same
St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 1. Wherein shall be that falling from faith? In forbidding
meats and marriage, says the same Apostle in the same place. Therefore, The
Pope has acted this falling away from Religion.

Take the time figuratively, and the Pope is Apostata, and Refuga, the Head and
Author of this Apostasy. My Instances are but two. In the old Testament: he is
the Head of falling away from Gods injunction, in the second Commandment: The
Pope is Caput adorationis Imaginu^ says Suarez, the Head of Image-adoration.
And in the new; he commands a falling away, Council. Trid. Sess. 21. C. 1.
from Christ's own institution of the Sacrament: Licet Christus instituerit,
although Christ did institute the Supper to be received in both kinds: yet the
Pope does command all Christians, non credere, not to believe that they may
receive it so. Thus the falling away, falls directly on the Pope.

Next, the Titles of Antichrist fit the Pope, as well as the Time does. He is
The man of sin: both a Practiser, and a causer thereof.

Concerning their Practice, they know nothing who know not enough. I will not
rake open that Dunghill.

That the Pope is the Cause of Sin; I oppose these three special instances;
1, He is the cause of Ignorance, by injoyning the Scriptures and prayers in
the Latin Tongue. 2, Of Whoredom, by being the maintainer of it, and
maintained Cornel. Agrip. cap. 64.
by it: the Pope has a Pension for permitting Stews. 3, Of Treason, usurping
Power to depose and kill Kings, as it is at large disputed by Suarez. Justly
therefore is the Pope termed Suarez Apolog. lib. 6. cap. 4.
The man of Sin.

Their Holy Father, is also the Son of perdition: destroying others, to be
destroyed himself. Destroying others, spiritually; by his agents, compassing
Sea and Land, to make one proselyte: and when he is so made, they make him the
child of the Devil twofold more than he was before, Math. 23. 15. And that he
destroys men corporally; I need inquire no further than the Inquisition: a
woeful testimony. Finally, that in a righteous recompense of reward, He and His
shall be destroyed, spiritually: we suspect it, Ezech. 3. 10. the blood of the
seduced will God require at their hands. And corporally, we expect it, from
Revel. 18. 2. Babylon is fallen, it is fallen, says the Oracle of God.
Moreover, the Vicar of Christ, is an adversary of Christ, (...): opposing
Christ both fundamentally and universally. The very foundation of Christian
Religion is this: Eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6. 23. opposed by the
Pope, who makes Good works meritorious, and the cause of Salvation.
Universally, Six hundred Popish errors are avouched by the Bishop of Derie. I
instance only in six which directly oppose Christ.

1. Christ says, Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 39.

The Pope says, Search not the Scriptures.

2. Christ says, Pray in a known Tongue, 1 Cor. 14.

The Pope says, Pray in Latin, in a language you know not.

3. Christ says, Call upon God only.

The Pope says, Pray to the Saints.

4. Christ says, Make no Image, and bow not to it.

The Pope says, Make an Image, and bow to it.

5. Christ says, Let every soul be subject to the Powers, Romans 13. 1.

The Pope says, Let the Clergy be exempted.

6. Christ says, Drink ye all of this, Math. 26. 27.

The Pope says, Drink ye none of this.

For the place, that the Popes Seat is the prime See of Christendom. They
themselves take it for confessed, that Rome is the Church (...): and we know it
to be expressed to be Babel it self, even the City situated on the seven
hills, said an Angel from heaven, Revel. 17. 9.

The properties also, are proper to the Pope. First he does exalt himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, that is, above Kings and
Emperors. For the Pope is superior unto all Princes, directly and in
Temporalls, say some Papists: but indirectly, and in spiritualls say all
Papists. And that suffrage of the Electours Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 1.
runs in this phrase, Ego investio te ut praesis urbi and orbi: I elect thee
to be Prince of this City, and of the whole world.

2. The Pope does rule the Church of Christ even as Christ. Christ does rule
the Church, as the head does the body, Ephe. 5. 23. The Pope does as much; he
is, Caput Ecclesiae, the Head of the Church say all the Papists. Christ in
regard of his infallible ruling the Church, is a Rock, Matthew. Suarez. Apolog.
lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 15.
16. 18. Pontifex docens est Petra, the Pope is the same: Teaching the Church
he is the very rock thereof, says Suarez. All power that Christ can have is,
power over all things in heaven and earth, Math. 28. 18. The Pope does equal
himself Sacrar. Cer. lib. 1. Council. Trid. Sess. 24. Can. 3.
in that also; He claims Christ's own power, in Christ's own words; Data mihi
est omnis potestas, in coelis and in terris, said Sixtus Quintus. Finally, he
shows himself to be God also: 1, Canningly by his Godlike actions; to wit,
by dispensing against the Scriptures, by commanding Council. Trid. Sess. 3. sub.
Jul. 3.
Christians credere, to believe, by making Saints, by arrogating jus creandi
Apostolos, Power to make Apostles, as Baronius is quoted and confuted Casaubon
Exerc. 14. Sect. 14.
by Casaubone; and finally, by calling his Decrees, Oracles, that is, the very
word of God: all which are Godlike actions, peculiar to God alone. 2, Literally
at the Iubile he is borne in a golden Throne, wearing a Golden Crown, and
with a Golden Hammer, he breaks open the Gates of Paradise, forgiving sins
to all the people, the people adoring him, and craving eternal life from him.
And at his Election, they place his Throne on the Altar, in the chief Church,
kissing his feet, and bending their knees, they sing before him, Te Deum
laudamus, We praise thee O God. What more can we imagine, or he desire, if he
were Deus in templo: Christ himself incarnated, in the shape of man?

To proceed; As the Pope is described in the Description of Antichrist: so is
he revealed in the Revelation of Antichrist. The Papacy and Primacy was, and
is a Mystery. Secretly a working, even in the Apostles time. Even then were
the Romans high minded, Romans 12. 20. Although their high minds were
over-topped by one Higher than they, by the Emperor, as it is in the 6. verse:
but so soon as the Emperor of Rome was removed: instantly was the Pope of Rome
revealed, that he advanced himself: but still in a Mystery, Desiring to be
called servus servorum, the servant of servants; but to be Dominus dominantium,
the Lord of Lords. And now, since this Revelation, he is discovered to be:
(...), a lawless person. According to his Canonists, Legi non subjacet ulli,
he is under no Law. And according to his Controversie-writers, he can moderari
and mutare praecepta Apostolorum, prout Ecclesiae expedierit: qualify and
alter the precepts of the Apostles, as shall seem expedient for the Church. In
a word: whatsoever his words are, by his deeds he is revealed, to be (...), a
man of groundless, and boundless ambition.

After the Pope was revealed to be Antichrist, high pitch of Antichristian
Pride. And being at the height, it pleased God to destroy him, and his pride in
some part. The (...) of his Antichristian Greatness, and growth, was about
1500 under Pope Leo the tenth. Then he domineered without control, there
being none but a few impotent, and illiterate Hussites in Bohemia, and such
like to oppose him. Then the Western Church was like a great Barn, having all
the Corn thrashed out. Little grain, some light corn, but infinite chafe,
and straw being in the Floor of the Lord: yet then it pleased the Lord to
consume Popery by preaching, and by the breath of his mouth to shake German
like an aspen. Then Luther caused Saxony, the Palatinate, Hassia, and Helvetia
to fall from Rome. And since, his Successors Bellar. de R. P. 3. 21.
(as Bellarmine confesses) have snaken, (if not exiled) Popery in almost all
Germany, Denmark, Norway, Suevia, Gothland, Hungaria, Pannonia, France,
England, Scotland, Bohemia, H^lvetia, yea and in part of Italy it self. Thus
has the Preaching of the word consumed Antichrist and Popery already in part!
The Lord consume it every day, more and more; by Christ's mouth, and for Christ's
sake if it be his blessed will.

Now that Popery is a consuming, the Pope instruments, to prolong, though not
to cure that consumption. Instruments, I say are employed to support Popery:
enabled by miracles, none in these days but Antichrist, and the Papists laying
claim to that faculty, and furnished with the bravest learning, that ever
gave life to falsehood, or probability to the deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness. And that you may know, that these Teachers are set on work
by Satan; The Papists are the men, who of all men, do teach the doctrine of
devils, and most impiously forbid meats, and marriage, as Saint Paul prophesied
long ago, 1 Timothy 4. 1.

But this (...) is not (...): these Engines of Popery, shall not fight for
falsehood against the truth unpunished; because (though they have the Letter of
the truth yet) they have not the love of the truth: but (for the pomp of their
Church) take pleasure in unrighteousness, and delight in gross ^dolatry: in
Images which are exploded by the Protestans, Turks, and Jews, and all the
world besides, Rome only excepted.

For this cause has God sent them strong delusion, that the Papists, our
English Papists especially, are obstinate in their Errors, that nolumus
scientiam, they will take an oath, and take the Sacrament, that they will not
be converted, though they be confuted: that they believe a lie: that a man
cannot err, a monstrous monstrous lie, and palpable impossibility: and that in
morality, they will relate and believe such lies, that modest men cannot repeat
them without the blushing of their brows, nor Christians without the bleeding
of their bowels.

Labor improbus improborum: They take great pains. And verily they shall have
their reward. The conclusion of my text, implies the Confusion of obstinate
Papists, (...), that they may be damned.

The Popish inhibition of Scriptures, obscuring of prayers, mingling of Christ
merits, mangling of his Sacrament, and open Idolatry, can be no other, then
damnable assertions. Their practices! descensus averni, the downfall of Hell.
But the Lord of Heaven reduce our seduced Countrymen if it be his blessed
will, from these damnable errors.

And now through the goodness of my great God, I am come to the end of my
great question: Concerning which employment I render hearty thanks to this
Auditory, to the worthy Deane and Prebendaries, and to my Reverend, and
Reverenced Predecessor; To you for hearing me, to them for accepting me, and
to Him for encouraging me in the discharging of these exercises. One favor I
must further entreat you and them to vouchsafe me: Do not suspect that I am
puffed with my employment, in this so eminent a place. And to clear all
suspicion, that I neither undertook, nor discharged this Lecture, for any
profit or ambition! I here resign this Lecture, to whomsoever shall please to
succeed me. I resign it freely, and I give him my prayers into the bargain.

Never did slow-tongued Valerius yield up his Preaching place at Hyppo, to
Eloquent Augustine, Possidon. vita Aug. c. 5. and 8.
with such willingness as I do this: And as he did, I shall rejoice if I may
survive and see my Successor to supply my defects of Art, Nature, and Learning.

But for mine own discharge thereof, Men, Fathers, and Brethren, hear my
Apology, which I make unto you once more. Once more I protest unto you before
God, and man: I protest in the sight of my soul, and your souls, (which must
all meet at the great day) that I have delivered this discouse of Antichrist
labouriously, and ingenuously, withoutany personal or partial dislike. I
protest moreover, that no man loves the peace of the Church, more than I do;
that few love the old Roman Church more the^ I do: and that not many love
even the outward glory of the Church more then I do; but all these with Basils
proviso to the Courtier, Pappus de Pers. page 149.
sent from Valens the Emperor, Omnia hac me magni pendere, cum pietate, qua
remota, eadem perniciosa esse judico. The Peace, Honor, and Pomp of the
Church I love, and would promote, provided they offend not a good Conscience:
But that these, and other things are unconscionably supported in and by the
Church of Rome; I take it, I have made that evident, by sound, and
uncontrouleable arguments.

Nevertheless, if any of deeper judgment, or graver moderation shall censure,
either the matter of my discourse for error, or the manner of my discourse for
indiscretion; I heartily beseech GOD, that my Successor (whosoever he shall
be) may make amends for my wants; and yet that He may not want one thing,
which (I thank GOD) I had in some measure, an heart to deliver Gods Truth
plainly, without either fear, or flattery.

Here I say, I end my Lecture: At the end of their Lectures, Lecturers are wont
to beg, some for themselves, but many for the poor: to show that I am an
absolute Beggar, I must do both, I must beg both for my self, and the poor
also.

There is a story of a certain woman, who on a time did present her self unto
Alexander the Great, and she had inveagled him to d^ate on her by her rare
beauty, but that Aristotle his Tutor prevented it: For when Aristotle had
observed her micantibus oculis, and pellucida facie, to have sparkling eyes,
and a shining countenance, he cried out, Cave tibi Alexander ab illa venenata
muliere; beware (quoth he) of that poisonous woman; and afterward it was
known, that she indeed did daily trim her self with diverse things of
poisonous, and infectious operation.

This is the thing which I would beg for my self, and for the poor, even for
my poor labors sake, and for your poor souls sake.

I know you shall find, that the woman of Babel, Popery, shall be presented
unto you, as brave as the Sun, and as beautiful as the Moon in the full
luster thereof, with a Crown on her head, purple on her back, and with Gold in
her hand, as it was long ago foretold by Saint John in his Revelation 13. 4.

Popery I say shall be addressed unto you, dressed up to some in pleasure and
promotion, to some in commodity and affinity, to some in ease and favor, to
some in countenance and maintenance, to all in these glorious garments of
unity, universalitie, antiquity, and infallibility. But! Cavete a venenata
muliere; I am your Aristotle, your Preacher, and must cry to you, to Take heed
of that poysnous, and poisoning woman, Revel. 17. 4.

I must tell you, that notwithstanding the beautiful face thereof, yet
Poperies eyes are sparkling Basilisks, her breath the steeme of Adders, and her
voice the tone of the Hiena, and the tune of the Crocadile to deceive you, to
destroy you. I must tell you, the glorious Church of Rome does teach many
Antichristian, detestable, damnable errors.

Whereto that you may be praemoniti, and praem^niti, forearmed, and forwarned:
I beseech you to remember the particulars of this prophecy which I have
expounded unto you by this whole years labor. If this be too heavy a burden
for your remembrance, then take up only the words of these verses, into your
frequent meditation, and consideration; Meditate and consider then whether the
deepest reach can apply these points to any person, but the Pope; and whether
the shallowest capacity may not apply them easily, and directly to the Pope.

Which that ye may perform, I perform a double labor in your behalf,
Preaching and praying. My Preaching to you does end now; my praying for you
shall end when my life does end.

And this is my prayer; The God of Truth, who gave his Truth written, to be
taught to us, and his truth begotten to be crucified for us: That GOD of Truth,
lead you into all truth, and preserve you from all errors: That God (I say)
protect you, your friends and your. families, this congregation, this City, and
this whole Land, from all heresy in general, and from popery in particular;
and that for his Christ's, and for our Jesus his sake. To whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, for these our meetings, and all his other blessings, be
rendered all praise, and power; all honor and hearty thanskgiving, the rest of
this day, the rest of our lives, from this timeforth, and for evermore.

Amen, Amen
(...).
FINIS.

