CASSANDER ANGLICANVS;

Showing THE NECESSITY OF CONFORMITY TO THE PRESCRIBED CEREMONIES OF OUR
CHVRCH, In Case of Deprivation.

By JOHN SPRINT, Minister of Thornbury in Gloucestershire, sometimes of Christ.
Church in Oxon.

MATTHEW. 12. 7. I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

printer's device (not amongst those attributed to John Bill by McKerrow) of
two squirrels eating nuts under a stylized rose

LONDON Imprinted by JOHN BILL. ANNO M. DC. XVIII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Mr. DOCTOR GOODWIN Deane; and to the Canons of the
College of CHRIST-CHVRCH in Oxon.
FOr dedication of this book to you (R. w.) I had direction from the Rivers,
who Eccles. 1. 7.
empt themselves into the Seas from whence they came. To you, by whose Reverend
praedecessors I was in common consent chosen scholar into Christ-Church; by
whom that small model of Learning which I have (if I have any thing in me
which may be called Learning) was derived to me, and by whom I was of free
donation, without bribe or suit first placed in my pastoral charge. Then you,
I have no greater patrones; for you, I have no greater gift. And this I offer
to your view, your censure, your memorial. God ever grant you so to bless
the College of Christ-church, by your free elections and elocations, that the
Church of Christ may ever bless God for you, and your selves may feel the
comfort of your well-doing in this life, and find the fruit thereof in the life
to come. London 27 of April M. DC. XVIII.

Who am ever at your service in CHRIST, IO. SPRINT.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. SAMVEL BVRTON, Archdeacon of the Diocese of
Gloucester.
SIR:
AS it pleased you to appoint me a certain time, to give answer of my
purpose, or refusal of Conformity: So I have at last resolved to offer it unto
you in these my Letters; Confessing ingenuously, (for some respects seeming
weighty to my poor judgment) my unwillingness thereto, if by any means I
might avoid it: Howbeit, seeing I see the sway of Authority ouer-ruling, and
enforcing thereunto, partly in obedience to it, and partly for other more
important reasons swaying my Conscience; I give you to understand, that I am
resolved to Conform. To the which resolution, I confess I was the rather
drawn, by the mixture of your discreet proceedings, yet not so much driven
thereunto by your public authority, as drawn by your private lenity and
kindness, and undeserved respect unto my meannesse; I being well acquainted
with the common condition of man's will which may be induced, when it cannot be
enforced. And I trust with equal good conscience and success, to proceed and
continue in service unto God and to his Church in this my Conformity, as
before I did in not Conforming: And I heartily wish, that in the like case all
others did the like. This I can say, that my endeavors have not been wanting
to persuade others, wherein I have prevailed with not a few: And I am
persuaded, that if my reasons of this point, might see the light (authority
giving way thereunto) it would more prevail to induce men of contrary
judgment, then many other books penned to that purpose. Not for any worth of
Art or reading that is in them more then others, my self being the meanest of
many thousands for a matter of this nature: But partly in respect of the
quality of the penner, (which have been I confess a Non-conformitan) and
partly because of the conclusion proved, which inforceth the imputation of a
sin upon the sufferers of silencing for not conforming; a matter which of all
things the Ministers of this kind will least endure: And partly also for the
sufficiency of the Truth presented in those reasons.

Now, if any shall think the book unfit to be published, because it reaches
not home to prove the conueniency or necessity of the Ceremonies themselves:
they may be pleased to consider, that this position of mine, being only
proposed by way of presupposall, concludes nothing to cross that. I have
endeavored to prove this, others (whose knowledge and dexterity is greater)
have liberty to prove further if they please. But this I may more then
probably affirm, that the very most of not conforming Ministers will hearken
unto this, when (I am assured) they will not unto that. My reasons I offer to
your Learned view, and correction of authority. If any thing be found in them
hindering the passage thereof, I wish it be censured with a Deleatur: For that
my intention is not rashly to thrust out any thing offensive to authority, but
that which may be to the profit of the Church: Which I humbly desire of God in
this, and al other mine endeavors for his own names sake. To whose saving
grace in Christ, I commend you, with many thanks for your many undeserved
favors. This 21. of October 1617. Thornebury.

By yours humbly at command in Christ, IO. SPRINT.

TO THE READER.
EVery part of Truth is precious, even the least: (as the least grain of
musk is sweet.) Because it is the Truth; Because Gods Truth; and because
small errors entertained against small Trueths, have often evil, sometimes
pernicious effects. Which last appears in the controversy of our Ceremonies;
the sparkles of which difference have grown unto great flames in this our
Church. Where the fault is, as God knows, so the day will try, and God will
one day judge. But difference of apprehensions has brought forth difference
of judgments, and difference of judgments, has brought forth difference of
practice, and disagreement in affection. The difference of practice has moved
Authority to silence and suppress refusers of Conformity: The disagreement in
affection, has moved the Ministers deprived to speak evil of persons in
authority, and of Conformers: Whereby in the event, the course of the Gospel
is interrupted, and of Popery enlarged; the friends of Sion are grieved, the
enemies rejoiced, the Devil gratified, and God not pleased. The Church is rent
with Schism, the Truth scandalized by dissension, and the Ministers undone by
loss of living, and the unity of brethren living in the same house,
professing the same Faith, and rejoicing in the same Hope, is pulled in pieces:
And this like to continue God knows how long; but all men know, the longer the
worse.

For which cause I have undertaken this service to Gods Church, to unfold the
state of this question, which as yet has not been so directly and distinctly
handled, in my opinion, as it might, by any that I know. The Ministers have
heretofore labored to prove the Ceremonies evil to be used, and fit to be
abolished; but they never went about to prove, whether in case of Deprivation
they ought to have conformed; which is the question directly concerning their
case. This is performed in this tractate, and resolved by reason drawn from
God and man, from Scripture and Authority of all sorts, which thou (good
Reader) may perceive, if thy desire allure thee, or thy patience will give
thee leave to read.

The occasion of my penning it was this: At The occasion of penning this
Treatise.
first, being of adversary judgment to the Ceremonies, I labored (as men do
that are sick of prejudice) to gather all I could against them, and abstained
from the practice of them, as from things simply evil: But after, having been
indicted at a quarter Sessions for refusing to conform, by some of my Parish
for my fidelity in opposing their disordered life, I was occasioned to look
more nearly into the state of this question, whether I might use them with my
peace in any case, or not; namely, of necessity, and Deprivation. I asked of my
self two things, whether I would rather suffer death, then use them in a
Church professing the foundation, and urging them as things indifferent, not
pressing them, as binding Conscience in themselves, or as needful to
salvation? And whether the execution of my Ministry (which was pressed on my
Conscience with a woe, if I neglected it) should not be as dear unto me, as my
life? Which questions, when they put me to a stand, and that I could not well
resolve unto my self, for the ill conceit I had against the Ceremonies, I
began to search into the judgment of our best latter writers, and the
practice of reformed Churches, from whence I went unto antiquity of primitive
and purer times; where with one consent and harmony of judgment, I found them
for the practice of far more, and more offensive Ceremonies then ours may be
supposed, and chiefly in this case. This was a ground to stay my judgment,
and build my resolution: From which when once I found it, in con-conscience I
could not, in modesty I durst not depart in haste. For with what show or
conscience should any man turn his back in dislike, or his face in opposition
to the judgment and practice of all Churches of Christ since the Apostles? And
from all those worthy Lights, those Spiritual persons, the Teachers of the
Churches, the champions of the Truth, the Masters of Religion, by whom, and by
whom only, God had in all ages propagated his Gospel, converted souls,
confirmed Verity, confuted Heresies and Errors, builded Christ's Church,
discovered and overthrown the Church of Antichrist? Chiefly, seeing it is the
judgment not of one or two, nor of some against some other, but even of All,
not One excepted which is of note, or classical authority: And none against
this judgment, excepting convicted and condemned Heretics and Schismatics,
such as Donatists, Anabaptists, and our latter Brownists. From thence I looked
into the reasons moving them unto this judgment, and that practice, which in
this Tractate are set down: So that here is no nouelty broached, or fancy of
mine own proposed to thy view (Christian reader) but Antiquity and
Universality; not Papal, but Evangelical, according to the Scripture; not of
Carnal, but Spiritual persons, which may be to thy Conscience as an (...).

The causes of publishing are principally three, respecting Causes of
publishing.
the truth, the Ministers my brethren, and my self. The publication of this
book concerns the truth in two respects: First, because it is a questioned
truth, which may not be concealed without injury to God, and to his Church:
and it is a sin of no light nature, to withhold the truth in unrighteousness:
Romans 1. 18.
next, it is a profitable truth, which may occasion some Ministers to enter,
which dare not for conformity, and others to return which are deprived for
not conforming to the Ceremonies, both tending to the benefit and edification
of Gods Church. For what greater profit may there be, then that which is
opposed to the greatest mischief? For as it pleases God to save them that
believe 1 Cor. 1. 21. prou 29. 18.
by preaching: so where no vision is, the people perish. Secondly, it
respects the ministers of two sorts. First, such as are deprived, on whom
these reasons do enforce a sin for not conforming in the case of
deprivation: and it is very scandalous for Ministers, professing sincerity of
Christ his Gospel to have begun, and to continue in a wrong course; neither
can they approve their conscience before God or man, to begin and to remain
in error and not amend when they see a better way. Then, it concerns the
Ministers that have conformed in this case: both because it serves to clear
the innocence of sundry godly teachers, that have conformed to prevent their
deprivation, which are hardly thought of, and traduced as backsliders, and
betrayers of Gods cause. And if this truth were known, they would not have
condemned innocents: As also because it is meet that the hearts of such as
have conformed of fear, and are wounded with grief, should be relieved: this
truth serving to quiet their afflicted conscience, which must not be
neglected. Lastly, it respects my self, and that two ways. First, because
by suppressing of this verity, I should wrap my self in the guilte of a two
fold sin; namely, unthankfulness to God, and unrighteousness to man. For why
has God opened my eyes to see this truth, but to that end I should reveal it
unto others?

And it were unrighteousness, and hatred to my Leu. 19. 17.
brethren to suffer them to sin, and not to show them of it, to see them to
wander, and not to point unto the right way. Lastly, it were iniquity to my
self, to suffer my Ministry to be evil spoken of, for practicing the
truth; there being scandal taken far and near at the alteration of my
judgment, and profession of my purpose to conform, rather then to suffer
deprivation, which I may lawfully, and must also of some necessity prevent. To
this I add the respect I have unto our Schismatickes, the Brownists, whose
errors are hereby discovered, and their false conclusions overthrown.

Objections answered.
But it will be said I am in error: If so, it shall the easier be confuted. And
when any man has showed it to be error, he may the more safely call it so:
And I shall be the rather induced to confess it so to be. It will be well,
and more agreeing to the comfort of men's consciences, and more fitted to the
rekconing they must give, to be advised before they so conclude it. Howbeit,
if I err, it is with such company, with whom in some case I had rather err
(as one speaks) then think or know the truth with some other. Neither can I
be persuaded, neither will any man prove easily, that all true Churches of
Christ, of all ages, agreeing in a point, have agreed in an error.



Romans 3. 4 23. Iam. 3. 2. 1. Cor. 13. 9, 10
that all men are liers, and that all have sinned; yea, in many things we
offend all: We know but in part, and difference will be among the best, and
with difference, error on one side or another in matters circumstantiall,
until perfection come. Our Psalm. 19* 12.
comfort is, that all sins, especially unknown to such as are in Christ, are
pardoned, as being included in the compass of their general repentance.
Though reason accuse them of a sin, yet grace in 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
Christ his blood cleanses from all sin, neither can any man condemn where
God has justified. Romans 8. 33, 34.
And what I think of them in charity, that to my comfort I think of my self
and all that hold this judgment albeit it prove an error.

Gal. 4. 16. Luke 7. 35.
the light? or am I their enemy because I tell them the Truth? wisdom is
justified of all her children. And every one that is of the Truth hears the
John 18. 37.
voice thereof.



Modest offer. fol. 19.
Ministers which stood against Conformity, have after yielding, evidently lost
the grace and power of their gifts, some fallen to idleness, neglect of
public and private duties, yea to profane and scandalous life and
conversation. And so (say I) have sundry done upon my knowledge, that have
holden out against Conformity, even to suspension and deprivation; whose zeal
in that behalf, has either been prepostrous, more insisting on the lesser
then the weightier matters of the Law, or joined with gross ignorance,
themselves not able to have given a reason of their doings before God or man:
It being just with God to punish them on either side, who without conscience or
ground of Faith, do either conform or refuse Conformity. For otherwise none
can be ignorant, but that on either side, sundry have remained in the constant
evidence of Gods best gifts and graces, and in the blessing of a sanctified
estate. To teach us that it is not the zeal, for or against the Ceremonies,
but an heart established in grace, that Heb. 13. 9.
can keep men from the marks and badges of hypocrisy.

Now, for the manner of my handling these my The manner of handling.
reasons, I trust it shall appear to every person fearing God, that as I have
written these things with a good conscience, as in the sight of God: so I have
performed it with due respect to my Brethren, as it becomes Truth. I know
with whom I hold this controversy, not with enemies but brethren, and I have
not learned the language of foul speech. If any man be moved to reply, I wish
him to perform it in the spirit of meekness, and in the evidence of James 3.
17.
heavenly wisdom; for that our passions are great hindrances of finding out
the Truth: And no man breaks out into inordinate affection in any
controversy, chiefly of this nature, but he hazardeth the loss of a better
thing then that he seeks. He seeks Truth, and loses Charity and power of
godliness; whereas he should seek Truth in Charity: For Charity rejoices
not in iniquity, but in Ephesians 4. 15. 1. Co^. 13. 6.
the Truth. God needs not our lies to defend his Truth: I leave such practice
for my part to Papists and to Brownists, who by unableness to leave their
railing forms and bitterness, do manifest the foulness of their heart and
falsehood of their cause, that cannot be defended but by weapons borrowed from
corrupted nature, and the diuill; And in a word declare themselves unprofitable
in the Truth they know, and incapable of any Truth they know not, and quite
unworthy of respect. We have had contentions enough about circumstances and
Ceremonies. The years should teach us how smally the Lord does bless the
dissentions of Brethren: And the times approach wherein it must be known, Romans
14. 17.
that the kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink, nor godliness in
Ceremonialls, but in the power of a regenerated state: And that saving grace
will stand, though men never write or preach against a Bishop, or suffer
deprivation for refusal of a Ceremony: And that the grace of God does teach us
to seek resolution of every doubt, and to witness our dislike of things to
be disliked in wisdom and proportion; but never to contend about any thing,
but for the faith once given to the Saints. If any man Jude v 3. Phil 3. 15.
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal the same unto him. If any man be
ignorant, let him be 1. Cor. 14 38.
ignorant still. If any man will be contentious, we 1. Cor. 11. 16.
have no such custom, nor the Church of God. In the foundation we all agree.
Time and day will 1. Cor. 3 11. 12. 13. 15* 10.
try the hay and stubble from the gold and silver: And the fire of Gods trial
will surely sindge delinquents. Let every man take heed how he builds. 1.
Cor. 4. 5.
Let us judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to
light the things hidden in darkness: Phil. 3. 16.
But whereunto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule, and let us
mind the same thing. Jude v. 20.
Let us edify our selves in our most holy Faith, and pray one for another. And
the in their hearts. James 5. 16.
Lord do good to those that are good, and to them that are upright Psalm. 125.
4.


JOHN SPRINT.

THE NECESSITY OF CONFORMITY IN THE CASE OF DEPRIVATION.
IT is necessary for a Minister to Conclusion.
conform to the Ceremonies prescribed in the Church of England, rather then to
suffer Deprivation.







Church of England, then suffer his Ministry to be suspended or deprived.

The reason of which answers stands in this, Because he shall sin against God
in not conforming, and in suffering himself for that cause to be deprived of
his Ministration in the Church. That he shall sin in so doing will appear by
these two reasons.









Cor. 6. 14. But this doctrine and practice is against the royal Law of love:
and therefore seems to be unlawful.



These things being directly and plainly proved, it will (I doubt not) appear
that to suffer deprivation or suspension, for refusing to conform to the
Ceremonies prescribed, is a sin: Whereupon will follow these conclusions.















reasons urged against our Ceremonies, is contrary to the doctrine of the holy
and inspired Apostles, and so by consequence is an error and sin: I prove it
by two reasons.

Because(1) the holy Apostles, with the whole Church at Jerusalem(2) by
inspiration of the holy Ghost and commandment of God(3) did practice
themselves,(4) and caused others to practice,(5) yea advised one another,(6)
and enjoined or commanded(7) whole Churches the practice of(8) as evil and
inconvenient Ceremonies(9) in sundry and maine respects, as in their judgment
ours are, namely in number,(10) nature,(11) use,(12) and evil effects, and(13)
that for reasons equiuolent or inferior to the avoiding of deprivation. This
proposition I thus prove in the several members. 1. The holy Apostles and
whole Church at Ierusalem] namely Peter, Acts 15. 7. James, Acts 15. 13. and
21. 18. 21. 24. 25. Paul, Acts 15. 2. 22. and 18. 18. and 21. 26. 1. Cor. 9.
10. Barnabas, Acts 15. 2. 22. Judas, Sylas, which were Prophets, Acts 15. 22.
23. The Apostles, all the Elders, and whole Church, Acts 15. 4. 6. 23. and 21.
18. 25. 2. By inspiration of the holy Ghost, and commandment of God] as
appears, Acts 15. 28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us. Also James
and the Elders, Acts 21. 18. that determined before one practice of conformity
to Jewish Ceremonies, Acts 21. 25. By inspiration of the holy Ghost, Acts 15.
13. 28. did afterward persuade Paul to another practice of conformity to
Jewish Rites, Acts 21. 23. 24. And the things written and determined by the
Apostles, even concerning matters of order in the Church, are the commandments
of God: 1. Cor. 14. 37. 3. Did practice themselves:] For Paul shaued himself,
and made a vow, Act. 18. 18. Paul purified himself, contributed, and entered
into the Temple, and declared the accomplishment of the days of the
purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.
Acts 21. 24. 26. Paul unto the Jew became as a Jew, to the men under the Law,
as though he had been under the Law, 1. Cor. 9. 20. 4. And caused others to
practice:] For Paul circumcised Timothy: Acts 16. 3. Paul took the men, and was
purified with them, Acts 21. 24. 5. Advised one another:] For James and the
Elders persuaded Paul thus to conform: Do this that we say unto thee, take
them (the votaries) purify thy self with them, contribute with them, that
they may shave their heads, Acts 21. 23. 24. 6. Enjoined or commanded the
practice of Ceremonies:] For thus did the council of Jerusalem, They laid on
them those necessary things, from which you shall do well to keep your
selves, Acts 15. 28. 29. This constitution was called the Apostles and Elders
Decrees ordained by them: Acts 16. 4. James and the Elders say, We have
determined and written that they observe no such things, but that they abstain
from blood strangled, etc. Acts 21. 25. 7. To whole Churches] of diverse and
far distant Countries and Nations, namely to the Gentiles in Antiochia,
Syria, Cilicia: Acts 15. 23. 8. As matters good and necessary in that case:]
For it is said, it seemed good to the holy Ghost. These necessary things, Acts
5. 28. From which if you keep your selves you shall do well, verse. 29. 9. And
yet as evil and inconvenient in sundry maine respects as they can imagine
ours, namely in number] for they were diverse, namely circumcision, Acts 16. 3.
Shauing the head, Acts 18. 18. and 21. 24. Purifying, Acts 21. 24. 26. Vowing,
Acts 18. 18. and 21. 23. Contributing, Acts 21. 24. Offering sacrifices for the
persons purified, Acts 21. 23. Observation of the Jewish Sabbath, Acts 13. 14.
42. and 18. 4. and 17. 2. Abstaining from blood, Acts 15. 29. Abstaining from
strangled, Acts 15. 29 10. And in nature] for they are called by the holy
Ghost, Needless shadows, Col. 2. 20. Yokes not to be borne, Acts 15. 10.
Burdens, Acts 15. 28. Traditions burdening. Col. 2. 20. Ordinances of the
world, Col. 2. 20. Commandments and doctrines of men, Col. 2. 22. Turning from
the truth, Tit. 1. 14, Voluntary religion or will worships, shows of religion,
Col. 2. 23. Impotent and beggarly rudiments, Gal. 4. 9. 10. And for the further
confirmation of this member, look the proof of the next immediate reason
proouing this first point. 11. In vse] First, for that they were most strictly
pressed on the consciences of weak Christians by Jewish and contentious
Brethren: for they were urged ex necessitate salutis: Except ye be circumcised
after Moses manner ye cannot be saved, Acts 15. 15. They would have brought
their consciences in bondage by them and yoaked them, Galat. 5. 1. 3. Acts 15.
10. They would have condemned them for the not using them, Col. 3. 16.
Secondly, they were more dangerously accounted necessary even to salvation,
Acts 15. 1. Thirdly, they were perniciously abused for confirmation of most
false, heretical, and impious doctrines, as much as ever our Ceremonies could
be, or were by the Papists; as namely, that men are justified by the works of
the Law, Gal. 2. 14-15-16 and 5. 4. That every Christian is bound strickly on
his salvation to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3. That there is no hope of
salvation without the use of them, Acts 15. 1. That Christ the body was not yet
come by continuing the shadow, Col. 2. 16. 17. That they are to be condemned
who use them not, Col. 2. 16. That the Kingdom of God stands in them, Romans
14. 17. Yea from Paul's preaching and practice it might be argued by some, that
a man may on occasion practice that, which practice he teaches every where
against, Acts 21. 21. 23. 26. Fourthly, for the latitude and compass of their
spreading, it was both amongst them, near and far from them every where:
Namely at Jerusalem, Acts 21. 17. 20. 21. Rome, Romans 14. 2. 5. 17. Antioch,
Acts 15. 23. Syria, Acts 15. 23. Cilicia, Acts 15. 23 Collossus, Col. 2. 16.
17. 20. 21. Creete, Tit. 11. 14. Derbe, Lystra, and Iconium, and those
quarters, Acts 16. 1. 2. 3. 12. And evil effects,] For the use and continuance
of them were the occasions of many pernicious effects to such as abused them,
which appears in this. First, they bondaged their Christian liberty, Gal. 4.
9. and 5. 1. 3. Secondly, they made Christ to profit them nothing, Gal. 5. 2.
Thirdly, they made them to fall away from grace, Gal. 5. 4 Fourthly, they
caused them to turn away from the truth, Tit. 1. 14. Galat. 2. 5. Fifthly,
they hindered them from obeying the truth, Galat. 5. 7. Sixthly, they were
occasion of condemnation to them as pressed them as necessary Gal. 5. 10.
Seventhly, they leauenned the whole lump with sowernesse, Galat. 5. 9.
Eighthly, it occasioned Paul to fear least he had bestowed his labor in vain
among his hearers Gal. 4. 10. 11. Ninthly, it occasioned Paul to wish them cut
off which did disquiet the Church by them, Gal. 5. 12. Tenthly, they were
occasion of Peter's dissimulation, and Paul's just reproving of him, and were
means to bring Barnabas, a man full of the holy Ghost, Acts 11. 24. and other
Gentiles into their dissimulation, and to cause them not to go the right way
to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 11. 12. 14. Eleuenthly, they were fit
means to put them besides their adoption and inheritance in heaven, Gal. 5.
10. 20. 21. 22. Lastly* they made as much stir, strife, and contention among
Brethren in the Church, yea much more then our Ceremonies have done, if either
we respect the violence and bitterness thereof, or the latitude and wide
spreading of it in so many and far distant Countries and Churches, Galat. 5.
10. 12. troubling and disquieting the Church. Act. 15. 24. 13. And for reasons
equiuolent partly, and partly inferior to the avoiding of deprivation:] For it
appears that the Apostles used and enjoined the practice of these Jewish
inconvenient Ceremonies for these causes. First, for the believing Jews, to
keep them from offense, being as yet zealous of the Law, and not rightly
instructed in the truth of the abrogation of the Legal Ceremonies by Christ,
that they might not be occasioned to be drawn back to Iudaisme, Acts 21. 20.
21. 24. For this cause he circumcised Timothy, because of the Jews, Acts 16.
1. 3. Secondly, for the unbelieving Jews, and that for two reasons. One reason
was to win them to the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 20. 21. 22. and to further their
salvation, 1. Cor. 10. 32. 33. Another reason was to avoid the persecution of
the froward and malicious Jews, as also to redeem the liberty of his
Ministry, and of the Gospel, which otherwise was like to be endangered, as
fell out in the event, Acts 21. 22. 27. 28. 30. 31. 32. Thirdly for necessity,
(for in that case they were necessary things, Act. 15. 28.) and expedient (for
it seemed good to the holy Ghost, and in the practice of them in that case they
did well, Act. 15. 28. 29.) namely, to appease their bitter dissentions and
vehement disputations in the Church, Acts 15. 2. 5. And to quiet the trouble
and cumber of their minds: as if one should say for the peace of the Church,
Acts 15. 24. That thus the Churches might be established in the faith, and
increase in number daily, Acts 16. 4 5. As doubtless by Gods blessing ours
would also do, if either the Ceremonies might safely be removed from the
scandal of Papists, or if they were conformed unto by our deprived Brethren,
till liberty of Ceremonies were granted by the Magistrate.

Out of this reason thus I argue;

If the Apostles by direction of the holy Ghost, and upon reasons of common and
perpetual equity did practice themselves, and caused others to practice, yea
advised and enjoined (as matters good and necessary to be done) Ceremonies as
inconvenient and evil in many maine and material respects, as the Ceremonies
enjoined and prescribed in our Church are supposed to be; then it follows;

That to suffer deprivation for refusing to conform to the ceremonies of our
Church, is contrary to the doctrine and practice of the Apostles:

But the former is true as has been proved:

Therefore the latter follows also.

So much of the first reason, proving that the doctrine and practice of
suffering deprivation for refusing to conform to our prescribed Ceremonies, is
contrary to the doctrine and practice of the Apostles, and so seems to be an
error and a sin.

The second reason proouing this point is this: Because the same objections in
substance, and for the most part which are brought forth against our
Ceremonies, to prove them simply and in nature sin, may be objected and applied
to the practice and doctrine of the Apostles, which was performed by direction
of the holy Ghost, for those Jewish Ceremonies were Abridgement Lincoln. fol.
17.
1. Humane inventions:] for they left to be the commandments of God, and are
called the traditions, commandments and doctrines of men, Col. 2. 22. 21. 16.
17. Titus 1. 14. Ibid.
2. Of no necessary vse] seeing Christ was come which was the body, and they
the shadow of things to come, Coloss, 2. 16. 17. Heb. 10. 1. And Paul taught
every where that the Jewish Ceremonies must be left, Acts 21. 22. Ibid.
3. Abused to superstition:] for they were abused to the confirmation of most
false and pernicious doctrine, justification by works, Gal. 2. 3. 4. 12. 14.
15. 16. No salvation without them, Acts 15. 1. vt sup. Abrid. Lincol. fol. 31.
4. Ceremonies significatiue, or of mystical signification:] Yea sacramental
Ceremonies indeed, and added to baptized persons,] For circumcision was a
Sacrament, and all the Ceremonies of the Law were shadows of things to come,
Col. 2. 16. 17. Heb. 10. 1. Patterns, shadows, similitudes of heavenly
things, Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 23. The holy Ghost signified by them, Heb. 9. 8. And
the signification of them, were inseparable to the Jews that believed not, as
also to the weak believing Jews, who were not instructed thoroughly. Abrid.
Lincol. fol. 37.
5. Esteemed, imposed and observed as parts of Gods worship:] So they were by
the Jews esteemed, imposed, and observed as necessary, Acts 15. 5. to
salvation, Acts 15. 1. For which cause the zealous Jews were violently
offended with Paul, for teaching that Christians ought not to circumcise their
children, nor to live after the legal customs, Acts 21. 21. 27. Yea, this
argument might seem to be pressed on the Apostles, who enjoined those
burdensome Ceremonies as good and necessary, Acts 15. 28. 29. and conformed
unto them for their sake, and in the presence of such as did esteem and hold
them as worships of God, Acts 15, 1. 5. and 16. 3. and 21. 26. 44. 48. fol.
6. Swaruing from the general rules and directions of the word for determining
of Ceremonies,] not needful or profitable to edification:] For how could
Jewish ceremonies, which were antiquated, and either had no signification,
being shadows of things already come, or a false one, edify the Church: nay,
the evil doctrines which they established, and evil effects which they
produced, served rather to destroy, then to edify the Church, yet their use
and yielding served to edify by making way to the Churches peace, and
furtherance of the Gospel. 44. 48. fol.
7 Not profitable for order:] For it had been most orderly to have served God
by Legal Ceremonies under the Law, and Euangelical under the Gospel. It might
seem disorder to bring back the Legal Ceremonies which were abolished, and
to join them with Gods worships in the Gospel: yet it was order to use and
practice them in that case, because it prevented the maine disorder and
confusion that else might have insued, namely discord of believing Brethren,
and suppressing of the Gospel. 44. 48. fol.
8 Not profitable for decency:] For what was more indecent, then for a
Christian to use idle, unfruitful, needless and beggarly rudiments? For a
Christian to be shaued, circumcised, offer sacrifice, yet did this indecency
uphold a higher decency, which was the establishment of faith, daily increase
of the number of Churches, Acts 16. 4. Which conformity in our Ceremonies in
the case of deprivation would also do. 45. 49. fol.
9. Offensive many ways:] For first they might offend and grieve the believing
Gentiles, which never used them, and knew by the Apostles doctrine that they
were to be abolished, Acts 21. 21. Galat. 2. 3, 9, 12, 15. Secondly, they did
so scandalize, and were such stumbling blocks to the believing and weak
Jews, that they contended about them, as needful to salvation, Acts 15. 15.
And were violent against Paul in the defense of them, Acts 21. 21, 22, 27, 28.
And ready to forsake the Christian faith about them, as perhaps some did.
Thirdly, the hardened and unbelieving Jews might be more hardened from
Christianity, and say, The Christian religion borrows our Ceremonies, they
decline and come back to us. Fourthly, the Apostles and the Church of God they
were offended, both in the violence of pressing the necessity of these things
by the Jews, Acts 15. 24. As also in imposing that they did: For they were
loath to lay any burden, and the burden that they laid was necessary for the
state of the Church, Acts 15. 28. Besides they taught against the things they
enjoined, that namely they ought not to be used by Jews and Gentiles, Acts
21. 21. Fifthly, to this we might add, that they might tend, and in the event
did serve indeed, as means to infringe the Christian liberty:] For they were
burdens, yokes, bondages, and opposite (as they were pressed by the Jews) to
the Christian liberty: Act. 15. 10, 28. Gal. 4. 9. 10. and 5. 1. yet the use
and practice of these things, by the direction of the Apostles, did procure the
liberty of the Gospel, and the preaching thereof; like as conformity to our
Ceremonies would do to prevent or recover the loss of their Ministry. To
this add again, that those Ceremonies were very strictly inioined] by the
Jews as necessary to salvation: Act. 15. 1, 5. As ours are now; By the
Apostles, as necessary for the peace of the Church, and freedom of the Gospel,
Act. 15. 24, 28. and 21. 21, 27. In which respects the practice and conformity
to our Ceremonies may seem necessary at this time for the appeasing of
fraternall discord, and furtherance of the Gospel. And seeing by the way these
are the chiefest and maine arguments, which the deprived Ministers have brought
against the Ceremonies to prove them simply, and in their nature evil: let it
be considered by the judicial and godly Reader, whether they might not upon
these grounds except against the Apostles prescription, and refuse the practice
of those Jewish Ceremonies, even with the loss of ministry and interruption of
the Church, as well as to suffer depriuatio^ for refusing of the Ceremonies
prescribed in the Church of England.

But from this point I argue thus;

Whatsoever Ceremonies are of humane invention, of no necessary use, abused to
superstition, of mystical and spiritual signification; esteemed, imposed and
observed, as parts of Gods worship, swaruing from the general rules of Gods
word, not profitable for edification, order, or decency, of fensiue many ways
to the godly, weak and wicked; infringing Christian liberty, strictly
enjoined as necessary: such Ceremonies by the doctrine of the Ministers
refusing conformity, are simply and in nature evil, and could not be
practiced by any persons, no not the Apostles themselves, and that through the
direction of the holy Ghost without sin.

But the Jewish Ceremonies prescribed and practiced, by the Apostles through
direction of the holy Ghost, were of this nature and quality, in every one of
the points above named.

Therefore by the doctrine of the Ministers refusing conformity, in the case
of deprivation, the Jewish Ceremonies prescribed and practiced, by the Apostles
through direction of the holy Ghost, were simply and in nature evil, and could
not by them be practiced without sin. Or thus;

Whatsoever doctrine and practice, tends to accuse and condemn the inspired
Apostles, in their inspired practice and doctrine, of teaching the practice,
and of practicing Ceremonies, in sundry maine respects, as unlawful as ours
are pretended to be, tends to accuse and condemn the Apostles, in their
inspired practice and doctrine, for teaching and for practicing things simply
evil.

But this does the doctrine and practice, of suffering deprivation, for
refusing to conform to our prescribed Ceremonies.

Therefore the doctrine and practice of suffering deprivation, for refusing to
conform to our Ceremonies, does directly tend to accuse the inspired
Apostles, in their inspired practice for teaching, and practicing things simply
evil. Whereupon I thus conclude;

Whatsoever doctrine or practice, does directly tend to accuse and condemn,
the inspired Apostles for practicing, teaching, and prescribing things simply
evil, such doctrine and practice is erroneous and sinful:

So does the practice and the doctrine, of suffering deprivation, for refusing
to conform upon the grounds alleged, as has been proved:

Therefore the doctrine and practice, of suffering deprivation, for refusing to
conform unto our Ceremonies, is erroneous and sinful.

To this that has been here alleged, there are certain objections made by
certain godly, grave, and learned deprived Ministers, which here I think fit
to make answer unto.



and in so doing we shall not err: For in so doing we may say, we do no
more about matters of Ceremonies, then the Apostles have done before us. It is
a point we wish the Church of Rome could say. Secondly, though we may not
immitate the Apostles in things peculiar to their office, persons and times:
yet we may follow them, and are bound in conscience so to do, in matters of
common equity and general reason. For as the Apostles had warrant from the
holy Ghost, so we have warrant from the example of the Apostles, and from the
reasons, for which the holy Ghost moved them to do those things. For the holy
Ghost being ever the same, teaches, and rules the Church by one and the same
reason revealed in his word, as well now as then. Now the Apostles in this
case, did urge the practice of these Ceremonies, not from their immediate
authority from God, nor from inspiration only of the holy Ghost: but by
reasons and rules of common and perpetual equity, namely expediencie; It
seemed good to the holy Ghost and us, Acts 15. 28. and necessity: these
necessary things, Acts 15. 28. also to win more, 1. Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22.
to further and propagate the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 23. By the which rules the holy
Ghost does teach the Church, in the like cases of the Church, to follow the
like example by the same general rules: namely to practice the same Ceremonies
in the like case, or other Ceremonies of like nature in other cases: no less
then he does teach the Church to pray, and singin a language understood from
the general rule of edification. [Let all things in the Church be done to
edification] 1. Cor. 14. 12, 26. And for Prophets to speak one after another,
not many at once: and for women to hold their peace in the Church, to avoid
confusion: from the general rule of order and honesty. [Let all things be
done honestly, and by order in the Church] 1. Cor. 14. 27, 30, 31, 34, 35, 40.
Which may the rather appear, because they be all cases of one nature, namely
of order, and Ceremony in the Church and worship of God, which I think a
sufficient answer to this objection.

Master Parker of the Cross. part 2. sect. 13. fol. 69.
and at first ordained of God, and must have honorable burial: for that our
Ceremonies are far worse in many respects and circumstances; As being
Antichristian, more scandalous, more hurtful, more dangerous, more strictly
enjoined, then sometimes Gods commandments, these the inventions of men, yea
of Antichrist, etc. stubble and straw, or rather straw when they are at the
best.





For the question is here, not whether our Church does well to prescribe these
Ceremonies: But whether such Ceremonies being prescribed, as the Church
conformed to by the Apostles decree in a case of necessity, ought not to be
conformed to by our deprived Ministers in a case of like or greater necessity.

Secondly, But the Church of England in prescribing Preface to the book of
common Prayer, tit. Of Ceremonies.
these Ceremonies, professes a respect of winning and profiting two sorts.

First, Some thinking it a matter of great conscience to depart from a piece of
the least of their Ceremonies.

Secondly some new fangled would innouate all things, and despise the old,
nothing liking them, but that which is new: therefore they thought it expedient
to take away some such as were most apt to be abused to superstition, and to
retain others: and in their practice they took away so many ceremonies, as
time would serve quietly to do it, the rest were reserved to keep order, and
quiet decipline in the Church. Which is further noted to King Edwards answer
to the Devonshire and Cornishe rebels: who being Ans. to 3. Artic. Act and
monument.
Papists would have the Mass in Lattine: To whom the King replyeth, that the
good things in the Masse-bookes were only translated into English for their
sakes, only the superstition taken out.



Acts, 16 4. and 21. 25. And that by the rule of necessity, then which there
can hardly be a greater argument of compulsion. Act. 15. 28.

Secondly, and besides the very cases alleged were done by compulsion also of
preventing the Jews offense: yea in a case of danger also of deprivation to
the Apostles, if they had not conformed, as appears by the tumult made by the
Jews, Acts. 21. 27 28, 29, 30. Upon a supposition of those Jews that Paul
taught non-confirmitie unto the Jewish ceremonies. Verse 21. By the which
tumult they raised, it came to pass, that Paul was indeed deprived from any
free use of his Apostleship in Judea, til he came to Rome, as appears in the
sequel of the history. And if there were no Law for deprivation of Ministers,
yet if the execution of their office were in hazard, I doubt not but they
should conform; for compulsion may as well be used without Law, as with Law.







blood and strangled, it was enjoined without limitation of time: whereupon a
man might have made this objection unto their decree, and say They are urged
for a perpetuity, and upon an ordinary and standing reason, namely of
necessity and fitness, and are not ever like to be removed.

Thirdly also, some of the prescribed Jewish ceremonies endured longer in the
Church, then on the sudden may be imagined: For it is observed that Christians
abstayned from blood and strangled, till the time of Tertullian, Origin,
Whitaker de To. pon. cont. 4. quest. 7. fol. 832. 833.
Syrill, Eusebius, Council of Ganga, yea of Augustine, 400. years after
Christ.

2 Concerning our ceremonies* it is untrue, that they are urged for a
perpetuity: for the preface of the common prayer book expressly says of the
ceremonies prescribed thus [they are retained for a discipline and order, which
upon just causes may be altered and changed, and therefore not to be esteemed
equal to Gods Law] And for the continuance of practice of our ceremonies, I
suppose noe sound Protestant will plead for the necessity of their practice,
or continuance, longer then the reason of necessity does hold.

Our case is rather to be matched with the time of Paul's refusing Object. part.
M Parker 2. sect. 14. fol. 71
to circumcise Titus, and of his reproouing Peter for his dissimulation in
co^forming to the Jews, Ga. 2. 3. 11. 13.

Paul in a case of hazard of his Ministry, disquiet of the Church, and
interruption of preaching the Gospel (which is our case) did circumcise
Timothy, Acts 16. 3. But did utterly refuse (as also all the Apo^tles at
Jerusalem) to circumcise Titus: Aretius in act. 16. 3. fol. 75. Gualter in act.
16. hom. 106. fol. 149. Beza annotat. in Gal. 2. 5.
Because they were urged as necessary to salvation, Acts 15. 15. Because by
them false brethren labored to bring their Christian liberty into bondage,
Gal. 2. 3. 4. Because by that practice in that sense he should teach
justification by works, Gal. 2. 14. 15. 16. This case sorteth therefore to the
Papists, who teach that God is worshipped by them; That a man is justified by
practicing of them; That a man is bound in conscience to use them, as he is
the precepts of God: al which false doctrines are in so many words disclaimed,
both by oath, doctrine, and confession of the Church, in the book of the
Articles of religion, as also in Artic. 11. 20. 34.
the preface to the book of common Prayer, where the superstitious use of
these Ceremonies is disclaimed, as also the opinion of Gods worship by them,
and the reasons set down of prescribing these, namely the quiet and decent
order in the Church. And that the conueniency or agreement of our case with the
Apostles conforming, (not with the Apostles refusing the Jewish Ceremonies) may
the better appear, I have added these paralells, which I desire may be
considered.

The Apostles and the Church of Jerusalem, The Church of England, To avoid
offense of weak and obstinate Jews, and to win them, To avoid offense of
weak and obstinate Papists, and to win them, Prescribed and enjoined
Ceremonies abused superstitiously. Prescribe and enjoin Ceremonies abused
superstitiously. Holden as the worships of God and needful to salvation.
Holden as the worships of God and needful to salvation. By the unbelieving
and weak Jews. By the superstitious Papists popishly affected. But not by the
Apostles nor faithful Christian. But not by any sincere Protestant, teachers,
or people.

The members therefore of either Church, may and ought equally to conform to
either Ceremonies, in a case of necessity, and of superior reason.

Again. The Apostles, The deprived Ministers, In a case of superior reason,
as to further the Gospel, and to prevent the hindering of their preaching, In a
case of superior reason, as to further the Gospel, to prevent their
deprivation and suspension, Conformed to Ceremonies many ways inconvenient,
abused superstitiously, and holden necessary by the Jews. Ought to conform to
ceremonies, though many ways inconvenient in their opinion, abused to
superstition and holden necessary by the Papists. Imposed by weakness and
violence of the Jews. Imposed and urged (as they construe it) by weak
Christians, and authority threatening deprivation.

Paul did evil in vowing, shauing himself, contributing, offering sacrifice,
circumcising Timothy, because they were Ceremonies of practice: But the
Apostles constitution, Acts 15. 28, was only of Ceremonies of omission, of
like nature with our abstaining from flesh on fasting days, not of the Cross,
or Surplesse.

They who thus reply have had, I confess, a light of this their answer from
some Hier. apud August. Epist. 19. Hierom. Ep. 89. Gualt. in act. 23. ho^. 138.
fol. 248. Bullin. in act. 21. M. Parker of the Cross, part. 2. sect. 14 fol.
70.
learned men, which usually have their differences from others according to the
reasons moving them, who thus did censure Saint Paul in these actions. Yet
Gaulter and Bulling do only doubt of the place, Acts 21. not of the rest: but
to this I say;

lived in these days would have behaved themselves toward the holy Apostle,
at least they would have reproved him, and condemned him for committing a
sin, and would by all means have disliked his doings: yea they would have
cast off a thousand weak believing and obstinate Jews, and suffered
deprivation of a thousand ministries, rather then to conform to that, which
the inspired Apostle Paul did submit himself unto. But withal we may
consider, whether authority in practice were rather to be esteemed theirs, or
Saint Paul's. And indeed it is a miserable shift, when no better answer can be
framed to accuse the inspired Apostles in their doings, because their practice
will not stand with the reasons, which themselves have framed or undertaken to
maintain the suffering of deprivation for refusing to conform. A very feeble
answer, as I suppose, which will not stand, but by heauing at the pillars of
the Church of Christ.



Paul may be easily and strongly justified.

1. Because he was advised to this practice by Saint James, and the Church of
Jerusalem, Acts 21. 18, 20, 21, 23, 24. Which persons inioyning other Jewish
Ceremonies in the like case were directed and inspired by the holy Ghost in so
doing, Acts 25. 28, 29.

2. Because the Holy Ghost seems to justify the reason of Paul in
circumcising Timothy, not only in not condemning him in his practices, but in
approving of his reason in so doing, Acts 16. 3. Paul circumcised him, because
of the Jews of those quarters. For (says the holy Ghost in the text) they
knew all that his Father was a Grecian.

3. Because Paul justifies this practice of his in those Scriptures of his
Epistles, wherein undoubtedly he did not err, as the 1. Cor. 9. 19. 20. 21.
22. 23. and 10. 13. and gives a maine reason thereof; because by his practice
he would win the more unto the liking of the Gospel, and be a means of
their salvation.

4 Because it cannot be immagined, that Paul was ignorant if it were a sin,
for he was at the Synod at Jerusalem, Chap. 15. where circumcision and other
Ceremonies were denied in other cases: and if he knew it to be a sin, it
were strange he should so many times fall into a relapse, Acts 16. 18. and 21.
and observe the Jewish Sabbath so continually, Acts 17. 8. and 18. 4. and 13.
14. 44.

5 Aretius gives another reason, to justify this fact of Paul: Aretius in
cap. act. 21. fol. 95.
Antiocheia ecclesia bona part constabat ex gentibus, itaque mayor pars non
erat offendenda in gratiam paucorum: Hic vero Ierosolymis mayor pars, imo omnes
Iudaei sunt quos Paulus debuit considerare. And of his judgment are the best
interpreters, namely, Augustine, Calvin, Beza, Aretius, Piscator, Gualter,
Zanchius, Iunius, Bucanus; who with one consent do hold these things
indifferent; which indifferent things should serve for the edification of the
Church.

Paul: Because,

1 They were Ceremonies of the Law as well as the other.

2 They were significatiue one as well as the other.

3 They were abolished by the coming of Christ, as well one as the other: In
which respect they were in their nature no less evil, though they might be
less in convenient then the Ceremonies, of practice in some respects. To this
objection I answer a little the more sharply, because it savors of a little
to much insolence* and small regard vn-the holy Apostles of Christ: and I would
show the absurdity thereof; let the reader take the less offense thereat: And
thus much of this point.

To the former argument let these Propositions following be added, and observed.

Proposition.
and furtherance of Gods substanciall worshippes, and for the propagation of
the Gospel. Acts 16. 3. 1. Cor. 9. 23. Practice and observe such Ceremonies,
which he preaches every where against, that men should not do, Acts 21. 21.
Neither he himself in some other cases would do. Gal. 2. 5. 11. 14.





Vt supra.



of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 23. do practice the like Ceremonies, being enjoined
them by authority, Acts 15. 28. and 16. 4. and 21. 25.

Paul to redeem his Ministry, and to gain liberty to the Gospel, to add
souls unto the Church, and to win the more unto Christ, Acts 16. 3. and 21.
20. 21. 1. Cor. 9. 20. 21. 23. might as well and lawfully have worn a linen
Ephod, or a linen Surplesse, as well as to have purified, and shaued himself,
vowed, circumcised Timothy, or to have joined in offering sacrifice.

Paul might as well have used the sign of the Cross, to a baptized person, in
a case of deprivation, or of redeeming the Gospels liberty, or of winning unto
Christ, as to have used the sign of circumcision, to a baptized person, as he
did to Timothy. Acts 16. 3. And thus much of this argument, being the first
member of the maine reason.



The grounds of Gods word, which are contraried by this doctrine and practice,
are two in number, and they do Minister two arguments, which I will prosecute
in order by the help of God. The first ground is this;

When two works, or deuties commanded of God, do meet in one practice, so as
we cannot do them both, but one of them must of necessity be done, the other
of necessity must be left undone, in this case the work or duty of greater
reason, must be performed, and that of lesser reason must be neglected and
omitted, and it is a sin to neglect the greater to perform the lesser: Out
of which ground I assume:

But the doctrine and practice, of suffering deprivation, for refusing to
conform, does cause men to neglect greater duties, to perform the lesser.

Therefore the doctrine and practice of suffering deprivation for refusing to
conform to our prescribed ceremonies is an error and a sin.

For the confirmation of this argument there are two points to be proved.

1 That it is contrary to Gods word, and therefore a sin to pass by a
greater work or duty to perform a lesser.

2 That to suffer deprivation for refusing to conform unto the ceremones
prescribed in our Church, is to pass by a greater work or duty to perform a
lesser; whereupon the former conclusion must follow of necessity.

Touching the former point, namely that it is contrary to Gods word and
therefore a sin to pass by a greater work or duty to perform a lesser:
The which point although it be in it self evident, and must needs be granted
by every sound divine, yet for illustration sake I make more manifest by these
reasons.







First, the Priests of the Law for breaking the Sabboths ceremonial, and
strict rest by sacrificing and other business to perform Gods Public
worship (a greater duty) and are pronounced blameless therein. Mat. 12. 5.

Secondly: David for eating shewbread (not lawfully for him to do) in a case
of necessity, he and they who were with him, were acquitted as innocent and
blameless. Mat. 12. 3. 4.

Thirdly, the Apostles of Christ, for plucking, rubbing, and eating the ears
of corn, so violating the Sabbaths strict and Ceremonial rest (a lesser
duty) to satisfy hunger, the necessity of nature (a greater and morrall
duty) were called innocent. Mat. 12. 2. 3. 4.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ preferring the healing of the sick a greater duty,
before the strict keeping the Ceremonial rest a lesser duty, and commanding a
kind of servile labor viz. the carrying home of a bed in some case unlawful.
Io. 5. 8. 9. proves it not only by a peculiar reason, proper unto himself,
that he is Lord of the Sabbath, and therefore might ouerrule in this case.
Mat. 12. 8. But even by reasons of Common equity, namely; First because it is
lawful, (by not strictly keeping ceremonial rest) to do (morrally) well on
the Sabbath day, omitting sacrifice to do mercy. Mat. 11. 12.

Secondly, because the end is superior to the means: for the Sabbath was made
for man, not man for the Sabbath, Mar. 2. 27.

4 Fourthly, because it is contrary to the inspired examples in the Scripture,
which are of common equity and reason, and to the practice of the faithful
Saints of God, namely (besides the forenamed examples of the Priests, of the
Apostles, of David, of our Savior) first of Solomon, who in a case of
necessity, did offer upon another Altar then the Altar appointed for the
worship of God: because it was not able to receive the offerings. 2. Chro. 7. 7.
but was to little for that end. 1. King. 8. 64. Whereas they were to offer
sacrifice, and to burn incense upon one only Altar in the Temple. 2. King.
23. 12. It being a Type of Christ, the only sacrifice and mediator. Heb. 13.
10. 2. of Hezekias, who to set forward the main and substantial worships of
God did admit of many to the Passover, albeit they were not ceremonially
sanctified, but legally unclean: and did not receive the same as it was
written in the Law, nor according to the purification of the Sanctuary; yet
with a true heart seeking the Lord, they were accepted, namely in a case of
superior reason. 2. Chron. 30. 17. 18. 19. 20. Thirdly of Paul who to save his
life (a greater duty) did with his own hands cast away into the Sea the good
creatures of God, which otherwise should have been preserved, and so for that
cause neglected a lesser duty, Act. 27. 30. Fourthly, of the inspired Apostles
of Christ, who (as before is noted) did practice on themselves: Act. 21. 26.
and upon others: Acts 16. 3. and did advise: Act. 21. 23. 24. yea ordain,
inioyne, and command the practice of Jewish ceremonies, as circumcision,
shauing, purifying, abstayning from blood, and strangled meat, and that as a
duty good and necessary, Act. 15. 28. which to avoid, and not to use was a
duty required of God: which to use and practice in other cases was reproved
by the holy Ghost: Acts 15. 10. and 21. 21. Gal. 4. 9. 10. 11. and 2. 12. 13.
14 and 5. 2. 3. 4. Colo. 2. 20. 21. 22. 23. and were needless shadows, Col.
2. 20. Ordinances of the world. Col. 2. 20. Commandments of men turning from
the truth Col. 2. 12. Titus 1. 14. Impotent and beggarly rudiments, Gal. 4. 9.
10. And of sundry perilous, and perniciouse effects: yet this they did admit
(albeit the violation of a duty) to do a greater duty of superior reason,
namely, to procure the unity of brethren: Act. 15. 2. 4. 6. 7. 24. The wyninng
of strangers to the faith: 1. Cor. 9. 19 20. And to propagate the Gospel. 1.
Cor. 9. 23. To prevent the scandal of weak believers, Act. 16. 3. and 21. 20.
And the danger of interruption or deprivation of the Ministry, by the violent
Jews persecution, Act. 21. 12. 24. 27. 28. Thus is the first point confirmed;
to the which doctrine sundry godly learned men, even so many as I have read
of this point, do also consent both in the same words and proofs. viz. vid.
Calvin: in Mat. 12. 1. 3 fol. 260. Vrsin. cat. part. 3. fol. 707. immediate.
ante praecept. 1. impress. Cantabridg: anno. 1585. Piscator in Mat 12. 1. 2. 3.
in analisi. fol. 190. and in obseruat. ad eundem locum. fol. 205. 106. 107 Idem
in obseruat. in Mat. 9. 13. fol. 156. Idem. in obser. ad Mat. 15. 3. 4. 5. 6.
fol. 243. Polan. syntagm. Theolog. lib. 9 c. 29 fol. 4077. 4078. Martyn in
summula. verbi dei cap. 2. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. fol. 47. 48. de-calogo. Mr.
Perkins vol. 1. of his works treatise of conscience Cap. 2. fol. 520.
Yet to this point or proposition howsoever firm it be in it self, as has
appeared, and is approved by the best divines, yet some objections have been
laid against it, which I will here set down.

Ob. Where it is said in the former proposition [when two duties do meet at
one time] it is objected that they cannot be duties both at once. For if they
were both duties they would both bind, and so a man must needs commit a
sin, seeing he is straightened between two duties, and must omit the one,
this therefore is not well proposed.

Ans. The mentioning of these two duties meeting together at one time in our
practice does not intend that they do both of them bynd the conscience at the
same instant, but they are called duties as they are considered apart; being
both works are commanded of God in two several commandments: Which two
works being duties considered apart, do sometimes offer themselves to our
practice at one instant; As to hear a Sermon at the Church on the Sabbath, and
to tend a sick person ready to die at home at the sametime, both are duties
being co^sidred apart, but meeting together, and offering themselves to our
practice at one time, there is indeed but one duty, because both cannot be
performed in one instant; In which case the greater work is the duty, the
lesser binds not for that present: In like case for a minister to refuse
inconvenient ceremonies, albeit it be a duty being considered apart from the
duty of preaching the word; yet when it meets with the duty of preaching, so
as preaching the word will not stand with refusing inconvenient ceremonies,
this refusing of ceremonies binds not the conscience, but leaves to be a
duty. There are not two duties at that instant, but only one, which is to
preach the word of God: In which case the refusing of inconvenient Ceremonies
is no duty, neither is their practice a sin, yea the practice of them is a
duty, if otherwise they cannot preach the Word; this objection therefore
needs not.





Secondly, to the instance of preaching in a naked manner I say, that in this
case there are two things to be considered: Necessity, and Decency: if then
he cannot preach naked but with the peril of his life, he ought to refuse
preaching, it being a case of necessity, and mercy is better then sacrifice.
But if his life will consist with his naked preaching, he ought to preach
notwithstanding the scandal or indecencie, if there be no other means
admitted for his preaching.

1 Because a man's naked body, being considered as it is naked, it is the good
creature of God, and is not indecent to be looked on but to unclean and vain
minds, it is decent enough to the pure.

2 Because the gayning of souls and means of man's salvation, is a duty of
far greater reason and weight, then the avoiding of an inconvenient
circumstance of scandal, or of seeming indecencie, arising only by accident,
not from the nature of the object: and the like case is of the practice of our
Ceremonies to redeem the liberty of preaching, to the place. Romans 3. 8. which
shows that we may not do the least evil to compass the greatest good: I
say, that to the present purpose we may consider evil two manner of ways.

For first, evil is either that which is formally simply, and in nature evil,
which no circumstance can amend: As to redeem preaching upon condition of
blaspheming God, Inuocating the Devil, committing of idolatry, perjury,
idultery, teaching of heresy, or the like, the which kind of evil, is
intended by the Apostle, and may not be done at any hand for the gayning of
the greatest good.

2 Again, evil may be taken for that which is only circumstantially,
ceremonially or accidentally evil: which kind of evil may in some cases be
practiced without sin, namely, in case of superior reason, at what time it is
improperly called evil. That this is so, appears in the Priests, who brake
the Sabbath: in David, who did that which was not lawful for him to do, and
yet were blameless and innocent. Mat. 12. 4 5. 7. Also in the practice of
Jewish inconvenient, and many ways evil Ceremonies, which practice was so
far from being evil in that case, that it was good and necessary. Act. 15.
28. 29. touching this objection see more at the end of the argument.

Mordecay refused to bow, and perform the gesture of reverence to Haman, yea
though he were commanded by the King. Hest. 3. 1, 2, 3. by which refusal of
obedience to a ceremonial, he violated two greater duties: One was the Kings
command: and the other was the hazard of his life, and destruction of the
Church of the Jews, and thereby for performance of a lesser duty he did
violate a greater.

heathen, a wicked person, an Amalekite, and an enemy of the Church, which is a
sufficient and the true answer, and thus do all interpreters understand this
place: thus the Hebrew gloss, thus the Apocryphal prayer in the additions to
Hester, Lyra, Vataplus, Iunius, Drusius, Merlyne upon these places. If the
latter, either his action was evil or good; if evil in disobeying the
Magistrate in a thing indifferent, it is impertinently alleged: if well the
reason is unknown and not expressed, we cannot judge of the quality of the
duties compared, if he did refuse this reverence.

1 Because he was of the Amalekites, which were especially cast out by God.
Exodus 11. 14. Deuteronomy. 25. 7. Number. 24. 7.

2 Because an open profane person, a malicious and professed adversary of Gods
Church.

3 Because himself was a better man then Haman, being the Queens Uncle, it
may be considerable, whether he did not well, even in this respect to refuse
this reverence. Touching the hazard of his life, and ruin of the Church it was
unknown to Mordecai; for Haman practiced it because he did refuse it.

Daniel neglected a greater duty to perform a lesser, for he continued to
pray three times a day, kneeling upon his knees, his window being open toward
Jerusalem, notwithstanding that he knew that he should die for doing it: so he
preferred the ceremony and circumstance of prayer which was a smaller duty,
before the safety of his life which was a greater: Dan. 6. 10. Also the Jews
chose rather to die then to eat Swines flesh. 2. Mac. 7. 1. and 6. 8.
preferring observance of a ceremonial duty before their life.

another, or could resolve himself to loose this life by being at a stake for
none other cause, then for refusing the prescribed Ceremonies, especially in a
true Church of Christ, wherein there are otherwise a true confession of faith,
and sufficient means of their salvation. If it should fall out that they would
not die in such a case, I would know further, how then they could loose their
Ministry for not using them, seeing it were better for a Minister to loose his
life, then to loose the comfort of his Ministry, Act. 20. 24. 1. Cor. 9. 15.
If they would rather suffer death then use the Ceremonies, let them show the
ground and comfort they should have before the Lord in this proceeding. If they
allege these instances, I will show to how small purpose they serve therein:
therefore I say, that their cases do far differ from the case in question.

First, they were controversies depending between the heathen and professed
enemies of Gods Church, and between the people of Gods covenant and members of
the Church: our controversies are in the Church, and between professed lovers
and believers in Christ.

Secondly, they were cases of confession, wherein they were called to confess
the truth and religion of God amongst Gods enemies, as also the necessity of
invocation of Gods name, and of obedience to Gods precepts: With us the
doctrine of Ceremonies is true, and according to Gods word, and the parts of
our general confession in the Book of Articles is agreeable to the word of
God.

Thirdly, the duties were of exceeding great moment, for the performance
whereof they should have hazarded and lost many lives. Daniel stood in
obedience of a maine substantial duty (not Ceremonial or circumstantiall)
of the first commandment, namely prayer to God, and praising of his name: for
which a man should rather die then intermit for the pleasure of any mortal
man: and the ceremony of his praying toward Jerusalem in far distant place,
was such as specially did exercise his faith, and to which the promise of
audience was tied, 2. Chron. 6. 34. The Jews refusing the eating of Swines
flesh, did confess the whole religion of God and faith of the Church, and
total obedience to all Gods Commandments, which was that which Antiochus did
aim at, as appears, 2. Mac. 6. 2. 7. and 18. 24. and 7. 1. 2. 4.

Lastly, to both cases, the mere commandment of a Magistrate and an idolater,
was opposed to the especial commandment of God, Dan. 6. 7. 9. 10. 2. Mac. 7.
30. In which respect God must of necessity be obeyed before man, Act. 5. 29.
There being no such material circumstance in the case in question, whereby it
also appears, that they did not neglect a greater duty to perform a lesser,
but passed by an inferior duty to perform a far greater. And thus much of
objections to the first point, which being answered, I proceed unto the second
point which is this:

That to suffer deprivation for refusing to conform, is the neglecting of a
greater duty to perform the lesser.

For the proof and clearing this point, two trueths must be confirmed:

The first that two duties, both commanded of God, do offer themselves in the
questioned case to be observed: where one of the two cannot be done, and
therefore must be left undone: The former duty is to preach the word, the
which duty is commanded to all the Ministers of Christ, Mat. 28. 19. 20. 2.
Tim. 4. 2. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 1. Cor. 9. 16. and is included in the second
Commandment: Now this duty cannot be done with us ordinarily, as things do
stand, if Ministers do not conform: for by order they are to be deprived of
their Ministry, as very many we see have been. Lincol. Apo. arg. 1. against
the ceremonies: Except. 2 fol. 17. and arg. 4 excep. 2. fol. 45. 49.


The other duty, is to refuse Ceremonies, as they pretend, inco^uenient in
their use, though in their nature indifferent, which is commanded in the second
commandment, Ez. 14. 7, as also to avoid occasions of superstition. And to
prevent sundry offenses, and other inconveniences, arising from the use of
things in different commanded, 1. These. 5. 21. Jude verse 23. 1. Cor. 10. 32.
and 8. 9. 12. Romans 14. 3. 4. 10. 15. 16. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. The which deuties,
in respect of diverse and sundry persons, which will take offense in the use of
them, cannot be well performed, if Ministers do conform unto the Ceremonies.

The second point is this, that for a Minister to continue in preaching, is a
greater deutie of superior reason, and of higher bond to tie the conscience,
then the duty of laboring unto fit Ceremonies, or of refusing inconvenient
Ceremonies, such as ours are presumed to be. And this appears by reasons,
drawn first from their nature, and secondly, from their effects.

First, from the nature of either work or duty: it is manifest that the duty
of preaching, is a duty of far greater moment, then the duty of performing
fit Ceremonies, or of refusing inconvenient Ceremonies, such as they pretend
ours are, or the like. First, because the duty of preaching the Gospel, is a
matter simply good in nature, but the refusing of such Ceremonies as ours are,
supposing them to be inconvenient, or the practice of other Ceremonies in their
steed supposing them to be more fit, is a laboring about matters in their
nature simply indifferent, as before is manifest, and after appears further,
so that in this case there is a refusal, of a thing simply good, as preaching
of the word, and propagation of the Gospel. Secondly, because the duty of
preaching the Gospel, is a substantial external worship of God: the duty of
using fit Ceremonies, or of refusing unfit (so they be not impious) is a matter
ceremonial, and circumstantiall: For the Ceremonies are but circumstances,
tending to the better performance of the substantial worshippes, and do serve
those substantial worships of God: that is, they must be so ordered, as they
may best serve to edify, and further the substantial worships of God, and
means of edification. Wherefore to omit preaching, is the violation of a duty
substantial, the conforming to inconvenient Ceremonies, is but the violating
of a duty circumstantiall. It is better suffering an untoward handmaide in the
house, then by thrusting out the handmaide, to thrust the mistress out of
doors. Thirdly, because preaching the word is a duty particularly commanded in
the word: but the duty of the practice of fit Ceremonies, or of refusing the
practice of unfit (so they be not simply and in nature evil) is included
only under general rules of necessity, of edification, expediencie, etc.
Fourthly, because the duty of preaching is pressed on the Church, as a duty
perpetual to the worlds end, Matthew. 28. 19. 20. till we all meet, Ephesians. 4.
11. 12. till the appearing of Christ. 1. Tim. 6. 14. But the performance of
Ceremonies are variable, as appears by the frequent and lawful variation of
them: as in the chang of the time of the Lords supper from night to morning
abolishing of the kiss of love: and of the feast of charity; sometimes in
some Church Ceremonies burdensome and scandalous are needefully imposed and
practiced as Jewish rites by the Apostles: sometimes in other Churches, others
more needful and they pernicious, Galath. 2. 3. 5. and 4. 9. 10. and 5. 2.
Colloss. 2. 20. 21. Besides all Churches differ in their Ceremonies one from
another, and that in such like Ceremonies as ours are: The Primitive from the
reformed, and all among themselves, some using more, others less
conuenientrites and ceremonies. But the preaching of the Gospel, which gives
life and being to the Church, is perpetual and uniform for the substance
thereof in all true Churches of all times and places; They all agree therein.
Fifthly, Because the preaching of the Word, is an essential and inseparable
mark of the true Church, without the which a Church cannot consist, fit
ceremonies are no mark of the Church, neither do unfit and inconvenient
overthrow the being thereof: and to this I add that by continuance of
preaching (by which the Church is gathered and vpholden) the danger of the
ceremonies, whatsoever it would be prevented and avoided by the purity of
doctrine: but the purity of ceremonies, or the refusing inco^uenient ceremonies
will not counteruaile the loss of preaching. Corrupt ceremonies deface the
walls, and perhaps may in time impair some part of the out house: But the
nullity of preaching overthrows the whole Church, walls, covering, ornament,
foundation, and all.

Sixthly, Because the preaching of Gods Word is the ordinary means of new
birth, faith, hope, and of all grace, and final salvation, 1. Cor. 1. 21. 1.
Tim. 4. 16. Romans 10. 15. 17. Ephesians. 4. 12. Fit Ceremonies are no such means,
neither do unfit Ceremonies destroy the power and efficacy thereof.

Seventhly, Because the duty of preaching is simply necessary, both in respect
of Gods particular command, and also in respect of the preacher, who is
attended with a woe if he neglect, 1. Cor. 9. 16. Hos. 4. 6. and in respect of
the people who are ordinarily by this means gathered, edified and saved,
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 1. Cor. 1. 21, and do perish if they have it not, Prou. 29.
18, Hos. 4. 6. But the using of convenient Ceremonies is not simply necessary,
only secundum quid, for the sake of preaching to further and uphold it, in
which respect scandelous and dangerous ceremonies may be necessary to be
enjoined and practiced, Act. 15. 28. 29. And with inconvenient and hurtful
Ceremonies, a Church may be a true church (as the Apostolical Church of Antioch
was, as the most part of primitive churches were, and of reformed Churches
using far worse ceremonies then ours are pretended to be:) Also a Christian may
have the being of a true Christian, and may so remain standing in the true
practice of faith, repentance, love, patience, etc. and in the assurance of his
election, adoption, justification, and in that state may finally be saved,
albeit he live and die in the practice of as evil ceremonies as ours are
supposed; who if he should continue without the means of preaching, the Word
might have great cause to doubt of all.

Eighthly, Because of their subordination, for Ceremonies (as before is noted)
and the determination of them do serve the ordinance of preaching the Word,
and are by the Church to be determined, as may best serve for the furtherance
thereof, so they be not formally and in their nature impious, in which respects
(as before is said) it may be expedient to admit of very inconvenient, and
accidentally hurtful Ceremonies namely for the furtherance of the Gospel, and
edification of the church: Else the Apostles by direction of the holy Ghost,
sinned in their doctrine and practice. But the ordinance of preaching does at
no time serve fit Ceremonies, neither should give place by laboring against
unfit.

Thus from the nature, now from their effects it does in like sort appear,
that the duty of preaching tieth the conscience with a far greater bond, then
the duty of refusing of the prescribed Ceremonies. First on the better part:
The benefit of preaching the Word is incomparably greater, then the benefit of
avoiding these or the like inconvenient Ceremonies. By the preaching of the
Word, the Church has name and being, yea, though Ceremonies, as is noted, be
very inconvenient, and do remain in the Church as timber, hay, and stuble
upon Christ the foundation: Ceremonies be they ever so well ordered without
preaching, are of no force to give name or being to the Church. Now far
greater is the Churches being, the progress and liberty of the Gospel, the
public use of the means of new birth, faith and salvation, and the visibility
of Christ his kingdom upon earth, then the avoiding of offense, and such other
inconveniences accidental, not inherent, neither purposed by Ceremonies in
their nature not evil, but merely indifferent: the one bringing a public
good to the whole Church, the inconvenience of the other but private to a few,
who take offense, and in this case by their own default. Besides experience
shows, how God has prospered multitudes of latter times, that have entered by
conformity in every place, and such who standing in their places have with a
grounded conscience, not by sinister respects conformed to prevent their
deprivation, or to redeem it being lost: The Lord has done as much good by
them, as by any Minister deprived, by the conversion, confirmation,
consolation, reclamation, excitation, edification, I say not refusing
Ceremonies, speaking against Bishops, pleading for Church discipline, but in
the maine doctrines and duties of saving grace and goodness: Gods blessing
has been on them as much as ever before, the Papists and enemies of
righteousness have been no less vexed and convinced; yea Saints no less
comforted and confirmed; the Church no less fortified, and the truth of the
Gospel no less propagated if not much more. And the reason hereof is plain:
because experience shows, that the Church is not builded up, but destroyed
rather, afflicted consciences nothing quieted, but troubled rather, doubtful
minds not settled, but distracted rather, zealous minds not rectified but
disordered rather, Papists and Brownists not won or convinced* but rather
driven further back by the doctrine, practice, and endless disputations of
discipline, ceremonies, constitution of Churches, and the like: but by the
sound doctrine and essential practice of repentance from dead works, faith in
Christ, love, patience, and good works, which saving points of the mystery of
godliness are more taught and better practiced by simple hearts, when the
stumbling blocks of these less pertinent questions (as Mint and Cummin in
respect of Mercy and Judgment) are removed, or more sparingly and peaceably
debated.

Secondly, on the worser part: The mischief, offense, and inconvenience of the
Ministers deprivation, for not conforming to the Ceremonies, seems in reason,
and has appeared in experience, to be more by many degrees, then the
scandal, and inconveniences arising of conforming to redeeming of their
preaching, which thing appears;

First, because the Papists do more rejoice, the Godly are much more grieved,
the Libertines do much more triumph, and so are like to do (as they have all
more cause) to behold the Gospel interrupted, the truth obscured, the Church
weakened, the Ministers of God thrown out, the flock of Christ scattered, and
the visible kingdom of Christ divided and dessolued, then they would be to
behold some inconvenient Ceremonies: these greater things of the law remaining
entire, whereby Antichrist and sin is daily discovered and wasted; and by the
which truth and piety, do more increase and prevail. Admit that by
inconvenient Ceremonies, the Church should be blemished, and the consciences
of many scandalized: yet in deprivation of teachers, without supply of as good,
the Church of God tends to dessolution, and utter ruin: yea the souls of
all the people are endangered to perish. Proverb. 29. 18. Hos. 4. 6. Math. 15.
14. For without the preaching of the word, there is no public ordinary
means of salvation left: and so by consequence no ordinary means of the hope
of salvation, though all both Minister and people, should abstain from these
inconvenient Ceremonies: Whereas so long as the word and Gospel preached does
remain, Christ the foundation does remain, both in sound and doctrine, 1.
Cor. 3. 11. Ephe. 2. 20. as also in assured presence, Matthew. 18. 20. and 28.
20. the infinite value of whose blood cleanses from all sin, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. and
5, 12, howsoever the stubble of corrupt doctrine, and Ceremonies do remain
withal, and so the Church, both Minister, and people retaining and laying
hold, on the foundation may be saved, though as by fire, 1. Cor. 3. 15.

Secondly, experience teaches us, what a decay of grace, and back sliding of
many most forward professors of religion, what increase of Popery, and all
profaneness in every corner of the Land, and even in sundry of the places,
where the deprived Ministers were placed, have ensued this their suffering of
themselves, to be thus put besides their Ministry. And being thus deprived,
what good have they done unto the Church? Or what good use have they employed
their talent, in more then to some few private families, wherein some of them
have been exercised? Verily in sundry others, especially the younger and more
unstaid sort, especially of them which draw near the brincke of Brownisme, it
has fallen out, that after the loss and leaving their Ministry, small other
fruit has happened in them, then to make the Churches rent the wider, to
speak evil, and scoff at persons in authority, which had more need to have
been prayed for in these dangerous times: to breed distraction in the hearts
of the people, to vilify their Godly breathren, which have submitted
themselves to conformity, to swell in scorn and pride against them, and to
prepare the minds of unstable persons, of tender consciences, and shallow
knowledge to schism and separation, and in the mean time, to neglect the
maine duties of true Godliness, as meekenes, mercy, tender heartednes,
patience, visiting the sick, comforting the feeble minded, instructing the
ignorant, chatechising children, persuading of Papists to the truth,
reproouing reigning sins in wisdom, love, and meekness: conference of
godliness to edification, provoking to love, to good works, painful laboring
in some honest trade of life, to prevent the eating of the bread of idleness:
which I write not in reproach, but in soberness, and tender hearted grief,
declaring that which I have seen not in a few. And further to this end, it may
be profitably noted, what degrees of grace do appear in such as are violently
carried this way: surely it is commonly seen, that the more eager people are
against the Ceremonies, and for reformed discipline, their zeal is so
exercised, and their affections carried to things without them, as that they
find small leisure to look into Gods kingdom within them: their tongues,
pens, practice are carried this way together with their hearts, so that they
commonly neglect mercy, judgment, fidelity, and love of God, mortification of
sin, moderation of affections, holy guidance of the tongue, fruits of love,
and conscience in their walking before men, and are brought at last so near
unto their practice, who were taxed by our Savior that they can hardly escape
their reproof, viz. To strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Cammell. Let the
Brownists and such as draw near unto them, witness for themselves, both in
their own practice and report of faithful witnesses, and in the dismal
proceedings of such fiery spirits, whom Arianisme, Familisme, Anabaptisme,
Libertisme, or plain profaneness have swallowed and undone at last. For it
is a true maxim in Theology, That when men bestow more zeal upon
circumstantialls or ceremonialls, matter right or wrong, one way or another,
for them or against them, then they do upon substantialls, they are
undoubtedly settled in the high way to hypocrisy. Lastly, this point will the
rather appear by the enumeration of sundry inconveniences, which are by some
alleged to arise from the prescribed Ceremonies, and comparing of those
evils, with the evil or inconveniences, which would arise from the general
doctrine and practice of suffering Deprivation, by refusing to conform.



Vtrum horum?































being emptied of Preachers, will they not think the places fitter for their
Mass Priests?













Now I will answer the objections, which are brought against this point.



David innocent before God. To perform Gods worship not as it was written, was
(...), and a sin: yet to further Gods substantial worships, which was a good
thing, was not regarded of God. To practice antiquated, and superannuated,
unprofitable, yea very hurtful Ceremonies was unlawful: yet to purchase the
liberty of the Gospel, and unity of brethren, which was good, made their
practice good and necessary. So that this rule of the Apostle must be limited,
and in some cases holds not: for that as we see a man may be said to do
some evil, that some greater good may come thereof; the reason whereof is
included in the foregoing argument, the sum whereof is this; Because the
relinquishing of obedience to a lesser duty leaves to be a sin, when a
greater duty comes in place, which yet were evil if the greater duty were
absent. As for example, to violate sacrifice, (namely to break the Sabbath by
rubbing ears of corn: to eat that which is expressly forbidden him of God,
and so to do a thing not lawful) is noe sin, when mercy and necessity comes
in place, which if mercy or other superior work and duty were away, were
sin. In a word a man may do a thing evil in use, circumstance, and by
accident, so it be not simply and in nature evil: also a man may violate a
duty ceremonial to further or accomplish a morrall good thing, in which case
the evil of the action cease, and this was the Apostles in the practice of
the Jewish ceremonies.



never so judged of in the church of christ in any age or place by any sound
teacher, or well grounded Christian, and the most curious sights among them that
most stand for reducing of the Church to the primitive purity in discipline and
ceremonies that ever looked on them in these days, though they wished them to
be abolished, as being many ways inconvenient, yet they judged of them in
their nature as things indifferent, not only as they are considered in
themselves, but as they are in use with us. Thus judged they of a surplesse or
linen garment in the worship of God.

In a surplesse there is no impious thing per se, noe not Bucer.
in the use of it. Script. Anglican fol. 79. Hoopero.

These garments are not impure of themselves speaking also of their use. idem
in his Epistle to Io. Alasco.

In the English litargie there is nulla manifesta impietas. Epist Calvin. P.
Martyr.
200. fol. 336. Per se sunt (...); these garments are of themselves
indifferent. Loc. com. fol. 1085. amico cuidam.

The use of them not impious or pernicious per sese, aut sua natura verbo dei
contrariae. ibidem. 1086. Hoopero.

These garments are not per se impiae impious of themselves, that a Minister
should rather leave his Ministry then Beza.
use them. Epist. 12. fol 98. I grant them to be indifferent, being
considered in themselves.

It is adiaphoron natura, in the use a matter indifferent in nature. Enchirid.
Tit. 1. de Adiaph. Clas. 3. cap. 16. Hemingius.
fol. 375.

It is liberum per se, a free matter of it self to use or not Zanchius.
to use. de redempt. lib. 1. cap. 16. fol. 445. yea magis deceret vestis linea
quam lanea.

It is an indifferent thing. Lo. 33. Quaest. 13. fol. 382. Bucan.


It is a thing indifferent in use, in Ezech. cap. 44. fol. 807. Polanus.


The surplesse in the own nature indifferent, meaning Cartwright
in the use, for he persuaded to the use, in the case of deprivation. Rest. of
the second reply. fol. 262.

Thus also judged they of the Cross in Baptism, and of kneeling at Communion,
and the rest, which afterward shall be alleged. The reasons proving this point
are these.

Bucanus vbi superius, this rule also of a thing indifferent has Polanus
Syntag. lib. 6. cap. 38. fol. 3036. Paraeus Colleg. 2. cap. 31. sect. 15. fol.
274. Illyricus claue Scriptur. fol. 22. part. 1. Adiap. And are distinguished
from things simply good, which are expressly Commanded, from things simply
evil which are expressly forbidden of God, being in their nature neither
morrally good or evil, neither Commanded nor forbidden of God, and by accident
may be both good and evil. Exerc. part inter. These. fol. 826.

Beza contra Sarauiam cap. 25. fol. 200. says indifferent things I call which
are neither expressly nor secretly Commanded, nor forbidden by the word,
neither makes us the better being used, nor the worse if we use them not. But
our ceremonies are forbidden in the word in general, and in particular in our
use. Ergo.

Beza with all other sound writers, that are of other minds concerning our
ceremonies they hold them in their nature indifferent, and not forbidden in the
word, especially in our use, and in the case of simple necessity.

2 Because in some cases a man may use them and not sin: which, a thing in
nature evil, he can never use, but he shall incuitably sin: of this nature are
Idolatry, adultery, blasphemy, perjury: which sins no circumstance can ever
amend. Beza cont: Saraui. cap. 25. fol. 199. Indifferentia sunt, quorum vsus
modo bonus, modo illicitus prout viz been vel male illis vtitur, quae naturam
habeant neque ad bonum neque ad malum determinatam.

3 Because in some respects, and in some use they may be good: a thing in
nature evil, can never be put to any profitable use: Peter Martyr says,
Adiaphoris been vel male vti possumus: L. Clas. 4. cap. 4. fol. 707.

4 Because in some respects and in the same use they may be good and
necessary, as the Jewish rites were in the Apostles practice.

5 Because they are of the same nature with the Jewish rites, practiced by the
Apostles. Of this opinion is Peter Martyr Loc: cum. inter Epist. fol. 1087.
Zanchius in Philip. 1. fol. 45. Polanus in Ezech. 44. fol. 807. which
ceremonies by the stream of all sound writers are holden as indifferent in
nature in the case wherein they used them.

6 Because a man using them all the days of his life, as they are prescribed
in our Church, and that without repentance, for such use of them, may still
remain a godly and good man, and presupposing him otherwise to walk in
holiness, may in that estate be saved, whereas one sin in nature, as to
live in fornication, 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. Being continued in especially if it
should be pleaded for, and defended, Mat. 5. 9. Cannot stand with his
salvation. So Bucer. script. Anglican. 1458. Martyr inter Episto. fol. 1085.
Amico cuidam. Aretius says that indifferent things are such as are in equal
respect to good and to bad, Prob. cap. 83. de Adiaph. fol. 266.

7 Because if they were in nature evil, a godly person could not communicate
with a good conscience with our Church (which does prescribe and practice them,
and remoueth them not being admonished) neither in the Ministry or any worship
of God. Bucer Epist. Io. Alasco. Martyr. fol 1086. Hoopero.

8 Because all such as have continued in the use of them, and defended, the
same might be judged impiouse and wicked, such as are the Martyrs and other
worthy persons of our Church, and other Churches also: yea the Apostles and all
faithful teachers and Churches since their time should be condemned; yea it
might be taught as a doctrine, that such as use them with continuance, or
maintaining them, could not be saved, which I suppose none of the Ministers
which are deprived will justify, Martyr. fol. 1086. Hoopero.

immutabiliter malum, as murder, perjury, adultery, etc. Being against the
immutabilitie of Gods nature, no circumstance can make them good, though by
circumstances they may be lessened or made greater: of this nature our
Ceremonies are not, neither can they be evils of this kind; or else evil is
taken for that, which being indifferent in nature, yet by accident is evil,
namely in use, when offense will be taken thereat, by diverse persons in diverse
respects, or rather inconveniences will arise, which were evil therefore to
use, if it lay in man's power to refuse them: Again, for that which being
particularly forbidden of God in his Word, is therefore unlawful to do.

The evil of both which latter kind may by circumstances be amended, and the
practice thereof may leave to be a sin, namely in a case of superior reason,
when a duty of greater band does tie the conscience; which that it may be the
better manifested, we may observe two points.

First the degrees; Secondly, the subordination of duties commanded in the Law
of God. Consider first, that there are degrees of duties of both Tables of the
Law, which appears in reason: for there are duties substantial, and duties
circumstantiall. Substantial duties are both internal of the first Table, as
love, knowledge, fear, and confidence in God: of the second Table, as love,
reverence, patience, kindness, compassion, justice, etc. Substantial
external also of the first Table, stands in the maine worships of
invocation, preaching, and hearing of the Word, receiving of the Scraments,
lawful swearing, etc. Of the second Table, as outward reverence, obedience,
help, and tribute to superiors, kindness and thankfulness showed to
equals, alms, reward, correction, and instruction to inferiors: The
circumstantiall duties of either Table are external circumstances, actions, or
Ceremonies, for the more orderly, fit, and decent performance of the
substantialls: as observation of fit time, as either night or day, and this or
that hour, in either place public or private, site of body, as sitting,
standing, kneeling, high or low, singing, saying, and the like. The which
degrees, and differences of duties are thus distinguished unto us by the holy
Ghost himself, who has taught us to sever the love of God, a substantial of
the first Table, and judgment, mercy, fidelity, substantialls of the second
Table, from the tithing of mint, cummin, annisse, rue, and all manner of
herbs, a ceremonial Law, which yet was a duty being commanded, and must be
done, calling the one sort of duties, the weightier matters of the Law, Matthew
12. 23. Luke 11. 43. separating them by that title, from the other which must
be less weighty, or (as they called) the lesser commandment, Matthew 25. 19.
Calling the one mercy, the other sacrifice, Matthew 12. 7. the one, the
knowledge of God, the other burnt offerings, Hosea 6. 6. the one Gods kingdom,
the other not so, Romans 14. 17. between the which he teaches us to put as much
difference, as between a Cammell, and a Gnat, Matthew. 23. 23. 24. himself
accepting the former without the latter, Mark 16. 15. 16. but not the latter
without the former: tying the promise of salvation simply to the greatest, but
not to the inferior without the greater. Consider that there is a
subordination of these duties of the Law (whereof there are these forenamed
degrees) as namely, that the greater duties, such as have in them greatest
reason and band, do tie the conscience, do ouerrule the lesser, and command
obedience with the neglect of the other for that present, when they meet
together. So as the neglect of the lesser leaves to be a sin, for the
performance of the greater: as the neglect of obeisance to a noble man, or
inferior person is no offense in presence of a King: and this subordination is
general to all the duties of the Law, except the supremest of all other, then
which there is none higher; as the highest duties unto God, fear, love,
confidence, repentance, which must never be commanded and ouerruled by other
duties inferior, whatsoever they be: and the reason is, because the supremacy
of God, and the immediate proximity between these duties and God: which also
in respect of the immutable nature, and attributes of God, which must leave to
be God, and deny his titles of justice, of mercy, goodness, truth, etc. if he
should dispense with them. Now the truth of this subordination I will in order
manifest in 4. propositions following.

First, the substantial duties of the first Table, do ouerrule Propos. 1.
the substantialls of the second Table. Love of Christ (a substantial of the
first Table) ouerruleth the love of parents, of wife, children, friends,
brethren, substantialls of the second Table, Matthew 10. 37. yea so far must
the one yield unto the other, that for the loves sake of Christ, the love of
parents must be turned into hate, Luke 14. 26. 33. and tokens thereof, Deuteronomy.
13. 6. 7. 8. 9, 13, Psalm 139. 21. 22. 2. Chronicles 19. 2. Obedience to good
meeting, the obedience to the Magistrate ouerruleth it, Acts 4. 19. and 15. 29.
This was the case of the three children, of Daniel praying, and of the Jews
refusing Swines flesh: who disobeyed the Magistrate to obey GOD, and neglected
life, a substantial of the second Table, to profess GODS truth, and to
refuse Idolatry, substantialls of the first Table.



Numb. 35. 31. 32. the not executing of which law draws on the whole land,
the heavy plagues of God, Numb. 35. 33. Deuteronomy. 21. 8. 9. And this was a
substantial duty of the second table, yet this duty is over ruled by a case
of necessity: for the safety of the policy of the kingdom and state of the
Church, (so Ioab the wilful murderer of Abner, 2. Sam. 3. 27. of Amasa, 2.
Sam. 12. 10. and that in the time of peace, 1. Kin. 2. 5. and of Vriah, 2. Sa.
11. 16. 17. is suffered to live all the time of King David, viz. because he was
(being Captain of the host) too hard for him, 2. Sam. 3. 39. which employed the
safety of himself, and of all the whole state, which was a substantial of
the second table, of greater reason then the other: neither is David reproved,
or the land plagued for this thing: neither was it repented, because it was no
sin in him, to pass by lesser work commanded for the performance, of a
work of greater reason. Again it is a breach of a substantial duty of the
second table, Exo. 10. 14. and even of the law of nature, for ab initio non
fuit sic, Mar. 10. 6. 7. 8. 9. Math. 19. 8. for the Magestrate or the Church,
Mat. 19. 3. 4. 8. Mar. 10. 6. 7. 8. 9. to command, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. 2. Mar. 10. 3.
5. Mat. 19. 7. or to permit Matthew. 19. 8. husbands to put away their wives for
every cause, Matthew. 19. 3. as namely for some filthynesse espied in them, Deuteronomy.
24. 1. yet this did Moses to prevent the breach of an higher precept: namely
many grieuious inconveniences in the whole policy of the Jews, arising from
the obstinacy and cruelty of an obdurate people, such as were the Jews. In
which respect, Moses is not reproved for this thing by our Savior Christ, and
that from the reason, for which Moses did permit this inconvenient precept,
which was the hardness of the Jewish nations heart, Matthew. 19. 8. Mark 10. 5.
Also it is not lawful, for it is not good, to cast away the good creatures of
God, which may serve for the life of man, but they must be preserved that
nothing be lost, Matthew 15. 26. John 6. 12. 13. yet in a case of necessity
to preserve life, and prevent violent death, a substantial of the second table
of greater reason, Paul and the rest of his company which were in the Ship,
with him in danger of Shipwreck, did lawfully cast with their own hands the
tackling, and the wheat out of the Ship into the Sea, where it was spoiled and
destroyed. Acts 27. 19. 38.

Hezekias, that the substantial worship of God in the Passover should not be
hindered: In which respect God laid not the breach of duty to the charge of
such as sought God in that Sacraments with their whole heart, 2. Chron. 33. 18.
19. 20. likewise the substantial worships of God, requiring pains and labor
of body, such as the sacrifice of the law, and other business to be done upon
the Sabbath, meeting the precept of bodily rest upon the Sabbath, by which
practice the Sabbath in respect of the rest is broken, Mat. 5. 12. yet in
respect of performance of the superior and substantial worships, they were
blameless for breaking the Sabbath in the ceremonial rest thereof. The
unlawfulness of Jewish Ceremonies, in many respects has before appeared:
whereby was violated a ceremonial circumstantiall duty of the first Table:
which yet the Apostles we see did practice to further the substantials thereof,
namely the liberty of the Gospel, and edification, and peace of the Church of
God. By all which instances we may see this conclusion proved: A matter evil
by it self alone considered, leaves to be evil when a superior duty comes
in place to ouerrule it, whereby we may infer, that admitting the Ceremonies
prescribed to be evil in some sense, yet in performance of a superior work,
as to continue in preaching of the work they leave to be a sin. Because the
duty of refusing of such like Ceremonies, is a subordinate duty to the
practicing of the word by preaching, the one being a duty circumstantiall, the
other an external duty substantial.

ad semper, and as Master Perkins says, (Golden Chain. cap. 19.) they bind at
all times, and to all times: The affirmative binds at all times but not to
all times: A negative is broken by acting or doing a thing forbidden: an
affirmative is broken by omitting some duty positiuely commanded, as for
example; I may for a time omit preaching or prayer, I am not bound continually
to use them, but have hours of omission: But no sin of adultery, bowing to
an idol, murder, swearing, profaning of the Sabbath, so neither of
conforming to forbidden Ceremonies. The negatiues are these; Thou shall not
make to thy self any similitudes, Exodus 20. 4. give no offense to the Church
1. Cor. 10. 32. use not the fashions of idolaters, Leuit. 19. 27. 28. wherefore
we may not neglect the refusing of Ceremonies to redeem our duty of preaching.

Perkins says not, that all negatiues do always bind, and in all cases, so
that in no case, they may at any time be violated, but only adds, that
negatiues are of more force then affirmatiues, which indeed is true.

Also this rule is not generally true: for these precepts were negative, which
yet were violated, none but Priests must ear sheaw bread: let none of the
people eat thereof [not lawful but only for Priests, Matthew. 12. 4.] yet
David did lawfully violate it, and they that were with him out of standing
reason, I will have mercy not sacrifice, Matthew 12. 7. thou shall do no
work, Exodus 20. 10. yet the Priests brake this and are blameless: the
Apostles violate it and are innocent by the former reason, I will have mercy
and not sacrifice, Matthew 12. 1. 2. 5. 7. In the the like case men do
lawfully feed and save the life of their cattle, Mat. 12. 11. 12. Lu. 14. 5.
6. and 13. 15. servile labor is used as carrying of a bead, Ioh. 5. 8. 9. 10.
cast not bread to whelps, Matthew. 15. 26. let nothing of Gods good creatures be
lost, Ioh. 6. 12. 13. yet Paul and his company do lawfully cast away the goods
in the Ship, to save their lives, Acts 27. 19. 38. Let no murderer live* let
not thine eye spare a man hating and killing his neighbor, Deuteronomy. 19. 11. 12.
13. Number. 35. 30. 31. 32. 33. yet David suffered Ioab the murderer of Amasa,
Abner, Vriah all his days, upon this ground he was to hard for David, 2.
Samuel 3. 39. till after his death, 1. Kings 2. 5. 6. neither was David
reproved, or the land plagued as it was threatened, Numb. 35. 33. Deuteronomy. 21.
thou shall not kill, Exodus 20. 13. no not in heart or intention, Matthew 5.
21. 22. yet Abraham sinned not, but is commended and rewarded of God, for
purposing and settling himself to kill his only son, Genesis 22. 11. 16.
grant no divorce between man and wife for every cause, not for light cause, Ab
initio non fuit sic. Matthew 19. 8. yet Moses is not blamed for permitting or
commanding such a bill, Matthew 19. 8. Deuteronomy. 24. 1. 2. but is justified,
because he did it for the hardness of their hearts, Matthew 19. 8. Mark 10.
5. Let none be uncircumcised after eight days, Genesis 8. 11. 12. 13. yet for
forty years there was not one circumcised, Ios. 5. 5. 6. 7. 9. let none
legally unsanctified be admitted to the Passover, 2. Chron. 30. 18. Matthew. 7.
6. yet in case of necessity some were admitted and approved of God, being
internally sanctified, 2. Chro. 30. 19. 20. hate not father, mother, brother,
sister, wife, life, Exodus. 21. 17. Pro. 20. 20. yet when Christ calls us to
show our love to him, and that the love of these will not stand with our love
to Christ, we must hate them indeed, and testify it by our outward practice,
Luke 14. 26. 33. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 7. 8. 9. 2. Chro. 15. 16. for the better
explication of this rule, and to see how far it holds, and how smally it
concerns our case, I say first, that this rule holds in the duties of the
first table, which forbides sin which by no circumstance can be amended, but
are formally evil, and in nature, and opposite to the purity and immutability
of Gods nature, as in these, Have none other gods, Commit not Idolatry, Take
not Gods name in vain. There is no time, or occasion, or duty superior,
wherein a man may violate the precepts, they are sempiternally, and irreuocably
inviolable, without exception. Duties also of the second table, as resist not
the Magistrate Romans 13. 2. despise not thy parents. Prou. 23. 22. commit not
murder, commit not adultery, steal not, bear not false witness, covet not,
neither may these duties in any case be, or for any superior reason violated:
neither have they been heretofore broken, but only in a case of exception,
and that is of Gods special command. For in this case the common rule holds:
That a particular command of God unto one person or more over rules a general;
In which case the substantial negatiues of the second table, do yield to the
substantial affirmatiues of the first, as being all subordinate to the love of
God: As the particular command of God to Abraham, to kill and offer his son
Isaac, Genesis 22. 10. 12. ouerrules the general command of God, Thou shall do
no murder: and in Abraham it was no murder, notwithstanding that command
which else had been. The particular command of God to Iehu, if not Jeroboam,
1. Kin. 11. 35, 37, 38, and 12. 24. to smite the house of Ahab his master, the
Queen, and the blood royal. 2. Kin. 9. 6, 7, 9, 10, and 10, 15, 16, 17, 30.
which else had been utterly unlawful for him to do. So Gods particular
command unto the Israelites to borrow that of the Egyptians, which they never
paid and so spoiling them, Ex. 3. 22, and 11. 2. and 12. 35. ouerswayd the
general command, Thou shall not steal, which else had bin theft in them. Also
the particular command of God unto the Prophet Ezechiel not to mourn for his
dead and most dear wife, Eze. 24. 15, 16, 17, 18. which else had been argued
want of natural affection. I will not give instance of Gods particular command
to Hosea, cap. 1. 2. to marry a wife of fornications, because the place is
otherwise interpreted by the best judgments, as Zanchius, Drusius, Iunius,
Paraeus, item. Eman. Sad. in hunc locum, though others understand it otherwise,
that is literally. The like is of the Lord particular command of smiting the
Prophet, 1. King. 20. 35, 36, 37. In which case it was no sin to smite and
wound the innocent Prophet, and it was a good work of obedience to smite him,
which without the particular command of God, had been a sin. Secondly, this
rule holds, excepting in a case of simple necessity: In which respect, it was
lawful for Paul to cast the wheat into the Sea, though otherwise it were not
good to do it, Mat. 15. 26. and for David to spare Ioab the murderer, in a
case of necessity, because he was too hard for him: also Moses command for
permission of divorce, is hereby justified, for the hardness of the Jews
hearts, a case of necessity: Also the Apostles prescribing and practicing the
Jewish Ceremonies was unlawful, but in a case of necessity: of like nature,
is David's eating the Shewbread, the Apostles rubbing of the ears of Corn:
under this kind comes the lawful use of all indifferent scandalous things,
ouerruled by necessity: and so is the conformity unto the Ceremonies
prescribed, made lawful, for all the negative prohibitions, whether one or
other in this case of necessity. Thirdly, this rule holds also in matters
circumstantiall and ceremonial, excepting when a superior duty meets with
them, to ouerrule them: of this kind is the case of David's eathing Shewbread,
and the Apostles practicing and prescribing Jewish Ceremonies, for the Churches
peace and furtherance of the Gospel: which hade not else been lawful to have
done, and here is also an image of our case. Here it is demanded, whether an
affimatiue substantial of the first table, meeting with a negative
circumstantiall of the first table, the former does ouerrule the latter? I
answer yea: For such were the former cases of David's eating the Shewbread, of
the Apostles practice of Mosaicall Ceremonies, and the like. By this also we
have an answer against the objection; That we may lawfully omit good, to do
some superior duty, or to omit good for a time, to prevent a mischief of
sin, or harm to others or our selves: as to conceal a truth to save ones
life, or to omit preaching, to quench an house on fire. But we may not commit
an evil, to purchase or procure any good. Which objection is both untrue, for
David's eating Shewbread, the Apostles practicing of Jewish, scandalous, and
hurtful Ceremonies, and the like instances before rehearsed, were matters of
commission, not of omission, and besides, this objection is incident into the
former: For omission is of duties affirmative, and commission is against duties
negative.

Ergo our Ceremonies are unlawful, simply, and in nature evil, as being
idolatrous, and may not be practiced.

Species idoloatriae kinds or degrees of idolatry: I answer, that admit it
were so, yet it is such aspecies, as the wearing of some apparel a little too
fine (yet not being evil in it self) or the smile of the wife of another man,
a little too familiar, without evil intention may be aspecies, or gradus of
adultery, that is of the least degree thereof, quatenus, it may be an occasion,
and accidental means of scandal in some, and vncleanenessein others, which
is far from making a divorce, or so much as sturring indignation in the
husband: But if we would make a parallel and equal cause, between that case
and ours, it must be thus, namely, in a case of necessity, that a man must
either go naked, and so impair his health, or endanger his life, and go
after an unseemly fashion, or else he must wear some inconvenient apparel,
in the wearing whereof, some good minds will be offended with him in the use,
others will take it as an occasion by the fashion, to be unlawfully inamored
with his person, and so may be an occasion to draw them to actual adultery in
thought, desire, entreaty, or attempt: suppose also, that other men do use
the same fashion or finenesse to pride, and intention of adultery, take away
the necessity, and I confess, even the least occasion of these scandalles
were unlawful: but with the necessity, it leaves to be a sin in the
wearing thereof, because a greater duty comes in place: nay it were a sin to
neglect health, by leaving the apparel; and compare this case with ours, it
may as well be say de to be adultery, as this idolatry, it being a violation
of a negative precept as well as this is supposed to be, for all the occasions
of the sin, are forbidden with the sin, that a sin of commission as well as
this is conceived to be, and the redeeming of preaching the Word, the means
of man's life spiritual and celestial, may be paralled, and put in balance,
with the redeeming of our health, and natural life, in comparision of the
other: other comparisons may be made out of other precepts, but this
suffices. Secondly, This Objection does ineuitably accuse the Apostles of
idolatry in prescribing and practicing Ceremonies scandalous, significant,
abused, and apt to be abased to superstition, and in many other respects in
convenient: yea, what Church in the world shall escape censure, for prescribing
and practicing Ceremonies of the like nature, which ever in the purest Churches
have been used more or less? yea if this hold, how can any manioyne to the
Church of England, or to any primitive or reformed Church of any age; seeing by
this they may all be said to be Churches, practicing and maintaining of
idolatry, and so idolatrous Churches? How can any deprived Minister communicate
in any assembly in England, where kneeling at the Communion is, if kneeling at
Communion be idolatry, albeit he sit himself, seeing he communicates with an
idolatrous Church, and with a company of idolators? and so must needs be
driven to separate from England, with the Brownists, and from all the most and
best reformed Churches, primitive and latter? For we must come out from
idolators and touch no unclean thing, 2. Cor. 6. 17. Romans 18. 4. By which
reason also our Savior Christ himself, his Mother, his Apostles, and all the
faithful of those times, could not escape the gilte of a sin, for
communicating with the Word, Sacraments, invocation, and Ministry of such a
Church, as proposed some Ceremonies of mere humane invention, as the worships
of God, and necessary to salvation, Mat. 5. 8. 9. Lastly it takes away
salvation from the Apostles, the Martyrs, and all faithful teachers which
communicate with such like ceremonies, both because Idolators shall never
enter, 1. Cor. 6. 11. Gal. 5. 19. 20. 21. Reu. 21. 8. as also because
presupposing it to be a breach of the lowest degree thereof: yet breakers of
the least commandment, and teaching so cannot be saved. Mat. 5. 19.



Scandalum acceptum, non datum.



and dissipated, then by using them to redeem these benefits, to offend some
few, who in this case should not be offended, and that they are is merely
their sin.

Ioh. ^3 35. 1. Ioh. 4. 7. and 13. 10. 19.
which is a sin. we be translated from death to life, which is a sin.

The second point is also proved thus, namely, That to incur and suffer
deprivation for refusing to conform, 2 Point.
is contrary to the royal law of love. The reasons are these;





and that it is not a convenient thing, neither yet safe, neither standing with
the credit of the Church, or commonwealth, to remove these things, which they
hold to have bin at first with mature advice established; and this resolution
of theirs, experience in the loss of many worthy preachers has taught us.



salvation, which they might have with good conscience continued in, to the
comfort and conversion of many a soul.



holds in matters evil only by nature, not in things indifferent of nature,
and in use only inconvenient.

Zanch. in Phil. 1. fol. 45. b. Read the Question.
of Christendom at this hour yea all Churches since Christ and his Apostles.
Wherefore this doctrine and practice is opposite unto the law of Love. The
inevitable overthrow, dissipation, and destruction of all Churches by this
doctrine and practice, appears by this that follows. forfeited, and left
the preaching of the Gospel to have been suppressed, the Churches of Christ to
have been dissolved and desolated, then to have yielded to this conformity of
inconvenient ceremonies. But to admit of this is apparently absurd: wherefore
the reason follows and remains in force.

Ergo against the law of love, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. Galat. 5. 13. 14. 15. Romans 12.
8. Whereas if in the case of deprivation, the Ministers did peaceably conform,
this scandal would be cut off, or exceedingly made less and mittigated: of
which sin the authors and accessaries are guilty before God. yet present to
withstand, disgrace and suppress these sins and therein to glorify God, to
further his kingdom, to edify his Church, to propagate his Gospel, with a
Surplesse on his back.





6 Sixthly, it unjustly condemns the harmony of all true Churches, that ever
were Primitive and reformed, for teaching false doctrine, and many godly and
most reverend persons, who in case of deprivation partly have taught the
doctrine of necessary conformity to inconvenient Ceremonies, partly who advised
thereunto, partly who practiced the same themselves: which has been an
universal doctrine of all sound Teachers, of all times, and places: (as
appears else where in the following arguments) yea it condemns the very
inspired Apostles of Jesus Christ, and the Churches of their planting, which
(for performance of greater duties) did conform themselves, persuade others to
conform, and commanded the same to others as a duty good and necessary. All
which inconveniences by conformity, even unto inconvenient Ceremonies, in the
case of deprivation would be wholly avoided: which by not conforming are
needlessely maintained, strengthened and vpholden. It follows therefore, that
the doctrine and practice of suffering deprivation for refusing Ceremonies,
though in some respect inconvenient, is opposite unto the law of love, and so
by consequence, and error and a sin. Touching the doctrine of this point, and
application thereof unto the practice of like Ceremonies to ours in a like
case, look Gual. in act. 16. 3. hom. 106. fol. 199. P^sc. in act. 15. 28. Idem
in act. 21. 20. Idem in act. 16. 3 Calu. in act. 15. 28. fol. 265. Idem in act.
^8. 18. Aret. in act. 15. 28. fol. 72. Idem in act. 16. 3. fol. 75. Beza annot.
in act. 15. 29. and in act. 16. 4. and 21. 20. and 18. 18.






For the further manifestation of this reason, there must be proved, these two
points.





Which points being proved, the conclusion will ineuitably follow, that to
suffer deprivation for refusing to conform, is a sin and an error to be
taught and practiced.

Touching the former point: That namely to condemn 1. Point.
all true Churches and sound teachers for teaching, and maintaining false
doctrine and sin, is both an error and a sin: First, I say it is an error:







ly, to be the congregation of the faithful, consists of a company of
spiritual persons, (not of carnal blind or prophaine persons, or heretical
Idolatours and tiranious Popes or Prelates as the Papists:) Now the spiritual
man discerns all things, 1. Corinthians. 2. 15. even the deep things of God,
verse. 10. by the spirit which God has given him, ver. 12. how much more is the
whole company of all the spiritual, able to perform the same: wherefore the
contrary to their doctrine must needs be an error.







1 One means is for learners to obey their teachers, Hebrew. 13. 17.
especially teaching secundum legem, according to the law, Deuteronomy. 18. 11. but the
Fathers and Godly learned Doctors, since them being the Ministers of the Church
of Christ in all ages, are the Teachers of all others, specially, if they teach
secundum legem, which must be hearkened unto and obeyed, and whosoever does not
hearken to them so teaching, erreth.

2 An other means and ordinance of God is this, that two or three Prophets
speaking, the rest must judge of that they speak: and that the spirit of the
Prophets must be subject to the Prophets, 1. Cor. 14. 29. 32. When therefore a
few English Ministers do speak in the Church, the will of God is this; that
the whole Church of all ages and places should judge: but for the whole
Catholic Church of all ages and places to speak, and a few Ministers of one
only Province and of one time to judge and censure them, is the mother of
confusion, and an enemy to peace, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 14. 32. 33.
and contrary to this rule and ordinance of God, and therefore the way to error.

3 An other means of Gods appointment even in the like case with this: that in
matters of difference, not only about fundamental points, but also in matters
of Ceremonies, when the peace of the Church is broken about them, the unity of
brethren divided, and the course of the Gospel hindered and interrupted: to ask
and seek the judgment of other true Churches and Teachers, about the case in
question: As the Apostles did in, Act. 15. 2, 3, 4, 6. and the Primitive ages
following after their example, also did imitate as their duty was, Ph. 3. 17.
and 4. 8, 9. in which case if the judgment of one, two, or twenty Churches be
to be harkned to, and not despised or contradicted rashly, how much less the
judgment, of all true Churches, of all times and places. Now for a few persons
of one Province (as of England and of one season, to sway against all Churches,
and to condemn their doctrine, and practice of sin and error, is against
this ordinance of God, and the way to error.

Because the swaying against the judgment and practice VIII.
of all Churches and Teachers, is against the equity of many forcible and maine
reasons: For:

1 Who are more likely to know the truth, even in such a point as this, then
the whole company of such? First, who are endued with the most excellent gifts
in the Church, and greatest degrees of knowledge and understanding of Gods
word, and with means tending thereunto? do not the best sights, best judge of
colors? Secondly, who are and have been endued with greatest degrees of
evident sanctity? Thirdly, whose labors have been most of all blessed of God,
for the conversion of souls, for the overthrow of sin, and Antichrist, and
Heresies? Fourthly, who have lived and died most comfortably in the Lord? If a
man should not rest in the judgments of the whole company of such, where
should he rest? or what peace or assurance shall he have to have all these (so
many as all and so incomparable persons) his adversaries: as in condemning such
for sinners and false Teachers.

2 No one point of error can be showed, which is established by this rule:
namely, by the consent of judgment and practice of all Churches, primitive,
and reformed latter. For albeit* some faithful persons, and some true
Churches, may differ from some other in sundry points, and thereby there must
needs be error in one part or other: yet it were hard for a few private
persons, to convince them all of error, in a matter wherein they all agree: if
they were in error; is it not strange, no age should be able to discern it?

3 Such as have wilfully and professedly differed from this rule, have been
found to have been Newfangles, Heretics, Schismatickes, and profane
persons; such as Donatists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Arians, Famelists, and the
like: and are of infinite varieties, one from another, and therefore all, or
the very most, must needs be an error, for there is but one truth.

4 By the rejecting of this rule, every Sect makes a way open to their own
contempt. For if the judgment of so reverend, and so excellent lights and
agreement of them all, is to be despised and rejected by any particular: why
should not others reject and contemn them and their judgment, the matter
being difficult, and of disputable nature, and themselves being so many
thousand degrees behind the person whom they thus despise, in their worth or
number?

5 It opens a door to singularity, novelty, and of endless differences,
errors and contentions, and leaves no rule of Peace, or of ending dissentions
in the Church of God: For if one may under color of truth, teach and practice
what he list in his diversity: why may not another do the like? or what rule
will there be, to compose the dissension, that do and will arise in the
Church! which one part having the truth, may urge unto the other void of
truth: why should he rather follow this part then that? wherefore in this case
we are to note, that no private person or persons, may raise up any new
opinion, and pretend Scripture for it, and so propose it for a Doctrine and a
truth in the Church, though he condemn the whole Church beside for an error
and a sin. Because as the Scriptures are not of private interpretation, so
Gods Spirit is not private, but general to all the faithful.

Thus we see this doctrine of swaying against all true Churches and Teachers
of all ages and places, and condemning them of sin and error, is false
doctrine. Whereupon also it follows secondly, that it is a sin: which also
appears further.

I Because David does judge himself that he trespassed, in that he being a
private man condemned and censured all the generation of Gods children, Psalm.
73. 13. 14. 15. Again because God lays a woe upon the practice of taking
away the righteousness of the righteous from him, Esa. 5. 23. or of condemning
the just, Pr. 17. 15. But that doctrine and practice which lays a sin unto
the charge of all Gods Church, takes away their righteousness and condemns them
in that point. Therefore it is a sin, even of bearing false witness against
the whole congregation of neighbors.

2 Because the censuring of all true Churches, for a sin, or of false Doctrine,
is contrary to the Commandments of God: who would have the Teachers obeyed and
hearkened unto, which do teach and define secundum legem: as above I noted,
Heb. 13. 17. Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 10, 11, 12. and would have the rest to judge of the
words of a few which prophecy, 1. Cor. 14. 29. 32. and of the commandment, of
walking in the ways of good men, Pro. 2. 20. Phil. 3. 17. and 4. 9. It is also
contrary to the practice of the holy Apostles, who determined one Churches
differences by another, Act. 15. 2. as before I noted.

3 Because this Doctrine is the ground, and mother of schism: For S. Paul
notes, that they cause division and offenses, that teach and practice contrary
to the doctrine which the whole Church has received especially from the
Apostles, Romans 16. 17. Therefore this doctrine is a sin.





1 The Papists understand the Church, to consist only of persons in office,
and those often heretical, sacrilegious, and profane persons such as their
Popes, Cardinals, carnal Bishops: We, the only faithful in all times and
places, whether in office or not.

2 They urge Apocriphall and basterd Fathers, for the patronage of their
errors: We the undoubted writings of the approved Fathers.

3 They urge the Fathers errors, and things wherein they differ: we their
truth, so far forth only as they agree and consent.

4 They allege the ungrounded opinions of some private fathers: we their
truth, so farreforth as they agree to Gods word, and examples of the Prophets
of Christ and his Apostles.

5 They insist upon Fathers further from the Apostles, and from Apostolical
and Primitive purity, we most of all insist on those who were most near to
the Apostles, as being most pure and free from Antichristian contagion.

6 They are only for the former Fathers we bring the consent of all our later
worthy Fathers and teachers of the most reformed and purest Churches of the
world.



the judgment of this thing, to a company of carnal persons, for in this
case, it is said that all men are liars, Romans 3. 4. But there is also the
spiritual man which has understanding to judge what other men do say, 1. Cor.
10. 15. and discerns all things, even the deep things of God, Psalm. 25. 14.
9. 1. Cor. 2. 15. 10. 12. Dan. 12. 10. John 7. 17. 1. John 2. 27. The consent
in judgment of which company, is not to be termed a company of men opposed
against God: But such as being built one the foundation of the Prophets,
Apostles, and Christ, the corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. are also called by holy the
Ghost in this respect the pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15.



Lyrinensis gives, Noue non noua: The Papists take the Church, for only
persons in office, as Pope, Cardinal, Bishops, and Abbots, and other Doctors
gathered in a Council: and it was well maintained by Gerson, that a private
man, by the light of Gods word, may see more then they all: And the reeson is
plain. First, because those persons have many ways proved themselves to be
carnal, and profane, and not able to discern the things of God, which are
spiritually to be discerned. And again, because they judge not as it was
inioined to the Priest in the law, Secundum legem Deuteronomy. 17. 11. and so there
can be no light in them, Esa. 8. 20. But the case in question is quite opposite
to this, in either part, and therefore this objection touches not the point.

truths; that is of al such truths as may quiet a man's conscience, it is not so
in matters of circumstance.



2 Though the judgment of all true Churches in matters fundamental, be
infallible, because without fundamentalls, they could not be Churches: and
again albeit all particular Churches may err in matters circumstantiall and
ceremonial: yet it is an hard speech to say that the general or Catholic
Churches, or company of the faithful, in all ages have generally consented in
an error, neither can there possibly on instance be showed of such a point, no
not of a circumstantiall point.

3 The deprived Ministers hold it a sin in nature to practice the ceremonies
prescribed in our Church or the like: but sin in nature is a thing
substantial, in the practice whereof a man's conscience cannot be quieted, and
therefore if the judgments of all Churches be brought against them, either
they must confess their doctrine in this point, to be an error: or else that
the whole general Church, since Christ have erred fundamentally, which is not
far from haeresy and blasphemy, and I earnestly do pray them to consider of
this point.



sanctified, and that from the ground, and in memorial of Christ his
resurrection: for they agree that all the books of Scripture are the word of
God: and in the point in question, they agree that Churches may vary in their
ceremonies and discipline, and yet retain their peace one with another. And
that ceremonies, as inconvenient (as our ceremonies are supposed to be,) and in
some respect, fit to be abolished, yet may they be retained, and ought to be
practiced to prevent the division of brethren: disquiet of the Church, and
hinderance of the Gospel; and there are few points wherein they agree more
constantly then in this.





1 If they will apply this to our Church in respect of our ceremonies
prescribed: then may they conclude against the Apostles, for prescribing Jewish
ceremonies, notwithstanding the end and accomplishment of them all, by the
death and consummatum est, of Christ.

2 The Primitive ancient and latter reformed Churches, are all of them
deficient this way: either in disipline or ceremonies, they are faulty and do
fail more or less; yet they will not accuse them for denying Christ, to be
their teacher and Prophet.

3. They only deny Christ to be their Prophet and teacher, who do preach
another Gospel to the Church, Gal. 1. 6. 7. which teach any thing besides,
Gal. 1. 8. 9. To. 16. 17. otherwise, 1. Tim. 6. 3. Contrary to the word of God,
Tit. 1. 9. diverse and strange doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. Heresies, Tit. 3. 10.
which will not hear him in all things whatsoever he shall say, Act. 3. 22.
Mat. 28. 20. Ioh. 3. 36. and 10. 5. All which our Church with all other
reformed Churches do utterly disclaim, and are free from: and namely in
prescribing and using of these ceremonies, or the like, as appears by
considering; First, the matter which is taught, which is of two sorts, some
things are fundamental and of greater moment, some things circumstantiall and
of lesser: again some things are specially commanded, others included under
general rules and are left free to every Church to be determined, as shall
best serve for the edification thereof, sometimes after one manner, and at
other times after some other: where we are to observe that our Church (as other
reformed Churches) do teach nothing fundamental, which is not expressly taught
in the Word, neither does it teach any thing contrary to that which is expressly
commanded by Christ in his Word; only it varieth the circumstantialls or
ceremonialls, according to the liberty left unto all Churches, and practiced by
all Churches, which the governors do suppose best to further or edify the
substantialls. Secondly, consider we the manner of our Churches proposing of
these things. The fundamental points, and special precepts of Christ she
proposes as binding the conscience under pain of condemnation to every
wilful and impenitent transgressour. The circumstantialls or ceremonialls
determined by her, out of the general rules of the Word, she proposes and
inioyneth as free, not binding the conscience in themselves, as variable not
perpetual, as accidental not as necessary. In which case our Church cannot
be said to deny Christ for her only teacher and Prophet, but rather to
confess him, seeing she teaches nothing but that Christ has commanded. In
which respect he is with our Church by promise, ad finem saeculi, Matthew 28.
19. 20. and he that hears the teachers thereof thus teaching hears Christ,
Luke 10. 16. Ioh. 13. 20.

And thus the first point is confirmed: The second follows Point. 2.
to be spoken of: which is this, [That the doctrine and practice of suffering
deprivation for refusing to conform to the prescribed Ceremonies, does tend to
condemn all Churches and godly teachers, Primitive and latter, of teaching
false doctrine, and of practicing a maintained sin:] Which point is thus made
evident: Because such Ministers as have suffered deprivation for refusing to
conform, or do hazard their ministry for the same, do account and conclude
it to be a sin simply to conform unto the Ceremonies proposed in the present
Church of England, or the like: and that all that do conform in any case unto
them, shall therein commit a sin against God: and further that whosoever
teaches the contrary, they stand out to confute them and convince them of an
error. But all true Churches of Christ, and all true Orthodoxall Teachers,
both ancient and latter of all times and places, without exception of any one,
have uniformly and constantly taught this conclusion: That it is a truth and
no error to teach; a duty and no sin to practice the prescribed Ceremonies
of the present Church of England, or the like, rather then to violate and
break the peace of the Church, or that a Minister should suffer deprivation,
and so the preaching of the Gospel should be interrupted, or that a Minister,
or any other Christian should separate themselves, or suffer themselves to be
separated from the public worships of God in a true Church: Wherefore it must
needs follow, that they who justify the former must needs condemn the latter.

Now, that it may appear that all Orthodoxall Churches and Teachers of all
ages and places, since the time of the Apostles of Christ, are of this
judgment and practice and not of the other: I will first begin with the
Primitive Churches, before the Revelation and reign of Antichrist, and next in
order of the latter reformed Churches, since the restoration of the Gospel,
and declination of Antichrist.

Concerning the Primitive Churches, and their teachers, I will observe two
points. First, the state of the Churches of those times concerning Ceremonies,
and secondly the judgment and practice of the Fathers and the faithful in
that estate.



1 Their multitude, variety and difference, did begin very high and near the
times of the Apostles: For the difference of the celebration of Easter (if the
Ecclesiastical Records be true) began before or about the time of Policarp,
Bishop of Smyrna, and disciple of Saint John, and Anicetus Bishop of Rome,
Euzeb. 5. 24. Socrat. 5. 22. and who reads the antiquity with any
observation, that shall not perceive in the undoubted writings of the most
ancient Fathers, both of the Greek and Latin Churches the evidence hereof:
as namely in Clemens, Alexand. Tertull. Cyprian, Basil, Ambrose, Hierom,
Augustine, and others: And for the latitude of this variety it stretched very
far, even over the whole face of the Christian world. Iraeneus in Eusebius. 5.
24. and Firmilianus in Cyprian, Epist. 75. do show the great difference and
variety of ceremonies between the Churches of Jerusalem and Rome, that is, of
the Eastern and Western parts of the world, and of the several Provinces
among themselves. And Augustine to Casulan. Epist. 86. and to Ianuar. Epist.
118. 119. declares the difference of customs and rites in the City of Rome
and Millaine, and in multitude of other places of his days: Quae diuer sorum
locorum diuersis moribus (says he) innumerabiliter variantur, Epist. 119.
cap. 19. in as much as for the variety thereof, Socra. 5. 22. affirms that a
man could scarce find two Churches retaining and following one order in both
places, and for the multitude thereof he says, that to set down in writing
the diverse and innumerable ceremonies and customs dispersed throughout Cities
and Countries, would prove a very tedious piece of work and hardly, nay
impossible to be performed: A taste whereof in both he gives largely in that
place, together with his censure. The like do Sozomen. 7. 19. who mentions
other diversities. The reasons of which variety and number, if we would give
we must distinguish of their quality, for if they were convenient ceremonies,
rightly deduced out of the general grounds of Gods Word, their variety and
difference proceeded from the lawful liberty which God has left unto all
Churches to order and appoint fit ceremonies for themselves, as they see to be
most apt to further their own edification, and if they were more studiously
commended by them then was meet, it was as Sadeele says, vt viam Schismaticis
obstruerent, De verb. Dei script. cap. 5. fol. 32. Or if otherwise they were
inconvenient, frivolous and needelesse, and as many of them proved to be
evident occasion of following superstition and contention. The cause of them in
general, is alleged by Martyr Loc. com. class. 2. cap. 5.. 17. to be this
that the devil did presently begin to sow his tares upon the good seed, which
was sowed by Christ and his Apostles, the particular reasons whereof shall be
showed in that which follows.

2 Touching the kind and quality of the Ceremonies, and traditions used by
the Primative Churches if we would examine the particulars, we should find
them to have been far more scandalous and hurtful, then ours can be
imagined to be, not only in their abuse (which I will note in the next
member) but also in their nature: which to mention only is to make evident; as
for examples sake I will give instance of some part.

Touching Baptism they used,
THe anointing of the Baptized, Tertul. contra Marcion. lib. 1. Distinc. 11.
cap. 5. de consecr. Did. 4. cap. 87. and 90. This Ceremony signified unto
them, that they were Christians and Champions, fighting and contending for God,
Tertul. and was commended as Apostolical, Basil de spir. sancto cap. 27.

The putting of milk and honey into the mouths of the Baptized, commended as
proceeding from the Apostles, Tertul. contra Marcion. and de coron. milit. In
some places also wine and milk without honey, Hierom. contra Lucifer.

The arraying of the Baptized in a white garment, Tertul. ibid. de
consecratione did. 4. canon 91. 92. in token that they did put on innocence
and purity, ibid. out of Ambrose and Rabanus.

The crossing of the child in Baptism, Tertul. de resurrect. carnis. Caro
signatur vt anima muniatur. August. tract. 118. in Joan. sermon. 55. says that
they used it in every Sacrament, and that else Baptism was not performed after
the rites and manner, unless the sign of the Cross were made in the childs
forehead.

To dippe the child three times in token of the Trinity, Basil. de spir.
sancto cap. 27. Sozomen. 6. 26. commended also as Apostolical by Basil and
Turtul. in other places they used to dippe the childs head only, and that
three times, Hierom. contra Lucifer. cap. 4. and that in token and remembrance
both of the Trinity, as also of Christ his three days death, and burial in
the grave, as also of his resurrection, which was performed the third day,
Tertul. ibid. de consecra. did. 4. can. 78. 80. 81. out of Augustine, Hierom,
and Gregory: in other places they dipped the child but once only, Cyp. to
signify the unity of Gods essence, de consecr. Did. 4. can. 82.

To Baptize only once in the year, and that in the Easter holidayes, Socra.
lib. 5. cap. 22. also three times in the year, viz. on the days of Christ's
Nativity, Easter, Whitsontide, Zopper. polit. eccle. lib. 1. cap. 12. fol. 76.
They deferred the baptising of their conuerts, two years after their conversion
to the faith, Caranza. summa council. in Elibert. council. can. 42.

To abstain a week after Baptism from washing, Tertul. cont. Mar. lib. 1.

To renounce openly the Devil and his Angels, and to give the Ministers the
right hand, Tertul. de coron. milit. commended by him as Apostolical, De
consecrat. did. 4. can. 95. also Decre. part. 1. did. 11. cap. 5. ex Basil.
commended as Apostolical.

To bless the font with oil, ibid. Did. 11. cap. 5. ex Basil. commended also
by him as Apostolical.

Touching the Lords Supper.
THey were accustomed, to sign the elements with the sign of the Cross, for
so was every Sacrament signed, August. tract. 118. in Joan. Sermon. 55.

To mingle water with wine, Cypr. l. 2. Epist. 3. and 63. and he calls this
Dominica traditio.

They also used only water in steed of wine, which persons so celebrating the
Eucharist, are in the fore alleged place by Cypr. called Aquarij.

To give the Eucharist to infants, Cypr. sermon. de Lapsis.

To receive the Lords supper every day, August. Epist. 118. cap. 2. thus it was
received in Rome, and in Spain, Hierom. Epist. ad Licin. 28. in other places
only on the Lords day, Socra. 5. 22. In other places on Saturn day, and the
Lords day, August. Epist. 118. cap. 2.

To receive the Lords supper in some places in the morning, and that fasting,
but in other places after supper, and that being well fed, Socrates 5. 22.
Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3. Augustine Epist. 119. cap. 6. commends the
receiving of the Lords supper fasting, to be a tradition Apostolical, and that
it was observed in all the world.

They sent the Eucharist to other Churches, for a token of their consent in the
faith, and of their love to one another, Eusebius 5. 24.

They reserved part of the bread of the Eucharist, and sent it to such as were
absent, Justin. Martyr.

The people carried the bread of the Eucharist home, and kept it in a little
box, Cypr. de Lapsis. Tertul. lib. 2. ad vxorem: in other places they burned
that which was left, Origin in Leu. 7. Hesych. in Leu. 8.

They gave the Eucharist unto the sick if they required it, even when they
were speachlesse, Eusebius. 6. 43. Decret. cause. 26. quaest. 6. 7. 8. 10.

They gave the Eucharist unto the Baptized, immediately after Baptism, Cries.
Epi. 1. ad Innoc.

Touching Prayer.
THese were their Ceremonies, to stand in prayer and not to kneel, and all the
Dominicall or Lords days, Basil. de Spiritu sancto cap. 27. Tertullianus de
resurrectione carnis, Hieron. cont. Lucif. cap. 4. This Ceremony was done in
token or signification of their resurrection, and further to teach them that on
the day of Christ his resurrection, they ought to seek heavenly things, Basil
ibidem August. Epist. 119. de consecrat. did. 3. cap. 10. quoniam, out of the
Nicene Council where it was decreed: This was commended to be an Apostolical
tradition, Tertull. cont. Marci. and de coron. mil.

To stand in prayer and not to kneel, on all days between Easter and
Whitsontide, commended also as Apostolical, Basil. Tertul. Hieron. ibid.

To pray toward the East, and that for this cause and signification, because
we seek to Paradise our old and ancient country, and is commended and
Apostolical, Basil. ibid.

To pray in some places by candle light, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. in the day
time, Hier. con. vigil.

They did also wear a linen garment, or Surplesse in the worships of God,
Cries. hom. 83. in Mat. Hier. lib. 1. contra Pelag. and of this judgment is
Zanch. de redemp. cap. 16. lib. 1. fol. 444. a. and cites Hier. P. Martyr.
Loc. Epist. Hoopero fol. 1087. cites Chrisostom, and Cyprians examples out of
Pontius Diacon. and Saint John's Petalus out of Ecclesiastical History, to
prove that the original of the Surplesse was not of Antichrist, Bulling. and
Gual. in an Epistle do cite Theodoret. hist. 2. 27. Socra. 6. 22. John the
Evangelist his example out of Euzebius, Pontius Diacon. of Cyprian, and
Chrisostom. It is cited by A. B B. C. Whitgift defense. fol. 2618. Polanus
cites Hieron. comment. in Esec. cap. 44. fol. 807. Zepperus cites Chrysostom
and Hieron. showing that they used them for a sign and admonition of honest
and pure life de Polit. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 12. the like does Zanch. vt sup.

Touching days.
TO celebrate the days of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension
to heaven, and descension of the Spirit, or Pentecostin the remembrance of
these things, this was observed in all the world, August. Epist 118. cap 2.
Origin cont. Celsum lib. 8. council. Agatheus can. 14. 39. also the feast of the
nativity of John the Baptist, ibid. can. 14.

To keep Saturn day holiday, and frequent the Ecclesiastical assembly, as on
the Lords day, Sozomen. 7. 19. and 6. 41. Socrat. 6. 8.

To keep the Friday holiday, using thereon the Ecclesiastical assemblies, in
remembrance of Christ his passion, as they did observe the Lords day in
remembrance of his resurrection; this was commanded by Constantinus Magnus,
Sozomen. 1. 8. Hist. tripartit. 1.

To celebrate Easter day on the foureteenth of April in half the world,
namely in the Eastern part, but on the Lords day in the Western part; this
was commended on either part to come from the Apostles, which yet could not
both be true, but the truth is (says Socrates) that the Apostles left no
Laws concerning days, but left them as a matter free, lib. 5. cap. 22.

Touching fasting.
TO fast on Thursdayes all the year, in remembrance of Christ his assention,
and on Fridayes in remembrance of Christ his Passion, this was commended, as an
Apostolical tradition, Epiphanius cont. haer. in Epilogo.

To fast on Saturnedayes in some places, in other places not, Augustinus Epist.
118. cap. 2. Hieronymus ad Licin. Epist.

To fast every Lords day, so they did at Rome, Socrates ibid. this Augustine
reprooueth in his days as an evil and scandalous thing in the Roman custom,
because it was used by the Maniches, and enjoined to their followers: in other
places they would by no means fast on the Lords day, Augustinus ibidem,
Hieronymus ad Lucif. Tertull. de coron. mil.

To fast the time of Lent before Easter, by some three weeks, by some six
weeks, and by some seven weeks, Socrates, 5. 22. Did. 4. cap. 5. This was
commended also, as an Apostolical tradition by Ambrosius, and Hieronimus, ad
Marcell. And by Epiphanius Haeres. 75. 80. who shows, that the Apostles
enjoined, that all men should eat in Lent nothing but Bread, Salt, and Water,
howbeit, this is denied by Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. by affirming that namely,
the Apostles neither made, nor left any laws for fasting, but left it also as
a matter free, the like does August. Epist. 86.

To fast from kinds of meat: some from every kind of living creatures: some
eating only fish, and fowls of the air: some not eggs, nuttes, apples, nor
any kind of fruit: some only dry bread: some not so much as that: Socrat. 5.
22. some only bread, salt, and water, Epiphan. Haer. 75.

Touching sundry other Ceremonies.
TO sign ones self with the sign of the Cross ad omnem progressum: at every
going abroad, and coming home: at putting on of apparel, putting on of
shoes, washing, sitting, lying down, etc. Tertull. de coron. mil. Did. 11.
cap. 5. eccl. ex Basilio, commended to be Apostolical.

To make an offering yearly for a man's birth day, Tertullian. cont. Marcion.
lib. 1. and de coron. mil. commended as Apostolical, yet afterward abolished
for Gentilisme.

To wash ones feet at a certain season, Aug. Epi. 119. cap. 18.

The Temples were erected to stand East and West, the Altars of the Church
stood Eastward; and some toward the West, Socrat. 5. 22.

III. Lastly concerning the effects of these Ceremonies and abuse of them. It
is also manifest, that they far exceeded our Ceremonies prescribed in their
evil effect, and were much more abused: First in the Fathers themselves, and
next also in the people.

Touching the Fathers and Bishops of the Church some being simple and of small
capacity, and shallow judgment, as Eusebius says, received traditions
without any searching of writings, as out of bare report. Such one was Papias,
the hearer of S. John, and companion of Policarp, who in this simplicity
broached fabulous doctrine of the Chiliast error: by whom Irenaeus and others
which were of the like opinion were deceived, namely by pretending and
reuerencing of his antiquity, Eusebius. 3. 35. such were Tertullian and Lactantius.

Some were endued as Calvin instit. 4. 10. 18. and P. Martyr. notes Loc. com.
class. 2. cap. 5.. 20. and Zanch. de redempt. lib. 1. cap. 15. fol. 366. (...)
quadam, with a certain false, and erroneous zeal, by being desirous to
imitate the Jewish Ceremonies: which they do both confirm and justify out of
Aug. cap. 20. de catechizand. rudib. and Calvin notes, that many of those
Fathers, were non satis considerati and nimis curiosi ac cupid, iquorum vt
quisque posterior erat, ita stulta aemulatione cum suis decessoribus certauit
ne rerum nouarum inuentione cederet.

Some were deceived by Heretics, who to cover their pernicious heresies, did
studiously broach traditions under the Apostles names and authority, so did
Artemon, Basilides, Valentius, Marcion, Eusebius 5. 25. Clemens Strom. lib. 7.

And thus Tertullian is noted to have been deceived by Montanus his Paraclet.
and inspiration, as appears in his book de veland. virgin.

Some are noted to have ascribed too too much unto traditions: So did Papias,
Clemens, Origin and they cite Apocryphal book to countenance them, and
commend very sorry matters, both of doctrine and of practice to themselves and
others. So did Papias, Clemens, and Origin, and Basil, and Epiphanius, of which
point, look Chemnitius examp. part. 1. de tradition. fol. 85, 86, 87. and
what they could not sound from any true original, sundry of them did usually
ascribe to the Apostles; So Hierome, Epiphanius, and Ambrose do affirm Lent
to be an Apostolical tradition: So Aug. Epi. 86. makes report of such, as
alleged James, John, and Peter the Apostles, for fasting on the Sabbath, the
urging of which kind of ground or allegation he says is, interminabilis
contentio, generans lites, non finiens quaestiones: So the Eastern Churches
did refer their observations of Easter to Saint John, and the Churches of the
Western parts unto Saint Peter, and Saint Paul: But hereof says Socrates,
5. 22. Sozomen 7. 19. There is no evidence in writing, and therefore he notes
them most likely to arise from custom, rather then from Canon.

Some of the ancient Bishops, governing at several times, in diverse places,
did commend the traditions, which they liked or fancied themselves, to their
posterities for laws. And this is Socrates observation ibid. a president
whereof a man may see, Did. 12. cap. 5. Ridiculum: and other places: see
Calvin instit. 4. 10. 18. and quia periculum, etc. And their posterity were no
less superstitiously obsequious in observing, then they in prescribing; for
Sozomen says, that in those days, in Cities and Villages, very many customs,
which for reverence of those which brought them in at first or of those which
succeeded the bringers in, they who had been trained up in them, did by no
means hold lawful or tolerable to violate, which very thing fell out unto
men in this very feast of Easter, lib. 7. cap 19.

Some of the Fathers did bring in the Ceremonies with no superstition or
opinion of merit, or necessity, but with a good intention; namely, to stir
up the more reverence and admiration toward the Sacraments, and to stir up a
kind of devotion in the minds of men: which going further and further, and
increasing, took strength until at last they turned to that manifest impiety,
idolatry, and superstitions, as we see in that supposed Church of Rome this
day, Zepperus de Politia eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10. fol 55.

Some were derived from the Gentiles, and though sometime they were used, yet
they were afterward abolished; such as the yearly offering for the birth day,
Sadeel.

Some of the Ceremonies were brought in upon occasion such as the signing of a
man's self with the Cross, which was used on occasion of the Pagans mocking of
the Christians crucified God, that they might testify unto them, that they
were Christians, and not ashamed of the Cross of Christ: this Martyr Loc.
class. 2. cap. 5.. 20. notes out of Augustine,, de verbis Apostoli ser. 8.
which after grew to superstition. So the not fasting one the Sabbath was
established, on occasion that the Maniches did in join fasting on that day to
their disciples August. Epist. 86. so the gloria Patri, and as some suppose the
threefold dipping of children in Baptism, was brought in by way of opposition
to the Arians and Antitrinitarians, Sozom. 6. 26.

All, or the very most part of these their ceremonies, were significatiue, as
before appears; many of them in the event were holden opperatiue, such as the
imposition of hands, sign of the cross, anointing with oil, Tertullian de
resurrectione carnis. Caro vngitur vt anima consecretur: Caro signatur vt anima
muniatur: Caro manus impositione adumbratur vt et anima spiritu illuminetur:
look more in Bellarm. Tom. de Imag lib. 2. cap. 29.

They were in process of time, and increase of superstitions (as many little
streams meeting in along tract, do end in an Ocean:) So multiplied for number
and burden, that to the more sincere and prudent Fathers, the estate of the
Jews seemed more tolerable and easy then the estate of the Christians of
those times, Augustine Epistle, 119. cap. 19.

Some of them were very eager and inexorable for the observation of them, it
was accounted nefat on the Lords day to kneel in prayer, Tertull. cont.
Marcion. lib. 1. and de coron. mil. and who has not heard of the^ foul coile
which Victor the Romish Bishop kept, or at least began to keep against the
Churches of the Eastern world: whom only for not observing the order of the
Western Churches, he would have excommunicated, and given them all unto the
Devil at a clap: which audacious and frantike attempt of that turbulent and
boisterous Prelat, albeit it be cogingly blanched over by Sanderus visib.
Monarch. lib 7. number. 22, 23, 24, 25 fol. 246, 247, 248.
Sanders, Bellarm de Rom pont. l. 2. c. 19.
Bellarmine, Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. anno. 198.
Baronius, and Genebrard. Chronol. lib. 3 anno Christi, 206 fol. 389.
Genebrard (fit dawbers of so tottring a wall) as if it had been by him, as by
the primacy of the Romish Sea, yet it is far otherwise reported in the
records of antiquity: for first it is plainly said by Irenaeus that this
excommunication was flat against the minds and practice of the most reverend
Fathers, such as Policarp the disciple of Saint John, and other Romish Bishops
his predecessors: such as Amicetus, Pius, Higynus, Telesphorus, and Xistus, who
in the like difference gave not the like example, neither did they hold this
odds of such trifles as Irenaeus calls them, a matter of that quality to break
communion, but held fast the band of love and unity, Eusebius. 5. 24. Socrat. 5.
22.

That this censure of the man, was done in excessive heat, or in a pelting
chafe on his part, as Socrates affirms, 5. 22. that Irenaeus Bishop of Lions,
did put Victor in remembrance of his duty, Eusebius 5. 24 sharply reproved
him, ibidem, and bitterly inueighed against him, and contested with him by
letters, Socrates 5. 22. that all the Eastern Bishops still kept their old by
as from the Romish Sea, for all the threats of Victor, even unto the time of
the Nicaene Council, when all agreed without any absolution at all, from
Victors thunder-clappe, yea that Policrates, the president of the Eastern
Bishops, and all the rest which were very many, were not moved an hair at
these rattles, set up to fright them, Eusebius. 5. 23. Where by the way we may
understand two points.

First what a feeble Primacy, the Pope had in those times, besides his
possibilities and actuality of erring, even in Catheara being so countermaunded
reproved, and disobeyed, by such incomparable Churches, and teachers.

Secondly, how dangerously the Papists put the iumpe of all their sempiternall
expectations upon the credit, even of the greatest clerks, which so untruly,
falsely, and corruptly relate the records of antiquity.

Next, for the effect and abuse of these things in the people, we may easily
see that if the fountains be troubled the streams cannot be clear, as may
appear by that which follows.

Many things commanded in the holy Scriptures, and of very wholesome and good
use, were less respected and cared for, then many light matters, whereof they
ouerbouldly presumed, August. Epist. 119. cap. 19.

Many of them neglected and swallowed great things, placing opinion of
religion, and showing great diligence in following or practicing such things as
had in them small profit, Hieronymus. in Mattheum cap. 23.

Many of them were observed to be troublesome to others by being carried on
with a contentious obstinacy, others by a superstitious timorousness about
such trifles, as neither were comfirmed, by authority of the holy Scripture,
nor by the custom of the Church in general, neither served for any profit to
the amendment of life and manners, August. Epist. 118. cap. 3.

As for example they were very superstitious and precise in bearing about
certain little pieces of the Gospels: and of the wood of the cross. and
istiusmodi rebus, and in the like things, and vsque body factitant, doing it
even to that day, having the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge,
straining at a gnat and swallowing a Cammell, Hieron. in Matt. cap. 23.

They were marvelous precise in their fastings; for on their fasting days,
they would eat no oil nor bread, but figs, pepper, nutts, dates, flower,
honey, pistachia, all herbs and fruits growing in the garden (and delicias) and
other delicates, they would not drink water, but they would have instead
thereof, sorbitiunculas delicatas: delicate suppings, and the Juice of herbs
pressed out, and that not in a cup, but in the shell of a Seafish: they sought
famam abstinentiae, in delitijs, commendation of their abstinence, by using,
delicates: Hierom. calls these things, ineptiae: superstitiones: Ieiunium
superstitiosum in Epist. ad Neapot.

They censured such as dined on the Sabbath soberly, and did not fast as the
manner of some places was: that namely they were in the flesh, and could not
please God; that they were wicked persons, belly mongers, and that they
sauoured of the flesh, and of death, and their voice was this, recedant a me
iniqui, viam eorum esse nolo, and they separated from them, Aug. Epist. 86. ad
Casulanum.

They would not serve God in a temple once abused to Idolatry, neither eat any
herbs growing in the garden, nor drink any water running from the fountain
of an Idoll-temple, Idem Epist. 154. Publicol.

They would more sharply reprove a man (qui per octauas suas terram nudo pede
tetigerit) Who during the time of their octaues, should touch the ground with
his bare feet, then a man which was with wine stark drunk, Idem Epist. 119.
cap. 19.

Some of them did abstain from eating flesh, with such a mind, as that they
judged those persons unclean which did eat thereof: This Augustine writes out
of the report of Ianuar. Epist. 119. cap. 20. and gives his censure thereof,
that namely, apertissime contra fidem sanamque doctrinam est.

In a word, many of them, out of their own fancies, or from the custom of
other places, did cause such litigious questions about these matters ungrounded
in the Scripture, and unprofitable in their nature, that they thought nothing
right, which they did not themselves, August. Epist. 118. cap. 3.

And thus in part, we see a small glimse of the state of the Primative Church
of Christ, which we commonly account and is here extended from the days of
the Apostles, until the time of S. Augustine or there about: For afterward the
same (which then was clouded) declined unto dark night, and we will descend no
lower, knowing that just exception might be taken at it in this argument.

Now in the next place we will give a taste of the doctrine and practice of the
Fathers, and the faithful in the midst of these corruptions, that we may see
how the doctrine of suffering deprivation for inconvenient ceremonies (far
more for number, and worse for quality then ours are pretended) has by them
been proposed and practiced. Touching their doctrine of this point, thus they
taught:

That the Apostles driftin their writings, was not to set down Canons and
Decrees concerning Feasts and Holidaies (or such like Ceremonies of the Church)
but to set down a president of piety, good life and godly conversation,
Socrat. 5. 22.

Seeing there is no man able to show any president or record in writing (of
fasting days or the like traditions) it is evident that the Apostles did leave
free choice and liberty to every Church at the discretion thereof, without
fear, compulsion, and constraint to use that which seems good and
commendable for it self, ibid. the like does Augustine, Epist. 86. speak of
fasting.

They observed three sorts of Traditions or Ceremonies in the Churches of their
times; First, such as Christ left to his Church, expressly set down in the
Canonical Scriptures, which Augustine calls an easy yoke and light burden,
very few for the number, very easy for the observation, very excellent for
signification (he mentions only baptism and the Lords Supper) whereby he
has knit together the society noui Populi of the new Church.

Secondly, such Traditions or Ceremonies in the Churches of their times, as are
not written but delivered, and are observed throughout the whole world,
supposed to proceed from the Apostles, or from the prescription of general
Counsels (whose authority was wholesome (quoth he) to be esteemed of) such as
the days observed yearly to the memorial of Christ his passion,
resurrection, asension, and descension of the holy Ghost, commonly called
Pentecost or Whitsontide.

Thirdly, such as in diverse parts and places of the world are observed
diversely, as for example, that some do fast on the Sabbath, others do not so;
some do daily receive the Communion, other receive it on certain days: In
some places it is celebrated on all days without exception, other where only
on Saturn days, and on the Lords day: Et si quid aliud huiusmodi animaduerti
potest, totum hoc genus rerum liberas habet obseruationes, August. Epist. 118.
cap. 1. and 2. Ianuar.

That there ought of necessity one faith to be spread over the whole Church, as
the soul within the members, albeit this unity of faith, be celebrated and
solemnized with diverse observations, by which diversity that which is true in
the substance of faith, nullo modo impeditur, is no way hindered because all the
beauty of the Kings daughter is within: but the outward Ceremonies which are
diversely observed, are as upon her garment, August. Epist. 86.

That the difference and variety of fastings, or of days observed in diverse
Churches (or Ceremonies of like nature) does not interrupt or impair but
commend the unity and consonance of faith, so says Irenaeus, Eusebius. 5. 24. the
like is, in Distinct. 12. cap. 3. scit. Sancta.

That if their be any matter of this quality, which is contrary to the grounded
observation of Christ and his Apostles; It must be reduced to the doctrine and
practice of Christ and his Apostles; again, though their predecessors of
simplicity or ignorance had erred (which by Gods mercy might be pardoned to
them) in which case men ought not to observe, what any man before them did
think fit to be done, but what Jesus Christ (who is far before all) did
perform himself, Cypr. Epist. 3. lib. 2. Legantur plura.

That Ceremonies and Traditions (such as fasting on a certain day, as on the
Lords day) after that they have been usurped and abused by detestable and
damnable Heretics (as that was by the Maniches) ought not to be observed, but
disused for the scandal thereof, Aug. Ep. 86. Casul.

That all such Ceremonies and Traditions, which are not contained in the holy
Scriptures, neither established by general Councels, neither universally
observed in the Church, but are varied innumerable ways in diverse Churches,
which either for number did ouerload the Church with a servile burden, or for
whose continuance there could not be given a sound reason, albeit it do not
appear that they be contra fidem, yet vbi facultas tribuitur, sine vlla
dubitatione resecanda existimo: They ought without staggaring to be cut off,
when conveniently they may says Augustine, Epist. 119. cap. 19. Ianuario.

That these cautions in establishing of Ceremonies (being observed) such
Ecclesiastical Traditions as do no hurt unto the faith, are so to be observed,
as they are delivered of the ancients, neither ought the opposite custom of
some, overthrow or prejudice the custom of other, did. 12. cap. 4. Illud. out
of Hier. Epist. 28. ad Lucinum. In the which Epistle he concludes also thus,
Vnaquaeque prouincia abundet in sensu suo. Touching Ceremonies, let every
Country abound in their own sense, presupposing their former caution that
therein they impair not the faith.

That whatsoever is enjoined in any Church, which is, Neque contra fidem, neque
contra bonos mores, neither opposite against faith, neither yet good manners,
is to beholden as indifferent, and to be kept, according to their custom with
whom we live, August. Epist. 118. cap. 2. Ianuar.

That in matters whereof the Scripture has determined no certainty, the
custom of Gods people is to be followed, August. Epist. 86.

That there is no rule or discipline better, or more fit for a grave and
prudent Christian, then to do after that manner as he sees to be performed in
that church, to the which it falls out that he shall come, Aug. Epist. 118.
This is to be understood of such Ceremonies, as before he says are not
contrary to faith nor manners, for of such he expressly speaks, and then also
he presupposes a true Church.

That into whatsoever Church a man shall come, he ought to observe the customs
or Ceremonies which he finds there to be in use, if he will not give
scandal to others, neither receive scandal from other. This was the counsel
of Ambrose to Augustine, on the behalf of his mother Monica; Ego vero (says
Augustine) de hac sententia etiam atque etiam cogitans ita semper habui,
tanquam eam caelesti oraculo susceperim, Epist. 118. cap. 3.

That upon occasion of refusal of these matters, Cauendum est ne tempestate
contentionis serenitas charitatis obnubiletur, August. Epist. 86. The law of
charity must moderate this controversy.

That if disputation be once admitted on the one side, from the diverse custom
of some Churches, to condemn others in these Ceremonies, there will arise
interminata luctatio, a boundless struggling or contention, which with toil of
ianling will produce no conclusions of any certain truth, Agust. Epist. 86.

That if on the other side, men do labor to ground their particular Ceremonies
on the authority of the Apostles: thence also comes interminabilis contentio
generans lites, non finiens quaestiones, an in determinable contention breeding
strife, without deciding of the question, Idem ibid.

That it was most evidently opposite to faith, and to sound doctrine for
Christians, about the using or not using of these things, to censure one
another, in respect of their standing in true grace, by judging one another to
be unclean, August. Epist. 119. cap. 20.

Thus of their doctrine: Now of their practice.
ALthough the teachers of diverse Churches, did vary very much in the judgment
and practice of diverse Ceremonies, as for example in the observation of
fasting, some fasting one day, some two, some more, some forty, as Eusebius. 5.
24. as also in the celebration of the days, as of the day of Easter, some
observing it on the Lords day (as the Western Churches did) some keeping it on
the foureteenth of the month: both sides deriuing their practice from the
Apostles, Socrat. 5. 22. yet for all this difference they were at unity one
with another, thus writes Irenaeus to Victor, Eusebius. 5. 24. they were not
at discord one with another, neither fell they out, Socrat. 5. 22. they varied
not among themselves about these trifling matters, Eusebius. 5. 24. they persuaded
not one another upon either side to practice other then they did, Eusebius. 5. 24.
they used not a word of discord about this matter, ibid. they did not ever
excommunicate one another for this difference, Eusebius. 5. 24. they did
communicate on with another for all this difference, Socrat. 5. 22. they parted
when they met one from another in peace, Eusebius. 5. 24. they never divided the
Communion of the Church, neither brake they asunder the bonds of amity,
Socrat. 5. 22. nor depart from their mutual Communion, Sozom. 7. 19. but all
of them in their variety held fast the bond of love and unity, Eusebius. 5. 24.
and the reason is well added and expressed by Sozom. 7. 19. for they held it
(quoth he) a frivolous thing and that deseruerdly, for those to be mutually
separated from the benefit of eithers Communion: Qui in praecipuis religionis
capitibus consentirent, which agreed in the chief and fundamental points of
religion: For neither (says he) shall you find the same traditions in all
Churches alike in every point, albeit they agree among themselves: and to prove
this he fetteth down a multitude of differences, of diverse Churches, both of
discipline and Ceremonies.

They sharply reproved such, Eusebius. 5. 24. and bitterly inueighed against
them, Socrat. 5. 22. as troubled the Church by attempting to compel other
Churches from their own ancient custom to their practice, and for threatening
them with excommunication, for not obeying their admonition, as before we noted.

They regarded not those excommunications, neither obeyed they such
admonitions, but persisted in their course, and so protested openly that they
would do, Eusebius. 5. 23. 25.

The Church of God in those times, being placed among much chafe and many
tares, did tollerat many things (which for the time she could not well amend)
and tamen quae sunt contra fidem (says Augustine) vel bonam vitam non
approbat, nec tacet, nec facit, yet neither did she appoue, conceal, nor
practice any thing which is contrary to the faith* or good life, Epist. 119.
cap. 20.

They held their Ceremonies not necessary, but alterable: for Constantine sent
Osius Bishop of Corduba, to make an uniformity of observing Easter, Sozom. 1.
15. but Osius returned and could do nothing therein, cap. 16. thereupon the
Necene Council was by Constantine gathered, wherein the matter of the Eastern
controversy was ended, and all conformed in one order, ibid. namely to the
order observed in the Western part, Theodoret. Hist. Ecclesi. 1. 9. fol. 585.

They grieved and lamented to behold many perturbations of weak Christians, to
have been wrought, partly by the contentious obstinacy, partly by the
superstitious timerousnesse, quorundam fratrum, of certain brethren, which
raised such contentious questions about Ceremonies, and matters of this nature,
which were neither grounded on authority of holy Scripture, nor on the
general observation of the Church, nor were profitable for correction of life
and manners in as much, as they thought nothing to be right, but that themselves
did* August. Epist. 118. cap. 3.

They grieved exceedingly to see many wholesome precepts of divine Scripture to
be less regarded, and such abundance of presumptuous every where, that they
would more sharply reprove a man for the violating of a trifling Ceremony,
then they would reprove a man for drunkenness August. Epist. 119. cap. 19.

There were many such inconveniences, which they durst not reprove more freely
then they did, that they might avoid the offense and scandal, partly of
certain holy persons, and partly also of some other turbulent persons, ibid.

They practiced the Ceremonies of every Church, wheresoever they came, as they
saw them there practiced and used, so they were not opposite to faith and good
manners: so did Ambrose, and so did Augustine and his mother Monica, at the
persuasion of Saint Ambrose, August. epist. 86. and 119. cap. 3.

They persuaded every Church to follow her own custom, Sozom.

They persuaded every Minister compassionately to correct, as much as in him
did lie, whatsoever was amiss, and that he could not amend, to bear it
patiently, and with a tender and loving affection to grieve and mourn at it,
August. contra Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2.

They persuaded the members of the Church, every one of them to observe, as
much as in them lie, the ceremonies and customs of the Church, wherein they did
come or remain, if they be not contra fide^ aut contra bonos mores, vt decet
ecclesiae prudente^ ac pacificu^, as becomes a prudent and peaceable, some of
the Church, August. Epist. 118. cap. 5. 7. thus did Ambrose teach and persuade
Augustine, telling him that he would teach him none other, then he practiced
himself: Et si melius nosset, id potius obseruaret: herein also did Augustine
and his mother rest, this advise they reverenced as an Oracle, and practiced
the same; and thus the same Saint Augustine persuaded others, as namely
Casulan. and Ianuar. to whom he wrote, Epist. 86. and 118. c. 3.

Lastly, they taught unto men the doctrine, and persuaded them unto the
practice of their Christian liberty, from all humane ordinances when by them
it was endangered or questioned, as also in a case of necessity, or of
superior reason, so Spiridion the B B. of Cyprus, when his guest having nothing
else to eat, denied to eat Porke flesh in the time of Lent, because he was a
Christian; yea rather eat (quoth he) because thou art a Christian, for that
all things are clean to the clean. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 11. Hist. tripartit.
1. 10. of the like nature is that of Augustine before alleged, Epist. 119.
cap. 20.

And so much of the judgment and practice of the Primitive Churches and
fathers, out of the which I know it is not possible, that any man should
conclude the doctrine of the necessity of suffering deprivation, for refusing
inconvenient Ceremonies; for my part, I suppose it clearly crushed and
quelled, in the uniform judgment and practice of the Primitive times. Neither
truly do I know, or have ever read, or heard any thing much differing from
this which is here set down, not that I make their judgment or practice the
infallible rule of truth, to ouerrule and guide my conscience or the
consciences of others by, but it proves the point in question clearly, that
namely the doctrine and practice of deprivation, is opposite to all the best
judgments, the most spiritual and Godly minded, yea the most eminent lights,
and must sanctified vessels of Gods grace, after the times of the Apostles in
the Primative Churches. Neither do I think that there were any better or many
other then these to be found, unless a man should pick out the opinions of
convinced and condemned Heretics and Schismatikes. And for my part since I
perceived this their uniform consent, I durst not be peremptory or
refractorie in dissenting therefrom, especially perceiving withal the
consenting harmony of all our later writers, and reformed Churches, to agree
and iumpe with them, both in doctrine and in practice of these things, and in
matters of this nature; which now in the next place, by the help of God, I
will labor to make manifest.

Secondly therefore I will prove the second part of the assumption, namely,
[that the doctrine and practice of leaving ones ministry by suffering
deprivation for not conforming to the Ceremonies prescribed, is opposite unto
the doctrine and practice of all true reformed Churches and teachers or all
classical writers.]

That this point also may be made evident, we must consider (as we did
before) two points: first of the estate of reformed Churches in respect of
Ceremonies: Next, the judgment, doctrine, and practice of the most excellent
teachers and classical writers of our time.

The former of these points will teach us, that the estate Point. 1.
of reformed Churches, in respect of inconvenient Ceremonies exceeds ours,
(supposing ours to be inconvenient, as is pretended) in three points, even in
number, nature, and effect. For the Ceremonies of other reformed Churches, are
for number more, and for their nature and effect much worse, whereof the
intelligent Reader may easily understand, in considering some of their
particular Ceremonies, which I here set down.

Touching Baptism.
THey do use the sign of the Cross in the Danish and Lutheran Churches:
Heming. syntag. 4. lege Decalog.. 3. fol. 365.

They do use exorcisme in Baptism: plane Papistico more, ibid. Putaeus lib.
2. exercit. 24. fol. 170. Lutherani exorcismum cum signatione crucis defendunt,
vt Muller. Leiser.

They permit allow and defend the Baptism of Women, Colloqu. Mompelgart. fol.
499. Conrad. Schlusselb. lib. 1. cap. 18 fol. 60.

They use the old hallowed Fonts to baptize in Berne, and Lansanna: Beza in
vita Caluini anno 1538. and every where.

They have such as undertake for childrens education in Baptism, commonly
called Godfathers, Calvin. Ep. 302. fol. 491. So in the Low Countries, as
appears, in Actis inferioris Germaniae, M. Can. 41. anno 1581. apud Sculting.
Anachr. Hierarch. lib. 9.

Touching the Lords Supper.
THey use kneeling at the Communion in all the Lutheran Churches, Harmon.
confess. Bohem.. 14. fol. 120 and that is the more dangerous, because of their
doctrine of consubstantiation.

They use the Wafer cake, as the Papists do, in the Church of Geneua, Bez. in
vita Calvin.

They give it in private, and unto the sick, Schluselb. lib. 1. cap. 30. fol.
161, 162. Harm. confess.. 16. Witenberg. fol. 197. Yea, they gave it unto only
two, ibid.. 14. fol. 146.

They retain the name of Missa, the Mass, Harm. confess.. 14. fol. 107.
Augustan.

They keep none back from the Communion, be they never so scandalous of life,
in the Churches of Heluetia, in libello de ritibus Eccles. Tigur. fol. 16.

The ministers do put in the Bread and Wine into the mouths of the
Communicants, ibid. fol. 15.

Touching the holy Scripture.
THey make the Epistle to the Hebrews, and that of Solom. Gesner. compend. de
Script. fol. 11.
James, and the second and third of John, and Jude, with the Apocalypse, to be
either Apocryphals, or at least of more doubtful authority then other parts of
Scripture in the Lutheran Churches, Chemnit. Enchir. fol. 63. propositiones
Marpurg. tom. 1. Hunnij. fol. 3. tom. 2. Winkelman. fol. 5. Laelius de verbo
Dei proposit. 22. fol. 113. propos. 22. 130.

They read the Scriptures after the form of Epistles and Gospels in the
Churches of the Lutherans, Heluetians, Nassouians, County Palatines, as
appears by the Epistle of Luther, Melancthon. Heming. Gualt. Oleuian. Textor.
So Harm. confess.. 1. fol. 9. Bohem. lib. de ritibus Eccles. Tigur. fol. 4.

They read publicly the Apocryphal Books of Scripture in the Church.

Touching prayer and Leturgie.
THey retain the form of their Leturgie like unto the Mass book, Harm.
confess.. 14. fol. 127. Augustan. fol. 131. ibid. Look the Book de ritibus
Eccl. Tigur. fol. 12, 13, 15, 16. they have the Angelical Hymn, Gospels,
gloria Patri, gloria tibi Domine after the Gospel, etc.

They have sundry prayers and Hymns in the Latin tongue, Harm. confess.. 14.
fol. 127. Aug.

They have the use of Wax candles in the Lutheran and Danish Churches, Heming.
syntag. 4. lex. Decal.. 33. fol. 365. Simlerus de vita Bulling. fol. 34.

They use the Surplesse, Heming ibid. Simler. ibid.

They use no singing of Psalms in some Churches of Heluetia, in lib, de
ritibus Eccle. Tigur. fol. 9. b.

They suffer and do use private prayers at burials, ibid. fol. 27. a. b.

Touching Churches.
THeir old Churches idolatrously abused, standing East and West, with the
Chancell, and in form of a Cross retained every where.

They retain Images in their Churches, and maintain a lawful use of them,
Colloq. Mompelg. fol. 390, 403, 404. Schlusheb. Theolog. Calu. li. 1. cap. 10.
fol. 35. 36. Eckhard. Fasc. quaest. cap. 8. quaest. 3. Heming. syntag 4. lex
Decal.. 33. fol. 365. Siml. b. sup.

They retain Altars, in stead of the Communion Table, so placed in the Church,
as are the idolatrous altars of the Papists, Colloqu. Mompelgart. fol. 424.
425. In the Lutheran Churches, and also in the Church of Berne, Ibid. Heming.
syntag. 4. lex decal.. 33. fol. 365. They retain the use of Organs in the
Church and other musical instruments, Colloq. Mompelg. fol. 391. 409.

Touching discipline.
THey have Diocesan Bishops and Archbishops in Simler. in vit. Bulling. fol.
35, 36. Heming. enchirid. class 3. cap. 10. ord. Eccle. fol. 348. Idem. Syntag.
tit. gubernat. Eccl.. 15, 16, 17. fol. 228.
Denmark, and superintendants, and even Abbots in Germany among the Lutherans,
Melancht. consil. part. 1. fol. 95, 96, 225, 276, 610. Harm. confess.. 17. fol.
Augustan. Some Bishops of France converted from Popery, retained their place
and office still by common consent of the French Church, Calvin. Epist. 373.
fol. 646, 647, 648. So Martyr. Loc. com. ad finem, inter Ep. fol. 1143. Bezae.

They have no use at all of excommunication in the Churches of County Palatine
Heluetia, of Witenberg, and Mompelgart. Erast. de excommunica. fol. 356, 382.
Vrsin catech. part. 2. qu. 83, 84. fol. 620. Calvin. Epist. 166, 170, 366.
neither ruling Elders, T. C. his admonit. fol. 83, 84.

They have holy days of Christ his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection,
Pentecost, etc. in the Heluetian Churches, lib. de ritib. Eccl. Tigur. fol. 4.
In the Churches of the Low Countries. Brownist 2. Letters to Iunius, in the
Churches of Denmark, Heming. Syntagm. 4 lex Decal. 22. 24. 25. fol. 363. 364.
Also in the Church of Berne, Aretius Problem. loc. 99. fall. 289.

They have holidaies consecrated to the memorial of the Virgin Mary, the
twelve Apostles, S. Paul, S. John Baptist, S. Stephen, Innocents, Saint
Michael, Al Saints, as appears in the Epistles which are before alleged,
also Heming. vbi sup. Harm. confess.. 19. fol. 176. Bohem.

Their Ministers are called by them, Sacerdotes Priests, as are the Popish
Mass-priests Harm. confess. Bohem.. 11. fol. 47. and fol. 4. 62. Aug. Item..
13. fol. 93. Bohem. Heming. syntag. 4. lex Decal.. 11. fol. 43. albeit
otherwise the Tigurines disclaim this name being taken in the worser sense
Harm. confess.. 11. fol. 38.

They have Deacons not Collectors for the poor, but a degree to the Ministry
and an assistant to him: yea supplying the place of a Minister in his absence.
Harm. confess. 11. fol. 47. lib. 2. de ritibus Eccle. Tigur. fol. 7. and 16.

Their Ministers in the Heluetian Churches do play the Deacons, and gather
contributions for the poor, lib. de ritibus. Eccles. Tigur. fol. 22.

They practice and maintain auricular confession and private absolution Harm
confess.. 8 fol. 142. 143. Bohem ibid fol. 147. 150. August. ibid fol. 154.
Saxon. ibid. fol 160. Wittenberg. schlusselb. Theol. Caluinist. lib. 1. cap.
19. fol. 6. 9. Simlerus in vita Bullingeri. fol. 34. calls it priuatam
quandam confessionem parum a Papistica differentem: yet look Zepper. de
Sacram. cap. 35. fol. 787. 798.

They allow and practice a kind of preaching and absolution of repentant
sinners by women, in the absence of the minister among the Lutherans, Colloqu.
Mompelg. fol. 499.

And thus we see in part the estate of reformed Churches in respect of
ceremonies, Not that hereby I do go about to justify these Ceremonies which
they do practice, but thinking and professing many of them rather most fit to
be abolished in many respects, and the Churches of Christ to be reduced so much
as is possible to Apostolical simplicity. Non damnamus veteres illos qui morem
hunc seruarunt; habuerunt enim graves pro ratione illorum temporum causas.
Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. fol. 102.
As neither do I utterly condemn their practice of these things, as knowing
that there may be just and many occasions for Churches to retain inconvenient
ceremonies, and that by the examples of the very Apostles, yet here we may see
how far more justifiable our Churches estate is which (to speak the truth)
has fewer, and those more convenient and decent ceremonies, then many other
reformed Churches, whose ceremonies are more liable to exception then ours,
whether we respect the number, or the nature, or the evil effect of the said
ceremonies. Now it follows that we consider of the judgment, and practice of
the most excellent teachers and classical writers of our reformed Churches;
who excelling in the greatest measure of knowledge, sanctification, power, and
blessing, were made the marvelous and mighty instruments of God in this latter
age, to propagate the everlasting Gospel to the Church and to reveal, and
ruinat the kingdom of Antichrist. First of their judgment touching ceremonies
in general appears to be this that follows.

First touching the Fathers, albeit they do testify their dislike of the want
of heedfullnesse, with abundance of curiosity, aemulation and of Zeal, with
some Lack of knowledge for their iniunction strict defending and multiplying
of ceremonies in sundry of the Fathers, as may further appear, Calvin. Instit.
lib. 4. cap 10. sect. 18. Beza confess. de eccles. cap. 5.. 20. fol. 129. Idem
Epist. 8. fol. 71. 72. 73. P. Martyr Loc. class. 2. cap. 5.. 20. Zanch. de
redempt. lib. 1. cap. 5. fol. 366. b and c yet they all generally approve of
the fore alleged doctrine and practice of the Fathers concerning the
ceremonies namely:

They justify Irenaeus for reproouing Victor, and condemn Victor for censuring
other Churches for the difference in such trifles. Also they commend the saying
of Irenaeus: That the difference of fasting, does not dissolve the consent of
faith, Calvin. inst. 4. 7. 7. Idem Epistola 118. fol. 215. Zanch. confess. cap.
24.. 10. fol. 207. Idem compend. Loc. 16. fol. 654. Harm. confess. 16. fol.
176. Heluet. Poster. Beza. Epist. 8. fol. 71. calls the message of Irenaeus
to Victor, insignis Epistola. Look also Polanus Symphonia, Cathol. cap. 47.
fol. 1212. Zepper. Polit Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 11. fol. 74. Idem de Sacrament.
cap. 13. fol. 329. Paraeus in Romans 14. Dub. 4. fol. 1203.

They commend the judgment and saying of Socrates: That the Apostles left no
ordinance of Ceremonies in writing: That these things were left by them free
for every Church: That no Religion does observe the same Rites: That they who
agree in the faith, do differ in their Rites among themselves, Harm. confess.
16. Heluet. Poster. fol. 176. and ibid. Augustan. fol. 187. 191 Where they
allege the saying of Socrates out of Tripartit. Hist. 9. 38. Harm. confess..
17. Heluet. Poster. fol. 211. Zanch. Compend. Loc. 16. fol. 654. Zepper. Polit.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 11. fol. 74.

They commend the practice of Polycarp with Anicetus, Pius, Higinnus,
Telesphorus, and Xist: who as Grinaeus notes in his note on Eusebius 5. 23.
Propter adiaphora non mouebant certamina.

They commend the doctrine of Ceremonies contained in Augustine, and of
Ambrose, alleged by him, Epist. 86. 118. 119. before alleged, Harm.
confess.. 16. fol. 187. 189. August. Calvin. Instit. 4. 10. 13. 14. 19. Peter
Martyr Loc. Class. 2. cap. 4. 39. fol. 203. and Class. 4. c. 4.. 4. fol. 7.
Sadeel de verbo Dei Scripto, cap. 5. fol. 32. Regula 4. Ibid. fol. 34. Obi. 9.
Aretius Problem. cap. 83. de adiaph. fol. 267. Paraeus in Romans 14. Dub. 4. fol.
1203. Quibus de rebus in genere vehementer probamus atque amplectimur vtramque
Epistolam Augustini ad Ianuar. says Zanchius confess. cap. 24. 15. fol. 2^1.
and cap. 25.. 30. fol. 251. yea they do specially commend the practice of that
council which was given by Ambrose to Aug. Namely that all men ought to
fashion themselves for ceremonies according to the custom of the church,
whereof they are, or whereto they come; So as those ceremonies be not against
faith or good manners, Zanch de operibus redempt. cap. 10. fol. 188. 6. and
cap. 19. fol. 696. item Danaeus Isag. part. 3. lib. 4 cap. 18. fol. 410.

They allow of the doctrine of Hierom: ad Lucin. Epist. That the constitutions
of every Church are to be kept, and observed which do not hurt unto the faith,
Sadeel de verbo Dei Script. cap. 5. Regula. 4. fol. 32. Zanch. comp end. Loc.
16. fol. 655. Polanus. Symphon. Catholic, cap. 49. These. 4. fol. 1239. and of
this saying also of his in place, In his rebus abundet quaeuis in sensu suo P.
Martyr Loc. Clas. 4. cap. 4.. 4. fol. 711.

They do partly excuse, and partly commend and allow the ceremonies, used by
the Fathers, and mentioned in Tertullian Zanch. in Ephesians. 5. fol. 448.

They give a probable and a commendable reason of the Fathers Studious
commending of traditions and Ecclesiastical rites, vt vias omnes schismaticis
obstruerent, Sadeel. de verbi Dei Script. cap. 5. fol. 32.

They commend the saying of Pope Leo 9. and Nicholas the first, that the rites
and customs which are diuersified according to the circumstances of the place
and time, do neither hurt the unity of the Church, neither the Salvation of
believers, Harm. confess.. 16. fol. 191. August. and. 17. fol. 215. Bohem.
taken out of Decret. part. 1. Did. 12. cap. 3. scit sancta.

They persuade and enforce the doctrine of Augustine against the Donatists cont
Parmen. 2. 1. and 3. 1. 2. that if private persons do perceive the corruptions
of the Church to be but slackly reformed, they must not therefore presently
depart from the church: or if the pastors themselves cannot reform all abuses
and corruptions as they would themselves, they must not therefore cast off
their Ministry or (inusitata asperitate) with extraordinary harshnes and
eagernes trouble the whole Church, because the life of Church discipline stands
in this, to retain the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: and
therefore out of Cyprian they do exhort, Miserecorditer igitur corripiat homo
quod potest quod autem non potest patienter ferat, and cum dilectione gemat
atque lugeat, Calvin. inst. 4. 12. 11.

Next, let us see their own uniform and entire doctrine and judgment of
those things, thus they teach.

That all Churches should labor, as much as possible may be, to Apostolical
simplicity and paucitie of Ceremonies, which they judge the safest, purest,
and the best, Pet. Martyr. loc. com. inter Epist. fol. 1086. Hoopero and fol.
1125. amic. in Angl. Beza confess. de Eccle. cap. 5.. 20. fol. 129. Zanch.
confess. cap. 25.. 30. fol. 249. Calvin. Epist. 303. fol. 497. Bucer. script.
Anglican. fol. 705. Resp. ad literas, Iocun. Hooperi. de re vestiaria. Zepper.
de Sacrament, cap. 13. fol. 32.

That Jesus Christ would not prescribe the particulars of external discipline
and ceremonies what we should follow: for that he foresawe that these things
depended upon the condition of the times, neither did he judge one form to
agree to all ages, and therefore in this case the Church must run unto the
general rule of the Word, namely of order, decency, and edification: of the
which rules determination, charity must be the moderator, in adding, altering,
abrogating, Calvin inst. 4. 10. 30. Bucer. vbi superius, fol. 708. Hoopero.

That albeit the Apostolical doctrine be exactly perfect, to the which we may
neither derogate, neither add anything: yet in rites and ceremonies of the
Church it is otherwise, for that the Apostles themselves could not set down at
the beginning what was expedient for the Church herein: and therefore did of
necessity proceed by little and little. And that even in their times the same
rites or ceremonies were not used in all Churches: and again, that many
ceremonies in their times in use, were afterward abolished, Beza Epist. 8.
fol. 71.

That there must needs be some certain form of rites and orders in all
Churches: and those established by laws, else the Church must of necessity
be weakened, and dissolved, and that it would prove the mother of contention
and confusion to suffer every man to do as he list himself, Calvin. inst. 4.
10. 27. 31.

That the same ceremonies, rites and orders cannot possibly, nor ought to be
the same in all places, or in all Christian assemblies, Harm. confess.. 16.
fol. 187. 191. Augustan. 11. ibid.. 17. fol. 214. Heluet. poster. Zepper. de
Sacram. cap. 13. fol. 328.

That ceremonies are alterable and to be disposed, according to the
circumstances of places, times and persons: some external rites are profitable
to some places, others more auailable for other places, Zanch. de operibus
Redempt. cap. 19. fol. 695. Zepper. de polit. lib. 1. cap. 11. fol. 73. 74.

That all true Churches have liberty left unto them of God to ordain and
establish, and to command such ceremonies and traditions, in their nature not
evil, but indifferent, as they shall perceive and judge to be fittest for the
edification of the Church, and furtherance of the Gospel, which therefore are
to be left free to every Church, to Alexander. Alesius in Prooem. ad lib.
ordinat. Angl. Bucer fol. 374 375. Polanus Syntag. Theol. lib. 9. cap. 29. fol.
4078. Canon 6.
make their choice as they shall perceive and judge to be fittest: To this end
Bucer. script. Anglican. Hoopero de re vestiaria. Idem in Epist. Joan. Alasco.
Zanch. de redemp. cap. 19. fol. 696. Polani Symphon. cathol. cap. 49. these. 4.
fol. 1234 Whitaker. controuer. 3. de council. qu. 1. cap. 3. fol. 18. Zepper.
polit. Eccle. l. 1. c. 11. fol. 73.

That albeit in the manner of governing the Church, churches must not turn
aside in any point that Christ has specially ordained: yet this does not
hinder, but that there may be certain instituta ordinances in every
particular place, pront commodum visum fuerit, as shall seem most commodious,
Harm. confess.. 17. fol. 216. Gallic.

That B Bs. may ordain with the consent of the Church canons, or injunctions
of days, feasts, reading Sermons for edification and instruction of the true
faith in Christ, Har. confess.. 17. fol. 229. Witemberg.

That men must not immoderately contend, that rites and ceremonies be in every
Church the same, and observed every whereafter the same manner: But they should
be most careful of this, that these ceremonies be not repugnant to Gods
Word. But that they may be by our uttermost endeavors so ordered, as that they
may further order an edification in the Church. P. Martyr. loc. class. 2. cap.
4.. 34. fol. 203. Zanch. confess. cap. 25.. 30. fol. 250. 251. That unity of
ceremonies in all Churches, albeit as much as may be should be labored for,
yet it is not necessary, but for the diversity of places and diverse respects
and reason of the time, it is profitable to have diverse rites in diverse
Churches, Zanch. Confessio. Scriptu. 24.. 15. fol. 21.

That diversity of Ceremonies in diverse Churches does serve to testify the
Christian liberty, and does greatly conduce to teach and manifest the true
doctrine and judgment of ceremonies, namely that all men may by this
diversity understand, that those things which are not delivered in the holy
Scripture are not necessary to salvation: but may be altered according, as the
time and circumstance of edification does require, Harm. confess.. fol. 194.
Witemberg. P. Martyr. loc. clas. 2. cap. 4.. 39. fol. 203. Zepper. polit.
Eccles. 1. 11. fol. 74.

That the external use of things indifferent, must be guided and moderated by
the rule of charity or love: which is the end of the law and bond of
perfection: Wherefore ceremonies must be squared to the edification and unity
of the Church, Calvin. in act. 15. 28. fol. 235. Idem. Inst. 4. 10. 30. Alesius
vbi supra. fol. 375.

That the Law of Love or of charity teaches men to observe things in their
nature indifferent (though in their use in sundry respects inconvenient) for
the sake of weak brethren to prevent their scandal: or hinderance of the
Gospel and hurt of the Church, Piscator in act. 15. 20. obseruat. in which
respect the use of such Ceremonies may be necessary not always and every where,
but necessary for the peace of the Church, Piscat. ibidem in scholijs act. 15.
28. Calvin. in act. 15. 28.

That one Church must not condemn another, for the diverse observation of
indifferent things: as it came to pass in the Primitive Church (ingenti malo)
with incredible mischief, about the observation of Easter and fasting, Bucan.
loc. 33. qu. 14. fol. 384.

That the Church of God, is every congregation which worships God according to
his Word, albeit there be great dissimilitude of Ceremonies: The true Church
of God is distinguished by doctrine and worship, and not by Ceremonies [hee
cites Ambrose and Augustine] Hemming. Syntag. in 4. Decal. legem.. 29. 30. 31.
32. 33. 34. fol. 364. 365.

That to the true unity of the Church, it is sufficient to consent in the
doctrine and administration of the Sacraments. Neither is it necessary that
humane traditions or rites ordained of men, should be every where alike,
Harm. confess. 10. fol. 19. August. Alesius vt sup.

That the unity of the Church, it rests not in external rites and
Ceremonies, but rather in the truth and in the unity of the Catholic faith the
brief of which Catholic faith is the Apostles Creed. Hence among the ancients
there was diverse varieties of rites, but such as was free: by which difference
no man ever thought the Ecclesiastical unity to be dissolved. Wherefore the
true agreement of the Church stands in doctrines and in the true preaching of
the Gospel, and in the rites expressly delivered by Christ, Harm. Confess.. 10.
folio 8. Heluet. poster.

That it is a general rule, that men must not contend about indifferent
things, that the unity of the Churches should be thereby broken, Zanch. de
redempt. c. 19. in 4 praecept. fol. 696. Neither the peace thereof troubled,
Zepper. de sacram. cap. 13. fol. 314.

That if different rites be found in diverse Churches, no man may thereby
think that they are at dissension, Harm. confess.. 17. fol. 20. Heluet.
Posterioris: so that they agree in the sum of doctrine, Beza Epist. 1. fol. 7.

That the diversity of rites, is no sufficient cause why we should separate
from any Church, seeing the Church has always varied in rites, according to
the diversity of places and of times, Aretius loc. 57. fol. 177. He cites
Augustine, and approves Irenaeus his reproving of Victor, Bulling Deca. 5.
sermon. 2. fol. 360. 361.

That it is not lawful for any man, vlla de causa, for any cause to make
separation from the Church of Christ: that is as much to say; as in which, at
least sound and sincere doctrine is retained, in the which stands,
incolumitas pietatis* the safety of piety, and where the use of the Sacraments
ordained of God is preserved: and they are Schismatikes that separate, and that
therein they do sin, Beza Epist. 24. fol. 148. No not although there be
sundry errors and corruptions in doctrine, manners, external policy,
ceremonies, Morneus de Eccles. lib. 2. fol. 32. Zanch. confess. cap. 24.. 10.
fol. 207. Idem in Philipians, 1. 25. 26. fol. 45. 46. Danaeus, Isagog. part. 3.
cap. 13. fol. 148. Bucan. loc. 41. Qu. 22 fol. 505. and qu. 25. ibid.

That contentions and strifes about things indifferent, as rites and
ceremonies, are such as before are mentioned in particular, to have been in
the Primitive Churches, must not be raised in the Church, Polanus symphon.
cathol. cap. 49. these. 4. fol. 1234. and cap. 47. these. 1. fol. 1212. and cap.
48. these. 2. fol. 1227. Idem syntag. lib. 9. cap. 29. fol. 4078. Zanch. de
redemp. cap. 19. fol. 696.

That if there be found any not pernicious dissimilitude of rites and
ceremonies, no man ought to be offended, or to take scandal thereby, or for
this cause to reproach or to harm others, or to be the author of Schism or
faction seeing the form of Ecclesiastical constitution, was never heretofore
one and the same, neither yet is to this day, Har. confess.. 17. fol. 215.
Heluet. poster.

That those persons do grievously sin, who for indifferent Ceremonies for
the Churches edification, do trouble the Churches, or condemn other Princes,
Magistrates, and Churches, for that it is opposite both to piety and charity.
Zanch. de redemp. cap. 19. fol. 697.

That where there is a certain form of Ceremonies for the Churches
edification ordained and received, there unity in those Ceremonies must be
retained of every one, and the Ecclesiastical order must not be troubled, or
interrupted, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1440. Zanch. confess.
cap. 24.. 15. fol. 211.

That in Ceremonies of indifferent nature, such as fasting, etc. every
faithful person (to avoid the giving of offense) is to follow the custom of
the Church wherein he is, or to which he comes, Polan. symphon. cathol.
cap. 47. these. 7. fol. 1226.

That because we are men, and do live amongst men in the Church, it is not
meet that in human manners, rites and traditions we should be found
froward. Let divine things be observed as divine, and humane as humane, so
long as with a free and pure conscience they may be kept, Musculus Loc. part.
2. de tradit.. 6. fol. 31.

That if any person wrangle, and will be more wise then he ought against a
common established order, let him look how he can give a reason, of his
frowardness to God, howbeit the saying of Paul should satisfy us, 1. Cor. 11.
16. we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God, Calvin. instit. 4.
10. 31.

That things otherwise in themselves indifferent, do after a sort change or
alter their nature, when they are either commanded or forbidden by any lawful
authority, Beza Epist. 24. fol. 143.

That albeit Christian liberty has taken away the yoke of the Law
Ceremonial, and in steed thereof it is not lawful for any mortal creature to
lay or impose any other yoke: yet the too licentious use of things indifferent,
is by Gods word restrained; both in general by the law of charity, whereby
we are commanded to do nothing which may scandalize our neighbor, or omit
any thing which may edify him, so far as in our calling we may; as also in
special by the politic, or Ecclesiastical constitution, so far as the
Churches gouerners under God do judge it profitable to the Commonwealth or
Church, and thereupon frames a law, Beza Epist. 24. fol. 143.

That such constitutions do bind the conscience, in as much as no man sciens
and prudens rebellandi animo, witting and knowing with a mind of disobeying,
or in case of scandal may without sin do that which is so forbidden, or
omit that which is so commanded, Beza Epist. 24. fol. 143. Calvin. institu. 4.
10. 31. Harm. confess.. 17. fol. 230. 231. Sweu. ibid. fol. 218. 224. Augustan.

And whereas it might be here objected, that these writers do speak of
Ceremonies rightly established, thus much they farther teach in general;

That the Word and Sacraments are not administered rightly and exactly, secundum
(...), as altogether agreeing with the prescript of the Lord, no not in all the
world; yet albeit they be not administered according to that exact rule, and by
reason of our frailty cannot be suddenly reformed, yet may they be so
performed, that they may be pleasing unto God, and healthful to the Church,
yet so as the defect should be lamented and acknowledged; which point if it
be not granted, there will be no pure or true Church in all the world,
Vrsinus catech. part. 2. ad quaes. 84. fol. 620.

That albeit many evil things do go along and be done, yet these things are
done by such as hinder reformation, and by the disobedient; not by such as wish
and sue for amendment: For blessed are they who hunger and thirst after
righteousness, Matthew. 5. 6. (that is) which do desire good things to be done
in the Church, which if they be not done it is not their fault, they may in
that case retain a good conscience, Vrsinus ibid. fol. 618.

That every Ceremony, or tradition have some certain causes, for which, and
some certain end to which they be ordained, and therefore every Ceremony must
be so observed of the faithful, that the observation thereof may answer to
the reasons, and may be aimed to the fulfilling of the end. And seeing there
is a diverse reason of traditions, some serving to faith some to piety, some
to charity and concord, others to discipline of manners and sanctity of life:
the people of God, must be instructed by the diligence of Ministers, and
understand how they may apply themselves to every of them, with fit and
competent observation, Muscu. Loc. part. 2. de traditionibus 6. fol. 31.

That if any man has so profited in Christ's religion, that himself can
receive either no profit, or very small from any on tradition: yet if this
tradition be so fitted as that it may serve for edification unto the
unskillful multitude, he ought to observe that Ceremony with that study of
charity, whereby such as are perfect, are debtors to the more imperfect, so
far forth that they harm them not by their example in those things wherein
they are bound, in the whole study of their life to profit them, Musculus ibid.

That when men under the color of the study of perfection cannot endure any
imperfection, either in the body or members of the Church; then are they
admonished that the devil attempteth to puff them up with pride, and to
seduce them with hypocrisy, Calvin aduersus Anabaptist. art.

That where the foundation remains entire, albeit there remain behind some
stubble error, or corruption in doctrine, external policy, manners, or
Ceremonies: there we may, and ought be present at Sermons, and receive the
Sacraments, and exercise, or hold charity and peace with our brethren, yet so
as making manifest our more sound doctrine, and persuasion of these
corruptions, and farther to signify that for these corruptions, we will make
no schism, Zanch. in Philip. 1. fol. 37. Idem confess. cap. 24.. 10. fol. 207.
Mornaeus de ecclesia cap. 20. fol. 32. and in respect of corruptios it were to
be wished indeed that the church were pure and without spot, yet if it be not,
we must use patience, else it is inevitable, that we must needs make a
private schism, which is most diligently to be avoided of every Christian
man. Wherefore those errors for which a man shall separate from the Church, in
which he is baptized and is conversant, must not be of any other sort, but
only such as overthrow, and violate the very substance of faith, and articles
of the faith, either directly and clearly, or in sense and consequence:
Danaeus Isagog. part. 3. cap. 13. fol. 148. Bucanus Loc. 41. qu. 22.

That there are many things which are not to be approved in the Church, which
are not worthy of contention, Calvin. Epist. 51. fol. 100.

That there may and ought many things to be tolerated, By tollerating them
also, we mean practicing, Beza Epist. 8.
which yet are not rightly commanded, Beza Epist. 12. fol. 98.

That many things must of us be tolerated, which is not in our power to
reform, Calvin. Epist. 148. fol. 254.

That albeit men must endeavor to purge the Church of corruptions, which
sprung up out of superstition, yet this exception must go along, that certain
things although they be not to be approved, yet must be borne with all,
Calvin. Epist. 305. fol. 504. to John Knox.

That some rites and Ceremonies, albeit not necessary are yet to be
tolerated, or borne withal for concords sake, Beza Epist. 8. fol. 70.

That as the manners of doting parents so the customs, of our unadvised country
must be endured: yea the servitude which is without impiety, and that in
matters of lesser nature [in the Church] must be borne withal, Harm.
confess.. 11. fol. 860. Melanctho council. Thelog. part. 2. fol. 107. and that
there is ever some kind of servitude of the Church, more mild somewhere,
somewhere more hard: howbeit more or less, there is ever some, Malanch. ibid.
fol. 92.

And thus we see their judgment and doctrine concerning Ceremonies in
general. Now let us see the general practice of the Churches in these points:
Thus they speak thereof,

Albeit our Churches do not equally observe all Rites and Ceremonies with
other Churches, a matter which both cannot, neither yet is necessary to be done
that namely in all places of Christian assemblies, one and the self same
Ceremonies should be used, yet do they not impugn or oppose themselves to
any good and godly constitutions: Neither are they so minded, that they would
raise up any dissentions for the cause of Ceremonies, albeit some of them might
be judged not very needful: so as they be not found opposite to God, and to
his worship and glory, and to the true justifying faith in Jesus Christ, Harm.
confess.. 17. fol. 214. Bohem.

We the reformed Churches of these days, having diversity of Rites in the
celebration of the Lords Supper, and in some other things: yet in doctrine and
faith we do not dissent, neither is the unity and society of our Churches
rent or divided thereby: But ever the Churches have in these Rites, as in
things indifferent, used liberty: That which we (the reformed Churches) at this
day do also use, Harm. confess.. 17. fol. 211. Heluet. Poster.

So much for the judgment and practice of the Churches, and of our classical
writers, concerning Ceremonies in general: Now also we will consider of them
in particular: wherein we will give notice of four points. First of the
judgment and censure of our classical writers, touching these Ceremonies which
are prescribed in our Church, and the like, and their advice to others touching
the practice thereof, especially in a case of Deprivation. Secondly the use and
practice of these ceremonies, by the most excellent and worthy persons in this
case. Thirdly, the reasons moving them unto this judgment, practice, and
advice. And lastly, the objections against these things, especially in the case
of Deprivation answered by them.

Touching their judgment and censure of our Ceremonies, I find them in a
threefold difference. For some of them do approve sundry of our controuersed
Ceremonies as fit and commendable. Some again do judge of many of them as of
things indifferent, to be used or not used, even as the Church shall think
fittest for it self. And lastly, some there be who account them as things in
many respects unlawful and inconvenient: but yet in respect of greater
inconveniences, (and namely of Deprivation) do hold them tolerable and
excusable: which difference if any man be desirous to make use of, he may
discern it in the reading and observing of them severally.

In the judgment, censure, and advice of the godly learned touching our
Ceremonies, we may observe first, what they thought in general of the Common
prayer Book of our Church, and of the Ceremonies therein contained. Secondly
what they thought concerning them in the several particulars, which are
usually excepted against.

Touching the Common prayer Book in general.
BVcer: In perusing the Common prayer Book of the Church of England* wherein he
was set a work by Bishop Cranmer I gave God thanks who had given you to
reform these ceremonies unto that purity: I have not found any thing in the
Ceremonies of that leturgie, which is not taken out of the word of God, or at
least is opposite thereto, if it be favorably taken or construed on the better
part. For (I confess) there want not some few matters, which if they be not
candide.
fairly taken, may seem not altogether to agree unto the word of God. Script.
Angl. fol. 456. Praefac. ad censur.

Calvin: In the English Leturgie, or book of Common prayer which you describe
I perceive sundry tolerabiles ineptias. Look the discourse of the troubles at
Frankford fol. 28. wherein is showed, that Knox, Whitingham, and others,
described the English Leturgie: to which description this was the answer of
Calvin, as appears there fol. 34, 35
tolerable vnfitnesses: In which two words I express thus much that there was
not that purity therein contained, which were to be wished; which blemishes at
the first day of reformation could not be corrected. Wherein seeing there is
contained no manifest impiety, these things therefore ought to be borne with for
a season, Ep. 200. fol. 336. and a little after to the English exiles at
Frankeford, which desired reformation of the English Leturgie, he gives this
advise: Vos vltra modum rigidos esse nolim, Epist. 200. fol. 336. Of the which
advice of his he thus speaks, in Epist. 228. fol. 374. in Anglorum
controuersia moderationem tenui cuius me non poenitet. and in Epist. 206. fol.
342. he persuades one part to incline themselves to all possible moderation,
and is displeased with the other part, that nothing by them was yielded or
mitigated.

Martyr. loc. com. inter Epist. fol. 1127. amico in Angliam: For mine own
part, I wish that all things may be done simplicissime* most free from humane
mixtures, in the worship of God. Yet when I think with my self, that if peace
between the Saxon Churches and ours, might be obtained, there would follow no
separation for such matters as these Ceremonies.

Alexander Alesius, a worthy Scot, of great account and note, in Proaem. before
his Translation of the Common prayer Book, in Script. Anglican. Buceri. fol.
373. commends the performance of it by our Contrymen exceedingly, with
their great diligence and care therein, and calls it, Preclarissimum and
diuinum factum, in constituting and ordering the Church of Christ, according to
that Book, and further declares that the virtue and piety of English men in
this matter, would rejoice many minds, and be an help to the endeavors of
others in the like, and that it was evident that the enemies of the truth,
were very sorry of the good success, and progress herein. Also he
complains with Gregory of some, Vt co^motis studijs contentio semper irritet
aliquorum indignationem, vtque nimio ardore interdum admodum peccetur, dum nemo
minus videri altero, ac potius solus sapere vult, fit vt non necessarijs
quaestionibus, and disputationibus necessariarum rerum cognitio negligatur:
further he shows this contention of brethren about this book, to come of the
devil, who failing one way, seeks another to mischief the Church, he
complains of some, Aliquam diuisionis occasionem arripientibus, non iam
nulli, and vocabula, and penissyllabas expendendo verbis tantum litigant,
reipsa si placide exquiratur futuri concordes. Of the common prayer book it
self, he says: Hic liber and per se vtilis futura lectio ipsius quam plurimis
and hoc tempore diuinitus oblatus esse videatur, ibid. fol. 375.

Cranmer Martyr: In his purgation of slanders against him: If the Queens
highness will grant thereunto, I with Master Peter Martyr, and other four
or five which I shall choose, will by Gods grace take upon us to defend, not
only the common prayers of the Church, the ministration of the Sacraments, and
other rites and Ceremonies: but also all the doctrine and religion, set out by
our said Sovereign Lord King Edward the sixth, to be more pure and according to
Gods word, then any other that has been in England these 1000. years, so
that Gods word may be judge, Acts and mon. fol. 1465.

Bishop Ridley: When Bishop Grindall from beyound Sea wrote to him (in prison
being condemned to be burned) concerning Knox his peremptory and violent
exceptions, against our book of Common prayer (which was even misliked by
Calvin himself, Epist. fol.) answered by writing thus. Alas that brother Knox
could not bear with our book of Common prayer, in matter against which
although I grant a man (as he is) of wit and learning may find apparent
reasons, yet I suppose he cannot soundly by the word of God, to disprove any
thing in it, Act. and mon.

Tailor Martyr: There was after that set forth by the most innocent King Edward
for whom God be praised everlastingly) the whole Church service with great
deliberation, and by the advice of the best learned men of the Realm, and
authorized by the whole Parliament, and received and published gladly by the
whole Realm, which book was never reformed but once; and yet by that
reformation it was so fully perfected, according to the rules of our Christian
religion in every behalf, that no Christian conscience could be offended with
any thing therein contained, I mean of that book reformed, Act. and mon. fol.
1521.

John Knox, William Whittingham, Christopher Goodman, David Whitehead, Miles
Couerdale, John Fox, Anthony Gilby, etc. The other part standing for it, which
also were reverend persons, as Thomas Leauer, John Jewel, John Mullins, John
Parckhust, Lawrence Humphry, James Pilkington, Alexander Nowell, James Haddon,
Edwin Sands, Edmund Grindall and others: Look the discourse of the troubles at
Franckeford, fol. 16. 23. 19. Which dissentions caused them to seek the
judgments of other churches, and their teachers, as of Calvin, Beza Bullinger.
fol. 25. 199.

Also Robert Horn, Thomas Leauer, Io. Mullins Tho. Bentham, W. Cole, Io.
Parckhust, Lawrence Humphry, etc. were all fully determined to use none other,
then the order last taken in the Church of England, Discourse fol. 16. 223. The
same order of service concerning religion, which was in England last set forth
by King Edward, fol. 10.

Also James Haddon, Edwin Sands, Edmund Grindall Christopher Goodman, etc. not
doubting or distrusting their good conformity and ready desires in reducing
the English Church now begun there, to it former perfection it had in England,
least by much altering the same we should seem to condemn the chief
authors thereof: whereas they now suffer, so are they not ready to confirm
that fact with the price of their blood, etc. fol. 22. 23.

They also at Franckford (writing to them at Zurick exiled also, dissenting
from them about our Ceremonies:) Thought not that any godly men would stand to
the death in defense of those Ceremonies, which, as the book specified, upon
just occasions may be altered, accounting it an argument that they are
slenderly taught, which for a Ceremony will refuse such a singular benefit, as
to join with the Church. Master Fox was one of the seventeen that subscribed
to this Letter.

Also after all those stirs upon the point of their return into England,
after Queen Mary's death, James Pilkington, Io. Mullins, Henry Carow,
Alexander Nowell, etc. writing an answer to Io. Knox, Christopher Goodman,
Miles Couerdale, Anthony Gilby, Willi. Whittingham, W. Williams, etc. We
purpose not (as we trust these shall be no cause) to enter into contention
with you. For Ceremonies to contend (where it shall lie neither in your hands
or ours to appoint what they shall be, but in such men's wisdoms as shall be
appointed to the diuising of the same, and withal received by common consent
of the Parliament) it shall be to small purpose but we trust that both true
religion shall be restored, and that we shall not be burdened with
unprofitable Ceremonies, and therefore as we purpose to submit our selves to
such orders as shall be established by authority, being not of themselves
wicked, so we would wish you willingly to do the same. For whereas all the
reformed Churches differ among themselves in diverse Ceremonies, and yet agree
in the unity of doctrine, we see no inconvenience if we use some Ceremonies
diverse from them, for that we agree in the chief points of your Religion,
etc. Discourse of troubles at Franck. fol. 189.

B B. Jewel: We are come as near as possibly we could to the Church of the
Apostles, and of the old Catholic Bishops and Fathers, which Church we know
was sound and perfect, and (as Tertullian terms it) a pure Virgin, spotted
with no Idolatry, nor with any fundamental or evident error. And besides
that, we have aimed not only our doctrine, but our Sacraments also, and form
of our public Prayers after the pattern of their rites and ordinances,
Apolog. fol. 170.

Deering against Harding: Our Service is good and godly, every title grounded
on holy Scriptures; and with what face do you call it darkness? sure with
the same that the Prophecies of the holy Ghost were sometimes called dreams,
the doctrine of the Apostles Heresy, and our Savior Christ a Samaritane. As
Elias said to the Priests of Baal, Let us take either our Bullockes (namely
their Mass book, and our book of Common Prayer) and lay the pieces on our
Altars, and on which God sends fire, let that be the light -- a little
before -- O Master Harding turn to your writings, examine your authorities,
consider your counsels apply your examples, look if any line be blamable in
your service Book, and take hold of your advantage; I think Master Jewel
will accept it as an Article.

This was their judgment of our Ceremonies in general, which how opposite it
is unto the doctrine, of suffering deprivation, for not conforming to them, I
need not say, no not to men of a contrary judgment: we will descend unto the
judgment of the particulars.

Touching the Surplesse.
MElancthon and Benhagius, in the territories of Marquis Albertus the Prince
and court required the Pastors, to embrace and follow the whole book of the
Augustane confession: refusal thereof was made (pio consensu) by the godly
agreement of the Nobility, or Gentry, of the Citizens and Pastors. The Court
hereupon runs on another deliberation, proposing Articles which alter not
the doctrine, and the Leturgie, but thrust upon them more Ceremonies, which yet
howsoever may well enough be borne, adding withal a threatening, that they who
will not follow this prescription should depart; albeit many Pastors had rather
have departed then yield to such condition; yet the Churches requested that they
might not be forsaken. In such a strait what council should be given? some
more forward affirm, that it were good the Court were frighted with some
terrible writing, with the fear of sedition, and with this scarcrow to
repress and hinder farther alteration.

There be many causes why we would not give any such advice: Neither would we
have the Churches forsaken, as it came to pass in Sweuia, where in many
Churches there remains either no Minister, or a Wolf, which bring in again
impious doctrine and false worships. That it may evidently appear that we
wilfully dissent not from the Papists our adversaries, we contend about great
matters, in the which the evidence of truth does convince the more sound,
even among the adversaries: that we judge to be more profitable, then to
wrangle about a Surplesse or the like matter, where wise men will exclaim
against us, that we withstand and disobey authority, and nourish dissentions
with a foolish frowardness, Council. Melanth. part. 2. fol. 90. 91.

Again, we persuade not that (by the use of these Ceremonies, as the
Surplesse) the Churches should be troubled, neither are we (which thus
persuade in this case to conformity) in less grief and peril then they who
stand against it. But where new burdens are imposed, we think fit that it be
judged, whether Churches be to be left to Woolues, or solitude and utter
overthrow of them to be admitted: or else whether servitude (of using these
prescribed Ceremonies) be to be endured. For neither would we have any
impious Ceremonies to be received, neither the Churches to be forsaken,
without most weighty reasons, as it is written, Not forsaking the fellowship,
etc. ibid. fol. 92.

Again Melancthon: Surely I could have wished in these great occasions, that
these Churches had by no alteration or imposition of these Ceremonies (such as
Surplesse, etc.) bin troubled. But I confess, I persuaded the Franck. Church
and other, that they would not forsake the Churches for such servitude, which
without impiety may be sustained. Miricus out cries, that rather desolation
should be made in the Church, and that Princes are to be frighted with the
terror of insurrection. For my part I will be author of no such sower advice:
And for our part it is evident, that we endure far more heavy and hard
burdens in our places, then is a linen garment, etc. fol. 106.

Again Melancthon: I persuaded that desolation should not be made in the
Church for the refusing of a linen garment, or matters of the like nature,
ibid. fol. 108.

Bucer: I am persuaded that godly men may use these garments godly, In Script.
Anglican. Censur. fol. 458.

Again: To the question moved by Bishop Cranmer to him, Whether the Ministers
of the Church of England might use the Surplesse prescribed by the Magistrate:
After he had put in this caveat, that his answer co^cerned only such as were
true and faithful Preachers of Gods word, answers, that he judged those
Ministers who are such in the English Church, might by the grace of God use
these garments, if so withal they did preach the whole truth, and perfect
detestation of the Antichrist of Rome; and teach withal that their meaning is
not hereby to establish any Antichristian corruption; that the Ministers by
them are nothing more holy then other men, neither the more effectual to
please God; neither that they thereby intend to reuolue Aharonicall garments,
but only in obedience to the King his Majesty, and those with whom God has
left authority to determine of external Rites of the Church (yet according to
Gods word) and further, that they do it to avoid the scandal of troubling the
public order and agreement: and last of all, testifying to godly men, that
every creature of God is good, and therefore all Christians may use such things
godly, howsoever others have impiously abused them, Idem ibid. in Epistol. ad
Cranmer. fol. 682.

Again, I can by no means affirm these garments by Antichrists abuse to be
so defiled, that they are not to be permitted to any Church; notwithstanding
that, that Church knows and worshippeth Christ, and withal knows and
practices the Christian liberty of all things. Neither do I see any
Scripture whereby I may defend this condemnation of the good creature of God,
Ibid. in Respons. ad liter as Hooperi, de re vestiaria^, fol. 707. To make it
(impium perse) an evil thing in nature for a man to use these garments in Gods
service in any respect, I see no Scripture to permit or affirm so much, ibid.
fol. 709..

Again, I verily (as I have confessed unto you, and declared to our
Countrymen) had rather that no kind of vesture, which the Papists used, were
retained amongst us, for the more full detestation of the Antichristian
Priesthood, for plainer aduouching of Christian liberty, for the avoiding of
dangerous contention among the Brethren: Yet I cannot be brought by any
Scriptures (as far as to see hitherto) to deny that the true Ministers of
Christ his Church may use without superstition, and to a certain edification
of faith in Christ, any of those vestures which the Antichristians abused, Idem
in Epist. Io. Alasco, at the end of the examination, a book so named and
written in answer of a book called the unfolding of the Popes attire.

Again I know very many Ministers of Christ, most godly men, who have used
godly these vestures, and at this day do use them: So that I dare not for this
cause ascribe unto them any fault at all, much less so heinous a fault, as
communicating with Antichrist: For the which fault we may utterly refuse to
communicate with them in Christ, Ibid.

Peter Martyr: Seeing these garments are things in different and in themselves
good, they neither make any man godly nor wicked; yet (as you also think) I
judge it rather expedient that these garments and other things of that kind be
removed, when conveniently they may, that matters of the Church may much more
simply be performed, Loc. com. ad finem inter Epist. Amico. fol. 1085.

Again, the reasons by you (Bishop Hooper) alleged persuade me not to hold
the use of these garments to be pernicious, or in their nature contrary to the
word of God, which I suppose to be altogether indifferent; being not ignorant
of this, that things indifferent may sometimes be used and sometimes should be
removed, Ibid. Hoopero. fol. 1086.

Again, albeit I do but slenderly approve these of garments, yet I perceive
sometimes, that some indifferent things albeit troublesome and burde some, yet
must needs be borne with, thus far forth as we cannot do otherwise: lest
if it be contended more bitterly then it ought to be, it prove to be an
hinderance unto the Gospel, and by our vehement contention we teach those
things to be impious, which in their nature are indifferent, Ibidem.

Again, surely to me it should be far more pleasing, (as I have often
testified) that we might only do those things which Christ himself
practiced and delivered to his Apostles: Howbeit if some indifferent things be
added, such as the Surplesse, I would not have men too eagerly to contend about
this matter, especially when we see those by whom the light of the Gospel is
much furthered in England, and may yet more be furthered, to oppose themselue^
to us herein, Ibid. fol. 1085.

Again, First I exhort that you withdraw not your self from your calling, (to
the Bishopric:) which is offered you, in regard of the wonderful penury of
able Ministers: Whence this mischie^e will come; that if you that are the
pillars of the Church pull back, and refuse to execute the Ecclesiastical
affairs both the Churches will be distitute of faithful Pastors, and you
shall give toome to Wolves and Antichrists after. Concerning the square Cappe
and external Apparel of Bishops, I suppose that it ought not much to be
disputed of; seeing it is free from superstition, and may have a civil reason,
especially in this Kingdom of England: Touching the holy Garments as they call
them; I wonder that they be so strictly retained: For I wish that all things
in Gods worship may be performed with greatest simplicity: Howbeit when I
think with my self that if reconcilement in points of doctrine might be made
between the Saxon Churches and ours* there would be no separation for such
garments as these: For albeit we like them not a whit, yet we would bear
with their use among them, and gratulate our selves, that we have abolish^d
them: Wherefore you may lawfully use these garments either in preaching, or in
administering the Lords Supper: yet so as you proceed to speak and teach
against the inconvenience in the use of them, Idem. ibid. fol. 1127. amico in
Angliam.

Calvin of Bishop Hooper: As I commend his constancy in refusing unction and
annealing, so I had rather that he had not so exceedingly contended (de pileo
and vest linea) about the square Cap and Surplesse, Epist. 120. fol. 217.

Again, to Melancth: To that you say the Magdeburg Ministers do move brawles
about a linen garment only: I see not whereto such brawles of theirs did
appertain or tend: a little before; It may be some will urge some things, and
as in contentions it came to pass, will odiously ventilate some ceremonies,
wherein there is not so much evil as they pretend, Epist. 17. fol. 213.

Also, although at first Calvin being demanded his judgment, de rebus
adiaphoris, of things indifferent in the Saxon Churches, such as Surplesse,
etc. did freely manifest his judgment, and admonish Melancthon whom some
accused as to soft and too remiss (for he persuaded to conformity, rather
then to suffer deprivation, vt superius) yet says Beza they accused him
immerito quidem, very undeservedly, as afterward Calvin knew more thoroughly.
For then it was not known with what intention that evil spirit, and whole
troop of Flaccians (which persuaded rather to be deprived then conform) which
after occasioned so many tumults, and now says Beza at this time does hinder
the work of God against the Papists, with that impudency and fury, as if he
had been hired with large sums unto it by the Pope of Rome, Beza in vit.
Calvin. anno. 1540.

Beza: But if any man demand, whether nothing at all of those things which are
indifferent in themselves, may be retained, at least for the sake of the
weak, and whether I think the ministry rather to be forsaken, then to use or
observe any such Ceremonies, especially if this caveat be also added; That
these things are brought in, or tolerated to this hour, not properly to tie
men's consciences, but for other not trifling reasons: I answer that it
appears not to me, that the Churches ought to be forsaken for Surplesses, or
Caps, or any other the like thing which is truly indifferent, Epist. 8. fol.
77. Grindallo.

Again, But our Brethren demand of us, What judge you that we should do in
this case, upon whom these inconvenient Ceremonies are imposed? We answer;
Here needs a distinction: For the condition of Ministers and people is
different, besides sundry may and ought to be tolerated, which are not rightly
commanded. Therefore first I answer, albeit in our judgment these ceremonies
are not rightly commanded. Therefore first I answer; Seeing these Ceremonies
are not of the kind of those things which are impious in themselves, they
seem not unto us of so great moment as that therefore the Pastors should
rather forsake their ministry then wear those garments, or that the flocks
should omit and leave the public food of their souls, then hear their
Pastors, being arraied in such attire. And these things which they cannot
reform or alter, let them rather endure and bear withal, then by forsaking
of their Churches to give way to greater and more dangerous evils, so yielding
to the will of Satan seeking herein nothing else, Idem Epist. 12. fol. 98. 99.
This Letter is set down and translated in the discourse of the troubles at
Frankford, fol. 211. and subscribed unto by diverse Ministers, among whom are
these; Theodorus Beza, Nicol. Colladonus, Simon Goulartius, Franciscus Port.
Henricus Stephanus, etc.

Bullinger and Gualter: If you wear a Cap or a peculiar kind of apparel, as a
civil and politic thing, it smells neither of Iudaisme nor Monachisme. For
these will seem to separate themselves from the civil and common life, and
account a meritorious deed in the wearing of a peculiar garment. If in case any
of the people be persuaded that these things savor of Papisme, Monachisme, or
Iudaisme, let them be told the contrary and perfectly instructed therein: And
if so be through the importunate crying out hereon before the people by some
men many be disquieted in their conscience; set them beware which so do, that
they bring not greater yokes on their own necks and provoke the Queens
Majesty, and bring many faithful Ministers in such danger as they cannot
rid themselves again. In an Epist. sent into England by them to Mr. N. and
Mr M. It is cited in Whit gift his defense fol. 277. They press the use
thereof in the Primative Churches, Idid. fol. 288.

Zanch. Touching the form of garments, which Ministers ought to use publicly,
either in the execution of their Ministry, our judgment is that about these
things we must not so contend, that for this cause the peace of the Churches
should be troubled, Confess. cap. 25.. 30. fol. 249.

Again, albeit seeing Christ neither his Apostles did not forbid, that any man
should take other garments, then the usual, honest grave and clean garment,
Liberum est per se vti, vel non vti alijs vestibus: and albeit it be a free
thing, and be accounted among matters indifferent, yet for signification it
rather should become a Minister in the administration of the Sacrament to use a
linen then a woollen garment: for that that color is an emblem of innocence
and sanctity, hence in the Apocalypse, white garments are given to the Saints,
Idem de operibus Redem. lib. 1. cap. 16. fol. 445.

Heming. I would not have private persons to alter any thing in Ceremonies
ordained, and approved of our Magistrates by grave, and weighty reasons and
authority: neither ought a most exact reason of every particular Ceremony be
enquired, so long as they savor not of manifest superstition and impiety:
neither do we judge Ceremonies to be of that moment, that for them schism
should be moved in the Church, [hee names there among other Ceremonies the
Surplesse] let the sincerity of doctrine be retained, as also the pure worship
of God; let other things serve partly to the peace of the Church, partly to the
infirmity of men, and let us leave these things to the wisdom of gouerners,
and let them determine of these matters, Syntag. in 4. Legem. Decalogi.. 29.
30. 31. 32. 33. 34. fol. 365.

Again, It is indifferent in nature to celebrate or perform holy things, as
Baptism and the Lords Supper, in a white and linen garment: howbeit if the
use be not free but be reserved (superstitionis gratia) for superstition, it
cannot be any longer accounted among things indifferent, for then as in a case
of confession of the truth, they leave to be indifferent, Idem Enchiridion
Tit. de adiaph. cap. 16. clas. 3. fol. 375.

Polanus moves a question whether a Minister of the reformed Church, when he
speaks in the pew or pulpet, ought not to put on a linen grament, which they
call a Surplesse upon his usual attire? To which he answers thus, Liberum
videtur vtivel non vti in Sacris vest linea: then he shows that in the time
of Hieron. the custom was in the Church that such as did administer the
Sacraments, did were a linen garment in the act of practice, citing the said,
Hier. contra Pelag. l. 1. thus speaking, quae sunt rogo inimicitiae contra
Deum, si Episcopus Presbyter, Diaconus, and reliquis or do Ecclesiasticus in
administratione sacrificiorum, candida vest processerit, yet he inclines to
the removing of these graments out of the Church.

But further he demands and puts case, that if in any reformed Church, the
use of a Surplesse may not be omitted without the fear of schism, or
incroaching of heretics, what shall a Minister do then? He answers, In
that case it is better for a man to wear a Surplesse, as an adiaphorall or
indifferent thing, then by the obstinate refusal thereof, to stir up schism
to interrupt the course of true doctrine, and to give occasion unto heretics
of possessing the Church, which he confirms by the example of Paul, which
circumcised Timothy for the Jews sake, because they all knew that his father
was a Grecian, Act. 16. 3. howbeit if God grant a full reformation unto any
Church, so as that with Idolatry it self, all instruments and helps thereof
be utterly banished, by so much the more is the grace of God to be
acknowledged, celebrated, and preserved, in Ezech. cap. 44. fol. 807.

Zepperus: Although he testify his dislike of the superstitious histrionicall,
and corrupt use of the Surplesse among the Papists, calling it an Aharonicall
garment, whereof there is no use, but advises men to use such a simple and
decent garment in the worships of God, as may seem most honest or agreeable to
every Country or place; and that from the example of Christ, the Apostles and
Primitive Church: yet he confesses that Chrysostom Homil. 83. in Mat. and
Hieron. lib. 1. contra Pelag. do make mention of a white garment, which the
Ministers in those days used without superstition, in token and admonishment
of leading an honest life, De politia Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 12. fol. 19.

M. Cartwright: Touching the point whether a Minister should wear it, although
it be inconvenient: the truth is, that I dare not be author to any to
forsake his Pastoral charge for the inconvenience thereof: Considering that
this charge, being an absolute commandment of the Lord, ought not to be laid
aside for a simple inconvenience, or uncomeliness of a thing, which in the
own nature is indifferent. After, if the Prince upon the declaration of the
inconvenience of such Ceremonies, and humble suit for release of them, will
nothing loose of the cord of this servitude, for my part, I see no better way,
then with admonition of the weak, that they be not offended, and prayer unto
God to strengthen them thereunto, to keep on the course of feeding the flock
committed to them in the end of his second Reply, fol. 262, 263.

Touching the sign of the Cross.
BVcer: This sign of the Cross, both in respect that it is of most ancient
use in the Church, as also that it is (admodum simplex and praesentis
admonitionis crucis Christi;) A Ceremony Sign of the Cross neither indecent
nor unprofitable.
of much simplicity, and of present admonition of the Cross of Christ: I do
hold it nec indecens, nec inutile, neither indeecnt, nor unprofitable. With
this condition, that in the use thereof it be purely understood, and
Religiously received, without the addition of any superstition or bondage of
the element, or common custom. In Script. Anglican. Censur. cap. 12. fol. 479.

Beza: Seeing these things (the sign of the Cross Not Idolatrous in it self
and other things) are not perse Idololatrica, Idolatrous in their own nature,
we think of these things, as we did of the Ceremonies going before, fol. 100.
and what was that, Not of that moment to suffer deprivation.
namely (fol. 98.) that it seems not a matter of that moment, that for it
Pastors should leave rather their charge, then use (this sign) or that the
Flocks should let alone the public food of their souls, then hear their
Pastors using this sign.

Again: Touching the Cross, what shall I say, admit there was a time wherein
there was some use of this Sign, in opposition to the cotemners of Christ
crucified. Admit also that it was willingly, and of long time used by
Christians for the external profession of the true Religion. After: Yet I
know, that some renouncing the adoration of the Cross, retain the use of this
Sign [vtantur igitur ipsi sicuti par est sualibertate.] let them therefore use
their liberty as is meet; we in the French Churches for sundry necessary
causes may not tolerate it, Beza contra Baldwin.

Heming: Some are offended with our Ceremonies (in the Denmark Churches, and
cry out that they are popish: they say we have (Sacerdotes) Priests, Altars,
Surplesses, Ca^dles, Images, Exorcismes (signationes Crucis) signings with the
sign of the cross, (plane Papistico more) merely after the Popish fashion. To
those men I answer, the true Church is distinguished from the false by
doctrine and worship, and not by Ceremonies, Quae per se adiaphora sunt; which
are Of it self indifferent.
in themselves indifferent. Neither do we judge indifferent Ceremonies to be
of that moment, as that Schisms should be moved for them in the Church. Let
the sincerity of doctrine be retained; let other matters (ceremonial and
circumstantiall) serve partly for the peace and quiet of the Church, and partly
to the infirmity of men, Syntag. ad 4. legem Decalogi.. 33, 34. fol. 365.
Also, in commentar. super 1. cap. Joan. he says, Minime improbo signum Crucis.

Zanch: Other sort of Traditions there are, not necessarily to be retained in
the Church, albeit very ancient, and mentioned of the Primitive Fathers: As
that a Christian ought to arm his forehead with the sign of the Cross, as
also to fast on Fridayes, and Saturndayes. For albeit they may be used, si
absque superstitione exerceantur, if their use It may be used.
be without superstition: yet they bind not the conscience, Compend. Relig.
loc. 16. De tradit. Ecclesiast. fol. 654.

Again, If we diligently consider the things which are reported of the sign
of the Cross, we shall find that many things were fabulous, other matters
fained of the Devil, other uses thereof true, but not to the confirmation of
superstions: others also of that quality which in those Primitive times
indeed, when as they were not as yet turned into superstition, Tolerari
potuerunt, and vero fuerunt laud In some case tolerable.
digna, might be tolerated, nay they were worthy of commendation: yet from
which uses of this sign, for the present we must wholly abstain for the
danger of superstition. Other uses in a word there were of this sign: Quae
tolerari etiam nunc possunt, cum nihil in tali crucis vsu insit periculi: which
may be tolerated even now in the Church, seeing in such use of the cross there
is no peril, Deredempt. l. 1. cap. 15. fol. 367. After he shows that the
Primitive had the sign of the Cross in the forehead, to testify that they
were not ashamed of the Crucifix: which was causa praecipua eaque non
improbanda, The chief cause moving them to use it, and that not to be
disliked, Ibid.

Polanus: The sign of the Cross might have been used of the holy Fathers
without sin, so far forth as it was a free and open testimony of the
confident confession of Christians concerning Christ crucified, albeit he
acknowledges that it was with good right abolished out of many reformed
Churches, because it was Idolatrously abused by the Papists, and that all true
worshippers might know, that God is to be served by them in spirit and truth,
In Ezech. cap. 9. v. 4. fol. 258.

Zepperus acknowledges the practice of the sign of the Cross to have been an
usual and ancient custom of Christians in the Primitive Church, and makes
apology and good construction of the holy Fathers use thereof, namely, that
they used it not superstitiously as the Papists do, but to testify their trust
and confidence in the cross, that is, in the passion and death of Christ, as
the Jews in Egypt did, which signed the door post of their houses, not as if
the blood of the Lamb had any power to preserve them from the destroyer, but
because it was a type of the blood and Cross of Christ, though otherwise he
dislike the use thereof in Baptism, because not commanded of God but has been
abused by the Papists to Idolatry: yet hereby he shows, as also do the rest
of our classical Writers, that the use of this sign is not a thing simply and
in nature evil, de Sacrament. cap. 16. fol. 357. 358. and de politia Eccles.
l. 1. c. 10. fol. 57. 58.

Gowlartius: The ancient or Primitive Christians, did use the figure of the
Cross without superstition, because the doctrine of the merits of Christ
preserved them from error, which afterward crept in, Annotat. in Cyprian lib.
ad Demetr. cap. 19. he calls it a thing indifferent. Annot. Cyprian Epist. 56.

Master Perkins shows, that the transient cross, that is, the sign of the
cross made with the finger in the air, was in common use with the Primitive
and purer Church, and was used as a simple rite, as a sign of the external
profession of their faith, and confidence in the Cross, that is, the death of
Christ, and as a certain monitory, whereby they stirred up their faith, and
that it was not adored or superstitiously used, as among the Papists. Problem.
tit. signum crucis. Sect. 1. 2. 3. fol. 83. 84.

Touching kneeling in receiving the Communion.
CHurches reformed: Bohem: Geneua: The Bohemian confession touching the manner
of their receiving the Communion says thus, The faithful members of our
Church do most usually receive this Sacrament (in genua procumbentes) kneeling
on their knees with thanksgiving, ioyfulnesse, and singing Psalms. Harm.
confess.. 14. Bohem. fol. 120.

Low Country Churches: In the administration of the Lords Supper, let every
Church impose or use such Ceremonies, as they shall judge to be most
expedient, so they look that the Ceremonies taken out of Gods word, be not
rashly changed, and superstitions be diminished. Ex actis Synodalibus general.
inferior. Germ. Middleburg. anno 1581. Can. 45. apud Sculting. Anachrys.
Hierarch. lib. 9.

Calvin being questioned of one, whether he might receive the Supper of the
Lord from the Lutheran teachers, (in whose Churches kneeling is used, as
appears before in the Bohem confess. as also appears in admonition of T. C.
fol. 84.) In his answer to this question, makes no difficulty in respect of
kneeling, but of their erroneous doctrine of consubstantiation, and therefore
insinuates it unlawful to receive, nisi clara and ingenua praecedat sanae
doctrinae confessio: In which case he allows the receiving thereof,
notwithstanding their kneeling. Epist 292. fol. 479.

Bucer: If you admit not this, I do not see how you can grant any Church,
that it may celebrate the Lords Supper in the Morning, and in an open Church
consecrate to the Lord, that the Sacraments may be distributed to men kneeling
or standing; yea, to women as well as to men: For we have received of these
things neither covenant of the Lord, nor any example; yea, rather the Lord gave
a contrary example in these things, in Epist. ad Ioh. Alasco.

P. Martyr: Neither do I judge that we ought immoderately to contend that
rites and Ceremonies be the same, and every where observed after the same
manner. But this must be looked unto, that they be not repugnant to Gods word:
yea, they ought to be squared unto that, as much as possible may be, and to our
uttermost endeavor, edification and decent order should be furthered: which
conditions if they be observed, it is nothing material whether we receive the
Lords Supper standing, sitting, or kneeleng, so as the institution of Christ
be kept, and occasion of superstition cut off. Neither is it much to be
respected while the Church receives the elements, whether some place of holy
Scripture be rehearsed openly, or whether Psalms and thanksgiving be sung of
the people. Loc. com. class. 2. cap. 4.. 39. fol. 203.

Again, concerning adoration, how it may be used in receiving the Sacraments,
I will say something, namely, in a clear case: For if ones mind be applied
not to the elements, but to the things signified, adoration may lawfully be
interposed. Therefore when the Sacraments are received, and the promises as
perteining thereto, if we adore the Lord by kneeling, we do not thereby
testify the real and corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Idem in
defen. ad Gardener. de Eucharist. part. 1. ob. 1. fol. 5.

Beza: Kneeling at Communion while the elements are received has indeed a
show of Godly and Christian reverence, and therefore might heretofore be used,
(cum fructu) with some benefit, yet because from this original, that same
detestable bread worship did first arise, and sticks as yet in the minds of
many, it seems worthily removed (in the Churches where they use other
gesture) yet again seeing this Ceremony is not per se idololatrica,
idolatrous of it self we judge of it as we did of the Surplesse, and other
foregoing Ceremonies, Epist. 12. fol. 100. namely that it is not of that
moment, as that for the refusal thereof the Ministers should leave their
Ministry, or the people the Sacrament, Ibid. fol. 98. in another place, Epist.
8. fol. 77. albeit he hold it inconvenient, yet he confesses that it is not,
per se impium, in it self impious.

Vrsinus: To a question whether among them that defend Consubstantiation, a man
might lawfully receive the Lords Supper? he answers thus, seeing in those
Churches the same foundation of salvation, and the same Christ is taught as is
in ours: albeit some defects and blemishes do stick upon their Sacraments,
and seeing the authority and use of the Sacraments, as also of the whole
Ministry, depends not on the persons of the Ministers, neither can their
false opinions or sins hurt and preiudicate, such as rightly do use Christ's
institution; a man rightly informed, may holily communicate with them on these
conditions. 1. If he have no more pure Ministry in the place, or about the
place of his aboade, or be driven from the use thereof against his will; as now
in these parts the communicating in the purer Churches is for bidden, to the
orthodoxe under pain of proscription. 2. If he receive not the Communion with
them, as a badge of approving their error, and disliking of the true doctrine;
as it is used, says he, in the quarters of our neighborhood. 3. If before he
come, he make confession plainly, and ingenuously, without darkness, and
doubtfulnesse unto the Ministers, and know whether they will receive him with
this confession, and acknowledge him as a member of the Church, yielding
confession of the truth to others also, but profess it before all, requiring
of him a reason of his faith, either in public or in private: If the Minister
refuse him on these conditions, let him abstain, if he admit him and there be
objected to him, and laid before him his practice (vitiosae Ceremoniae)
corrupt Cemonies, false opinions, scornings of the truth by the adversaries,
as if he should be infected with some superstition thereby, and that he
gives scandal hereby to the weak, which may suspect that he approves their
opinions, and so may be confirmed also in these things. It is answered thus,
that this is scandal taken, not given, if he who endures this servitude,
inioying in the mean while his Christian liberty, does not omit the
confession of the truth unto the Ministers and others; and with all do openly
profess for what cause, on what conditions, on what persuasion, and to what
end he communicates, and in what different reckoning he holds the
ordinances of Christ, and the traditions of men; for thus all just cause of
offense is taken away.

Neither is a person of sound judgment defiled, when as he uses the Ministry
of such as err; yea and observes also haumane Ceremonies, if with all he
clearly and constantly disliketh the errors, and do neither commit in word
nor deed any thing openly and impious in it self, and repugnant to the word
of God, and withal profess that he esteems not humane traditions for the
worship of God. So the Prophets and other Saints in the old Testament, and
Christ and his Apostles in the New, did use the Ministry of the Priests, which
many ways did corrupt the doctrine and worship of God: but in the mean while
they themselves did nothing in it self idolatrous or forbidden of God, but did
sharply reprehend the errors of the Pharisees and Saduces: So Paul by the
observation of Jewish abolished Ceremonies did apply himself unto the weak,
when they fled from him as from an enemy of the Law, and of their country
Customs, and in this thing did not sin. Peter applied himself unto the
Jews also, and yet is reproved, we see, of Paul: The cause was because Paul
did add, but Peter did omit the necessary confession and doctrine of the
truth: Therefore Peter gave scandal to the weak, and confirmed them that
erred in their error, which Paul did not. Of this question (says Vrsinus) I
conferred heretofore at Zuricke, with P. Martyr of holy memory, not for mine
own scruple, but for others, of whom I was importuned for advice, neither was
his answer different from this of mine, Exercitat. part. 2 fol. 835, 836, 837,
838, 839.

Zanch: As he who with some kind of reverence and honoring does bear himself
unto the Sacraments, is not to be blamed, so he commits idolatry which
adoreth and worshippeth the same: He gives a reason hereof, because the Bread
and Wine of the Lords Supper are no longer common or profane things, but holy,
by which Christ does communicate himself and his grace, and in that respect
those elements are worthy of reverence. For as the word which is preached,
although it be not to beadored, yet it is reverently to be heard and handled,
as the word, not of man, but as the word of God: So also the elements of the
Sacraments, in the act of the administration of them are worthy of some
reverence and honor, as things not profane, but holy, and to this purpose is
that where the Apostle commands the Bread to be eaten, and the Wine to be
drunk worthily. For albeit this dignity consist properly in the mind, which is
endued with faith and love, yet not from the purpose do we also refer the
same to external reverence: Hence they who approach irreverently to the Lords
Supper, as to a common or profane supper, were of God grievously chastened, as
the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 11. 29, 30, 31. Wherefore there is no doubt but
he does well and godly, and according to the will of God; which adresseth
himself to come with external reverence (as bareheaded, kneeling, or the like
gestures) and so handles, and partaketh of the Sacraments, De Redempt. lib.
cap. 17. fol. 486.

Zepperus: These Ceremonies of good order or matters indifferent, may be thus
distinguished, as that some of them may be considered about the administration
of the Sacraments: others are accessaries, or furtherers of good order, and of
honesty about external worship: For albeit the Sacraments are not to be
accounted among the number of adiaphorals, or things indifferent, yet there is
a real and great difference between the Sacramental Ceremonies themselves,
which at man's pleasure neither can, nor ought to be altered or changed, and
between the circumstances of those Sacramental Ceremonies; which
circumstances for the state of Churches may by the Christian liberty be
differently appointed and observed, as for example, the time of administering
the Sacraments, Situs vel positus corporis in vtenda coena, the site and
position or gesture of the body in using the Lords Supper; And the like, Polit.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 11. fol. 76.

Again, it is usually objected, that if we will so exactly, and peremptorily
sift all things* and square them to the institution of Christ, then it will
follow, that the Supper of the Lord, shall not be celebrated but once a year,
and that in the evening or night season, and that lying along about the Table,
as Christ did in his institution, etc. He answers thus, as if there were not
great difference between the Sacramental Ceremonies themselves, and the
circumstances of the Sacramental Ceremonies, such as are the circumstances of
time, place, and site, or state or position of body, to which we are not bound
in the New Testament, but do here rejoice in the Christian liberty, according
to that of Galat. 4. 10. and Col. 2. 16. And as Saint Paul of the use of the
Supper of the Lord does bring in and apply the Word Quotiescunque. But the case
is far otherwise of Sacramental Ceremonies, which appertain unto the
substance of the Sacraments. Idem de Sacrament. cap. 13. fol. 321. 322. Look
Sarauia contra Bezam. defens. cap. 25. fol. 582. 583. and Luther in Genesis 47.
where he allows this Ceremony of Kneeling.

Touching Holy Days.
THese are of two sorts: some bearing title to the memorial of Christ our
Savior, and the parts of our redemption by him performed; as namely, the days
of Christ his Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, Assension, and
Descension of the Holy Ghost: some others bearing the name and memorial of the
Virgin Mary, the Apostles and other of the Saints. The former sort as they are
in every reformed Church in the world that I have heard of practiced (excepting
in Geneua which only observes the day of Christ's Nativity, Calvin. Epist.
118. fol. 215. and Argentorat or Strausbourg, Calvin. Epist. 128. fol. 226.) as
namely in the Churches of Denm. Heming. Syntag. in 4. leg. Decal.. 22. fol.
363. 364. Of Bohem. Harm. Confess.. 16. fol. 179. Saxony and high Germany, Harm.
Confess.. 16. Augustan. fol. 186. Heluetia Harm. Confess.. 16. Heluet.
posterior. fol. 179. Item in libello de ritibus Eccles. Tigur. 8. fol. 1. of
Basil. Polan. Syntagm. lib. 9. cap. 35. fol. 4147. Belgic or Low Countries as
appears in the last letter of the Brownists unto Iunius last letter. Berne.
Aretius Problem. loc. 99. fol. 289. Fulke in Rhem. Apoc. 1. 10. fol. 854. and
in Gal. 4. 10.. 5. fol. 63. So do all good and godly judgments that I could
light of (excepting only Piscator in Gal. 4. 9. 10. 11. obseruat. fol. 426.)
concur together to approve of them, so does Bucer. Script. Anglican. in
censura fol. 493. cap. 26. Pet. Martyr. loc. com. inter Epistolas fol. 1087.
Bulling. in Epist. Calvin. 129. fol. 227. Zanch. confess. cap. 25. fol. 250.
and in Col. 2. 17. fol. 67. Zepper. de politia Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 13. fol.
94. Aretius Problem. de Ferijs fol. 289. Paraeus in Romans 14. dub. 4. fol. 1203.
1204.

The latter sort of holy days, albeit they be not used in some Churches, as in
Heluetia, Belgia, France, county Palatine, etc. but are by sundry godly persons
in some respects misliked, as Har. confess.. 16. Heluet. Poster. fol. 175.
Bulling. in Ep Calvin. 129. f. 227. and Dec. 2. Ser. 3. f. 126. Calvin. Ep.
278. fol. 456. and Ep. 379. fol. 658. Muscul. loc. part. 1. in 4. praecept.
fol. 133. 134. 135. Zegedine loc. co^. fol. 324. de fest is Christianoru^
Oleuian. in Romans 14. 5. f. 691. 692. Ide^ in Gal. 4. 10. fol. 95. Rolloc. in
Coloss. 2. 16. fol. 164. 165. Paraeus in Romans 14. dub. 4. fol. 1204. 1205.
1206. Bb. Hooper on Command. 4. fol. 48. Paraeus in Romans 14. Idem exercit. 29.
lib. 2. fol. 200. Yet by sundry reverend persons they are excused, and by some
allowed and practiced in sundry Churches, as the Churches of the Augustane
Confession Danish, Bohem. Berne. and others Harm. Confess.. 16. Bohem. fol.
179. Hemming. syntag. in 4. legem Decal.. 27. 28. fol. 363. 364. Aretius
Problem. loc. 99. f. 289. Bucer. script. Anglic. censura. cap. 26. fol. 494.
allow them upon condition that they be sanctified by preaching and practicing
of holy duties; and not profaned by sin, belly cheer and vanity. Zanchius
excuses them in that the Fathers who first ordained them, did upon those days
worship God, and not the Saints and besides by this, Quod nulla lege
prohibebantur id facere quod faciebant de redempt. cap. 19. fol. 601. as also
in respect of their ends of institution, the remembrance of the Saints
excellency to our own profit, the declaration of their virtues to Gods glory,
and an excitation of men's minds to thankfulness unto God. Idem in Col. 2.
17. fol. 67. And therefore he concludes, that as those Churches did well to
abolish the Popish supestitious days, which were abused to Idolatry; as the
day of the Conception and Assumption of the Virgin Mary, etc. yea, they also
did not evil, which for the state of their Church did abrogate omnia praeter
diem Dominicum, all days, being matters merely indifferent, and to prevent
future superstition, Zanch. in Coll. 2. 17. fol. 614. and de redempt. cap. 19.
lib. 1. fol. 618. yet seeing they are matters in their nature indifferent,
Liberum est Ecclesiae deligere sibi dies Festos, Every Church has liberty to
choose holy days for the edification of it self. Idem de redempt. cap. 19.
fol. 615. Idem confess. cap. 25.. 30. fol. 250. on condition that they be not
too many, neither used profanely or superstitiously, or when they be so
abused, if they cannot well be reformed to abolish them. Idem de redempt. cap.
19. fol. 615. 618. confess. vbi supra. And so he affirms, that these holy
days ought by no man to be contemned, and that by the example of Christ,
Zanch. in Col. 2. 17. fol. 67. a. Idem de Redempt. ibid. fol. 612.

The obseruators on the Harmony of confessions on sect. 16. ad Bohem. 1. do
thus affirm of these Holy days: As some Churches do so far submit
themselves to their infirmity with whom they converse, as that they do observe
these holy days (titled with the names of the Apostles) albeit with an uneven,
yea altogether a repugnant reason: So other sundry Churches being driven unto
it by no such necessity, have taken these holy days also, not only as
unprofitable, but also in some respects hurtful.

Hemingius shows, that there is great difference between the observation of
these Holy days distinguished by the names of Saints, as it is performed by
the Papists and Heathens: The ends of whose observing them (being idolatrous
and profane) we abhor, (says Hemingius) as unworthy of whom any mention
should be made among Christians, and as it is observed among the reformed
Churches, whereof he gives 6. profitable ends: That the history of the Church
may be the better made known: That the benefits of God toward the members of
his Church may be thought upon: That thanksgiving may be given to God for
them: That the diverse cases of the Saints may be considered and weighed: That
we may imitate the Saints in repentance, life, worship, confession, constancy,
patience, and in other virtues: That lastly with holy sighs, we may desire the
communion of Saints, Syntag. ad 4. legem Decal. 25. 26. 27. 28. fol. 364.

Calvin to the French Church at Mompelgart concerning the not receiving of
feasts: I could wish you to be more constant, yet so (vt non litigetis de
quibus libet) as ye contend not about all the holy days; but about such only
which neither make anything at all for edification, and besides, do manifest
themselves to be superstitious in the very first appearance. He gives
instance of the holy days of the Conception and Assumption of the Virgin Mary,
[which are built the one on false doctrine, the other on a lye] Epist. 51. fol.
100.

Again, In another place, touching Festival days, and other ceremonies, as I
suppose then to be subject to the censure of God, which under the color of I
know not what conformity and agreement among Churches, have both nourished an
inconvenience, and turned aside the remedy: and it is an hard matter for the
godly Brethren to subject themselves to such things which they apprehend
neither to be right, nor profitable, Ita etiam defectus multos tolerandos
iudico, vbi emendari non possunt; Even so I do judge that many defects are to
be borne withal, where they cannot be reformed: Wherefore I do not think it
fit that any of the Brethren should for this cause insist so far, as to
depart and separate from the Church, whereof he is a member, if the greater
part of the Church be carried in a contrary course; because in such cases it
seems unto me sufficient if that which we know to be right be of us labored
unto: for albeit it be thrust upon us, and malam caudam trahat, and do draw a
long some evil effects with all, yet because it is not repugnant to the word
of God, concedi potest, it may be yielded unto, especially where the greater
number does overcome the lesser, when as there is no possible way or means
for him, which is only but a member of that body, to porcure and to further
reformation, Idem Epist. 379. fol. 658.

Aretius: Because the appointing and determining of Feasts has ever been a
matter free, that is, that other Churches may add other days to the Sabbath
to be kept holy, Nihil and in hac re vitij inesse iudicamus, Probl. Loc. 99.
fol. 289.

Polanus: The observing of holidayes in the beginning of the Christian
Primitive Church, was a matter indifferent, and therefore discord and
contention for the celebration of them should not be moved, Polan. Syntag.
Tom. 2. lib. 9. cap. 35. fol. 4148.

The Churches of the Low Countries make this Canon for themselves, as holidayes
shall be abolished, excepting the Lords day, and the days of Christ's Nativity
and Ascension; howbeit, if more festiuals be to be kept by the Magistrates
command, the Ministers must be admonished, that they labor by preaching to
turn the peoples idleness on those days into godly business or exercise,
Ex actis Synod. inferior. German. Middleburgi anno. 1581. canon. 50. apud.
Schulbrig. Anacrysi.

Fulk: That other days also, besides the Lords day, may be kept by the
Churches ordinance, for the assembly of Christians to the exercise of religion,
we acknowledge: But that any are simply necessary, more then be of the Holy
Ghosts appointing in the Scriptures, we deny: In Rhem. Test. ad Gal. 4. 10.. 5.
fol. 603.

Again, that any contention should arise for keeping or not keeping of the
such feasts, it is a fault in our time, but yet such a fault as was very
ancient, as appears by the contentions of Victor, and the Bishops of the
East, for the celebration of Easter: and pursued with more bitterness by
Victor Bishop of Rome, then by any of our time. For he presumed to
excommunicate as heretics, all such as would not keep Easter after his
manner, Eusebius. 5. 25. we acknowledge it was a very ancient custom of the
Church, to celebrate the memory of Martyrs, as the Church of Smyrna does write
in their Epistle, Eusebius. 4. 12. For the remembrance of them that have fought
before us, and for the exercise and preparation of them that shall fight
hereafter. But your Popish manner of celebration is nothing like, either in the
form or in the end, for you keep your holy days, as the Jews did the feast
of the Calfe, wherefore it is written; The people sat down to eat and
drink, and rose up again to play: In your Churches, you solemnize them with
idolatros worshipping of the creatures, and their images out of the Churches,
with banqueting, reuelling, and idleness, so that the people by your
festiuities of Martyrs, are not taught what true Martyrdom is, nor prepared to
suffer for Christ, but rather to become Epicures, whose belly is their God, who
glory in their shame, etc. In abrogating and retaining of feasts, our Church
has used that liberty, which Christians have in observation of days: To
conclude we learn by many testimonies of the ancient Fathers, how Christian
solemnities may be kept, that they be not Jewish or Heathenish observations,
as when they are free from superstition, idolatry, or opinion of holiness in
the times, and when they be kept as things indifferent, wherein the Church may
use her liberty to appoint or abrogate what is best for edification, and not to
be seruilely bound to keep the^ of necessity, as you the Papists defend that
they are, Fulk. Rhemi. Gal. 4. 10.. 5. fol. 603. 604. Also we show the
Christian liberty in respecting all days alike that are not discerned by the
commandment of God. As for the doung of your festiuities, we condemn as open
idolatry by manifest texts of scripture, forbidding Gods honor to be given to
creatures, and yet the days appointed by the Church for exercise of religion
we observe, and that without superstition, Idem in Romans 14. 5.. 2. fol. 480.
Look also Reu. 1. 10.

Perkins: He reproves the Papists for dedicating many of their Holy Days to
the honor of Saints and Angels: whereas the dedication of ordinary and set
days, is a part of religious worship, he shows that it is the privilege of
God to appoint an ordinary day of rest, and to sanctify it to his own honor.
After: Indeed the Church of England observes Holy Days, but the Popish
superstition is cut off: For first, we are bound in conscience to the
observation of these days: secondly, neither do we place holiness in them:
thirdly, but we keep them only for orders sake, that men may come to the Church
to hear Gods word: fourthly and though we retain the names of Saints days,
yet we give no worship to Saints, but to God alone: fifthly, and such days as
contained nothing in them but superstition, as the Conception and Assumption of
the Virgin Mary, we have cut off. Thus does the Church observe days with us,
and no otherwise. Indeed the ignorant multitude among us fail greatly in
observing of days: For they greatly solemnize the time of the Birth of Christ,
and then they keep few or no Markets: But the Lords day is not accordingly
respected, and men will not be dissuaded from following on that day, On the
Gal. cap. 4. 10. fol. 316.

Touching sundry other Ceremonies, some used in our Church, others of much like
nature used in other reformed Churches.
THe other Ceremonies which are used in our Church, are thus by our classical
writers that have written of them, partly defended and excused.

The Ring in marriage with the words annexed, In the name of the Father, the
Son, and she holy Ghost: This albeit some learned men condemn as the outward
sign of a Popish Sacrament: yet Bucer calls it, admodum commodus ritus, a very
fit Ceremony with this condition, if it be expounded to the people what all
this may signify, which there he sets down, Bucer. Script. Anglican. in
censura cap. 20 fol. 488.

The Purification of women delivered of child, now called more appositely, The
thanksgiving for women delivered, some condemn it as Jewish, yet Bucer gives
this censure and excuse for it, Haec omnia Scripturis congruunt; This Ceremony
is agreeable to the Scriptures, with that which in the Common prayer book is
expressed; He excepteth the offering of a white garment, which is since
abolished, Bucer. ibid. cap. 24. fol. 490.

Private Communion to be given to the sick: Bullinger grants, that good men
might admit of a private Communion to be given to the sick, even in these our
days, for a time, to these which have not as yet understood the full use of
the Lords Supper: yet he would not have this liberty granted unto all,
neither they that receive it to hold it as viaticum, a necessary supply to
help them in the way to heaven Decad. 5. Sermon. 9. fol. 498. a.

Calvin allows it, if there be some company of the kindred, friends and
neighbors of the sick, that the distribution thereof may be performed
according to the institution of Christ; and withal, if the action of this
communicating be explained to the receivers, neither any different matter done
from the common practice of the Church, yet he would not have this used
commonly: He holds it valde periculosum huc and illuc promiscue defer, very
dangerous (for superstition, and ambition, or vain ostentation) to have the
Sacrament carried hither and thither, Epist. 360. fol. 625. Bucer holds it in
our Church, Scripturis satis consentanea, sufficiently agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, for the consolation of troubled consciences, if it be received as
the Lord appoints, Censura cap. 22. fol. 489. The obseruators of the harmony
of confessions, albeit they dislike the Communion of two alone, obseru. ad. 15.
Wirtemb. 6. yet they grant private Communions, upon condition that the liberty
of other Churches be reserved, wherein the Lords Supper is not administered but
in public assembly, least salvation might seem to be tied to the Sacraments,
or the Supper of the Lord to be tied to that time only, Obseruat.. 16.
Wirtemberg. 1.

Bowing the knee at the name of Jesus: Zanchius thus excuses; This name which
was before by all the Jews blasphemed: after his death his Godhead being
manifest, is adored of all, Insomuch as he is adored of all, so as all men bend
their knee at the only mention of his name. Hence I doubt not (says he) came
first this most ancient custom in the Church, that when Jesus is named all
should uncover their heads, in token of reverence and adoration: and it was
established against the Arrians and other Heretics, which affirmed Christ to
be only man. Consuetudo fuit non improbanda: sed postea versa est in
superstitionem vt multa alia pie and Sancte instituta: It was after turned into
superstition, as were sundry other godly and holy ordinances, Zauch. In Philip.
cap. 2. 10. fol. 123.

Paraeus to the question, whether the putting off the Cap to the hearing of the
name of Jesus may be proved by the scriptures answers negatiuely: In the mean
time, says he, We condemn not this Rite, if it be not esteemed as a worship
of God, but for a decent adiaphoral, and then again if such as do it not be
not condemned, Colleg. 2. cap. 31. Sect. 13. fol. 280. Master Fulke: Capping or
Kneeling at the name of Jesus, is of it self and indifferent thing, and
therefore may be used superstitiously, as in Popery, etc. It may be also sed
well, when the mind is free from superstition, in sign of reverence to his
Majesty, and as in a matter wherein Christian liberty ought to take place and
due reverence to our Savior, may be yielded without any such outward Ceremony
of Capping or Kneeling, Fulk. Rhem. on Phillip. 2. 10.. 2. fol. 628.

Witnesses at Baptism, Sponsores, commonly called Godfathers, Bucer in his
censure dislikes it not. It is used in most Churches of the world, even in
Geneua, which Calvin liked of, so that the Parents were also present, unless
urgent occasion should hinder, Epist. 302. fol. 491. Beza allowed of this
custom and asks a question thereof: Quis tandem damnare ausit? Who dares to
condemn it, unless he would be reproved, by those express words of Paul,
commanding that all things be done honestly and by order, Epist. 8. fol. 75.
to Bishop Grindall. Pet. Martyr calls it Vtile institutum, a profitable
ordinance, yet he reproves the usual negligence of such in casting off the
care of children, of whose Baptism they are the witnesses, loc. class. 4. cap.
8.. 5. fol. 822.

Private Baptism to sick and weak children, Bucer allows it, and says it
is holily proposed in our common prayer Book: He wishes that it might be
observed; especially that infants Baptism be not deferred. Whereby he
observes, that a door is opened to the Devil to bring in the contempt of the
Church, and so of our whole redemption and communion with Christ, which
prevailed greatly by the opinion of the Sect of the Anabaptists. Censur. cap.
15. fol. 481. So Calvin judges hereof, that infants may be baptized out of the
Temple, so it be done wheresoever there is numerus aliquis fidelium qui
Ecclesiae corpus efficiet, and qui baptizat pro Pastore agnoscatur; A certain
number of the faithful, which may make the body of a Church, and he which
baptizeth be acknowledged of them as their Pastor: And further, that it be not
performed in private without any witnesses at all. Epist. 185. fol. 304.

Perambulations in Rogation week: Peter Martyr, albeit he affirm to have
risen from the Heathen custom of perambulating, and could not well tell how to
give advise thereof: yet on condition that only Prayer be used unto God for
his mercy, and for the use and blessing of the fruits coming up, with
thanksgiving for his blessings on the creatures the last year; he does not
altogether condemn it as superstitious, though otherwise he wishes the
Magistrates to abolish it; Loc. com. inter Epist. fol. 1128. amico in Angliam.

Epistles and Gospels (the readings of holy Scripture so called) used in sundry
Churches, as before appears, and is so far forth approved by the
obseruators of Geneua on the Harmony of confessions, that liberty be left to
every Church of using these, or not using them, upon condition that this
dividing of the Scripture do not produce a neglect of the rest; Obseruat.. 1.
ad Bohem.

Reading of Homilies: Albeit that all learned and godly teachers do with one
consent condemn an ignorant unlearned slothful Minister, and by all means
do persuade to their uttermost endeavor in the furtherance and planting of a
Godly, learned, and painful Ministry, as Calvin. Epist. 127. fol. 124. and
Epist. 87. fol. 164. 165. Bucer. censura cap. 2. fol. 458. and cap. 7. fol.
465. and Epist. ad Cranmerum fol. 683. Idem deregno Christi lib. 1. cap. 15.
fol. 52. 62. Beza Epist. 12. fol. 95. 96. and Epist. 8. fol. 79. Hyperius de
Scriptur. lect. lib. 1. fol. 122. ad fol. 136. and Tom. 2. fol. 675. 676. 677.
678. P. Mortyr loc. inter Epist. fol. 1085. Danaeus Isag. part. 3. lib. 3. cap.
45. fol. 373. Zanch. Obseruat. ad confess. 25. fol. 66. 67. Whitaker in Epist.
dedicat. contra Paraeum, with diverse others: yet in a case of necessity Bucer
says, that it is better that godly and learned Homilies made by others should
be rehearsed or read unto the people, so long as Preachers are wanting, which
may holily and holesomely teach and exhort them, Censur. cap. 7. fol. 465. Also
in another place he commands the order used both in the Primitive times among
the Fathers, as also in England in his time of appointing Readers in the
Church, with condition, si idonei, if they be fit: if they read gravely,
religiously, clearly, and to the peoples edification: if they be de singulari
pietate commendati, of singular piety: Else he concludes Illos non esse
Ministros Christi, that they are not the Ministers of Christ, which chop and
mumble up their reading, as they cannot be understood with edification by the
people. I script. Anglican. de vi and vsu ministerij. fol. 564. 565. This
Zanchius also cites and approoueth out of Bucer. Obseruat. ad confess. cap.
25.. 10. 11. fol. 65. 66. 67.

Sundry other Ceremonies there are, partly used in our English Churches, and
partly not such, as Christ's picture, and Crucifixes, Beza colloqu. Mompelgart.
fol. 49. Heming.

Images of Saints, Beza ibid. fol. 401. Heming. ibid. fol.

Altars of stone, Beza ibid. fol. 424. 425.

Exorcismes, Heming. ibid.

Candles, Heming. ibid.

Organs, Beza ibid. fol. 410. 411. 423.

Name of Priest by the Latin word Sacerdos, Heming. ibid.

Against which Ceremonies, albeit the said Beza does by many pregnant reasons
show his dislike, yet does he and Hemingius conclude them to be things of
their own nature (adiaphora) indifferent, howsoever in use inconvenient: also
the obseruators on the harmony of confessions do mention other Ceremonies,
such as the use of Ecclesiastical discipline in Sect. 8. August. obseruat. 6.
Of Excommunication, in Sect. 10. Bohem. 3. in Sect. 11. Anglic. 1. Of
Suspe^sion, in Sect. 17. Gallic. 1. Of private Absolution, in Sect. 8. Bohem.
1. and Saxon. 1. and Wirtemberg. 1. and in Sect 11. Bohem. 8. Putting on of
hands on the head of the baptized, in Sect. 13. obseruat. 1. Imposition of
hands on the head of the Minister, in Sect. 11. Heluet. prior. obseru. 2. All
of the which they do not simply condemn, but do leave them to be done, or
not, at the liberty of every Church upon two conditions. First, that the
liberty of other Churches of different practice being kept entire not
prejudiced. Secondly, that the inconveniences of such Ceremonies be carefully
prevented.

So that we see here the unity of judgments of the godly learned to be
opposite unto the doctrine of suffering deprivation, for not using or
conforming to our inconvenient Ceremonies, or to the like.

Secondly also after the suruay of their judgment, we will take a view of
their practice also, what it has been in this respect.

In Geneua about Wafer-bread in the Lords Supper: This Church in the
reformation thereof used common bread in the Lords Supper, and had abolished
the use of the Wafer-cake, as also their fontes to be baptized in, and all
their holy days except the Lords day: Now it fell out that the Church of Berne
assembling a Synod required a restoring of these things unto the Churches of
Geneua, Calvin. Coraldus, and Farell refusing to consent unto them, or to
administer the Sacrament in such manner, they were banished thereupon the City
of Geneua, and within three days after their refusal, were deprived of the
use of their Ministry in that place, the great part commanding over the
better. Now in their absence sundry godly persons were so offended, with this
change from common bread to the Wafer-cake, as that they thought best for them
to abstain from the Lords Supper, and to separate from their Ministry, rather
then use the same with the said Wafer-bread: Whereupon Calvin. serio monuit ne
ob istud (...) litem mouerent, seriously admonished them that they would not
raise contention about this indifferent matter, which is set down in his
Epistle 17. fol. 37. 38. 39. 40. so (says Beza) the use of the Wafer-bread
took place and was established; about the which, Calvin after he was restored
to his Ministry again [Nunquam contendendum putauit, minime tamen dissimulans
quid alioqui magis esset probaturus] did not think it meet to contend, yet
not dissembling his mind what otherwise he did mean to approve. Beza in vita
Caluini anno. 1538.

In Germany, about excommunication and discipline, Bullinger: There was never
any contention about excommunication between our Church of Zuricke, and the
Church of Geneua most beloved of us, Apud Erast. de excom. fol. 365. also in
another place: In the mean space, we never condemned the Church of Geneua
which has her discipline, albeit, we have none, Ibid. fol. 350.

About the Surplesse: It being enjoined to the Ministers of Sueuia; they
utterly relinquished their Ministry rather then they would conform unto it:
this practice did Melancthon, and Pomeranus utterly dislike and persuaded the
Ministers of Marquess Albertus dominions, to conform rather then to suffer
deprivation, which they yielded unto for the most part, Consil. Melancth. part.
2. fol. 91.

About an Altar: There is a history related of two great persons, a Prince and
an Earl, the one a Lutheran, the other a reformed Protestant. The Earl
supposing that he had more jurisdiction in a certain Church then the Prince
had, commanded an Altar in the Church to be pulled down, and a table to be
erected in the place: The Lutheran Prince understanding thereof, commanded the
table to be taken down, and the Altar to be again set up: The Earl
repeated his practice the second time, so did the Prince, at last the Earl (in
a matter of that nature) let alone the Altar in the Church, and suffered the
contentious Prince to have his will, Colloqu. Mompelgart. fol. 424.

In the Low Countries, about breaking bread of Lords Supper: A certain person
was accused to the general Synod of the Low Countries, gathered at
Midleborough 1581. That he would not have the bread in Lords Supper to be cut
(as the manner is of those Churches) but would have it broken out into parts,
out of the whole loaves, the which Ceremony of breaking is doublesse the more
agreeable to the institution of Christ who brake the bread, Mat. 26. 26. and to
the analogy it had to Christ his Passion whose body was broken, 1. Cor. 11.
24. howbeit, it was demanded of the Synod, what was to be done and practiced in
this case? It was answered by the Synod, that they must remain in the received
custom of the Belgicke Churches, and if any should do against the custom,
they must be admonished to desist and leave of that their practice: In actis
Syn. inferioris Germ. partic. interrogat. numb. 76. apud Schul. Anachrys.
Hierar. l. 9.

In America: When Villagagno transported the French Coloniae into Brasil, anno
1555. under direction and protection of Gasper Colignius, Admiral of France,
there was a question on occasion moved touching the elements of the Lords
Supper, whether in defect of Wine, and so of Bread of Wheat, they might
administer the Sacrament in the Bread of Roots, and common drink of the
Americans, made also of Roots? Hereof there was difference in judgment, some
holding that it were better to abstain from the Lords Supper, then to
administer or receive it, seeing Christ mentions expressly, Mat. 26. 16. Marc.
14. 25. of the fruit of the Vine: Others on the other side thought that our
Savior speaking of Bread and Wine, mentioned them only as the common or usual
meat and drink, not as determining those very elements. To which controversy,
Joan, Lerius, the reporter that was then present, infers, Albeit (quoth he)
the greater part inclined to the latter judgment yet because there was not so
great scarcity of the things questioned, as then the controversy rested to
be determined by further judgment, yet this peaceable disputation was cause
of no kind of discord among us, who by the grace of God remained most nearly
knit in our affection, in as much as I could willingly desire and wish, that
there were so good agreement between all those which do profess the true
Christian Religion, as there was at that time among us, Joan. Lerius. Histor.
nauigat. in Brasil. cap. 6. fol. 69.

In England: About Episcopal garments and Surplesse, Bishop Hooper was a person
exceeding peremptory both in preaching against the Ceremonies (as appears in
his Sermons on Jonah, and on the Commandments, and in the objections which he
made against them to Bucer, and P. Martyr as we may perceive in their answer
to his Letter) as also in his flat refusal of them; whereupon he was by the
high Commission conuented, and for his constant refusal was imprisoned by them,
where he remained for a season. Howbeit, after his objections were by Bucer and
P. Martyr answered and by them, and by Calvin persuaded to conform, rather
then to suffer deprivation: He conformed at the last, and wore the garments;
and being appointed to preach before the King to try his conformity, he
appeared in his Bishoply Robes, namely, a white linen Rotchet, a long scarlet
Chimere, and a square Cappe, Calvin. Epist. 120. fol. 217. Bucer. in Script.
Anglican. fol. 705. de re Vestiar. Hooper. Pet. Martpr Loc. Com. ad fineminter
Epistolas, fol. 1085.

About receiving the Lords Supper with inconvenient Ceremonies, and persons in
differing doctrine: P. Martyr when he came into England first, and the opinion
of the corporal presence of Christ in the Lords Supper was in force, and when
the Ministers albeit differing from him in judgment, yet did not refuse to
admit him with open confession of contrary judgment, he joined with them, and
received the Lords Supper, Non obstantibus illorum Ceremonijs sibilicet ipsi
molestis, notwithstanding the Ceremonies, though very much troubling him. This
counsel did P. Martyr give to Vrsinus, and to other Christians in Germany
Vrsin. exercitat. lib 2. fol. 840.

About the Surplesse: M. Deering: While any law did bind me to wear Cap and
Surplesse, I did wear both; since I never persuaded any man to refuse them
etc. Register, fol. 84.

M. Greenham: Albeit he affirm that he neither could, nor would wear the
apparel, no, not so far as he thought it might be observed, Register. fol.
87. yet from the objection from authority, namely, that Bucer, Martyr,
Bullinger, Beza, and Gualter, do think rather that these inconveniences
should be borne withal for a time, then the Flock should be left to
Woolues, sure (says he) this reason is maine enough of it self, if it were
not authorized with these learned and godly men's writings; And I pray to God
the Father of Jesus Christ, by his holy Spirit, to move others to be as
unwilling to use it, (i.) to suffer their flocks by deprivation for the
Ceremonies to be left to Woolues, as I am unwilling to answer it, and have it
practiced on me. I will not answer therefore this reason until there be no
remedy, Regist. fol. 90.

The judgment and practice of Bishop Jewel, Doctor Whitaker and Doctor Fulke,
is known this way.

Doctor Humfrey: Albeit it be known that he was a great adversary in his
judgment and long practice of refusal of the Surplesse, as appears in a
letter of his written of that thing; yet he did at the last conform unto the
Surplesse.

The like of late we know did Doctor Reinolds, Doctor Sparks, Doctor
Chaloner, Doctor Ayray, Master Chaderton, Master Knewstub, though they stood
out and testified their dislike against sundry of the Ceremonies established,
yet did they in case of deprivation yield unto them, and conform, and
studiously persuaded others in this case unto this practice: The like did many
other very godly and learned men at diverse times and in diverse places. Thus we
see their practice also.

Thirdly, there comes to be considered the reasons moving these persons to
this judgment and practice, namely, wherefore they persuade and practiced
conformity to prevent deprivation or the Churches desolation, viz.

Because these ceremonies, seeing they are (adiaphora) indifferent, they make
no man in themselves godly or ungodly, Martyr amico loc. fol. 1085. And
therefore albeit it were granted that these Ceremonies were not fit to be
used: Yet if other things which are prescribed by Gods Word do remain entire,
these things may well be thought neither impious nor pernicious per sese aut
sua natura, of themselves, or of their nwne nature, Idem Hoopero loc. f. 1088.

Because, where the doctrine it self is sound and pure, and the Ceremonies
used to a civil honesty and decency, the inconveniences are rather to be
passed by in silence, then that by occasion of them men should proceed to
contentions and more grievous tumults, Calvin. Epist. 303. fol. 497.

Because, albeit these things be not to be approved, yet, sometimes these
indifferent things, howsoever offensive and burdensome, are to be borne
withal, so far forth (quoad aliter non liceat) as conveniently we cannot do
otherwise, lest if men contend about them more bitterly then they ought, it be
both an hinderance to the progress of the Gospel, and the things which in
their own nature are indifferent, be taught by our vehement contention to be
plainly wicked; which two points do bring with them most grievous
inconveniences, P. Martyr. Hooper. loc. com. f. 1086. And therefore these
things which the Pastors cannot change, they should rather bear withal, then
by forsaking the Church for that cause they should give occasion for far
greater and more dangerous mischifes unto Satan, who seeks nothing else, Beza
Epist. 12. fol. 99.

Because it is better to use these Ceremonies (he mentions a Surplesse) as a
thing indifferent, then by the obstinate refusal thereof to raise up Schism,
and to interrupt the course of the doctrine of truth and to give occasion to
Heretics to possess the Church, Polan. in Ezec. 44. fol. 807.

Because such is the example of Paul, who circumcised Timothy for the Jews, in
that they all knew his father to be a Grecian, Act. 16. 3. Idem Ibid.

Because we must give place unto the sway of the times wherein we live, so
far forth as may stand with keeping faith and a good conscience, Act. 28. 11.
and 19. 10. 26. and 15. 28. 29. Master Perkins cases of Consc. lib. 3. cap. 2.
fol. 483.

Because, if we cannot do the good that most we desire, in such exquisite
manner as we would, we must content our selves with the mean, and in things
which are good and to be done, it is the safest course to satisfy our selves
in doing the less, lest in ventring to do the more, which cannot be, we grow
to the extremity, and so fail to offend in our action, Eccles. 7. 16. read
the proofs, Perkins cases of Consc. lib. 3. cap. 2. fol. 484. 485. 486.

Because it may be thought expedient, that these things for a time be borne
withal; for it may perhaps produce this effect, that these contentions may be
avoided, by the which contentions there is great peril, lest greater and far
more important benefits be hindered; and lest the minds of men be at the
first beginning turned from the Gospel, as we see it come to pass, Martyr.
ibid. fol. 1085.

Because, if the parity of Doctrine and of Faith do remain entire, the
Pastors may openly teach and press unto their flocks such doctrine as may
serve to take away offenses arising by the use of these Ceremonies, Beza Epist.
12. fol. 99.

Because, if we preach and teach indifferent things to be impious, we shall
so alienate men's minds from us, that they will no longer endure to be
attentive and patient hearers of sound doctrine, and of necessary instructions,
P. Martyr ib. fol. 1086. Hoopero.

Because it is far better to contend about greater matters, in which the
evidence of truth may convince the Papists and other our adversaries, then to
wrangle or braule about a Surplesse or the like thing, where wise men cry out
upon us, that with peevish way wardnesse and obstinacy we cross our gouerners,
and nourish dissentions, Melancth. council. part. 2. fol. 91.

Because the sinew and principal members of Antichrist should first of all be
studiously oppugned [such as an unlearned Ministry, slackned discipline, etc.]
The which things, if all of us on either side did uniformly with united force
and endeavors set upon, the abuses of Surplesses and of all other inconvenient
things would easily be abolished, and all the marks and shadows of Antichrist
would vanish: Elsevaine will be the labor of driving or expelling Antichrists
relics and shadows from the Church, Bucer script. Anglican. Hoopro fol. 706.
For if we did suffer the Gospel first of all to be spread abroad to take deep
rooting, perhaps men would better and more easily be persuaded that they might
remove these external inconvenient shows and Ceremonies, like as a sick man
lusting after some small trifling meats, which, after he is well again,
does voluntarily renounce as unfit. Wherefore let England be first diligently
instructed, and confirmed in the chief and most necessary perils of Religion,
and so afterward in my judgment the Church shall not much be offended to have
these things somewhat superfluous to be removed, P. Martyr loc. fol. 1086.
Hoopero.

Because if some things in their nature indifferent be imposed it is not meet
too egerly to contend about such matters; especially when as we see those
Magistrates by whom the light of the Gospel is much furthered in England, and
by whose authority it may much more be furthered, to oppose themselves against
us. Peter Martyr ibid. fol. 1085. Hoopero.

Because, whereas the Ministers are willing to reform abuses, and the
Magistrate is peremptory and resolute, not to reform for some reasons of
policy, the Minister in that case is not to leave his ministry, or to trouble
the Church, intempestiuis clamoribus, or to contest or contend with the
magistrate: The reason is, because this course tends to the overthrow of the
Church, and is opposite to that charity which he owes unto Christ and to his
church, out of which ground and rule he ought to preach, and to hold on in the
course of his ministry. He ought indeed to teach publicly and privately (as
the matter requires) what is to be done, but this he must perform without
sedition and troubling of the Church; but peaceably and discreetly. Charity
will inform the Pastor, if he love the Church indeed, how he ought in these
cases to behave himself, Zanch. in Philip. 1. fol. 45. Look also, Musculus
loc. part. 2. de tradit.. 6. fol. 31.

Because the Apostles in this case being guided by the rule of love, did at the
instant request of the Jews, inioyne the Brethren, and the Churches which were
gathered out of Gentilisme, to abstain from strangled meat and blood; and
chose rather to burden them for a season with the observation of these things
which sauoured of Jewish superstition. Also by the same rule of love was Paul
led whenas he came into the Temple with those four Jews which had a vow upon
them, and purified himself with them. Yet these Rites of those times were
(Stipulae cum fundamento Christo non co^gruentes) Stubble not agreeing with
Christ the foundation: But the edification of the Church required this thing.
Wherefore many things are to be tolerated by the Ministers, that the peace of
Churches be not rent, and that Schisms may be avoided, so that they be not
such things, or doctrines which do fight with the foundation and do heave at
it, Zanch. ibid.

Because if Pastors cannot reform all things which need amendment, according
to their desire, they must not therefore cast away their Ministry, or trouble
the whole Church with an unusual asperity. The reason: Because all godly
ground and form of Ecclesiastical discipline ought ever to have respect and
have reference to the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; which the
Apostle commanded to be kept by serving one another; and which rule not being
kept, the medicine of discipline grows to be superfluous, and pernicious. It
is confessed, that Pastors ought with their uttermost endeavors to labor, that
there remain no corruption in the Church: but they must use that wisdom which
our Savior prescribes, lest by plucking up the tares, they hurt the good
corn. Wherefore the precept of the Apostle of separating the evil, (or of
mending corruption) must by no means be neglected, cum sine periculo violandae
pacis fieri potest, when it may be done without the danger of violation of the
Churches peace: for else he would not have it done. Calvin. instit. 4. 12..
11. 13.

Because the charge of preaching the word of God is an absolute commandment of
the Lord; and it is so necessary for him that is called thereunto, that a woe
hangs on his head if he do not preach it: It ought not to be laid aside for
a simple inconvenience, or uncomeliness of a thing, which in its own nature is
indifferent; such as the Surplesse is, whereof he speaks, or the like
Ceremonies, Master Cartwright in the rest of the 2. reply, fol. 262. 263.

Because when two commandments of the moral Law are opposite in respect of
us, so as we cannot do them both at the same time; then the lesser
commandment (as avoiding inconvenient Ceremonies) gives place to the greater,
(such as preaching of the Word) and does not bind for that instant, Master
Perkins in his Treatise of conscience, cap. 2. fol. 14. 15.

Because it is evident that Jesus Christ our Lord did only prescribe the
substance of the Ministry both of the Word and Sacraments in his own words;
and all other things which appertain to the decent and profitable
administration of his mysteries he has left and admitted to be ordered by his
Church: Hence we celebrate the Lords Supper, neither in the evening, neither
in a private house, neither leaning, neither yet with men only. Now who would
condemn the Church, if by a pure and holy consent of the members thereof, it
should be the custom that every communicant (as in the Primitive Church the
new baptized did) should wear a white garment? Bucer. Script. Anglican. fol.
708. Hoopero. so also he argues in his Epistle to Io. Alasco: Christ no where
has forbidden such a use of them, as we have expounded, namely of Ceremonies
significatiue ordained by the Church, not superstitiously, but purely used.
This argument also has Zanch. de redempt. cap. 16. fol. 445. a. There is a
great question (says he) in these our days about Ministerial garments:
surely we read not that Christ and his Apostles did appoint any thing of this
matter; neither that they changed their garments, either when they baptized, or
when they administerd the Lords Supper, but neither did they forbid, that men
might not take other garments. Wherefore it is (liberum perse) a matter free in
it self to use or not to use other garments in the administration of the
Sacraments.

Because, if true Christians, having the pure doctrine of Christ and discipline
in their Churches, should enioine some special garment though abused by the
Papists, for the commendation of the Ministry to the simple people, there is
no Scripture forbidding a man to leave such Christians to their judgment: But
there are sundry Scriptures clearly teaching a man why he should leave them to
this their practice, as Romans 14. 1. Cor. 8. and 9. and many other places,
namely, wheresoever we are taught of the liberty and good use of the
creatures, not of meats only, but of all creatures else. He gives instance
of a white garment used on the Baptized or Communicants of the Lords Supper,
Bucer. Script. Anglican. fol. 708. Hoopero.

Because they which defend these things, may pretend some honest and just
signification, not strange from the Scriptures: As, [touching the Surplesse]
the Ministers of the Church are Angels, Mal. 3. 1. and the Angels always for
the most part appeared as apparelled in White garments, Pet. Martyr. loc. fol.
1085. Hoopero. Bucer will have them signify (Caeleste^ puritatem and candore^,
omniumque virtutu^ ornatu^) heavenly purity and sincerity, and the ornament
of all virtues, Script. Angl. fol. 682. so also fol. 707. 709. Again, What
should let, but that the Churches may use this white Vesture, or more Vestures,
to monish us precisely of that divine benefit, of the light and dignity of the
heavenly doctrine, which he gives us by the holy Ministry, and by the which
the Ministers themselves may be the more mindful of their office etc. Bucer in
his Epistle to Io. Alasco, at the end of the examination. This reason also has
Zanch. Albeit a garment be a free thing, says he, and numbered up among matters
indifferent; yet for signification, a linen garment were more decent then a
woollen for a Minister to use in administering the Sacraments, for that it is
the Impresse, or type of innocence and holiness; Hence in the Apocalypse white
garments are given to the Saints, Zanch. de redempt. cap. 16. fol. 445. a.

Because these Ceremonies are ancient, and have some good use, it was an old
custom in the Church, that such as administered the Sacraments, should wear a
white linen garment, Zanch. ibid. ex Hieron. cont. Pelag. li. 1. The sign of
the Cross is vetustissima, very ancient, Beza Epi. 8. fol. 75. There was
therefore some use thereof, though since it has bin horribly abused, and there be
small profit thereof, Bez. Ep. 12. fol. 99. Kneeling at the Communion has a
show indeed of godly and Christian reverence, and therefore might heretofore
have been used (cum fructu) with some profit, ibid. fol. 100.

Because if we proceed to dissuade from these indifferent things, as from
pernicious and evil things, we shall thereby condemn very many Churches, not
disagreeing from the Gospel; and shall tax too bitterly innumerable Churches,
which have ever, and are of old celebrated, as most commendable and approved,
P. Mart. loc. fol. 1086. Hoopero. If agreement in doctrine might be procured
between the Saxon or Lutheran Churches and ours, there would be no separation
made for Surplesses, or Ceremonies of the like nature, ib fol. 1127. Bucer has
also this reason; If there be no liberty granted to the Churches, of ordeining
Ceremonies about the Lords Supper, whereof they have not the express
commandment of Christ; By this means will all Churches be condemned (impiae
audaciae) of impious boldness: For all Churches do observe in the Supper of
the Lord, such a time, place, and habit or site of body, and besides do admit
women to the Communion; of all which things they have not only no commandment
of the Lord, but they have also his contrary example; For our Lord did
celebrate his Supper at night not in the morning; in a private house, not in a
public; leaning with his Apostles and after the receiving of the Pascall lamb
notwithstanding: Also, he admitted not the women, among whom he had sundry his
most holy Disciples, Bucer. Scrip. Anglic. fol. 807. 809. To this reason Pet.
Martyr moves an objection. The Church authority present or past, ought not to
be of that force, that the truth of Gods Word be thereby wronged; which (albeit
the world do fall about our ears in pieces) ought to be kept inviolable. It is
true (sed propter (...)) but for things indifrent, I am resolute, that by no
means we may admit that either Churches should be condemned, or that we
should less reverently or honestly speak of them, Ibid. fol. 1086.

Because we must take heed, lest these things which be of less importance
through our contention, may be the means or occasions that those things which
should be esteemed of greater force and value, either cannot at all be brought
unto the Church, or if they be once brought in they cannot be established with
continuance, Peter Martyr ibid. 1086.

Because we must take heed of Satan's accustomed sleights, whereby he leads us
away from the care of necessary things, to the immoderate carfulness of those
things which may well be let pass, and from searching out of the true doctrine
of Christ, to induce us to those things wherein few can consent alike: and
finally, by the which he kindles in diverse men a zeal to purge those things
which are without us, thereby to neglect our inward deformities, Bucer. Epist.
ad Joan. Alasco. After at the end of that Epistle, This coulorable craft of
Satan must be taken heed of, by which often he effects this, that we reckon
those things sins which are no sins, and those that be sins indeed, we
seem not to regard them in our selves, or else against those sins which our
consciences define to be sins indeed, we use no such severity as we ought.

Because we should in this Realm take most godly heedfulnesse that we further
not unawares the Devils intents, who throws in among us sundry questions and
controversies, least we should take in hand to handle the question of setting
forward the doctrine of the Gospel, and restoring of discipline, and thereby to
remove all drones from Ecclesiastical Ministeries, Bucer. in Ep. Io. Alascco.

Because things in themselves otherwise indifferent, do after a sort change or
alter their nature, when as by any command of lawful authority, they be either
commanded or forbidden: because they may not be omitted contrary to a just
commandment, if they be commanded, neither may they be done against a
prohibition if they be forbidden, as appears by the Law Ceremonial, Bez.
Epist. 24. fol. 143.

Because there is some burdensome servitude in every Church, in some more
mild, in others more hard and the sorrows of such servitude and burdens
should be comforted by the Brethren, and not increased by their condemnation so
long as the foundation is retained, Melancht. consil. part. 2. fol. 92.

Because concord and mutual love must by Brethren be defended, lest invocation
in themselves, or in the people be interrupted, and lest lamentable and
pernicious doubts be produced from questions not necessary, as of old time it
did about Easter; they who have their Christian liberty less restrained
should give God thanks and use the same godly, for the illustration of
doctrine, and not for that cause to slacken the raines of discipline the more:
others in more burden some servitude should acknowledge themselves to be
corrected of God, and let them not suffer the true worship of God to be
corrupted, as it is written, All this has come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, Melancht. consil part 2. fol. 92. And so much of the reasons
moving these persons to this judgment and practice of admitting rather
inconvenient ceremonies then to suffer deprivation, or the overthrow of the
Church.

Fourthly and lastly, we will observe such objections, as have been made
against this doctrine and practice, which have by them the said excellent
persons and pillars of Christ his Church been answered and resolved.



Melancht. As it is with a Pilote of a ship, which must take that way, and
run such a course, not which he knows to be most right, but which the
winds do permit unto him: so we when we could by no means hinder the
greater, it was sufficient to admit the lesser, Consil. part. 1. fol. 76.

2 Zanchius: I approve not their intemperancy, which do nothing unless it be
tumultuously, and which have more mind to tear and rend through all things,
then discreetly and advisedly to vnrippe them, Compend. loc. 14. de Scandalo.
fol. 6. 15. taken out of Calvin. Institut. 3. 19. 13.

3 Illyricus: That Medicall and political rule here takes very good place,
[omnis mutatio periculosa] That all kinds of alterations are not without some
peril: For alteration of Ceremonies cannot easily be made without offense
unto the weak, nor without an imputation or aspersion of leuity, or of
ambition with the more wise, Clau. script. part. 1. fol. 33. verbo adiaph.

4 Zepperus de Sacramentis cap. 13. fol. 324. 325. 326. 228.

1 The furious clamors and persecutions of the Papists did not permit this
reformation of Ceremonies at the first: which were so violent and bloody, that
it gave small or no leisure to the teachers and lights of the Church, neither
was it safe for them to bend their care or cogitations this way.

2 The people were so drowned in the deep darkness and Idolatry of the
Papacy, that the amendment of Ceremonies, and of external worship could not in
those beginnings be undertaken. It was necessary to use doctrine, and to
instruct the people of sundry and horrible errors, Idolatry, Superstitions, and
abuses, which the whole Papacy and Popish ceremonies have in their departure,
that so all those ougly things might first be removed out of their minds,
before they were removed from their sight. That which is not the work of one
year, but a task of long season: For as Ceremonies which are visible things,
and apprehended by the eyes, do more affect and move then the invisible
doctrine; So the people did closely stick to their accustomed Ceremonies, and
opposed themselves vehemently against the reformation of them: Even as we see
at this day to come to pass, when as yet sound doctrine has prevailed and
flourished for above these 80. years.

3. The Church in Popery was nothing else but a sick body: In which from the
sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there was nothing sound and
entire: Wherefore at the first beginning of reformation, that whole chaos and
abomination of error, and of Popish Idolatry could not suddenly be perceived,
but use and experience did daily manifest and teach every day more, then at the
first.

Hooper:] Your ceremonies are humane inventions, and man's Traditions about Gods
worship, and are spoken against, Matt. 15. Col. 2.

P. Martyr:] 1 All humane inventions about Gods service are not presently to
be condemned: for it was an humane invention, that we should rather receive
the Lords Supper in the Morning, then after dinner. So it was an humane
invention, that the price of the things sold in the Primitive Church, should be
laid at the Apostles feet.

2 I confess with you, that these ceremonies (such as the Surplesse) are
humane inventions, and of themselves they do not edify: Howbeit, to some it
may be thought expedient that they be borne with for a season: for it may
bring this to pass, that by these contentions there is great danger, lest
greater good fruit, and more rich commodity will be hindered, and that the
minds of men be suddenly turned from the Gospel; the experience whereof, we
have seen heretofore, Loc. com. inter Epistolas Hoopero. fol. 1087.

Bucer:] 1 Whatsoever Scripture you allege against humane Traditions, that
altogether you know to be understood only of those things, whereby men will by
these things offer worship unto God, and that also by letting pass the
Commandments of God.

2 To the place of Matt. 15. Even you B b. Hooper had rather receive your meat
with your hands washed, then with your hands unwashed, (as the Pharisees did.)
To Col. 2. Whatsoever is spoken there of beggarly and weak elements
appertains to superstition: by which superstition these things were exacted
as matters necessary or profitable to salvation, even after Christ was
revealed: And whatsoever abuse there be of these garments, (or the like
Ceremonies) that sticks not on the garments, but in impure minds.





1. Beza: There is a twofold opinion concerning the reformation of Churches,
some hold that nothing at all should be added to Apostolical simplicity, and
by consequence are of mind, that whatsoever the Apostles did, they think they
are to do it, but whatsoever the Church after the Apostles did add to the
first rites, they think them fit even all at once to be abolished: There are
others on the other side, which hold that certain ancient rites (besides the
Apostolical ordinances) are to be retained, partly as profitable and
necessary: partly also albeit not necessary, yet to be tolerated for concord
sakes. For mine own part I doubt not, but the Apostolical doctrine to be
most absolutely perfect without all exception, to the which it is not lawful
to add, or to detract any thing, howbeit, touching Ceremonies my judgment is
otherwise. For first, it is certain that even the Apostles themselves, could
not determinately set down, what they judged to be expedient for the Churches
in their first beginning: and therefore necessarily they proceeded by little
and little, as the institution of Deacons does make evident, in as much as
they suffered, for a season many Jewish Ceremonies, as appears in the story
of their acts: again, to whom can it b^e doubtful, that the Apostles had
exceeding regard unto their times, places, and persons in external rites. In
as much as it is not profitable, that the same rites were observed every where,
as appears in that excellent Epistle of Irenaeus to Victor; besides necessity
it self abolished certain of their ordinances, as their common feasts of
love. Wherefore whatsoever was performed by the Apostles in rites and
Ceremonies, I do not judge that presently, neither yet without some exception,
to be followed as a rule. And indeed I wonder not that those ancient Fathers,
having respect unto their own times, did take away some things, some things
add, and some what alter. Only herein (with their good leave be it spoken)
they seem to me to have often failed, that they neither held any measure in
their rites, neither had that due regard to Christian simplicity and purity,
as was meet, Epist. 8. fol. 70. 71.

2. Bucer: If there be no liberty granted to the Churches, of ordaining
Ceremonies about the Lords Supper, whereof they have not the express
commandment of Christ, by this means will all Churches be condemned (impiae
audaciae) of most impious boldness. For all Churches do observe in the Supper
of the Lord, such a time, place, and habit, or site of body; and besides do
admit women to the Communion, of all which things they have not only no
commandment, but they have also his contrary example: for our Lord did
celebrate his Supper at night, not in the morning in a private house, not in a
public, leaning on his side, (and after the receiving of the Paschall lamb)
not standing; also he admitted not the women, sundry of whom he had for his
most holy disciples, Bucer. Script. Anglican. fol. 708. 789.

3. Calvin: Forasmuch as our Lord has both faithfully comprehended, and
clearly declared in the holy Scriptures, the whole sum of true
righteousness, and all the parts of his worship, and whatsoever was needful
to salvation therefore [in his solus magister audiendus est] in these things
the Master, Christ, is only to be hearkened unto: Howbeit, because he would
not particularly prescribe what we ought to follow or practice [in externa
disciplina and ceremonijs] in external discipline and ceremonies: For that he
foresaw that these things did depend upon the condition of the times, neither
did he judge one form to be agreeing to all ages: Therefore here we are to
have recourse unto the general rules which he has left and given, that
whatsoever the necessity of the Church for matter of order and decency shall
require, may be determined by these rules, Instit. 4. 10. 30.

4. Zanchius: If any thing be altered or added, which is not commanded of God
being not essential, but accidental, and not as necessary, but as
indifferent, appertaining to decency, or to order, or to edification; we
cannot hence conclude, that any thing is altered of the appointed worship, or
that there is another worship erected. As for example, Christ performed his
Supper at night. The Apostles were wont to perform it also in the morning, and
the Church followed afterward this time: Should a man hereupon say, that any
thing is derogated from the Supper of the Lord? surely no; because Christ
commanded not the same to be celebrated in the night, as himself observed it,
but only (hoc facite) that we should do that (for the matter or substance)
which he did, but not at that time wherein he did it. Also to that the Primitive
Church (as appears in Justinius Martyr) did mingle Water with the Wine in the
Lords Supper; it is not a sufficient ground to say they altered or changed the
institution of the Lords Supper, and that for two reasons; One, because it may
be that the Wine which Christ Jesus gave to his Disciples was mingled with
water, seeing the Apostles do not report the contrary and it is probable, that
the Primitive Church might receive this from the Apostles: Another reason is,
because the Primitive church did not add water as a matter altogether
necessary, and so as appertaining to the substance of the Lords Supper, but
only to signify a mystery; but if any did commend it as necessary, they did
undoubtedly deprave the Lords Supper. But they much more, who used only water
in the Lords Supper, as the Aquarij did, against whom Cyprian did write: for it
is evident, that Christ our Savior used wine, and commanded that we also
should do the like. To this add, in that the ancient Bishops in the
celebration of the Lords Supper, did put on another garment, then that they
usually did wear, appertains nothing to the alteration of the Lords Supper:
For Christ commanded not that we should celebrate his Supper with our usual
garments, as he did, but only that we should do that which he did himself.
The like may be affirmed of sundry other things, as well in Baptism, as in
the Supper of the Lord. The sum of all is this: Such things as are added, but
yet as matters indifferent, for order, for decency, and to edification; such
matters do not change the substance of the Sacraments, and therefore alter not
the worship. But such things as are taken from the institution of Christ, or
else are added as necessary, and appertaining to the substance, those things do
corrupt the institution of the Lord, and so do establish another kind of
worship. To this kind of addition appertain the places of forbidding to add to
Gods word, Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 2. Note that which he there says, Ye shall not add
to the Word which I command you: The Word of the Lord is necessary, it tyeth
the conscience, and delivers the substance of the Worship, and has nothing
adiaphorall or indifferent therein: wherefore to add unto the Word, is to
ordain or appoint in Gods worship some thing as necessary, and as appertaining
to the essence or worship of God, and which does so bind men's consciences,
even as the Word of God it self; wherefore he adds not unto the Word of God,
which by the consent of the Church ordains any thing, not as necessary, but
as indifferent, and free for order only, or for decency, and unto
edification, not binding the conscience of any by such an ordinance, Zanch. de
redempt. cap. 19. fol. 447.

Hooper:] Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23.

P. Martyr:] This I acknowledge with you to be most true, hobeit that we may
have a quiet conscience in our actions, that chiefly seems to conduce which
is written by the Apostle unto Titus, All things are clean unto the clean,
And unto Timothy, Every creature of God is good: But it is not necessarily
required, that we have an express mention of every particular and singular
thing which we use to do: This is sufficient in general, to know by faith
that indifferent things cannot defile those which use them with a sincere mind
and conscience, Loc. com. inter Epist. fol. 1088. Hooper.

Hooper:] These Ceremonies are Aaronicall and Jewish, an imitation of the
Aaronicall Priesthood, and therefore ought to be eschewed of all that love
Christ.

Bucer:] 1. Though I admit your antecedent, yet your conclusion follows not,
for to imitate Aarons Ceremonies is not of it self vicious: but only when men
use them as necessary to salvation, or to signify that Christ is yet for to
come to take flesh upon him, Epist. ad Joan. Alasco. Nothing can truly be said
to appertain to the Priesthood of Aaron so far forth as it is abolished, but
that which is used with such like superstition as if it were now (after Christ
revealed) needful to salvation, or profitable of it self, or whereby some
occasion is given to a man to assume or to retain this superstition with
himself, or of troubling the peace and quiet of Brethren, Idem Script.
Anglican. fol. 707. Hoopero.

2 For a Rite or Ceremony to be Aaronicall, adheareth or sticks not to any of
the creatures of God in no garment, in no figure, in no color, in no work of
God: But in the mind and profession of such as abuse the good creatures of God
to impious signification, idem ibid.

3 If by no means it be lawful to use those things which were of Aarons
Priesthood or of the Gentiles; Then it is not lawful for us to have Churches
nor holy days: For there is no express commandment by word in the holy
Scriptures of these things. It is gathered notwithstanding from the example of
the old people, that they are profitable for us to the increase of godliness,
which thing also experience proves, Idem ad Joan. Alasco.

Petre Martyr: In the Law or Priesthood of Aaron there were 1. Sacraments,
whereby it pleased God to confirm and seal the promises of Christ to come,
all which I know are abolished and that we must believe that Christ is already
given, not to be given: And seeing other seals of Gods promises are under the
Gospel given by our Lord himself, namely, Bread and Wine; we ought not to
recall the antiquated signs. 2 Howbeit, there were some actions in the Law of
that nature, that properly they may not be said to be Sacraments: For they made
to decency, to order and some benefit* which I do judge may be recalled and
retained as agreeable to the light of nature, and furthering some profit to our
selves: Who knows not that the Apostles for the peace and more comfortable
conuersing of believers, did command the Gentiles that they should abstain
from blood and strangled? Those things were out of question Aaronicall, if you
will comprehend all things generally which were in the Law. Further, no man is
ignorant that Tithes are enjoined in innumerable places for the maintenance of
Ministers: besides* if I might more diligently search and consider, as the time
now will not permit me, I could find out not a few things which our Church
has borrowed out of the law of Moses, and that from the first beginning of the
Church: And that I may not omit this one thing we have the festival days in
memorial of our Lord, Resurrection, Nativity, Pentecost, and death of Christ;
shall all these things be abolished because they be shadows of the old Law?
By these things I suppose you see (B b. Hooper) that all things appertaining to
the Aaronicall Priesthood are not so abolished, as that nothing thereof either
may be retained, or used by us. Martyr. loc. inter Epist. Hoopero. fol. 1087.

Hooper:] These Ceremonies were of Antichrists invention.

Bucer:] The use of such garments (as the Surplesse, were used Godly by the
holy Fathers, before the Pope became to be the Romish Antichrist, Script.
Anglic. fol. 682. Cranmero.

Martyr: I cannot easily grant that the diversity of garments had their
original from the Pope, seeing we read in the Ecclesiastical History, that
John the Evangelist ware Petalum, seu Lamina Pontificalis, a kind of garment
proper to a Minister or B b. and Pontius the Deacon witnesses of Cyprian the
Martyr, that when as he was to be beheaded, he gave his garment (named Birrus)
to the executioners: His garment called Dalmatica he gave to the Deacons, and
stood in his linen garments. And Christians when they were converted unto
Christ, did as the Fathers witness, change their garment, and for a gown did
put on a cloak: For the which when they were mocked of the Heathen, Tertullian
wrote a most learned book (de Pallio) of the cloak. Besides, Chrysostom
makes mention of the white garment of the Ministers of the Church; Neither do
I think that you (B b. Hooper) are ignorant, that there was given a
Whitegarment unto those that were admitted unto the Church by Baptism.
Wherefore it is clear that there were some differences of vestures before the
tyranny of the Pope was in force. But admit these things to The like answer
and allegations do Bullenger and Gualt. give to the sam objection: Look
Whitgifts defense. fol. 268.
be the Popes inventions, I cannot persuade my self, that the impiety of the
Papacy is so great that whatsoever it touches, it makes so polluted and
defiled, as that the use of such things may not be granted to good and Godly
persons. Martyr. Hoopero fol. 1087. Look more for answer hereto, in the
answer to the next objection.

Hooper:] These things abused by Antichrist, are so defiled, that they may not
be permitted to any Church howsoever, knowing and worshipping Christ, and
acquainted with her liberty of all things.

Bucer:] Surely I make great conscience to say thus much: For 1. I see no
Scripture whereby I may defend it. 2. The Scripture does every where preach,
that every creature of God is good unto the good; that is, to such as do
truly believe in Christ, and do godly use his creatures: And that this
creature of God is good, not only in natural effects, as bread is good in the
effects of feeding and strengthening our bodies, and wine in the effects of
drinking and heating us, but also it is good in diverse significations and
admonitions: For godly men do stir up and nourish in themselves the
remembrance and consideration of many of Gods benefits from every thing which
is a creature of God. From hence are those things in the Psalms, and in the
Songs of the Saints concerning the praise and celebration of Gods Name, to the
which all the works of God do inuit them. 3. What Scripture teaches, that
there is such power given to the Devil, or to evil men, that by their abuse
they can make any creature of God which is good in it self, and good also in
signification and admonition, to be in it self evil and impious? 4. Nothing
can be said to be a rite of Antichristianisme, but such whereby some profession
of, and communication with Antichrist is exercised, or whereby such profession
and communion is furthered, Script. Anglic. fol. 707. Hoopero.

Peter Martyr] By this which you allege I see not how it may be firmly
concluded, that we may use nothing which is usually done in Popery, surely we
must beware, lest we oppress the Church of Christ, with too much servitude or
bondage, that namely it have liberty to use nothing which appertains to the
Pope. Surely our ancestors (in the Primitive times) took the Idol Temples,
and converted them into sacred houses, in the which Christ may be worshipped:
and the revenues which were consecrated to the Gods of the heathen, to stage
plays and Vestall Nuns, they translated for the maintenance of the Ministers
of the Church, when as these things did not only serve Antichrist, but even the
devil. Further the verses of Poets, which were consecrated to the Muses, and
to diverse of their Gods, or used in Plays acted on stages to appease their
Gods (forsooth) the Ecclesiastical writers used such of them as were fit,
comely and true, and that by the example of the Apostle, which did not disdain
to cite Menander, Aratus, and Epimenides, and that in the very body of the
divine Scripture which he delivered; and those words which were otherwise
profane, he fitted and applied (diuino cultui) to the service or worship of
God: unless perhaps ye will say, that the words of Paul, which are written and
set down in the holy letters, do less serve to the worship of God, then the
visible words which are used in the Sacraments. Besides who knows not that
wine was consecrated to Bacchus, bread to Ceres, water to Neptune, oil to
Minerua, letters to Mercury, songs to the Muses or Apollo, and sundry other
matters of this nature you may find in Turtullian (de corona militis) who
there is most of all in this argument: Al which things notwithstanding we are
not afraid to use freely, as well in holy as profane uses, albeit, they have
been dedicated to devils, or to Idols (look more in the former objection, and
in that which follows) Loc. com. fol. 1087. Hoopero.

Hooper.] These Ceremonies ars notes of Antichrist, and they that communicate
with them, do communicate with Antichrist.

Bucer.] 1. For any thing to be a note of Antichrist, is not in the nature of
any creature in it self (for to that end nothing was made of God) But it
hangs altogether of consenting to Antichrists religion, and the professing
thereof: The which consent and profession being changed into the consent and
profession of Christianity, there can stick in the things themselves, no note
or mark of Antichrists religion. The use of Bells was a mark of
Antichristianity in our Churches, when the people by them were called to
Masses, and when they were rung against Tempests: Now they are a token of
Christianity, when the people by them are gathered together to the Gospel of
Christ, and other holy actions, why may it not then be, that the self same
garment (or other like Ceremony) may serve Godly with Godly men, that was of
wicked signification with the ungodly. Justinius Martyr, and Tertullian make
mention, what let is there why we may not use the same Ceremonies also?



made for man, and not man for the Sabbath; and all hings are pure to the pure,
and every creature o^ God is good, nor can be defiled to good men, by the abuse
of evil men: The word of God must be followed in all respects, as well in our
private actions as public: For all things are to be done in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and to the glory of God. Then such liberty as we grant unto our
selves in our private use of external things, let us not deny in public,
Bucer. Epist. Joan. Alasco.

Hemingius] Some are offended with our Ceremonies, which they exclaim to be
Papisticall. They say, we in the Denmark Churches have Priests, Altars,
Surplesses, Candles, Images, Exorcismes, Signings with the Cross, plainly
after the Papistical manner. To these I answer, that the true Church is to be
distinguished from the false, by doctrine and worship, not by Ceremonies which
are (per se adiaphora) in their own nature indifferent; neither do we judge
indifferent Ceremonies of so great moment, as that for them Schisms should be
raised in the Church. Let the sincerity of Doctrine be retained, and the pure
Worship of God; let other things serve partly for public peace, partly for the
weakness of men; and let us leave these things to the wisdom of our
governors, and let them determine of these matters, Syntag. ad 4. leg. decal..
33. 34. fol. 365.

Hooper] If ye grant so great liberty to Churches, as that they may use all
things for holy significations and instructions, we shall open a window to let
in all manner of abuses, Jewish, Gentilish, Antichristian, yea, Holy water,
Censing, and innumerable matters of that kind.

Bucer] This inconvenience need not to be feared at all: For the Churches
which I have described, and to the which I judge that liberty, whereof I
speak, cannot be denied, will so temper whatsoever Rites or garments, which
they assume for their use, that they may serve to illustrate, and not obscure
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, Script. Angli. fol. 709. Hoopero.

P. Martyr] 1. There is a measure to be appointed in those things, which they
revoke, that the Church of the faithful be not burdened with these kind of
matters.

2. Neither that Gods worship, or the opinion of Relegion be placed therein, as
we see in Popish holy water, and in censing to have been done.

3. Further, great care herein is to be used, that Christian liberty be not
hereby endangered, that albeit some old Ceremonies be restored, yet they be
not so restored or esteemed of, as a necessary means to obtain salvation: But
so ought such things as these are to be tolerated, that when they seem less
profitable, they be removed, Loc. com. fol. 1087. Hoopero.

Hooper] Therefore by this grant it is in the Churches liberty to communicate
but once a year, or very seldom: To stand and behold the celebration of the
Lords Supper, and not to receive, and the like.

Bucer] These things I judge to be per se Papistica, (and the like to these)
for they are contrary to the word of God, as there he shows: But those other
circumstances of place, time, site or habit of the body, in the celebration or
receiving of the Lords Supper: of admitting women as well as men to the
Communion: of the form and manner of public prayer to God, and of singing
Psalms: as also of garments and other things appertaining to outward decency,
I doubt not but the Lord has given free power to his Church, of appointing and
ordaining, concerning these matters, such things as every Church does judge to
be most expedient for the upholding and increase of reverence in the people
toward all the holy ordinances of God, Scrip. Anglic. fol. 708. Hoopero.

Hooper] Thus by imposing of these Ceremonies, spiritual tyranny will be
established on the conscience.

P. Martyr] I do not think that tyranny is therefore brought in, if some
indifferent thing (as the Surplesse, whereof he speaks) be undertaken or
entertained to be practiced in the Church, and be thereupon constantly observed
of many. In these days we do so administer the Lords Supper in the morning
as that we will not have the Communion administered after dinner; but who will
call this tyrannical, which all of us do perform with like will and one
consent. To me in truth it were much more pleasing, that we did only that
which Christ practiced and delivered to his Apostles, but if some indifferent
things be added, I would not for this cause now that to sharp contention be
raised about it. Loc. com. fol. 1088. Hoopero.

Sarauia:] 1 Tyranny appertains to the Pope, which undertakes the command
over men's consciences, and under penalty of eternal curse, commands and
forbids things (in their nature) indifferent, which cannot be approved for
three causes. First, because he places religion in such things whereby God is
not worshipped: Secondly, because he asscribeth merit, expiation of sins, and
satisfaction to them: Thirdly, because he has no authority to exact these
things of the people of God.

2 Yet we must know that the just commandments of lawful authority,
concerning things in their nature indifferent, does even with God tie the
consciences of men, albeit the Magistrate, and such as have lawful authority,
do commit them to God, as for example; A Father commands his son to dig
his field: this son cannot with safe conscience disobey his fathers command;
that which was free unto him before his fathers command, when the commandment
came is made necessary. A Merchant desires to transport certain wares, it is
a thing indifferent, but if the exportation of those wares be forbidden by the
Princes Proclamation, albeit the Prince respect not his conscience, yet it is
not a good man's part to carry out wares against the command of his Sovereign,
albeit he may do it secretly without any punishment: the like I say of all
other things, whether they concern the common affairs of our life or the
external comeliness of divine worship, so as golden mediocrity be observed,
Defens. fol. 580.

Bb. Hooper:] These Ceremonies are repugnant and opposite unto the Word of God:
they are impious superstitions.

Calvin: In the English Leturgy as you (the English exiles at Frankford) do
describe unto me, I spy out many tolerabiles ineptias, tolerable unfit things:
By which two words I express thus much, that there was not that purity which
were to be wished, which errors could not immediately the first day be
corrected (Cum nulla subesset manifesta impietas ferenda ad tempus fuisse)
Seeing there was therein contained no manifest impiety, these things should
have been borne withal for a time, Epist. 200. fol. 336.

Bucer:] 1. In the Ceremonies of the English Leturgy, or Book of Common
Prayer* I have not found any thing which is not taken out of the Word of God,
or at lest which is repugnant to it, so it be favorably understood, Bucer.
script. Angl. in cens. fol. 456.

2 I am not persuaded that there is in them (the Surplesses) any impious thing
(per se) of themselves, or in their own nature, so that godly men may not use
them godly, Ibid. fol. 458. To make the use of these garments impious in
themselves, I see no Scripture to allow it, Ibid. f. 709. Hooper.

3 As for my part, if I thought that those Ceremonies and Vestures were impure
of themselves, I would not take upon me in any wise the office of a Minister or
Bishop, until by ordinary authority they were taken away, In Epist. to Io.
Alasco.

P. Martyr:] These garments are (per se (...)) of themselves indifferent, and
do make no man either godly or ungodly, loc. com. fol. 1085. amico cuidam. I
do not hold the use of these garments to be pernicious, or in their nature
contrary to Gods Word, but do esteem this use of them (omnino (...))
altogether indifferent, ib. fol. 1088, Hooper. This difference of garments I
think not fit to be used, howbeit if other things which are prescribed unto us
from Gods Word, do remain entire, I hold ths use of these Vestures neither
impious, neither pernicious, (per se, aut sua nature a) of themselves, or in
their nature. Ibid. fol. 1089. Hoopero.

2. I dare not condemn whomsoever I shall see use these garments: If I were so
persuaded, I would never have communicated here in England with the Church,
wherein such difference of garments is retained. Ib. f. 1486. Hoopero.

Beza:] Of Surplesses: They are not (ex earum rerum genere) of those kind of
matters which are per se impiae, of themselves wicked, Epist. 12. fol. 98. Some
men will say they are indifferent things; I grant them verily so to be, being
considered in themselves, Ibid. fol. 97. Caps and Surplesses vere media and
indifferentia, truly indifferent, Ibid. Epist. 8. fol. 78. Round wafer bread,
kneeling at Communion: non per se impia, Ibid. fol. 77. Sign of the cross in
Baptism, kneeling at the Communion, are not per se Idololatrica, matters of
themselves Idolatrous, Ibid. Epist. 12. fol. 99. 100.

Heming: It is (adiaphorum nature a) a matter indifferent in nature to perform
holy things, as Baptism, and the Lords Supper in a linen garment, Enchirid.
tit. de Adiaph. class. 3. cap. 10. fol. 375.

Zanch: It is (liberum per se) a free matter of it self to use or not to use a
linen garment, De redempt. lib. 1. cap. 16. fol. 445.

Bucan: Indifferent things are said to be such actions, which are neither
precisely commanded in the Law, or word of God, neither yet expressly forbidden
to be done: as to eat flesh, or this or that kind of meat, or not to eat it
on this or that kind of day: to be clothed in this fashion or color, or not
to be clothed. Loc. 33. quaest. 13. fol. 382.

Cartwright:] The Surplesse is a thing in its own nature indifferent; In the
rest of the 2. reply. fol. 262.

Polanus:] The use of a linen garment is a thing indifferent, In Ezec. 44.
fol. 807.

Alexander Alesius calls optimi and veritatus studiosissimi.

Alesius: To this objection, albeit they give answer which framed the Common
prayer Book themselves [in the Preface of ceremonies] yet we also may say
truly, that it is best in all changes and alterations, as little to digress
or differ much from those things which are in use, as possible may be: because
sudden and great alterations are ever very perilous: And it is much more safe
to follow the commendable consent of some few, then casting all away, to begin
and ordain another altogether new. The errors and faults of the Mass books
are not therefore approved, if something be defended which those errors have
defiled, so the errors be removed. Neither does the Physician flatter the
disease, if presently he cut not off, and cast not away the member, which
labors with a recouerable evil. This whether ye call it wisdom, or
moderation, or timorousness, or whatsoever, I say it neither serves, neither
gratifieth the impiety of any, but does perform a necessary duty warily and
circumspectly, and with the fear of God; and serves God and the Church, in
professing and defending, and keeping the heavenly truth; and does glorify
the Son of God, which will be worshipped by holiness and righteousness
before God, and adored by the holy Ghost. This moderation will not content him
that is more hot of nature; yet let such a one look what he does, and whither
he goes: Let him look that he be not ouer-wise, more then he ought to be
wise: Let him not cavil at other men's godly and temperate reasons; neither let
him insolently condemn others less stout and confident: For all must stand
before the tribunal of God, to give an account of the things they have done:
Let not therefore the high minded too curiously pry into all the sayings and
doings of the more humble: Let him bear with some things; let him slander
none: Let him not hope by wrangling or brauling, that it is possible to give
help to things out of order, but rather to all agreement making, to bring two
necessary affections, one of knowing the state, another of pardoning the
faults. Judgment is a great and high thing. This by how much the business is
greater, is by so much the more diligently intended, and opinion is less
rashly to be given: The cause ought to be evident, (not ambiguous) and of great
weight, and by no means to be dissembled, for the which one brother should
accuse another, much less that it hold a right affection to condemn him. Let
every one therefore look that he be not swift to speak, but rather attentive
to know, and inclined to pardon, wheresoever he may lawfully do: but of this
sufficient, Inter. Script. Anglic. Buceri fol. 374.

Hooper:] Holy significatiue signs are unlawful.

Bucer:] 1. When as God by his word has sanctified all things by our prayers,
and has made all things pure to the pure, what cause can we allege out of
the word of God, to deny that God will not bless the use of such signs,
(whereof we speak) that it should not be effectual to that Church; to some
commendation of the Ministry, and thereof also to some edification of the
faith? For how can it be but that he, which promised to bless the works of
our hands, which we take in his name, will deny his blessing to these signs,
seeing he has no where forbidden such an use of them as we have expounded; and
has made us Lords of the Sabbath, and all other things in the world? In Epist.
Joan. Alasco.

2. Let us consider what the Holy Ghost teaches, of the signification of a
woman's veil, and covering of the man's head, 1. Cor. 10. wherefore does he
particularely mention the bright garments of the Angels? The Holy Ghost does
nothing rashly, and does by all creatures preach the salvation of his, which
consists in the faith of the Gospel, Script. Anglican. fol 709. Hoopero.

Petre Martyr:] The Ministers of the Church are the Angels, and Messengers of
the Church, as Malachy witnesses; and the Angels all ways for the most
appeared, as apparelled in white garments: [This he calls honesta and iusta
significatio a Scripturis non aliena an honest and fit signification of the
Surplesse, not disagreeing, or strange from the Scripture.] How shall we
deprive the Church of this liberty, that it may not signify some thing by her
actions and Ceremonies; so as the people of Christ, be not burdened with
Ceremonies, and better things be not hindered? ye will say, let them declare
themselves to be Angels indeed, let them not signifieit. But this might be
replied as well on Saint Paul, when he appointed among the Corinthians, that a
woman should have her head covered, and a man have his head open, 1. Cor. 11.
5. for he only presses the reason of signification, to confirm this
Ceremony. Now any man of the Corinthian Church might here reply upon him thus;
let the man declare himself indeed to be the head of the woman, and let the
woman show her self subject to her husband, by their deeds and life; let them
not strive to declare it by signs. But the Apostle saw that even this might
profitably be done, not only that we live rightly, but also that by words and
signs we be admonished of our duty, Loc. com. fol. 1089. Epist. Hoopero.

Zanchius:] Albeit, a garment linen or woollen for a Minister, be numbered among
indifferent things: yet for the signification (magis deceret vestis linea quam
lanea) a linen garment were more decent then a woollen for a Minister to wear
in the administration of the Sacrament: for that it is the Symbol, or type of
innocence and holiness. Hence in the Apocalips, white garments are given the
Saints, De redempt. cap. 16. fol. 445.



Calvin:] 1. Touching holy days and other Ceremonies: It is a very hard
condition to the godly brethren to subject themselves to those things, which
they understand to be neither right nor profitable. For my part, I do judge,
that many defects are to be tolerated, and borne with, whereas they cannot be
amended: wherefore I do not think that any of the brethren should for this
cause proceed so far, as to separate and depart from the Church, whereof he
is a member; if so be the greater part of the Church be of a contrary
judgment, because in such cases it seems to me sufficient, if that which we
know to be right, be of us labored unto.

Object. That which is thrust upon us does bring with it scandal, and also
draws along an evil tail, namely, sundry evil effects.

Answ. Notwithstanding this, because these Ceremomonies are not repugnant to
the Word of God, they may be yielded to, especially where the greater number
does ouersway, and whenas there is no means for him that is only a member of
the body to proceed further, Epist. 379 fol. 658.

2. I understood some difficulty cast in your way about certain Ceremonies,
which those your Hosts, and entertainers would have you to use: Surely I see
nothing more expedient, then to use most few Ceremonies in the Christian
Church: For it is sufficiently evident by experience it self, how easy a
matter it is, by occasion of them to slide into superstition, howbeit the
matter is otherwise, when authority rests not in us, of admitting or
refusing what seems to us meet: And those Ceremonies are not matters of that
quality, on occasion whereof we should voluntarily suspend, or separate our
selves from the Supper of the Lord, and as much as in us lies, we must
procure that which is manifest to be the best. But if we may not obtain what
we desire (feramus illos defectus) let us bear with those defects, and not
approve of them, so as there be therein no impiety, or other thing repugnant
to Gods Word: As for example, If any show or kind of Idolatry were therein, we
ought to withstand it, even to the death: But where the doctrine it self is
sound and pure, and the Ceremonies be used to a civil kind of honesty and
decency, they are by us to be passed by in silence, rather then by occasion
of them we should proceed to contentions, and more grievous tumults, Epist.
303. fol. 497.

3. This must be ever remembered, that by whatsoever scandals Satan and the
world do labor to draw us away from the commandments of God, or to hinder
us from following that which he prescribes, we must notwithstanding this
stoutly proceed, Just. 3. 19. 13.

P. Martyr] 1. We confess we must yield something to the weak, but yet with
Paul we must not suffer this to be done, but only in things indifferent; But
that which is in it self evil, and forbidden of God, we advise that it be
not done for any man's sake: For the rule remains unremovable, which grants
to no man to commit evil that good may come thereof, yea, and neither may we
always yield unto the weak in things indifferent, but only so far forth,
until they be taught better and more perfectly: But when they understand the
matter, and yet notwithstanding this do stick, their weakness must not be
nourished in them. Besides, so much may not be yielded to the weak, as that
we should harm others, and many mo of the members of Christ by our example,
Loc. com. clas. 2. cap. 4.. 32. fol. 201.

2. In that you write, that very many will be offended with your wearing the
Episcopal garments, and holy garments as they call them; I do easily believe
it: but you shall avoid the fault of scandal, if ye declare in your Sermons,
that those garments also are displeasing unto you, and withal do with all care
endeavor, that they may at last be abolished Epist. Amic. in Angliam, fol.
1128.

3. If occasion of erring be given to the weak hereby, let them be
admonished, that they persuade themselves these things to be indifferent: Let
them be taught by Sermons, that Gods worship is not placed in those things,
Loc. fol. 1089. Epist. Hoopero.

4 To this Objection, that the eyes of the beholders will be turned aside from
thinking on serious matters: He answers, This it may be, wilnot be judged to
be true of al beholders: For first it may be answered, that will not come to
pass if without cost these garments be used simply, as they have bin hitherto;
for the use and profit of them do take away admiration: Again perhaps it may
be answered, that it is probable that the people being moved with admiration,
may think of attentively the things that be more serious, for which cause the
Sacramental signs seem to have been imposed, that from the very sight and
sense they may be drawn to think of divine things, ibid.

Bucer: 1 Holds that the faithful preachers of Gods Word may then use the
Surplesse, if they join withal the clear preaching of Christ our Savior,
and with all the detection and detestation of whole Antichrist, as well of the
Roman, as of any other, that they by the use of these garments mean not to
establish any of Antichrists wicked lies which be thrust upon the people: That
the Priests are in themselves no whit holier, or more effectual to appease God
then other Christians are: That they do not set Christ before his Father in
the Communion, neither apply his merit by their deed and will to any man,
morethen any man does receive by faith out of the words of the Sarcrament: That
Aaronicall Rites are not to be recalled: That by the wearing of these garments,
they only give obedience to those governors, within the compass of whose
authority God will have the determination of external Rites (consentientes
tamen Verbo Dei) though yet agreeing to Gods Word. And that hereby they flee
from the offense of troubling the common order, and the public consent, as
also that hereby they do witness to godly persons that every creature of God
is good, even by the way of signification, and therefore that all Christians
truly believing may well and godly use these things, howsoever impiously
others have abused them, Script. Anglic. Cranmero fol. 682.

2 To this that in England many use Vestures with manifest superstition, and
that they do nourish and confirm in the people superstition; even so it may
be answered, very many abuse all this whole Sacrament, as also Baptism and all
other Ceremonies, Epist. Joan. Alasco.

Zanchius: In things indifferent something is to be yielded to the weaker, and
that for a time; namely, until they be taught the truth. For if after that the
truth is sufficiently and clearly laid abroad unto them so as being convicted
they have nothing more what they may object and yet will notwithstanding stick
in doubt; sure their infirmity is not to be nourished by their dissembling with
them or winking at them. For this is rather strong obstinacy then weakness,
Deredemp. cap. 17. fol. 493.

Beza in a case of deprivation advises to conform; yet before they conform
he thus counsels them: That both the Pastor and the flock sin not
against their conscience (presupposing the purity of doctrine to be left
entire:) We persuade the Pastors that after they have freed their conscience,
both before the Kings Majesty and the Bishops, by a modest (as it becomes
Christians to be free from all tumult and sedition) and yet weighty
protestation (according as the greatness of the case requires:) they then do
openly press unto their flocks those things which do tend to take away the
offense arising from conformity, and do withal discreetly and peaceably give
diligent endeavor for the amendment of these abuses, as the Lord shall offer
occasion (and so to conform) Epist. 12. fol. 99.

Cartwright: The offense in occasioning the weak to fall, and the wicked to be
confirmed in their wickedness, is one of the fowlest spots cast upon the
Surplesse: But when it is laid in the scales with the preaching of the word of
God, which is so necessary for him that is called thereunto, that a woe hangs
on his head if he do not preach it, it is of less importance, then for the
refusal of it, we should let go so necessary a duty. As for that which is
uttered against the offense, it is as the rest of this disputation, to show how
inconueniently such things are established, not that they may not in any
respect be borne with. In the use of those indifferent things, and abstaining
from them, we are so straightly bound to have regard unto the weak brother, as
no Magistrate is able to loose the knot of that bond. But where offenses cannot
otherwise be redeemed then by leaving that undone, which the Lord himself has
not left free unto us, but cast a yoke of necessary service upon us, there the
case is otherwise: For if the Prince upon declaration of the inconvenience of
such Ceremonies, and humble suite for the release of them, will nothing loose
of the coard of this servitude, for my part I see no better way, then with
admonition of them thereunto, to keep on the course of feeding the flock
committed unto him. This is in few words my simple judgment of the matter of
this apparel and such like ceremonies. In the rest of his second reply, fol.
262. 263.

Sarauia: To the objection, that the Papists will be confirmed in their most
damnable will-worships, by the use of these ceremonies. 1. This is denied for
two causes: First, for the public contrary doctrine, which challenges and
reproves those which profess the use of these ceremonies for superstition:
Secondly, for the Public authority, which, (as is known to all, does forbid
the Subjects of eating of flesh, and commands other things) not for that end
which the Pope intends. For there is great difference between those things
which are performed by way of obedience to public authority, and those things
which are superstitiously assumed to be done by private council. There was a
controversy among the Primitive Christians about the observation of legal
ceremonies; Some thought that every kind of food was sanctified: others
believed the contrary. They which thought rightly, might eat of strangled
meat, and of blood, and it was superstition for them, to abstain of
conscience: Neither could any man make a Law unto himself of abstaining from
strangled meat and blood, more then from swines flesh. But after that it was
upon good advice established by the authority of the Church, (not to confirm
any man in a false opinion) that such as were converted from Paganism unto the
faith of Christ, should abstain from strangled meat and blood, that, which to
do on a man's private council had been a sin, was made to be godly by the
authority of the Churches constitution, Defens. de diverse. grad. ministr. cap.
25. fol. 580. 581.

2. Touching the scandal of the weak (by the use of these ceremonies) which
is objected, it cannot take place against a public law, to the which private
persons ought not to prefer their judgment, but subject it according to the
public doctrine and profession, as well of the Magistrates, as of the chief
governors of the Church, Ib. f. 851.

3. Touching the Papists scandal: Small regard is to be had of them in this
Kingdom; their error can admit of no excuse, after so many years preaching of
the Gospel: Paganism being abolished, and the Idols with their worship being
cast out, the Idolothytes or things offered Idols, did cease. Even so the Pope,
being cast out and renounced, there cease whatsoever he brought in and
polluted, in as much as those things which are done this day with us at the
Princes command, or for obedience sake unto our Laws: whereas withal, sound
and Christian doctrine flourishes of the grace of God, and man's merits: such
Ceremonies and actions cannot be compared neither with the eating of a thing
offered to Idols, neither with Popish will worship, etc. Ibid. fol. 582.

Hooper:] By the strict pressing and obedience to these Ceremonies, Christian
liberty will be infringed and broken.

Peter Martyr:] The endangering of our Christian liberty will be prevented,
if such Ceremonies as be restored be not so respected, as if they were
necessary to obtain salvation: and again if we do so bear with such
matters as these are, that when they seem to be less profitable, they may
be removed, Loc. fol. 1087. Hoopero.

Beza:] Albeit, the Christian liberty has taken away the yoke of the
Ceremonial law, and instead thereof it is not lawful, for any mortal man to put
another yoke, yet the too promiscuous use of things indifferent is lawfully
restrained, both in general and in special. In general it is restrained by
the law of charity, which is universal, that is respecting all persons and
things, and carefully bewaring, that nothing otherwise indifferent and lawful
be done, whereby ones neighbor be destroyed; and that nothing be omitted,
whereby he may be edified. But here two cautions must be presupposed, one that
whatsoever may and ought to be done, or omitted, ought always to be judged by
the word of God: the other that every man have a respect unto his calling, thus
are we to understand that of the Apostle, I am made all things to all men. In
special, if the use of things indifferent be restrained by a constitution,
whether politic or Ecclesiastical. For albeit, God only binds the
conscience porperly: yet so far forth as; either the Magistrate, which is the
Minister of God does judge it to be good for the Commonwealth, that some
thing otherwise lawful in it self be not done; either the Church having
respect of order, and decency, and edification, does establish some laws
orderly concerning things indifferent: such laws are altogether to be
observed of the godly, and so far forth do tie the conscience, as that no
man wittingly, and willingly, and deliberately, with a purpose to disobey, may
without sin either do the things which are forbidden, or omit the things
which are commanded, Epist. 24. fol. 143.

Zanchius:] Christians, albeit they be subjected to no laws of men in respect
of their conscience, but are exempted from all power of men: yet in respect of
their outward man, in respect of the flesh, they are not exempted from all
power of men, but are rather subject to Magistrates, as well Civil as
Ecclesiastical, and are tied to obey them both for Gods commandment, and the
public good, and for keeping of order in the Church, as Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2.
Compend. cap. 14. fol. 620.

Hemingius:] That no man abuse this his Christian liberty, both piety to God,
and charity to his neighbor persuade us that we observe the godly Rites and
Ceremonies, established for order and discipline sake, so as the necessary
worship of God, opinion of righteousness, merit and necessity be not placed
in them, Enchirid. clas. 3. cap. 14. fol. 372. de liberate Christiana.

Sarauia:] Christian liberty does not exempt men from the obedience of those,
to whom God has made us subject. The pure doctrine of the Gospel does take
away the abuse of things, and restores the true use of all things, which
infidelity had polluted; in as much as albeit, the actions outwardly are very
like: yet they are diverse, as well from the cause efficient, from which they
are done, as the end for the which they are done, Defens. de gradibus Ministr.
cap. 25. fol. 582.

And so much for the proof of this argument: In all which precedent
allegations, I think fit to observe and note thus much* that albeit, I
confess there be some difference among those worthy writers primitive and
latter, about this matter circumstantiall and ceremonial, some looking more
upon the practice of the Primitive Church, and the substantials and maine
worshippes of God, and danger of their removing; by removing of these
Ceremonies, were more inclined to the defense of ceremonies; other looking into
the inconuenie^ces, and many evil effects of the ceremonies, and wishing
Apostolical simplicity, and in the just detestation of Antichrist and all his
superstitions, have been more stern against them; and yet all of them have
uniformly agreed in the substa^tials of Religion; as also in this point, for
the which they are alleged only, namely, that such Ceremonies as are with us
prescribed, suppose they were inconvenient, and fit to be abolished, yet they
are not of that moment for a man to lose his Ministry, and to hazard the
overthrow of the Church, for the refusing of them: and this is worthy to be
noted for the confirmation of this argument, that they are all and every one
among the Orthodoxe, ancient and late classical Fathers and Divines, of this
very mind. And again, there is not one, I say not one of any sound judgment or
good report in the Church of God, for the contrary opinion, unless Heretics,
and Schismatikes, such as Donatists, Anabaptists, Separatists. As for
Illiricus, (and his few associats and defendants) who only is alleged to be
of this mind, albeit he well deserved for his labor in the Centuries, and
certain other of his works: And something might besaid for his excuse, and to
show the difference of his case from ours; as that,

1. The Ministers of Germany were compelled to use Illir. clau. Scriptur. par.
1. fol. 23. verbo adiaph.
such Ceremonies, which were cast out by the Church before.

2. That they were commanded and enjoined them by the Romish Church: Charles
the fifth, by the advice of Sleid. comment. li. 20. ann. 1548. fol. 330. a. and
fo. 332. b. f. 349. a
his Clergy imposed the Interim (wherein were sundry Popish errors to be
received and approved) on the German Churches, which was refused and confuted
by diverse Churches, in which respect Illiricus, and the rest, refused the
Ceremonies, as in a case of confession; and in which respect Hemingius
himself, an adiaphorist, makes an excuse for Heming. Enchirid. class. 3. cap.
16. tit. adiaph. fol. 375.
the Ministers refusal in that case, because superstitionis gratia seruabatur,
whereas in another he pleads for the use of them, as being things
indifferent. Yet for all this, the condition of Illiricus is not unknown to
the Church of God, how furiously and turbulently he was addicted to the
peremptory maintenance of unsavory and gross errors diverse other ways, and
insufferable disgrace of his betters for desert unto the Church of God, whereby
we may the more probably guess of the truth of his opinions this way, and
supposing that his case were the self same case with our deprived Ministers;
yet what is one to universality? Illiricus to all the Church of God, to broach
a singular and new opinion of suffering deprivation for inconvenient
Ceremonies, not known nor heard of since the time of Christ, yea, accusing and
condemning of all others besides himself of errors and false doctrines. But if
any be desirous to see further of Illiricus, and of the iniquity of his cause
and proceedings, let him look Melancthon. consil. part. 2. fol. 104, 105, 106.
107, 108, 109. and Beza in vita Caluini anno 1549. And it is worth the
observation that a French Historian says of him, Mathias Flaccius, homo
vehemens, and quocunque loco pedem figeret acerrimus turbarum incentor, Iac.
Aug. Thuanus hist. l. 38. fol. 806. b. anno 1567.

Thus we have seen the judgment of all true antiquity, and of all their
pure posterity, to be opposite to the doctrine and practice of suffering
deprivation for using inconvenient Ceremonies; whereby his argument is proved:
And therefore the conclusion which follows is, that the doctrine of suffering
deprivation for not using inconvenient Ceremonies, cannot be admitted with a
good conscience: and lastly, to admit and practice it, it is a sin against
God.

The whole foregoing argument is thus concluded in a Syllogism.

Whatsoever doctrine or practice tends to condemn all true Churches, and
godly learned teachers (which are known to have declared their judgments of
these things) since the time of the Apostles, without exception of any one for
teaching of false doctrine and for maintaining of a sin, is contrary to Gods
Word, an error in doctrine, and a sin in practice: But

Thus does the doctrine and practice of suffering deprivation for refusing to
conform to the prescribed Ceremonies in the Church of England.

Ergo, the doctrine and practice of suffering deprivation is contrary to Gods
Word, an error in doctrine, and a sin in practice.

This whole argument I shut up with the sayings of Lumbertus, which he used on
another occasion, In Ep. dedicat. de Christo seruatore contra Socinum: Nihil
noui attuli, sed antiquam and receptam doctrinam, quam hoc saeculo Martinus
Chemnitius, Johannes Caluinus, Petrus Martyr, Zacharias Vrsinus, and multi alij
Sancti Viri ex Dei verbo clare and solid docuerunt, defendi and tutatus sum:
Idem ibid. Subijcio hunc librum iudicio sanctae and orthodoxae Ecclesiae, quae
Augustanam, Helueticam, Gallicam, Brittanicam and Belgicam confessiones
sequitur. Hanc enim esse veram Ecclesiam, and de his dogmatis quae in hoc libro
tractantur recte sentire credo, cum hac me concordiam colere profiteor.

To these authorities there are some things excepted, which here I will
setdowne: And



been spared. The question here is not whether the Churches and Writers agree
or disagree in their judgment and practice of such Ceremonies as ours are, but
whether in a case of deprivation a man ought to conform to Ceremonies as evil
and inconvenient as ours are pretended to be, rather then suffer deprivation.
The answer by me is affirmative, which conclusion all the forealleaged Authors,
as well one as other, do uniformly hold consent and agree upon: and of this
there is an undoubted harmony. For their differences, let them be urged when
question is concerning any point wherein they differ. To give instance hereof,
suppose a question between Timothy and Titus, whether it were fit that the
Apostles should visit the Church which they had by preaching converted to the
faith; and to find out the truth hereof they will refer themselves to the
judgment of Paul and Barnabas, who converted them unto the truth: Timothy
says, that they should do well to visit them, and alleges that Paul and
Barnabas did consent in that judgment and practice as appears, Acts 15. 26.
Titus denies it and says, there was no consent nor agreement in their
judgment nor practice: For Barnabas counseled to take John called Mark with
him, but Paul thought it not meet. Here may Timothy reply, that the question
between us is not about the taking a long of Mark, wherein they disagreed,
but about the visiting of the Churches wherein they were both of one mind.

praecipitium and desperate downfall: Howbeit the mystery of iniquity began to
work even in the Apostles times: The Devil in those days began to sow his
tares (as the watchmen began to sleep) both of false doctrine and corrupt
Ceremonies, the controversy which troubled all the Christian world, was within
one hundred years. And Anacletus, Euaristus, Telesphorus, Anicetus, Victor, as
also Polycarp, Irenaeus, which note the controversy about Easter, and others,
were within the 200. years: So were the Heretics, Valentinus, Montanus,
Chiliastae. and others, who brought innumerable ceremonies. Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Tertullian within the 210. year did stir in their writing:
Origin about the 216. year: Cyprian about the 240. year. In whose undoubted
and not bastard writings may be seen, and has been alleged the diversity
and multitude of Ceremonies which were then in use: and much more might be said
touching the confirmation of this point, namely, that such ceremonies as were
then in use, as inconvenient in use and nature as ours, were practiced by them:
and the doctrine of suffering Deprivation for refusing to conform unto such
Ceremonies as ours, was not by any of them taught, but by all of them confuted,
partly by their doctrine, and partly by their practice.



thereof; Such as Calvin, who had our Leturgy translated, and sent him to
peruse; Beza, Bullinger, Gualter, Zanchius, Vrsinus, Polanus, etc. Others were
such as dwelling in our Church, were eyewitnesses themselves of the state
thereof, such as Bucer in Cambridge: For whose censure the common prayer Book
was translated into Latin. P. Martyr in Oxon. The members of our Church were
no less worthy then the Forreiners and could not be ignorant of the state of
this Church; such as the Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley, F. and Hooper who at last
conformed. Exiles, as Fox, Jewel, Nowell, Parkhust, Sanders, Grindall,
Humphry, etc. And the latter teachers, as Deering Fulke Perkins, and especially
Master Cartwright, who with most exact diligence did sift every thing to the
utmost of his power, that might carry any show of the warrant of an opposition.



Bucer and P. Martyr, to the several objections of B b. Hooper; Besides, the
members of our Church were well acquainted with the reasons urged against them,
especially the later.

contra fidem, and bonos mores: and therefore seeing our Ceremonies are contra
fidem, and bonos mores, it follows that the doctrine and practice of refusing
our Ceremonies, agrees with the doctrine of the Fathers: as for their
practice, if it were contrary to their doctrine, in that part it was their
ignorance, we must leave their practice, and follow their doctrine, Mat. 23. 2.



petitio principij, or a begging of the question to conclude without any
further proof that our Ceremonies are contra fidem and bonos mores, and I
think verily that our brethren themselves, which do thus object, will not say
that they are fundamental, or overthrowing Christ, which they should do if
they were contra fidem and bonos mores. Let this be soundly proved and then I
will yield the whole cause, but then with all it must be concluded, that no
Church can be a Church, which retains fundamental errors; No conformer to
them without repentance can be saved: the practice of the Ceremonies overthrow
faith and a good conscience, and let it be considered how far this will
stretch, even to the Apostles, and all Churches and faithful teachers since
the time of Christ.



medius terminus, or pregnant argument tending directly to prove this
conclusion: that all true Churches and teachers since the Apostles* did teach
and practice conformity, rather then they would suffer deprivation or
separation from the Church. But if any among so many things as are alleged
be impertinent, let it be showed and put out with my good liking: there is
enough besides which is without all controversy to the purpose.

Virgin Mary, this truth being fundamental now, was not so before Christ was
borne and manifested. Cornelius was a faithful man before he believed in
Christ the son of the Virgin Mary: yet he had the faith of the Messiah in
general, sufficient to his salvation; but after it was revealed by the
Apostles to him, even this was also fundamental.

Virgin Mary, between which I confess there seems to me to be so great and
so real a difference, as that I suppose it to be brought in quite besides the
point: When these two points be solued, I will answer as occasion is offered
further.

and further, these our ceremonies are now far more strictly enjoined and
imposed, then ever before.



ergo concludes a necessity of receiving Ceremonies, though even holden
necessary and operative, rather then to suffer deprivation for refusing such.
Thus may we also dispute for all other Popish Ceremonies, as for the shaven
Crown, Exorcisme, White garment in Baptism, Soot, Spittle, Cream, holy Water.

argumento a maiori ad minus ducto; which holds strongly for conforming to
our Ceremonies, which are far more tolerable, and less inconvenient and
burdensome then theirs. Neither can my argument be farther drawn or racked
then I urge it.

2. Touching the Jewish Ceremonies, they were holden necessary to salvation by
refractary Jews, not by the Apostles and the godly well grounded Christians.
So our Ceremonies are holden by the Papists, but not by us, therefore that
instance concerns us no more the^ the Apostles, and the faithful of those
times.

3. Touching the Ceremonies of the Primitive Fathers, they were also holden
operative, not by the sounder Fathers themselves (as Zepperus, Perkins, and
others do allege for them) but by others, which did so accidentally, as the
sign of the Cross was not holden operative by the Orthodoxall Fathers of it
self opere operato, but they held their faith operative, which was exercised
in them when they exercised that sign. Only Tertullian is cited to hold that
sign operative, but he is noted thereby, as by many other his singularities,
to have been a Montanist, who thus used the sign, and other Ceremonies, as
operative in themselves: and in like sort our prescribed Ceremonies are holden
operative in themselves, opere operato, by the Papist, but not by us: Therefore
neither does this part of the objection concern our Church or this my
argument, who utterly and professedly disclaim these things.

4. For the Popish Ceremonies alleged, such as shaven Crown, holy Water,
Cream, Spittle, Salt, etc. they are not mentioned in this my argument, and
there may be other weighty causes alleged wherefore we may except against
them justly. The Lutherans use some of them, and we all account of them as of
true Churches: And it is not possible for the true Church to put operation in
them, or opinion of necessity, or Gods worship or merit in the deed doing, for
that this tends to overthrow the foundation, and so to nullify the Church:
But excluding these gross apprehensions of those Ceremonies, it might prove a
matter very questionable, whether in case of necessity, as of deprivation of
ministry and overthrow of the Church, they ought not to be used, even by this
my argument. Howbeit till question be made and justly moved upon these
points, we will omit further disputation, because it is a matter merely
needless and unprofitable. And so much of this matter.

Deo soli sit Gloria.
A Brief and plain Answer to Master SPRINTS discourse concerning the
necessity of conformity in the case of Deprivation.
BEfore particular answer be made to Master Sprints several arguments, one
thing is necessary to be premised that makes much against the whole scope and
drift of his Treatise, viz. That the cause why so many godly and worthy
Ministers, have been heretofore, and are daily deprived or suspended; or why
so many able men that have desired to enter into the ministry have been kept
back, is not this only that they have refused to conform; but that many have
been and are daily deprived and suspended only for refusing to subscribe
according to the Canon: yea, many that at the time of their conuention, have
not so much as been charged with nonconformity, and of whom (by reason they
were Lecturers only, or for that there were some other that did use conformity
in their churches) the use of the ceremonies was not at all or little required,
have been deprived or suspended for this cause only, because they durst not
subscribe. And who knows not that by the 36. Canon no man may be either
received into the ministry or suffered to preachor catechize, except he shall
first willingly and ex animo, subscribe to the 3. articles there mentioned, and
to all things contained in the^. Yea, admit that a man were contented both to
conform and subscribe also, yet if he shall but at any time affirm (as it is
evident many conformers and subscribers also will not stick sometime to do:)
That the Book of common Prayer contains something in it that is repugnant to
the Scriptures, or that some of the 39. Articles are in any part superstitious
and erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience subscribe unto, he
is to be excommunicated, ipso facto (which must needs imply suspension from
his ministry) and not to be restored till he have publicly revoked such his
wicked error. So that though all Master Sprints arguments shall prove good and
unanswerable, whereby he goes about to justify the use of the Ceremonies in
this case: yet will he never be able to convince a great number of them, that
have either been kept out, or put out of the ministry, of so foul a sin as
he would make the world believe they stand guilty of, unless he can also
justify the subscription, which he seems altogether unwilling to do, and
can prove it unlawful for a godly minister to say, that there is something in
the Book of common Prayer repugnant to the Scriptures, or that some of the 39.
Articles are in some part superstitious and erroneous, and such as he may not
with a good conscience subscribe unto. And if those conclusions which he
sets down in the first page of his Treatise, and which he says will follow
upon the proof of this point, That to suffer deprivation or suspension for
refusing to conform, is a sin; be the very mark he aimed at in his whole
Treatise, and the only fruit he expects of all these pains he has taken (as
indeed they seem to be:) then has he surely bestowed his time very ill, and
spent a great deal of labor to no purpose at all. From hence it will follow
(says he) first, That seeing those Ministers have sinned that have suffered
deprivation so refusing to conform, they ought of conscience to offer
conformity that they may return to their ministry. 2. That such as not
conforming do remain in their places, are bound in conscience to conform,
rather then to suffer deprivation. 3. That such as are profitably or probably
fitted to the Ministry, and desire that calling, are tied in conscience before
God to promise and practice conformity, rather then for refusing it, to be
kept out of the Ministry. And where be those Ministers to be found in England,
that have suffered deprivation for no other cause, but for that they have
refused to conform? or that being deprived; might have had assurance to enjoy
again, and continue in the use of their Ministry, if they would offer
conformity? Or what Prelate has he known, being to admit any into the
Ministry, has been wont to require of him a promise of Conformity, and to
allow him thereupon, though he did refuse to subscribe? It is not to be
doubted indeed, but that the only cause that has been pretended for the
deprivation and suspension of some, has been their refusing to conform, and
that liberty has been offered unto others, upon this condition only, if they
would conform; But that this has been the only cause, why any have suffered
Deprivation or Suspension, will hardly be proved by Master Spr. or any other
man. If then he knew it not before, let him now understand, That the true cause
why so many able and faithful Ministers have suffered themselves to be deprived
and suspended, rather then they would conform to the Ceremonies prescribed,
has been partly (but not only,) this; that they have judged the ceremonies
unlawful, and partly, that they knew though they should have yielded to the
use of them, they could by no means have bin assured, that the bearing of this
heavy yoke would have kept them in their Ministry, unless they could be
content also to subscribe to the Book of common prayer, and those 39. Articles
according to the Canon, or at least forbear to speak either publicly or
privately against any thing contained in them. This being so, M. Spr. should
either first have made it plain* that the only, or at least chief cause why
the Ministers have been deprived usually, or suspended in England, has been
their refusing to conform; or else he should have made this the state of his
question, Whether the suffering Deprivation, rather then a man will conform to
the ceremonies in this case, when besides conformity upon the same penalty
subscribing to the Book of Common prayer, and the 39. Articles, or at least
forbearing to speak against any thing contained in them, is required, be a
sin.

And this shall suffice to be premised for a general answer to his whole
treatise. Now the arguments whereby he labors to prove the lawfulness and
necessity of Conformity in the case of Deprivation, are to be examined
particularly.

His first maine argument is this, The doctrine and practice of suffering
deprivation (specially upon the reasons urged against our ceremonies) is
contrary to the doctrine and practice of the Apostles.

The antecedent of this Argument (for the consequent is strong and good) he
labors to prove, first in this manner.

To refuse to do that, which the Apostles with the whole Church at Jerusalem
did by Divine inspiration and commandment do themselves, and both advise and
command others to do, is a sin.

But to refuse conformity in the case of deprivation, is to refuse to do that
which the Apostles and whole Church at Jerusalem did themselves, and both
advised and commanded others to do: for they practiced themselves, and
commanded others, even whole Churches to practice ceremonies as inconvenient
and evil, for number, nature, use, and evil effects, as ours are supposed to
be, and that for reasons equivalent or inferior to the avoiding of Deprivation.

Ergo, to refuse to conform in the case of deprivation, is a sin.

The proposition of this argument, he never goes about to prove, which yet is
most false and unsound: for the Apostles and whole Church a Jerusalem might by
divine inspiration, and some special commandment of God, both themselves use
and inioyne others to use some Ceremonies, in themselves as evil and
inconvenient as ours, and yet it may be unlawful for a Minister now to use
ours, except he did it by the same in spiration, and had the like commandment
from God, as they had. Abraham to manifest his faith was commanded by divine
vision to kill his son and if he had done it, he had in so doing done an
excellent work; will this make it lawful for all other belieuers for the
manifestation of their faith, to do the like, when they have not the like
special commandment from God to do it? The contrary would be much better
concluded by this argument, viz. that the Apostles doctrine and practice, does
not so warrant a Minister now to conform to such like Ceremonies, because they
that command them to do so, do it not by divine inspiration, or commandment,
as the Apostles did.

That which he alleges afterward for the confirmation of this proposition in
his answer to the first object. page makes it never a whit the stronger. For
first, the answer he gives, does but begin the question, and is the very
same with the proposition it self, whereof it should have been a proof. If
the Apostles authority (says he) were immediate from God, and that they did
was done by the direction of the Holy Ghost, we may be the boulder to imitate
them. Secondly, his second answer, that though we may not imitate the Apostles
in things peculiar to the office, persons, and times; yet we may in matter of
common equity, and general reason: Instead of confirming he does directly
overthrow his own proposition, for he grants here that it is no sufficient
warrant for us to do any thing, for that the Apostles did so, because they did
many things by divine direction, that were peculiar to their office, persons,
and time. Thirdly, he does expressly in this his second answer affirm, that
the Apostles did urge the practice of these Ceremonies, not from the immediate
authority of God, nor from the inspiration only of the Holy Ghost, but by
reasons and rules of common equity and perpetual: Wherein besides that, he
forgets what he had urged before in the proof of his assumption, and
expressly contradicts the text, which affirms that all the things they did
write, even concerning matters of order in the Church, were the commandments
of the Lord, 1. Cor. 14. 37. and that when they decreed these things in
question, they said it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, Act. 15. 28. he
has also weakened his own proposition here, and made it of no strength at all.
For if the Apostles had used, or enjoined these things, and not done it by
divine inspiration, and immediate authority from God, whatforce could there be
in their example or commandment to bind our conscience? The Apostles we know
were men, and subject to error (as other men) in all cases wherein they were
not immediately directed by the spirit of God. And if the reason why we are to
conform, be not this; because the Apostles did so, or because they did so by
immediate direction from God: but because they did that, which the rules of
common and perpetual equity, and general reason did require: then an
argument drawn from the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, as well as of
the holy Apostles, might have served the turn. For we are bound to follow them
also, where they do, or teach that which the rules of common and perpetual
equity, and general reason do require.

But let the reasons be examined, whereby he is moved to judge, that the
Apostles did use and inioyne these Ceremonies, not by immediate authority from
God, nor from inspiration only of the Holy Ghost, but by reasons and rules of
common and perpetual equity.

They used and enjoined these things (says he) for expediencie and necessity
to win the more to Christ, and to further and propagate the Gospel; which
though it be granted to be true, yet shall we be as far to seek as we were
before; for still the question will be, whether there be the same reasons now
to move us to the use of our Ceremonies, as moved the Apostles then to use
those. There might be such special causes as made it expedient and necessary
for them to use and inioyne such Ceremonies then, as never did fall out before,
nor shall do again while the world does stand. It is indeed a rule of common
and perpetual equity, that things expedient and necessary, that may make for
the winning of more to Christ, and furtherance of the Gospel, be done; but that
may be expedient and necessary unto these ends for some persons at sometimes,
which yet would be neither necessary nor expedient for other persons at another
time to do, without a special and immediate calling from God. It was expedient
and necessary, that the Apostles should preach the Gospel to all nations, and
do sundry other things that were peculiar and proper unto their function, which
yet none in these days may take upon them to do, because they have not the
like immediate calling and authority from God; neither is there any thing more
evident to every reasonable and understanding man, then this, that the same
things, which in some places and times have been both expedient and necessary
to be done, have at other times, and in other places proved far otehrwise.

That which he alleges in the same place (viz. in his answer to the first
objection) to confirm this, that the reasons for which the holy Ghost moved
the Apostles to do those things, do warrant and bind us to use our ceremonies
now, because the holy Ghost being ever the same, teaches and rules the Church
by one and the same reason revealed in his Word, as well now as then; is not
easy to be understood: For if this be his meaning, (as by his words it seems
to be) that upon what reason the holy Ghost at any time teaches any person in
the Church to do a thing he teaches all persons in the Church to do the same,
when they shall have the same reason, because he is always one and the same;
it would follow, that whatsoever God has by any special commandment, for any
special reason required, of any should be done of all, where there is the same
reason, though there be not the same special commandment of God. And so,
forasmuch as God (upon this reason, that Abraham might make known his faith)
commanded him to sacrifice his son, all men shall be bound to show the like
readiness that he did, to kill his own children, seeing the reason that
moved God to require this of him* concerns them as well as him, all men
being bound to manifest and make known their faith.

Where he adds, that by the same rules whereby the holy Ghost teaches the
Church to pray, and sing in a known language, and Prophets to speak one after
another, and women to be silent in the Church, he teaches that Conformity
which is in question; because they be all cases of one nature; namely, of
order and Ceremony in the Church, and worship of God; he affirms that which
seems to have no color of good reason in it: For these things are of
themselves, and by the very light of nature at all times, and in all places,
matters of order and decency, and such as if no precept had been given, common
and general reason would say are fitting: And the contrary (in themselves, and
not in respect of circumstance only) unseemly; which he will never (surely)
say of any of these Ceremonies. And what consequence there is in this reason
the holy Ghost does no less teach the one then the other, because they are all
cases of one nature, namely, of order and Ceremony in the Church? Are there
not some impious and idolatrous orders, or (at least) Ceremonies, such as a man
ought to die rather then to yield unto them? Are there not, or may there not
be some contrary to all these general rules? Does not the damnablest idolatry,
that is, lie in orders and Ceremonies? how can it follow then that they are of
the same nature, and required by the same rules, because they are matters of
order and Ceremony?

And so much shall suffice for answer to the proposition of his first maine
argument, and to that which in his answer to the first objection he has
brought for the fortifying of it: now let us come to consider how he proves the
assumption of this argument. All that he has said to this purpose (though it
be by him spread into thirteen several branches) may well be referred unto
these four heads, and yet nothing omitted that is worthy consideration, or
carries any weight in it at all, viz. 1. That the Apostles and whole Churches
in their times, used as many Ceremonies as ours does. 2. That these many
Ceremonies which they used, were every way as inconvenient and evil as ours
are supposed. 3. That the Apostles by divine inspiration and commandment from
God, required the Churches to use so many Ceremonies of such sort. 4. That the
Apostles were moved to do thus, upon reasons of no greater weight then the
avoiding of deprivation and suspension with us. These four points, if he can
indeed make good, as he has undertaken to do, then will no man deny but
that he has confirmed his assumption sufficiently.

The first of these points concerning the number, though it be not set down by
him in so many words, yet it is evidently collected from that which he has
here written, without any wresting of his words or perverting of his meaning.
For when he says, The holy Apostles, with the whole Church at Jerusalem did
practice themselves, and enjoined whole Churches the practice of ceremonies in
number equal unto ours, there is no doubt to be made but that he intended to
say as much, as in this first point he is charged to say. Let us therefore
observe well how he proves this. The Ceremonies (says he) that they (that is
the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem, and whole Churches of diverse and far
distant Countries and Nations, namely the Gentiles in Antiochia, Syria,
Cilicia) did use, were diverse: as namely circumcision, shauing the head,
vowing, purifying, contributing, offering sacrifices for the persons purified,
observation of the Jewish Sabboths, abstaining from blood, abstaining from
strangled. Whereunto this answer may be given; first, that sundry of these 9.
things which he has here reckoned up, can with no good reason be called
Ceremonies. In the last clause of his answer to the first objection, when he
had matched praying and singing in a known tongue, the Prophets speaking one
after another, and women's keeping silence in the Church, with our Ceremonies,
he makes this the reason of it: Because (says he) they be all cases of one
nature, namely of Order and Ceremony in the Church and worship of God. Whereby
he seems to understand that this is of a nature of a Ceremony to be used in
the Church and in the worship of God: which if it be so, then surely can
neither abstaining from blood, nor abstaining from strangled be accounted
Ceremonies. And though it be granted that all these nine things he mentions,
were once commanded in the Ceremonial Law, yet that the Apostles or Churches
he speaks of, did use any of them as Ceremonies, or as in obedience to that
Law, he will never be able to prove. If a man in these days should abstain
from flesh in Lent in the presence of a Papist whom he is loath to offend, and
of whom he conceiueth hope, that by condiscending to him in this he may win
him to the Gospel: or if a Minister coming to a people Popishly affected;
should he (having the gift of continency) for the same reason for bear to
marry? would any man say, that either the one of these, or the other did in so
abstaining practice any Ceremony? or was it a Ceremony in Paul, when having
preached long among the Corinthians and Thessalonians, he departed from his
right, and forebare to take any maintenance from them?

2. If he will needs have all these 9. points to be Ceremonies, yet can he
not make their Ceremonies any whit near equal in number unto ours: For it
will be easy (specially accounting ceremonies as he does here) for their 9.
to reckon up 49. that are used among us. 3. These 9. ceremonies of his, can
never be proved to have been used or practiced by the holy Apostles, the whole
Church at Jerusalem, and those whole Churches of diverse and far countries and
Nations he speaks of, namely of the Gentiles in Antiochia, Siria, and
Cilicia. For the use of Circumcision, he brings the example of the Apostle Paul
only, who is mentioned once to have used it; But for Purifying. Contributing,
offering Sacrifices for the persons purified, he proves that not Paul only, but
four men more did once so, Act. 21. 23, 24. 26. for vowing and shauing of the
head, that Paul did so, not only at that time with those four men, Act. 21.
24. but once before, Act. 18. 18. For the observation of the Jewish Sabbaths;
That in one place Paul and Barnabas preached on the Jews Sabbath in a
Synagogue, Act. 13. 14. In two other places, Paul himself disputed with the
Jews in their Synagogue upon their Sabbath day, Act. 17. 2. and 18. 4. for as
for the place Act. 13. 42. he has much mistaken it: For the Gentiles desired
them to preach to them (...). on some day between that and the Sabbath. And
lastly, for abstaining from blood, and strangled, he alleges the decree of
the Council at Jerusalem, sent unto certain Churches of the Gentiles, Act.
15. 29. Thus we see, that whereas he did undertake to prove, that the holy
Apostles, the whole Church at Jerusalem, and sundry other whole Churches of
sundry Nations in the Apostles times did use and practice more Ceremonies then
the Church of England does, he has not been able to show that either the
Church of Jerusalem, or any one Church then, did practice any one Ceremony, or
any Apostle either besides Paul: or that Paul did at any time use more then 6.
Ceremonies at the most: or that he used any of those six above once or twice
at the uttermost. For neither abstaining from blood or strangled, was enjoined
as any Ceremony to the Churches of the Gentiles, nor the preaching or disputing
in the Synagogues upon the Sabbath, Mat. 20. 55. Act 13. 42. and 20. 3. Act.
17. 17. and 19. 9.
can with any better reason be called a religious observation of the Jews
Sabbath, then Christ's or Paul's preaching and disputing daily when occasion was
offered, will argue, that they did religiously keep and observe as holy, every
day in the weak. And this may suffice to have been said of the first point,
wherein he equalleth the Ceremonies used in the Apostles time, with ours now;
namely, the number of them.

The second point, wherein the confirmation of his assumption consists, is
this; That those ceremonies which the Apostles and the Churches in their times
used, were every way as inconvenient and evil as ours are.

And that he may make this good, he takes upon him to show, 1. That they were
as evil in nature, as ours are. 2. That they had been, and were as much
abused as ours are, or have been. 3. That the use of them wrought as dangerous
effects, as the use of ours can do. 4. That whatsoever is objected against our
ceremonies, might have been said against them.

To all which this answer may be given, that no one of all those testimonies
of holy Scripture, which he here cites to show what names and titles the holy
Ghost gives to ceremonies, that were used in those days; how Ceremonies were
then abused; what evil effects the use of them did bring forth, does make any
whit at all to his purpose, nor can with any color of reason, be applied unto
any ceremony which either the Apostles themselves, or any Church by their
appointment did use. For 1. they were no yokes or burdens, or burdening
Traditions, as the places which himself (a strange thing) cites, do
evidently show: for by Act. 15. 10, 28. it is manifest, that the Apostles would
by no means be drawn to inioyne Ceremonies as were such yokes and burdens.
Neither could they truly be called ordinances of the world, commandments or
doctrines of men, or voluntary religion. For besides that, neither the
Apostles, nor the Churches that used them by their appointment, did put any
religion in them when they used them: if they had done it, yet had not this
been voluntary religion, or a subiecting themselves to the commandments, or
doctrines of men. Because as these things at the first, were of divine
institution, so during the time that the Apostles did inioyne the use of them,
they remained still the commandments of the Lord, as it is evident by that we
find written, Act. 15. 28. 1. Cor. 14. 37. no more could they be termed
impotent and beggarly rudiments, so long and so far forth, as the Apostles
did use or inioyne them, but were of great force and sufficiency, and served
unto very good use, for the winning of the Jews unto, or retaining of them in
the love of the Gospel. This is made the reason, both why James councelleth
Paul, to do as he did, Acts 21. 20. 24. and why Paul became a Jew, to the Jew,
1. Cor. 9. 20.

If it be admitted, that all these places were meant of the Jewish Ceremonies
(as indeed the most of them were) and even of those which the Apostles and
Churches did yield to the use of; yet will Master Spr. be never able to prove
(and if he prove not this he says nothing to the purpose) that when and where
the Apostles of those Churches used them, they had been notoriously known to
have been so abused, or to have wrought such evil effects, as he here
speaks of. Nay it is evident, that after they grew into such abuse, and such
evil effects followed the vfe of them, the Apostles were so far from using
or inioyning them, as they did utterly refuse the use of them themselves, and
forbad it to the Churches, therefore Paul who once had used circumcision, and
some other of the Ceremonies himself does afterward, with great sharpness,
and bitterness, reprove, and condemn the use of them, Gal. 4. 9. 10. and 5.
12. Tit. 1. 14. which places and such like, it is very strange that Master
Spr. would allege to prove that the Apostles, and Churches in their time by
their appointment, did use Ceremonies as bad as ours. For can any man be so
absurd, as to imagine that the Apostle would ever practice, or command those
things after that they were grown so bad, after that he had seen just cause
to inueigh against them, and condemn them in that manner? To this purpose also
the Apostles resolution, in not suffering Titus to be circumcised (when he saw
what an abuse that Ceremony was grown unto, and how dangerous an effect was
like to follow it, if he had yielded unto it) makes very strongly,
notwithstanding any thing that he would seem to say to the contrary in his
answer to the sixth obiction, as shall further appear in the discussing of the
fourth point, that has been observed in the confirmation of this his
assumption.

3. If it were granted, that the Ceremonies which the Apostles used and
appointed, had bin notoriously known to have been subject to so great abuse
of some, and to have had in them so evil effects, even before or at that time,
and in those places also, where the Apostles enjoined them: yet could not this
have proved them every way as inconvenient, and evil as ours are. For ours are
said (and sufficiently proved also, as they suppose who have suffered
deprivation, or suspension for this cause) to be evil, not only because they
have been grossly abused, and very evil effects have followed the use of
them (for so much may be said also of some of Gods own ordinances) but for
that they never were good, nor can ever serve to any good use. Those, as they
were at the first the ordinances of God, so they are here said by Master Spr.
to have been still enjoined to certain Churches by the Apostles; which if it
be so, then could no abuse, that obstinate Jews, or other wicked men had put
them unto, make the use of them either unlawful, or inconvenient unto the
faithful, that by Apostolical (that is divine) authority, were required to
use them.

And here fitly comes to be examined, whether that be true which is
affirmed by him in his second reason, which he brings for the proof of this
point, viz. that nothing in substance is objected against our Ceremonies, which
might not have been said as well against those which the Apostles and Churches
of their times did use. In handling of this point, as he has left out much of
the force and substance of every argument, which in the Abridgement (the book
which himself quoteth) are set down against our Ceremonies, so has he
affirmed much more against them which the Apostles then used, then he is able
to justify and make good. The truth is, that though every one of those four
arguments does strike to the heart the ceremonies of our Church; yet is there
never a one of them that does give the least touch unto those which the
Apostles and Churches then did use.

For first, Ours are humane inventions, notoriously known to have been of
old, and still to be abused to idolatry and superstition by the Papists, and
yet of no necessary use in the Church: Theirs, as they were at first by divine
institution, so were they not at that time when they used them, notoriously
known to have been abused, either to idolatry, or to the confirmation of
false and pernicious doctrine, and were at that time of necessary use: and
though they had been never so much abused, and had been also in any other of
no necessary use; yet because they were used, by warrant of Apostolical and
divine authority, this first argument touches them not at all, he does
indeed deny all this, and quoteth Scripture to prove that they were humane
inventions, of no necessary use, and abused to superstition. But it has been
already showed, that all these Scriptures are misunderstood, and applied by
him; and no more shall need to be said for the conuincing of him in this point,
when that himself (clearly and strongly contradicting himself) has both
elsewhere in this argument, and even in this very place affirmed. For were they
humane inventions, which himself here says were practiced and taught by
direction of the holy Ghost? were they of no necessary use, which he in the
proof of his first proposition of his first argument, Number. 8. affirms to have
bin commanded by the Apostles, as matters good and necessary in that case, and
brings for proof thereof? Act. 15. 28.

2. Ours are humane Ceremonies appropriated to Gods service, and ordained to
teach spiritual duties, by their mystical signification. Theirs, as they were
not appropriated to Gods service, so neither were they used or appointed by the
Apostles to be used for mystical signification; or if they had, yet (seeing
as has before been showed) they were not humane Ceremonies, this argument
does not concern them. It is true indeed that they were in their first
institution significatiue and mystical, and thus much the places quoted by him
here, viz. Col. 2. 16. 17 Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 8 23 and 10. 1. do prove: But that
either the Apostles used them or ordained them, that they might teach some
spiritual duty by their mystical signification, that he has not so much as
indeauoured to prove. And surely if Paul did use circumcision as a Sacrament,
Acts 16. 3. then by the force of Master Spr. argument here (which maintains
it lawful for us to do now what the Apostles or Churches in their time did:)
it may be concluded that it is lawful for us to use in Gods service, other
Sacraments then those which God has ordained.

3. Ours being but humane Ceremonies are esteemed, imposed, and observed as
parts of Gods worship. Theirs cannot be proved to be observed by them, much
less imposed upon them as parts of Gods worship; and if they had, yet because
they were not humane Ceremonies, this argument makes nothing against them: For
what is this to the purpose that here he takes upon him to prove, That the
Jews esteemed, imposed, and observed them as necessary to salvation, Acts 15.
1. 5? That the zealous Jews were violently offended with Paul, for teaching
that Christians ought not to circumcise their children, and to live after the
legal customs Acts 21. 27? That the Apostles ordained them as good and
necessary, Act. 15. 28. 29? That the Apostle conformed himself unto them for
their sakes, and in their presence that esteemed them as worships of God, Acts
15. 1. 5. and 16. 3. and 21. 26? Seeing the question between us is not here,
whether the Jews observed and imposed Ceremonies, as bad as ours; but whether
the Apostles or any Church by their appointment did so. Did the Apostles or any
of them, whose conformity of Ceremonies is now in question between us, use any
Ceremony as imposed by those Jews he speaks of here? And what though the
Apostles called those things that by their decree was enjoined good and
necessary? will it follow from thence that they imposed them as parts of Gods
worship? or can nothing be good and necessary, but that which is a part of Gods
worship? Though the superstitious estimation the people among who^ they are
used, have of them be objected by the ministers in the abridgement (and that
justly and materially) against our ceremonies: Yet does not the maine forces of
this third argument lie in that, but in this rather; that though they be but
humane Ceremonies, yet they that inioyne them do esteem and impose them as
parts of the worship of God, which puts a manifest difference between them
and the Ceremonies that were used by the Apostles, or any Church by their
appointment.

4 In the imposing and using of ours, those rules that are prescribed in the
Word for matters of direction in the Church concerning Ceremonies, are not
kept. For they are no way needful or profitable for the edification of the
Church, but are known to cause offense every where, and hinderance unto
edification* and are observed only for the will and pleasure of them that do
inioyne them. Theirs though they were used and appointed by them, who had more
far absolute authority, and might lawfully have commanded in the Church of
God, specially doing that they did by the inspiration of the holy Ghost: yet
were they also squared and directed by the rules of the holy Scripture, and
were no way offensive, but tended greatly to the edification of Gods people.
And how often has Master Spr. affirmed in the prosecuting of this argument,
that they were profitable and necessary, and alleged for proof thereof, Acts
15. 28. 29. though here as forgetting himself he do deny it? Yea this very
Section here, wherein he takes upon him to prove they were not needful or
profitable, they served rather to destroy then to edify the Church, he
concludes with this clause; Yet their use and yielding served to edify, by
making way to the Churches peace and furtherrnce of the Gospel. And this vain
of contradicting himself he takes such pleasure in, as he continues it to
the end of his discourse, wherein he laboreth to prove that the fourth argument
against the Ceremonies in the abridgement, makes as strongly against the
Apostles, as against our Church. They were not profitable for order (says he,
in the beginning of that Section) and in the conclusion of it affirms, yet it
was order to use and practice them in that case. And in the beginning of the
next Section, having said, they were not profitable for decency; for what was
more indecent then for a Christian to use idle, unfruitful, needless and
beggarly rudiments; by and by he adds, yet did this indecency uphold an higher
decency: Which last phrase of speech (besides the contradiction) is very hard
to be understood; for how can indecency support decency? or in what sense can
the establishment of the faith, and the daily increase of the number of the
Churches be termed a higher decency? or how could the indecency of these
Ceremonies establish the faith and increase the Churches. After this in going
about to show that they were offensive many ways, in the fifth Section he
says, that in the event they did serve indeed as means to infringe the
Christian liberty, and immediately after; yet the use and practice of these
things by the direction of the Apostles did procure the liberty of the Gospel:
So that if M. Spr. himself be to be beelieu'd, every indifferent and
understanding man will easily discern that the 4. Argument which the Ministers
have used against our ceremonies in the abridgement, does not any way concern
those which the Apostles did use. And surely it would be altogether needless
to insist longer upon this part of this his Discourse, but that there is one
thing affirmed by him, which may not be passed over: For noting this to be the
4. way, whereby those ceremonies were offensive; that the Apostles themselves
were offended in imposing that they did, he adds that they taught against
the things which they enjoined; that namely, they ought not to be used by the
Jews or Gentiles. It is strange any learned or Godly man should so far
forget himself, as to charge the holy Apostles to have inoyned the faithful
to use those things which themselves did teach ought not to be used, either by
Jews or Gentiles; specially when the text expressly says, that what they
enjoined, they enjoined by the direction of the Holy Ghost. The place he cites
to prove this that he says, viz. Act. 21. 21. does not affirm that Paul had
taught so indeed, but that the Jews had been so informed of him: and by James
his words verse. 24. it appears also that information was false. And if this
which he speaks of the Apostles preaching this against that which they did so
decree, were to be believed, (which God forbid) what had he gained by it?
surely that there could be no force in this example or decree to bind us in
conscience to use those things which they in their doctrine did teach ought not
to be used by any Christian: And so this his first Argument, wherein he has
labored so much and with so great confidence, is by himself utterly
overthrown.

The third maine point in confirmation of the assumption of his first Argument
is this, That the Apostles by divine inspiration and commandment from God,
required the Churches to use so many Ceremonies, and such as were as
inconvenient and evil as ours are supposed to be. That whatsoever the
Apostles did inioyne the Churches, they did it by divine inspiration and
commandment from God, is so undoubted a truth, as he needed not at all to have
troubled himself in the confirmation of it, it being so hard to find any
scholar that would so much gainsay, or call this in question, as he himself
has (sometimes) done in this Treatise. All the question in this point is,
Whether ever the Apostles did inioyne unto whole Churches so many Ceremonies as
ours are, and those also as inconvenient and evil as ours are: This he goes
about to prove after this manner; They caused others to practice ceremonies:
for Paul circumcised Timothy, Act. 16. 3. and took the men, and was purified
with them, Act. 21. 26. They advised one another to practice ceremonies: for
James and the Elders persuaded Paul thus to conform, Acts. 21. 23. 24. They
enjoined or commanded the practice of Ceremonies: for thus did the Council at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. 28. 29. This constitution is called the decrees that were
ordained by the Apostles and Elders, Act. 16. 4. and the determination of the
Apostles, Act. 21. 25. and this commandment they gave to whole Churches of
diverse and far distant countries and Nations, namely to the Gentiles in
Antiochia, Siria, and Cilicia, Act. 15. 23. and afterward he adds that the
Ceremonies that they did thus cause others to practice, advise one another to
practice, inioyne whole Churches to practice, were as inconvenient and evil as
ours, both for number, nature, and evil effects.

For answer unto all this: First, it were sufficient to say, That he has not
performed that, which he has undertaken, because he proves not that the
Apostles enjoined so many Ceremonies as we have in our Church; or that any one
of those Ceremonies which he says they did inioyne, were as inconvenient and
evil as ours are: And for this point he is to be referred to that which has
been answered unto the two former parts of his Assumption.

2. Though he had proved, that they did inioyne unto some one, or some few
persons such Ceremonies, as were both for number and for nature as bad as ours:
yet unless he had showed, that they had enjoined them unto whole Churches,
he has not concluded that which he took in hand. And therefore that which
he brings of Paul's circumcising of Timothy, or James persuading Paul to
purify himself, is nothing to the purpose.

3. He has not proved (nor ever will be able to do) that the Apostles did
join the practice of any one of those Ceremonies to any one Church, or to any
one person, eitheir by inspiration of the Holy Ghost. For as for circumcision
of Timothy though it be true that Paul did it, and did it well: yet it would be
a harsh speech and vniustifieable, to say, that he compelled, or enjoined, or
commanded Timothy to be circumcised. And for that which James and the Elders
said to Paul concerning his purifying, besides that it cannot hastily be
called a commandment, or iniunction (because no Church or Apostle had so much
authority over Paul, as to command him any thing, 2. Cor. 11. 5. Gal. 2. 6. 9.)
Master Spr. knows well, that some are Magdaburg. Centurion. 1. lib. 2. p.
603. Gualt. in act. 21. hom. 139. Zanch. de red. p. 491. b.
great Divines, who have plainly affirmed that James and the Elders, did ill
in pressing Paul so far in this matter; Calvin. in act. 21. 22. 23.
others stand in doubt whether they did well in it or no; sure it is, he can
never soundly prove, either out of this or any other place of Scripture, that
they did it by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, or commandment of God. The
place which he puts most confidence in for the proof of this third point is
Acts 15. for there we read indeed of a decree sent by the Apostles unto sundry
Churches, and that decree was made by the inspiration, or direction of the Holy
Ghost. But to this place it may be answered that things mentioned in this
decree, were so far from being so many Ceremonies, or so bad as ours are
(which he must still be put in mind, that he should have proved) that in
very deed they were no Ceremonies at all, neither ever came into the mind or
purpose of the Apostles, when they made that decree to inioyne the use of any
Ceremonies to the Churches. For to omit this that the mere abstaining and
forbearing the use of many things, can with no good show of reason be called
the use, or practice of a Ceremony; though the abstinence from blood and
strangled, were once a ceremonial duty (while the law was in force) yet it
was now enjoined by the Apostles to the Gentiles, not as a ceremonial, but as
a moral duty, that they should abstain from their libertiy in the use of
these indifferent things, when they saw the use of them would offend their
weak brother. And surely seeing the reason and end of this abstinence was not
any such mystical signification, as it had under the law, but only to avoid
the offense of the Jew; it could no more be called a Jewish Ceremony, then if
either out of a natural loathing of those meats, or respect had to their
health, or some such like consideration, they had forborne the same. Neither
let Mr. Spr. think it strange that the same thing, which being commanded in
the law, was a Ceremony, should now, being commanded by the Apostles, alter
the nature and become no Ceremony. Let him consult with the best Divines, and
Interpreters of the Scripture, and he shall find, that though circumcision,
was a Sacrament under the Law, yet Timothy his circumcision Calvin. in Act. 16.
3.
was no Sacrament; and that all the Ceremonies of the law were so abrogated by
the death of Christ, as that (though some use of them did remain for a time)
yet they did no longer belong to the worship of God, nor were figures of
spiritual things, nor were observed in conscience of obedience to the
ceremonial law: In which things consists the very life and essence of a
Jewish Ceremony, and without which nothing can in good propriety of speech be
called a Ceremony. But what need any more be said of this matter, when the
Apostles themselves speaking of this decree affirm that they that said the
Gentiles ought to keep the law, did in saying so, seek to subvert their
souls: that they had written and concluded, that the believing Gentiles should
observe no such thing, (as vowing, shauing of the head, purifying, etc.) save
only that they keep themselves from things offered to idols, and from blood,
and from strangled, and from fornication: By which words also they do
plainly intimate, that this abstinence which they inioyne in this decree, was
no such thing, (but of another kind and nature) as vowing, purifying, shauing
of the head, offering, etc. and consequently was not enjoined by them as any
Ceremony of Moses Law.

The fourth and last point in the confirmation of his assumption is this, that
the Apostles and Churches were moved thus to enjoin and practice such
Ceremonies, so many, so inconvenient and evil, upon reasons of no greater
weight, then the avoiding of deprivation is with us.

This he proves by specifying the causes and reasons that moved the Apostles
to practice and enjoin those Ceremonies, which he says were these three:
First, for the believing Jews that they might not be offended, nor occasioned
to turn back to Iudaisme, Acts 16. 1, 3. and 21. 20, 21, 24. Secondly, for
the unbelieving Jews, that they might be won to the Gospel and saved, 1 Cor.
9. 20, 22. and 10. 32, 33. Thirdly, to avoid the persecution of the malicious
Jews, and so to redeem the liberty of the ministry, which otherwise was
like to be endangered, Act. 21. 22, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32.

For answer unto all this, it may be said, that if the Apostles had practiced
and enjoined such as are evil Ceremonies as ours are, they had far greater
reason so to do, then the avoiding of deprivation is with us. For first, as
their ministry was of more great excellency then ours, whether we respect the
extraordinary gifts wherewith they were endued, or the wonderful power of God,
which did accompany them, and give success and fruit to their labors: so the
redeeming of the liberty of their ministry (if that were any cause, as he here
supposes it was) was, and ought to have been of much more weight to move them
to do as they did, then the continuance of us in our ministry can be to
persuade us to the use of our Ceremonies. What one Minister of the Gospel is
there that dare to be so presumptuous, as to say that his preaching and
ministry can be of that necessity and use for the glory of God, and good of
his Church, as was the ministry of any Apostle? The work whereunto the Lord
has called and separated the Apostles, (viz. the planting of the Church, and
preaching of the Gospel to all nations) was such as could not have been
performed by any other but the Apostles alone: But in the deprivation of our
Ministers that refuse conformity, there is no such danger, and of their
preaching, there can be no such necessity imagined; though they preach not,
the Gospel is preached still, and that soundly and fruitfully. And how then can
Master Spr. say, that the avoiding of deprivation with us, is a reason either
superior or aequiualent unto that which moved the Apostles to do as they did?
if he had said, there is great similitude and analogy between these two
cases, he had spoken probably, but to maintain a paritie between them he has
no color of reason at all.

2. The Apostles in using and inioyning those Ceremonies, might be well
assured that they should greatly further the success of the Gospel thereby,
the believing Jews would be preserved from Apostasy, the unbelieving (many
of them) would be gained and that they should not only obtain liberty, and
freedom for their Ministry by this means among the Jews, but that the very
using of these things would edify them. Now our Ministers have no reason that
is either Superior or aequiualent unto this, to persuade them to the use of our
Ceremonies, for they cannot be assured that the using of our Ceremonies would
do any good at all: no they are well assured by many reasons and long
experience that they would do much hurt every way, both unto the belieuer, and
to him that is not yet called to the faith. And should not he (think you) have
great cause to brag of this bargain, who after that he had purchased the
liberty of his ministry by yielding unto conformity, should find ever after a
woeful experience, that he has done much more hurt by his conformity, then
good by his ministry.

3. The Apostles in using and inioyning those Ceremonies (if they had enjoined
any) and the Churches also in observing them by their appointment (if any such
thing had bin were well assured in their consciences they did that which was
not only lawful but necessary for them to do, and that they had sinned if
they had not done so: for they had divine authority to warrant and command to
do as they did. Will Master Spr. say that the avoiding of deprivation with us,
is a reason either superior or equiuolent unto this? our Ministers can
discern no such warrant for the use of our ceremonies, but are fully assured
they have this commandment expressly to the contrary: And will any man persuade
them that for the avoiding of deprivation, or a far greater penalty (though
indeed that be very great) they may do a thing which they are assured is evil
in the sight of the Lord.

For a conclusion to this answer unto his first maine argument, it shall not
be amiss to set down and repeat sundry material differences between the
case of the Apostles and Churches in their times and ours now.

1. They used such Ceremonies only, as both at the first were divine
ordinances, and the use whereof was warranted unto them by divine authority; We
are required to use such as are inventions, not humane only but Antichristian.

2. They used them in this persuasion of their conscience, that they might in
that case and ought to be used: neither did they ever inioyne them to any that
held them unlawful: ours are imposed upon such as are persuaded in their
conscience they cannot use them without sin.

3. They used them but once or twice upon extraordinary occasion: we are
required to use ours constantly and continually in the ordinary exercise of our
ministry.

4. They never used them, but when they saw evidently that the use of them
would prevent scandal, and tend unto edification: we are required to use ours,
though we see evidently the use of them would hinder edification, and give
offense many ways.

A Reply to the Answer of my first Reason for Conformity in case of
Deprivation.
LEst the answers of my reasons should hold me void of charity, which is not
suspicious, or to be carried on with evil surmising: I will omit, that sending
an answer to me, which am the second person from them, they give answer as to
a third. Neither will I insist upon the Ironies which may seem too palpable,
and among godly minds needed not especially in disquisition of a truth of so
great consequence: Only I put my brethren and my self in mind, for our
better prosecuting of this question, that piety is meek and gentle, equalling
her self to the lower sort: it scorneth not such as are differing from it in
judgment, it is not provoked to anger, but in evidence and demonstration of
the truth, approves her self to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

Now as there is none end of making many books, so Gods wisdom should
instruct us, by contention not to leingthen controversies, for which cause I
have purposed to be short in reply.

Touching the Preface or general answer, made before the Answer to
particulars, it might, as I suppose have been well spared* as being to small
purpose, and quite besides the point in question: For,

1. The Answerers could not be ignorant and my Conclusion, drift in handling,
matter, manner, whole course of prosecuting in every Argument, do plainly
stretch no farther then to enforce Conformity in case of Deprivation. Therefore
this caution is but a voluntary and studious wandering from the question;
Neither do these arguments labor to make the world believe, that all deprived
Ministers have sinned in suffering Deprivation, but so many only as for not
conforming, have suffered deprivation. Therefore this speech of theirs is either
an untrue surmise, or a scornful Ironie.

2. Though the Answerers should be ignorant that any Minister should suffer
Deprivation for only refusing to conform; yet all the faithful Ministers of
these our parts do know the contrary of sundry: my self do know it of my
self, and others. And who can be ignorant, that diverse Ministers have been
deprived only for not conforming, by inditements at Assise and Sessions, as
well as by the Bishops, and do perpetually stand liable to that censure; and
is a cause ouer-ruled, as appears in the Lo. Cooks reports? Again, it is
well known, that for these later 5. or 6. years, subscription has not been
urged to Incumbents or settled Ministers, but mere conformity: And Bishops have
acknowledged* being put in mind by men of learning in the Laws, that they
could not urge Subscription, either by virtue of the Statute, or the book of
Canons, to such as were already placed and settled in their charges. It was
therefore unadvisedly and untruly affirmed (to say no more) that M. Sprint
surely bestowed his time very ill, and spent a great deal of labor to no
purpose at all. And the question is easily solued, which asks, Where be those
Ministers to be found in England that have suffered Deprivation for no other
cause, but for that they have refused to conform.

But besides the caution here made, the Brethren my Answerers were not ignorant
of the principal point, which they should have thought upon chiefly, and would
have qualified this their censure; that for mine own necessary resolution in a
doubt of deprivation, I undertook this business at first; and yet besides
they do forget, that in my reasons there are specified other ends and use of
this my labor, that it should not be ill bestowed; namely, to move all
Ministers who were deprived, even for Subscription, as well as for
nonconformity, to try whether by offer of conformity they might not return
unto their Ministry, which would be a cause of wondrous benefit and comfort to
the Church. Also it serves to resolve and quiet such as are to enter, which
being scrupulous to conform, can receive admittance by none other means. And
lastly, it has use for professors of Religion, which without conformity to the
ceremonies, (as kneeling at the Communion, or admitting the cross) can by no
means in the most places receive the Sacraments of Baptism, or the Lords
Supper: which things have bred no small perplexity of mind, and outward
trouble to many godly persons, who if by this means of my labor they might be
resolved (as they may be, if they will follow the judgment and practice of
all true Churches and faithful teachers since Christ) would prove labor to
great and good purpose, and far from labor very ill bestowed. Men should
beware of bearing false witness against their neighbor, or his honest
labors: If therefore the Brethrens answer prove no sounder in the particular
then in the general, out of all question it is but weak, which now I will
further consider of.

And before I give reply unto the particular answer, let my Brethren know,
that this Argument urged by me, is no fancy of mine own, but has bin thus
conceived, even as I urge it, by persons of most reverend note in the Church of
God, such as Calvin, Martyr, Zanchius, Vrsinus, Piscator, Polanus, to the end
that they do not so lightly esteem of it and cast it of, but may be moved
more seriously to consider of it: Their judgments, I will deliver in these two
propositions.

1. The Jewish Ceremonies after the death of Christ, were in sundry respects as
inconvenient, and unlawful to be practiced by Christians, as the Ceremonies of
the Church of England are pretended to be: yet the holy Apostles of Christ did
lawfully practice them, and cause others to practice them in cases of
necessity, as of the peace of the Church, or propagation of the Gospel.

Calvin in Act. 21. 24. fol. 355. That Ceremony of vowing, practiced by Paul,
seemed to have in it some things mingled with it (Parum consentanea cum fidei
professione) smally agreeing with the profession of faith: yet he defends his
practice by the place, 1. Cor. 9. 20. Idem in Act. 16. 3. fol. 27. says, Non
licuisse fidelibus eas retinere, nisi quatenus earu^ vsus in adificationem
faceret: That it was not lawful for the faithful to retain their use, but
only so far forth as their use did make for the edification of the Church:
yet in this case he defends the practice of Paul, Paulo circumcidere
Timotheum licuit. fol. 270. the like he does in Act. 21. 23. citing, 1. Cor.
9. 20.

Zanchius says of the forbidding of strangled and blood, Act. 15. 28. that
they were things Superstitionem Iudaicam redolentes, also of Paul's vow and
purification, Act. 18. 18. and 21. 23. thus he speaks, Fuerunt tamen etiam
illi tunc temporis ritus stipulae, cum fundamento Christo non congruentes: yet
he defendes their practice by the law of charity, and for the peace and
edification of the Church, Comment. in Phillip. 1. fol. 45. (b*)

Pet. Martyr calls the Ceremony of abstaining from blood and strangled Citra
controuersiam Aharonicam: yet he defends the action as lawful; Pro pace and
conuictu credentium faciliori, Loc. com. inter Epist. fol. 1087.

Piscator calls the circumcision of Timothy, re^ molesta^ both to Paul and
Timothy, in Act. 16. 3. yet he defends that practice of his, by that saying
of 1. Cor. 9. 19. 20. as also that practice of Act. 18. 18.

Now, that the Ceremonies practiced by the Apostles, were as evil and
inconvenient in their judgment, as our prescribed Ceremonies, the proofs of
the next proposition will manifest.

2. The practice of the Jewish Ceremonies, by the Apostles in a case of
necessity, such as deprivation of Ministry, is a sufficient ground to move us
to conform to the Ceremonies prescribed in our Church, in a case of the like
necessity.

Peter Martyr defending the lawful use (Vestium Ministrorum Ecclesiae
Anglicanae) alleges the Apostles iniunction, of Act. 15. 23. of Judicial
Ceremonies. Quis non videt Apostolos, pro pace and conuictu credentium
faciliori, mandasse gentibus vt a sanguine and praefocato abstinerent? Erant
haec citra controuersiam Aharonica, si generaliter omnia quae in lege fuerunt
complecti volueris. Loc. com. fol. 1087. inter. Epist. Hoopero.

Vrsinus: Speaking, De vitiosis Ceremonijs falsis opinionibus, cum veritatis
insectationibus says, Neque vero polluitur recte sentiens, cum vtitur
Ministerio errantium, and Ceremonias etiam humanas seruat, si modo errores
diserte, and constanter improbet, and neque verbis, neque factis aliquis palam,
and per se impiam, and verbo Dei repugnans committat, and humanas traditiones
pro cultu Dei se non habere profiteatur, Paulo Post: sic Paulus obseruatione
Ceremoniarum accomodabat se infirmis, cum auersarentur eum tanquam hostem legis
and moris patrij and in hacre non peccabat. And that we may not doubt but that
he speaks of Ceremonies, as inconvenient as those of our Church, in their
judgment; he adds presently after, that such was the judgment of P. Martyr;
as also his practice, who when he came first into England, and the error of
corporal presence was as yet in force, did yet with profession of his opposite
judgment, receive the Lords Supper with them, Non obstantibus sibi illorum
Ceremonijs licet ipsimolestis. exercitat. part. 2. fol. 838, 839, 840.

Zanchius persuades the Ministers being compelled by necessity of Magistrates
compulsion, and threats to the practice of such Ceremonies, which may be
termed stipula and faenum. And gives instance of the Apostles practice of
Jewish Ceremonies, (as before is alleged) concluding thus, Ergo multa
toleranda sunt ministris, ne pax scindatur Ecclesiarum, and vt vitentur
Schismata, modo ne tales sint, vel res, vel doctrinae quae pugnent cum
fundamento, fundamentumque conuellant, in Philip. cap. 1. fol. 45.

Polanus in Ezec. cap. 44. fol. 807. moves a question de vest linea, of the
Surplesse; Si in aliqua Ecclesia Euangelica prorsus non possit omitti vsus
vestis lineae seu superpelliceae, absque metu Schismatis, aut subreptionis
haereticorum, quid tum faciendum? He answers, Praestat tum vti vest linea,
tanquam re adiaphora, quam obstinata eius reiectione excitare Schisma inter
rumpere cursum veritatis doctrinae, and praebere occasionem haereticis
occupandi Ecclesiam. And of this his judgment he gives instance in the
Apostles practice thus, Exemplum est in Paulo qui circumcidit Timotheum propter
Iudaeos sciebant enim omnes Patrem eius Graecum esse, Act. 16. 3.

Now to the answer of my first reason.

Which first reason of mine, when my Brethren went about to answer, if they
would needs vnstrip out of his own coat which I had framed, and draw into a
Syllogism of their own, yet ought they not to make an argument, or new reason
of their own, and so to fight without an adversary: But their duty was (as
they well know) faithfully to have taken all the substance of that I set down
in the whole reason, and that especially included in my Syllogism, which they
have not done: piety and sincerity, and faithful dealing should go
together; and thus they should have laid it down.

To refuse to practice such Ceremonies, which the Apostles by direction of the
holy Ghost, and upon reasons of common and perpetual equity did practice
themselves, and caused others to practice, yea advised and enjoined (as matters
good and necessary to be done) on others, especially in a like case in sundry
maine and material respects, is a sin.

But to refuse conformity with our Ceremonies in the case of deprivation, is
to refuse to practice such Ceremonies, which the Apostles by direction of the
holy Ghost, and upon reasons of common and perpetual equity did practice
themselves, and caused others to prctise; yea, advised and enjoined (as matters
good and necessary to be done) on others, and that in like case in diverse
maine and material respects.

Ergo: To refuse to conform in the case of deprivation, is a sin.

The Proposition of this argument thus proposed, is sufficiently confirmed in
that which is included in the second member of mine answer to the first
objection, in these words [though we may not imitate the Apostles in things
peculiar to their office, persons and times, yet we may follollow them, and are
bound in conscience so to do in matter of common equity, and general reason:
for as the Apostles had warrant from the holy Ghost, so have we warrant from
the Apostles examples, and from the reasons for which the holy Ghost moved them
to do these things.]

Thus if my Brethren had proposed mine argument, they needed not to have spent
so many words, nor sounded such a triumph before the victory: viz. 1. That the
proposition is false and unsound. 2. That I never go about to prove it: which
assertion of theirs they straight confute themselves, by setting down my
proofs of the proposition. 3. That I forgot my self what I had urged before.
4. That I weaken my proposition, and make it of no strength.


But let us see what material show of exceptions they bring against the
proposition of mine argument.

Whereas I said that the Apostles did use and inioyne the Jewish Ceremonies,
not only by immediate authority from God, but by reasons also and rules of
common and perpetual equity, and further did give instance of the rule of
expediency and necessity out of Act. 15. 28. The answer is, that though it be
granted to be true, yet shall they be as far to seek as before they were:
For still the question will be, whether there be the same reasons now to move
us to the use of our Ceremonies as moved the Apostles then, because they
suppose there might be some special causes might make those Ceremonies
necessary, which never fell out before nor shall do so again. And to this I
say that there needed no such further seeking as before: and the questions
demanded touching common reasons with the Apostles, were set down in the self
same place where they read the other, in the words immediately following, which
reasons are these; namely,

1. To win the more, 1. Cor. 9. 19. 20. 21. 22. Now all men know, that this
reason should move every godly minister in his place, and according to his
parts and calling to labor the winning of souls, no less then it did move
the Apostles, for all are required to be faithful, 2. Cor. 4. 1. 2. all are
alike commanded of God in the Prou. and all alike are to receive reward, Dan.
12. 3.

2. To further and propagate the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 23. which also is a common
care appertaing to us now, as to the Apostles then. For the commandment given
to the the Apostles does stretch in respect of place to all Nations, Matthew. 28.
19. Luke 24 47. and in regard of time, to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 19.
20. Reu. 14. 6. 7.

Wherefore the following (might be or) supposall of causes might have well
been spared, unless they had been named: For my Brethren do well know that A
posse ad esse non val et argumentatio.

Howbeit they confess at last that the two forenamed reasons be matters of
common and perpetual equity (what need then was there to seek for that they
had, or question that they grant at last?) and yet again they ouerwhelme them
with a new supply of unwarranted supposalls [that something may be expedient
for some persons and times, as are not for other without a special calling
from God:] But here again the former rule cuts them off from arguing from a
naked and unproven supposal: And indeed it is but petitio principij, an
encroaching on the point in question: Besides, it is a very feeble answer that
is only affirmed without proof; so might a man argue against the practice of
every part of discipline practiced by the Apostles, which may be said to be
proper to their function, time and place. Therefore it follows by this kind
of argumentation: their practice may seem to give us no stronger warrant, then
the practice of those Ceremonies in the case of necessity, unless we were
inspired and had immediate authority from God: The like might be argued from
other sundry matters.

2. To the exception of the next member or allegation, that namely, the holy
Ghost teaches and rules the Church by the same reason revealed in his Word,
as well now as then: and therefore the reasons warranting the Apostles to
conform to the Jewish ceremonies, may move us to conform to these in the like
case;] It seems to me a palpable cavil, and it may seem probable to others,
that my Brethren would here studiously not understand my meaning. For what
need was there for me (as they could possibly suppose, to prove a duty of
common equity, by an extraordinary case, or by a sentence of extraordinary
sense? And if there had been that difficulty in that sentence which they
pretend: yet Grammar might have put them in mind that sentences of doubtful
interpretation, should be construed by that which immediately goes before, or
follows after, especially if it cohaere therewith. Now the rules or reasons
spoken of in that very place immediately before, as also immediately after this
sentence, are expressly specified to be rules and reasons of perpetual and
common equity, which they could not be ignorant of, and therefore the instance
of Abraham urged this second time comes in here as unseasonably as it did
before, that is as much to say, as to no purpose at all.

3. Lastly, to the instance which I gave out of 1. Cor. 14. 27, 30, 31, 34, 35,
40. It is answered by my Brethren, that I affirm that which seems to have no
color of good reason in it; namely, because of the different natures of the
Jewish ceremonies, and of these prescribed by S. Paul in the forenamed place.
Howbeit. I say again, although there be disagreement in respect of
dissimilitude of Ceremonies, the one sort of them decent of themselves, and by
the light of nature, the other sort (namely, for a Christian to practice Jewish
Ceremonies) unseemly; the one sort fitted to all times, the other only
practiced in certain cases, and in some Churches; yet there is agreement
between them in those things for which they are alleged: For 1. both sorts
are matters ceremonial and circumstantiall, not substantial or fundamental.
Ceremonia may be genus to them both. 2. Both sorts were prescribed and
practiced by the holy Apostles. 3. Both sorts had the same rules, grounds, or
ends of practice: namely, Necessity, expediency, profit and edification of the
Church. Now touching our Ceremonies, albeit they be not of that nature
altogether with those prescribed of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. yet I suppose them
to be of the nature of the Jewish Ceremonies practiced by the Apostles, and
therefore do conclude with all godly learned teachers that ever uttered their
judgments herein, that for necessity, expediency, profit, and edification of
the Church, as for the liberty of the Gospel, and preventing the deprivation of
faithful Teachers, they may lawfully, and must necessarily be practiced, no
less then the Jewish practiced, or the Christian Ceremonies prescribed by the
Apostles, 1. Cor. 14. As for the question concerning impious and Idolatrous
orders, such as a man ought rather to die, then yield unto their practice, I
marvel my Brethren would not consider, that if they speak of other Ceremonies
then ours, they are besides our question, and touch not the point in hand. If
of ours, yet that they do still petere principium, unless they plainly
prove our Ceremonies as they are used in our Church, to be such indeed. And
thus much also shall suffice for the defense of the proposition of my Argument.

Now to the answer of the Assumption.

The answer, which my Brethren make, they have reduced to 4. heads, replying
to 4. parts of mine Assumption. Touching 1. the number, 2. the nature, 3. the
warrant or ground, 4. the reasons of practice of the Jewish ceremonies and ours.



The first member says, That sundry of the things I allege, can with no good
reason be called Ceremonies, because they would enforce my words against their
will, to say that I defined a ceremony to be that, which is used only in Gods
worship: But sundry of the things alleged were not such, and therefore by
mine own account they were not Ceremonies. But my Brethren should know, that
howsoever I say, that there be Ceremonies in Gods worships, yet that lets
not, but that there may be ceremonies out of G^ds worship; and so that
collection of theirs is marred: But if for once I shall let it stand, and be
as they would have it, what could they get by it? As though every ceremony of
the ceremonial Law, whereof we spoke, were not a worship of God, because
whatsoever God commands, is a worship to perform: Therefore these things
were both worships, and Ceremonies in Gods worships sometimes, which if my
Brethren had remembered, they would have blotted out this for a cipher; yea, by
this reason, abstaining from blood, and strangled, must needs be Ceremonies,
though they would not have it so: Which might further appear, because it is
one distinction of the Ceremonies of Moses law, that they were either of
action, as circumcision, or of abstinence, as abstaining from swines flesh,
blood, and strangled: Because they had signification, and were shadows of good
things to come, and therefore Ceremonies. Lastly, because ceremonial duties,
and therefore Ceremonies, seeing they were included under, and commanded by the
ceremonial law of God, and so receiving denomination from that law: Which last
reason my brethren themselves do give hereof; therefore by their confession
they are Ceremonies. But they add that I shall never be able to prove, that
the Apostles or Churches did use them as Ceremonies, or as in obedience to that
law: And I say again, suppose I never go about to prove it, what needs me
to do it? What if I grant (as I do freely) that it is true and evident, and
that it can by no means be proved, nay that the contrary is manifest? It
suffiseth me that they inoyned these things, that were some times duties,
though not as they were duties of the law, merely ceremonial, and now after
Christ his death, when as the holy Apostles practiced them, were fruitless,
dead, unprofitable in themselves: yea which might and did prove hurtful unto
some, which held them still as worships, Col. 2. 23. and means of
justification, Gal. 5. 2. 4. and even necessary to salvation, Act. 15. 1. 5.
Wherefore the instances of abstaining from flesh, or from marriage, for the
wining of a Papist, and of Paul's departing from his right, are of no value.

To the second and third members, concerning the number and often use of the
Ceremonies alleged, I answer, that albeit they grant but six of the Jewish
Ceremonies, and allege nine and forty Ceremonies of our Church: yet the
Ceremonies which are questioned by the deprived Ministers at this time, such
and so many I mean, as come under the compass of their practice, or of this
our question, that is so many, the practice whereof would keep a man from
deprivation, are not six, as Cross in Baptism, Surplesse, Ring in Marriage,
observation of Holy Days, and if there be one or two more, let it be so. It is
a matter needles to contend about the number, and about the often use and
iniunction of them. For if I prove but one Jewish Ceremony, at one only time
used lawfully by the Apostles, yet as evil in the most maine and material
respects, as ours are, and that by reasons of common and perpetual equity,
thence I will argue the lawfulness of the Apostles using them an hundred
times, and in an hundred Churches. Again if Paul did lawfully practice
circumcision on Timothy, and shauing, vowing, offering, and purifying on
himself, I will conclude, that he might as lawfully practice on the like
occasions, and for the same just reasons, the most part of the Ceremonies of
the law ceremonial, if need had been, which amount to a far greater
reckoning, then the Ceremonies of our Church make them, as many as my brethren
may. In a word, if they were lawfully practiced, then might the practice
thereof be lawfully enjoined vn-the Churches where necessity enforces; seeing
it is the iniunction of a lawful and needful thing. As for those proofs of
mine, which my brethren do sift clean contrary to my drift or practice; there
was no need for themselves so to wrest them, and then to lay the wresting of
them to my charge, as if from them I had concluded, quidlibet ex quolibet. They
were orderly and perspicuously set down by me under every head or member, in
as much as that without wresting and abusing, they could not intend more then I
did there clearly prove by the^: For though I did undertake to prove every
head or member of my proposition, by the Scripture annexed to them in several;
yet I did not undertake to prove every member, or any member by every
Scripture, as my brethren would enforce upon me: This dealing of my brethren
was not so direct as I could wish.

And one thing more, that whereas I allege the Apostles iniunction of
abstaining from blood and strangled; My Brethren answer, that these Ceremonies
were not by them enjoined as Ceremonies to the Churches of the Gentiles: That
also of their observation of preaching on the Jewish Sabbath, they say it
cannot be called a religious observation. As if they could produce or conclude
out of my words, any such absurd or unsound doctrine as my Brethren would
seem to thrust upon me: Or as if it were not sufficient to my purpose, that
the Apostles enjoined to the Churches of the Gentiles, and observed the time of
the Jewish Sabbath, matters which were Ceremonies of Moses law, and in
themselves fruitless, though not religiously, or as Ceremonies of the Law (as
before I noted) such an assertion would serve a Papist well, who observes
humane Ceremonies, as religious observations, which our Church disclaimeth, and
therefore were it needless for any man to strain himself to such a purpose.



1. That they are as evil in nature as ours are. 2. That they had been, and
were as much abused as ours have been. 3. That the use of them wrought as
dangerous effects as the use of our can do. 4. That whatsoever is objected
against our Ceremonies might have been said against them.
To which report of theirs, I say, before I proceed further to answer, that,
seeing truth needs no falsehood or fraud for confirmation (for God needs not
the help of man's lie) I do greatly marvel, that my Brethren (men of that
approved piety, learning and sharp judgment, should be found failing in
their fidelity, as I do herein challenge them.

1. In the untrue reporting of my assertion, as is evident by collation of
either part.

1. They report that I should say, that those Ceremonies which the Apostles
used, were every way as inconvenient and evil as ours, and that it may appear
it was no slip nor oversight, they proceed to misinterprete, that I should say
that they are, first, as evil in nature, as our ceremonies are; secondly, as
much abused; thirdly, and having as dangerous effects in the use as ours have.

2. Whereas it is true, that I say, that they were as inconvenient and evil as
ours; but I say withal in sundry maine respects, which is far from that
which my Brethren do report, namely, every way as evil.

2. The like dealing my Brethren use in misreporting me touching the fourth
member of the things alleged: First, I say, the same objections in substance,
and for the most part which are objected against our Ceremonies, to prove them
simply evil, might be objected against the Ceremonies practiced by the
Apostles. But they will have me say, that whatsoever is objected against our
Ceremonies, might have been said against them. But thus an elder Brother might
easily put besides his younger Brother from that benefit of enjoying his poor
patrimony: The Fathers will says the elder Brother shall have his Fathers
goods for the most part; but the elder Brother says, that his Father gave him
all whatsoever; what equity were this, let my Brethren judge.

Secondly another exception against my Brethrens lack of fidelity toward me
is this, that they allege the heads of probation, but they conceal the most
part of the proofs of those heads, by which they be confirmed. And further in
taking such things, which they think they may say most against, with greatest
probability, and leaving much more that strongly makes against them as by
collation the Reader may judge easily: But by this dealing who may not easily
confute the cleerest truth, or confirm the strongest error?

Now to the reply of my Brethren to this second point, touching the nature of
the Ceremonies, which is by them distinguished into three members.

First, they say that no one of those testimonies of Scripture alleged by me
touching the titles given to Ceremonies, how abused, what evil effects they
had, does make any whit to my purpose, or can with any color of reason be
applied to any Ceremony used or enjoined by the Apostles; and they bring out
three or four instances to which they speak, leaving clean out and passing
by all the other Scriptures cited by me and annexed to the evil use and
effects of those Ceremonies, which are very many: which places and proofs do
still remain in full force, and had been answered, as I suppose, if there
were not that force in them which is unanswerable. Wherefore my Brethren should
not have thus said, that no one of the testimonies make any whit to my purpose,
unless they had answered all; for wherefore should they say [not one] and
leave so many untouched? To answer three, and suffer more then thrice three or
four to escape their censure? But let us see the places which they deal
withal. First, they say the Ceremonies used or enjoined by the Apostles were
no yokes or burdens or burdening traditions] This is untrue: For circumcision
urged, Act. 15. 1. is called a yoke. verse. 10. and a burden, verse. 26. Yet
after that Paul circumcised Timothy, Act. 16. 3. Whereupon I infer that the
holy Apostle did practice some legal Ceremon^ (though in his own purpose not
as a legal Ceremony, or in obedience to the Law ceremonial, or as a yoke and
burden, but in other material respects) in sometime and on some person after
that it appeared to him, and was evident that the same Ceremony among other
persons, and at other times was a yoke and a burden. And is it not strange that
my Brethren should not see this, but impute it to me as a strange thing? But
they enjoined none such Ceremonies as were yokes and burdens: admit of that,
the question is of practice of Ceremonies to avoid deprivation, not of
inioyning. Next they affirm that they could not be called ordinances of the
world, commandments or doctrines of men, or voluntary religion; neither could
they be termed impotent and beggarly rudiments:] I say again, yes they might
be so termed and that lawfully. For the holy Ghost in the Apostle does expressly
term them so in the same words; both the observation of days, months, times
and years Gal. 4. 9. 10. Holydaies, new Moons, Sabbath days, Colos. 2. 16.
22. as also abstinence from meats. Touch not, taste not, handle not, Col. 2.
10. 21. 22. 23. which was the very thing enjoined by the Apostles, Act. 15. 28.
If the Holy Ghost called them so, we may be bold to term them such. But my
Brethren say that they could not be termed such so long and so far forth as the
Apostles did use or inioyne them. The which I answer by distinguishing
between there nature and the use that the Apostles had of them. In their
nature they were such as they were called yokes, burdens, or burdening
traditions, impotent and beggarly rudiments; not only in respect of the
unbelieving or ignorant believing Jews abuse; but unto the godly and best
instructed Christians also; for which of them would willingly have used them
without occasions of necessity to avoid a further incouenience? yea
considering them also in themselves: for seeing Christ himself was come, the
body of what sound use or erudition could they be, what could they teach but
Christ to come, which was already come, which also was an untruth? or what
comfort could they minister to the Gentiles to whom they were enjoined; or to
Timothy and Paul by whom they were practiced, but as yokes and burdens? only
the comfort of their practice was the good purpose which they served for, the
winning of the Jews, or retaining of them in the love of the Gospel, as the
reasons alleged by my Brethren out of Acts 21. 20. 24. 1. Cor. 9. 20. do
show, which were the causes of the Apostles use of them, and made their
practice lawful. But this much is sufficient to prove the point in question:
For this shows the nature of those ceremonies to agree with the nature of
ours. As the Jewish ceremonies, so likewise ours barely considered in
themselves, which the Papists and many professed Protestants abuse, may be
accounted in a sort yokes burdens, burdening traditions, commandments and
doctrines of men, voluntary religion, impotent and beggarly rudiments, etc. yet
as the Ceremonies practiced by the Apostles; so also ours by the same analogy
in a case of necessity of expediency, to redeem the liberty of the Gospel in
the Ministry of many good Teachers, they are good and necessary, and the
commandments of God to practice.

2. The second member of this Section affirms, That it will never be proved
by me, (and if not, then nothing is said to the purpose) that when and where
the Apostles, or those Churches used them, they had been notoriously known to
have been so abused, or to have wrought such evil effects as I there speak
of.] And my answer is, That it is true, these ceremonies were not at all
abused by any well grounded Christians at any time or place. But it is not
possible but my Brethren should know, that the ceremonies well used by the
Apostles, Churches, and other godly persons, were known by them to have been
grossly abused (even as I alleged in my first reason) by the refractary and
weak Christian Jews every where, even then when as they practiced them (like
as we know that our Ceremonies have been, and are abused by Papists and weak
Brethren) notwithstanding which abuse and knowledge thereof, they persisted to
use them as often as necessity enforced, and just occasion was offered. For Paul
knew how the Jews abused circumcision, to establish an opinion of the
necessity thereof unto salvation, Act. 15. 1. yet after this knowledge he used
it, Act. 16. 3. and when S. Paul circumcised Timothy for the Jews sake, is it
not evident that the Jews had a false and abusiue opinion and practice of
circumcision (to prevent whose unjust offense, Paul did it) notwithstanding
which, the Apostle practiced Circumcision on Timothy. Likewise S. Paul his
reproving of Peter for abuse of Jewish ceremonies, in causing of Gentiles to
conform unto them, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 14. whether we refer the time thereof to
Paraeus in Gal. 2. 104.
Act. 11. 26. or as Paraeus does to Act. 15. 30. 35. was before his
circumcising of Timothy, and his vowing and shauing of himself, Act. 18. and
21.

Lastly, was it not known to the Apostles, when they observed the occasion of
the Jewish Sabbath to preach unto them, that the Jews had an opinion of
necessity of observation of that day? as they had, Ioh. 9. 16. Luc. 13. 14.
Matt. 12. 2. Or could Paul and the Apostles be ignorant, that vowing, offering,
contributing, shauing, (duties of the ceremonial Law) were abused by the
Jews both before they practiced them, and where they practiced them, and even
by occasion of their practice, which does easily appear by the violence which
the Jews used on a bare suspicion, that Paul was a professed enemy unto the
Legal rites, Act. 21. 21, 27, 29. As for that which my Brethren allege
concerning Paul, who having used circumcision and other Ceremonies, does after
with great bitterness reprove and condemn the use of them, Gal. 4. 9 10. and
5. 12. Tit. 1. 14. I will omit that which some Gual. in Gal. 2. Hom. 10 fol.
29. b. Codoman. annal. s. Scriptur. Ambros. Chrysostomus.
learned men observe, that the Epistle to the Galat. was written before the
Council of Jerusalem, Act. 15. (and then those reproves of his must go
before the circumcising of Timothy, and shauing of himself, Act. 16. and 18.)
because it is controuerted and holden otherwise by Paraeus prolegom. in Ep. ad
Romans fol. 48. 49. Idem pro. em. in Epist. ad Gal. fol. 22. 23.
other godly learned men; But to it I say, that that reproof of Paul was not
used in respect of the time after, but in respect of the different case, it was
a case of confession, that is, he was called to confess a fundamental truth
in Titus case, which he was not in the case of Timothy. For the false Brethren
would have compelled Titus to have been circumcised, meaning his conscience,
as pressing it Thus do all our godly learned men hold Paraeus in Gal. 2. f. 81.
82. Paulus Titum ^^^cumcisione defendendo recte fecit, quia fals^^^^nionem
circumcisionis necessariae ad salutem sta^^lire non debuit.

Aretius in Act. 16. 3. f. 75. Titum noluit circumcidere, quia videbat hoc peti
tanquam ad salutem necessarium. Idem ad Gal. 2 f. 224. circumcisionem Galatis
obtruserunt vt ad salutem necessarium, post obserua hic quando sint (...)
adiaphora, tum scil. cum necessitas illis ani^^ctitur, habet enim meritum
aliquod in causa salutis.

Gualt. in Act. hom. 106. f. 199 Propter ho^ Titum circumcidere noluit, eo quod
illos libertati fidelium astute insidiari videret. Gal. 2. lege reg.
vniuersalem eo loci. Idem in Gal. 2 Hom. 11 f. 32. quando Timotheum
circumcidit, nulla erat eo loci de circumcisione controuersia. In Titi autem
causus de circumcisione controuertebatur, and erant qui hanc ad salutem
dixerint esse necessariam.

Piscator in Gal. 2. obseru. ad v. 3. 4. 5. Titum circumcidere noluit propter
Iudaeos pertinaces (...) exemplo isto abuterenter ad iactandum consensum Pauli
de suo dogmate quasi s^^l circumcisio ad huc in N. T sit necessaria ad salutem.

Calum. Titum circumcidere non poterat, quia puram Euangelij doctrinam proderet
in Act. 16. 3. fol. 271. a.

Perkins. in Gal. 2. tom. 1. fol 218 b. as if he should say, For my part I was
ready to circumcise Titus, if there had been a meet occasion: False brethren
would have imposed a necessity upon us: Then I and Titus refused. After learn
that a thing indifferent, when it is made necessary to salvation (as
circumcision was) is not to be used. This conclusion serves to overthrow the
Popish religion, etc.

Look Beza and Roll. on this place.


ex necessitate salutis, as Acts 15. 1, 5. or as a work iustificatory, Galat.
5. 2, 3. whereby Paul notes, that circumcision would have been a bondage, as
they did, Act. 15. 10. Whereupon I conclude that Paul, even after the reproves
of the Epistle to Galat. 2. and 4. and Tit. 1. would have been no less ready
to have circumcised Titus, in a like case with Timothy, then he was to
circumcise Timothy after the decree of the council of Jerusalem, as Master
Perkins notes on Galathians 2. and so I say touching our Ceremonies, though in
our Church to redeem the ministry and liberty of the Gospel, a man were
bound to conform to the prescribed Ceremonies: yet if we were called to a
case of confession, if the Ceremony were urged as needful to salvation, if our
conscience were compelled to use them, if justification were taught in their
use, I hold plainly, that a man should lose goods, liberty, life and
ministry, then to conform unto them: wherefore there is no such absurdity, as
my Brethren presuppose, in affirming that which is with so good evidence
approved, and that which I alleged in my answer to the sixth objection
(though my brethren promised to answer it but did not) stands firm.

3. The third member (fearing least it might be proved, which in the former
member is denied) puts case, that if such abuse, or evil effects of such
Ceremonies used by the Apostles, had been known before, or when they used
them: yet would not this prove them every way, as inconvenient and evil as
ours] where my brethren forget that they go on in perverting my words. For I
said not, that I would prove them every way simply as inconvenient as our
Ceremonies, but added expressly in sundry maine respects. Let it be supposed
that those Ceremonies, were sometimes Gods ordinances, and enjoined to Churches
by the Apostles, and that these our Ceremonies were never good, nor in
themselves may serve to any good use, what serves this to overthrow my
conclusion, which is this, that the Jewish Cermonies were as inconvenient, and
evil as our Ceremonies? then in conforming to the like case we shall do well:
and if we do evil in conforming to the Ceremonies to prevent deprivation,
then did the Apostles and other persons evil in a much like case to conform
to Ceremonies, as evil and inconvenient as ours are deemed in many maine
respects. And here my brethren think fit to examine the contents of my second
reason, which is brought for the proof of this point: Which is this as they
affirm for me [that nothing in substance is objected against our Ceremonies,
which might not have been said as well against those, which the Apostles and
the Churches in their times did use.] Here again I call upon my brethren for
fidelity, for I proposed my second reason thus [That the same objections in
substance, and for the most part which are brought forth against our
Ceremonies, to prove them simply and in nature sin, may be objected and
applied to the doctrine, and practice of the Apostles.] The differences are
these: first, I propose the reason affirmatively, they negatiuely: Wherewith
they give themselves more advantage to confute, and me less to defend, as all
men know. Secondly, they say, that nothing in substance is objected, leaving
out that which I added [and for the most part:] Thirdly, they add, which might
not have been said, [as well] which words I have not, but they have added for
their own advantage: Which alteration if my Brethren had not made, they needed
not accuse me, that I left out much of the force and substance of their
arguments; For I well know, that in some things, agreement in both cases would
not stand, and yet my reason would have justified it self. But I must go
along to see how well my Brethren prove the point they affirm, namely, that
the arguments made by them do overthrow our Ceremonies, and yet never a one
do give the least touch to those which the Apostles and the Churches used; and
to this purpose they run over four members, or orders of differences
between the Ceremonies of our Church, and those practiced by the Apostles.

The first sort of difference affirms that our Ceremonies are, first, humane
inventions; secondly, notoriously known to be abused to superstition and false
doctrine; thirdly, and of no necessary use in the Church, all which suppose I
grant, let my Brethren tell me plainly, whether these exceptions might not
have been urged by the Pastors of the Gentiles, touching the iniunction made
at Jerusalem, as abstinence from blood and strangled, and touching the practice
of Circumcision, shauing, vowing, offering, and observation of the Jewish
Sabbath by Paul and the Apostles: That namely, these Ceremonies are simply
unlawful, and in nature evil. First, because Jesus Christ heing come, which
was the body, of whose coming they were shadows, and therefore in their
nature rudiments of great poverty and weakness (impotent and beggarly
rudiments) and in themselves considered, of no use or profit; and therefore
leaving to be Gods commandments, (for God commanded them as ceremonies, in the
time of the Law, not in the time of the Gospel) in as much as being pressed by
the blind and wilful Jews, they were called the commandments of men, Col.
2. Tit. 1. I would know here of my Brethren, what maine difference there is
between the inventions of men, and the commandments of men.

Seconly, because they were abused to superstition, and false doctrine many
ways, and had very many evil and pernicious effects, as I have proved in the
first reason of my first argument, Numb. 11. 12. which cannot be denied with
any show of contradiction.

Thirdly, because they were notoriously known to have bin so abused, even
whersoeuer the Christian faith was planted in Italy, Graecia, Asiaminor, Syria,
Coelosyria, Iudaea, Creta; and may we think, that the famous controversy and
Council at Jerusalem for deciding thereof, about the false opinion about
Circumcision was not notoriously known unto all the Christian Churches, which
also prescribed some Jewish Ceremonies, on occasion of abuse of other, as also
the tumult made on Paul by the furious Jews at Jerusalem: In a word,
wheresoever the Jews were (as they were scattered almost in every part) and
new Jewish conuerts, there must needs be known their notorious abuses of the
legal Ceremonies; and I much admire that my Brethren should deny this.

Fourthly, Because they are of no profitable use, because of no use at all, (I
mean in themselves, and in their nature being considered) being as shadows
without a body, weak rudiments without signification, shows without substance,
types and similitudes without an antitype, yea, resemblances of nothing: Though
I deny not but they were of necessary and very profitable use in the Apostles
practice; but that was not in respect of any power in themselves, or of any
virtue which the Apostles gave them by their iniunction, but as means and
weapons of necessity to defend the Church from mischief, and the Gospel from
interruption, which by no means they would have practiced without such
necessity; the like I say of our Ceremonies. These things being so clear and
evident, it must needs follow that these Ceremonies, in their nature, must be
tainted with that formal and inseparable evil, which the arguments of the
deprived Ministers do fasten on our Ceremonies, so far forth as they agree
in these Circumstances alleged: which my Brethren fearing, are feign to run
into their old and only refuge; That though they had been never so much
abused, and had been also in any other respect of no necessary use, yet this
aagument touches them not, because they were used by warrant of Apostolical
and divine authority: But that I may drive my Brethren from this their vltimum
refugium, I say their answer is of no force at all, which appears by these
reasons.

1. Because the answer of our Brethren is barely affirmed, without all show of
proof or reason, which is sufficiently confuted with a bare denial and matter
of this nature, Eadem facilitate comtemnitur qua probatur, as the old saying
of Hierome is: yea the Holy Ghost is silent and gives not the lest touch, to
intimate that this action was peculiar to the Apostles, and how can my Brethren
speak so confidently where the Holy Ghost is silent.

2. Because of the equal necessity of the Church in all ages, and like care
which God has of his Church in giving equal remedy, who does not only
command and inioyne duties for the purity and comely order of the Church, but
also provides remedies against the diseases thereof. Now is there not a
necessity for other things (as well as for these Primitive Churches) to appease
dissentions, schisms, tumults, interruption of the Gospel, deprivation of
Ministers, arising from inconvenient and abused Ceremonies? Must all other
Churches besides these for every inconvenient Ceremony, or other thing of like
nature with the Jewish Ceremonies, suffer the Church to be overthrown, and
the Gospel interrupted? did God give them only privilege thus to conform,
and not to others in other cases, or did he give remedy to their evils, and
take it from us? If it seemed good and necessary to the Holy Ghost in one cause
for the good of the Church, to give way to the practice of inconvenient
Ceremonies of this nature; by what reason should it not be still as good and
necessary for other Churches in the like case, in the sight of the same blessed
spirit to practice the like Ceremonies?

3. Because Saint Paul, rehearsing his practice of conforming to the Jewish
Ceremonies, does draw his practice thereof out of a general doctrine, 1.
Corinthians 9. 19. The general doctrine is this; That though he were free
from all men (as every faithful Minister is) yet he made himself the servant
of all men (as in this sense every faithful Minister should do) to win the
more. From this ground he deduceth his particular practice, verse. 20. of
becoming a Jew unto the Jews, that is, of practicing the Jewish Ceremonies
for the Jews sake to avoid their scandal, and to win them to the Gospel;
showing and declaring that out of this general doctrine any godly and sincere
Minister of the Gospel, might lawfully and ought needfully to conform to the
like Ceremonies of the Jews in the like case, to win them and to gain liberty
to the Gospel. Therefore I conclude the Apostles practice of Jewish Ceremonies
was not peculier to them, as arising from mere Apostolical authority, and that
the practice of like inconvenient ceremonies in the like case is lawful and
needful.

4. Because the same Apostle, declaring his withstanding of the practice of
Jewish Ceremonies in other cases, does specify the reasons thereof, namely, 1.
They would compel men unto it, Galat. 2. 2. and bondage their Christian
liberty, Galat. 2. 4. with Act. 15. 1. 5. 10. 19 -- 3. And it was not the right
way to the truth of the Gospel, Galat. 2. 14. Therefore I conclude they
practiced the Jewish Ceremonies by a certain and standing reason, and not
alone by Divine or Apostolical authority. If they had not been Apostles, by
these reasons they would have practiced them in these cases or the like.

5. Because by this means any shifting disputant, may shift off al necessity of
the practice of any part of Apostolical discipline and order, namely of
excommunication of obstinate offenders, because a matter peculiar to the
Apostles, as Erastus Erast, de excom. in These. fol. 46. These. 58.
and others do, or of the Churches meeting on the First day of the week, as
many Libertines and Sabbatarians do, and things of like nature: yea also of our
particular assurance of true grace, justification, remission of sins, and
salvation* which we usually ground from the example of the Apostles, Romans 8.
38. 39 Gal. 2. 20. 1. Tim. 1. 1. 15. which yet the Papists put off with this
our Brethrens answer, It was peculiar to the Apostles, it was of special
revelation. For Bellarm. de iustificat. lib. 3. cap. 9 in resp. ad 7. testimon.
Staplet. de Iustific. l. 8. c. 24. f. 297. Rhem. in Romans 8. 38.
what is the difference between their answer and the answer of my Brethren,
being both alike pressed without reason, or rather contrary to sound reason.

6. Because all godly learned judgments (before my Brethren) have judged as I
judge hereof; Therefore their answer is against all godly learned judgments;
with whom if I err, (not obstinately as seeing no better reason) I shall
retain my peace. The Scriptures that I quote to prove the Jewish ceremonies,
practiced by the Apostles, to have been in themselves of no necessary use,
humane inventions, and abused to superstition, my Brethren disalow, and say
that they are misunderstood, and mis-applied by me, as they have showed; the
truth whereof appears in my Answer to that show of theirs. And they say
further, that I contradict my self clearly and strongly, and therewith they
convince me: But why? Because I distinguish of their different titles, nature,
and use, in different respects; namely, that in some respects I said, that
they were called commandments of men, and ordinances of the world, impotent
and beggarly rudiments, shadows of things already come, and therefore fit to
be abolished, as being of no necessary use, but very hurtful and offensive in
sundry maine respects, and because the Apostles taught against their not
necessary use, and yet in other respects were practiced and taught by the
direction of the Holy Ghost, as matters good and necessary, Act. 15. 28. then
both which members of affirmation, what can be more clear? unless my Brethren
will say (which I am assured they will abhor to say) that the Holy Ghost does
contradict himself in the Apostles, for that I herein say no more then I am
taught to say by the Holy Ghost in the holy Scriptures, by all classical
writers. The second sort of difference which my Brethren make between our
ceremonies, and the Ceremonies of the Apostles practice, shows that our
Ceremonies being humane ceremonies, are first appropriated to Gods service:
Secondly, ordaind to teach spiritual duties by their mystical
significations, which theirs were not. To the first of which, I say, First,
That some of the ceremonies practiced by the Apostles, albeit they were not
appropriated to Gods service, that is, his immediate worships, yet they might
seems to be appropriated thereunto; such as circumcising, offering vowing. For
what were these things, being performed as God required, but the immediate
services of God, or else as shows thereof? If he did them as shows only of
Gods services, and not as services there might seem to be a taking of Gods
Name in vain: or if he did by them serve God when they were out of use, and
left to be commanded of God, there might seem to be some fault in Paul's
action. Well then, how shall we clear Saint Paul of one or other error?
Verily not as my Brethren would do, who would say, that he did it by mere
divine authority, and nothing else; as if God should for a time command these
Ceremonies a new unto the practisers thereof.

But my answer is this, that if Saint Paul and the Apostles did not
appropriate the practice of Gods service one way, that is, to his immediate
woorship: yet did they appropriate the practice of them unto the service of God
another way, that is, for the liberty of the Gospel, the appeasing of
fraternall discord, the winning of the more: the compassing of which in the
performance of these Ceremonies were the true services of God. Wherefore even
the Ceremonies of the Apostles practice, were appropriate to the service of
God: But these were not humane inventions, but I have showed that they left in
themselves, to be Gods commandments, and should not have been practiced
without necessity, that is, of doing service to God in these forenamed ends.
And touching signification, some man might thus argue, that either the Jewish
Ceremonies practiced by the Apostles, had a signification in their intention,
or none at all. If none, then they might seem needless and unprofitable, and
so the Apostles might seem to be the practisers of idle actions, which (say I)
is most true, were it not by their practice to wine the more, and to further the
Gospel, which made them actions very fruitful, and to good purpose. But if
they had signification in their intentions, then this signification was either
true or false, not any false, as of Christ to come, which was their old and
decayed signification, Col. 2. unless they might have still a kind of
lawful, and yet untrue signification of Christ to come in their minds, which
expecting the Messiah with an upright heart, believed not as yet in the Messiah
come; therefore they must have some true signification, if any at all imposed
on them; but this we read not, therefore we cannot affirm (as I suppose) that
they had any signification at all: Wherefore I marvel my brethren would give
instance of the use of other Sacraments (such a trifle to play withal) as
knowing that in the Apostles, it might imply an absurdity in us, an evident
impiety. But it will be demanded, I know, that if I grant the Ceremonies of
the Apostles practice, to be void of signification in their intention, what
then is this unto our Ceremonies, which are ordained to teach spiritual
duties, by their mystical signification? But my brethren should remember, that
the question here is not of the lawfulness of imposing signification on
Ceremonies (not of Gods ordaining) but of the lawfulness of the use of
Ceremonies, in a case of necessity, on which signification, signification is
imposed by others: And thus these Ceremonies will accord to the point in
question. For seeing those Ceremonies had a signification of the superstitious,
and not well informed Jews, before whom they were used by the Apostles, and
for whose sakes some of them, were enjoined to the Gentiles; the question is
whether an Apostle in a case of superior reason, as to redeem Ministry,
might conform unto them (or to the like in the like case) lawfully,
notwithstanding that inevitable scandal, that he should occasion unto the
beholders; namely, to apprehend by them I say, not a true signification (in
which respect our significatiue Ceremony of the Cross seems more tolerable)
but a false, namely, to signify to them Christ to come, which was already
come. And if he might lawfully do this (as it is evident he might) then let my
brethren tell me, wherefore a Minister of the Gospel, now may not lawfully use
such a Ceremony, which (being no commandment of God) is by others ordained
and imposed to teach spiritual things, by their mystical signification, and
not intentionally, or approuedly in the mind of the vser.

As for that which is included in the third difference, I must needs confess
it has more weight, then any thing I know alleged against our Ceremonies, if
my brethren can soundly prove, that namely our Ceremonies are esteemed imposed,
and observed as parts of Gods worships (whereby first of all I doubt not, but
my brethren do mean essential parts of Gods of worships, not accidental)
And secondly, that these our Ceremonies are esteemed, imposed, and observed, by
the intention and doctrine of the Church of England, for things of such nature.
For this I constantly auerre and resolutely hold, that if they can be proved
matter of this nature, that they are doubtless to be refused of all, in a
case of confession, unto the loss of Ministry, and of life it self: Howbeit
of this I can by no means be persuaded as yet, and I will give my Brethren the
reasons thereof, namely, because the Church of England does not so esteem
them, impose them, or observe them for parts of Gods worship.

But here it will be first asked, what I mean by the Church of England? To which
I answer, that as the Church is considered two ways, first, for the
Congregation of the faithful, scattered here and there, or for the whole
society of English men compact in one entire body, visibly professing the
religion of Christ distinguished from the bodies of Scotland, France, Germany,
and other Countries: So by the Church of England in either acception,
ceremonies are not esteemed, imposed, or used as parts of Gods worships. Of the
Church in the former sense, I know my Brethren make no question; the latter I
will justify: For the doctrine and practice of the Church of England, I take
to be that which by common consent of the whole State, King, Nobles, Bishops,
Judges, Commons in Parliament is taught and commanded: Whatsoever comes
hence, comes from the complete body of the Church of England, and is to be
ascribed to it, as to the visible Church: Now the doctrine of this Church of
England is included in the Books established by this power, which are, the
book of Articles, and the book of Common prayer: Now for the doctrine of our
Church in this point, the book of Articles expressly teaches: first, that it
is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods
word, Act. 20. Secondly, that the Church ought not to enforce any thing to be
believed, besides the holy Scriptures, for necessity of salvation. Act. 20.
Thirdly, that nothing of traditions and Ceremonies be ordained against Gods
word, Act. 34. Fourthly, that every particular or National Church has
authority to ordain, change and abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church,
ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be done to edifying,
Act. 34. So likewise the Preface of the common prayer book, tit. of Ceremonies
enacted by Act of Parliament (that is, by the authority of the visible Church
of England) this doctrine of Ceremonies is set down: [We think it convenient
that every country should use such Ceremonies as they shall think fit, to the
setting forth of Gods honor and glory, and to the reducing of the people to a
most peafect and godly living without error or superstition: and that they
should put away other things which they perceive to be most abused, as in men's
ordinances, it often chances diversely in diverse countries. And thus we see
the doctrine of our Church does not esteem any Ceremonies, as parts of Gods
worships but does disclaim it utterly. And for the application of their
doctrine to our Ceremonies that we may see what manner of Ceremonies, and of
what nature the Church of England does propose to be practiced, and with what
affection such as practice them should perform it: the said Preface to the
Book of Common prayer says of the Ceremonies prescribed in that Book: [That
they are retained for a discipline and order, which upon just causes may be
altered and changed, and therefore not to be esteemed equal to Gods Law.] Now
according to this doctrine and application thereof by our Church all doctrines
and practice of intention and action should be conformed, to this they should
be referred: If there be any contrary direction or doctrine taught published,
or enjoined by any one person, or many together, or in diverse places, it is
nothing to the point: For they who preach esteem, practi^e and impose any
Ceremonies otherwise, by any conceit, word or act, then according to the before
mentioned direction they do it contrary to the judgment of the Church of
England, and it is to be esteemed as the judgment and practice of private
persons, violating the doctrine and laws of this Church, for the which they
shall answer unto God, and are liable to the censure of authority. Whatsoever
Ceremony therefore of our Church is either imposed, or the omission censured
by any persons, or by any Minister practiced, or observed by superstitious or
ignorant people, as a part of Gods worship, is only accidental, adherent, and
not inherent to our Church; neither ought it to be laid unto the charge of
our Church: Neither do any of the Divines, Abridg. fol. 38. 39.
mentioned in the deprived Ministers reasons, nor can any Divinity justify or
say that the questioned Ceremonies are imposed by the Church as parts of Gods
worships, for this cause, or will persuade men to suffer themselves to be
deprived for refusing to conform unto them. For here is no such case of
confession, to which we are enforced; seeing we may all freely and ought, as in
obedience to the Church, confess the doctrine thereof agreeing to Gods Word,
and conform unto the Ceremonies according to the doctrine, namely, as to
things which are no worships of God, nor needful to salvation. And as for them
that hold, teach, or conform unto them, as to the parts of Gods worships, they
are to be esteemed as malefactors condemned by the Church, which can no more
prejudice the doctrine of the Church, then the practice of thieves, rebels, and
murderers can prejudice the good laws of our Commonwealth that are made
against them; and it were no less strange to blemish our Church with the
judgment or practice of the one, then to brand the Commonwealth with the
practice of the other.

Now where my Brethren say that the Apostles neither observed nor imposed the
Ceremonies of the Jews as parts of Gods worship, I refer them to my answer
in the former member touching the service of God; and do add that if they used
them not as parts of Gods worship taken stricte, yet they did use them and
inioyne the^ as parts of his worship taken late, or in a larger sense, seeing
God may be said to be worshipped by that he is served, and he is served by
duties done according to his will, and they conformed, and enjoined co^formity
to those ceremonies that they might do duties according to his will, viz. the
winning of the Jews, the freedom of their teaching and the like. But now
whereas it is demanded further by my Brethren, what it is unto the purpose I
allege, that the Jews esteemed, imposed, observed them as necessary to
salvation, Acts 15. 1. 5. and the rest. I answer, first, that I might make
those Ceremonies analogicall with ours, that as our Ceremonies were and are
holden as parts of Gods worship and needful to salvation by the Papists, so
were those practiced by the Apostles, esteemed by the Jews; yet the Apostles
used them in case of necessity, and so may we these in the like case.
Secondly, Abridg. fol. 38.
I ever held it as an argument urged by the deprived Ministers to persuade to
the disuse of our Ceremonies, that being in themselves needless (a man having
no necessity to use them) there is occasioned the stumbling of the weak, by
them the Papists and ignorant peoples abuse and opinion of Gods worship: In
which respect the practice of the Jewish Ceremonies might apparently be taxed,
had it not been in a case of superior reason. For the practice of them was in
that case good and necessary, notwithstanding whatsoever abuse or offense might
have bin taken thereat, so that they were done, first, voluntarily and not
pressed on there conscience as Gods worships; secondly on just occasion, as to
redeem the preaching of the Gospel, and to win souls to Christ.

The fourth and last kind of difference alleged by my Brethren between our
Ceremonies, and the ceremonies of Apostolical practice and iniunction of the
rules prescribed in the word, for the direction of the Church in the matters of
ceremony, which are not kept in the imposing and using of our Ceremonies, (as
my Brethren say) but were in those others by the Apostles. First, they say they
are no way needful: which may be understood either in respect of inioyning by
our Governors, or of practicing by our Ministers. In the inioyning of them,
again we may consider the inioyning of them in their first plantation, or for
the present. The inioyning of them in the first plantation in King Edwards
days, of what necessity it was, it might easily be collected, if we either
consider the nature of coacted Churches, gathered and reformed by authority of
Princes, where the most are worst, and of how great difficulty it is to reform
all disorders at the first, in comparison of Churches gathered by voluntary
coition, where all being willingly assembled, will also willingly unite their
thoughts and proceedings to the best: and this is one maine reason of the
different degrees of reformation of different Churches. This Church of England
therefore being a coacted Church, it is easy to imagine of what difficulty it
was to reform all things at the first; where the most part of the Privy
Counsel, of the Nobility, Bishops, Judges, Gentry, and people were open or
close Papists: where few or none of any countenance stood for religion at the
first, but the Protector, and Cranmer. Wherefore, howsoever those worthy
persons were solicited and stirred up by Caluins letters, howsoever they
labored at the first, and did what in them lay, desiring to do more, as
appears in the Preface of the common prayer Book, and in the Rule before
Commination: howsoever they refined the book of Common prayer in an 5. and 6.
Edwardi; yet necessity compelled them there to stay. The general reasons
whereof, are excellently observed and set down by Zepperus, which elsewhere I
have cited in my reasons. Now if we look to the present iniunction of our
Ceremonies, it is not for me to contest with authority, or to call her to
account for her proceedings; she pretends necessity of enioyning them; that
omnis mutatio est periculosa, and plena scandalis (and therefore also must be
observed for the only will and pleasure of such as inioyne them.) Now if
authority on these, or other like grounds will have the Ceremonies practiced,
or else will proceed to Deprivation, there is here an inevitable necessity of
conforming in the Ministers: in which respect Conformity is simply needful.
In this sense also, though the ceremonies themselves be supposed to be smally
profitable, yet conformity to them in this case of necessity, is most
profitable for the edification of the Church, though it be denied by my
Brethren. And howsoever it may be granted, that offense and hinderance to
edification do arise from these our Ceremonies; yet it is certain that there
is no show of comparison between the offense and hinderance of the peoples
edification* arising from the practice of the Ceremonies, and the suffering of
Deprivation for not conforming by every Minister, which my Brethren in their
argument do teach. Now for the Jewish ceremonies, to omit my Brethrens
repetition of Appstolicall authority, as being dealt withal before; they say
they were squared and directed by the rules of the holy scripture. But to
understand this better, we must needs distinguish between the different
respects wherein we may consider them, first in their nature, and then in
their practice, and then again as it was needless or constrained, or
occasioned by just reason of necessity for the furtherance of the word, and
good of the Church. In their nature they were fruitless, unprofitable, empty,
burdensome, and most indecent. Also in their needless use they were not
needful or profitable, they served rather to destroy then edify. They were
not profitable for order or decency, they tended to infringe the Christian
liberty, and they were so far from having no offense in them, that they were
above measure scandolous; all which I have so proved to my Brethren, in my
first and second reasons of this my first argument, that though they deny and
wonder, yet they meddle not with any proof thereof, knowing that the very
citation of the place would confute them. But in their constrained use, or use
occasioned by reasons of necessity forealleadged, that conformity to these
Ceremonies was profitable, necessary, serving to edify, by making way unto the
Churches peace, and preaching of the Gospel, it was ordered to use them: and
this use of the practice of indecent Ceremonies, in nature did uphold one
higher decency, even the decency of Apostolical preaching, converting souls,
planting of Churches, and unity of brethren, and thus that paradoxe or riddle
is absolved, which my brethren thought impossible to be believed, that an
indecency, supported decency, which if they had called to their remembrance,
they might have seen how this fourth argument, of the abridgement against our
Ceremonies, does very fitly square to those which the Apostles used.

Yet one thing remameth to be considered, which so much offends my brethren,
that they scarce hold it possible, for a godly or learned man to hold, namely,
to charge the holy Apostles; first, that they were offended in imposing that
they did; and secondly, that they taught against the things which they inioyed*
that namely, they ought not to be used by the Jews or Gentiles. But to the
first I say, that if it were necessity, that moved the Apostles to inioyne
abstinence from blood and strangled, which were legal Ceremonies, for they are
called necessary things fol. 15. 28. yea without that necessity, they would
not have enjoined them: if without necessity urging, they would not have
enjoined them, yea they must needs be unwilling, and loath to do that which
without necessity, they would not do: If they were loath to do it, then they
must needs have some offense in them, for doing that they were loath to do:
And for the second* let me remember my brethren, who think I forget my self,
once again to say unto them, that the holy Apostles did teach against the
things, which they enjoined and practiced, as appears by these plain
instances Paul preached against circumcision, Acts 21. 21. Gal. 5. 2. and so
did Peter before the practice thereof; yet Paul practiced circumcision on
Timothy, Acts 16. 3. Paul preached against the Jewish Sabboths observation,
Col. 2. 16. 17. Gal. 4. 10. yet he observed them usually, Acts 13. 14. 44. and
18. 4. and 17. 2. Paul taught against abstaining from meats [touch not; taste
not; handle not] Col. 2. 20. 21. yet the Apostles (and Paul among them)
prescribed difference of meats, Acts 15. 28. Let my brethren therefore give me
leave, to think without any further marvel, that though I grant it were
absurd and impious, to suppose that the Apostles practiced those Ceremonies
they preached against in the self same respect, and so far forth as they
practiced them, so far forth to preach against them; yet in diverse respects
this may well stand. The Apostles therefore preached against the Ceremonies,
not because they held them simply impious in themselves, for then they could
not practice them without impiety, but because that Christ the body was come,
the shadows were unprofitable, and because that many abused them perniciously,
and held them necessary to salvation, in which respect, in some cases the
Apostles refused the practice of them: Again, the Apostles practiced them not,
of any love they bare them, or for any opinion of necessity, or the least
profit in themselves, being impotent and beggarly; but only being compelled
for the necessity of the superior ends, which themselves do give of such
their doings. My brethren deny not but that the Apostles practiced these
Ceremonies, Calvin. in Act. 21. 20. 21. fol. 353. 354.
and that lawfully. But they cannot be persuaded, that they preached against
the practice of them, yet Calvin will teach them, that Stephen did long before
preach the abolishing of the ceremonial law: And for this very place of Acts
21. 21. whereof my brethren are so peremptory, that Paul had not taught so in
deed, but that the Jews had been so informed of him, that he preached
against the practice of the Jewish Ceremonies: Howbeit, Calvin apprehends it
otherwise [Etiamsi aliqua ex part verus erat rumor, quo offensi fuerunt
Iudaei, fuisse tamen callumnia aspersam Legis abrogationem docebat Paulus.]
Again. [Qui aduentu Christi abolit as fuisse Ceremonias docent, adeo non sunt
in legem contumeliosi, vt potius eius veritatem confirmant] Again. [Non minus
Iudaeos, quam gentes a Ceremonijs liberat, quas col. 2. 14. decretanominat]
Aagaine [Paulus promiscue Iudaeis and Gentibus libertatem docebat partam esse:
Nam istae sententiae generales sunt, 1. Corint. 7. 19. Col. 2. 11. 16. Corint.
10. 25. Galat* 5. 1. and 4 3.] In a word, that my Brethren may altogether
leave to wonder at that I wrote, as at a strange matter or that they should
think that godly and learned men forget them selves in such a point as this,
let themselves consider of the advice of those godly, learned, and Bucer.
Script. Angl Ep ad Cranm. ^o. 6852 P. Mart. loc. com. inter Epist. amico in
Angliam, fo 1127. Beza Epist. 12. fol. 99. and 8. fo. 77. V^sin. exercitat.
part. 2. fol. 835, 836, 837, 838, 839.
excellent persons, which they give to Ministers in the case of necessity and
deprivation; namely, that they practice the Ceremonies, and yet preach openly
against the things they practice, namely, against the inconveniences of their
practice, and of their unwillingness to do them: the names of them are these,
Bucer, P. Martyr, Vrsinus, Beza. Wherefore, though my Brethren have labored
with so great vehemency against this argument of mine, yet is it not
overthrown by them, or me, as they would have it, but still remains firm,
for ought that my Brethren have said yet.

fallacia compositionis, my Brethren might understand (for they lack not
sense) that as the former part of their assumption (which they would have me
speak [That namely, the Apostles by divine inspiration, and commandment from
God, required the Churches to vse] was not intended to be connected or joined
with the latter part, which is, [To use such and so many Ceremonies] so was it
not immediately joined with it in my proposition; nay, in the proof thereof, it
was disioyned and placed by it self, and the proper or peculiar Scripture of
probation annexed to it. Inasmuch as (without violence offered) they must needs
understand the inioyning of the Apostles to be vndrstood of Act. 15. only,
and the number to have reference to Numb. 9. where the Ceremonies were
enumerated: now my Brethren or their answerer, (whom it seemed they trusted in
sundry things too far) takes my proofs for number, and applies them to
inioyning; and the decree of inioyning, where there was but two Ceremonies,
they applied to number: The which confused shuffling of things together, which
should be separatly considered (as they were proposed and proved) is done but
to make show of absurdity in my reason, which is but the trick and cunning of
a Sophister, to get advantage to his feeble cause, and not the direct dealing
of a sound disputant, which my Brethren needed not to borrow for the defense of
that they are assured is the truth.

This being observed, my answer is the sooner made. To the Contents of their
first member of Reply, touching the number, I refer them back to the place
in my answer, which they refer me to theirs. To the second member my
Brethren still remain unmindful, that the question is not of inioyning here,
but of conforming in a case of necessity: But the force of my reason drawn
from the Apostles inioyning those Ceremonies (Act. 15.) stands in this, that if
the Apostles in case of necessity did inioyne Ceremonies to Churches, as
inconvenient as ours are pretended to be in many maine respects (as they did
act 15.) then might they much more practice the^, or the like in the case of
necessity. As for the circumcision of Timothy, and James persuasion to Paul,
they are brought in to prove another member of my proposition and not this. The
matter of the third member might have been spared, as being altogether
ludicrous and trifling (save only that they misreport the judgment of
Zanchius, who inclines to the De redempt. fol. 492. b. Also touching the
judgment of the Magdeburgenses, look D. Reinolds de Idolol. lib. 1. cap. 4.
fol. 158. 159.
contrary judgment, to that for which they allege him, and says that it is
recepta illius loci interpretatio) until they come unto the place which my
Brethren say, I put most confidence in, which they find to be Acts 15. Which
place it self unless they had gone about directly to confute, they could have
said nothing to the purpose. For what is it to the point, when I speak of
inioyning, and do bring a place to prove it, for them to insist upon the
number; but according to the old saying, Ego de allijs, tu de caepis, which
might be referred to the Dialogue of Erasmuus de absurdis? As for the ensuing
repetion of the things which before they alleged in the same words almost,
[that the things enjoined in Act. 15. were not Ceremonies: that they were
imposed not as ceremonial, but as moral duties: that Timothy his
circumcision was not a Sacrament, and the rest: they are by me sufficiently
replied unto before.

caeteris paribus, understood as the office of a Minister, is the ordinance of
God, as well as the office of an Apostle; so the one in these days is no less
necessary for the salvation of the faithful man now, then the other then: and
a Minister in these days ought no less to be careful of the loss of his
Ministry; or interruption of the Gospel, then the Apostles then: and
therefore I see not but the same reasons and practice they used then to that
end, we should also now use for the profit of Gods Church.

Next, in the second place there is one thing by the way, that I cannot be
persuaded of that my Brethren say, that the very using of the Jewish ceremonies
then would edify; whereas they should rather say, that the effect of such use
did edify only: For that the bare use of them being in it self considered,
might in many respects be scandalous, and did minister occasion to the corrupt
Jews of stumbling, as I have proved. But it is much, that my Brethren should
affirm, that conformity to our Ceremonies to prevent Deprivation, should not
do any good at all; and further, that a Minister should do much more hurt by
his conformity, then good by his Ministry: As if the liberty of preaching the
word were so great good by the Apostles practice to the Church, and with us (by
Gods blessing on his own ordinance) it were no good at all: Or as if the
practice of the ceremonies would nullify or confound the blessing of Gods
ordinance of preaching (and then how can the preaching of Conformitans be
blessed of God?) Or as if the use of our Ceremonies would destroy more souls,
then preaching could convert or establish in the faith: Or (last of all* as if
the use of the ceremonies were more apt and forcible to pervert a man to his
destruction, then preaching to convert him to salvation. Which supposals as
they are most untrue, and my Brethren I know will not deny: so if they grant
them to be false, a Minister conforming to redeem the free passage of his
preaching, shall have a better bargain out of question by his practice, then
my Brethren here do undertake to drive on his behalf.

Now touching the last point, if my Brethren will have me grant, that the
Apostles were well assured in their consciences they did that which was not
only lawful* but needful for them to do: Then still I must needs conclude,
that so long as we do perform the like practice with them in the like case,
and on the like reasons, (as it does yet appear) we may very well have
assurance sufficient for it in our hearts; And so in degree (according to our
model) we may be said to have an equivalent reason for the avoiding of our
Deprivation. As for that full assurance, which my brethren say they enjoy;
namely, that they have Gods express commandment to the contrary, and that
they should do evil in the sight of the Lord, to conform unto our
Ceremonies, even to avoid de privation: It seems to me a speech, neither
Theological nor safe. I say not Theological, for that Theology is assurance
of matters fundamental, which in their nature are only evident, and
unquestionable among the faithful, which this is not. And I say again not
safe; because, as we are expressly charged not to call good evil: so if our
Ceremonies should in their nature prove indifferent, we should fear to call
them simply, and in nature evil, both because it is untrue, and the
consequences are pernicious, which come from thence. And if it be good and
needful in a case of deprivation, to conform unto our Ceremonies, as all good
judgments, and godly learned teachers and Churches have taught, till now our
brethren are become assured otherwise: Me thinks this plerophoricall confidence
of my brethren should not be so safe for them; but rather to set a side all
ancient prejudice, to hearken carefully to that which is disputed, and
concluded by the chiefest lights, and judgments that ever the Church of Christ
since the time of the Apostles obtained of God; to judge charitably of their
differing brethren, and modestly of themselves; and to judge nothing before the
time, till the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness:
And if they will not yield unto this truth, yet to leave it as a matter of
disputall nature till the day do try, and the fire consume the stubble of the
errors of Gods faithful servants.

FINIS.
AN ADMONITION TOUCHING THE FAVLTS escaped in Printing.
THOU may understand (good Christian Reader) that this treatise was put in
press, before I had knowledge thereof; and I had not perused the copy that was
written: Whereupon there is great need of thy patience in respect of the many
slippes escaped in Printing, and other alterations thereof, yet without the
Printers fault or mine. The chief whereof I have here corrected. Let no man
take offense at my consent for the publication thereof; because I rest
persuaded of the truth therein contained, and I bring not show of words, but
weight of reason; and besides it was needful for me to publish those reasons,
which the hazard of my deprivation did heretofore occasion me to frame, and
enforced me of late to follow. The Lord give such blessing to the same as I
heartely desire for the peace of the Church, and for the quieting of the
consciences of such as need it.

Page Err. Correct. 7 GAl. 5. 20. 21. 22. Gal. 5. 30. 10. 21. 22. 10 of Faith
daily in the Faith daily 11 as ours are now as ours are not by our Church 13
mystically mutually 14 then sometimes they sometimes or rather straw or rather
tares those many things those maine things 16 noted to King noted by King 18 as
also all as also did 19 both by otah, doctrine both by doctrine Papists
popishly Papists and Popishly 21 these days those days Act. 25. 28. 29. Acts
15. 28. 29. 22 and 10. 13. and 10. 31. of his judgment of this judgment 24 in
one practice in our practice 25 reproved approved 27 2. King. 23. 12. 2. Chron.
32. 12. 28 being both works because both works 31 we cannot judge and
therefore we cannot judge 31 by every person by all persons 35 the performance
the forms 38 yea saints the Saints essential practice effectual practice 39
sound and doctrine sound doctrine 43 to conform or the like to conform unto
our ceremonies or the like 45 the Apostles in the Apostles case in 46
Contrariae. contrarius. 47 Exercit* part: inter these. Vrsin Excercit: part. 2.
inter these. 126. 48 because all such because otherwise al such 49 or rather or
other 50 kneeling high or low kneeling, outward habit as this or that form of
apparel, voice high or low 51 Consider that which also Consider secondly that
as also 52 obedience to good obedience to God 54 proved, a matter proved, that
a matter 54 preaching of the work preaching of the word 55 practicing of the
word by preaching preaching of the word no sin of adultery no time of
adultery 57 the praecepts these praecepts 59 The former as a circumstantiall
duty to which all ceremonies as a lesser work to a greater the former as a
circumstantiall duty commanding fit ceremonies, the other as a substantial
duty* to which all ceremonies, and ceremonial duties, must serve as a lesser
work to a greater. 62 broken taken 63 of the fulfilling if the fulfilling by
well doing be well doing violation of the Law violation of that Law 64 many
thousands may thousands 72 as the Papist as the Papists will have it 74 as in
condemning or in condemning must needs be an error must needs be in error 78
the consent of Churches suppose then, the consent of Churches 79 Catholic
Church taken Catholic Church may err being taken Catholic Church have
Catholic Church has here should we make how should we make 80 For they agree
so they agree 87 Decret. cause. 26. qu. 6. 7* 8. 10. Decret. Cause. 26. qu. 6.
can. 9* ex Nicaeno Conc. item. can. 6. 7. 8* 10. 88 Commended and commended as
90 only fish and fowls only fish, some fish and fowls 91 Valentius
Valentinus 92 that in those days in cities in villages that a man in those
days might find in cities and villages 97 afterward the same afterward the
Sun 98 wholesome wholesomely 102 Eastern Controu. Easter Controu. 103
praesumptuous praesumptions pacificum pacificum filium 106 M. Middelburgi
Putaeus Paraeus Witenberg Wirtenberg. so Correct it. page 108. 109. 115. gave
give 107 Epistle of Luther Postill of Luther, the like page 109. 109 Harm.
Confess.. fol. 176. Bohem. Harm. confess.. 16. fol. 179. Bohem. 4. Lex Decal..
11. fol. 43. albeit. 4. Lex Decal. 33. so do the Tigurines. Har. conf. 11.
fol. 43. albeit 110 First of their judgment touching ceremonies in general
appears First of their judgment touching ceremonies in general, as also of
their practice after, and then also of our cere. Iniunction Invention 113
Iocun. Joan. 115 an aedification and aedification Scriptu. fol. 21. Cap. fol.
211. 118 for the Churches aedification Deleatur 125 penislyllabas Paene
syllabas 128 Benhagius Bugenhagius 130 Myricus Illyricus reuolue revoke 133
Came Comes 134 therefore first I answer, albeit in our judgment these
ceremonies are not rightly commanded. Deleatur 140 primitive had the Primitive
Church used 144 yielding Confession of the truth yielding to his request
herein. 4. if he conceal not this confession of the truth 151 lesser better
152 wherefore it is written whereof it is written 153 we are bound following
we are not bound following faires 157 Paraeum Duraeum Commands commends
159 mean to rather 162 then to then so to 165 paritie purity 166 perils points
167 of mending of weeding out 168 admitted permitted 170 have some
notwithstanding have had some not standing 171 to be kept inviolable to be kept
inviolable: And he answered it thus 175 No parts neither parts 191 hold a
right affection should prejudice a right affection 197 admonition of them
admonition of ye weak that they be not offended, and prayer unto God to
strengthen them. 199 so respected so reserved 202 his argument this argument
203 Lumbertus Lubbertus 205 which note the controuerfie which were the
controuertists did stir do show 288 though pure past 209 soote salt 213 so
refusing for refusing 214 doctrine and practice of the Apostles doctrine and
practice of the Apostles, therefore it is a sin 215 viz. that the Apostles
doctrine and practice does not so warrant a minister viz. that it is both
against the doctrine and practice of the Apostles for a minister begin beg
doctrine of the Scribes practice and doctrine of the Scribes 224 Apostles
enjoined them Apostles used and enjoined them 225 when that himself then that
himself 226 his first proposition his proposition to be observed to have been
observed 227 for matters of direction in the Church concerning ceremonies for
the direction of the Church in matters of ceremonies 230 nature and evil
nature, use and evil 235 this commandment his commandment 236 Answers
Answerers


