Meditations, and Resolutions, Moral, Divine, Political.

Century 1.

Written for the instruction and bettering of Youth; but, especially, of the
better and more Noble.

By Antony Stafford, Gent.

There is also annexed an Oration of Iustus Lipsius, against Calumny;
translated out of Latin, into English.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. and are to be sold by Thomas Saunders. 1612.

To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS, Countess of Hertford (Daughter to the Right
Honorable, Thomas, Vicount Bindon) Antony Stafford, wishes the effects of her
wishes.
What I had a long time sought for in others (excellent Lady) and could never
find, of my self, at last I found in you. I mean, Madame, a true definition
of Honor: Which, as I first found in you; so at last I honored you for it, and
will do to my last. And should I not, I were as worthless as you are worthy;
since I never in any, but in you, discovered the height of Blood, of Beauty, of
Virtue, of Spirit, and (which vvonder at World, or thou thy self wilt be
wondered at) with all these, the height of low Humility: Of Humility, Madame,
in you to be admired; not to be imitated: or if to be imitated, not to be
equalled. I know, your Ladishippe (in whom Mildness and Modesty have made a
Marriage) will rather mislike than admit these praises. Pardon me, Madam; you
should not do so. For, as Virtue cannot be ouerpriz'd; no more can she ever be
ouer-prais'd.

Were it not the world would think that Partiality did prompt me, I would
yet ad to yor praises; not that you might read them; but that after Ages, by
them, might know how fair was the fairer part of fairest you; and knowing
it, admire it; and with admiration, imitate it. It would be long (incomparable
Lady) it would be very long, before we should win any one to belong to Virtue,
with the mere praising her in abstract, should we not praise her in some
person gracious in Gods eye, and the Worlds.

I know, Madame, I shall be praised for praising you; and disprays'd for
offering to express the infinite honor and service I owe you, with so poor a
present, so little a labor, as this vnlicked Work. The truth is, Madam, that
finding my Book to have little spirit, or life in it, I made use of your Name
to make it live. For, it could not live long, without your everliving virtues
to relieve it. I am so far from expecting thanks; as that I humbly crave
pardon, for presuming so much to abuse your Name, as to set it before so
weak a Work. If I live, most worthy Lady, I here promise you and the Age, a
far greater, and a far better. If in the mean time I die, I die infinitely
indebted. Thus, with my incessant prayers for your Ladyship, and your thrice
honorable Lord, I rest

Your Honors humble, loyal Servant, and unworthy kinsman, Antony Stafford.

TO THE Understander.
Understander (for, to every Reader I write not) behold this Book with a
gentle eye, and entertain it with favor. It was penned by him who had rather
say, Est iudicium in nobis, than est furor in nobis. Wink therefore at the
want of wit thou shall find; since it is a work of judgment only. As for
the Asses of the Age, I care as little for their censures, as their companies.
Though they can pick out good sense, yet they will not; contrary to the equity
of a Reader; who, in a place doubtful, should strive to understand, before he
cry out, Non sense. They little know, that he, who writes in every thing
properly, shall never write any thing pleasingly. If I were disposed to
carpe, I do not think there are ten lines in any book extant, out of which I
would not pick something to cavil at. My greatest comfort is, I never yet saw
any carper that had any judgment. Which whosoever wants, lacks the very salt
of wit: without which, whatsoever is read, lies ravve, and undigested. But,
that which makes me most merry, is, that some of our printed puppies think
themselves worthy to be compared with the most authenticke, ancient
Authors; whose vvittes they come as short of, as of their works. I have
heard some of them censure Authors, whom they do as little understand, as
they do themselves. If they had but some small deal of matter with their
many words, they might (I confess) rubbe-out reasonably well, amongst
coxcombes, that are capable of no higher matters than themselves. But, as they
are, I would entreat them to content themselves with their Iigge-learning:
in which when they have known all they can, they then know just nothing; and,
as Seneca says, operose nihil agunt. I write not this out of Spleen, for the
wrong they have done me: for, my spirit is pearcht so far above them, that
they cannot fling so high, as to hit it. Do not I know, that these Times
let-loose literatores, to set upon literatiores? Yes, yes: I know it; and have
puton a resolution to bear both with the iniquity, and the stoliditie of the
Times. Farewell, Understander, and use me well.

The Authors request to the understanding Reader.
THe material Faults, escaped, are here underwritten. Do me the favor, to
correct them with thy pen, before thou read on.

Page 64. Line 14. for lowest, read least. p. 124. l. 17. for some, read Sense.
p 163. l. 5. for not, read nay.

MEDITATIONS MORAL, DIVINE, POLITICAL. (*)
WHen I consider in what estate Man was created, I cannot but think of his
folly; who, through a false hope of knowing good and evil, lost the enough of
good he had, and found too much evil. This makes me call to mind the vain
ambition of those, who seek to pry into that unrevealed (and therefore
inscrutable) knowledge of the Deity: upon whom GOD looking down, says in a
pitiful derision (as he did to Adam) Behold, the men are become as one of
us. This meditation stretcheth-out it self, and biddes me also consider the
arrogancy of those, who scorn to err, or to be reprehended for their
errors, not-withstanding that they see Man to have erred in the state of
Innocence. I will therefore seek to know my self (the next and surest way
to know GOD) and by an humble Confession, beg Remission of my faults. I say,
I will confess them unto God; not boast of them to Man.

2
When I think who made me, and wherefore he made me, I hold my self a
glorious creature: when I consider of what he made me, I then think my self
corruptible and miserable. I will therefore temper the former with the later:
so shall I never grow too proud, nor too abject.

3
When I behold Beauty, it puts me in mind of my Glorification: but withal, I
find, that it hinders much my Mortification. I will therefore, as near as I
can, never fix mine eye upon Beauty; least by being never mortified, I never be
glorified.

4
When a man is borne, he begins to die: but when the just man dies, he then
but begins to live. I will therefore in my beginning think of my end; that
in my end, I may rejoice in my better and neuer-ending beginning.

5
Job made a covenant with his eyes, least at any time they should look upon a
Maid: but, since I cannot make a covenant with mine eyes, least at any time
they look upon a Maid, I will try if I can make a covenant with my heart,
least at any time it desire a Maid.

6
GOD made Heaven for the good, Hell for the badde: but, he made earth for both.
This shows us, that while we live here, we must of necessity converse with
both. I will therefore lay mine ears open to all; but, my heart to few.

7
Our Master has left us two Sacraments. One of which tell's us that we are
Christians: the other biddes us live like Christians. This later is that Tree
of Life; the passage whereto is guarded by no Cherubin, nor by any brandished
Sword: but whosoever will, may come thither; and, eating worthily, may live for
ever. When therefore I eat of this Tree, I will remember out of whose blood
it sprang. The memory whereof will suggest unto me, that if I eat not this
fruit worthily, I am unworthy to be a branch of the Tree: that is, if I eat
not his body worthily, I am then unworthy to be a member of that body whereof
he is the head.

8
The first murderer of all mankind, was also the first Liar; two horrible
vices, and alike bloody. For, a man had better be murdered, then belyed; have
his person slain, then his fame. I will therefore fly from a Liar, as from an
Aspe: the poison of whose tongue is mortal.

9
Besides our internal, original, and actual sins, we have external and
accidental crimes laid upon us by our families; but, in my conceit, very
unjustly: for, we have enough to answer for the first man; and are no way
liable to the debts of his successors. Why should man lay more upon man, than
GOD himself does? As with him the virtues of my House cannot save me, no more
can the vices of it damn me. The Law of God shall be with me, above the Law
of Arms, or the Law of Nations.

10
Those that serve God only upon Sundays, are like servants extraordinary; who
come to wait upon their great Lords, only upon great days: But I will make
every day my Sabbath; and will follow my Lord in ordinary, making Charity my
Cognizance.

11
While the Papists and we contend which of us err most in matters of faith,
we strive who shall err most in matters of life: so that we study at once,
who shall believe best, and who shall live worst; not who shall be most
virtuous, but who most envious. My chiefest care therefore shall be, to live
well: so shall I ever be sure to fare better, than he who believes well, and
lives ill.

12
Two sorts of men I loathe, and detest; a Fool, and a Carper. Yet, of the
two, I would make choice to hold discourse with the Carper: for, I had rather
be misunderstood in all, then not to be understood at all. I will therefore
only beware of the one: but I will scorn the other.

13
Laughing is only proper to man, amongst all living creatures: whereas indeed
he ought ever to be weeping, in that he ever sins; and the beasts ever
laughing, to see man so much abuse his so much reason. O! if a man knew before
he came into the world, what he should endure in the world, he would fear
his first day, more than his last. I will therefore weep at mine own misery,
and never laugh but at mine own folly: and since my Master was Vir dolorum, a
man of griefs, it shall not be said that I am Vir voluptatum, a man of mirth.

14
Valor has many servants going under her name: but few of them are her true
favorites. Some snatch courage from her; and, wanting wisdom to rule it, are
disclaimed by her. Others are Giants in their words, and Dwarfes in their
deeds. She hates him, who speaks more than he dares do; and makes him her
Champion, who dares do more than he dare speak. I, I: he is the man with her,
who wounds his enemy with his sword; not with his word. Yet, Christianity
vnhorses even Valor her self; and, deposing her, makes new laws, and
proclaims him the brauest combatant, who can conquer himself: that is, who
can ascend so high above Nature, as to descend below himself, and to offer
service where he owes revenge. I will inuoke GOD to endue me with this
supernatural gift; and, withal, to deliver me from a valiant drunkard, and a
valiant fool.

15
When my memory looks back, as far as she can see, me thinks it is but
yesterday: and yet I know, by course of Nature, my life cannot be trebbl'd.
Now, I have endured so much misery in my one Yesterday, that I am affraide to
think of the two To-morrowes.

16
It is a wonder, to see the childish whining we now-adayes use at the
funerals of our friends. If we could houl them back again, our lamentations
were to some purpose: but as they are, they are vain, and in vain. If therefore
my friend be good, I will be glad that he is rid of the world: if he be bad,
I will not be sorry that the world is rid of him: but, that so woeful a world
is like to receive him. If I have a friend, whose soul joined with mine, makes
but one mind; and that at his death, I see, my tears must burst out, or my
heart within; I may then perhaps yield to the infirmity of the flesh: yet not
so much, that he has left the world, as that he has left me in it.

17
He is the most miserable of men, who fashions his body and mind according to
the opinion of the vulgar; and he the happiest, who conforms his life to the
laws of a true judgment. This man knows, that we must hear with many, but
decree with few, and joining forces with two or three brave retired spirits,
he bandies with a legion of the Vulgar. He looks down with pity on the
poor Plebeians; and (like Xerxes) bewailes their hard hap, in that none of
their names shall live after a few years. Knowing that the eternal substance
of his soul was breathed into him, by the Eternal, he cares for nothing which
is not able to hold-out with Eternity. I will therefore despise things
momentary: and since I have full assurance, that I shall live in the other
world, my deeds shall do their best to make me live in this.

18
Now-a-dayes the clothes are spoken to, and not the men: and few have regard to
the riches of the breast; but, of the back. He, who in his fashions differs,
and degenerates most from his ancestors, is held the most generous Gentleman.
The world is grown so sensual, that the parts of the body are preferred before
those of the mind; so that to say, He is a man of good parts, is as much to
say, as He is a man of good members. Christ says that the body is more worth
then the raiment: but some of our Gallants make them clothes more worth then
their bodies. With me it shall not be a good argument, to say, I will wear
this, because it becomes me; but, I will wear this, because it becomes a man:
and he that speaks to my clothes, and not to me, shall be answered by my
clothes, and not by me.

19
Some are never well, but when they are vnpacking their bosoms with words,
and whispering their thoughts in the ears of their reputed friends: and at
length, thorough the perfidiousnes of some falls brother, they are brought either
to die shameful deaths, or to live the like lives. If therefore I find my
tongue to be so laxatiue, as that it cannot hold, but must needs bewray me, I
will lock my secrets deep in my heart: and if my tongue unlock my heart, I
will bite it, and beat my heart for not tying my tongue. I will not do GOD so
great a dishonor, as to demy-deifie Man, in making him privy to my heart and
thoughts.

20
Nothing gives us delight in this world, but Beauty. We take pleasure in
beholding heaven when it is fair, and clear: but when it is ouer-cast, our
minds are clouded, and our bodies ill disposed. We love Vesta better, when her
face is smooth, and her colors fresh, than when her beauty is blasted, and her
visage wrinkled. For, in Summer every man lies, with, and upon his first
mother, nuzzles himself in her lap, and plays with her dainties; whereas in
the Winter every man keeps his house: and yet if that be not neat and sweet,
we loath that too. One and the samething, being young, delights; being old,
displeases. I will therefore joy in nothing, more tha^ in Beauty; nor admire any
thing, more than her: yet since she is such an Inchantresse, my bodily eye
shall never behold her, but withal my spiritual eye shall be fixed upon her
Maker; who made her to feed the sense, not to bewitch the soul: who left her
us, to make us conceive how much more excellent is that inconceiueable fairness
of the celestial Canaan. In a word; she is but a corruptible type of an
incorruptible treasure. And as Christ shall consume Antichrist with the
brightness of his glory: so shall the blasing beauty of the other world, blast
the fading fairness of this.

21
More then many there are, to whom Superstition dictates, that it is pleasing
to GOD to wear squalid, and unclean clothes; and that the welfare of the
soul consists in the foul keeping of the body. Others there are, whom
Hypocrisy leads the same way. They both err: the former, by not knowing the
Scriptures; the later, by transgressing against the^: for, Christ commands us
not to look sour, as the Hypocrites, who disfigure their faces, that they may
seem unto men to fast. I will therefore wash my hands, and face, and anoint
my head; that my head my be anointed with the oil of gladness. And since I
cannot endure to see the lodging of my body durty, I will much more have a
care, to keep the chamber of my soul clean. When my soul is sad, my
countenance shall be merry: neither will I so much care to cast up mine eyes to
heaven, as to lift up my heart to God; not so much respecting the throne, as
the enthroned.

22
Many there are, who never serve God, but when he serves their turn. Hence it
comes to pass, that the Seaman mutters against him, when he has not a good
wind; and the Plough-ma^, when he has badde weather. All this proceeds from
nothing, but the imprudency of man; which accuses the Providence of God, of
Improuidency. Before there was any rain at al, what did God then? Did he not
send a mist up from the earth, which watered all the earth? He will not have
his power tied to any ordinary mean; but, will show us what he is, by what he
can do. When therefore mine own means fail me, I will rely upon God: who
is as able to give me something, as to make me of nothing; to keep me to the
last, as to make me at the first.

23
He that strives to please the intoxicated multitude, labors as much in vain,
as he that sought to put the winds in a bag. And the reason is, because it is
impossible to please the godly and ungodly, the judicial and the vnjudiciall,
the sensible and the senseless, both at once. Neither Christ, nor his
forerunner could please them. For, John came neither eating nor drinking; and
they said, He had a devil. The Son of Man came eating and drinking; and they
said, Behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, a friend to Publicans and
sinners. I will therefore take my Saviors counsel, and seek to justify my
judgment to the children of Wisdom, of whom she is justified; and not to
fools, by whom she is daily crucified.

24
As many have hungry stomachs; but, few disgesting: so many have apprehending
wits; but, few judging. Hence it comes to pass, that some are wise in words,
and fools in actions. For my part, I had rather it should be said, that I am
one of the judgments of the town, then that I am one of the wits of the town.

25
Diverse men propound unto themselves diverse ends. One makes honor his end;
another, riches: a third hunts after both: a fourth seeks to purchase to
himself the name and fame of a Scholar; a fifth, of a Soldier, etc. As for
me, I will make the honor of God mine end. So shall I be sure that mine end
shall not be dishonorable.

26
I have often wondered with my self, to think that Scholars are the most
poor of all others; notwithstanding that they have the best wits of all
others. And my wonder never left me, till I considered, that they cared not
for the things of this world, which the Mothe and Canker could corrupt; but,
laid up their treasures in the other world: whereas they, who knew nothing, but
the things of this world, carkt and cared most for the world. Some say, that
because Solomon used the riches he had so ill, therefore God would never since
bless Scholars with them: But, that is false: for, we see Kings
Philosophers, and Divines. I will beseech God, to give me an estate equally
distant from abundance, and penury. So shall I never rise so high as
presumption, nor fall so low as despair: yet of the two, I had rather have
nothing than know nothing; that my body should want, than my soul.

27
The Hermits are reprehended, for sequestring themselves from the world: and it
is the opinion of many reverend Divines, that he is most valiant, who grapples
with the enemy; that is, who talks face to face with the wicked. Yet too much
relying upon this Maxim, has brought many into the jaws of danger; but, has
fetched few out. To be a good man in the midst of Sodom, to be abstemious in
Germany, to be chaste in Italy, all these are hard and rare things; we seeing
many return absolutely vicious from thence, that almost went absolutely
virtuous thither. True it is, that Christ kept company with Publicans: but, as
true it is, that he was without the leauell of temptation. We see one man
change nature with another, and put on the disposition of him, with whom he
conuerses. I will therefore not only shun evil, but the means to come to it;
and to avoid hurt, I will keep my self out of shot: neither will I presume,
being but a man, to follow my Master in that which he did as God.

28
Man consists of two parts; the body and the mind: that is, says Lactantius,
of heaven and earth. I will therefore not grudge to let my earth go to earth;
that my heaven may go to heaven.

29
The greatest and most common care men have, is, to pass away the time. They
desire most to pass away that, which is most precious. O! if they knew what
treasure Time offers to their souls, they would look with a jealous eye upon
the houre-glasse, and sigh at the dropping of every sand. They abuse and lose
Time, the mother of Experience; and so, lose Experience, the Mother of
Wisdom. It is a hard case, when a dying man shall think with himself, that
he has left nothing behind him, whereby posterity may know, he did once live.
If that this man (says Seneca) inhabit this world a thousand years, yet can
we not truly say, Hic vir diu vixit, This man lived long; but, Hic vir diu
fuit, This man was long. For my part, I had rather the company would pass
away, then the time; except it be such company, as may help me to redeem the
time. And while I live here, I will study so to use Time, as that I may come
to live there, where is no time.

30
In these times, when me^ will lay an imputation upon one, they will say, He is
Morally honest. Certain it is, that he, who is at no time morally honest, can
never be religiously good. God shows that he is our Father by his works, in,
and for us: and we should show, that we are his children by our works, to his,
and for him. It is not enough, to say with the thief, Lord, remember me, when
thou co^mest into thy kingdom, unless we remember him here. To believe
Christ, is not enough; neither is it enough to believe in him: for, we ought
as well believe in his commandments, that we must do them; as in his
promises, that we shall have them. We read, that we should declare our
faith by our works; that is, our invisible belief by our visible life: but, we
no where read, that we should show our works by our faith. True it is, that
the Scripture bids us, not to give alms sonante tuba, with our tongues
talking of that we give; but, with our hearts thinking for whom we give. No,
no: he that glories in his works, shall never be glorified for the^. The
Publican could not have done a work so acceptable in the sight of Christ, as
was the disclaiming his own works. For, as we have nothing, but from God: so
God will have us confess, that we can do nothing without him. I will have
mercy on my neighbor, that God may have mercy on me; and save him from
momentarie misery, that I may be saved from eternal. Yet, in so doing, will I
know what I do; and will tell, that I do it for the discharge of my duty, and
to Gods glory; who has promised to make me a great one in heaven, if I
relieve but one of his little ones on earth.

31
We read, that Alphonsus, and Fridericus, Kings of Spain and Sicily,
recovered their long lost health (being giuenouer by the Physicians) by reading
history: Alphonsus by reading T. Liuius; and Fridericus by reading Q. Curtius.
Two Christian Kings were healed by profane history. O! if vain, and
uncertain Annals have such a miraculous operation: what have those sacred
pages, penned by the hands of Prophets, and Apostles; and wherein the Spirit of
GOD has expressed the majesty of God? All you that are sick, come you hither;
and read here, where Comfort her self offers to cure you. Come hither Lambs,
and you may wade: come hither Elephants, and you may swim. Come hither
Children, and feed on milk: come hither you toothed understandings, and you
shall feed on hard meat. Lord let mine eyes lose their light, in beholding this
light: and let me read that till I die, which can make me live, never to die.

32
Nothing torments a man more then ambition. She is the only enemy to Content,
and Rebel against Reason. She is borne with her eyes cast up; that is,
comparing her self with those, that are above her. If she cast her eyes
down, it is but in scorn of those that are belovve her. If she should be
pearcht upon the very top of heaven, yet she would desire to clime higher.
That I may not be subject to this aspyring devil, I will be contrary to her;
and never compare my self, but with my Inferiors. And if I see no man more
contemptible than my self, I will yet retain the majesty of a Man; and
think that I am placed Lord, and King, over the Beasts.

33
There is nothing durable in this world, but grief. As for the word rejoice,
it requires, in most toongs, an Ablative Case; and is taken away before it be
thoroughly enjoyed. Grief is a firm and neuer-flitting companion of Man: and
it never forsakes him; though all his friends do. The first note man sings, is
howling; and his last, groaning. I will therefore moralize upon this, and think
that the all-griefe we have in this world, is but a figure of that all-ioy we
shall enjoy in the next world; and as a sour Preparatiue, to make us relish
that sweet food the better.

34
Friends are threefold; profitable, delightful, virtuous. The two former are
embraced in this world; the later ca^sierd. The name of an honest man is grown
odious: and the reputation to be such a one, is a clogge to a man's rising. And
therefore as one says, That he had rather be rich, than be accounted so: so a
man had better be honest, tha^ be reputed so. In these gayish times, the
outward appearance is more looked into, th^n the inward essence (...) that of
Seneca is (...) Annulis magi^^ quam animis creditur. For my part, I will not
make choice of a friend, that has not all those three accidents united in him;
to wit, profit, pleasure, and virtue. But of what profession shall this my
friend be? A knowing, doing scholar. He is the true profitable friend, the
only delightful, the most truly virtuous. That he is profitable, appears in
this, that in exchanging with him a demand for an answer, a man shall gain a
secret, worth a Signiory. That he is delightful, no man will deny, that has
his understanding but once tickled with his discourse. That he is the truliest
virtuous, is easily proved; in that other men are in love with virtue only by
relation: whereas the Scholar, with his understanding part, pries into her
fairest parts, and loves her for her self only, without any other base
respect. A Merchant loves a Merchant; as hoping to gain by him. A Soldier
loves a Soldier; as expecting to be rescued by him: but, a Scholar loves a
Scholar; as desiring to be better instructed by him. I, I: this is love
indeed; and this is a friend indeed: and he that loves not such a friend, hates
himself.

35
It is a thing worthy observation, how the vulgar feeds upon false opinions.
For example; if a man seduce a woman to commit what should be omitted, he is
little or nothing defamed thereby, but she: the seducer is not so much blamed,
as the seduced. If a child consent with a man to commit a villainy, I would
feign know, whether the child, or the man deserve the sharper censure. If the
stronger vessel ouerturn the weaker, which of the^ causes the fall? Some
object, that a woman should have more modesty than a man; and therefore is
held more culpable in the breach thereof. That a woman should be more
shamefac't than a man, I grant; that more shame-minded, I deny. A man should
not have a ^earefull blush: but, he should ever retain an honest shame. And
yet, whosoever should maintain (against all Ethics) that modesty is common
(though not alike common) to every age, and sex, he should on his side have
probability: out of which, absurdity never yet issued. I have seen a fellow
blush, whose face Age had pleighted, and whose eyes could neither send out
light, nor receive it in. And indeed, it is a thing common to every man, to
blush for error in manners, though not in life. Some will answer, There are
men, whom nothing can make blush. To whom I reply, that I doubt not, but there
are both men and women, whom Impudency her self has trained up; and, sitting
on their faces, beats-backe the blushing blood. Amongst all the vulgar errors,
that of extenuating man's offense is the grossest: and I would I could with
reason murder this opinion. Howsoever; if I cannot beat the vulgar from it,
yet I will be sure the vulgar shall never beat it into me.

36
It is an Aphorism in Physic, that we consist of those things by which we
are nourisht: So also falls it out with the soul. For, if she feed upon gross
and unclean conversation, she proves impure: if the conversation be choice
and good, she grows fair and lovely. Howsoever my body fare, I will be
careful that my soul suck her sustenance out of what is sweet and good: if
it be otherwise, she shall not once chew it; much less digest it.

37
As at some times, meats; so at some times, discourses are out of season. To
discourse in matters of policy, or of controversy, in the presence of women,
is altogether as much out of season, as Oisters in July. Let me therefore
consider how, when, and to whom I speak: and if I can speak to no purpose, I
will (if I can) hold my tongue to some purpose.

38
There is no such laughing stock in the world, as the worldling: He says in
his heart, There is no God; and lives thereafter: and on the other side, God
says, he is not his child; and therefore gives him over to his lusts, and
permits him so to live. He thinks the joy to come uncertain; and therefore
prefers a present certain sorrow before it; being afraid to let his body put
off his infirmities. Lord take me thither, where I shall not conceive the
grief I do here: by taking me from hence; where I cannot conceive the joy,
I shall have there.

39
I cannot but laugh at the vain wishes of men. One vvishes that he might
never want money; another, that he might ever enjoy health; a third, that he
might never die. Not one of my desires shall fight against necessity: but, I
will rather wish for that which must be, than wish, that that may not be,
which must be.

40
All opinions are not to be told; but only such, as either learned men, or
else the Church of God have held before us. To leave antiquity, and cleave to
our own opinions, argues a selfe-opinion, and no wisdom. Some there are, who
care not how raw their opinions be, so they be rare. I for my part, had rather
wander with company, than alone; make another man's judgment my ground, than
ground my self upon mine own judgment: for I had rather that my Author
should be laughed at, than my self.

41
Amongst the diverse complaints of men, there is none so ordinary, as that of
Age: but, especially women are vexed with this old vnwelcom guest; and had
rather cease to be, than cease to be young. He that tells a woman, she has a
wrinkle in her face, gives her a wou^d in the heart. If her complexion fail
never so little, her spirit falls with it. She fears not Death awhit, but his
ordinary forerunner, Age. Many men also become vvomanish; and have
hermaphroditicall minds. If a verdit of women once pronounce them ill-fauor'd,
they straight sequester themselves from the world; as, unworthy of the world. I
care not if my corruptible part rot, so my fairer part fade not: nor pass I so
much for the beauty of the Case, as for the glorious splendor of the enclosed
Image.

42
Many travel: but, few deserve to be styled Travelers. To fetch-home apish
gestures, queint fashions, new vices, is now become the proposed end of a
Traveler. There is no better sport, than to read some of their written
Observations. One sets down, what delicate Wines, and Salats have been subject
to the command of his palate. Another discouers strange stratagems in a
gun-hole. A third, writes out all superscriptions of Hospitals, etc. Phy upon
it; that a man should go from home, to go from himself, and return
destitute of the little wit he carried out with him. The wisest of Grecians
esteemed him wise, who had seen many Cities, and the diverse manners of men.
Every Carrier can see many Cities, and the different natures of Nations: but,
to discern betwixt them, and pick wisdom out of them, that requires the man;
and such a man did Homer require. The reason why we travel, is, because all
happy wits reign not under one Climate; and therefore are to be hunted out. Who
would not wade a million of miles, to enterchange discourse with a Scaliger, a
Lipsius, or a Causabone? My mind therefore shall travel more than my body; when
the later rests, the former shall labor: and my care shall be greater to please
my Understanding, than my Sense.

43
It is a common saying, that a continual companion is a man's shadovv. This
saying is never so true, as when a substantial fellow has an Ass, and a
shadow to associate him. And as shadows cannot be seen in darkness, but by
light; no more can dark and dull understandings discern this shadow from this
substance: for, that cannot be discovered without the light of some bright
Intellect.

44
An Hypocrite thinks himself the vvisest of men: but, at last he finds it
otherwise. He thinks, that his knauerie is unseen, because it is unpunished:
but, he is deceived. For, not only the searcher of hearts sees him, but also
men (who can guess at hearts) will at length epsy him. For, as he that
wears another man's garment, will at length be discovered either by the
ouerlength, too shortness, or ouer-widenesse, or some other default of the
raiment: so he that puts on an outward habit of sincerity, of which he never
had the lowest inward tincture, will in time be found faulty through the want
of some thing, or other, requisite to such a holy professor. I will not
therefore dissemble, either with God, or man; but, profess that living, which
I will pronounce dying.

45
Some will imitate Great men though it be in the greatest vices. These are
miss-led by opinion. For, as a golden rule, being crooked, cannot measure a
thing, so well, as a plain straight stick: so neither can we square our
actions by the unruly lives of Princes so fitly, as by the plain, even, and
virtuous courses of the Poor. I will honor Greatness: but, I will both honor
and imitate goodness; and will not hold him good who is great, but him great who
is good.

46
A drunkard is no good secret-keeper. It is the property of a drunkard, to
disgorge his bosom, with his stomak; to empty his mind, with his maw. I will,
therefore, not tell a bibber what I would not hear again; least I hear of it
again, from those to whom I dare not avouch it again.

47
Some say all they hear; and report that with confidence, which was related to
them with doubt. These always purchase laughter; and now and then peril. I will
not, therefore, tell all I hear: but, I will hear, again and again, that
which I tell.

48
Curiosity, and Inquisition, are two great enemies to Wisdom One being
demanded what Caesar whispered in his ear, made answer, that Caesar told
him, he would invent a very strange punishment for such as pried into his
words, and actions. This Vice is very incident to young Courtiers: who inquire
after the discourses and courses of Jove and Juno; of the King and Queen. I
will not ask what I should not ask; least I hear what I would not hear.

49
There is nothing so much to be desired in this world, as health; Without it,
the body cannot travel; nor the soul well discourse. Without it, Kings esteem
themselves more miserable than Beggars; and would give their Kingdoms for an
hour of ease. I will use health, as I do my dearest friend. whom I detain by
all means I can: and, going away, I straight devise how to get him again.

50
No vice gets a man so many enemies, as Pride. The humble loath the proud man,
because he is so far different from their strain: and the haughty hate
him, because he would equal them. If I be proud of any thing, it shall be
of my humility.

51
Some make their bellies their gods; and pray to him that feeds the Foul of
the Air, to feed them with the Foul of the Air. They are not so much
solicitous what they shall wear tomorrow, as what they shall eat tomorrow.
For my part, as I will look to my belly, that it sterue not; so I will look
to it, that it stretch not.

52
No humane study is so profitable, as moral Philosophy. No other study, says
Seneca, can diminish greefes, and subdue Passions; nor make a man more
liberal, more just, more temperate. Seneca might have also added, that no
other study can fit a man with manners, and a fair behauior. Ferdinand the
Emperor, making a speech in a public assembly, by chance gave Priscian a
fillip or two. Which a Bishop hearing, started up, and said; Caesar, you have
forgotten your Grammar: to whom Caesar, And you have forgotten your Ethics,
Bishop. The reply was good; but, not rough enough for an admonition ^o rude.
From, hence it is that Scholars, defective in this study, are termed, by the
Vulgar, Mere Scholars; that is, Pure ^uppies. Before I seek to know other
things, I will ^eeke to know my self.

53
Constancy is no virtue, if it be (might I so speak) devoted to vice. Change,
in the vicious, is as great a virtue, as Constancy in the virtuous. I will
therefore be inco^stant to Vice, who is incertaine and instable of her self;
and constant to Virtue, who is ever the same, and her self.

54
They say, there is a kind of resemblance between Sleep and Death. As
therefore he that is wearied with the days toil, does not grudge to go to
bed, as hoping to rise again: So I, oppressed with the excess and cares of many
days, will gladly sleepe-out that long, slowe-pas't Night. Neither will I think
much to go to my earthly bed; as knowing that I shall rise again, and put-on
an incorruptible raiment.

55
Marriage was ordained by God for man's comfort: and yet man often times abuses
it to Gods dishonor, and his own discomfort. The reason heerof is, because al
bodies are not of one constitution: and therefore souls, following the humors
of their bodies, have not all one disposition. When therefore two differing
natures meet, and see they are tied one to the other; they will cut the very
thread of life, to be loose, though it be with the loss of their souls.
Parents, therefore, do ill, to match those together, betwixt whom Nature has
placed an Antipathy, and a loathing. What a cruel part is it of a Parent, to
marry his child to him that has most, when she hates him most? I pray God,
some of them do not one day give a dear account of some dear souls, whose
fair bodies they have begotten; doing perpetual penance, for placing wealth
above worth. Had I a child, that loathed the man that I liked, I would sooner
send her to the Churchyard to be buried, than to the Church to be married;
and should think, I did her a greater courtesy, to wed her to a Grave, than
to Grief.

56
There is nothing that man at once glories in, and grudges at, but Service. He
is proud, when he thinks himself the servant of God: and he is abject, when
he considers that he is subject to his fellow subjects. He mutters against
God, accusing him of injustice, for that he dimmes his bright beginning, with
a base succession; and made him not only to his own glory, but also to augme^t
the vain glory of men. The very name of King, is as an allarum to stir and
rouse up his envy: and he fears him with the same fear, that he does the
devil. Man is deceived: for, the Deity is served not only in the Deity, but
in Magistrates, in Parents, in Tutors; and in all those, whom he, that is
above all, has placed above us. I will not therefore think I serve God only,
when I immediately obey his will; but also, when I obey the wills of those, whom
he wills me to obey: and I will make a holy vow, of an idle complement; vowing
my self the servant of his servants.

57
As there are few good Physicians for the body: ^o there are not many for the
soul. As those of the body let many die, for want of skill: so those of the
soul let many perish, because they know not how to apply themselves unto
them. I have seen an Empirick prescribe a cold remedy for a cold disease;
like those who seek to cure the desperation of Gods mercy, with the
declaration of his justice. As therefore the Physician of the body is not
esteemed, except he can give a reason for what he does; no more is the
Physician of the soul to be valued, unless he can give a reason of that he
says. GOD has left to his Ministers, weapons to wound, and balmes to heal;
Keys to open, and keys to shut: but, some of them wanting theological
prudencie, manage these things amiss. As, therefore, knowing the constitution
of mine own body, I will give the Physician direction in some things: so,
knowing well the ill estate of mine own soul, I will in some things supply the
defect and ignorance of my ghostly Physician.

58
It is a common speech, that Every man is either a fool or a Physician: that
is, he knows, what does him good, and takes it; and look what does him hurt,
he refuses it. It fares not so in matters of the soul. For, in those, most
are fools: and few are Physicians; like children, coveting that which harms
them, and flying that which helps them. I care not if I be a fool in my bodily
diet, so I be a Physician for the health of my soul.

59
It is a thing worthy the consideration; that though the soul be her self
imprisoned in the body, yet she cannot endure that her prison should be
imprisoned. Of this there is a two-folde reason: first, because she loves not
to be double walled in; and, secondly, this brings to her mind, her own
imprisonment, with the thraldom, and subjection she lives in to the Sense.
Yet withal, it is a thing remarkable in her, that she is never so glad, as when
she has given her body the slip, and left it imprisoned in the Grave: though
at Natures first motion, she was loath to part from it; as having dwelt so long
in it. Lord, let my body go to his earthly prison, that my soul may enjoy
that heavenly liberty. So shall she be free of Heaven, and free from Earth.

60
Examples, taken from Great men, hurt more, than if they were taken from Poor.
The reason is, because adversity makes a man know him self; whereas
prosperity makes him know himself too well. Now, it is more safe to follow
him, that knows him self, than him that does not. For, as a true knowledge of
God, and of his truth, is the beginning of divine wisdom: so a true knowledge
of a man's self, is the beginning of humane. I will therefore sooner imitate
those who^ misery has tamed, than those whom joys have made wild.

61
It is a great folly, to write, and print things foolish. Things foolish I
call things lewd, and void of sense. It Is strange, that man should not be
content, that only the present generation should call him fool; but, that
posterity also should prick and pick him out for one. For my part, I will not
impart that knowledge to any man, which may make him forget himself; and (when
he comes to remember himself) may make him know that I forgot my self.

62
All flatterers are odious, and dangerous; and above all others, the Creeper.
The first and most pernicious that ever was, was a Creeper, and beguiled the
Woman; who thought that such a crawler could not have such craft, as afterward
she found he had. Such Flatterers are poison to Princes, and oftentimes a bane
to the best disposed. Flattery is now-a-dayes admitted into the Courts of
Princes: nay, into the bosom of Princes; not considering that though her ward
below, yet she aims high, and hits those soonest who lie highest. Those
Courts are as happy that want her, as those are cursed and unhappy that have
her.

63
As the stomach if it be fed a long time with one meat, at length loathes
the same: so the soul despises ordinary and accustomed discourse. I will
therefore feed my soul with variety; but, not with confusion.

64
Every man thinks, that, which is opposed to the extremest of his griefs, to
be man's chief felicity. The poor man judges riches, the sick man health, the
prisoner liberty, to be the highest happiness. I my self, when I have been
discontented (as I have been often) have thought content to be the best
bliss: and I often fall into the relapse, and embrace that opinion.
Hence-forward, I will place my felicity in those things, which may bring me to
that never fading felicity: and if my soul have content here, I will think
that she is contented with this world; and so has lost the only mark of her
immortality.

65
God looks for most honor from those, to whom he has given greatest honor.
As Princes have the highest place upon Earth; so should they do the greatest
homage to Heaven.

66
Nothing in this life is so unsavory as Old Age. The sadness of man's last days,
is sufficient to pay him for the folly of the first. The nearer Age comes to
her growth, the nearer Beauty is to her bane. For, in this pensive time, every
thing withers, and grows old, but Evil: and that retains his full vigor.
Lord, let my soul then flourish when my body fades: and let the concord of my
mind fight against the discord of my body.

67
Nothing is so terrible to the greatest part of mortality, as Death. This
little lean dwarf will beard a Monarch, in the midst of his Army; making him
shake, that whilome shook Towers, and made the Earth it self tremble with the
weight of his Hoaste. Great Alexander was a little child in this: and though
he had often met Death face to face, yet at last he turned his back to him, and
would have hid himself from him; as hoping to be invisible to his invisible
Enemy. What an absurdity is it in a man to seek to choke Nature! or to grudge
her the voyding of her excrements! As when I was borne, another died: so I will
consider, that when I die, another is borne. If Nature be weary of me, I
will be weary of my self: I were a fool if I should not. For, as no man can
play upon a broken instrument; no more can any soul recreate her self with a
bad instrumentaliz'd body. If, therefore Life fly from me, I will not fly
from Death.

68
When men are calumniated, they grow angry: and if they be reprehended for any
predominant vice in them, they seek to excuse and extenuate it. I will not do
so; but, will hearken to Epictetus: who wills me, not to deny the sins mine
enemy taxes me with; but, to reprove his ignorance: in that, being
unacquainted with the infinity of my crimes, he lays only two or three to my
charge; whereas indeed I am guilty of a million.

69
As Sin sold the world to Death: so Death bought the world at the hands of
Sin; it being the will of the heavenly Father, with the death of one to buy
everlasting life for all. Blessed be he then, that died the cursed death of the
Cross, that we may lead a blessed life without crosses.

70
Christ himself says, that Many are called, but few are chosen. Many are
called Christians, who are not chosen to live with Christ. Many are in the
Church, that are not of the Church: and many visible members there are, which
belong not to the invisible body; nor receive their motion from the invisible
Head. We, whose souls look upon others through the dim spectacles of Sense,
do often times take a Judas for a Nathana^ll, and (contarily) a Simon Peter,
for a Simon Magus. Let us then spare to judge; least we be judged to be
unjust, by that just Judge, at the dreadful day of Judgment. I, I: this is a
(...) course; and this will I observe: because I know not, whether or no, the
Saul I see now, may prove a Paul to-morow.

71
The world delights in those, that delight in it. The reason therefore, why the
world co^temnes me, is because it is contemned of me. So then there must be a
mitigation on both sides. To a mitigation I may be brought; to a subjection,
never.

72
The devil is never so busy, as when a man is idle. He has no so fit
instrument to work by, as by Sloth: which is, indeed, the mother of vice. I
will therefore abandon this mother; least in time she bring me to that father.

73
Many pray: but, few pray aright. Some presume to beg that, which God in his
justice cannot grant: and others again despair to crave that, which God in
his mercy will not deny. I will not therefore beg all that which I would;
but, all that which I should.

74
There is nothing in this world, that all men shun so much, as Baseness: yet
many run into it, because few know the true definition of it. Opinion styles
many things base, which Virtue calls bright, and glorious. We see Gentlemen
ashamed, and hang down their heads, when they look up to the place, where
their Ancestors sat. And why do they this? Because they do not think it any
disparagement, to decline from the virtue of their Ancestors; but, from their
riches. If Poverty take-vp her residence in me, or change beings with me; yet
shall she never make me think my self base, so long as Virtue leaves me any
one spark of her brightness.

75
The basest grief of all, is that, which receives his birth from the death of
a Horse or a Cow; or from the loss of the two too high-priz'd Metalls. Phy
upon it, that a man should hurt his internal substance, for the want of
external. If the Sun and Moon shine upon me, I shall think they do me a
sufficient favor; without presuming to implore their descension in to my
pockets: but, if the Sun and Moon, that is, Gold and Silver, vouchsafing to
make my pockets their Spheres, shall afterward (out of their Planeticall
inconstancy) skippe out, and wander from me; I will not mourn, and say, I have
lost them: but, that I have rendered, and sent them back to him, who sent, and
gave them unto me.

76
Poverty lies begging in the streets, and no man pitties her. The reason is,
because it is against the nature of man to pity a common enemy to Mankind.
Man should consider, that though Poverty be his worldly enemy, yet she is his
spiritual friend.

77
Every thing has his fit application: but, few find it. Some, by the
extraordinary application of a thing common, will bring the Reader both into
admiration and delight. Others again, by an vnwittie application, make non
Sense; and infuse lothing into the nice stomach of the Reader I will apply
nothing, which may not imply something.

78
All men cry-out for plain dealing: but, few love the trade. It is an old
Proverb, that he that uses it long, shall die a beggar. Sure I am, that he,
who uses it ever, shall die rich: He that ^aw him in secret, will reward him
in secret. He shall enter, and inhabit heaven, and partake of that true
treasure; whereas the hypocrite leaves his wealth behind him, and carries his
woe with him.

79
Eating, and drinking too much, are two great vices. Yet, of the two, too much
eating is the greater. To drink too much, comes often times from constraint:
but, to eat too much, proceeds from a man's inordinate appetite. He that is a
drunkard, may justly blame others: but, he that is a glutton, can justly blame
none but himself. I will, therefore, make my appetite conformable to my
digestion: so shall I be sure neither to eat too much, nor too little.

80
Some fearing their names should die, build houses; to make posterity know,
that they once were, and were wealthy. This indeed tells the world that they
had purses; but, not that they had pates. He is the man, who trusts not to
oftentripping Tradition; but pleads his own Cause to Posterity; making her
confess, that he was a man of deeds, though not a man of dross.

81
A great man's favor is hardly got, and easily lost. He keeps a man to serve
his turn; but, not to observe his turnings. The greatest part of his
followers, are like his horses: they carry him; and he guides them. That horse
which offers to fling him, or that is not te^dermouth'd, he puts off, as a
headstrong Jade. It is better therefore to serve God, who is void of all
accidents, and humors; than man, who by them is made void of reason: and he
that is most unfit to observe man, is the most fit to serve God.

82
The Church militant, labors to be united to the triumphant; and the
triumphant longs for the union. Lord then join them; and let sorrow sever them
no longer.

83
Nature binds men one to the other; but, never so fast as when she chains them
together with the linkes of virtue. Nature may make me love my kindred: but,
Virtue will make me do more.

84
He that hates a man, because he has some notorious vices, is rash and
unadvised: for, if he did but look into the same man, he should find some
eminent virtues in him. I will not shun his presence that has a good nature,
and but one virtue; as knowing my self to be all vicious.

85
It is an usual speech, that nothing is said, which has not been said
before. If it be mea^t, that no words are spoke, which have not been spoke
before, that is false: and if the meaning be, that nothing is thought, which
has not been thought before, that is false too. For, we see that every day
reveals a new secret to the world; and that for never heard-of things, we
are feign to feign never heard of words. I will rather think all brains are
exhausted, than Nature.

86
Virtue is placed even in the midst of Vice. Liberality, is placed betwixt
Avarice and Prodigality; Valor, betwixt Cowardice and Rashness; Mercy,
betwixt Cruelty, and a fond Lenity. Take courage, Virtue: thou shall once
shake-off thy privation; and put-on a habit, without reiterated actions.

87
He that meets with a contentious fool, does wisely in granting all he
objects: for, it is more policy, to gain a friend without trouble, than a foe
with it.

88
The same holds with GOD, that does with great Lords: he loves to be well
followed and attended. But, neither desert, nor great friends, can prefer a
man to him: only those whom he likes, he chooses. I had rather follow him,
than go before Emperors.

89
A young man is like a wild horse; who, if he want a curb, will run
himself to death. Those parents, therefore, are wise, who join correction,
with direction; and keep those in, who else would lash-out.

90
It is a thing difficult, to find out the humors of men; because many
dissemble their dispositions. This business requires a crafty, and experienced
wit: for, deceit is never so soon discovered as by the deceitful.

91
Passion is the only enemy to Wisdom. He that conquers this enemy, makes
Wisdom his friend.

92
A lingering hatred is badde. Gods children are angry, yet sin not. My wrath
shall go down with the sun: but, my love shall endure longer than the sun
it self.

93
Affectation makes a wise man a fool; but, if it meet with a fool, it makes
him an intolerable Ass. In these later, lame times, we see many affect
defects; and to be proud of that, which indeed they should be ashamed of.
Since Nature has made me somewhat better than a fool; let me beware, that
affectation make me not worse than a fool.

94
It is a question worth the inquiring into, whether or no, all ostentation be
to be avoided. The Philosophers cried-out, Sum superbiam quaesita^ meritis:
Assume a pride proportionable to thy merits. And indeed, both Morality, and
Policy, persuade it; for, generally, we see those undervalued of all men, who
undervalue themselves. Yet, the word of God is to be observed, before the
observations of men.

95
Co^mines observes this in Lewis the XI. that he would even toil, to gain any
man that might either profit, or hurt him This is an excellent policy; and
little or nothing (or rather, in nothing) repugnant to divinity.

96
Religion is often made a cloak to villainy. But, at one time or other, Villainy
will cast-off her cloak: and he that is wise, will perceive and detest it. I
wonder, that men do not tremble (as being before God) when they dissemble
before men.

97
Nothing should so nearly touch, nor so much move a Prince, as a base report
of his predecessor; though he were his utter enemy. For, though he himself
lead the life of a blessed Angel; yet, from some mouths wherein Calumny
cloisters her self) as much imputation shall be laid upon him, as can be
cast upon the Devil; which, his Successor, in imitation of him, will
winke-at. How many ministers of hell, now-adayes not only revile Gods on Earth,
with words, but with written words also? Historiographers may lightly touch
the faults of Princes: but, if they rail at their persons, they cease to be
Historians, and become maleuolent Orators. Princes, therefore, should not
imagine that their present fame will be permanent; but, should take this
prescribed, or some other course: by which, they may as well stop the mouths
of the reuealers of their vices, and reuilers of their persons; as let-loose
the tongues that trumpetout their virtues.

98
As, on the one side, it savors much of indiscretion, to remember a man of any
thing by which he has either done himself disgrace, or received it from
others: so, on the other side, it is a point of Wisdom, to put one in mind of
any action of his bravely performed; of any speech of his vtter'd with the
astonishment of the audience* or of any Office in the Commonwealth, which he
has undergone with honor, and with augmentation of his reputation. He that
delights to displease men, will at length reap no great pleasure.

99
Humility may be without honor: but, honor cannot be without humility: if it
be, it is but bastard. There is no surer way than this, to finde-out bastards,
fathered upon the Nobility.

100
It is foolish, to brag of riches, or any external thing, in the company of
others. For, the better sort will think it done in envy, and emulation of
them: and the worse will take it done, in contempt of them. He that brags of
things without, has but little within.

101
If the Miser did but look into what he does, he would never be so
miserable. He is ever solicitous; and has scarce one happy hour in the course
of his whole life. He hoords and layes-vp, not knowing who shall enjoy it: and
oftentimes they enjoy it, who lay it out as fast; not caring what become of it.
So that it plainly appears, the whole life of an Usurer is nothing but misery
and vexation. O that a Cormorant did know, how many beautiful bodies starve,
and how many substantial souls faint, for want of his cash! he would not
only willingly part with all his pelf, but sell his own body to solace their
souls. But, indeed, he is not so much to be blamed: because, whereas charity
begins at home in others, cruelty begins at home in him: and he almost
starues himself, that others, who^ he suffers to starve, may not take
exception. Euery-one is not guilty of this Vice. The Prodigal has such use
for his money at home, that he can put none to use abroad. Some get by the use
of their money: he loses by the use of his.

To Virtue.
O Great, and glorious Goddess of the good; thou suter, and thou vvooer of the
wicked; thou, without who^ the mightiest Monarchs are but poor, and
miserable; and with who^ the basest Beggar is great, and mighty: thou Mistres
of so many mild Martyrs; thou Gouernesse of all sweet dispositions; thou
beginner, co^tinuer, and perfecter of all honorable actions, Virtue; to thee I
consecrate this little languishing Work, together with all the humble indeauors
of my soul. Gracious Mistress, as thou have hitherto hardened me against all
the buffets of hard-fisted Fortune, and armed me against the kicking of Asses,
and the hissing of Geese: so give me still encouragements to maintain thy
cause against thy black-visag'd enemy, Vice. And seeing thou art a Mistres of
many servants, I must not only remember my self, but beseech thee also, to
remember all those that suffer for thy sake. Give an end to their misery:
least misery cause their end; and so thou be destitute of servants: for, the
next Age (take the word of thy devoted) will not afford thee many. Make much
therefore, make much of those, who by thee are made more than earthly: let
them adorn earth yet a while; and let us a little longer triumph in them here,
before they themselves triumph in heaven. The world has need of them, bright
Empress: The world has need of them; in that precious precepts never shine
so much, as when they are set in examples; nor examples, as when they are
set in curious creatures.

The Philosopher says, that, if the world had the full view of thee, thou
would so dazzle the eyes of Mortality, that admiration would lay it in a
transe. But, some cannot behold thy essence: and therefore, we were much to
blame, if we should not honor thee much in those, in whom we see even a
little of thee. But, if we see almost all thee, in some other self of thine;
then pardon us, if we give you both alike worship. As I began, so I end with my
self; and beseech thee once more, that I may be no more: I mean, that my
massy part may fall, before my ethereall fall into any thing base, or below
the height of that blood, which has run through the veins of so many
valiant and truly honorable persons. If thou grant this, great Goddess, I
will then make this my Motto,

Virtute tute.
An Advertisement from the Translator, to the Reader.
Whosoever shall come to the reading of this Oration, let him know, that it is
not translated like Quae genus, to teach any man to construe. I have not
rendered verbum verbo: but, verba verbo; and in some places, verbum verbis. As
in Printing, many faults usually escape in the first Proof: so many errors in
the first Edition. I confess, through haste, I have not always closely
followed the Authors steps. If ever it be reprinted, all shall be redressed.
In the mean time, it may be well understood, though it be ill translated. I
had never undertaken it, had it not been written against Calumny: who has
wronged me; and may hereafter, more, than ever Fortune did, or can do. No,
no: I had rather contemplate a thousand lines, than turn one; the task being
more noble: Since, as Aristotle says, Deus, si qua felicitate gaudet, gaudet
contemplatione. Besides; I plainly see, that the only thing which has brought
Scholars out of request, has been Translating. Let these suffice.

An Oration of Iustus Lipsius, against Calumny.
THis day, this day, am I to speak of Calumny, and to draw and lugge this Vice
into the light. Thou God, who art goodness, brightness, and all love, be a
light to the steps of my dim Intellect, and lead me against a vice, of all
vices the greatest enemy to thee. Move my mind and tongue, that I may instill
innocence and humanity into Humanity; winning men to show honesty, peace, and
charity, in their lives, discourses, and writings. Calumny I here define to
be, a guilefull, privy wounding, and diminishing of another fame, either in
word, or with pen. Calumny is so called a caluendo: which (being an old, and
obsolete word) implied as much, as to abuse, or deceive. For, Calumny, in
general, lies, and beguileth (as hereafter I will show) and deriues her
authority from lying, and deceiving. The Graecians named her (...); and that,
very properly: because she pearces, sticks, and strikes-through, with the
all-harming dart of her venomed tongue. So that Calumny has two proposed ends:
the one, to deceive; which the Latins considered: the other, to hurt; which
the Graecians often observed. O Vice of Vices! and yet in these Times what is
more frequent? what more inseparable companion of public, and private ruins?
I may yet add, and ask, what has been more neglected by modern, and ancient
Writers? Wherefore, since there is not any one found (to my knowledge) who has
written of it, or against it; I hope, this Treatise of it will not be
unprofitable to you, nor inglorious to me, who first begin to lay it open,
and to explane it with my plain style. Three principal things then there are,
from which the present discourse must be derived. First, I will show how
filthy, and loathsome Calumny is; secondly, how pernicious; thirdly, how to be
avoided. Whilst I severally discourse of these, somewhat amply, and acutely, I
shall desire this fair Audience, not only to lend me their minds, but their
ears; and to fill and guide the sails (as I may say) of my Oration, with the
Zephyrus, or gentle gale of their loue-breathing thoughts.

As for the filthiness of Calumny, it cannot be more clearly proved, than by
this two-folde argument: to weet, that it self, and all those in whom it
dwells, are most loathsome. The persons, that harbor it, are branded with these
three marks; base, idle, prattling: So truly, by me termed base, that I deny
not only any good, but any indifferently good, or lofty spirit, ever to have
been blemished with this blot. Examine the old, and these our modern Times,
and you shall never read, see, or hear, that any have been prone to this
vice, but only sad, and malign natures, envying others and distrusting
themselves; whom melancholy Saturn has blasted with his star. Did you never
see little, cowardly dogs bark at guests, that durst not bite beasts? Why,
such are these worser sort of men; who are borne only to hurt and vex the
harmless. I say, they are borne to that end; because they do so lean, and
incline to this vice, that they are never quiet, but when they have made others
unquiet. Their second mark is Idleness: than which nothing is more apparent;
since the first spark, and tinder of Calumny, is Sloth: for, no man will have
leisure to enquire into other men's affairs, who is detained by his own. In
sluggish, and dronish people, this godless Goddess takesvp her lodging, and
there lays the foundation of her kingdom. He that denies this, let him but a
little frequent the Palaces of Princes, and places of Pleading: in which,
occasion and matter of Calumny is daily, and abundantly, sown by those, who
make this their only business, To walk and talk. Whatsoever is publicly,
or privately done, is there censured, and scourged. The Prince, and his
Counselors are said to do amiss: one man is said to have done this; another
man to have spoken that. To conclude; no report of any man can stand with them
unblemished, and vnslandred. And if wise, and experienced men did this, I could
the better bear with it: but, now, men not only most idle, but also most
ignorant, do busy themselves in those things, to whose height, their sense,
and understanding will not reach. As in a ship an unskillful passenger is not to
be endured, that teaches, and chides the Mariners, when he himself will lend
hand neither to the Rudder, nor to the Ore: so also, unto us, these empty
vessels must needs be molestfull, which sound most, and have least liquor in
them. To be brief; their last mark is prattling. And, indeed, how should
they be other? since it is proper to these babblers, not only to speak much,
but much evil. Have any of you at any time ranked your selves with those
headstrong untamed people, who have, as Pindar says, vncurbed mouths? If you
have; tell me, was not the greatest part of their talk not only of some body,
but against some body? surely, it was. For, they vent things, both heard, and
unheard; mingling things true and certain, with things vain, and uncertain.
And, as in a lake of Iudaea, called Asphaltes, nothing sinks; but whatsoever
is cast-in, swimmes upon the surface of the water: so, nothing goes to the
bottom of their bosoms; all things keep the top, and slote over. But, to
say the truth, how should they favor others, when they cannot spare themselves?
For, it is the nature of this disease, to make them rail against themselves,
when they have nothing to speak against others. As in an extreme and long
dearth, our bodies, for want of nourishment, feed upon themselves: so falls
it out with them.

I have now sufficiently discoursed unto you of the Minions of Calumny: I will
therefore (as order requires) bring her self upon the Stage, with her own
true countenance. I confess, all vice to be detestable, ugly, and loathsome;
but, this above all other: which does not only reign in filthy people, but
is also begotten, and borne of loathsome Parents. The Poets feign their
Chimaera to have three bodies. They fain: but, I dare swear, that to the
composition of Calumny, the mixtion of three vices is necessary. For, Lying,
and Envy are her Parents; and Curiosity, her Nurse. Consider, with your
selves, what a fair infant this must needs be, which receives her being
from three such foul vices. I said, and said truly, that Lying was her father;
because it inspires and animates Calumny: which without Lying, languisheth,
having neither life nor soul. What Backbiter was ever yet content with the
naked truth only? which of them was ever yet pleased to call a fig a fig?
And, indeed, he cannot choose but do so; in that he has no power to hurt,
nor can attain to his proposed end, if he keep himself within the limits of
truth. Therefore he adds to every thing and as that sound of neighboring
Valleies (which we call Echo) returns woe or three words, for one: so he
doubles things heard, and seen. Have I in a word or two complained of any man?
he will say, I have sharply accused him. Have I made doubt of any thing? he
will say, I have carped at all. Have I my self some doubtful speech, or
sentence, he will choose the worse sense. In a word; as the Physicians say of
their cupping glasses, that they draw-out nothing but the most impure blood of
all: so I may more truly say of a Slanderer, that he neither attracts, nor
receives any thing unto him, or into him, that is not evil. But, I would he
did detract only: for, oftentimes, he adds, and reports those things to have
been done, and spoke by us, which we never so much as dreamed of. As Spiders,
with a wonderful Art, bring-foorth threads and cobwebs, out of their bodies:
so, he begets, and weaues subtle snares with his wit. I have truly and
sufficiently showed, that Lying is the Father of Calumny: it now rests that I
prove Envy to be her Mother; who in the malignant womb of her wit, conceiues,
bears, and at last brings forth this impious infant. This is easily proved, by
the manners and deeds of Calumniators: for, they sildome draw that
fame-defacing weapon upon base people, and men of their own coat; but, upon
those whom they see to excel others in virtue, in learning, or in some other
thing worthy admiration. As Runners do not look back for the laggers, but
strive to outstrip the foremost: so, Calumny pursues the better sort.

It was observed in the sportes of old, that Bulls would roar, and wex
enraged at the sight of any read, or purple thing; which, notwithstanding are
the most fair of all colors: the like may be seen in these men; whose rancor
is stirred up by Virtue.

Last of all, I added, that Curiosity was the Nurse of Calumny. And that, very
truly; since she seeds and fosters this Damsel with the long sought-for meat of
speeches and rumors. Take her from Calumny, and what can she do? She will
straight wex weak, faint, and empty; having more will, tha^ power to hurt.
For, she has matter ministered to her, by Curiosity: who, dwelling never at
home, but ranging always abroad, enters not only the houses, but the minds of
all men; being ever watchful, never sleeping. It is she, it is she, that
gathers reports together, and vents them to him that next accosteth her,
saluting him thus: Give me your hand. What news? What Is done at Court? How
stand the affairs of England? How, of France? What does Titius? What does
Seius? These things, and other of like nature, does she pry into, and meddle
with; yet never grows full, nor satisfied. But, as a putrid and scabbed limb
delights to be scratcht, and rubbed: so she itcheth for sharp and opprobrious
speeches. Neither only has she itching, and greedy ears, but quick and
pearcing eyes: which when she opens, what is it she sees not? Yea, even those
things which she sees not. She the^ searches into things revealed, and
unrevealed. Tiberius, the Emperor, is reported to have been so quick-sighted,
that he could see as well in the night, as in the day: but, this may more
fitly be said of Curiosity; in that, neither darkness, nor solitude, can
keepe-out her all-searching sight. Do thou shut thy doors? she will pearce
through them. Do thou tie-vp thy tongue? she will pry into thy bosom.
Do thou shun the society of men? she will nevertheless find thee out. As
Flies, and such little creatures, can by no means be kept-out; no more can
she, by any Art. She is sole Queen of that Family of the Curio's, whom the
Comic Poet very wittily thus paints forth; They have a great care of other
men's affairs. They would seem to know all things; but, indeed, know nothing.
They know what the King whisperd in the ear of the Queen; and what Jove
discoursed of with Juno. Nay, which is more; they know things which never were,
nor ever shall be.

By this time, I am sure, you evidently perceive the ugliness of Calumny;
which lodges in base, filthy persons, and has like Parents; begotten by
Lying, brought forth by Envy, and brought up by Curiosity. Come on now, and
follow me to the Mischief that attends her: which I thought good to make the
second part of my race. And before I run it, pause with me awhile, and
refresh your minds.

The Mischief in Calumny, is Forcible and Variable: and that so great (I
auerre it seriously, without an Hyperbole) as I find the like in no other vice.
I say, Forcible, because she wounds deeply, and privily. Variable, in that (for
the most part) she neither leaves any thing, nor any body, untouched. Let us
handle every one of these by themselves. That she wounds deeply, the holy
Prophet will witness with me, crying-out; Their teeth are darts and arrows: and
their tongue is a sharp sword. Neither is there any great difference betwixt
the words of this divine man, and of that Spartan, who being demanded whether,
or no his sword were sharp enough, replied, More keen than Calumny; intimating
thereby, that no edge of iron and steel, could compare in keenenesse with the
edge of the tongue. What cannot this touch? or what touches it, that it
touches not to the quick? As that subtle force of Lightning pearceth through
every thing: so, nothing can be so closely shut, nor so far removed, but
Calumny will burn through it. And this she does the more effectually, in that
she does it privily, and (as I added) by treachery. How can a weapon be
avoided, that is not seen? The clouds forewarne us of the ensuing tempest;
smoke of the ensuing fire; a Spy, of the approach of the Enemy: but, the
mischief that comes from a Calumniator, is sudden, and unexpected. Do thou
think he threatens? he then flatters. Do thou take him for thine enemy?
he will induce thee to believe that he is thy friend; and will first tie thee
with the snaring praises of his tongue, and then with the same will wound thee.
And as a Scorpion, if thou handle him, will seem to play with thee, till he
get opportunity with the winding of his tail to sting thee: so, when thou
fear little hurt from a Calumniator, he has the^ already harmed thee. O
detestable deceit! which my Historian (as from an Oracle) notes, when he
says, A man's greatest enemies are his greatest praisers. Give me poison
openly, and I will beware of it: but, if you cunningly mingle it with my meat,
or drink, how can I shun it then? The same may be said of Calumny: which may
truly be called, poisoned honey. It is not a thing difficult (says singular
Salust) to a stout and valiant man, to conquer an assaulting enemy; but, good
men never suspect, and therefore never go about to shun hidden and unknown
dangers. How Forcible and violent the Mischief is which proceeds from Calumny,
has sufficiently been proved: you shall now hear how Variable or diverse it
is. It does hurt (as I said before) in most matters, and to most persons; a
thing more remarquable in Calumny, than in any other vice. It hurts not one, or
two; but, many: If I be lustful, two only are contaminated with the impurity
of the crime. Say, I am covetous: it may be I cheat three, or four of their
money. If I be drunk, perhaps I wrong some man with blows, or with words.
But, with Calumny it is far otherwise: for, she spares no Age, sex, nor order;
and may rightly be called a public calamity, and the Phaeton (if I may so
say) of the Earth's circle. Who was ever so happy, or so wise, that could brag
he was safe from her reach? There was never any. Her tearing teeth are whetted
to hurt all men; but, those most, who are of most merit.

He that excells in any thing, is sure to be troden-downe by her. As they, who
pull-downe houses, do first take a way the pillars: so, Calumny (desiring to
destroy Mortality) first seeks to supplant those, upon whom the public good
is builded. Prudent, honest, and learned men, are her proclaimed enemies: whose
fame she sometimes shakes with the engines of reproach; and sometimes, again,
seeks to overthrow it with the cunning undermining of suspicion. Neither only
does she iniure and wrong sundry men; but, in sundry matters also. Nor is there
any thing dear and precious to a man, but she will be sure with her wiles
either wholly to bereave him of it, or very much to empaire it. Do riches
delight thee? She will, if she can, dispossess thee of them. Do thou rejoice
in great titles, and honors? Of those she will deprive thee. Does any man
place his felicity in his friends? Here she will employ her uttermost art, and
strength; and will sever Laelius from Scipio, Pylades from Orestes. What is so
precious to a man* as his fame? which to good men is above all goods, and life
it self. For, riches, and life, are things brittle, and flitting; our goods
going often away before us, and our lives always with us: but, our fame is
that which does eternize us; that only remains, when we are rotten. Why, this
fame, this treasure of the wise, this life-enlightning gemme, Calumny does
daily seek to obscure, and utterly to deface. For, because she cannot hurt
Virtue it self (the Chiefe-good in us) she seeks to ouer-cloud, and lessen
virtuous actions: which are, as it were, the shadows, not the very images of
Virtue. But, why talk I of men, and humane affairs? O good God! she neither
spares thee, nor thy heaven. For she will find in divine matters also
something to debate of; by which she may offend not only thine, but thee. It is
thy decree, thy sanction, that the secrets of the mind be reserved for the
moderatour of the mind: neither are the strings of the heart, to be played
upon by any, but by him that made them. But, Calumny violates this Law: for,
now-a-dayes (O hateful days!) she directs her eyes, and tongue hither;
prying into this inmost Temple. She cries-out, that this man is not upright in
his government; that a second is not valiant; that a third is a close fellow,
and not open enough. In a word; what remains, but that the thoughts, and
meaning of our minds be summoned to appear before this calumniating Judgment
seat? Homer, the true Prince (in my judgment) not of Poets only, but of all
other men (I understand Profane) faines a certain Goddess, which he calls
Ate; from whom all offense and mischief took their sourse and deriuation.
Under the cover of which fiction, I assure my self (as certainly as I now
speak and breathe that he intended to touch and twitch Calumny. For, thus he
describes her:

A mischievous Goddess (I interpret him summarily) which offends all:

Which touches not the earth; but, walks upon the heads of men,

And has hurt Jupiter himself.

Answer me now truly, and on your word. Was there ever any Painter, with a
curious and artificial pencill, or Orator with plentiful Rhetoric, who
with more light and propriety, has marked-out the true genuine form of
odious Calumny? I think, never any. He tells you, that she offends all.
Just my doctrine; that all men, in all places, are endangerd by her. She
touches not the earth. True: for, she sildom aims (...) base, earthy, and
lowecreeping spirits: but, as it follows in the verse, she walks upon the
heads of men; to wit, she directs her flight to the highest matters, and most
eminent persons. In conclusion; she hurts Jupiter himself: (Who makes
question of it?) either in casting Calumny and aspersion upon divine and holy
actions; or in not suffering Religion herself to go free and untouched of her
venomed tooth. These are but the villainies, wherewith she sports her self in
private; being nothing in comparison of those which she commits publicly,
and in the Courts of Princes. For, here is her proper and true throne: here
she plays the vvanton, and curuets within her circle. But, time so straitens
me, that I cannot chase and pursue this subject in all particulars.

Briefly, thus: Whatsoever deceit, oppression, or villainy has been in any
Age, or in any Court whatsoever, it flowed first from this head, from this
fountain. What was it, that allured Alexander to murder so many of his deer
friends, but Calumny? that banished Socrates from his natural life, Rutilius
from his native City, but Calumny? that fed, as it were, with new blood,
and gave life to Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, and so many monsters of Kings,
but this hateful Calumny? And, not to speak only of former Times, this Age,
this miserable Age, does sufficiently testify, that those flights, those
slaughters, those general calamities, those Seas, and inundations of misery,
under which we groan, have no other birth, sourse, nor Generation, but from
the Riuerets of Court-Calumnie. Are your souls grieved, that these arrows of
sedition stick in the bowels of the Common-vveale? Calumny fixed the^ there.
That the fire of Civil wars has burned, now so many years? Calumny did
first kindle it. And we never see, or have seen, any wickedness whatsoever,
but infused and diffused from this poysning Fountain. Subjects against their
Princes, Princes against their subjects, are first stirred-vp, kindled,
provoked, and enflamed (as it were) by this fan of words. And as the Seas,
naturally calm, by the wind grow swollen and enraged: so, many Princes, of good
and gentle dispositions, are set on fire by these matches.

You see now the Forcible and Variable Mischief, atte^ding Calu^ny. Which me
thinks our old Christians did well understand, when they named the father of
all sins, or rather Sin it self (that Monster from Hell) by a Greek word,
(...); a Detractor, or one which is accustomed to calumniate: thinking (it
seems) that our most malicious enemy could not be made known by a word of more
malice. Neither did the ancient Lawgiuers, with less judgment, consider her
unbridled and ouer-mastering violence. Who, when they restrained all other
vices with laws and punishments; to this one (which I wonder at) they made
way for her Cariere; giving her free scope to be hurtful. For, number up all
the Nations in the world; I am deceived, if you name one, that (with any
sanction or penal Law) has bridled and suppressed it. The Athenians, I
confess, were wont to inflict Pecuniary punishments upon such offenders: the
Romans burnt them in the foreheads heads with the letter K. But, let not this
lead any man into error: for, they were only such as practiced it in Courts
of Justice, and in public accusations. What then? were they either so blind,
as not to see this mischief? or so foolish, as seeing it, to give it allowa^ce
and approbation? Neither of these: but, with great judgment and discretion
they held any vice unpunishable, which they thought incurable.

Small Rivers are withstood with bays and sluices: but, what Mountains can
resi^t a common Deluge? Calumny has made an inundation over all the earth: and
lurkes close in the marrow of ill dispositions and wicked natures; being no
longer esteem'd-of as a fault; but as a custom. What should they do then? Why,
like wise and discreet Physicians: which do not rashly handle with their
fingers a Canker, or the Plague. So as the greatness and diffusion of the
evil, has given it this freedom and enlargement: neither was it ever
tolerated, but through despair, But, least I should weary-out my self, and
detain you with too long an Oration, I will guide my ship to her Port or Haven,
and come to the third and last part; namely, the Avoiding of Calumny: which if
any man so understand, as hoping to be secured against all Calumny, he deceiues
himself, and requites that of me, which was never in the power of man. Let
not Thales only, that Favorite of Wisdom, but even Wisdom her self,
undertake this task, they can never perform it. What shall we do then? I can
only succor thee with two bucklers, to repulse and give abatement to the
violence of her charge. The first of which is Innocence: the other, Patience.
Whosoever would avoid the bytings of this mischiefebreathing Goddess, let him
above any thing arm himself with Innocence: and indeed they, which live in
integrity of life, warines of speech, modesty of actions, why should they
fear her? For as no filth does easily adhere to smooth and well polished places:
so, no abusiue speeches can settle themselves on unblemished deeds. This has
bin oftentimes a good remedy: I shouldly, if I should say always. I know well
that Tully writes, as fire cast into water, is in an instant extinguished: so,
a false accusation on a chaste life. I would to God, those words were as true,
as witty: for, how many men, even of the purest and most immaculate
conversation, have been wounded by this Calumny, and will ever be so! How many
have been wounded, even to the letting-out of the best blood, and juice of
their reputation! Neither is it any marvel. For, Calumny (as I said before)
supports her self by Lying. And she may do it safely; because she has but
one judge: and that one, such, as (for the most part) never enquires further;
but, belieues at first. Wherefore, a certain flatterer of a King, saw further
into this matter, than did the forenamed Orator: who was wont to say, that
nothing was to be spoken against any man: for, said he, though the wound may
be healed, the scarre will remain. A shrewd speech: but (believe me) very
witty; and which takes his original, and credit from our own natures. For,
it is grafted in the dispositions of many men, not only to give open, but
credulous ear, to al whispering reports: and the more willingly, if they
treat of any wrong done, or to be done.

He, whose chance it is to be spotted, will hardly wash himself clean
again: for, the suspicion will remain, though the crime do not. And therefore
I did not unwisely, to paint out Patience for the buckler, wherewith the
innocent might defend themselves. The use of Patience consists in bearing
inevitable Calumnies courageously, and with a high crest. Varro was wont to say
of an ill wife, That either a man must endure her, or rid himself of her. Do
thou the same here; tolerating, what cannot be taken-away. What said I? thou
should bear them? nay, rather despise them. As a courageous Soldier scorns
the weak darts, that (like hail) make a light rattling round about his Helmet:
So does the wise, and fortified man, all scoffs, and derisions. For, what can
they take from him? His good name? That will ever be good, amongst good men.
Can they rob him of his Virtue and his Wisdom? Those are no way subject to
the will of man. To conclude; when all these carping detractours have spoke,
and done their uttermost, this man of men (with a true and lofty courage)
cries-out, All that is mine I carry with me. But, thou will reply, that the
mere color and appearance of Infamy is to be feared. If thou be guilty,
fear it: if not, why fear thou? Apply it not to thy self; and all is well.
Diogenes, the Cinicke (a man of a towering wisdom; who therein not only
exceeded men, but almost equalled even the Gods themselves) was wont to say,
when the people mocked him; They deride me: yet, I am not derided. Do thou the
like: and so hear all those scoffs and jests, broken (directly) upon thee, as
if they had aimed at some other. Calumniatours never lightly contemn or scorn
any man, that has not first contemned himself. Marcus Cato (that Roman
Socrates) having received a blow from one, and the party coming afterward to
give him satisfaction, and to entreat pardon* he sent him away only with this
answer; I assure thee, I remember no such matter. O worthy man, beyond other
men! who thought it a greater glory, not to regard an injury, than to pardon
it. And, indeed, if we iudicially examine them, how small are those things,
that do so much trouble us! For the most part, no deeds at all; but only a
few trifling words, whose chiefest strength consists altogether in the
interpretours construction. Refuse to understand them; and, withal, the
scoffer has lost the whole purpose and fruit of his contumely. These (gentle
Auditors) are the safest weapons against Calumny: not those, which the vulgar
fight withal; Memory, and Revenge. As in traveling, if a dog, or horse dash
me, I am nothing moved at him, nor strive to do the like to him; but rather,
rub it off: so should we do here; accounting of them as of Curres, and
Iades: whose injuries proceed not from judgment; but, from froward passion

But, here I end; taking down, and folding together, the sails (as I may say)
of my Oration. You have heard three things concerning this Vice: the
Filthiness of it; the Mischief; and the Remedy against it. I beseech you, in
the name of the immortal God, to banish far from your tongues, and ears,
this infectious plague. For, he offends, not only that vtters Calumnies; but,
he that hears them with approbation. And as it is impossible to handle hot
iron, with out harm, and danger: the like also befalls us, in giving
assistance to these fiery tongues. I know well, they will insinuate, and
fawn upon you; making a show of Jove in their countenance, and of mildness
in their words: but, believe me, they are Aspes, and Vipers; which blowe-in
their poison, through soft and deceitful kisses. These I hold not worthy of
admonition; but rather, of dire imprecation: and therefore, I pray, with DAVID;
Confound the lying lips, O God, that speak against the Righteous.

FINIS.

