Staffords NIOBE: Or HIS AGE OF TEARS.

A Treatise no less profita ble, and comfortable, then the times damnable.

Wherein Deaths visard is pulled off, and her face discovered not to be so
fear full as the vulgar makes it: and withal it is showed that death is only
bad to the bad, good to the good.

AT LONDON Printed by Humfrey Lownes, 1611.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Robert Earl of Salisbury, Knight of the most
honorable Order of the Garter, Vicount Cranborne, Lord Cecil of Essindon, Lord
high Threasurer of England, Chancelour of the University of Cambridge, and one
of his Majesty's most Ho nourable privy Council, A. S. wishes the pleasures
of the Kingdom of Heaven, for his pains taken in this Kingdom of the Earth.
IT may seem strange unto you (truly honorable Lord) that a stranger should
dedicate a Book unto you: but, wonder not. For, though I be not known to your
Honor, yet your Honor is well known unto me: and (indeed) to whom not? I have
no small time (be it spoken without blasphemy) even worshipped your Worth; and
therefore now offer up unto it, all the revenues of my reverence. I was the
rather induced to dedicate it to your Honor, by reason that my father was a
neighbor to your Father, being much obliged unto him; and my whole Family unto
your self. And next of all, to give you thanks in the behalf of all Gentry;
which is daily bettered by your Lordships directions, and furtherances in all
honest courses. Desert was fled into the Desert, before your Lordship called
her home from exile, and clad her weather-beaten limbs. And (which draws
near unto a miracle) your Lordship does not imitate the greatest part of the
hodiernall Nobility, Qui beneficia in calendario seribunt. But whether go I?
knowing that your monosyllables, as also short speeches, are pleasing to GOD
sometimes, and to Great-men at all times. Accept then this Leaf rather then
Book, together with my vowed and owed service: which though I offer sero,
tamen serio, my ever honored Lord.

Your Lordships most humble servant: to be commanded, ANTHONY STAFFORD.

TO THE Reader.
Different, or indifferent READER, Health to thy Soul and Body. Knoweing
virtue to be of the nature of the Sun, that is, she shines as well upon the
bad, as upon the good; I thought the badde would claim interest in her, as
well as the good. To prevent which, I wrote this treatise: in which I have
laid my self open to the world; to the intent, that I may attract the love of
the virtuous, and the hate of all those who continue vicious: for, I hold him
to be no honest man, that is beloved of all men. For, in that, he shows that
he can apply himself to the time, be it never so vicious, to the place be it
never so infamous, to the person, be it never so odious. Wherefore I give all
men to understand, that I am a servant to Virtue: which I proclaim to the
world, by this book, my Heraulde; and give defiance to her foes and mine. And
howsoever I seem, now and then, to lend an ear to lewdness; it is not that I
take pleasure in it, but because I am loath to diplease the harbourers and
diu^lgers of it. What soever the world thinks of me, or thinks me to be: yet
this I am. For, being thoroughly acquainted with myself, I do not ask another
man what I am. I protest it again and again, that I depend on Virtue. And, if
I wax poor in her service, I shall account my self richer, then all this
wicked worlds wealth can make me: and, if I grow rich without her, I shall
esteem my self poorer then poverty her self can make me. I speak not this,
like a Politicia^, to purchase my self a greater fame then mine own worth;
No, no* We do not dissemble in those things, in which he first deceiues
himself, that would others. Wherefore he is injurious to me, who wicked in
himself frames a mind to me out of his own. If my inward man excuse me,
what care I, who accuse me? yet do I not despise an honest report; but, only
warn you this, that it is not in my power to tie loose tongues. And therefore
Fame is to be reckoned amongst these external accidents; as of no moment to
the accomplishment of a quiet and a blessed life. What to be, consists on my
part; what I am said to be, on the vain vulgars. Fame and Conscience are of
two differing properties: the one blazeth a man's deserts; yet makes him never
the better: the other, the better; yet never the more renowned. I know, that
my belief in God, and not the worlds belief of me, shall save me: yet (by the
way) would I not have any man think, that I write this by constraint; that is,
to clear my self of any imputed Crime: for, I write it not to dispossess,
but to possess the world of a good opinion of me. I verily think, that I have
laid my self too open, and dealt too plainly in some things contained in
this ensuing treatise: but, I pass not much. For, as my birth styled me a
gentleman; so I would have my death style me generous. Prying Policy tells
me, that it is far (...) to know what a man speaks, then to speak what he
knows: but my harmless heart dictates to my pen, not what the world would,
but what it should hear of. My soul is an Antipode, and treads opposite to
the present world. My intent, in writing this book, is twofolde: first, to
purchase to my self, not so much the title of a learned, as of an honest man;
and secondly (because I know not whether my unfortunate fortunes, and unstaid
youth may lead me) that the world may be acquainted with the secrets of my
soul, and may receive from me a testimony of my lively faith; that so it may
judge the more charitably of me being dead. Thus much for my self. Now,
gentle or ungentle Reader; concerning thee, I divide thee into Learned, and
Unlearned: and the Learned I subdiuide into Judicial, and Not-indiciall. Seneca
says, that Summu^ bonum in iudicio est, that man's chief felicity is in
judgment: and Sealiger calls it Animamsapientiae, the soul of wisdom. And
therefore he that has this Wisdoms soul to be the Center of his soul, I
do not so much fear, as reverence his censure. But he that has read never
so much, and in his discourse will shoot whole Volleis of Volumes at a man,
and yet wants judgment, my Book turns his posteriours to him, and bids
him shoot there, as a mark too fair for his carping mouth, to aim at. The
Unlearned I rediuide into Prudent, and Impudent. The Prudent will not let his
censure fly above his knowledge; but, what he understands not, he will with
modesty either pass it over, or with discretion enquire after it, of some
better-knowing spirits. As for impudent asses, who will reprehende what their
shallowe wits can neither apprehende, nor comprehend, and so turn despair
into judgment, I hold them fitter to read bills, and ballads, then my Book.
And withal I must needs add this, that I neither fear a Stage, nor the
censure of a Woman. And against the Learned, and Unlearned, Judicial and
Not-iudiciall, Prudent and Impudent, Women, and the worlds wide Theater, I
bandy that of Job, Job. 31. 35.
Behold my sign, that the Almighty will witness for me; although mine
Adnersarie write a book against me.

Errata.
Page Line 81. 10. ioy-forioyne. 81. 11. (...) for (...) 99. 13. perfect
imperfect, for perfect or imperfect. 142. 8. present for presents. 154. 2.
Jesuits for Iesuitas. 166. 2. these for those. 195. 1. gift for guest.

In some few Books, Page 10. li. 11. men for men's.

STAFFORDS NIOBE, OR His age of tears.
SAd to the very Soul, bearing in my mind a disco^tent, that I could be no
more discontented; in a word, weary of my self, I on a time walked forth,
hoping by some divine meditation to abandon, and expel this hellish
disposition. And being com to the place ordained by my self to this solemn
exercise, I first lifted up mine eyes to heaven, to see what heaven would have
done upon earth: and then again I cast them down upon earth, to see what earth
had done against heaven. But lo, in the entrance (...) to this my sanctified
contemplation, my old agony came upon me; I mean, a conflict betwixt mine
unequal, disagreeing passions: which forced me to call back the better of my
thoughts, to drive back the worse. But, finding no way, whereby I might appease
these implacable furies of my mind, leaving my meditation, I thus spoke unto
my soul. Soul, said I, how chances it, that nothing can content thee so
much as discontent? Is not this rotten body, this all corruption, this worst of
earth, a sufficient prison unto thee, but that thou thy self must become a
prison to thy self? To these my demands she thus makes answer; that the
devil, as she thinks, has committed incest with his daughter, World, who is
now delivered of an Age, from the which the sooner it should please God to
deliver her, the better. Then soul, said I, take thy flight, and with the
sharp pearcing eyes of contemplation pry into the corners of the Universe; and
see if within this spacious Round thou can find out some place, where thou
may enjoy a pure conversation till the hour com wherein thou shall leave
this thine impure mansion. She obeyed, and after long, and teadious search,
she returned like Noah's turtle, and told me that such a deluge of sin had
ouerspread the face of the earth, that there was no place free where virtue
might tread in sa^etie. If earth then, said I, affoorde thee no comfort, let
thy conversation be in heaven, laugh at the idle pleasures of these days, and
let not thine unlimited appetite so much covet as contemn them; following that
rule, of Seneca, Contemnere omnia aliquis potest; omnia habere nemo Sen Epist.
62.
potest. Some one man, says he* may contemn all things; but no man (...)
have all things. And indeed what is there in this world, on the which Envy may
not justly spend all her gall? For whosoever shall with an inten^ine and
rectified Iudgem^nt, look into this worst of ages, shall find, that the
lascivious heathen Poets were but as wicked prophets of the wickedness to come
in these accursed times; we having turned their lewd inventions into more
lewd actions. So that it seems we have anatomized vice, and laid those parts
of her to the open view, which they in modesty let lie undiscovered. From the
highest to the lowest, from the youngest to the oldest, from the Eagle to the
Wren, all have corrupted their ways, and are become degenerate from the purity
of their ancestors. Vice has supplanted virtue: and he now a-dayes is held
the most absolute man, who is the most dissolute liver. As now and then the
humors of the whole body fall down into the legs, and there make an issue:
So has the corruption of times past slidde down into the present, to the
annoiance, and choking of all that is good. This is the time foretold by
Seneca, Sen. de benef. lib. 1. cap. 10
Hab^bitur aliquando ebrietati honor; et plurimummeri cepisse virtus erit, The
time shall come, says he, when honor shall be ascribed to drunkenness; and to
drink much wine shall be held a virtue. Pride, luxury, and ribauldry have
now their reign, and his happiness is greatest who follows them the
soonest. As for pride, she has so many feathers added to her wings, that she
covers all the earth with her shadow. Our men are grown so effeminate, and
our women so man-like* that (if it might be) I think they would exchange
genders. What modest eye can with patience behold the immodest gestures* and
attires of our women? No sooner with them is insancie put off, but impudency is
put on: they have turned nature into art; so that a man can hardly discern a
woman from her image. Their bodies they pinch in, as if they were angry with
nature for casting them in so gross a mould: but as for their looser parts,
them they let loose to preie upon whatsoever their lustdarting eyes
shalseize-vpon. Their breasts they lay to the open view, like two fair
apples: of which who^oeuer tastes, shall be sure of the knowledge of evil; of
good I dare not warrant him. As for our men, they equal, if not surpass this
female frailty, the qualities of their minds being as light as the substance
of their bodies is heavy. Light clothes, and a light behauior is now your
only wear, and he your greatest gallant who can whiffe off his gallon. O,
that iniquity were here limited! but alas, it is not. For men's tongues are now
beecome trumpets or rather strumpets to their minds: so that what soever they
conceive, they not only tell others Ambros. de poenit. lib. 1. cap. 34.
of it, but also entice them to do it. Lust, says Ambrose, is feade with
banquets, nourished with delights, kindled with wine, enflamed with
drunkenness; but straight adds, peiora tamen his sunt fomenta verborum, quae
vino quodam Sodomitanae vit is mente^ inebriant. But worse then all these,
says he, is that impurity of speech, which makes drunk the mind with the
sweet tasting wine of the Sodomiticall vine. Sodom, thy sins were few in
respect of ours, and our just men few in respect of thine. Thou peradventure
had three, or four: but happy is that city with us that can yield one; yet
we rail at thee, and seek to be opposite to thee in all things: but in one
thing we iump with thee by following the literal sense; to weet, that because
one of thy sins was fulnes^e of bread, we hold it no sin to be full of
drink. I cannot with method proceed in this confusion of wickedness; nor with
order, in that wher^n is so much disorder. My pen, following my hearts motion,
trembles, the paper waxes wan, and pale, and the ink puts on melancholies
sad hew, when ^ go about to relate, that in the mouths of our youth, Talassio
becomes a watchword. And to put fire to this quick kindling fuel our poets
have put-to their helping hands: who therefore are rightly taxed by that last,
and everlasting Worthy of the French, divine du Bartas.

P^u te regretter oy la perte de leur^ ans,
Si par ces verse pipeurs leur muse trop d^serte
Se perdant, ne tra not^ des auditeurs la perte.
Sous les mielleus appas^s de leur doctes^scrits,
Ils cachent le venin, q^e lesieunes esprits
Aualent a longs traicts, et du vin ^'amour yvres.
Leur mauuais estomach aim les mauvais viures.
In English thus.
Yet would I grieve their loss of time the less,
If by their guilefull verse their too much Art
Made not their hearers share with them a part.
The sugared baits of those their learned writs,
Due shroude that poison which the younger wits,
Quaffe downwith breathless draughtes, and loves hot wine
(Making them homage do at Bacchus shrine)
Distempereth so their stomachs, that they feed^
On such ill meats as no good humors breed.
But belike our Poets think by disguising their lasciviousness, under a veil
of smooth running words, to take away not only the inquination, but the very
essence of it; which they cannot do. For, as whether a man writes with a
coal, with chaulke, or ink, it is nevertheless writing: So is vice vice,
under what words soever it be conveyed. And these men, says Scaliger, call I
Scalig. lib. 1. poetic. cap. 2
upon Phoebus, Jupiter, Pallas, together with the Muses, and inuoke devils in
stead of the true God. And the same Scaliger does reprehend Scal. lib. 6.
poetic. pa. 800. 801.
Bembus* because in a certain verse which he made, he called Jesus Christ,
Heroa. That Bembus is also censured by Lip. cent. Epist. 5^.
I. Lipsius. Ipse deus raro in stilo, aut animo, sed prisco ritu, dij
immortales: idque in se^ijs maxim sententijs, aut rebus. GOD himself, says
Lipsius, is seldom in his style, mouth, or mind; but according to the ancient
rights of speech, the immortal gods: and this does he in his most serious
sentences. If for every idle, for every unadvised word we shall gine account,
what shall we answer for premeditated sin? over which the heart a long time
sits ho^ering as if it were unwilling to hatch so ugly a monster. To think
evil, is a sin; and that mortal: to speak evil, is yet a greater: but to
write evil, is in it self both matchless, and namelesse; no word being fit
to express so unfit a work. O that so foul a matter should be left to
posterity in so fair characters! or that a man should with his own hand
write a confession, to condemn his own heart! What should I say, or rather
what should I not say in so hopeless, so hapless a case? only this then I
will say, that for shame men should have some feeling, some remorse in
eternising their own shame, as also consider that their bodies, nay the fair
frame of this spacious Round, shall be subject to ruin: only the soul, and
her actions are eternal. For, the soul being eternal, the actions proceeding
from her, participate of the same eternity. The body, being spotted, is
quickly mundified: but the soul, once branded with infamy, ever keeps her
mark, and never becomes immaculate. O dangerous age! thou seducest many to
error; but reducest none to truth: thou causest many to fall; but raisest up
none. And indeed, how should they stand firm, when their footting is so
slipperie? How should they resolve, when every thing gives them occasion of
doubt? What shall a man decree to be truth, when he shall see Pontius Pilate
washing his hands, but not his heart? Caiphas, pretending blasphemy, to rent
his garments? the new Scribes and Pharisees crying Mat. 27 24
out to Jesus, master thou art good, though they think him to be most had?
Simon Judas selling, Simon Magus buying GOD for money? holding a trinity of
benefices in unity of person: and these three are, for the most part, four.
Those who should tell Israel of her sins, and Judah of her transgressions, do
now sooth her up in her iniquity; nay, flatter the dead to please the living:
in so much that Durus de Pascalo makes it one of his precepts, that the
courtier ought to give credit neither to funeral sermons, nor to
Gallobelgicus, or other such idle fablers. I must confess that the word lie
is indecent, to give to a minister; but very aptly applied to Gallobelgicus,
who lies of set purpose, and tells truth at adventure. Sure I am, he has
not learned, or (if learned) not practiced that first, and chiefest law of a
lawefull historian, which is, Vt ne quid falsi audeat, nequid very dicere non
audeat. But to my purpose, it were to be wished, that this abuse of preaching
might be reformed; that so the laudable use of it, might be with the more
applause, and profit continued. Mercy should be in the Preachers mouth, not
flattery: he should pronounce pardon to others (not crave it from others) and
pronounce (nay, denounce) vengeance against those who renounce the ordained
means of their salvation. Flattery, thou base, creeping sin, thou seducer of
Princes, thou obseruer of noddes, thou impudency clad in modesty, thou fawning
devil, when shall thy dominion have an end? I would my end might procure
thine. But what should I talk of thine end, who art now in thy prime? We
Athenaeus lib. 6
have our Clisophi, who will imitate Philip whether he halt in mind, or in
body: neither want we Courtiers, who though they see that Ibidem.
Dionisius cannot see, yet they counterfeit the like infirmity. Ann^l. li. 1
Temporibusque Augusti dicendis (they be the words of Tacitus) non defuere
decora ingenia, donec gliscente adulatione deterrerentur. Neither wanted there,
says he, worthy, and singular wits to deliver Augustus exploits, until they
were by the ouerswarming of flatterers utterly discouraged. But what base
means will not ambition use, where the proposed end is honor? with her there
is no impossibility, no difficulty: with her, things to come are as present:
and what she aspires to, she makes no doubt to attain to. Thou mother of
discontent, thou Goddess of m^tabilitie, dwell still in the Courts of Princes;
but insinuate not thy self into the hearts of Prophets; for, if they be
tainted, all the world is deceived. Their tongues persuade, where force cannot
avail: if in a bad cause, then mischief follows. From their tongues, for
the most part, Princes frame their actions: so that the former being bad, the
latter are worse* in as much as a bad deed outstrippeth a bad word. Yet shall
they one day answer, both for the word, and deed, of which they were
procurers. Is it possible that a man should look up to heaven, and not think
who gouernes earth, and heaven? or who is so foolish, as to think that God will
answer an eye of dissimulatio^ with the eye of mercy? No, no: a true God
cannot away with a false heart. Lord, that a man should think with all his
^ratory, to persuade others (...) that which he cannot persuade himself to*
or who is such an idiot, as to think to have an army well governed or guided,
without a good conductor? Why, this is mere, and absurd equivocation: as for
example; I say to another, Follow me: he straight obeyes; when forthwith I tell
him, that he must no^ trace my steps, but my words. These men are worse then
the Scribes, and Mat. 23. 3
Pharisees, whom Christreprehended for saying, and not doing: for, these men
do not only say and not do, but also do and not say; as being indeed
ashamed to say what they do. All other things they know: only what is most
worthy to be known, they know not; which is, to know themselves. Yet how is
it possible they should not know themselves, since they know that God knows
and searches both the heart, and reins? though some of them, I fear, would
be content that God should search their hearts, so he would let their reins
alone. Oh profaneness! that the same hand which lifts up the Cupp in the
Communion, should lift up pot after pot in an Alehouse; and offer more
sacrifice to Bacchus, then to Iehoua: a vice which whosoever gives him self
over to, God gives him over to execute the inventions of a dist^^bed Intellect.
Which I think the Lowecountry men allude to, in calling their strongest beer
double Pharaoh; their strong beer, in a lower degree, (...) Phar^o^* and their
small beer Israel; intimating thereby that the stronger the beer is, the more
it makes a man to rebel against God; and the smaller it is, the more it leaves
the soul to her self, and renders her freer from the sen^ualitie of the
body, and makes a true child of Israel. Look how a passenger in a thick
dark mist is sad, as doubtful which way to turn: even so Reason being
blinded by the (...) wines hot vapo^^^, (...) pensive, and (...) knowing
whether she should ^ncline to vice, o^ (...) till at length shee^ (...) from
virtue to vice. I have heard a reverend english Divine, often compare a drunk
arde to Mare mortu^m: for, as no fish by report can live in the one; so no
virtue in the other. Amongst the very In Alcor. Turc. page 191.
Turks, this vice is so odious, that they reward it in whomesoeuer they find
it with 8o. stripes, making it the most detestable sin of all, next to
adultery; to which, they a lot a hundred stripes. If heathen people do this
(whom error leads hood-winked in ignorance, or rather ignorance in error)
what should a Christian do? why should not he lead a good, and sober life,
whose name is written in the book of life? But (alas!) for want of
consideration this is not looked into. Upon this vice depend three other (as
ugly servants upon a deformed master) to wit, Quarelling, Whooring, and
Swearing. The first of which has more by tongue, then sword, purchased to it
self the name of valor; which indeeds is no nearer to valor, then frenzy
to wisdom. True valor bids a man fight pro patria, et patre patriae; this
bastard courage incites a man to fight cum fratre, cum patre: the former
persuades a man to be careful not only that he take no injury, but (even
religious) that he do none; the latter says, that he is worthy of injury,
that offers none. The one says, Fight being provoked; the other says, Provoke
to fight. And therefore I think, that Seneca spoke rather out of the greatness
of his mind, then the depth of his wisdom, when he defined fortitude, to be
Scientia periculorum Sen. de benef. li. ^ cap. 34.
repellendorum, excipiendorum, prouocandorum: that is, a Science of repelling,
of receiving, and provoking dangers. The latter of which is false; seeing there
is no man wisely valiant, who will not rather inuoke help against danger, then
provoke it.

Is it not a lamentable case, to see two men christened with one Baptism,
bought with one redemption, for whom the blood of Christ was indifferently
shed, upon every slight, and light occasion, to shed the blood one of
another? Or is it not a hard case, for one that pro^esseth the name of Christ
Jesus, to dig for honor in the heart of a Christian* And this forsooth they
do for reputation. What blemish is it to my reputation to deny that in
sobriety, which I affirmed in drunkenness? that is, to recall that as a man,
which I spoke as a beast? Yet these roaring gentlemen, whatsoever they speak,
be it never so bad, will make it good. Surely, I am of opinion, that the word
duel, is derived from the French word dueil, by reason that it makes so many
parents mourn for the untimely death of their children, and one friend lament
the decease of another. But by the way, I will give this caution, that no man
misconstrue me, and think that I persuade men to cowardice: for, I am so
far from that, that I think a cowarde to be the basest of A Coward who?
all creatures: and A Coward I call him, who slauishlie fears any thing but
God. For, if my Prince allow me combat, upon dishonorable imputation of
treason, and I be drawn into the lifts with a chain of foul, disgraceful
words linked together, which will so stick to my Family, and Race, that no
time can raze them out; the injury here becomes more then private, (whereof
only, I take it, Christ speaks, when he says; He that gives Mat. 5. 39.
thee a box on the one care, turn to him the other etc.) For, in this case
the injury is public, and not mineowne: and therefore I say, standing upon
these terms, God refuse me, if I refuse any man. Wherefore I could not,
without much applause, read that Motto in the Scottish arms; In defense. For,
if a man be driven to maintain his honor, and clear his wronged name from
perpetual infamy; let him then with an undaunted spirit, and alacrity of heart
sing the Psalm of David, If ten thousand hemme me ^o^nde about, yet will I not
fear, etc. resting confident in this, that he has God, and so good ^ cause
on his side. For, this infamy never leaves a man: insomuch that when his flesh
forsakes his bones, this cleaues fast to them, and the Sexton, digging up his
scull, says, This was the head of a Traitor, and a Cowarde. But for a frown,
the trippe of the tongue, or the slip of a word, to quarrel, dominere, and
swear oaths, Que pulmo anima ^er^ins.
pralarg^s anhelet, this is far from valor: for, valor is an enemy to no
virtue; this to every virtue, and a friend to all vice. Neither can I be
indueed otherwise to believe, but that there are many gentlemen, whose modest,
ingenuous faces are free from scouls, and furrows of wrath; in whose hearts,
notwithstanding, maiestical magnanimity sits richlier clad, then in those
of your roaring, angry boys of London; and peradventure would give them just
cause both to roar, and houl too. The second daughter to drunkenness is
whooring, the deflourer of many a virgin, and defiler of many a wife; a sin
which most men are addicted to by nature, and fewest freed from by grace. For
though God has separated the male from the female, and disioyned them; yet, I
know not how, they will still desire a conjunction. The Cedars of Libanus have
fallen this way: the Patriarehs, Prophets, Fathers, and our forefathers have
here gone astray. Many a Saint has fallen at the feet of these saints, and
has adored their adorned beauty. Yet, for men to prostrate their bodies to
every dunghill, and sink into every sink-hole, was never so common, as in
these later licentious times; wherein money can buy affection, Beauty offering
her self to hire. But, to keep yout servant brisk, and spruse, that the town
may take notice of him, for a neat, complete gentleman; and to feed upon
the answerable report the world gives of him; tush, this is no sin. No no: it
is no offense at all to allow him so much for every course; so causing him to
spend flesh for silver, till he become so lank, and lean, that his legs are
scarce able to support their late portly young master; going still, as if he
were sitting (occasioned through the imbecillitie of his hammestrings) and so
dry, that a marrow-bone-man, if he should boil his bones, could scarce get
out two drops of moisture: his eyes so hollow, that they run back to
salute his memory, least she should forget them* and his cheeks, dentingin, as
if he were still sucking at a bottle. And now my brave slave being a neighbor
to death, begins to find, that all this while he has mistaken, and
worshipped a false deity, for a true: and that therefore (though ceasing,
through weakness, to burn here in lust) he shall ever burn in never consuming
fire. Where is his mistress now? whose praises should be written with pens
of Angels wings; whose drink should be Nectar, and Ambrosia. He now must
leave her behind him, common to men, that shall one day be common to devils.
It breeds astonishment in me to hear a man style a woman, Divine creature
of a heavenly feature, goddess of my thoughts, natures utter most endeavor,
etc. whose body he knows to be composed of putrefaction, and shall one day
come to that degree of rottennels, that (as she now, in the nostri's of God) it
shall stink in the nostrils both of men, and beasts. Reason and Religion teach
a man (as her remembrancer) thus to court his Mistress: Fair Queen of dust
and dirt, will it please your eueryhower-decaying majesty, after some few
years, or months, or days, to have th^se star-shining eyes of yours eaten
out with worms, and the holes become cages for cankers? when your delicate,
(mooth body shall be enfolded in earths rugged arms; and your soft, swelling,
moist, ruby lips be kissed by her moldy mouth; when your pure red, and
white, shall be turned into poor brown, and black; and that face which has
driven so many into consumptions, shall it self be consumed to nothing. Yet,
for all this, our young gentlemen will not forbear their amorous profane
louediscourses; but yield as much honor to women, as to their Maker. These
men are rightly taxed by a late writer, where he says, Quorum sermonis venus
ipsa Venus. Reason, thou bright star which directest the wise man to the god of
wisdom, thou eye of the soul, why do thou suppress thy clearshining beams,
and leauest the soul of man in darkness. Were thou truly mistress of the
mind, thou would never suffer a commandresse of elaie and clods, to subdue
and conquer it. For, take this for an infallible position, that Sin never
enters the will of man, till defect his reason. Men's lives, together with the
states of their souls, now-adaies, depend upon the voice of a woman: and they
are more penitent for one duty omitted toward her, then for a thousand
offenses committed against God. For the one they crave mercy: for the other
they care not, but mock at justice. Mors, et vita, says Solomon, in manibus
linguae: death, and life, says he, are in the hands of the tongue. Surely,
say these doting doltes, Solomon in this place m^an^th the tongue of a woman.
O stupidity of man! to come at the beck of a woman, stoop at her frowns, hold
his (...) ^ ^ from ^ence (...) those (...) ^ ^ For the first, they (finding
through their daily discourse with men, that their words are esteemed Oracles,
nay, articles of faith) do challenge to themselves such a freedom of speech,
as to utter that without shame, which the standers-by are both ashamed and
abashed to hea^. You shall see a wench, a^ thirteen, have more au^^city then a
man, at thirty, (...) him to the encounter, and (...) ^^thes with him by the
douzen. They have so little grace, that they (...) it a great disgrace to
blush* and that which in those formor, purer times was the badge of modesty, is
now thought to be the only mark to know a fool by. Besides this, there is
a lascivious impudency, or rather indecency, borne and bred in this our native
soil, which no other Nation is acquainted with; I mean, a wanton sport in
public, between man, and wife. Let me perish, if more souls of our youth
perish any other way; then this. For, there are but two estates of men: the one
married, the other unmarried* the one bound, the other free: so that the one
cannot abuse his own calling, without giving the other occasion on to
transgress in his. But whether this kissing, and lap-dalliance be through the
default of the husband, or the wife, it is a great offense in either. It
pleases not me, though spoken by an Emperor, Give me leave by the lust of
others, to exercise mine own; though a witty, yet a wicked speech. Wife is not
only a name of pleasure, but of honor: though our men cannot discern this;
but rather answer with Aristippus, who being told that Lais loved him not; no
more, says he, does ^^in^ nor fish, and yet I (...) be without them. A true
beast, respecting more the sensual pleasure, and appetite of the body, then
the harmony, and union of the mind. A man ought not to embrace his wife,
without a flattering kind of s^^^^itie: for, this public billing shows the
way, to unexperienced youth, to commit riot in private. And Cato accused one
before the Senate, for that he had kissed his wife, before his neighbors
daughter: A short, yet wise speech and of a hidden use. Neither by this often,
and open smacking is shame only diminished; but by little, and little
chastity abolished. The very Elepha^ts crie-out against them; who, as Pliny
writes, make not the least love one to another, except they be covered with
boughs. Wherefore when the scripture says, Genesis 2. 24
Therefore shall a man leave his father, and his mother, and shall cleave to
his wife, and they shall be one flesh; the literal and sensual sense is not
here to be followed: for, beasts can cleave to one another in this obscene
manner, as well as man and wife. But, if the woman be culpable in this behalf,
it is so much the more intolerable, by how much (of the twain) she should
be the more shamefaste. She ought ever to prize a bashful countenance, before
a painted one that cannot blush: and should be so far from proffering these
unseemly loue-trickes; as rather, at the least lewd look, or touch, to
present the beholders eyes, with modesties red badge, in way of mislike. To
the same end did the Romans of old, carry before the married couple, fire,
and water (the former representing the man; the later, the woman) what else
signifying, then that the woman should expect till heat be infused into her
by her husband? it being as much against the nature of an honest spouse, as of
the coldest water, to boil of her self; and on the contrary side, that the
bridegroom should distill warmth into his water, and heat it, but not
ouer-heate it. The bashful, and well disposed wife should repose her self on
her pallet, and there with emulation contemplate that answer of the
Lacedemonian less, who being asked in the morning by her friend, whether, or
no, in the night she had infolded her husband in her arms, replied; Good
words, good man: not I him, but he me. Oh divine song of a refined creature!
whose tongue unlocked the treasure of her hearts chastiric. The next vice in
women is pride, arising from the lavish, and lascivious praises of men; which,
women knowing too well how to apply to themselves, become so proud that they
scorn earth, and are scorned by heaven. For Prou: 16
every one that is proud in heart, i^ abomination to the Lord. And in another
place Prou. 15 24*
it is said, The Lord will destroy the house of the proud. But hearken, you
miserable unfortunate Dames, to that which the Lord says in the third of Esaias:
Because the daughters of Sion are hautie, and walk with stretched-out necks,
and with wandering eyes, walking, and minsing as they go, and make a tink^ing
with their feet; therefore shall the heads of the daughters of Sion be balde,
and the Lord shall discover their secret parts. In that day shall the Lord
take-away the ornament of the slippers, and the calls, and the round tiers, the
sweet balls, and the bracelets, and the bonets, the tires of the head, and the
slops, the headbands and the tablets, the eare-rings, the rings, and the
mufflers, the costly apparel, and the veiles, and the wimples, and the crisping
pinnes, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoodes, and the lawnes;
and in stead of sweet savor, there shall be stink; and in stead of a girdle, a
rent, and in stead of dressing of the hair, baldenesse: and in stead of a
stomacher, a girdle of sackecloth; and burning, in stead of beauty. Then shall
her gates mourn, and lament; and she being desolate shall sit upon the
ground. Amongst these menaces of GOD, some have already lighted upon our women,
as baldenesse, and burning; many of our men gaining burning in stead of
beauty: and the restare as yet to fall; whose weight will be so heavy, as
that it will crush these tender offenders. O! I could lash pride, and be
bitter toward these sweets, but that I know my words would go into wind,
and be rather scoffed at, then regarded. I could tell them of setting borrowed
teeth into their pale, bloudless gums; how they ouerlaie yellowe with white, in
so much that in an hours space they will make a man believe that the yellowe
Iaundies is turned into the green sickness; how they turn their black
blood ^ into fair crimson, and set that Baude, Art, to bedaube Nature. I could
tell them also of their prodigality in apparel, but that it concerns not all
in general, but only some in particular. Honor, as of her self she is
bright, and glorious; so we allow her like raiment correspondent to her
splendor, to the end that she may be discerned from the base vulgar. But that
every blurt (who is only a gentlewoman of two months standing) should be clad
like a Queen; this (I think) is more then any wise man will yield to. Another
kind of base pride has possessed our women, so that they think a man poor in
spirit, that is not rich in clothing. Bring me a gentleman of a great,
far-famed family, whose mighty ancestors have spent their blood to crown
their blood with virtues diadem, and left behind them triumphant trophies of
their uncontrolled greatness: and, to associate this Pirocles, bring me a
Dametas, who has of late extracted gentility out of dung; if this foist be
more fine then the former, his entertainment shall be rich, and sumptuous, the
others poor and beggarly. But this is not only a fault in this frailer sex,
but also in men of eminency; who though they should be the eyes of our Island,
yet their sight is dimmed with this foggy mist. If one man excel another as
far in height of knowledge, as heaven earth in distance; yet he that is the
best able in purse shall be judged worthiest of preferment, and employment.
Seneca had lied in his throat if he had said in our time, Nemo sapientiam
paupertate damnauit: for, as the world goes now, the inversion would be most
true, Quiuis sapientiam opulentia approba^it. Poverty, thou veil of wisdom,
curb to the mind, thou common enemy to virtue, through thee Natures greatest
gifts pass unrespected, and the best deserts unrewarded. How many brave
spirits ^urke, and become pliable to wretched servitude, and all for want of
means to declare their meaning? I have seen a decayed merchant put-on the
spurs of him who in times past made clean his shoes* and man him whose master
he was once: but he did it not without an eye of indignation. Why, poverty
fashioneth a man to any thing; Nobilium familiarum Tacit. Annal. lib. 14.
posteros egestate venales in seenam de duxit, says Tacitus. Wherefore I
cannot but marvel at the sottishness of the Papists, who teach men to vow
poverty: which in it self is evil, as Beckermane a late dutch writer very
wittily proves against the Stoickes; where he says, that a free
prae^lection, is not but of good, nor a free shunning but of evil. If then they
grant, says he (as indeed they do) that health, riches, liberty are to be
chosen, and (on the contrary) diseases, poverty, grief to be avoided; they
yield perforce, these to be bad, those to be good. For my part, would riches
come for the vowing, it should be the first vow I would make, and bless God for
them as blessings bestowed upon the blessed; the want of them being as a
punishment laid upon man to bring him unto God, and to the knowledge of
himself: which if a man do attain-to in prosperity, what needs humiliation?
O penury! through thy persuasions, kings think Cottages Kingdoms, and subject
themselves to their own subjects. Thou monster, thou cunning Artist, thou
transformer of men (that of a gentleman, can make a scullian, of a prince a
pesant) craule along with plebeians; but mount not the back of vnsaddled
honor, nor go about to jade the generous: for, if thou do he will fling
thee, though himself lie by it. Thus have I assaied to swim against the
current of swift, unstaid humors: and if my labor may amend others, it shall
sufficiently commend itself. Yet, whether it do, or do not, I must and will
write, because my spleen is swollen. To this purpose Sen. Epist. 29.
speaks Seneca, Quare verbis parcam? gratuita sunt. Non possam scire an
eiprofiturus sim, quem admoneo: illud scio, alicui me profiturum, si multos
admonuero. Spargenda est manus. Non potest fieri vt non aliquando succedat,
multa tentanti Why should I spare words? says he. I know not whether, or no,
I shall profit him to whom I write: this I am sure of, that in warning many, I
shall do good to some. Much happens to him that tries much and if this hand
sprinkle, it cannot be but other hands will gleane. By whose counsel being
hartned I will proceed, and scourge the hardhearted world, and so I descend to
women's third frailty, to weet, loss of chastititie. A loss, said I? a loss
to her that loses it, and a loss to him that gains it. For, when a man has
with much loss of time, expense of money, neglect of friends, chased this tame
game, and made a preye of it; then, I say, satietie of one makes him love
variety of all, and he thinks her easy to be lost who is no harder to be
won. O what seas of unequal passions keep their daily ebb, and flow in
him? Today he coueteth what tomorrow he loatheth: his mind is with a little
thing erected, with a less dejected: he pursues that with a great desire,
which once obtained he abandons with a greater: one and the same thing in one,
and the self same hour brings him content, and discontent: he laughs, he
weeps, he pines, he repines, not knowing (himself) why. At last, he
learneth, that praise is the Pandar to lust; and therefore with mellifluous
speeches charms her listening ears: and the fortress of her ears being
won, the bulwark of her heart is conquered. And now he has her, he cannot
keep her long, he must have sharers; for, her ears are open to flattery: and
who knows not, that complement is a sure friend to copulation? His only
course therefore would be, to change his mistress into a master, who is Heb.
13. 8
yesterday, today, and the same for ever. But the best jest is, that some of
our young novices, our guls passive, are so cheated, as that they spend the
best remainder of their days in courting mercenary whoores, and make a long
suit before they can obtain. It is not only flesh will make one of these
hawks stoop to the lure; but she must have silver too: which, my young
practician not being acquainted with, makes his request in vain. When he
speaks of love, she looks so strangely as if she heard a miracle, swearing
she never as yet saw any man who could gain the least corner of her heart.
He belieues all; and (like a kind natured man) presents her with rich gifts,
desiring no gift from her but her self: which she (with a pitiful look)
condescends to, exclaiming against Fortune for subduing her to man; when God he
knows she has been as common as a Retraict. And now my plain, downright
squire (who never before was further then his fathers windemill) in taking is
taken himself with a hook that will not easily let him go; and many a
land-knaue, and seagull shall feed upon the revenues of his purse, and he
shall be called patron till all his patrimony be spent. Their soul dies in
youth, Job. 36. 14.
says Job, and their life among the whooremongers. But it were good here to
spur a question, and ask whether a whore hiring, or hired, is the more
detestable in the sight of God? Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
The scripture determines, and judges, that a woman, taking money for
prostituting her body to men, is infamous; Ezech. 16. 33.
but she that gives money to enjoy her lover, is most infamous of all others.
All are abominable before the Lord: and therefore Solomon in his Proverbs
says, that the mouth of a strange woman, or an harlot, is as a deep pit: he
Prou. 22. 14.
that is a detestation to the Lord shall fall therein. And in another place,
he says; A whore is as a deep Prou. 23. 17.
ditch, and a narrow pit. Noting thereby, that if a man be once in with an
harlot, he shall as hardly get out again, as a man that is plunged into a
very deep, and narrow pit, where he can hardly stir himself. The same
Solomon, in the book of Ecclesiastes, yields us the reason hereof; namely,
because she is as nets, snares, and bands; where if a man be once in, he is
fast enough for getting out. I find, says he, more bitter then death, the
woman, whose heart is as nets, and snares, and her hands as bands: he that is
good before God, shall be delivered from her; but the sinner shall be taken by
her. O that flesh, and blood would listen to the advice of the spirit, and
follow the counsel of the wise man! Prou. 26. 5
Desire not, says he, her beauty in thine heart; neither let her eyelids
catch thee: for, by a who^rish woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread:
and the adultresse hanteth for life which is precious. Again he says; Albeit
the lips of an harlot drop as an honey comb, and the roof of her mouth be
softer then oil; yet her latter end is bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a
two-edged sword. Chastity, art thou fled from Christians to Pagans?
Virginity (thou, in whom Antiquity did glory) can thou find no modern
person worthy thy presence? The ancients honored the very title of virgin, so
much, that they thought virgo to be named ^ virtute: that as Virtue is
unspotted; so Virginity should be uncorrupted. They all concurred in applause
of this estate: but they differed in degrees of praise; some of them thinking
virgo to be derived ^ vir^; because they having passed their tender years,
desire the society of man. Others thought virgo to be so nominated a vigore,
because they flourish most in those years. Others deduced virgo a virga: not
because they are scourges to men; but they called them so ab atate viridiori:
because that as greenness is a token of the spring; so those green, tender
years are marks of virginity. Some compared a virgin to a Lilly: the
similitude was this; they thought the six leaves of the Lilly did represent
the heart and the five senses in a virgin, which (like the former six) should
be kept fresh, having no savor of evil: and that as those leaves are spread
abroad; so maiden-actions should be open: not close, nor secret; but secure,
as able to endure the most searching eye. How many plants, rivers, springs,
temples, cities did they consecrate to the name Virgin, and gave them that
name! They thought the same difference to be between matrimony, and
virginity, that is betwixt to sin, and not to sin, good, and better. And
therefore Hierome in his exposition of the Psalm. Homines et iumenta saluabis
domine; Per homines, inquit, intelliguntur solae virgins, per iumenta Albert.
Mag. de mulier. fort.
reliqui omnes. Him follows Albertus Magnus. Continentia, inquit, habet
fructum triplicem: scilicet, ^entesim^m in virginibus, sexagesimum in viduis,
et tricesimum in coniugatis. Continence, says he, has a threefolde degree, or
condition: i^ virgins it brings forth a^ hundred, in widows threescore, and
in the wedded thirty. Scripture runs clean, and clear on our side: which
the passages following demonstrate. 1. Corinthians, 7. 1. Kings 2. Wisdom the
3. Matthew. 19. Esaias 56. Syrach. 26. But, amongst all these places, this one in
the Revelation is most Revel. 14.
of all to be noted. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and
before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song, but
the hundredth, forty, and four thousand which were bought from the earth. These
are they which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins: these follow
the Lamb wheresoever he goes; these are bought from men, being the first
fruits to GOD and to the Lamb. And in their mo^ths was found no guile: for,
they are without spot before the throne of God. These are words that would
enforce any sober soul to embrace that single, simple, and sincere kind of
life, approved by God, Saints, and Angels; as being free from all
uncleanness, and void of all cankering cares. Yet how many now-adaies, would
be ranked among virgins, who indeed are rank whoores? how many are courted,
who deserve to be carted? Had Job lived in our hours, he never should have
needed to have made a covenant with his eyes, least at any time they should
look Job. 31. 1
upon a maid; for, he should scarce have found any to look upon. So far is
Chastitity exiled, so much is shame empaired, as that impudency and women are
almost become Relatiues. And the cause of this, is vain perjured man; who,
notvsing his tongue to glorify him that made it, imployes it to flatter,
deceive, dissemble. And when he has obtained his purpose, what is his
victory? That he has seduced a woman? A hot conquest surely, to enter and
overcome a city whose gates stand open day, and night. Yet bar I not any
man, from admiring the Creator in the creature; nor from beholding beauty:
which, as one says, is radius di^inae pulchritudinis, a Castilionaeus, in suo
Aulico. lib. 4
be^^e darted into man from that divine beauty. The Platonians were so
enamoured of this amiable goddess, that they thought beauty to be like a
circle, whose center they made goodness: and they were of opinion that as a
circle cannot be without a center, no more can a fair, and comely body be
without a maiesticall mind. The Hebricians confound fairness with goodness,
in calling that fair which is good, that good which is fair. And therefore
when it is said, that Sara seemed very good in the eyes of the Egyptians, the
meaning of the text is that she seemed very fair. Neither did the Graecians
separate this beautiful yoke, but joy* (...). August. says, De ciuit. 15.
100. 23.
Consuetudo scripturae est etiam speciosos corpore bonos vocare. It is an
ordinary thing in the holy scripture, says he, to call the fair of body good
of mind. Columella says, that the Bees choose the fairest, and the best
formed to be their king. Pythagoras was led by beauty beyond reason: so that
he falsely imagined the frame of the body to represent the state of the mind,
and that the crookedness of the body was a sign of a wracked conscience; so
that he could not be of an upright mind who was not upright of body: and
therefore he caused to be written over his school, that no disproportioned
fellow should enter there; for, he would not give countenance to any deformed
countenance. Which sentence of his is wisely, and iudicially contradicted by
S. Bernarde. Est, inquit, nigredo quaedam foelix, quae Bernha^. Sermon. 25 super
canticum canticorum.
mentis candorem coniunctu^ habet. There is, says he, a certain foulness of
complexion which is accompanied with fairness of disposition. I, I: the gifts
of the mind are able to shadow the defects of the body; but the perfection
of the body is no way able to hide the imperfections of the mind. Although I
think obstinacy her self will confess, that that of virgill is most true,
Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus: Yet, as true it is, that virtus
et forma raro co^ueniunt: virtue, and beauty seldom shake hands. One only have
I seen (since first I could see) admirable for both; in whom they so sweetly
kissed each other, as that it would make Hatred her self love to see them.
When I first beheld this glorious Architecture, this Natures choicest Art, I
straight concluded, that heavens fairest Jewel was there locked up in earths
richest cabinet. Now rests it, after a long digression, that we examine the
third property of a drunkard, to weet Swearing. This vice, of all other,
carries the most detestation with it; because it brings least delight of all
other. For all other vices, a man may wring out some excuse from Nature, to
lessen their greatness: but, this admits no veil at all. What a desperate
case is it, for a man in mirth to swear by that blood, the remembrance of
which would strike sorrow to the most obdurate hearts! that blood, I say, the
loss of which gained redemption to the whole world. A good Christian would
shed tears, to think that that blood was shed, a drop whereof is able to
clarify an Ocean of disturbed sin. Me thinks, relenting thoughts should
wound the heart of a Christian, in naming the wounds of Christ. But, where
reverence is laid aside, there devotion is cold. Deuteronomy. 28 53.
God says, that if we do not fear; and dread his glorious, and fearful
name Iehoua, he will make our plagues wonderful. He says also by Mal. 3. 3
his Prophet Malachy, that he will be a swift witness against Zach 5. 2.
swearers. The Prophet Zachary says, that the flying book of Gods curse and
vengeance shall enter into the house of the swearer, and he shall be cut off:
We may well take up the old complaint of the Prophet Jeremy, who says, that
in Ier. 23. 20
his time the Land did mourn because of oaths. The tongue alone of man is able
to work man's condemnation, without any notorious action. And let us consider
the ingratitude of man to God. God blesses man; man curses God: God blesses
the earth to man; man blasphemeth against God, and heaven: God reuealeth
himself to man; man reuileth the name of God: in a word, God made not man in
vain; man takes Gods name in vain. And yet these swearers, when they have
searched the very entrails of God for an oath, they can hardly gain belief,
except it be from some plain meaning man, or weak woman. They may cousen all
sorts of men with this their damned Art, but one; and him they cannot cheat.
Let them swear to an usurer, that it lies in his power to oblige them to
him; he will reply again, that it lies not in his power to do it without an
obligation: for, he will have a gage, and yet engage them too. This man is too
wise to be caught by his neighbor; and yet he catches at his neighbors
substance. Co^etonsnes, says Saint Paul, is the root of all 1. Tim^t. 6. 10.
evil. The same Apostle says, that the end of all Phil. 3. 19
such as mind earthly things, is damnation. They do not rightly understand
those words of Christ, when he says, Though a man has abundance, Lu. 12. 15
yet his life consists not in the things that he has. Doubtless, says the
Psalm. 39. 6
Prophet David, man walks in a shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. But, they have a
sufficient torment laid upon them here in this world: which is implied in
these words; Eccl. 5. 9
He that loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with silver. He carkes and
cares, he hoordes and rakes-vp; yet no satietie can cloy him. He has wealth:
yet he will scarce use it, though to purchase his own health; but sterues his
poor hide-bound carcass, and impouerisheth his body to enrich his purse. He
is never secure; he cannot hear the wind whistle, but he thinks it to be
the call of a thief; and if a storm com, he straight divines the ruin of his
ship at sea, or of his house on land. But, God were not just, if he should give
content to that conscience, which makes war against Widows, and Orphans,
and insults over poverty. Thou sterne-fronted, hard-hearted man, thou terror
of the poor, thou that suffer the image of God to decay when one penny of
thine may repair it, thou that let one of those little ones sterue for a
morsel of Mat. 18. 10.
bread; thou little think that their Angels behold the face of their
heavenly Father, and plead for justice against thee unjust. The voice of the
beggar beggeth for revenge against thee: Which God will hear, and pay thee
with Sulphur, when that body of thine shall render-vp it self to
neuer-consuming flames; and thy merciless soul (which being void of pity,
did deprive the needy of comfort) shall be deprived of the presence of him,
whose absence possesses the soul with more horror, then the fire can the
body with torment. Who shall receive then the Interest of thy money? these
that laugh at thee, for keeping thy coin that they might inioie it? It is
better bestowed upon them, then upon thee: for, they rejoice in it; thou had
not it, but it had thee. Usury, thou bane to many a distressed gentleman,
thou deuourer of the oppressed, thou nipper of mirth, thou unpleasant toil,
thy sin is so weighty, that it makes passage for it self, through earth
into hell. Yet know I their common caution, with which they use to cloak
these their intolerable wrongs; to weet, that a man may let out money to use,
so he give it not in morsum; when I Will be sworn they give it in dorsum, and
lay on such load that they break the backs of many decayed men. Sure, it
was avarice which first made theft so capital a crime; it having in this our
Land a greater punishment allotted to it then adultery, and many more enormous,
heinous crimes. I know no reason why adultery should not be rewarded with
death, as well as theft, but only this; that whereas man accounts of his
wife, but only as flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, he esteems of his
coin, as soul of his soul. It is Avarice, that makes greedy fathers force
their children to seem to like what indeed they loath, and to take unto them
one for better for worse, then whom (indeed) they can like nothing worse.
From hence it comes to pass, that age is matched with youth, fairenes with
foulnes, beauty with deformity; which doubtless is far from the first
institution; for, In the Mat. 19* 8
beginning (as Christ replied, concerning wives, to the Scribes, and Pharisees)
it was not so. GOD at first created man, and woman, in their full vigor, that
they might be full of love one to the other. What an unseemly sight is it, to
see an old grandsire as frostie in flesh as hair (whose eyes are ready to
set in his head, and whose rotten lungs scarce afford him breath) march to the
Church with his young spouse, whose eyes roll in her head, whose marrow burns
in her bones, whose heat scorns cold, and in whose heart disdain of age
does breed desire of youth!

According to GODs ordinance, Youth should honor, and reverence Age: but we
no where read, that Youth should solace it self in Age, or affect it. Those
women, that thus marry, in my judgment differ little or nothing from common
ones: for, both sell their affection. What will you give me? says one: what will
you give me? says the other.

Having now traced Vice by her footing as far ^s hell, we will there leave
her, to accompany her black, sinful sire. And now let us suppose man to be
without all notorious actual transgressions, only considering him in his
original corruption: and we shall find that for all he is thus eased, he is
yet miserable euough; and that for one comfort, he has millions of crosses.
Hearken to Solomon. I my self, says he, am Wis. 7
also mortal, and a man like all other, and am come of him that was first made
of the earth. And in my mothers womb was I fashioned to be flesh in ten
months: I was brought together into blood, of the seed of man, and with the
pleasure that comes with sleep. And when I was borne, I received the common
air, and fell upon the earth, which is of like nature, crying and weeping at
the first as all other do. I was nourished in swaddling clothes, and with
cares: for there is no King that had any other beginning of birth. All men,
then, have one entrance into life and a like going out. Thus far Solomon. It
were too tedious a thing here to unfold the mystery of man's conception, which
in Philosophy is no less pleasing, then strange, and wonderful. The first
gift man receives from Nature after his conception, is feeling; the next is
moving: and after he has received the uttermost of his perfect, imperfect
form, she gives him birth. He is no sooner borne, but his reasonablesoule (as
di uining his troubles to com) makes him bawl and cry: and, having nothing but
humor wherewith to vent his passion, he sheddeth tears. Well, as coming from
a woman, he is referred to the care of a woman; who spends all her time (yet
all little enough) to dress him, to still him, to watch him, and to wipe away
the excrements of this excrement. The first word he speaks bewraies vanity:
and as soon as his legs are able to underprop the burden of his body, he goes
to vanity. He waxes Idolatrous, and beholdes a baby made of clouts, a wooden
puppie, or a paper bird, with an eye of worship and adoration. He lived in his
mothers womb like a plant, came out from thence like a beast, and so still
remains, till institution fashion his Intellect, and make it capable of
reason. Having now left to cry of himself, he is sent to school; where he is
forced to continue, and exercise this weeping trade: and there he spendes the
third part of his life, in tears, sighs, and sobs. Being thus bound in
obedience, and servitude, he desires to shake off captivity, and will be no
more commanded, but obeyed. Having rule over others, he cannot govern
himself; but pursues whatsoever passion, and humor, lead him to. Ifhe have
plenty, he is riotous, luxurious, prodigal, not accounting of the accounts
he shall one day give for it. If he live in scarcity, he accuses his
parents, curses the hour of his birth, and longs for his burial; and as
(in his own opinion) he came into the world, before his time; so he seeks
by all means to go out before his time appointed. But, this by the way is
certain, that abundance choaketh more with riot then want kills with
despair. Man receives more detriment from this middle age, then either from
his precedent, or subsequent. In this age he is unruly, headstrong, violent;
neither will he hearken to information, the begetter of reformation. And
therefore the ages of man may aptly be compared to the sea: his youth may be
likened to the weathershore, stormy: his old age, to the lee shore, calm: and
his middle age, to the midst of the Ocean; where rough, unmeasured,
Skymounting billows carry this light balanced Bark, now hither, now thither;
and now and then drive her into helles harbor (from whence sometimes the
treader of waters, the commander of winds, the drier-vp of clouds,
prouidences great pilot, brings her back into heavens happy haven. For, now
being come to live of himself, he cannot tell how to dispose of himself, nor
where to spend the remnant of his days. If in the Court, he sees that he must
crouch, bow, dissemble, put on a smooth front to his enemies, and even lick the
feet of the great. His generous mind tells him, that a gentleman (who is
therefore called so, because he should not degenerate from his own nature)
should not fawn, nor bend his knee when his heart rises; but (as Seneca says)
induere animi sui val^um. He apprehends what baseness it is, to put on a
doggish property; and (as the same Seneca Sen. de beat. vita* cap. vlt.
says) in consummationem dignitat is per mill indignitates erepere; that is,
to creep up to honor, through a thousand dishonours. He perceiues, a
courtier must pocket up many a great wrong, to come to greatness; and serve
all men, that he may command all men. Fame whispers in his ear, that the
Court is a Baude that will do nothing without money, a mint of fashions, an
exchange of complements, a shame to shamefastness, and a Scene of all obscene
actions. And now he thinks that Machiauell was unfortunate, only in this that
he divulged his villainy to the world: for, in this place more is acted then
ever he invented. He was for the Theorick; these men for the Practique.
Experience tells him, that the time is long that hangs upon desert; and the
reward like to a woman's favor; then farthest off, when it is most expected.
These poor deluded men, make me call to mind an old Christmas gambole,
contrived with a thredde, which being fastened to some beam has at the nether
end of it a stick, at the one end of which is tied a candle, and at the other
end an apple; so that when a man comes to bite at the apple, the candle burns
his nose. The application is as easy as the trick common; we having before our
eyes daily examples of men discarded for their service done. After his soul
has ruminated these inconveniences, he manifestly sees that the Court is not a
place suting with his disposition. Well, the Court being displeasing, he goes
into the country; where he discouers Solitude (Melancholies mute mother)
sitting in a forsaken weed, stroking her child Absence on the head. Being
here, he feels this dumb, silent life, to be a still kind of death unto him.
He is here in the world, as if he were out of the world: he lives more like
a beast then a man; pampring his body: but his nobler part (for which only he
breathes) is barred from the minds nurse, Conversation; and from the knowledge
of strange events, the confirmers and conformers of the mind. He learneth
here, to prefer corporal exercise, before the souls recreation. The Papists
are forced to go to Church, and to receive the Sacrament once in a year, or
else to undergo the penalty; when these voluptuous countrey-protestants
never frequent the Church or receive the Sacrament once in their life time. O
that any reasonable soul should valewe the pleasures of the body, above those
of the mind! between which there is as much inequality, as is between the
substances they issue from. These pleasing motions of the soul, proceed from
the Intellect: those brutish ones of the body, have their birth from Sense, by
which they are nourished. The former of which, are by so much more noble then
the latter, by how much the quick, swift Intellect bettereth, and surpasses
the slow, and dull Sense.

A touch, or a taste with the body is but momentary, and abides not a whit:
but with the soul the relish of the thing received remains for ever. The
beasts themselves have sense: nay they have appearing (though not apparent)
virtues; but none of them ever yet mounted one degree of Contemplations rising
scale: by which the wise man with an aspiring zeal, ascendes the throne of
God; and seeing most things there inscrutable, in humility descendes again
upon his foote-stoole. O! but Gentry now degenerates: Nobility is now come to
be nuda relatio, a mere, bare relation, and nothing else. How many Players
have I seen upon a stage, fit indeed to be Noblemen? how many that be
Noblemen, fit only to represent them? Why? this can Fortune do; who makes some
companions of her Chariot, who for desert should be lackies to her Ladyship.
Let me want pity, if I dissolve not into pity, when I see such poor
stuff, under rich stuff; that is, a body richly cladde, whose mind is
capable of nothing but a hunting match, a racket-court, or a cockpit, or at
the most the story of Susanna in an alehouse. Rise, Sidney, rise: thou Englands
eternal honor, revive, and lead the reuolting spirits of thy contrymen,
against the souls basest foe, Ignorance. But what talk I of thee? heaven has
not left earth thy equal: neither do I think that ab orb condito, since
Nature first was, any man has been, in whom Genus and Genius met so right.
Thou Atlas to all virtues, thou Hercules to the Muses, thou Patron to the poor,
thou deseruest a Quire of ancient Bardi to sing thy praises; who, with their
musickes melody, might express thy souls harmony. Were the transmigration of
souls certain (which opinion as Caesar says, the ancient British Druidae
embraced) I would thy soul had flitted into my body, or would thou were alive
again that we might lead an indididuall life together. Thou wast not more
admired at home, then famous abroad; thy pen, and sword being the Heraldes of
thy Heroicke deeds. A worthy witness of thy worth, was Lipsius; when in
amazement he cried out, Nihil tibi deest, quod aut naturae, aut Fortunae adest:
nothing, says he, to thee is absent, that either to Nature, or Fortune is
present. And in another place he adds, O tu Britanniae tuae clarum sidus, cui
certatim lucem affundunt Virtus, Musa, Gratia, Fortuna: O, says he, thou
bright star of thy Brittany, whose light is fed by Virtue, the Muses,
Fortune, and all graces. The verses which are extant in S. Paul's Quire at
London, made in a grateful memory of this king of knights, sufficiently
declare his deserts: which verses, valor, and honor command me here to
insert.

England, Netherland, the heavens, and the Arts,
The soldiers, and the world have made six parts
Of the Noble Sydney: for, who will suppose
That a small heap of stones can Sydney enclose?
England has his body; for, she it fed:
Netherlande, his blood, in her defense shed.
The Heavens have his soul: the Arts have his fame:
All soldiers the grief: the World, his good name.
Lord, I have sinned against thee, and heaven, and I am not worthy to be called
thy child: yet let thy mercy obtain this Boon for me, from thee; that when
it shall please thee that my name be no more, it may end in such a man, as
was that Sidus Sydneyorum. What grace is it to me, when men report that a
grasier of the same name (the very sound of whom leaves rust behind it in Fames
trumpet) scraped up together thousands a year? whose greasy dignity in some
two generations wii be Fly-blowne. And therefore I do not envy, but emulate,
the happiness of the late Josephus Scaliger: who being descended from Princes,
and having all his race in his reins, fled the society of wanton women;
fearing least he should beget one, who might one day destroy his family, and
take from the luster of it: and so he himself, like a Semi-god, gave a Period
to his Parentage. O! if a man had all his lineage in his loins, it were brave
smothering it there, rather then hereafter to let any crooked branch deform the
beauty of the whole stock; or any disorderly person either in (...) or death
to purchase infamy to his whole family. Yet do not I clearly see, how a man
by never so heinous a fact cantaint his whole blood, or kindred; since it is
evident to all men of understanding that alia est cognatio culpae, alia
sanguinis: neither could Esau any way disparage Jacob. But it is not a thing
any way strange, if the young gentlemen of this kingdom leave dishonor in their
houses, since their maintenance is too little to maintain any honest course.
You shall see an elder brother stalk before his train, like Pharaoh before
his host; and his younger brother (of the same blood, and of a greater spirit)
come sneaking after him, as if he were the basest of his brothers retinue.
What mind can frame it self to such means? what will not a daring spirit
undertake, rather then be a bondslaue to his own brother? Non seruiam, said
that Laconian lad; et praecipitem Sen. Epist. 26.
se dedit: upon which, Seneca, writing, says, Qui mori didicit, seruire
dedidicit, he that has learned to die, says he, has forgot to serve. Sen.
Epist. 7.
And the same Seneca says, Sapiens viuit quantum debet, non quantum potest.
Epictetus, talking of the care men have how they shall live hereafter,
crieth-out, 1. Disser^. cap. 9.
Mancipium! si habuer is, habeb is, si non habuer is, abibis. Aperta est ianua.
Which se^tences we will not English, because the doctrine is not safe, and
sound. No, no: that soul which leaves her tabernacle without a license from
her Emperor, merits condemnation. As a man who escapes out of prison, does
not thereby clear himself of his fault done, but augmenteth his punishment:
even so that soul, which steals out of her fleshy Iaile without a command
from that supreme magistrate, in flying temporal misery falls into
eternal anguish, and lays her self open to all that severity can inflict.
Hoc fecit illa, says Augustine, August. de ciu. cap. 19.
illa sic praedicata Lueretia; innocentem, castam, vim perpessam Lucretiam
Lucretia insuper interemit. Proferte sententiam, leges, iudicesque Romani: This
did, says he, that so much renowned Lucretia; innocent, chaste, violated
Lucretia murdered Lucretia. Give sentence, O ye laws, and Judges of Rome.
Having a little wandered, let us now at last take a view of man in his last,
and oldestage. As he brought diseases with him from his last mother: so he must
carry them with him to his first mother, the earth. Now comes the Physician
with his mish, mash, an hundred Simples in one Compound, and powers it into
this leaking vessel. If he recover, he stands bound to his Doctor, for his
life; and acknowledges him, next under God, his preserver. Good Jesus! that a
man should be obliged to him for breathing, who deteines the breath in
bondage, and prolongeth the hour of the souls releasement. Seneca says, that
there are some men, who though they save another man's life, yet they do not
any way engage him whom they save: amongst which he places Physicians, and
makes Sen. lib. 4. de ben. cap. 13.
this his reason; Quia ad alienum commodum, pro suo veniunt; because they seek
another man's profit, for their own. Moreover, an old man grows a young
child again; his limbs fail him; and all the faculties of his body fade.
Nay, which is worse, his divine part begins to nodde, and is deprived of
that subtility which runs through all things, in, and above nature; that is,
conceiueth all that is not inconceiueable. And therefore Seneca thought, that
it was lawful for an aged man of an imperfect mind to kill himself. Non
relinquam Sen. Epist. 58.
senectutem, si me totum mihi reseruabit: totum autem ab illa part meliore. At
si coeperit concutere mentem, si parts eius conuellere, si mihi non vitam
reliquerit, sed animam; prosiliam ex aedificio p^trido, a^ ruenti. I will not
leave Age, says he, if it leave me whole, and entire to my self; that is,
perfect in my better, and perfecter part. But if age distract my mind, and
deface her fairest parts, if it leave me a soul, and (as I may so say) no
life to solace that soul: I will then leap out of this ruined, and loathsome
lodging. But this is more acutely handled in Stobaeus; where Musonius, or some
other says in this manner; Sermon. 1.
Sicut e domo exigi videmur cum locator pensione non accepta fores reuellit,
tegulas aufert, puteum obstruit: it^ et hoccorpusculo pelli videor, cum natura,
quae locauit, oculos adimit, aures, manus, pedes. Non moror igitur amplius: sed
velut e conviuio discedo, nihil aegrescens. As, says he, an angry unpaid
Landlord seems to enforce his Tenants departure, when he takes away the
doors of the house, vntileth the whole building, stops up the Well, and
barreth him from all necessaries: euenso I seem to be driven out of this
body, when Nature, who lent me eyes, ears, hands, feet, takes away the
virtue and use of them, so that I can neither see, hear, handle, nor go. I
will not therefore abide any longer; but will go away, as from a banquet,
being no way sick, and diseased. Besides this feebleness of body and mind,
there is another inconvenience incident to old age: to weet, that it makes a
man less pleasing, not sociable; but so peevish, cursed, and crabbed, as that
mildness it self cannot keep him company. His very children are weary of
him, and wish him a portion in heaven, that so they may have their portions on
earth into their own hands. Yet he endures all this patiently, till at last
his professed foe, Death, assaulteth him: to whom (after he has in vain
striued to maintain life against death) he yields up himself. Thus we see
the whole droues of calamities, which man meets with in this his earthly
pilgrimage: in which he proves by experience, that nothing is more true then
that Italian Proverb,

Questo mondo e fatto a scale,
Chi le scende, et chi le sale.
This same world is made with steps:
One falls down, one up leapes.
Who would think, that misery wanted so much as an inch of her height? Nay, who
would imagine, that this brittle, earthen vessel could stand so many knockes,
and not be broken? yes, yes* there is yet an addition to extremity, and a
plague is yet left behind, which all the former cannot counteruaile. Religion,
Religion, thou sower of dissension, and reaper of hatred, thou set soul
against soul, and body against body. Man, who by thee does excel beasts in
knowledge, by thee also does surpass them in envy. Christ is divided from
Christ: that is, Christianity is parted into sects* But, this is not
contrary to Christ's fore-warning. Think Mat. 10 34 and 35
not, says he, that I am come to send peace into the earth, but the sword.
For, I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter
against her mother in law etc. If Christ would have descended into particulars,
he would have mentioned also the setting of subjects against their Princes;
then which, nothing is more common with the Romish Religion. This made Parsons,
that false fugitive, that Romish runnagate, rail against his royal Queen,
and Mistress. A fair equality: the basest man on earth to write against a
GOD, on earth; Gods cursed, against Gods anointed. That tongue (I dare
pronounce it boldly) shall burn in never quenching fire, that defames his
Princes name. This detracting Traitor, with his fellows, would have all
virtues in that, which in it self De Benif. lib. 4. cap. 26. and 27.
is nothing but sin. Omnia vitia sunt in omnibus, says Seneca: yet those
prying malicious men would have omnes virtutes in singulis. Detractions eyes
reflect still upon her self: and she regards ever what is to be approved
in her self, and reproved in others: whereas indeed she should run this
race clean backwarde, and have an eye to those virtues which lie hid and
suppressed in others, and to those vices which are most eminent in her self.
These reproachefull Reprobates should wink at the small faults in great
persons, and bear away that sentence of Austine: Non statim malum, quod minus
bonum, together with that other saying of a late Writer; Genus humanu^ diuinum
facimus, si vitijs carens. If our Elizabeth should have uttered those
blasphemies, which some of their Popish Princes have belched forth, they would
have thought, that the earth could not stand with her upon it. What if she
should have said with Fridericke, the Second, tres fuisse insignes impostores,
qui humanum Lipsius in ex^mp. po. lib. 1. cap. 4.
genus seduxerunt; Moysem, Christum, Mahumetem? That there were three
wonderful impostours, which seduced Mankind; to weet, Moses; Christ, and
Mahomete? What if she should have said with Alphonsus, Idem ibidem.
the tenth, of Spain: Si in principio mundi ipse Deo adfuisset, multa melius,
ordinatiusque condenda fuisse; That if he had been with God at the beginning
of the world, many things should have been better disposed of, and with less
confusion! No, no: our peerless Princess had nothing so horrid to lie upon
her conscience. Elizabeth, thou glory of thy sex, thou mirror of Majesty
and modesty, thou resemblance of that sacred Elizabeth, look down through Luke
1.
those thy Crystal spectacles, upon thy meanest of subjects, who in defense of
thine honor would oppose himself againstal mortality, and expose his life to
death for thee. I loved thee more then I did all the world, or more then all
the world could love thee. Incomparable, immutable, inimitable Queen! I am not
afraid to say, that generations Luke 1.
shall call thee Blessed, although a generation of Vipers not forewarned of
Mat. 3. v. 7
the vengeance to come sting thy reputation, and seek to debase thy ever
exalted name. The Queen of the South came to see Solomon: had Solomon lived in
thy time, or thou in his, he would himself have come to visit the Queen of
the North; and being the wisest of men, would have wondered to find so much
wisdom in Woman. Blessed Virgin, thou restest from thy labors, and we
labor for thy rest, and with ceasseless pain strive to attain to that
endless pleasure which now thou enioyest. Thou abidest now far enough out of
the reach of contumelious tongues, and art secure from all, that pale envy, or
meager malice can charge thee with. There is no greater sign that thou wast
virtuous, then that thou art maligned of all who are vicious. For, as a great
body is not without a like shadow: no more is any eminent virtue without
imminent detraction. Me thinks, that Calumny should end with the carcass of
her subject, and not haunt the grave till the last bone be consumed. Which to
effect, Solo^ made a law, that no man should speak ill of the dead: and his
reason was, for fear of immortal enemies. But they will not stick to write
against the dead, who are not afraid to write against the living. The same
forenamed perfidious Parsons, has, with little reverence, written a book
against his living King. O, for some coniuring laws, to lay these rouing,
rauing tongues! Is it not a mad world think you, when every braine-sick,
giddie-headed, pamphleting companion shall presume to vpbraide and beard mighty
Monarchs? Wherefore hot spirited Luther (though otherwise a stout soldier in
Christ's Church militant) is not to be excused for his vnreuerent speeches of
Henry the eight of England. The mildest terms he uses, are, Momus, mimus,
and stultus: nay, at the length, his presumption swells so big, that he
changes the name Henry into Pharaoh, and calls all his Courtiers, Iannes and
Iambres. Unlimited Luther, thou verities chief champion, I am altogether as
unable to censure thee, as to equal thee: yet my never dying zeal to my ever
living Princes^ forces me to tell thee, that these thy misse-beseeming words
did not proceed from divine inspiration, but from humane passion. This is a
thing rare with Luther, and unexpected from him: but nothing is more usual
with the defenders of the Papacy. They not only allow to revile and mock a a
King, but also to murder him. Which damnable doctrine Francois de Verone
Franc. de ver. Con. par. 2. ca. 2
Constantine mainetaineth, when he says: L'Action de Clement est loysible, et
le coup qu'il a done a Henry 3. estoit du mesme endroict, que celuy de lulian
l'apostat, c'est a dire du ciel. The Actio^, says he, of Clement is lawful:
and the blow which he gave to Henry the 3. was sent from whence that of Julian
the Apostate; that is, from heaven. Is there then no difference to be put
between a persecutour and a professor of Christ? Of the former of which, it
is said, Iaculabatur sanguinem in Galilaeum: of the latter it may besaid,
effusit Socr. in vita Iul.
sanguinem pro Galilaeo. The same Writer after he has railed his fill at Henry
the 4. in saying, that he was not l'oingt de Dieu, who was loing de Dieu, nor
more rightly king of France, then he who in the Gospel is called Prince of
this World; at last he bursteth out into these words, which point at murder,
C'est vne chose louable, de sauuer tant de milliers d'hommes tant presents,
qu'auenir, de la damnation eternelle. It is, says he, a thing praise worthy,
to save so many millions of men, as well present as to come, from eternal
damnation. He says also, that Gerard who killed the Prince of Orange did that
act, Pour le bien de la virtue, for virtues good: and again he says, Gerard,
le coeur luy estant arrache, rendit ainsi son ame a Dieu: Gerard, says he, his
heart being torn from out of his body, re^dred his soul up unto god. But,
what will not this author undertake? whose book is written in defense of
Chastelet, who essayed to slaye the late murdered King of France. What odious
enterprise will not a bad impudent spirit seek to make good? I think, there
would not be wanting a seditious turbulent soul, to write against GOD, for
his unjust throwing down of Lucifer. Surely, some pen or other will paint
forth that accursed Rauilliake for a Saint on earth, and of a monster make a
Martyr. That ravenous Rauilliake glutted himself with the blood of that king,
in whom were eminently contained all the virtues of all the French kings since
Pharamond. The minutes of that hour, the hour of that day, the day of that
week, the week of that month, the month of that year, wherein that
nothing-fearing Phaeto^ had his downfall, France shall ever hold both ominous
and odious. Grief gripes my heart when I think, that the Mars of men received
his deaths blow from a pen-maker, a Pedagogue. A late French Writer has
composed a short Treatise to prove that the sword is more proper to the French
Nation, than to any other. Which though I deny; yet I would easily yield unto
him, that the sword was more proper to the late French king, then to any of
his ancestors, or to his living equals. He was a king of the sword, and of his
word; whose word was his sword, and whose sword was his word: for, where his
word could not warrant, his sword bore sway. Out of the ashes of this Phoenix
another bird is risen; whose feathers, I fear me, will not be able to bear
him the flight and pitch his Sire sored. Well, France has lost her Sovereign:
and we were near losing ours. How often has God pulled our King, out of
Treason's murdering mouth, and out of the jaws of death? When that
Powder Plot (a treason, at the which, Fiction her self stood affrighted) was
ready to lay hold on him, then God delivered him. But I do not think, if
Faux, or rather Fax, had given fire to the powder, that it could have devoured
that sacred assembly. What? he that delivered the children of Israel out of
Egypt; he that led them through the red sea, without wetting of their feet;
he that fed them without any ordinary bread for the space of forty years in
the wilderness; he that caused the Sun to stand still; he that caused the
Sun to go backewardes at the prayers of king Hezechiah; he that raised the
dead; he that did so many wonders and miracles; could not he also have
changed the property of Powder? No doubt, but he could and would have sent
the force of it down-wards, making a passage through the earths hollow womb
into hell, and there have blasted the black Devil with his unhallowed Senate
of Popes, the inuentours and fautours of this unheard of attempt. It can be
none other but the devil, that bids a traitor pick out GODS chosen to
butcher. If the Devil (upon my souls altar I swear it) would take me up to
the pinnacle, as he did my heavenly Master, and say to me, all this will I
give thee to kill thy earthly Master; had he power to perform his promise, I
would not do it: but, rather then tentation should win this frail flesh to
spill the numbered drops of that royal blood, I would first let out all mine
own. Me thinks my Savior whispereth in mine ear, and tells me, that his
blood shall not cleanse the polluted soul of that man, that dies with that
bloody thought. But the Jesuits are the ringleaders to this troop of
king-slayers: which, whosoever reads their books shall soon perceive. For
mine own part, I had with no small pains gathered together their doctrines,
concerning this point; meaning indeed to printit: but I was prevented by
Anticoton; who made a discovery of the slaughtering ambush they lay for
Princes. Which book is turned into English; the Translatour being in nothing
inferior to the Author. But, it is nothing strange if these Jesuits be
bloody; seeing the first of their Order was a soldier. He was a Spaniard by
birth (which makes them love that soil so well) his name Ignatius, so called
ab igne, as one that should incense subjects against their Sovereigns, and set
the whole world on fire with sedition and dissension. Incredible things are
reported of this man, by those of his own coat. Ribadeneira, who has written
his life, says, that this Ignatius kneeling on a certain day before the
Image of the spotless Virgin Mary, there arose an earthquake. Surely, the
earth trembled to feel the weight of such a Monster. One thing the Author
reports of this Ignatius; whereunto I give credit, since his succeeders do the
same: and this it is; Ignatius disputauit cum Mauro de Maria Virgin: and cum
ex verbo Dei hominem refutare non potuit, pugione confodere voluit aduersari^m.
Ignatius, says he, disputed with a Moore concerning the Virgin Marie: but,
when he saw, that he could not refute him out of the word of God, he sought
with his poniard to conquer his adversary. This holds not only with the
women, but also with the men of this religion: for, what they cannot have with
disputing, they take out in railing and fighting. The Author yet goes farther,
and says, Inter h^^ rursus vehementissima homine^ invadebat cogitatio, vt ex
cellula, vbi erat, sese praecipitem daret. In the midst, faith he, of these
occurrences, Ignatius was assaulted by a strong temptation, to cast himself
headlong from the place where he was. I would to GOD, he had done it, and
shiuered his neck, the prop to his false head, into a thousand pieces, so that
Christendom might not have had so dear a tr^all of the treachery of his
followers. They leave a poisonous leaven in the lawless lump of their
doctrine: so that whosoever swallows it, his mind is infected and enuenomed.
The Jesuits have set-out Martialem Castratum: and it were a worthy work for
some industrious wit, to setout Iesuit^s Castratos, and gelde them of their
guilty doctrine. Ye live like Gods, says the Prophet; but ye shall die like
men: you live like Gods, says the Jesuit, but you shall dye by men. What
should move them to set a-broach their hogsheads, and make youth drunk with
their new invented liquor? Why break they their sleeps, to break the bond of
peace between the people and their Prince? Why do they all this? That their
service may be acceptable to the Pope their Master; whom they exalt,
aboucthrones and principalities, and all that is called God: nay, I might
almost say, that is GOD. Crux, Baronius in paraenes. ad venet. page 9^ Colin.
^^ditionis.
says Baronius, antecellit aquilas Caesaris; gladius Petri, gladium
Constantini; and Apostolica seeds praeiudicat imperatoriae potestati. The
cross, says he, excels the eagles of Caesar; the sword of Peter, the
sword of Constantine; and the Apostolic See out-strippeth the imperial power.
In my simple judgment, common sense should give a man this, that if Christ
commanded his Apostles not to bear rule sicut reges ge^tium; without doubt,
then, non*supr^ Reges Iudae. And therefore Princes, learning that the Pope
seeks nothing else, but to make them his vassals, have rejected his power and
authority; as finding a great difference between his yoke, and that of
Christ. For, Christ says, my yoke is easy, and my burden light: whereas it
may truly be said of the Pope, that his yoke is uneasy, and his burden not
to be borne. The king our Master seems to yield him more, then Saint Agust.
de baptis. contra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Austin would, were he alive; Neque enim quisquis nostrum, says he,
episcopu^se esse episco poru^ co^stituit, atque tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi
necessitatem collegas suos adigit; quando habet omnis Episcopus, pro licentia
libertatis and potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicari ab alio
no^ possit, quomodo nee ipse potest alterumiudicare; sed expectemus vniuersi
iudicium Domini nostri Ies^ Christi, qui vnus est, solus habens potestatem and
praeponendi nos in Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, et de actu nostro iudicandi.
But, if the Pope would be content only to insulte over Bishops, it were well
enough; or if he would but only take the place of Kings, he were (though
hardly) to be endured: but, that he should have the disposing of their lives,
and revenues, no man of judgment and honesty will allow. It cannot sink into
my head, how superstition should so bleare the eyes of so many learned men, so
many years together, as that they should not spy out this usurper, and seek
to deprive him of his stolen supremacy: But (alas!) in Rome now, new
superstition supplies the place of ancient valor. Were Saint Paul in Rome
today, he would utter the same words in Campo Martio, that he did in Mars
Acts. 17 22.
street at Athens; Men and brethren, I see that in all things you are too
superstitious. The Church of Rome is built upon superstition; and makes more
of ceremonies, then of the substance of religion. Some of these ceremonies are
so absurd, as I think they only stay the Jews conversion. For, as Auerrhoes,
in derisio^ of them, said, Sit anima mea Aver. in 12. Metaphysi.
cum Philosophis, quia Christiani adorant id quod edunt; Let my soul be with
the Philosophers, seeing the Christians adore that which they eat: So may the
jews justly say, Let our souls be with the old ceremonies, since the new
ones are so foolish and ridiculous. Others again of those ceremonies are so
impious, that it is a wonder that heaven does not blast, or earth swallow-vppe
the profane obseruers of them. They picture GOD the father, like an old
decrepite man; and make him visible to the eye of the body, whom the eye of
the cleerest mind cannot truly discern. God made Man according to his own
image, one way: and Man, in way of recompense, makes God according to his
image, another way. I am so great an enemy to ceremonies, as that I would
only wish, to have that one ceremony at my burial, which I had at my birth;
I mean, swaddling: and yet I am indifferent for that too.

Tacitus said, in his Tacit. Annal. lib. 14.
time, that Christianity was Super stitio exitiabilis: had he lived in our
time, he would have added execrabilis. Oh that religion were once purged from
the lees of the Romish grape! that so every their sting soul might drink out
of the fountain of the written Word. I would not be so presumptuous as to wish
Ma. 20. 22
to sit either at the right, or at the left hand of my Redeemer: But, if I
could obtain my request at the hands of God, I would only desire to see my
native country void of erroneous doctrine, and flourish under a lively, well
grounded faith. Oh! but this union of religions is a harder thing to effect,
then an union of kingdoms. For, in this business of the soul every private
man is a Senator, and passes his judgment: No man in this can be compelled
to tread in the kings high way; but he will (if it stand with his liking) have
a pathway of his own. That man would merit eternity, that could reconcile
the long severed Protestants and Papists. But it is a bootlesse endeavor to
essay it; since that of Cyprian is most true: Nulla societas fidei et 55.
episto.
perfidiae potest esse. The learned, on both sides, set the ignorant together
by the ears; and-cast in boanes, to make them snarle one at another: their
long studied distinctions, do as much dull zeal, as they whet subtlety. They
teach the people to talk well, not to live well; alluring them to delight in
controversies, the only Seminaries of Heresies. They abuse that knowledge and
light, which they have, infused into the^ by the father of lights: and whereas
they should turn it into actions, they turn it into factions. Is it not glory
enough to them, that their learning places them almost as far above
ordinary men, as ordinary men above beasts; but that they must also clip
truth, to enlarge their triumphs? They inueigh deadly one against another, as
being at deadly enmity, and strive to draw others to their parties; employing
invention, only to feed contention. Their reasons would make a reasonable man
to laugh: and their Motives would move a man to be of no religion, and think
Christianity a mere delusion. The Papist firmly affirms that the Protestant
is damned; the protestant doubts of the salvation of the papist: yet in my
weak opinion, it should not be so with the latter. For, though the papists
judge uncharitably of us; yet we should censure more favorably of them. It
is a dangerous doctrine, which the purer sort of our divines have of late
diuulged to the world; to weet, that all these are blotted out of the book of
life, that die absolute papists. To this end says an Eng. writer of the
forementioned sect; where is, says he, Cyrus, Darius, Xerxes, Alexander,
Caesar, Pompey, Seipio and Haniball? Where are the Valiant Henry's and Noble
Edwards of England? The worms eat them: and what is become of their souls, is
most of all to be feared. See the indiscretion of this man, in mingling
Christianity and Paganism together. The Valiant Henry's, and Noble Edwardes
of England are with him in no better taking, then Cyrus, Darius, etc. and he
makes their case common. GOD send the poor idle man to come to the place,
which the Valiant Henry's, and the Noble Edwards of England inhabit. He and
the rest of his faction, need not as they do, complain of their poverty;
since their own rashness procures it. Rash in Hebrewe, signifies Pauper in
Latin, in English A poor man. For my part, I never knew a rash man* that dyed
rich. Their tongues are theirs: who shall control them? Audacitie leads them:
and out of an assumed liberty, or an ill governed zeal, they speak they care
not what, without either fear or wit. Many things are spoken (GOD he knows)
from the heart, which never came near the head; and many things are thought to
be uttered ex animo, which indeed issue ex animi morbo* That most of our
ancestors are damned, I dare not believe: but, I had rather determine of my
successors, who living in the later times are more subject to sin, the
reward of temporal and eternal death. Though our ancestors were gally-slaues
to the pope, as being chained fast to Ignorance; yet their Works leave a
sufficient testimony of their faith. Sunt, says Cambden, vi Cambdenus epist.
ad lectorem.
audio, qui monasteria, et eorum fundatores a me memorari indignantur; dolenter
audio: sed cum bona illorum gratia dixerim, ijdem indigne^tur, imo fortasse
obliuisci velint, et Maiores nostros Christianos fuisse, and nos esse. They had
fidem formatam; we, fidem informem: they did more then they knew; we know more
then we do. Their ignorance was the greatest fault they had: which if it did
condemn them, woe be to little knowing, yet well meaning minds. If Christ
prayed for those that crucified him, saying; Father forgive them: they know not
what they do; will he not pray for them also that praise, magnify, and
glorify his euer-glorious name, yet in so doing, know not what they do? Those
that teach them, shall answer for it; according to those words of Christ:
Whosoever Mat. 5. 19
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, etc. where we see a
punishment alloted to false teaching. Let us defer then to censure, what shall
become of them, till we know what shall become of our selves; which is only
known to GOD. If all the Divines in the world avouch that Hell is my portion,
if That Divinity whisper to me the contrary, I will deride them. It were a
brave thing, if one man could dispose of another soul, and reward it with
either pain, or pleasure, according to his own will. Yet I must confess this
ingenuously; that I put so great a difference between the ancient and modern
papists, as that I resolve rather that the former are taken to mercy, then that
the later either are, or shall be. The former instructed no men to destruction,
with king-killing doctrine: the later teache^ to make-away an Heretic (yet an
Heretic of their own brain) by any means whatsoever. God renounce me, if I
had not rather be an Heathen, then a Christian and hold this merciless
Axiom for current: for, I had rather be an honest Turk, then a knauish
Christian. Papistrie and Treason now are grown to be Accidentia concomitantia;
and they give mutual attendaunce one on the other. Neither did the ancient
Priests so work upon the frailty of silly women, as these do: neither were
they so lecherous, as these are. These are they whom Saint Paul points at,
saying; For of this sort, are they 1. Ti. 3. 6
which creep into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins,
and led with diverse lusts. Yet, for all this, our Puritans ought not to give
definitive sentence against them; but refer it to him, who will have mercy
on whom he will have mercy. These men, whose purity has made them
uncomfortable to the present Discipline of the Church, though they be guilty
of Schism, yet they are not dangerous; but live, and dye, without thought of
slaughter: yet is there a tatling Treatise, entitled Herod and Pilate
reconciled, wherein the author strives very hard, to prove that the Papists
and Puritans are both alike dangerous; as holding the same treacherous tenants.
He spetteth-out the venom of his tongue in the faces of Calvin, and Beza; men,
whose names his mouth should not usurp, without reverence. He may well wrest
their speeches: but, well I know, he can never infer any pretended treason,
from them. His book is well labored; and he manifests to the world, that
he has read some thing: he lacks nothing but the judgment of Tertullian;
that is, that a man ought to employ all he has or knows, in testimonium
Tert. de resur. carn.
very, non in adiutorium falsi. Sir Francis Bacon says, that the way to
dimmish bad books, is not not to burn, or tear them; but with plenty of
good books, to make scarcity of bad: whereas I for my part think, that the
daily increase of triuiall trifling books, will at the length consume and
annihilate the weighty and serious ones. Now-a-daies, almost every Sect has a
several exposition of the Text, and a diverse application. We may well crie-out
with the Prophet Psalm. 60. 1. 2. and 3.
David, O God thou have cast us out; thou have scattered us: thou have been
angry; turn again unto us. Thou have made the Land to tremble, and have made
it to gape: heal the breaches thereof; for it is shaken. Thou have showed thy
people heavy things: thou have made us to drink the wine of Giddines. It
fatteth the soul of the Jew, to see Christianity torn in pieces by schism
and heresy. He scorneth the head the more, because he sees the members of the
body so wound one the other. Oh, that we could, with the harmony of an
inseperable union, charm the ears of this Christianities serpent! But surely
he will stop his ears to our charming, who disobeyeth the voice of that great
charmer, charm he never so wisely. Thou seed of Abraham, thou house of
Jacob, thou disposer of the graces and promises of the all-puissant, I bewail
from my soul thy heavy condition, and lament that thou can not repent. What
gross absurdities have seized on thee, of the which belief is not See the
quotatio^s of Monsieur du Plessis upon their Thalmud, in his book entitled
Aduertissement aux Iu^fs.
capable? As, for example, that God before he built this world, exercised
himself a long time in setting-vp and pulling-downe, before he could learn
to finish the frame he had conceived. Thou further say, that God has
certain appointed days, wherein he afflicts himself, because in choler he
defaced thy city, with thy temple: and tokens of this his felt sorrow, thou
make to be lightning and thunder. Thou say also, that God ordained a
sacrifice amongst the Jews every new Moon, to recompense the wrong he did to
the Moon, in taking light from her to give it to the Sun. Thou farther
say, that he is angry once a day, and then the crimson combs of the Cooks
wax pale and bloudlesse. Thou have also a profane fable, that on a day there
being a disputation between certain Rabbis, and R. Eliezer, God gave
sentence on Eliezers side: for which the Rabbis excommunicated him; and then
God smiling, said, My children have overcome me. Thou say also, that he that
gainsayeth the words of the Scribes, deserves more to be punished, then he that
contradicts the Law of Moses: the one may be absolved; the other must
absolutely die. Thou say also, that he is no good Rabbin which does not hate
his enemy; nay, that does not pursue revenge even until death. And he that
disalloweth of any thing in these books, denies God himself. What God will
do with thee, I know not: this I know, that no Nation has kept her integrity
but thou. Oh, would thou had also kept thy sincerity in religion! It is more
then a miracle to me, that fear does not weigh-downe the eyelids of the
Jew, when he offers to looke-vp to heaven. Neque enim, says Origin, deberent
vltra coelum aspicere, qui in creatorem coeli pe^^auerunt, et dominum
Maiestatis. Neither indeed, says he, ought they to behold heaven, who have
sinned against the Creator of heaven, and the Lord of Majesty. The Turk
conceiueth more reverently of Christ, then the Jew: for, he accounts of him
as of a great Prophet; the Jew, as of a false Prophet. Neither has the Turk
so gross abuses and absurdities, as has the Jew: which* whosoever lists to
compare, shall find. The Turk has many riddles, which rather merit laughter
then loathing: and, for example sake, we will set-down some In Alcor. Turc.
few of them. What is that, which is first wood, and afterward receives a
spirit into it? It is there answered, Moses Rod. What woman is that which only
came from a man? and what man is that which only came from a woman? It is
there said, the former to be Eve, the later to be Christ. The rehearsal of
more of these frivolous fooleries would cost me much time, and yield the
Reader little profit: and therefore I will only here insert one or two
things remarqueable in the Turkish Phisiques. They hold, that the stars hang
by golden chains: Again, they say, that a Bull bears the earth upon his
horns; so that when the Bull shakes his head, an earthquake ensues. Modesty
will not let me enter into the Turks paradise; where all things are unclean,
and beyond measure baudy. Oh my God! who is there that rightly understands
the courses of man's life; the curses due to it for the vices of it; and withal
considers the variances of religion; as also that Turks inhabit the better
half part of the world; Jews and Atheists a quarter of the other half;
Schismatickes and Heretics three quarters of that quarter: who is there, I
say, that weighing all these things, will not welcome, if not inuit death*
specially in this age; in which, that of Tacitus is right true: et propter
virtutes Tacit. hist. lib. 1.
certissimum exitium: And virtues, says he, are rewarded with certain
destruction. Virtue, look to thy Essence; for, thou have almost lost thy
Existence: thou have a Being of thy self; but, scarce any Being in any other.
Wherefore I exhort all those, who either have or love virtue, to desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Let them contemplate this, that death is the
Orient of Weal, and the Occident of Woe; that is, the rising of all comforts,
and the fall and setting of all crosses. Death is the sole sanctuary for
sorrow, the freedom from fear, hope's harbor, faith's fair field, the
ending of a bad and beginning of a better life. Death is not so ugly as the
world would make her; her looks are lovely: and when all the world disdaines
desert, she rewards it. Wherefore, we should not with such a fond childish
grief bewail the death of our friends, whom mercy has taken from misery. As
when we see the sun eclipsed, we grieve not; knowing it shall come to his
former form again: even so (...) it is here; we should not fall into
womanish lamentations for the loss of them, whose bodies we know shall rise
again; who shall see God with those eyes, with which they leave to see the
world: For, though they die to us, they live to the Lord. Wherefore, we must
not think, that David lamented the temporal death of his son Absolon; but,
that his propheticke soul fore-sawe that eternal death due to Devils and
their ministers: for, to them, death bringes damnation. The wicked man dares
not, in his greatest passion, call to God for compassion; but hides himself
from his face, having all his time been glutted with forbidden fruit. If he
look up, he sees Gods judgment hang over him: if downward, he meditates his
grave under him; and hell under it: if on both sides of him, at each hand
sits horror, and confusion: if before him, he beholds Perdition, his
hangman, dragging him on to his slaughter: if behind him, Vengeance doggeth
him at the heels; the least noise makes him expect his pursiuants: At last, he
withdraws himself into his cabine, thinking to lock-out Death; who, in a
moment, locketh-vp his eyelids, never more to open, till they shall see heaven
gates shut against their master. Oh fool! revolt from thy irreligious
superstition, to a religious piety; neither quake at that, whose power it is
in thy power to conquer by an hearty penitence, and fervent prayer. Shrink
not at thy fatale blow: thy death shall be life; and that, a blessed and
eternal one. I, for my part, will account of death as of that which helps me
to an unvalued bargain; things eternal, for things momentarie: things truly
delightful, for things falsely deceitful. Oh welcome minute, that shall free
this body from so long an apprentiseship of woe. And, indeed, what is there
that should hold or delight me here? except to satisfy the vnordred
appetites of the body, and unlawful desires of the soul. But perhaps some will
urge, that I am as yet in my spring of youth; which I grant: Yet am I glutted,
and tired as much with the troubles of this Age, as a Priam, as a Nestor. The
days are Ecclesiastes. 12. 1.
already come upon me, wherein I may truly say, I take no pleasure in them.
But, others will reply, that I have friends for whose sake I should desire to
live. It is true indeed, that I have friends; but, with-all, such friends as
Tacitus speaks of; Et quibus deer at inimicus, Tacit. hist. lib. 1.
ab amicis sunt oppressi: and they, says he, to whom enemies were wanting were
oppressed by their friends. I long to be acquainted with my nearer kindred, to
whom I shall say, Corruption thou Job. 17. 14.
art my father, and to the worm thou art my mother and my sister.
Salomontelleth us, All pleasures under the Eccles. 1.
sun are vanity: I take his word; and therefore long to see what pleasures
are above the sun, where the Son of God sits at the right hand of his
father, making intercession for me and all sinners. And thou, Lord of hosts,
grant, that when this my last and best day shall come, and those harbingers of
death summon me to appear, that then I may be ready: and grant also, that
as, at the first, my body was willing to receive my soul; so, at the last, my
soul may be willing to leave my body. Thou lover of souls, be thou merciful
to my soul: and when mine eyes shall grow dim, my lips black, my mouth
drawen-vp, my brows knit, my ears deaf, my hands and feerebenummed with cold,
my pulse beating yet weakly, and when all my senses fail me, then give me
some sense of life euerlas^ing. My good God, let me at that hour think as I
do now, that it is a thing no more strange to die, the^ to be borne* ^being it
is an equal law of Nature, which binds over all alike, to their first and
last appearance. I know, there is some pain in death: but, withal I know,
that I owe that pain with the vantage to my mother. Who, as she endured as
great pain, us ever woman did, to bring me into the world* so must I endure
some pain to rid my self of this painful life, of the which I am as weary,
a^ a (...) of his ^are. I shallneuer be truly merry, till that day of mi^th
and releasement comes. All joy h^ere below is sinful; and almost all
delights unlaw (...) August. in Euang. seeun. Lucam, sermon. ^7.
according to that of Austin* (...) l^titia est imp^^it a (...) The joy, says
he, of this Age is nothing else bu^ (...) ^^punished. Ye^ will I not seek to
hasten the hour^^ of my dear delivery; but will attend Gods (...) and (...) of
life as of a gift. If it will tarry, I will not thrust it soorth of doors: if
it make haste to be gone, I will not be he that shall entreat it to abide. The
time I have to live, devotion shall dispose of: and my chiefer pleasure shall
be in prayer. I will first pray for Christ's church milita^t, that it would
please him to shorten the time of her warfare, that so the time of her
triumphing may approach. Next of all, I will pray for all Gods anointed, over
what Kingdoms, or Nations, soever they be placed; and in particular (as by
the duty of a subject I am bound) for my gracious Sovereign, Faiths great
defender. Thou Ancient of days, crown his days with happiness: and as he
reigns by thee; so let him reign for thee: and, while he defends thy Truth,
defend thou him from those porte-couteaux. For, in these treacherous times, it
is to be Mat. 10. 36
feared, that his greatest enemies are those of his own^ house. And, as for his
succeeder in the throne, gracious God let him be successeful in all his approved
proceedings: that so, succeeding ages may sing and say his praises. Lord,
shield him rather from secret flatterers, then from open enemies: and, having
all things, let him not want this one; A truth-teller. I will wish the same to
him, which Thomas Walsing hamus reports of Henry the fifth: that as he is
Modest us (...) so he may be Magnanimus in actu. Last of all, I will pray for
my self; that he that made me, would vouchsafe to have mercy upon me. Thou,
that art able to throw an Angel down, ar^ able to raise a sinner up: Lord,
then, raise me, (...) fal^e (...) the gul^^ of sin. Thou into Lamb of OOD,
which dyed^t once for the (...) of the (...) mercy upon me: and, seeing thou
have suffered for my wickedness, let not me suffer for it too, nor cry for my
crying sins. lesus, at thy Name my ^^ee shall bow, my heart bend, and all my
soul and body be transformed into reverence. Oh blessed, comfortable,
allpromising Nome! in which, the old Age of new names, and (if you will have
it so) the new Age of old names may be included Christ^^* (...) Origin, qui
(...) ill is or is, (...) ap^d (...) Christ, says he, who is in those (...) of
the earth, ^^en amongst the Britannes. Amen, Lord Jesus: and be with us still
to the ends of the world. Merciful master, let me with my last gasp
pronounce in confidence those words of dying Luther; I have served thee, I have
believed thee, and now I come to thee. And because there is no other way to
come to thee but by death, Lord let me expect death every where, and always;
not knowing where, or when it will expect me* and (...) me think of that
often, which I must do once. Blessed Master, my will is thine: but, if it be
thy blessed will, take me out of this Age, before I be aged: and let this
corruption put-on incorruption, this mortality immortality, imperfection
perfection; and then this impotency shall see omnipotency; this nothing all
things. Oh inconceiueable joy, to behold the Apostles, Patriarks, and Prophets,
together with the Kings of the Earth, doing homage to the King of Heaven and
Earth! And till this joyful appointed time come, the greatest comfort I can
yield my self and others, is an allusion which I took out of an (...) French
Writer: to weer, that as GOD labored six days, and rested the seventh; so
man, after he has turmoiled himself through-out all the sex ages of the
world, shall in the seventh Age repose himself in a better world. Which, he
that created the world, grant, for his sake that redeemed the world,

Amen.
FINIS.

